
1. Stem Cells Int. 2016;2016:2452985. doi: 10.1155/2016/2452985. Epub 2015 Dec 7.

Modeling Neurological Disease by Rapid Conversion of Human Urine Cells into
Functional Neurons.

Zhang SZ(1), Ma LX(2), Qian WJ(3), Li HF(4), Wang ZF(3), Wang HX(5), Wu ZY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, Institutes 
of Brain Science and State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200040, China; Department of
Neurology, Research Center of Neurology in Second Affiliated Hospital, and the
Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, Hangzhou 310009, China. (2)Department of Anatomy, Histology &
Embryology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200030, China.
(3)Institutes of Brain Science, Institute of Neurobiology and State Key
Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Fudan University, Shanghai 200030, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Research Center of Neurology in Second Affiliated
Hospital, and the Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310009, China. (5)Department of
Neurology, Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, Institutes of Brain Science 
and State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200040, China.

Somatic cells can be directly converted into functional neurons by ectopic
expression of defined factors and/or microRNAs. Since the first report of
conversion mouse embryonic fibroblasts into functional neurons, the postnatal
mouse, and human fibroblasts, astroglia, hepatocytes, and pericyte-derived cells 
have been converted into functional dopaminergic and motor neurons both in vitro 
and in vivo. However, it is invasive to get all these materials. In the current
study, we provide a noninvasive approach to obtain directly reprogrammed
functional neurons by overexpression of the transcription factors Ascl1, Brn2,
NeuroD, c-Myc, and Myt1l in human urine cells. These induced neuronal (iN) cells 
could express multiple neuron-specific proteins and generate action potentials.
Moreover, urine cells from Wilson's disease (WD) patient could also be directly
converted into neurons. In conclusion, generation of iN cells from nonneural
lineages is a feasible and befitting approach for neurological disease modeling.

PMCID: PMC4685145
PMID: 26770203  [PubMed]


2. Glia. 2016 May;64(5):743-62. doi: 10.1002/glia.22958. Epub 2016 Jan 6.

miR-124-9-9* potentiates Ascl1-induced reprogramming of cultured Müller glia.

Wohl SG(1), Reh TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington.

The Müller glia of fish provide a source for neuronal regeneration after injury, 
but they do not do so in mammals. We previously showed that lentiviral gene
transfer of the transcription factor Achaete-scute homolog 1 (Ascl1/Mash1) in
murine Müller glia cultures resulted in partial reprogramming of the cells to
retinal progenitors. The microRNAs (miRNAs) miR-124-9-9* facilitate neuronal
reprogramming of fibroblasts, but their role in glia reprogramming has not been
reported. The aim of this study was to test whether (1) lentiviral gene transfer 
of miR-124-9-9* can reprogram Müller glia into retinal neurons and (2)
miR-124-9-9* can improve Ascl1-induced reprogramming. Primary Müller glia
cultures were generated from postnatal day (P) 11/12 mice, transduced with
lentiviral particles, i.e., miR-124-9-9*-RFP, nonsense-RFP, Ascl1-GFP, or
GFP-control. Gene expression and immunofluorescence analyses were performed
within 3 weeks after infection. Overexpression of miR-124-9-9* induced the
expression of the proneural factor Ascl1 and additional markers of neurons,
including TUJ1 and MAP2. When Ascl1 and miR-124-9-9* were combined, 50 to 60% of 
Müller glia underwent neuronal reprogramming, whereas Ascl1 alone results in a 30
to 35% reprogramming rate. Analysis of the miR-124-9-9* treated glial cells
showed a reduction in the level of Ctdsp1 and Ptbp1, indicating a critical role
for the REST pathway in the repression of neuronal genes in Müller glia. Our data
further suggest that miR-124-9-9* and the REST complex may play a role in
regulating the reprogramming of Müller glia to progenitors that underlies retinal
regeneration in zebrafish. GLIA 2016;64:743-762.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26732729  [PubMed - in process]


3. Gene Expr Patterns. 2016 Jan;20(1):71-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2015.12.002. Epub
2015 Dec 19.

Testicular receptor 2, Nr2c1, is associated with stem cells in the developing
olfactory epithelium and other cranial sensory and skeletal structures.

Baker JL(1), Wood B(2), Karpinski BA(3), LaMantia AS(4), Maynard TM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Advanced Study of Human Paleobiology, The George Washington
University, USA; GW Institute for Neuroscience, The George Washington University,
USA. Electronic address: jenniferlbaker7@gmail.com. (2)Center for the Advanced
Study of Human Paleobiology, The George Washington University, USA; Human Origins
Program, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, USA.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, The George Washington
University, USA. (4)GW Institute for Neuroscience, The George Washington
University, USA; Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, The George Washington
University, USA.

Comparative genomic analysis of the nuclear receptor family suggests that the
testicular receptor 2, Nr2c1, undergoes positive selection in the
human-chimpanzee clade based upon a significant increase in nonsynonymous
compared to synonymous substitutions. Previous in situ analyses of Nr2c1 lacked
the temporal range and spatial resolution necessary to characterize cellular
expression of this gene from early to mid gestation, when many nuclear receptors 
are key regulators of tissue specific stem or progenitor cells. Thus, we asked
whether Nr2c1 protein is associated with stem cell populations in the
mid-gestation mouse embryo. Nr2c1 is robustly expressed in the developing
olfactory epithelium. Its expression in the olfactory epithelium shifts from
multiple progenitor classes at early stages to primarily transit amplifying cells
later in olfactory epithelium development. In the early developing central
nervous system, Nr2c1 is limited to the anterior telencephalon/olfactory bulb
anlagen, coincident with Nestin-positive neuroepithelial stem cells. Nr2c1 is
also seen in additional cranial sensory specializations including cells
surrounding the mystacial vibrissae, the retinal pigment epithelium and Scarpa's 
ganglion. Nr2c1 was also detected in a subset of mesenchymal cells in developing 
teeth and cranial bones. The timing and distribution of embryonic expression
suggests that Nr2c1 is primarily associated with the early genesis of mammalian
cranial sensory neurons and craniofacial skeletal structures. Thus, Nr2c1 may be 
a candidate for mediating parallel adaptive changes in cranial neural sensory
specializations such as the olfactory epithelium, retina and mystacial vibrissae 
and in non-neural craniofacial features including teeth.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26712358  [PubMed - in process]


4. Nanomedicine. 2016 Feb;12(2):399-409. doi: 10.1016/j.nano.2015.11.015. Epub 2015 
Dec 19.

Deterministic transfection drives efficient nonviral reprogramming and uncovers
reprogramming barriers.

Gallego-Perez D(1), Otero JJ(2), Czeisler C(3), Ma J(4), Ortiz C(3), Gygli P(3), 
Catacutan FP(3), Gokozan HN(3), Cowgill A(3), Sherwood T(5), Ghatak S(6), Malkoc 
V(4), Zhao X(4), Liao WC(4), Gnyawali S(6), Wang X(4), Adler AF(7), Leong K(7),
Wulff B(3), Wilgus TA(3), Askwith C(5), Khanna S(6), Rink C(6), Sen CK(8), Lee
LJ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, College of Engineering,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH; Department of Surgery, College of
Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH; Center for Regenerative
Medicine and Cell-Based Therapies (CRMCBT), The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
OH. (2)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH; Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH; Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell-Based
Therapies (CRMCBT), The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH. Electronic address: 
jose.otero@osumc.edu. (3)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH; Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell-Based
Therapies (CRMCBT), The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH. (4)Department of
Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, College of Engineering, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH. (5)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH. (6)Department of Surgery, College of
Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH; Center for Regenerative
Medicine and Cell-Based Therapies (CRMCBT), The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
OH. (7)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC.
(8)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH; Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell-Based Therapies (CRMCBT),
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH. Electronic address: sen.16@osu.edu.
(9)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, College of Engineering,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH; Center for Regenerative Medicine and
Cell-Based Therapies (CRMCBT), The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
Electronic address: lee.31@osu.edu.

Safety concerns and/or the stochastic nature of current transduction approaches
have hampered nuclear reprogramming's clinical translation. We report a novel
non-viral nanotechnology-based platform permitting deterministic large-scale
transfection with single-cell resolution. The superior capabilities of our
technology are demonstrated by modification of the well-established direct
neuronal reprogramming paradigm using overexpression of the transcription factors
Brn2, Ascl1, and Myt1l (BAM). Reprogramming efficiencies were comparable to viral
methodologies (up to ~9-12%) without the constraints of capsid size and with the 
ability to control plasmid dosage, in addition to showing superior performance
relative to existing non-viral methods. Furthermore, increased neuronal
complexity could be tailored by varying BAM ratio and by including additional
proneural genes to the BAM cocktail. Furthermore, high-throughput NEP allowed
easy interrogation of the reprogramming process. We discovered that BAM-mediated 
reprogramming is regulated by AsclI dosage, the S-phase cyclin CCNA2, and that
some induced neurons passed through a nestin-positive cell stage.FROM THE
CLINICAL EDITOR: In the field of regenerative medicine, the ability to direct
cell fate by nuclear reprogramming is an important facet in terms of clinical
application. In this article, the authors described their novel technique of cell
reprogramming through overexpression of the transcription factors Brn2, Ascl1,
and Myt1l (BAM) by in situ electroporation through nanochannels. This new
technique could provide a platform for further future designs.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26711960  [PubMed - in process]


5. Development. 2016 Feb 1;143(3):492-503. doi: 10.1242/dev.126292. Epub 2015 Dec
23.

A novel role for Ascl1 in the regulation of mesendoderm formation via
HDAC-dependent antagonism of VegT.

Gao L(1), Zhu X(1), Chen G(1), Ma X(2), Zhang Y(1), Khand AA(1), Shi H(1), Gu
F(1), Lin H(1), Chen Y(3), Zhang H(1), He L(1), Tao Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Protein Sciences, Tsinghua University School of Life
Sciences, Beijing 100084, China. (2)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and
Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China. (3)Tianjin Normal University College of Life Science, Binshuixidao
(extension line) 393, Xinqing District, Tianjin 300387, China. (4)MOE Key
Laboratory of Protein Sciences, Tsinghua University School of Life Sciences,
Beijing 100084, China qhtaolab@tsinghua.edu.cn.

Maternally expressed proteins function in vertebrates to establish the major body
axes of the embryo and to establish a pre-pattern that sets the stage for
later-acting zygotic signals. This pre-patterning drives the propensity of
Xenopus animal cap cells to adopt neural fates under various experimental
conditions. Previous studies found that the maternally expressed transcription
factor, encoded by the Xenopus achaete scute-like gene ascl1, is enriched at the 
animal pole. Asc1l is a bHLH protein involved in neural development, but its
maternal function has not been studied. Here, we performed a series of gain- and 
loss-of-function experiments on maternal ascl1, and present three novel findings.
First, Ascl1 is a repressor of mesendoderm induced by VegT, but not of
Nodal-induced mesendoderm. Second, a previously uncharacterized N-terminal domain
of Ascl1 interacts with HDAC1 to inhibit mesendoderm gene expression. This
N-terminal domain is dispensable for its neurogenic function, indicating that
Ascl1 acts by different mechanisms at different times. Ascl1-mediated repression 
of mesendoderm genes was dependent on HDAC activity and accompanied by histone
deacetylation in the promoter regions of VegT targets. Finally, maternal Ascl1 is
required for animal cap cells to retain their competence to adopt neural fates.
These results establish maternal Asc1l as a key factor in establishing
pre-patterning of the early embryo, acting in opposition to VegT and biasing the 
animal pole to adopt neural fates. The data presented here significantly extend
our understanding of early embryonic pattern formation.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4760308
PMID: 26700681  [PubMed - in process]


6. Neurotox Res. 2015 Dec 17. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of Nurr1 in the Generation and Differentiation of Dopaminergic Neurons from 
Stem Cells.

Rodríguez-Traver E(1,)(2), Solís O(1,)(2), Díaz-Guerra E(1,)(2), Ortiz Ó(1),
Vergaño-Vera E(1,)(2), Méndez-Gómez HR(1,)(2), García-Sanz P(1,)(2), Moratalla
R(1,)(2), Vicario-Abejón C(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC),
Avenida Doctor Arce 37, 28002, Madrid, Spain. (2)Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Instituto Cajal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC),
Avenida Doctor Arce 37, 28002, Madrid, Spain. cvicario@cajal.csic.es. (4)Centro
de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas
(CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain. cvicario@cajal.csic.es.

NURR1 is an essential transcription factor for the differentiation, maturation,
and maintenance of midbrain dopaminergic neurons (DA neurons) as it has been
demonstrated using knock-out mice. DA neurons of the substantia nigra pars
compacta degenerate in Parkinson's disease (PD) and mutations in the Nurr1 gene
have been associated with this human disease. Thus, the study of NURR1 actions in
vivo is fundamental to understand the mechanisms of neuron generation and
degeneration in the dopaminergic system. Here, we present and discuss findings
indicating that NURR1 is a valuable molecular tool for the in vitro generation of
DA neurons which could be used for modeling and studying PD in cell culture and
in transplantation approaches. Transduction of Nurr1 alone or in combination with
other transcription factors such as Foxa2, Ngn2, Ascl1, and Pitx3, induces the
generation of DA neurons, which upon transplantation have the capacity to survive
and restore motor behavior in animal models of PD. We show that the survival of
transplanted neurons is increased when the Nurr1-transduced olfactory bulb stem
cells are treated with GDNF. The use of these and other factors with the induced 
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-based technology or the direct reprogramming of
astrocytes or fibroblasts into human DA neurons has produced encouraging results 
for the study of the cellular and molecular mechanisms of neurodegeneration in PD
and for the search of new treatments for this disease.

PMID: 26678495  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Nat Commun. 2015 Dec 7;6:10100. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10100.

Cell cycle and p53 gate the direct conversion of human fibroblasts to
dopaminergic neurons.

Jiang H(1,)(2), Xu Z(2,)(3), Zhong P(1,)(2), Ren Y(2), Liang G(4), Schilling
HA(2), Hu Z(5), Zhang Y(4), Wang X(6), Chen S(3), Yan Z(1,)(2), Feng
J(1,)(2,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Western New York Healthcare System, Buffalo, New York 14215, 
USA. (2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, State University of New York at 
Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14214, USA. (3)Department of Neurology and Institute
of Neurology, Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. (4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Departments of Genetics &Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. (5)Center for Computational Research, New York State
Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics &Life Sciences, State University of New
York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14260, USA. (6)Department of Neurobiology, Key
Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Disorders of the Ministry of Education, Beijing 
Institute for Brain Disorders, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, China.

The direct conversion of fibroblasts to induced dopaminergic (iDA) neurons and
other cell types demonstrates the plasticity of cell fate. The low efficiency of 
these relatively fast conversions suggests that kinetic barriers exist to
safeguard cell-type identity. Here we show that suppression of p53, in
conjunction with cell cycle arrest at G1 and appropriate extracellular
environment, markedly increase the efficiency in the transdifferentiation of
human fibroblasts to iDA neurons by Ascl1, Nurr1, Lmx1a and miR124. The
conversion is dependent on Tet1, as G1 arrest, p53 knockdown or expression of the
reprogramming factors induces Tet1 synergistically. Tet1 knockdown abolishes the 
transdifferentiation while its overexpression enhances the conversion. The iDA
neurons express markers for midbrain DA neurons and have active dopaminergic
transmission. Our results suggest that overcoming these kinetic barriers may
enable highly efficient epigenetic reprogramming in general and will generate
patient-specific midbrain DA neurons for Parkinson's disease research and
therapy.

PMCID: PMC4672381
PMID: 26639555  [PubMed - in process]


8. Int J Stem Cells. 2015 Nov;8(2):228-34. doi: 10.15283/ijsc.2015.8.2.228.

FGF8 is Essential for Functionality of Induced Neural Precursor Cell-derived
Dopaminergic Neurons.

Lim MS(1), Lee SY(2), Park CH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biomedical Science and Engineering, College of Medicine,
Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea ; Hanyang Biomedical Research Institute, College
of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Microbiology,
College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea. (3)Graduate School of
Biomedical Science and Engineering, College of Medicine, Hanyang University,
Seoul, Korea ; Hanyang Biomedical Research Institute, College of Medicine,
Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea ; Department of Microbiology, College of
Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea.

Induced neural precursor cells (iNPCs) are one source of transplantable
dopaminergic neurons used in cell therapy for Parkinson's disease. In the present
study, we demonstrate that iNPCs can be generated by transducing Brn2, Ascl1,
Myt1L and Bcl-xL in a culture supplemented with several mitogens and subsequently
can be differentiated to dopaminergic neurons (DA). However, studies have shown
that iDA and/or iNPC-derived DA neurons using various conversion protocols have
low efficiency. Here, we show that early exposure of FGF8 to fibroblasts
efficiently improves differentiation of DA neurons. So our study demonstrates
that FGF8 is a critical factor for generation of iNPC-derived DA neurons.

PMCID: PMC4651287
PMID: 26634071  [PubMed]


9. J Neurosci. 2015 Nov 18;35(46):15379-90. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2345-15.2015.

Reliable Genetic Labeling of Adult-Born Dentate Granule Cells Using Ascl1 CreERT2
and Glast CreERT2 Murine Lines.

Yang SM(1), Alvarez DD(1), Schinder AF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Plasticidad Neuronal, Fundación Instituto Leloir-Instituto de
Investigaciones Bioquímicas de Buenos Aires-Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones
Científicas y Técnicas, Buenos Aires, C1405BWE, Argentina. (2)Laboratorio de
Plasticidad Neuronal, Fundación Instituto Leloir-Instituto de Investigaciones
Bioquímicas de Buenos Aires-Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y
Técnicas, Buenos Aires, C1405BWE, Argentina aschinder@leloir.org.ar.

Newly generated dentate granule cells (GCs) are relevant for input discrimination
in the adult hippocampus. Yet, their precise contribution to information
processing remains unclear. To address this question, it is essential to develop 
approaches to precisely label entire cohorts of adult-born GCs. In this work, we 
used genetically modified mice to allow conditional expression of tdTomato (Tom) 
in adult-born GCs and characterized their development and functional integration.
Ascl1(CreERT2);CAG(floxStopTom) and Glast(CreERT2);CAG(floxStopTom) mice resulted
in indelible expression of Tom in adult neural stem cells and their lineage upon 
tamoxifen induction. Whole-cell recordings were performed to measure intrinsic
excitability, firing behavior, and afferent excitatory connectivity. Developing
GCs were also staged by the expression of early and late neuronal markers. The
slow development of adult-born GCs characterized here is consistent with previous
reports using retroviral approaches that have revealed that a mature phenotype is
typically achieved after 6-8 weeks. Our findings demonstrate that Ascl1(CreERT2) 
and Glast(CreERT2) mouse lines enable simple and reliable labeling of adult-born 
GC lineages within restricted time windows. Therefore, these mice greatly
facilitate tagging new neurons and manipulating their activity, required for
understanding adult neurogenesis in the context of network remodeling, learning, 
and behavior.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Our study shows that Ascl1(CreERT2) and
Glast(CreERT2) mice lines can be used to label large cohorts of adult-born
dentate granule cells with excellent time resolution. Neurons labeled in this
manner display developmental and functional profiles that are in full agreement
with previous findings using thymidine analogs and retroviral labeling, thus
providing an alternative approach to tackle fundamental questions on circuit
remodeling. Because of the massive neuronal targeting and the simplicity of this 
method, genetic labeling will contribute to expand research on adult
neurogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3515379-12$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4649008 [Available on 2016-05-18]
PMID: 26586824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cell Reprogram. 2015 Dec;17(6):419-26. doi: 10.1089/cell.2015.0046. Epub 2015 Nov
18.

Direct Conversion of Equine Adipose-Derived Stem Cells into Induced Neuronal
Cells Is Enhanced in Three-Dimensional Culture.

Petersen GF(1), Hilbert BJ(2), Trope GD(2), Kalle WH(1), Strappe PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 School of Biomedical Sciences, Charles Sturt University , Wagga Wagga, New
South Wales, Australia . (2)2 School of Animal and Veterinary Sciences, Charles
Sturt University , Wagga Wagga, New South Wales, Australia .

The ability to culture neurons from horses may allow further investigation into
equine neurological disorders. In this study, we demonstrate the generation of
induced neuronal cells from equine adipose-derived stem cells (EADSCs) using a
combination of lentiviral vector expression of the neuronal transcription factors
Brn2, Ascl1, Myt1l (BAM) and NeuroD1 and a defined chemical induction medium,
with ßIII-tubulin-positive induced neuronal cells displaying a distinct neuronal 
morphology of rounded and compact cell bodies, extensive neurite outgrowth, and
branching of processes. Furthermore, we investigated the effects of
dimensionality on neuronal transdifferentiation, comparing conventional
two-dimensional (2D) monolayer culture against three-dimensional (3D) culture on 
a porous polystyrene scaffold. Neuronal transdifferentiation was enhanced in 3D
culture, with evenly distributed cells located on the surface and throughout the 
scaffold. Transdifferentiation efficiency was increased in 3D culture, with an
increase in mean percent conversion of more than 100% compared to 2D culture.
Additionally, induced neuronal cells were shown to transit through a
Nestin-positive precursor state, with MAP2 and Synapsin 2 expression
significantly increased in 3D culture. These findings will help to increase our
understanding of equine neuropathogenesis, with prospective roles in disease
modeling, drug screening, and cellular replacement for treatment of equine
neurological disorders.

PMID: 26579833  [PubMed - in process]


11. Science. 2015 Dec 4;350(6265):1251-5. doi: 10.1126/science.aad2456. Epub 2015 Nov
5.

Single-cell transcriptomics reveals receptor transformations during olfactory
neurogenesis.

Hanchate NK(1), Kondoh K(1), Lu Z(1), Kuang D(1), Ye X(1), Qiu X(2), Pachter
L(3), Trapnell C(4), Buck LB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(2)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98115,
USA. Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Washington, Seattle,
WA 98115, USA. (3)Departments of Mathematics, Molecular and Cell Biology, and
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California-Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. (4)Department of Genome Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98115, USA. coletrap@uw.edu lbuck@fhcrc.org. (5)Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, 1100 Fairview Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
coletrap@uw.edu lbuck@fhcrc.org.

The sense of smell allows chemicals to be perceived as diverse scents. We used
single-neuron RNA sequencing to explore the developmental mechanisms that shape
this ability as nasal olfactory neurons mature in mice. Most mature neurons
expressed only one of the ~1000 odorant receptor genes (Olfrs) available, and at 
a high level. However, many immature neurons expressed low levels of multiple
Olfrs. Coexpressed Olfrs localized to overlapping zones of the nasal epithelium, 
suggesting regional biases, but not to single genomic loci. A single immature
neuron could express Olfrs from up to seven different chromosomes. The mature
state in which expression of Olfr genes is restricted to one per neuron emerges
over a developmental progression that appears to be independent of neuronal
activity involving sensory transduction molecules.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26541607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Dec 3;17(6):719-34. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.09.002. Epub
2015 Oct 29.

Rapid Conversion of Fibroblasts into Functional Forebrain GABAergic Interneurons 
by Direct Genetic Reprogramming.

Colasante G(1), Lignani G(2), Rubio A(1), Medrihan L(2), Yekhlef L(3), Sessa
A(1), Massimino L(1), Giannelli SG(1), Sacchetti S(2), Caiazzo M(1), Leo D(2),
Alexopoulou D(4), Dell'Anno MT(1), Ciabatti E(1), Orlando M(2), Studer M(5), Dahl
A(4), Gainetdinov RR(6), Taverna S(3), Benfenati F(2), Broccoli V(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Ospedale San Raffaele, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia, 16163 Genoa, Italy. (3)Department of Neuroscience and Brain
Technologies, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, 16163 Genoa, Italy;
Neuroimmunology Unit, Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific
Institute, Milan 20132, Italy. (4)Deep Sequencing Group, Biotechnology Center TU 
Dresden, Fetscherstrasse 105, 01307 Dresden, Germany. (5)University of
Nice-Sophia Antipolis, 06108 Nice, France; INSERM, iBV, UMR 1091, 06108 Nice,
France. (6)Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Istituto Italiano
di Tecnologia, 16163 Genoa, Italy; Institute of Translational Biomedicine, St.
Petersburg State University, 199034 St. Petersburg, Russia. (7)Division of
Neuroscience, Ospedale San Raffaele, 20132 Milan, Italy; CNR Institute of
Neuroscience, 20129 Milan, Italy. Electronic address: broccoli.vania@hsr.it.

Transplantation of GABAergic interneurons (INs) can provide long-term functional 
benefits in animal models of epilepsy and other neurological disorders. Whereas
GABAergic INs can be differentiated from embryonic stem cells, alternative
sources of GABAergic INs may be more tractable for disease modeling and
transplantation. We identified five factors (Foxg1, Sox2, Ascl1, Dlx5, and Lhx6) 
that convert mouse fibroblasts into induced GABAergic INs (iGABA-INs) possessing 
molecular signatures of telencephalic INs. Factor overexpression activates
transcriptional networks required for GABAergic fate specification. iGABA-INs
display progressively maturing firing patterns comparable to cortical INs, form
functional synapses, and release GABA. Importantly, iGABA-INs survive and mature 
upon being grafted into mouse hippocampus. Optogenetic stimulation demonstrated
functional integration of grafted iGABA-INs into host circuitry, triggering
inhibition of host granule neuron activity. These five factors also converted
human cells into functional GABAergic INs. These properties suggest that
iGABA-INs have potential for disease modeling and cell-based therapeutic
approaches to neurological disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26526726  [PubMed - in process]


13. J Neurosci. 2015 Oct 28;35(43):14467-75. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1278-15.2015.

Retinoic Acid Receptor ß Controls Development of Striatonigral Projection Neurons
through FGF-Dependent and Meis1-Dependent Mechanisms.

Rataj-Baniowska M(1), Niewiadomska-Cimicka A(1), Paschaki M(1), Szyszka-Niagolov 
M(1), Carramolino L(2), Torres M(2), Dollé P(1), Krezel W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology and Stem Cells Department, Institut de Génétique et de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Institut de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale, U964, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de
Recherche 7104, Fédération de Médecine Translationnelle de Strasbourg, and
Université de Strasbourg, 67404 Illkirch, France, and. (2)Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares, CNIC, Madrid 28029, Spain. (3)Developmental
Biology and Stem Cells Department, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie
Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Institut de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
U964, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche
7104, Fédération de Médecine Translationnelle de Strasbourg, and Université de
Strasbourg, 67404 Illkirch, France, and krezel@igbmc.fr.

The mammalian striatum controls sensorimotor and psychoaffective functions
through coordinated activities of its two striatonigral and striatopallidal
output pathways. Here we show that retinoic acid receptor ß (RARß) controls
development of a subpopulation of GABAergic, Gad65-positive striatonigral
projection neurons. In Rarb(-/-) knock-out mice, concomitant reduction of Gad65, 
dopamine receptor D1 (Drd1), and substance P expression at different phases of
prenatal development was associated with reduced number of Drd1-positive cells at
birth, in contrast to normal numbers of striatopallidal projection neurons
expressing dopamine receptor D2. Fate mapping using BrdU pulse-chase experiments 
revealed that such deficits may originate from compromised proliferation of
late-born striosomal neurons and lead to decreased number of Drd1-positive cells 
retaining BrdU in postnatal day (P) 0 Rarb(-/-) striatum. Reduced expression of
Fgf3 in the subventricular zone of the lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) at
embryonic day 13.5 may underlie such deficits by inducing premature
differentiation of neuronal progenitors, as illustrated by reduced expression of 
the proneural gene Ascl1 (Mash1) and increased expression of Meis1, a marker of
postmitotic LGE neurons. In agreement with a critical role of FGF3 in this
control, reduced number of Ascl1-expressing neural progenitors, and a concomitant
increase of Meis1-expressing cells, were observed in primary cell cultures of
Rarb(-/-) LGE. This defect was normalized by addition of fibroblast growth factor
(FGF). Such data point to role of Meis1 in striatal development, also supported
by reduced neuronal differentiation in the LGE of Meis1(-/-) embryos. Our data
unveil a novel mechanism of development of striatonigral projection neurons
involving retinoic acid and FGF, two signals required for positioning the
boundaries of Meis1-expressing cells.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3514467-09$15.00/0.

PMID: 26511239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Psychiatry. 2016 Jan;21(1):49-61. doi: 10.1038/mp.2015.161. Epub 2015 Oct 27.

Generation of functional human serotonergic neurons from fibroblasts.

Vadodaria KC(1), Mertens J(1), Paquola A(1), Bardy C(1), Li X(1,)(2), Jappelli
R(1), Fung L(1,)(2), Marchetto MC(1), Hamm M(3), Gorris M(1), Koch P(4), Gage
FH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
CA, USA. (2)University of California, San Diego (UCSD), La Jolla, CA, USA. (3)The
Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, USA. (4)Institute of
Reconstructive Neurobiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

The brain's serotonergic system centrally regulates several physiological
processes and its dysfunction has been implicated in the pathophysiology of
several neuropsychiatric disorders. While in the past our understanding of
serotonergic neurotransmission has come mainly from mouse models, the development
of pluripotent stem cell and induced fibroblast-to-neuron (iN)
transdifferentiation technologies has revolutionized our ability to generate
human neurons in vitro. Utilizing these techniques and a novel lentiviral
reporter for serotonergic neurons, we identified and overexpressed key
transcription factors to successfully generate human serotonergic neurons. We
found that overexpressing the transcription factors NKX2.2, FEV, GATA2 and LMX1B 
in combination with ASCL1 and NGN2 directly and efficiently generated
serotonergic neurons from human fibroblasts. Induced serotonergic neurons (iSNs) 
showed increased expression of specific serotonergic genes that are known to be
expressed in raphe nuclei. iSNs displayed spontaneous action potentials, released
serotonin in vitro and functionally responded to selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs). Here, we demonstrate the efficient generation of functional
human serotonergic neurons from human fibroblasts as a novel tool for studying
human serotonergic neurotransmission in health and disease.

PMID: 26503761  [PubMed - in process]


15. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 3;112(44):13717-22. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1510595112. Epub 2015 Oct 19.

Transgenic expression of the proneural transcription factor Ascl1 in Müller glia 
stimulates retinal regeneration in young mice.

Ueki Y(1), Wilken MS(2), Cox KE(1), Chipman L(1), Jorstad N(1), Sternhagen K(1), 
Simic M(3), Ullom K(4), Nakafuku M(4), Reh TA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98125; (2)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA 98125; Molecular Cellular Biology Program, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA 98125; (3)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039; Polytech' Marseille, School of
Advanced Studies of Luminy in Marseilles, 13288 Marseille Cedex 09, France.
(4)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039; (5)Department of Biological Structure,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98125; Molecular Cellular Biology Program, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98125; tomreh@u.washington.edu.

Müller glial cells are the source of retinal regeneration in fish and birds;
although this process is efficient in fish, it is less so in birds and very
limited in mammals. It has been proposed that factors necessary for providing
neurogenic competence to Müller glia in fish and birds after retinal injury are
not expressed in mammals. One such factor, the proneural transcription factor
Ascl1, is necessary for retinal regeneration in fish but is not expressed after
retinal damage in mice. We previously reported that forced expression of Ascl1 in
vitro reprograms Müller glia to a neurogenic state. We now test whether forced
expression of Ascl1 in mouse Müller glia in vivo stimulates their capacity for
retinal regeneration. We find that transgenic expression of Ascl1 in adult Müller
glia in undamaged retina does not overtly affect their phenotype; however, when
the retina is damaged, the Ascl1-expressing glia initiate a response that
resembles the early stages of retinal regeneration in zebrafish. The reaction to 
injury is even more pronounced in Müller glia in young mice, where the
Ascl1-expressing Müller glia give rise to amacrine and bipolar cells and
photoreceptors. DNaseI-seq analysis of the retina and Müller glia shows
progressive reduction in accessibility of progenitor gene cis-regulatory regions 
consistent with the reduction in their reprogramming. These results show that at 
least one of the differences between mammal and fish Müller glia that bears on
their difference in regenerative potential is the proneural transcription factor 
Ascl1.

PMCID: PMC4640735
PMID: 26483457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Am J Pathol. 2015 Dec;185(12):3164-77. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2015.08.018. Epub
2015 Oct 23.

Insulinoma-Associated Protein 1 Is a Crucial Regulator of Neuroendocrine
Differentiation in Lung Cancer.

Fujino K(1), Motooka Y(1), Hassan WA(2), Ali Abdalla MO(3), Sato Y(4), Kudoh
S(4), Hasegawa K(4), Niimori-Kita K(4), Kobayashi H(5), Kubota I(6), Wakimoto
J(6), Suzuki M(7), Ito T(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Experimental Medicine, Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan; Department of Thoracic Surgery,
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology and Experimental Medicine, Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan; Department of Pathology, Faculty 
of Medicine, Suez Canal University, Ismaileya, Egypt. (3)Department of Medical
Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan; Department of Clinical Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine, Suez Canal University, Ismaileya, Egypt. (4)Department of Pathology and
Experimental Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University, 
Kumamoto, Japan. (5)Department of Thoracic Surgery, National Hospital
Organization Kumamoto Saishunso Hospital, Kumamoto, Japan. (6)Department of
Thoracic Surgery and Pathology, National Hospital Organization Minami-Kyushu
Hospital, Kagoshima, Japan. (7)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. (8)Department of
Pathology and Experimental Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. Electronic address:
takaito@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

Insulinoma-associated protein 1 (INSM1) is expressed exclusively in embryonic
developing neuroendocrine (NE) tissues. INSM1 gene expression is specific for
small-cell lung cancer (SCLC), along with achaete-scute homolog-like 1 (ASCL1)
and several NE molecules, such as chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and neural cell 
adhesion molecule 1. However, the underlying biological role of INSM1 in lung
cancer remains largely unknown. We first showed that surgically resected SCLC
samples specifically expressed INSM1. Forced expression of the INSM1 gene in
adenocarcinoma cell lines (H358 and H1975) induced the expression of ASCL1,
brain-2 (BRN2), chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and neural cell adhesion molecule 
1; in contrast, knockdown of the INSM1 gene by siRNA in SCLC (H69 and H889)
decreased their expression. However, forced/knockdown expression of ASCL1 and
BRN2 did not affect INSM1 expression. A chromatin immunoprecipitation study
revealed that INSM1 bound to the promoter region of the ASCL1 gene. A
xenotransplantation assay using tet-on INSM1 gene-transfected adenocarcinoma cell
lines demonstrated that INSM1 induced NE differentiation and growth inhibition.
Furthermore, we found that INSM1 was not expressed in non-small-cell lung cancer 
and some SCLC cell lines expressing Notch1-Hes1. By forced/knockdown expression
of Notch1 or Hes1 genes, we revealed that Notch1-Hes1 signaling suppressed INSM1,
as well as ASCL1 and BRN2. INSM1, expressed exclusively in SCLC, is a crucial
regulator of NE differentiation in SCLCs, and is regulated by the Notch1-Hes1
signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26482608  [PubMed - in process]


17. Brain Struct Funct. 2015 Oct 12. [Epub ahead of print]

The molecular and cellular signatures of the mouse eminentia thalami support its 
role as a signalling centre in the developing forebrain.

Adutwum-Ofosu KK(1,)(2), Magnani D(1,)(3), Theil T(1), Price DJ(1), Fotaki V(4).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Edinburgh, Centre for Integrative Physiology, Hugh Robson
Building, George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9XD, UK. (2)Department of Anatomy,
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana. (3)MRC Centre for 
Regenerative Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH16 4SB, UK. (4)The
University of Edinburgh, Centre for Integrative Physiology, Hugh Robson Building,
George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9XD, UK. vfotaki@ed.ac.uk.

The mammalian eminentia thalami (EmT) (or thalamic eminence) is an embryonic
forebrain structure of unknown function. Here, we examined the molecular and
cellular properties of the mouse EmT. We first studied mRNA expression of
signalling molecules and found that the EmT is a structure, rich in expression of
secreted factors, with Wnts being the most abundantly detected. We then examined 
whether EmT tissue could induce cell fate changes when grafted ectopically. For
this, we transplanted EmT tissue from a tau-GFP mouse to the ventral
telencephalon of a wild type host, a telencephalic region where Wnt signalling is
not normally active but which we showed in culture experiments is competent to
respond to Wnts. We observed that the EmT was able to induce in adjacent ventral 
telencephalic cells ectopic expression of Lef1, a transcriptional activator and a
target gene of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway. These Lef1-positive;GFP-negative cells 
expressed the telencephalic marker Foxg1 but not Ascl1, which is normally
expressed by ventral telencephalic cells. These results suggest that the EmT has 
the capacity to activate Wnt/ß-catenin signalling in the ventral telencephalon
and to suppress ventral telencephalic gene expression. Altogether, our data
support a role of the EmT as a signalling centre in the developing mouse
forebrain.

PMID: 26459142  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Nov 5;17(5):624-34. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.08.002. Epub
2015 Oct 8.

Adult Neural Stem Cells from the Subventricular Zone Give Rise to Reactive
Astrocytes in the Cortex after Stroke.

Faiz M(1), Sachewsky N(2), Gascón S(3), Bang KW(1), Morshead CM(4), Nagy A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON M5T 
3H7, Canada. (2)Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada; Department of Surgery,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5T 1P5, Canada. (3)Department of
Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology, Ludwig-Maximilians University
Munich, Pettenkoferstrasse 12, Munich D-80336, Germany; Institute for Stem Cell
Research, Helmholtz Center Munich, Ingolstädter Landstrasse 1, Neuherberg/Munich 
D-85764, Germany. (4)Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada; Department of Surgery,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5T 1P5, Canada. Electronic address:
cindi.morshead@utoronto.ca. (5)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount
Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON M5T 3H7, Canada; Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1E2, Canada. Electronic
address: nagy@lunenfeld.ca.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Nov 5;17(5):501-2.

Reactive astrocytes (RAs) have been reported to convert to multipotent neural
stem cells (NSCs) capable of neurosphere (NS) formation and multilineage
differentiation in vitro. Using genetic tagging, we determined that
subventricular zone (SVZ) NSCs give rise to NSs derived from the stroke-injured
cortex. We demonstrate that these cells can be isolated from the cortex in two
different models of stroke and from different stroke-lesioned cortical regions.
Interestingly, SVZ NSCs give rise to a subpopulation of RAs in the cortex that
contribute to astrogliosis and scar formation. Last, we show that these SVZ
derived RAs can be converted to neurons in vivo by forced expression of Ascl1.
Identifying the contribution of cells originating from the SVZ to injury repair
has implications for neural regeneration strategies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26456685  [PubMed - in process]


19. Dev Biol. 2015 Dec 1;408(1):90-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.10.009. Epub 2015 Oct
9.

Insm1 controls the differentiation of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells by
repressing Hes1.

Jia S(1), Wildner H(1), Birchmeier C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine,
Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany. (2)Developmental Biology,
Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13125
Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: cbirch@mdc-berlin.de.

Epithelial progenitor cells of the lung generate all cell types of the mature
airway epithelium, among them the neuroendocrine cells. The balance between
formation of pulmonary neuroendocrine and non-neuroendocrine cells is controlled 
by Notch signaling. The Notch target gene Hes1 is expressed by non-neuroendocrine
and absent in neuroendocrine cells. The transcription factor Ascl1 is expressed
in a complementary pattern and provides key regulatory information that specifies
the neuroendocrine cell fate. The molecular events that occur after the induction
of the neuroendocrine differentiation program have received little attention.
Here we show that Insm1 is expressed in pulmonary neuroendocrine cells, and that 
Insm1 expression is not initiated in the lung of Ascl1 mutant mice. We use mouse 
genetics to show that pulmonary neuroendocrine cells depend on Insm1 for their
differentiation. Mutation of Insm1 blocks terminal differentiation, upregulates
Hes1 protein in neuroendocrine cells and interferes with maintenance of Ascl1
expression. We show that Insm1 binds to the Hes1 promoter and represses Hes1, and
we propose that the Insm1-dependent Hes1 repression is required for
neuroendocrine development. Our work demonstrates that Insm1 is a key factor
regulating differentiation of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26453796  [PubMed - in process]


20. J Neurosci. 2015 Oct 7;35(40):13761-72. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1708-15.2015.

Primary Cilia on Horizontal Basal Cells Regulate Regeneration of the Olfactory
Epithelium.

Joiner AM(1), Green WW(2), McIntyre JC(2), Allen BL(3), Schwob JE(4), Martens
JR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan 48109-5632. (2)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, University of 
Florida, College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610-0267. (3)Department of
Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109-2200, and. (4)Department of Developmental, Molecular, and Chemical
Biology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan 48109-5632, Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, University of
Florida, College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610-0267, martensj@ufl.edu.

The olfactory epithelium (OE) is one of the few tissues to undergo constitutive
neurogenesis throughout the mammalian lifespan. It is composed of multiple cell
types including olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) that are readily replaced by two
populations of basal stem cells, frequently dividing globose basal cells and
quiescent horizontal basal cells (HBCs). However, the precise mechanisms by which
these cells mediate OE regeneration are unclear. Here, we show for the first time
that the HBC subpopulation of basal stem cells uniquely possesses primary cilia
that are aligned in an apical orientation in direct apposition to sustentacular
cell end feet. The positioning of these cilia suggests that they function in the 
detection of growth signals and/or differentiation cues. To test this idea, we
generated an inducible, cell type-specific Ift88 knock-out mouse line
(K5rtTA;tetOCre;Ift88(fl/fl)) to disrupt cilia formation and maintenance
specifically in HBCs. Surprisingly, the loss of HBC cilia did not affect the
maintenance of the adult OE but dramatically impaired the regeneration of OSNs
following lesion. Furthermore, the loss of cilia during development resulted in a
region-specific decrease in neurogenesis, implicating HBCs in the establishment
of the OE. Together, these results suggest a novel role for primary cilia in HBC 
activation, proliferation, and differentiation.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: We show
for the first time the presence of primary cilia on a quiescent population of
basal stem cells, the horizontal basal cells (HBCs), in the olfactory epithelium 
(OE). Importantly, our data demonstrate that cilia on HBCs are necessary for
regeneration of the OE following injury. Moreover, the disruption of HBC cilia
alters neurogenesis during the development of the OE, providing evidence that
HBCs participate in the establishment of this tissue. These data suggest that the
mechanisms of penetrance for ciliopathies in the OE extend beyond that of defects
in olfactory sensory neurons and may include alterations in OE maintenance and
regeneration.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3513761-12$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4595624 [Available on 2016-04-07]
PMID: 26446227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cancer Gene Ther. 2015 Oct;22(10):496-505. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2015.49. Epub 2015
Sep 25.

Chrysin suppresses achaete-scute complex-like 1 and alters the neuroendocrine
phenotype of carcinoids.

Somnay YR(1,)(2), Dull BZ(1,)(2), Eide J(1,)(2), Jaskula-Sztul R(1,)(2,)(3), Chen
H(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratories, Department of Surgery, University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA. (2)University
of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, University of Alabama-Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.

Carcinoids are neuroendocrine neoplasms that cause significant morbidity and
mortality and for which few effective therapies are available. Given the recent
identification of the anticancer flavonoid chrysin, we sought to investigate its 
therapeutic potential in carcinoids. Here we report chrysin's ability to modulate
the achaete-scute complex-like 1 (ASCL1), a neuroendocrine-specific transcription
factor highly implicated in the malignant phenotype of carcinoids and other
neuroendocrine cancers. Moreover, we elucidate the role of ASCL1 in carcinoid
growth and bioactivity. Treatment of two carcinoid cell lines (BON and H727) with
varying chrysin concentrations suppressed cell proliferation, while reducing
expression of ASCL1 and the neuroendocrine biomarker chromogranin A (CgA),
demonstrated by western blotting. Propidium iodide and phycoerythrin
AnnexinV/7-aminoactinomycin D staining and sorting following chrysin treatment
revealed S/G2 phase arrest and apoptosis, respectively. This was corroborated by 
chrysin-induced cleavage of caspase-3 and poly ADP-ribose polymerase and
activation of p21(Waf1/Cip1). Furthermore, direct ASCL1 knockdown with an
ASCL1-specific small interfering RNA inhibited CgA and synaptophysin expression
as well as carcinoid proliferation, while also reducing cyclin B1 and D1 and
increasing p21(Waf1/Cip1) and p27(Kip1) expression, suggesting an arrest of the
cell cycle. Collectively, these findings warrant the deliberation of targeted
ASCL1 suppression by chrysin or other agents as a therapeutic approach for
carcinoid management.

PMCID: PMC4607661
PMID: 26403073  [PubMed - in process]


22. Int J Cancer. 2016 Feb 15;138(4):927-38. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29835. Epub 2015 Sep
25.

NOTCH, ASCL1, p53 and RB alterations define an alternative pathway driving
neuroendocrine and small cell lung carcinomas.

Meder L(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), König K(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Ozretic L(1,)(2,)(3,)(4),
Schultheis AM(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Ueckeroth F(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Ade CP(5), Albus
K(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Boehm D(2,)(3,)(6), Rommerscheidt-Fuss U(1,)(4), Florin
A(1,)(4), Buhl T(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Hartmann W(1), Wolf J(2,)(3,)(4,)(7),
Merkelbach-Bruse S(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Eilers M(5), Perner S(2,)(3,)(5), Heukamp
LC(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Buettner R(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Cologne, Kerpener Straße 62,
Cologne, 50937, Germany. (2)Center for Integrated Oncology Cologne, University
Hospital Cologne, Kerpener Straße 62, Cologne, 50937, Germany. (3)Center for
Integrated Oncology Bonn, University Hospital Bonn, Sigmund-Freud Straße 25,
53105, Bonn, Germany. (4)Lung Cancer Group Cologne, University Hospital Cologne, 
Kerpener Straße 62, Cologne, 50937, Germany. (5)Biocenter, University of
Würzburg, Am Hubland, Würzburg, 97074, Germany. (6)Department of Prostate Cancer 
Research, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, Sigmund-Freud Straße 
25, Bonn, 53105, Germany. (7)Clinic for Internal Medicine I, University Hospital 
Cologne, Kerpener Straße 62, Cologne, 50937, Germany.

Small cell lung cancers (SCLCs) and extrapulmonary small cell cancers (SCCs) are 
very aggressive tumors arising de novo as primary small cell cancer with
characteristic genetic lesions in RB1 and TP53. Based on murine models,
neuroendocrine stem cells of the terminal bronchioli have been postulated as the 
cellular origin of primary SCLC. However, both in lung and many other organs,
combined small cell/non-small cell tumors and secondary transitions from
non-small cell carcinomas upon cancer therapy to neuroendocrine and small cell
tumors occur. We define features of "small cell-ness" based on neuroendocrine
markers, characteristic RB1 and TP53 mutations and small cell morphology.
Furthermore, here we identify a pathway driving the pathogenesis of secondary
SCLC involving inactivating NOTCH mutations, activation of the NOTCH target ASCL1
and canonical WNT-signaling in the context of mutual bi-allelic RB1 and TP53
lesions. Additionaly, we explored ASCL1 dependent RB inactivation by
phosphorylation, which is reversible by CDK5 inhibition. We experimentally verify
the NOTCH-ASCL1-RB-p53 signaling axis in vitro and validate its activation by
genetic alterations in vivo. We analyzed clinical tumor samples including SCLC,
SCC and pulmonary large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas and adenocarcinomas using 
amplicon-based Next Generation Sequencing, immunohistochemistry and fluorescence 
in situ hybridization. In conclusion, we identified a novel pathway underlying
rare secondary SCLC which may drive small cell carcinomas in organs other than
lung, as well.

© 2015 The Authors International Journal of Cancer published by John Wiley & Sons
Ltd on behalf of UICC.

PMID: 26340530  [PubMed - in process]


23. Brain Struct Funct. 2015 Aug 27. [Epub ahead of print]

Fgf15 regulates thalamic development by controlling the expression of proneural
genes.

Martinez-Ferre A(1), Lloret-Quesada C, Prakash N, Wurst W, Rubenstein JL,
Martinez S.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Murciano de Investigación Biosanitaria (IMIB-Arrixaca), University
of Murcia, 30120, El Palmar, Murcia, Spain.

The establishment of the brain structural complexity requires a precisely
orchestrated interplay between extrinsic and intrinsic signals modulating
cellular mechanisms to guide neuronal differentiation. However, little is known
about the nature of these signals in the diencephalon, a complex brain region
that processes and relays sensory and motor information to and from the cerebral 
cortex and subcortical structures. Morphogenetic signals from brain organizers
regulate histogenetic processes such as cellular proliferation, migration, and
differentiation. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in the key signal of the ZLI, identified as
the diencephalic organizer. Fgf15, the mouse gene orthologous of human, chick,
and zebrafish Fgf19, is induced by Shh signal and expressed in the diencephalic
alar plate progenitors during histogenetic developmental stages. This work
investigates the role of Fgf15 signal in diencephalic development. In the absence
of Fgf15, the complementary expression pattern of proneural genes: Ascl1 and
Nng2, is disrupted and the GABAergic thalamic cells do not differentiate; in
addition dorsal thalamic progenitors failed to exit from the mitotic cycle and to
differentiate into neurons. Therefore, our findings indicate that Fgf15 is the
Shh downstream signal to control thalamic regionalization, neurogenesis, and
neuronal differentiation by regulating the expression and mutual segregation of
neurogenic and proneural regulatory genes.

PMID: 26311466  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Front Cell Neurosci. 2015 Aug 4;9:288. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2015.00288. eCollection
2015.

Real-time imaging of bHLH transcription factors reveals their dynamic control in 
the multipotency and fate choice of neural stem cells.

Imayoshi I(1), Ishidate F(2), Kageyama R(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Hakubi Center, Kyoto University Kyoto, Japan ; Laboratory of Growth
Regulation, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University Kyoto, Japan ; World
Premier International Research Initiative-Institute for Integrated Cell-Material 
Sciences, Kyoto University Kyoto, Japan ; Precursory Research for Embryonic
Science and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency Saitama, Japan.
(2)World Premier International Research Initiative-Institute for Integrated
Cell-Material Sciences, Kyoto University Kyoto, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Growth
Regulation, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University Kyoto, Japan ; World
Premier International Research Initiative-Institute for Integrated Cell-Material 
Sciences, Kyoto University Kyoto, Japan ; Core Research for Evolutional Science
and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency Saitama, Japan.

The basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors Ascl1/Mash1, Hes1, and
Olig2 regulate the fate choice of neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes,
respectively; however, these factors are coexpressed in self-renewing multipotent
neural stem cells (NSCs) even before cell fate determination. This fact raises
the possibility that these fate determination factors are differentially
expressed between self-renewing and differentiating NSCs with unique expression
dynamics. Real-time imaging analysis utilizing fluorescent proteins is a powerful
strategy for monitoring expression dynamics. Fusion with fluorescent reporters
makes it possible to analyze the dynamic behavior of specific proteins in living 
cells. However, it is technically challenging to conduct long-term imaging of
proteins, particularly those with low expression levels, because a
high-sensitivity and low-noise imaging system is required, and very often
bleaching of fluorescent proteins and cell toxicity by prolonged laser exposure
are problematic. Furthermore, to analyze the functional roles of the dynamic
expression of cellular proteins, it is essential to image reporter fusion
proteins that are expressed at comparable levels to their endogenous expression. 
In this review, we introduce our recent reports about the dynamic control of bHLH
transcription factors in multipotency and fate choice of NSCs, focusing on
real-time imaging of fluorescent reporters fused with bHLH transcription factors.
Our imaging results indicate that bHLH transcription factors are expressed in an 
oscillatory manner by NSCs, and that one of them becomes dominant during fate
choice. We propose that the multipotent state of NSCs correlates with the
oscillatory expression of several bHLH transcription factors, whereas the
differentiated state correlates with the sustained expression of a single bHLH
transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC4523821
PMID: 26300726  [PubMed]


25. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 20;10(8):e0135830. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135830.
eCollection 2015.

VSX2 and ASCL1 Are Indicators of Neurogenic Competence in Human Retinal
Progenitor Cultures.

Wright LS(1), Pinilla I(2), Saha J(3), Clermont JM(4), Lien JS(3), Borys KD(3),
Capowski EE(3), Phillips MJ(1), Gamm DM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of 
America; McPherson Eye Research Institute, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wisconsin, United States of America. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Lozano Blesa
University Hospital, Zaragoza, Spain; Aragones Health Sciences Institute,
Zaragoza, Spain. (3)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, 
United States of America. (4)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wisconsin, United States of America; New England College of Optometry, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (5)Waisman Center, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America; McPherson Eye Research
Institute, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America;
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Three dimensional (3D) culture techniques are frequently used for CNS tissue
modeling and organoid production, including generation of retina-like tissues. A 
proposed advantage of these 3D systems is their potential to more closely
approximate in vivo cellular microenvironments, which could translate into
improved manufacture and/or maintenance of neuronal populations. Visual System
Homeobox 2 (VSX2) labels all multipotent retinal progenitor cells (RPCs) and is
known to play important roles in retinal development. In contrast, the proneural 
transcription factor Acheate scute-like 1 (ASCL1) is expressed transiently in a
subset of RPCs, but is required for the production of most retinal neurons.
Therefore, we asked whether the presence of VSX2 and ASCL1 could gauge neurogenic
potential in 3D retinal cultures derived from human prenatal tissue or ES cells
(hESCs). Short term prenatal 3D retinal cultures displayed multiple
characteristics of human RPCs (hRPCs) found in situ, including robust expression 
of VSX2. Upon initiation of hRPC differentiation, there was a small increase in
co-labeling of VSX2+ cells with ASCL1, along with a modest increase in the number
of PKCa+ neurons. However, 3D prenatal retinal cultures lost expression of VSX2
and ASCL1 over time while concurrently becoming refractory to neuronal
differentiation. Conversely, 3D optic vesicles derived from hESCs (hESC-OVs)
maintained a robust VSX2+ hRPC population that could spontaneously co-express
ASCL1 and generate photoreceptors and other retinal neurons for an extended
period of time. These results show that VSX2 and ASCL1 can serve as markers for
neurogenic potential in cultured hRPCs. Furthermore, unlike hESC-OVs, maintenance
of 3D structure does not independently convey an advantage in the culture of
prenatal hRPCs, further illustrating differences in the survival and
differentiation requirements of hRPCs extracted from native tissue vs. those
generated entirely in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4546156
PMID: 26292211  [PubMed - in process]


26. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Sep 25;465(3):458-63. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.08.039. Epub 2015 Aug 13.

Neuronal differentiation of human iPS cells induced by baicalin via regulation of
bHLH gene expression.

Morita A(1), Soga K(2), Nakayama H(2), Ishida T(3), Kawanishi S(2), Sato EF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Suzuka University of Medical Science,
Japan. Electronic address: morita-a@suzuka-u.ac.jp. (2)Faculty of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Suzuka University of Medical Science, Japan. (3)Institute of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Suzuka University of Medical Science, Japan.

Efficient differentiation is important for regenerative medicine based on
pluripotent stem cells, including treatment of neurodegenerative disorders and
trauma. Baicalin promotes neuronal differentiation of neural stem/progenitor
cells of rats and mice. To evaluate the suitability of baicalin for neuronal
differentiation of human iPS cells, we investigated whether it promotes neuronal 
differentiation in human iPS cells and monitored basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
gene expression during neuronal differentiation. Baicalin promoted neuronal
differentiation and inhibited glial differentiation, suggesting that baicalin can
influence the neuronal fate decision in human iPS cells. Notch signaling, which
is upstream of bHLH proteins, was not involved in baicalin-induced neuronal
differentiation. Baicalin treatment did not down-regulate Hes1 gene expression,
but it reduced Hes1 protein levels and up-regulated Ascl1 gene expression. Thus, 
baicalin promoted neuronal differentiation via modulation of bHLH transcriptional
factors. Therefore, baicalin has potential to be used as a small-molecule drug
for regenerative treatment of neurodegenerative disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26277393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Oct;14(10):2167-74. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0037.
Epub 2015 Aug 7.

Sensitivity of Small Cell Lung Cancer to BET Inhibition Is Mediated by Regulation
of ASCL1 Gene Expression.

Lenhart R(1), Kirov S(1), Desilva H(1), Cao J(1), Lei M(1), Johnston K(1),
Peterson R(1), Schweizer L(1), Purandare A(1), Ross-Macdonald P(1), Fairchild
C(1), Wong T(1), Wee S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Princeton, New Jersey. (2)Bristol-Myers Squibb
Company, Princeton, New Jersey. susan.wee@bms.com.

The BET (bromodomain and extra-terminal) proteins bind acetylated histones and
recruit protein complexes to promote transcription elongation. In hematologic
cancers, BET proteins have been shown to regulate expression of MYC and other
genes that are important to disease pathology. Pharmacologic inhibition of BET
protein binding has been shown to inhibit tumor growth in MYC-dependent cancers, 
such as multiple myeloma. In this study, we demonstrate that small cell lung
cancer (SCLC) cells are exquisitely sensitive to growth inhibition by the BET
inhibitor JQ1. JQ1 treatment has no impact on MYC protein expression, but results
in downregulation of the lineage-specific transcription factor ASCL1. SCLC cells 
that are sensitive to JQ1 are also sensitive to ASCL1 depletion by RNAi.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies confirmed the binding of the BET protein
BRD4 to the ASCL1 enhancer, and the ability of JQ1 to disrupt the interaction.
The importance of ASCL1 as a potential driver oncogene in SCLC is further
underscored by the observation that ASCL1 is overexpressed in >50% of SCLC
specimens, an extent greater than that observed for other putative oncogenes
(MYC, MYCN, and SOX2) previously implicated in SCLC. Our studies have provided a 
mechanistic basis for the sensitivity of SCLC to BET inhibition and a rationale
for the clinical development of BET inhibitors in this disease with high unmet
medical need.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26253517  [PubMed - in process]


28. Mol Psychiatry. 2016 Jan;21(1):62-70. doi: 10.1038/mp.2015.101. Epub 2015 Jul 28.

Direct conversion of human fibroblasts to induced serotonergic neurons.

Xu Z(1,)(2,)(3), Jiang H(2,)(3), Zhong P(2,)(3), Yan Z(2,)(3), Chen S(1), Feng
J(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Ruijin Hospital affiliated
to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (2)Veterans
Affairs Western New York Healthcare System, Buffalo, NY, USA. (3)Department of
Physiology and Biophysics, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, 
USA.

Serotonergic (5HT) neurons exert diverse and widespread functions in the brain.
Dysfunction of the serotonergic system gives rise to a variety of mental
illnesses including depression, anxiety, obsessive compulsive disorder, autism
and eating disorders. Here we show that human primary fibroblasts were directly
converted to induced serotonergic (i5HT) neurons by the expression of Ascl1,
Foxa2, Lmx1b and FEV. The transdifferentiation was enhanced by p53 knockdown and 
appropriate culture conditions including hypoxia. The i5HT neurons expressed
markers for mature serotonergic neurons, had Ca(2+)-dependent 5HT release and
selective 5HT uptake, exhibited spontaneous action potentials and spontaneous
excitatory postsynaptic currents. Application of serotonin significantly
increased the firing rate of spontaneous action potentials, demonstrating the
functional utility of i5HT neurons for studying serotonergic neurotransmission.
The availability of human i5HT neurons will be very useful for research and drug 
discovery on many serotonin-related mental disorders.

PMCID: PMC4518549 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26216300  [PubMed - in process]


29. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Aug 18;43(14):6827-46. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv589. Epub 2015
Jul 2.

Identification of in vivo DNA-binding mechanisms of Pax6 and reconstruction of
Pax6-dependent gene regulatory networks during forebrain and lens development.

Sun J(1), Rockowitz S(1), Xie Q(1), Ashery-Padan R(2), Zheng D(3), Cvekl A(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Departments of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA. (2)Sackler School of Medicine and Sagol School of Neuroscience,
Tel-Aviv University, 69978 Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel. (3)The Departments of
Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA Neurology,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA Neuroscience, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA deyou.zheng@einstein.yu.edu.
(4)The Departments of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA ales.cvekl@einstein.yu.edu.

The transcription factor Pax6 is comprised of the paired domain (PD) and
homeodomain (HD). In the developing forebrain, Pax6 is expressed in ventricular
zone precursor cells and in specific subpopulations of neurons; absence of Pax6
results in disrupted cell proliferation and cell fate specification. Pax6 also
regulates the entire lens developmental program. To reconstruct Pax6-dependent
gene regulatory networks (GRNs), ChIP-seq studies were performed using forebrain 
and lens chromatin from mice. A total of 3514 (forebrain) and 3723 (lens)
Pax6-containing peaks were identified, with ~70% of them found in both tissues
and thereafter called 'common' peaks. Analysis of Pax6-bound peaks identified
motifs that closely resemble Pax6-PD, Pax6-PD/HD and Pax6-HD established binding 
sequences. Mapping of H3K4me1, H3K4me3, H3K27ac, H3K27me3 and RNA polymerase II
revealed distinct types of tissue-specific enhancers bound by Pax6. Pax6 directly
regulates cortical neurogenesis through activation (e.g. Dmrta1 and Ngn2) and
repression (e.g. Ascl1, Fezf2, and Gsx2) of transcription factors. In lens, Pax6 
directly regulates cell cycle exit via components of FGF (Fgfr2, Prox1 and Ccnd1)
and Wnt (Dkk3, Wnt7a, Lrp6, Bcl9l, and Ccnd1) signaling pathways. Collectively,
these studies provide genome-wide analysis of Pax6-dependent GRNs in lens and
forebrain and establish novel roles of Pax6 in organogenesis.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4538810
PMID: 26138486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Glia. 2015 Dec;63(12):2152-67. doi: 10.1002/glia.22882. Epub 2015 Jun 30.

Pluripotent stem cell-derived radial glia-like cells as stable intermediate for
efficient generation of human oligodendrocytes.

Gorris R(1), Fischer J(1), Erwes KL(1), Kesavan J(1), Peterson DA(1,)(2),
Alexander M(3), Nöthen MM(3), Peitz M(1,)(4), Quandel T(1), Karus M(1), Brüstle
O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, LIFE & BRAIN Center, University of
Bonn, Germany. (2)Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Department of
Neuroscience, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, Chicago,
Illinois. (3)Institute of Human Genetics, LIFE & BRAIN Center, University of
Bonn, Germany. (4)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Bonn, Germany.

Neural precursor cells (NPCs) derived from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs)
represent an attractive tool for the in vitro generation of various neural cell
types. However, the developmentally early NPCs emerging during hPSC
differentiation typically show a strong propensity for neuronal differentiation, 
with more limited potential for generating astrocytes and, in particular, for
generating oligodendrocytes. This phenomenon corresponds well to the consecutive 
and protracted generation of neurons and GLIA during normal human development. To
obtain a more gliogenic NPC type, we combined growth factor-mediated expansion
with pre-exposure to the differentiation-inducing agent retinoic acid and
subsequent immunoisolation of CD133-positive cells. This protocol yields an
adherent and self-renewing population of hindbrain/spinal cord radial glia
(RG)-like neural precursor cells (RGL-NPCs) expressing typical neural stem cell
markers such as nestin, ASCL1, SOX2, and PAX6 as well as RG markers BLBP, GLAST, 
vimentin, and GFAP. While RGL-NPCs maintain the ability for tripotential
differentiation into neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes, they exhibit
greatly enhanced propensity for oligodendrocyte generation. Under defined
differentiation conditions promoting the expression of the major oligodendrocyte 
fate-determinants OLIG1/2, NKX6.2, NKX2.2, and SOX10, RGL-NPCs efficiently
convert into NG2-positive oligodendroglial progenitor cells (OPCs) and are
subsequently capable of in vivo myelination. Representing a stable intermediate
between PSCs and OPCs, RGL-NPCs expedite the generation of PSC-derived
oligodendrocytes with O4-, 4860-, and myelin basic protein (MBP)-positive cells
that already appear within 7 weeks following growth factor withdrawal-induced
differentiation. Thus, RGL-NPCs may serve as robust tool for time-efficient
generation of human oligodendrocytes from embryonic and induced pluripotent stem 
cells.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26123132  [PubMed - in process]


31. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Jul 2;17(1):74-88. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.05.014. Epub
2015 Jun 25.

Transcriptional Mechanisms of Proneural Factors and REST in Regulating Neuronal
Reprogramming of Astrocytes.

Masserdotti G(1), Gillotin S(2), Sutor B(3), Drechsel D(4), Irmler M(5),
Jørgensen HF(6), Sass S(7), Theis FJ(8), Beckers J(9), Berninger B(10), Guillemot
F(11), Götz M(12).

Author information: 
(1)Physiological Genomics, Biomedical Center, University of Munich, 80336 Munich,
Germany; Institute for Stem Cell Research, Helmholtz Centre Munich, 85764
Neuherberg, Germany. (2)The Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, The
Ridgeway, London, NW7 1AA, UK; Hutchison/MRC Research Center, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0XZ, UK. (3)Physiological 
Genomics, Biomedical Center, University of Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany. (4)The 
Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, The Ridgeway, London, NW7 1AA, UK.
(5)Institute of Experimental Genetics, Helmholtz Centre Munich, 85764 Neuherberg,
Germany. (6)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, 
UK. (7)Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Centre Munich, 85764
Neuherberg, Germany. (8)Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Centre
Munich, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany; Department of Mathematics, Technical
University Munich, 85748 Garching, Germany. (9)Institute of Experimental
Genetics, Helmholtz Centre Munich, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany; Center of Life and 
Food Sciences Weihenstephan, Technical University, 85354 Freising, Germany.
(10)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, University Medical Center of the
Johannes Gutenberg University, D-55128 Mainz, Germany; Focus Program
Translational Neuroscience, Johannes Gutenberg University, D-55128 Mainz,
Germany. (11)The Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, The Ridgeway,
London, NW7 1AA, UK. Electronic address: francois.guillemot@crick.ac.uk.
(12)Physiological Genomics, Biomedical Center, University of Munich, 80336
Munich, Germany; Institute for Stem Cell Research, Helmholtz Centre Munich, 85764
Neuherberg, Germany; Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology "SyNergy," Ludwig
Maximilian University of Munich, 80539 Munich, Germany. Electronic address:
magdalena.goetz@helmholtz-muenchen.de.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Jul 2;17(1):1-3.

Direct lineage reprogramming induces dramatic shifts in cellular identity,
employing poorly understood mechanisms. Recently, we demonstrated that expression
of Neurog2 or Ascl1 in postnatal mouse astrocytes generates glutamatergic or
GABAergic neurons. Here, we take advantage of this model to study dynamics of
neuronal cell fate acquisition at the transcriptional level. We found that
Neurog2 and Ascl1 rapidly elicited distinct neurogenic programs with only a small
subset of shared target genes. Within this subset, only NeuroD4 could by itself
induce neuronal reprogramming in both mouse and human astrocytes, while
co-expression with Insm1 was required for glutamatergic maturation. Cultured
astrocytes gradually became refractory to reprogramming, in part by the repressor
REST preventing Neurog2 from binding to the NeuroD4 promoter. Notably, in
astrocytes refractory to Neurog2 activation, the underlying neurogenic program
remained amenable to reprogramming by exogenous NeuroD4. Our findings support a
model of temporal hierarchy for cell fate change during neuronal reprogramming.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4509553
PMID: 26119235  [PubMed - in process]


32. J Neurosci. 2015 Jun 24;35(25):9336-55. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3975-14.2015.

Ascl1 Converts Dorsal Midbrain Astrocytes into Functional Neurons In Vivo.

Liu Y(1), Miao Q(2), Yuan J(1), Han S(3), Zhang P(3), Li S(3), Rao Z(3), Zhao
W(3), Ye Q(4), Geng J(1), Zhang X(5), Cheng L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China. (2)Institute of Neuroscience and State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200031, China, State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and
Learning, and IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal
University, Beijing 100875, China, and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200031, China. (3)Institute of Neuroscience and State Key Laboratory of 
Neuroscience, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200031, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and
Learning, and IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal
University, Beijing 100875, China, and. (5)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive
Neuroscience and Learning, and IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Beijing
Normal University, Beijing 100875, China, and lpcheng@ion.ac.cn
xhzhang@bnu.edu.cn. (6)Institute of Neuroscience and State Key Laboratory of
Neuroscience, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200031, China lpcheng@ion.ac.cn xhzhang@bnu.edu.cn.

In vivo induction of non-neuronal cells into neurons by transcription factors
offers potential therapeutic approaches for neural regeneration. Although
generation of induced neuronal (iN) cells in vitro and in vivo has been reported,
whether iN cells can be fully integrated into existing circuits remains unclear. 
Here we show that expression of achaete-scute complex homolog-like 1 (Ascl1)
alone is sufficient to convert dorsal midbrain astrocytes of mice into functional
iN cells in vitro and in vivo. Specific expression of Ascl1 in astrocytes by
infection with GFAP-adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector converts astrocytes in
dorsal midbrain, striatum, and somatosensory cortex of postnatal and adult mice
into functional neurons in vivo. These iN cells mature progressively, exhibiting 
neuronal morphology and markers, action potentials, and synaptic inputs from and 
output to existing neurons. Thus, a single transcription factor, Ascl1, is
sufficient to convert brain astrocytes into functional neurons, and GFAP-AAV is
an efficient vector for generating iN cells from astrocytes in vivo.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/359336-20$15.00/0.

PMID: 26109658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Neural Dev. 2015 Jun 18;10:15. doi: 10.1186/s13064-015-0044-8.

Multi-site phosphorylation regulates NeuroD4 activity during primary
neurogenesis: a conserved mechanism amongst proneural proteins.

Hardwick LJ(1), Philpott A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Hutchison/MRC Research
Centre, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0XZ, UK. ljah2@cam.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Hutchison/MRC Research
Centre, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0XZ, UK. ap113@cam.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Basic Helix Loop Helix (bHLH) proneural transcription factors are
master regulators of neurogenesis that act at multiple stages in this process. We
have previously demonstrated that multi-site phosphorylation of two members of
the proneural protein family, Ngn2 and Ascl1, limits their ability to drive
neuronal differentiation when cyclin-dependent kinase levels are high, as would
be found in rapidly cycling cells. Here we investigate potential
phospho-regulation of proneural protein NeuroD4 (also known as Xath3), the
Xenopus homologue of Math3/NeuroM, that functions downstream of Ngn2 in the
neurogenic cascade.
RESULTS: Using the developing Xenopus embryo system, we show that NeuroD4 is
expressed and phosphorylated during primary neurogenesis, and this
phosphorylation limits its ability to drive neuronal differentiation.
Phosphorylation of up to six serine/threonine-proline sites contributes
additively to regulation of NeuroD4 proneural activity without altering neuronal 
subtype specification, and number rather than location of available phospho-sites
is the key for limiting NeuroD4 activity. Mechanistically, a phospho-mutant
NeuroD4 displays increased protein stability and enhanced chromatin binding
relative to wild-type NeuroD4, resulting in transcriptional up-regulation of a
range of target genes that further promote neuronal differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Multi-site phosphorylation on serine/threonine-proline pairs is a
widely conserved mechanism of limiting proneural protein activity, where it is
the number of phosphorylated sites, rather than their location that determines
protein activity. Hence, multi-site phosphorylation is very well suited to allow 
co-ordination of proneural protein activity with the cellular proline-directed
kinase environment.

PMCID: PMC4494719
PMID: 26084567  [PubMed - in process]


34. Cell Rep. 2015 Jun 23;11(11):1679-85. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.05.024. Epub
2015 Jun 11.

Programming Hippocampal Neural Stem/Progenitor Cells into Oligodendrocytes
Enhances Remyelination in the Adult Brain after Injury.

Braun SM(1), Pilz GA(1), Machado RA(2), Moss J(3), Becher B(4), Toni N(3),
Jessberger S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, Faculty of Medicine and Science, University of
Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland; Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of
Zurich and ETH, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. (2)Brain Research Institute, Faculty of
Medicine and Science, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Fundamental Neurosciences, University of Lausanne, 1015
Lausanne, Switzerland. (4)Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and
ETH, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland; Institute of Experimental Immunology, University
of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. (5)Brain Research Institute, Faculty of
Medicine and Science, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland;
Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH, 8057 Zurich,
Switzerland. Electronic address: jessberger@hifo.uzh.ch.

Demyelinating diseases are characterized by a loss of oligodendrocytes leading to
axonal degeneration and impaired brain function. Current strategies used for the 
treatment of demyelinating disease such as multiple sclerosis largely rely on
modulation of the immune system. Only limited treatment options are available for
treating the later stages of the disease, and these treatments require
regenerative therapies to ameliorate the consequences of oligodendrocyte loss and
axonal impairment. Directed differentiation of adult hippocampal neural
stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) into oligodendrocytes may represent an endogenous
source of glial cells for cell-replacement strategies aiming to treat
demyelinating disease. Here, we show that Ascl1-mediated conversion of
hippocampal NSPCs into mature oligodendrocytes enhances remyelination in a
diphtheria-toxin (DT)-inducible, genetic model for demyelination. These findings 
highlight the potential of targeting hippocampal NSPCs for the treatment of
demyelinated lesions in the adult brain.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26074082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 10;290(28):17401-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.629808. Epub
2015 May 28.

Generation of Dopamine Neurons from Rodent Fibroblasts through the Expandable
Neural Precursor Cell Stage.

Lim MS(1), Chang MY(2), Kim SM(3), Yi SH(2), Suh-Kim H(4), Jung SJ(5), Kim MJ(5),
Kim JH(6), Lee YS(7), Lee SY(8), Kim DW(9), Lee SH(10), Park CH(11).

Author information: 
(1)From the Graduate School of Biomedical Science and Engineering, the Hanyang
Biomedical Research Institute, the Departments of Microbiology. (2)the Hanyang
Biomedical Research Institute, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of
Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Korea. (3)the Department of
Biomedical Science, Graduate School, and. (4)the Department of Anatomy and Brain 
Disease Research Center, College of Medicine, Ajou University, Suwon 443-749,
Korea, and. (5)the Hanyang Biomedical Research Institute, Physiology, and.
(6)From the Graduate School of Biomedical Science and Engineering, the Hanyang
Biomedical Research Institute, Physiology, and. (7)From the Graduate School of
Biomedical Science and Engineering, the Hanyang Biomedical Research Institute,
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University,
Seoul 133-791, Korea. (8)the Departments of Microbiology. (9)the Department of
Physiology and Cell Therapy Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 
120-752, Korea. (10)the Hanyang Biomedical Research Institute, Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Korea,
leesh@hanyang.ac.kr. (11)From the Graduate School of Biomedical Science and
Engineering, the Hanyang Biomedical Research Institute, the Departments of
Microbiology, chshpark@hanyang.ac.kr.

Recent groundbreaking work has demonstrated that combined expression of the
transcription factors Brn2, Ascl1, and Myt1L (BAM; also known as Wernig factors) 
convert mouse fibroblasts into postmitotic neuronal cells. However, questions
remain regarding whether trans-conversion is achieved directly or involves an
intermediary precursor stage. Trans-conversion toward expandable neural precursor
cells (NPCs) is more useful than direct one-step neuron formation with respect to
yielding a sufficient number of cells and the feasibility of manipulating NPC
differentiation toward certain neuron subtypes. Here, we show that co-expression 
of Wernig factors and Bcl-xL induces fibroblast conversion into NPCs (induced
NPCs (iNPCs)) that are highly expandable for >100 passages. Gene expression
analyses showed that the iNPCs exhibited high expression of common NPC genes but 
not genes specific to defined embryonic brain regions. This finding indicated
that a regional identity of iNPCs was not established. Upon induction, iNPCs
predominantly differentiated into astrocytes. However, the differentiation
potential was not fixed and could be efficiently manipulated into general or
specific subtypes of neurons by expression of additional genes. Specifically,
overexpression of Nurr1 and Foxa2, transcription factors specific for midbrain
dopamine neuron development, drove iNPCs to yield mature midbrain dopamine
neurons equipped with presynaptic DA neuronal functions. We further assessed the 
therapeutic potential of iNPCs in Parkinson disease model rats.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4498077 [Available on 2016-07-10]
PMID: 26023233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Dev Neurobiol. 2016 Mar;76(3):241-51. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22310. Epub 2015 Jun 10.

Differentiation potential of individual olfactory c-Kit+ progenitors determined
via multicolor lineage tracing.

Goss GM(1), Chaudhari N(2), Hare JM(3), Nwojo R(1), Seidler B(4), Saur D(4),
Goldstein BJ(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, Florida. (2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Miami
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida. (3)Interdisciplinary Stem Cell
Institute, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Technical University of Munich, München,
Germany.

Olfactory tissue undergoes lifelong renewal, due to the presence of basal neural 
stem cells. Multiple categories of globose basal stem cells have been identified,
expressing markers such as Lgr5, Ascl1, GBC-2, and c-Kit. The differentiation
potential of individual globose cells has remained unclear. Here, we utilized
Cre/loxP lineage tracing with a multicolor reporter system to define c-Kit+ cell 
contributions at clonal resolution. We determined that reporter expression
permitted identification of c-Kit derived progeny with fine cellular detail, and 
that clones were found to be comprised by neurons only, microvillar cells only,
microvillar cells and neurons, or gland/duct cells. Quantification of
reporter-labeled cells indicated that c-Kit+ cells behave as transit amplifying
or immediate precursors, although we also found evidence for longer-term c-Kit+
cell contributions. Our results from the application of multicolor fate mapping
delineate the clonal contributions of c-Kit+ cells to olfactory epithelial
renewal, and provide novel insight into tissue maintenance of an adult
neuroepithelium. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Develop Neurobiol 76: 241-251,
2016.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4662645 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26016700  [PubMed - in process]


37. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 22;6(28):24690-8. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3992.

Identification of deregulation of apoptosis and cell cycle in neuroendocrine
tumors of the lung via NanoString nCounter expression analysis.

Walter RF(1,)(2), Werner R(2), Ting S(2), Vollbrecht C(3), Theegarten D(2),
Christoph DC(4), Kurt Werner S(2), Wohlschlaeger J(2), Mairinger FD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ruhrlandklinik, West German Lung Center, University Hospital Essen, University
of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (2)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital
Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (3)Institute of Pathology,
University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany. (4)Department of Medical Oncology,
West German Cancer Center, University Hospital Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Neuroendocrine tumors of the lung comprise typical (TC) and atypical 
carcinoids (AC), large-cell neuroendocrine cancer (LCNEC) and small-cell lung
cancer (SCLC). Cell cycle and apoptosis are key pathways of multicellular
homeostasis and deregulation of these pathways is associated with cancerogenesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sixty representative FFPE-specimens (16 TC, 13 AC, 16
LCNEC and 15 SCLC) were used for mRNA expression analysis using the NanoString
technique. Eight genes related to apoptosis and ten genes regulating key points
of cell cycle were investigated.
RESULTS: ASCL1, BCL2, CASP8, CCNE1, CDK1, CDK2, CDKN1A and CDKN2A showed lower
expression in carcinoids compared to carcinomas. In contrast, CCNE1 and CDK6
showed elevated expression in carcinoids compared to carcinomas. The calculated
BCL2/BAX ratio showed increasing values from TC to SCLC. Between SCLC and LCNEC
CDK2, CDKN1B, CDKN2A and PNN expression was significantly different with higher
expression in SCLC.
CONCLUSION: Carcinoids have increased CDK4/6 and CCND1 expression controlling RB1
phosphorylation via this signaling cascade. CDK2 and CCNE1 were increased in
carcinomas showing that these use the opposite way to control RB1. BAX and BCL2
are antagonists in regulating apoptosis. BCL2 expression increased over BAX
expression with increasing malignancy of the tumor from TC to SCLC.

PMCID: PMC4694788
PMID: 26008974  [PubMed - in process]


38. J Cell Sci. 2015 Jul 1;128(13):2303-18. doi: 10.1242/jcs.168849. Epub 2015 May
19.

A Brn2-Zic1 axis specifies the neuronal fate of retinoic-acid-treated embryonic
stem cells.

Urban S(1), Kobi D(1), Ennen M(1), Langer D(1), Le Gras S(1), Ye T(1), Davidson
I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics and Cancer, Institut de Génétique et de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS/INSERM/UDS, 1 Rue Laurent Fries,
Illkirch, Cédex 67404, France. (2)Department of Functional Genomics and Cancer,
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS/INSERM/UDS, 
1 Rue Laurent Fries, Illkirch, Cédex 67404, France Equipe Labellisée of the Ligue
Nationale Contre le Cancer, CNRS/INSERM/UDS, 1 Rue Laurent Fries, Illkirch, Cédex
67404, France irwin@igbmc.fr.

Mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) treated with all-trans retinoic acid
differentiate into a homogenous population of glutamatergic neurons. Although
differentiation is initiated through activation of target genes by the retinoic
acid receptors, the downstream transcription factors specifying neuronal fate are
less well characterised. Here, we show that the transcription factor Brn2 (also
known as Pou3f2) is essential for the neuronal differentiation programme. By
integrating results from RNA-seq following Brn2 silencing with results from Brn2 
ChIP-seq, we identify a set of Brn2 target genes required for the neurogenic
programme. Further integration of Brn2 ChIP-seq data from retinoic-acid-treated
ESCs and P19 cells with data from ESCs differentiated into neuronal precursors by
Fgf2 treatment and that from fibroblasts trans-differentiated into neurons by
ectopic Brn2 expression showed that Brn2 occupied a distinct but overlapping set 
of genomic loci in these differing conditions. However, a set of common binding
sites and target genes defined the core of the Brn2-regulated neuronal programme,
among which was that encoding the transcription factor Zic1. Small hairpin RNA
(shRNA)-mediated silencing of Zic1 prevented ESCs from differentiating into
neuronal precursors, thus defining a hierarchical Brn2-Zic1 axis that is
essential to specify neural fate in retinoic-acid-treated ESCs.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25991548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Aging Cell. 2015 Aug;14(4):710-4. doi: 10.1111/acel.12343. Epub 2015 May 20.

Increased gene dosage of Ink4/Arf and p53 delays age-associated central nervous
system functional decline.

Carrasco-Garcia E(1), Arrizabalaga O(1), Serrano M(2), Lovell-Badge R(3), Matheu 
A(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Neuro-Oncology Group, Biodonostia Institute, Paseo Dr. Beguiristain s/n, San
Sebastian, 20014, Spain. (2)Tumor Suppression Group, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), 3 Melchor Fernandez Almagro st, Madrid, 28029, Spain.
(3)Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

The impairment of the activity of the brain is a major feature of aging, which
coincides with a decrease in the function of neural stem cells. We have
previously shown that an extra copy of regulated Ink4/Arf and p53 activity, in
s-Ink4/Arf/p53 mice, elongates lifespan and delays aging. In this work, we
examined the physiology of the s-Ink4/Arf/p53 brain with aging, focusing on the
neural stem cell (NSC) population. We show that cells derived from old
s-Ink4/Arf/p53 mice display enhanced neurosphere formation and self-renewal
activity compared with wt controls. This correlates with augmented expression of 
Sox2, Sox9, Glast, Ascl1, and Ars2 NSC markers in the subventricular zone (SVZ)
and in the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus (DG) niches. Furthermore, aged
s-Ink4/Arf/p53 mice express higher levels of Doublecortin and PSA-NCAM
(neuroblasts) and NeuN (neurons) in the olfactory bulbs (OB) and DG, indicating
increased neurogenesis in vivo. Finally, aged s-Ink4/Arf/p53 mice present
enhanced behavioral and neuromuscular coordination activity. Together, these
findings demonstrate that increased but regulated Ink4/Arf and p53 activity
ameliorates age-related deterioration of the central nervous system activity
required to maintain the stem cell pool, providing a mechanism not only for the
extended lifespan but also for the health span of these mice.

© 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley
& Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4531087
PMID: 25990896  [PubMed - in process]


40. Sci Rep. 2015 May 13;5:10132. doi: 10.1038/srep10132.

Retinoic acid receptor beta and angiopoietin-like protein 1 are involved in the
regulation of human androgen biosynthesis.

Udhane SS(1), Pandey AV(1), Hofer G(1), Mullis PE(1), Flück CE(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology, Department of Pediatrics,
University Children's Hospital, Inselspital [2] The Department of Clinical
Research, University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.

Androgens are essential for sexual development and reproduction. However,
androgen regulation in health and disease is poorly understood. We showed that
human adrenocortical H295R cells grown under starvation conditions acquire a
hyperandrogenic steroid profile with changes in steroid metabolizing enzymes
HSD3B2 and CYP17A1 essential for androgen production. Here we studied the
regulatory mechanisms underlying androgen production in starved H295R cells.
Microarray expression profiling of normal versus starved H295R cells revealed
fourteen differentially expressed genes; HSD3B2, HSD3B1, CYP21A2, RARB, ASS1,
CFI, ASCL1 and ENC1 play a role in steroid and energy metabolism and ANGPTL1,
PLK2, DUSP6, DUSP10 and FREM2 are involved in signal transduction. We discovered 
two new gene networks around RARB and ANGPTL1, and show how they regulate
androgen biosynthesis. Transcription factor RARB stimulated the promoters of
genes involved in androgen production (StAR, CYP17A1 and HSD3B2) and enhanced
androstenedione production. For HSD3B2 regulation RARB worked in cooperation with
Nur77. Secretory protein ANGPTL1 modulated CYP17A1 and DUSP6 expression by
inducing ERK1/2 phosphorylation. By contrast, our studies revealed no evidence
for hormones or cell cycle involvement in regulating androgen biosynthesis. In
summary, these studies establish a firm role for RARB and ANGPTL1 in the
regulation of androgen production in H295R cells.

PMCID: PMC4429542
PMID: 25970467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Glia. 2015 Oct;63(10):1809-24. doi: 10.1002/glia.22846. Epub 2015 May 6.

Age-dependent Müller glia neurogenic competence in the mouse retina.

Löffler K(1), Schäfer P(1,)(2), Völkner M(2), Holdt T(2), Karl MO(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)CRTD-Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Technische Universität
Dresden, Dresden, 01307, Germany. (2)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases
(DZNE) Dresden, Dresden, 01307, Germany.

The mechanisms limiting neuronal regeneration in mammals and their relationship
with reactive gliosis are unknown. Müller glia (MG), common to all vertebrate
retinas, readily regenerate neuron loss in some species, but normally not in
mammals. However, experimental stimulation of limited mammalian retina
regeneration has been reported. Here, we use a mouse retina organ culture
approach to investigate the MG responses at different mouse ages. We found that
MG undergo defined spatio-temporal changes upon stimulation. In EGF-stimulated
juvenile postmitotic retinas, most MG upregulate cell-cycle regulators (Mcm6,
Pcna, Ki67, Ccnd1) within 48 h ex vivo; some also express the neurogenic factors 
Ascl1, Pax6, and Vsx2; up to 60% re-enter the cell cycle, some of which
delaminate to divide mostly apically; and the majority cease to proliferate after
stimulation. A subpopulation of MG progeny starts to express transcription
factors (Ptf1a, Nr4a2) and neuronal (Calb1, Calb2, Rbfox3), but not glial,
markers, indicating neurogenesis. BrdU-tracking, genetic lineage-tracing, and
transgenic-reporter experiments suggest that MG reprogram to a neurogenic stage
and proliferate; and that some MG progeny differentiate into neuronal-like cells,
most likely amacrines, no photoreceptors; most others remain in a
de-differentiated state. The mouse MG regeneration potential becomes restricted, 
dependent on the age of the animal, as observed by limited activation of the cell
cycle and neurogenic factors. The stage-dependent analysis of mouse MG revealed
similarities and differences when compared with MG-derived regeneration in fish
and chicks. Therefore, the mouse retina ex vivo approach is a potential assay for
understanding and overcoming the limitations of mammalian MG-derived neuronal
regeneration. Postmitotic MG in mouse retina ex vivo can be stimulated to
proliferate, express neurogenic factors, and generate progeny expressing neuronal
or glial markers. This potential regenerative competence becomes limited with
increasing mouse age.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25943952  [PubMed - in process]


42. Development. 2015 May 1;142(9):1593-605. doi: 10.1242/dev.115279.

Transcription factors COUP-TFI and COUP-TFII are required for the production of
granule cells in the mouse olfactory bulb.

Zhou X(1), Liu F(1), Tian M(1), Xu Z(1), Liang Q(1), Wang C(1), Li J(1), Liu
Z(1), Tang K(2), He M(1), Yang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Brain Science, State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai
200032, China. (2)Institute of Life Science, Nanchang University, Nanchang,
Jiangxi Province 330031, China. (3)Institutes of Brain Science, State Key
Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain
Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China yangz@fudan.edu.cn.

Neural stem cells (NSCs) persist in the adult mammalian subventricular zone (SVZ)
of the lateral ventricle. Primary NSCs generate rapidly dividing intermediate
progenitor cells, which in turn generate neuroblasts that migrate along the
rostral migratory stream (RMS) to the olfactory bulb (OB). Here, we have examined
the role of the COUP-TFI and COUP-TFII orphan nuclear receptor transcription
factors in mouse OB interneuron development. We observed that COUP-TFI is
expressed in a gradient of low rostral to high caudal within the postnatal SVZ
neural stem/progenitor cells. COUP-TFI is also expressed in a large number of
migrating neuroblasts in the SVZ and RMS, and in mature interneurons in the OB.
By contrast, very few COUP-TFII-expressing (+) cells exist in the SVZ-RMS-OB
pathway. Conditional inactivation of COUP-TFI resulted in downregulation of
tyrosine hydroxylase expression in the OB periglomerular cells and upregulation
of COUP-TFII expression in the SVZ, RMS and OB deep granule cell layer. In
COUP-TFI/COUP-TFII double conditional mutant SVZ, cell proliferation was
increased through the upregulation of the proneural gene Ascl1. Furthermore,
COUP-TFI/II-deficient neuroblasts had impaired migration, resulting in ectopic
accumulation of calretinin (CR)+ and NeuN+ cells, and an increase in apoptotic
cell death in the SVZ. Finally, we found that most Pax6+ and a subset of CR+
granular cells were lost in the OB. Taken together, these results suggest that
COUP-TFI/II coordinately regulate the proliferation, migration and survival of a 
subpopulation of Pax6+ and CR+ granule cells in the OB.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25922524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 May 12;4(5):780-94. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.03.006.
Epub 2015 Apr 23.

SOX2 reprograms resident astrocytes into neural progenitors in the adult brain.

Niu W(1), Zang T(1), Smith DK(1), Vue TY(2), Zou Y(1), Bachoo R(3), Johnson
JE(2), Zhang CL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Hamon Center for
Regenerative Science and Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (2)Department of
Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 6000 Harry Hines
Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (3)Department of Neurology and
Neurotherapeutics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 6000 Harry
Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (4)Department of Molecular Biology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and Medicine,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address: chun-li.zhang@utsouthwestern.edu.

Glial cells can be in vivo reprogrammed into functional neurons in the adult CNS;
however, the process by which this reprogramming occurs is unclear. Here, we show
that a distinct cellular sequence is involved in SOX2-driven in situ conversion
of adult astrocytes to neurons. This includes ASCL1(+) neural progenitors and
DCX(+) adult neuroblasts (iANBs) as intermediates. Importantly, ASCL1 is
required, but not sufficient, for the robust generation of iANBs in the adult
striatum. These progenitor-derived iANBs predominantly give rise to calretinin(+)
interneurons when supplied with neurotrophic factors or the small-molecule
valproic acid. Patch-clamp recordings from the induced neurons reveal subtype
heterogeneity, though all are functionally mature, fire repetitive action
potentials, and receive synaptic inputs. Together, these results show that
SOX2-mediated in vivo reprogramming of astrocytes to neurons passes through
proliferative intermediate progenitors, which may be exploited for regenerative
medicine.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4437485
PMID: 25921813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Brain Res. 2015 Jul 30;1615:51-60. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2015.04.027. Epub 2015
Apr 24.

Neurogenin 2 enhances the generation of patient-specific induced neuronal cells.

Zhao P(1), Zhu T(2), Lu X(3), Zhu J(2), Li L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, China; Department of Neurosurgery, Nanjing
Brain Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu,
China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Fudan university Huashan Hospital, Shanghai
200040, China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, China. (4)Department of
Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: lilixin2@hotmail.com.

Direct lineage reprogramming of human fibroblasts into functional neurons holds
great promise for biomedical applications such as regenerative medicine and
cellbased disease modelling. However, clinical applications must consider how to 
increase neuronal conversion efficiency and at the same time reduce the number of
required transcription factors. Here, we investigated whether Neurogenin 2
(Ngn2), which is a proneural gene that directs neuronal differentiation of
progenitor cells during development, can enhance the generation of
patient-specific induced neuronal cells. In this study, we transfected Ascl1,
Sox2 and Ngn2 into human fibroblasts from the patients' scalp by lentivirus.
Morphological analysis, immunocytochemistry, gene expression and
electrophysiological analysis were performed to identify the similarity of
induced neuronal cells (iNCs) to human neuronal cells. Ngn2 increase the
conversion efficiency from 4% to 13.4%. iNCs express neuronal cell markers and
resemble wild-type neurons in their morphology, gene expression profiles and
exhibit functional membrane properties of mature neurons. Implanted iNCs can
survive and integrate in mouse brains and, unlike iPS cell-derived neural cells, 
do not generate tumours.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25912433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 May 5;112(18):5821-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1417955112. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Odorant receptors regulate the final glomerular coalescence of olfactory sensory 
neuron axons.

Rodriguez-Gil DJ(1), Bartel DL(1), Jaspers AW(1), Mobley AS(1), Imamura F(1),
Greer CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurosurgery. (2)Departments of Neurosurgery, Neurobiology, and
The Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT 06520-8082 charles.greer@yale.edu.

Odorant receptors (OR) are strongly implicated in coalescence of olfactory
sensory neuron (OSN) axons and the formation of olfactory bulb (OB) glomeruli.
However, when ORs are first expressed relative to basal cell division and OSN
axon extension is unknown. We developed an in vivo fate-mapping strategy that
enabled us to follow OSN maturation and axon extension beginning at basal cell
division. In parallel, we mapped the molecular development of OSNs beginning at
basal cell division, including the onset of OR expression. Our data show that ORs
are first expressed around 4 d following basal cell division, 24 h after OSN
axons have reached the OB. Over the next 6+ days the OSN axons navigate the OB
nerve layer and ultimately coalesce in glomeruli. These data provide a previously
unidentified perspective on the role of ORs in homophilic OSN axon adhesion and
lead us to propose a new model dividing axon extension into two phases. Phase I
is OR-independent and accounts for up to 50% of the time during which axons
approach the OB and begin navigating the olfactory nerve layer. Phase II is
OR-dependent and concludes as OSN axons coalesce in glomeruli.

PMCID: PMC4426395
PMID: 25902488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2015 Jun;19(3):154-6. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2015.03.009.
Epub 2015 Apr 6.

Achaete-scute homolog 1 expression closely correlates with endocrine phenotype
and degree of differentiation in sinonasal neuroendocrine tumors.

Taggart MW(1), Hanna EY(2), Gidley P(2), Weber RS(2), Bell D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, University of Texas, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, University 
of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA; Department of Head and
Neck Surgery, University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
Electronic address: diana.bell@mdanderson.org.

Primary sinonasal tumors with neuroendocrine differentiation (STNDs) are
uncommon, with overlapping histology. According to the amount of neuroendocrine
component, they can be subcategorized into esthesioneuroblastoma, high-grade
sinonasal neuroendocrine carcinoma/small cell carcinoma, and sinonasal
undifferentiated carcinoma. Achaete-scute homolog 1 (ASH1) is a master gene for
neuroendocrine differentiation and is expressed in fetal and adult neuroendocrine
tissues. Expression of ASH1 protein may be a useful marker for cancers with
neuroendocrine features. The aim of this study was to compare and assess the
value of ASH1 protein expression/levels in STND. We reviewed the morphological
features and performed immunohistochemical analyses for ASH1 in 30 samples of
surgically resected cancers with neuroendocrine differentiation from our
institution. Achaete-scute homolog 1 was found to be expressed in STND,
indicating that it is instrumental in the development of a subset of neurons and 
neuroendocrine cells and plays a key role in regulating neuroendocrine
differentiation in tumor cells. Achaete-scute homolog 1 levels were associated
with the degree of STND tumor differentiation (high-grade tumors show increased
expression of this protein), correlating well with studies indicating that
expression of ASH1 appears to be restricted to immature cells.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25892663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Lancet Oncol. 2015 May;16(5):569-82. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)70114-2. Epub
2015 Apr 14.

Molecular subgroups of atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumours in children: an
integrated genomic and clinicopathological analysis.

Torchia J(1), Picard D(1), Lafay-Cousin L(2), Hawkins CE(3), Kim SK(4),
Letourneau L(5), Ra YS(6), Ho KC(7), Chan TS(1), Sin-Chan P(1), Dunham CP(8), Yip
S(9), Ng HK(10), Lu JQ(11), Albrecht S(12), Pimentel J(13), Chan JA(14), Somers
GR(15), Zielenska M(15), Faria CC(16), Roque L(17), Baskin B(18), Birks D(19),
Foreman N(19), Strother D(2), Klekner A(20), Garami M(21), Hauser P(21),
Hortobágyi T(22), Bognár L(20), Wilson B(23), Hukin J(24), Carret AS(25), Van
Meter TE(26), Nakamura H(27), Toledano H(28), Fried I(29), Fults D(30), Wataya
T(31), Fryer C(32), Eisenstat DD(33), Scheineman K(34), Johnston D(35), Michaud
J(36), Zelcer S(37), Hammond R(38), Ramsay DA(39), Fleming AJ(40), Lulla RR(41), 
Fangusaro JR(41), Sirachainan N(42), Larbcharoensub N(43), Hongeng S(42),
Barakzai MA(44), Montpetit A(5), Stephens D(45), Grundy RG(46), Schüller U(47),
Nicolaides T(48), Tihan T(49), Phillips J(50), Taylor MD(51), Rutka JT(51), Dirks
P(51), Bader GD(52), Warmuth-Metz M(53), Rutkowski S(54), Pietsch T(55), Judkins 
AR(56), Jabado N(57), Bouffet E(58), Huang A(59).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada;
Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumour Research Centre, Hospital for Sick Children,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of
Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (2)Alberta Children's
Hospital, and Departments of Oncology and Pediatrics, Cumming School of Medicine,
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. (3)Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain
Tumour Research Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of Pathology, Hospital for
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National
University Children's Hospital, Seoul, South Korea. (5)Genome Quebec Innovation
Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. (6)Department of Neurosurgery,
Asan Medical Center, Songpa-gu, Seoul, South Korea. (7)Division of
Hematology-Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Arthur and Sonia
Labatt Brain Tumour Research Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (8)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Children's and
Women's Health Centre of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (9)Department
of Neuropathology, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(10)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China. (11)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology,
University of Alberta Hospital, Edmonton, AB, Canada. (12)Department of
Pathology, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill University Health Center Research
Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada. (13)Department of Neurology, Hospital de Santa
Maria, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Lisbon, Portugal. (14)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(15)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, Hospital for
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. (16)Instituto de Medicina Molecular,
Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal. (17)Cytogenetic 
Laboratory, Centro de Investigação em Patobiologia Molecular, Portuguese Cancer
Institute, Lisbon, Portugal. (18)Department of Immunology, Genetics and
Pathology, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden. (19)Department of
Pediatrics, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, USA. (20)Department of
Neurosurgery, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. (21)Second Department of
Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. (22)Department of
Histopathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Szeged, Hungary. (23)Division 
of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. (24)Division of Neurology and Oncology, Department
of Pediatrics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(25)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
Sainte-Justine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada. (26)Pediatric
Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA. (27)Department of Neurosurgery, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan. (28)Oncology Department, Schneider Hospital, Petach 
Tikva, Israel. (29)Pediatric Hematology Oncology Department, Hadassah Hebrew
University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel. (30)Department of Neurosurgery,
University of Utah, School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (31)Department
of Neurosurgery, Shizuoka Children's Hospital, Aoi-ku, Shizuoka, Japan.
(32)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (33)Departments of Pediatrics and
Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. (34)Department of 
Pediatrics, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada. (35)Department of
Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(36)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Ottawa Hospital and
Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada. (37)Division of
Children's Health and Therapeutics, Children's Health Research Institute, London,
ON, Canada. (38)Department of Pathology, University of Western Ontario, London,
ON, Canada. (39)Department of Pathology, London Health Sciences Centre, London,
ON, Canada. (40)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada. (41)Division of Pediatrics-Hematology, Oncology and Stem
Cell Transplantation, Ann and Robert H Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA. (42)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of
Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand. (43)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi 
Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. (44)Department of Pathology and 
Microbiology, Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan. (45)Department of 
Clinical Research Services, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(46)Children's Brain Tumour Research Centre, School of Clinical Sciences, Queen's
Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK. (47)Center for
Neuropathology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany. (48)Department of
Pediatrics Hematology/Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(49)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California,
San Francisco, CA, USA. (50)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of
California, San Francisco, CA, USA. (51)Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumour
Research Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Division of Neurosurgery, Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. (52)Department of Computer Science, Donnelly
Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto, ON, Canada;
Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, ON, Canada.
(53)Department of Neuroradiology, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(54)Department of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (55)Department of Neuropathology, University
of Bonn Medical Center, Bonn, Germany. (56)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine at Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (57)Department
of Pediatrics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; Department of Human
Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. (58)Division of
Hematology-Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of
Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (59)Division of
Hematology-Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Arthur and Sonia
Labatt Brain Tumour Research Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. Electronic address: annie.huang@sickkids.ca.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2015 May;16(5):486-8.

BACKGROUND: Rhabdoid brain tumours, also called atypical teratoid rhabdoid
tumours, are lethal childhood cancers with characteristic genetic alterations of 
SMARCB1/hSNF5. Lack of biological understanding of the substantial clinical
heterogeneity of these tumours restricts therapeutic advances. We integrated
genomic and clinicopathological analyses of a cohort of patients with atypical
teratoid rhabdoid tumours to find out the molecular basis for clinical
heterogeneity in these tumours.
METHODS: We obtained 259 rhabdoid tumours from 37 international institutions and 
assessed transcriptional profiles in 43 primary tumours and copy number profiles 
in 38 primary tumours to discover molecular subgroups of atypical teratoid
rhabdoid tumours. We used gene and pathway enrichment analyses to discover
group-specific molecular markers and did immunohistochemical analyses on 125
primary tumours to evaluate clinicopathological significance of molecular
subgroup and ASCL1-NOTCH signalling.
FINDINGS: Transcriptional analyses identified two atypical teratoid rhabdoid
tumour subgroups with differential enrichment of genetic pathways, and distinct
clinicopathological and survival features. Expression of ASCL1, a regulator of
NOTCH signalling, correlated with supratentorial location (p=0·004) and superior 
5-year overall survival (35%, 95% CI 13-57, and 20%, 6-34, for ASCL1-positive and
ASCL1-negative tumours, respectively; p=0·033) in 70 patients who received
multimodal treatment. ASCL1 expression also correlated with superior 5-year
overall survival (34%, 7-61, and 9%, 0-21, for ASCL1-positive and ASCL1-negative 
tumours, respectively; p=0·001) in 39 patients who received only chemotherapy
without radiation. Cox hazard ratios for overall survival in patients with
differential ASCL1 enrichment treated with chemotherapy with or without radiation
were 2·02 (95% CI 1·04-3·85; p=0·038) and 3·98 (1·71-9·26; p=0·001). Integrated
analyses of molecular subgroupings with clinical prognostic factors showed three 
distinct clinical risk groups of tumours with different therapeutic outcomes.
INTERPRETATION: An integration of clinical risk factors and tumour molecular
groups can be used to identify patients who are likely to have improved long-term
radiation-free survival and might help therapeutic stratification of patients
with atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumours.
FUNDING: C17 Research Network, Genome Canada, b.r.a.i.n.child, Mitchell Duckman, 
Tal Doron and Suri Boon foundations.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25882982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Brain Res. 2015 Jul 10;1613:59-72. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2015.04.001. Epub 2015
Apr 9.

Dopaminergic differentiation of stem cells from human deciduous teeth and their
therapeutic benefits for Parkinsonian rats.

Fujii H(1), Matsubara K(1), Sakai K(1), Ito M(2), Ohno K(2), Ueda M(1), Yamamoto 
A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.
(2)Departments of Neurogenetics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan. (3)Departments of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 65
Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan. Electronic address:
akihito@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder caused by
the loss of nigrostriatal dopaminergic (DAergic) neurons and the depletion of
striatal dopamine. Here we show that DAergic-neuron-like cells could be
efficiently induced from stem cells derived from human exfoliated deciduous teeth
(SHEDs), and that these induced cells had therapeutic benefits in a
6-OHDA-induced Parkinsonian rat model. In our protocol, EGF and bFGF signaling
activated the SHED's expression of proneural genes, Ngn2 and Mash1, and
subsequent treatment with brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) promoted their
maturation into DAergic neuron-like SHEDs (dSHEDs). A hypoxic DAergic
differentiation protocol improved cell viability and enhanced the expression of
multiple neurotrophic factors, including BDNF, GDNF, NT-3, and HGF. Engrafted
dSHEDs survived in the striatum of Parkinsonian rats, improved the DA level more 
efficiently than engrafted undifferentiated SHEDs, and promoted the recovery from
neurological deficits. Our findings further suggested that paracrine effects of
dSHEDs contributed to neuroprotection against 6-OHDA-induced neurodegeneration
and to nigrostriatal tract restoration. In addition, we found that the
conditioned medium derived from dSHEDs protected primary neurons against 6-OHDA
toxicity and accelerated neurite outgrowth in vitro. Thus, our data suggest that 
stem cells derived from dental pulp may have therapeutic benefits for PD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25863132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Stem Cells. 2015 Jul;33(7):2232-42. doi: 10.1002/stem.2017. Epub 2015 Apr 23.

Transcriptional Hallmarks of Heterogeneous Neural Stem Cell Niches of the
Subventricular Zone.

Azim K(1), Hurtado-Chong A(1), Fischer B(1), Kumar N(1), Zweifel S(2), Taylor
V(3), Raineteau O(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, University of Zurich/ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. (2)Inserm U846, Stem Cell and Brain Research Institute, Université
de Lyon, Université Lyon 1, Bron, France. (3)Department of Biomedicine,
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Throughout postnatal life in mammals, neural stem cells (NSCs) are located in the
subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral ventricles. The greatest diversity of
neuronal and glial lineages they generate occurs during early postnatal life in a
region-specific manner. In order to probe heterogeneity of the postnatal SVZ, we 
microdissected its dorsal and lateral walls at different postnatal ages and
isolated NSCs and their immediate progeny based on their expression of
Hes5-EGFP/Prominin1 and Ascl1-EGFP, respectively. Whole genome comparative
transcriptome analysis revealed transcriptional regulators as major hallmarks
that sustain postnatal SVZ regionalization. Manipulation of single genes encoding
for locally enriched transcription factors (loss-of-function or ectopic
gain-of-function in vivo) influenced NSC specification indicating that the fate
of regionalized postnatal SVZ-NSCs can be readily modified. These findings reveal
the pronounced transcriptional heterogeneity of the postnatal SVZ and provide
targets to recruit region-specific lineages in regenerative contexts. Stem Cells 
2015;33:2232-2242.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25827345  [PubMed - in process]


50. Dis Model Mech. 2015 May;8(5):429-41. doi: 10.1242/dmm.018630. Epub 2015 Mar 18.

Ascl1 phospho-status regulates neuronal differentiation in a Xenopus
developmental model of neuroblastoma.

Wylie LA(1), Hardwick LJ(2), Papkovskaia TD(2), Thiele CJ(3), Philpott A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Hutchison/MRC Research Centre, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge CB2 0XZ, UK Pediatric Oncology 
Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, CRC-1W-3940, 10 Center Dr. MSC-1105,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (2)Department of Oncology, Hutchison/MRC Research
Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge CB2 0XZ, 
UK. (3)Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, CRC-1W-3940,
10 Center Dr. MSC-1105, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)Department of Oncology,
Hutchison/MRC Research Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical
Campus, Cambridge CB2 0XZ, UK ap113@cam.ac.uk.

Neuroblastoma (NB), although rare, accounts for 15% of all paediatric cancer
mortality. Unusual among cancers, NBs lack a consistent set of gene mutations
and, excluding large-scale chromosomal rearrangements, the genome seems to be
largely intact. Indeed, many interesting features of NB suggest that it has
little in common with adult solid tumours but instead has characteristics of a
developmental disorder. NB arises overwhelmingly in infants under 2 years of age 
during a specific window of development and, histologically, NB bears striking
similarity to undifferentiated neuroblasts of the sympathetic nervous system, its
likely cells of origin. Hence, NB could be considered a disease of development
arising when neuroblasts of the sympathetic nervous system fail to undergo proper
differentiation, but instead are maintained precociously as progenitors with the 
potential for acquiring further mutations eventually resulting in tumour
formation. To explore this possibility, we require a robust and flexible
developmental model to investigate the differentiation of NB's presumptive cell
of origin. Here, we use Xenopus frog embryos to characterise the differentiation 
of anteroventral noradrenergic (AVNA) cells, cells derived from the neural crest.
We find that these cells share many characteristics with their mammalian
developmental counterparts, and also with NB cells. We find that the
transcriptional regulator Ascl1 is expressed transiently in normal AVNA cell
differentiation but its expression is aberrantly maintained in NB cells, where it
is largely phosphorylated on multiple sites. We show that Ascl1's ability to
induce differentiation of AVNA cells is inhibited by its multi-site
phosphorylation at serine-proline motifs, whereas overexpression of
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and MYCN inhibit wild-type Ascl1-driven AVNA
differentiation, but not differentiation driven by a phospho-mutant form of
Ascl1. This suggests that the maintenance of ASCL1 in its multiply phosphorylated
state might prevent terminal differentiation in NB, which could offer new
approaches for differentiation therapy in NB.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4415893
PMID: 25786414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 10;6:6474. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7474.

Cenpj/CPAP regulates progenitor divisions and neuronal migration in the cerebral 
cortex downstream of Ascl1.

Garcez PP(1), Diaz-Alonso J(2), Crespo-Enriquez I(3), Castro D(1), Bell D(4),
Guillemot F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology I, School of Biology and Instituto Universitario de
Investigaciones Neuroquímicas (IUIN), Complutense University, 28040 Madrid,
Spain. (3)Department of Craniofacial Development &Stem Cell Biology, King's
College London, Guy's Tower Wing, Floor 27, London SE1 9RT, UK. (4)Confocal and
Image Analysis Laboratory, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, Mill
Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The proneural factor Ascl1 controls multiple steps of neurogenesis in the
embryonic brain, including progenitor division and neuronal migration. Here we
show that Cenpj, also known as CPAP, a microcephaly gene, is a transcriptional
target of Ascl1 in the embryonic cerebral cortex. We have characterized the role 
of Cenpj during cortical development by in utero electroporation knockdown and
found that silencing Cenpj in the ventricular zone disrupts centrosome biogenesis
and randomizes the cleavage plane orientation of radial glia progenitors.
Moreover, we show that downregulation of Cenpj in post-mitotic neurons increases 
stable microtubules and leads to slower neuronal migration, abnormal centrosome
position and aberrant neuronal morphology. Moreover, rescue experiments shows
that Cenpj mediates the role of Ascl1 in centrosome biogenesis in progenitor
cells and in microtubule dynamics in migrating neurons. These data provide
insights into genetic pathways controlling cortical development and primary
microcephaly observed in humans with mutations in Cenpj.

PMCID: PMC4366522
PMID: 25753651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cell Rep. 2015 Mar 4. pii: S2211-1247(15)00171-0. doi:
10.1016/j.celrep.2015.02.025. [Epub ahead of print]

Ascl1 Coordinately Regulates Gene Expression and the Chromatin Landscape during
Neurogenesis.

Raposo AA(1), Vasconcelos FF(1), Drechsel D(2), Marie C(3), Johnston C(4), Dolle 
D(5), Bithell A(6), Gillotin S(2), van den Berg DL(2), Ettwiller L(7), Flicek
P(5), Crawford GE(8), Parras CM(3), Berninger B(9), Buckley NJ(10), Guillemot
F(2), Castro DS(11).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, 2780-156 Oeiras, Portugal. (2)MRC National
Institute for Medical Research, London NW7 1AA, UK. (3)Inserm U1127, CNRS UMR
7225, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC University Paris 06, UMR-S 1127, Institut du
Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière, ICM, 75013 Paris, France. (4)Centre for the
Cellular Basis of Behavior, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London,
London SE5 9NU, UK. (5)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European
Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge
CB10 1SD, UK; Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Welcome Trust Genome Campus,
Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. (6)University of Reading, School of Pharmacy, Hopkins
Life Sciences Building, Reading RG6 6AP, UK. (7)Centre for Organismal Studies
(COS), Ruprecht-Karls-University, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (8)Institute of
Genome Sciences & Policy, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA. (9)Institute of
Physiological Chemistry, University Medical Center Johannes Gutenberg University 
Mainz, 55128 Mainz, Germany; Department of Physiological Genomics, Institute of
Physiology, Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany.
(10)Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7JX, UK.
(11)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, 2780-156 Oeiras, Portugal. Electronic
address: dscastro@igc.gulbenkian.pt.

The proneural transcription factor Ascl1 coordinates gene expression in both
proliferating and differentiating progenitors along the neuronal lineage. Here,
we used a cellular model of neurogenesis to investigate how Ascl1 interacts with 
the chromatin landscape to regulate gene expression when promoting neuronal
differentiation. We find that Ascl1 binding occurs mostly at distal enhancers and
is associated with activation of gene transcription. Surprisingly, the
accessibility of Ascl1 to its binding sites in neural stem/progenitor cells
remains largely unchanged throughout their differentiation, as Ascl1 targets
regions of both readily accessible and closed chromatin in proliferating cells.
Moreover, binding of Ascl1 often precedes an increase in chromatin accessibility 
and the appearance of new regions of open chromatin, associated with de novo gene
expression during differentiation. Our results reveal a function of Ascl1 in
promoting chromatin accessibility during neurogenesis, linking the chromatin
landscape at Ascl1 target regions with the temporal progression of its
transcriptional program.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25753420  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


53. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 9;10(3):e0118918. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118918.
eCollection 2015.

MASH1/Ascl1a leads to GAP43 expression and axon regeneration in the adult CNS.

Williams RR(1), Venkatesh I(2), Pearse DD(3), Udvadia AJ(2), Bunge MB(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine, Miami, FL, United States of America. (2)Department of Biological
Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI, United States of
America. (3)The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, United States of America; Department of
Neurological Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL,
United States of America. (4)The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, University of
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, United States of America; Department 
of Neurological Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami,
FL, United States of America; Department of Cell Biology, University of Miami
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, United States of America.

Unlike CNS neurons in adult mammals, neurons in fish and embryonic mammals can
regenerate their axons after injury. These divergent regenerative responses are
in part mediated by the growth-associated expression of select transcription
factors. The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, MASH1/Ascl1a, is
transiently expressed during the development of many neuronal subtypes and
regulates the expression of genes that mediate cell fate determination and
differentiation. In the adult zebrafish (Danio rerio), Ascl1a is also transiently
expressed in retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) that regenerate axons after optic
nerve crush. Utilizing transgenic zebrafish with a 3.6 kb GAP43 promoter that
drives expression of an enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP), we observed
that knock-down of Ascl1a expression reduces both regenerative gap43 gene
expression and axonal growth after injury compared to controls. In mammals, the
development of noradrenergic brainstem neurons requires MASH1 expression. In
contrast to zebrafish RGCs, however, MASH1 is not expressed in the mammalian
brainstem after spinal cord injury (SCI). Therefore, we utilized adeno-associated
viral (AAV) vectors to overexpress MASH1 in four month old rat (Rattus
norvegicus) brainstem neurons in an attempt to promote axon regeneration after
SCI. We discovered that after complete transection of the thoracic spinal cord
and implantation of a Schwann cell bridge, animals that express MASH1 exhibit
increased noradrenergic axon regeneration and improvement in hindlimb joint
movements compared to controls. Together these data demonstrate that MASH1/Ascl1a
is a fundamental regulator of axonal growth across vertebrates and can induce
modifications to the intrinsic state of neurons to promote functional
regeneration in response to CNS injury.

PMCID: PMC4353704
PMID: 25751153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 30;6(9):7348-63.

ColoLipidGene: signature of lipid metabolism-related genes to predict prognosis
in stage-II colon cancer patients.

Vargas T(1), Moreno-Rubio J(2,)(3), Herranz J(4), Cejas P(2,)(5), Molina S(1),
González-Vallinas M(1), Mendiola M(2), Burgos E(5,)(6), Aguayo C(5,)(7), Custodio
AB(5,)(7), Machado I(5,)(8), Ramos D(5,)(9), Gironella M(5,)(10),
Espinosa-Salinas I(1), Ramos R(11), Martín-Hernández R(4), Risueño A(12), De Las 
Rivas J(12), Reglero G(1), Yaya R(5,)(13), Fernández-Martos C(5,)(13), Aparicio
J(5,)(14), Maurel J(5,)(15), Feliu J(5,)(7), Ramírez de Molina A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology, IMDEA-Food Institute, CEI UAM+CSIC, Madrid (Spain).
(2)Translational Oncology Laboratory, La Paz University Hospital (IdiPAZ), Madrid
(Spain). (3)Precision Oncology Laboratory (POL), Infanta Sofía University
Hospital, Madrid (Spain). (4)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Unit, IMDEA-Food
Institute, CEI UAM+CSIC, Madrid (Spain). (5)Grupo Español Multidisciplinar en
Cáncer Digestivo (GEMCAD). (6)Pathology Department, La Paz University Hospital
(IdiPAZ), Madrid (Spain). (7)Medical Oncology, La Paz University Hospital
(IdiPAZ), Madrid (Spain). (8)Pathology Department, Oncologic Institute of
Valencia (IVO), Valencia (Spain). (9)Molecular Pathology, La Fe University
Hospital, Valencia (Spain). (10)Gastrointestinal and Pancreatic Oncology, Centro 
de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas
(CIBEREHD), Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS),
Hospital Clínic, Barcelona (Spain). (11)Genomics Unit, Science Park, Madrid
(Spain). (12)Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics Research Group, Cancer
Research Center (CSIC-USAL), Salamanca (Spain). (13)Medical Oncology, Oncologic
Institute of Valencia (IVO), Valencia (Spain). (14)Medical Oncology, La Fe
University Hospital, Valencia (Spain). (15)Medical Oncology and Translational
Genomics Group and Targeted Therapeutics, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques
August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Hospital Clínic, Barcelona (Spain).

Lipid metabolism plays an essential role in carcinogenesis due to the
requirements of tumoral cells to sustain increased structural, energetic and
biosynthetic precursor demands for cell proliferation. We investigated the
association between expression of lipid metabolism-related genes and clinical
outcome in intermediate-stage colon cancer patients with the aim of identifying a
metabolic profile associated with greater malignancy and increased risk of
relapse. Expression profile of 70 lipid metabolism-related genes was determined
in 77 patients with stage II colon cancer. Cox regression analyses using c-index 
methodology was applied to identify a metabolic-related signature associated to
prognosis. The metabolic signature was further confirmed in two independent
validation sets of 120 patients and additionally, in a group of 264 patients from
a public database. The combined analysis of these 4 genes, ABCA1, ACSL1, AGPAT1
and SCD, constitutes a metabolic-signature (ColoLipidGene) able to accurately
stratify stage II colon cancer patients with 5-fold higher risk of relapse with
strong statistical power in the four independent groups of patients. The
identification of a group of 4 genes that predict survival in intermediate-stage 
colon cancer patients allows delineation of a high-risk group that may benefit
from adjuvant therapy, and avoids the toxic and unnecessary chemotherapy in
patients classified as low-risk group.

PMCID: PMC4466690
PMID: 25749516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Curr Mol Med. 2015;15(2):138-45.

Clinical utility of neuronal cells directly converted from fibroblasts of
patients for neuropsychiatric disorders: studies of lysosomal storage diseases
and channelopathy.

Kano S, Yuan M, Cardarelli RA, Maegawa G, Higurashi N, Gaval-Cruz M, Wilson AM,
Tristan C, Kondo MA, Chen Y, Koga M, Obie C, Ishizuka K, Seshadri S, Srivastava
R, Kato TA, Horiuchi Y, Sedlak TW, Lee Y, Rapoport JL, Hirose S, Okano H, Valle
D, O'Donnell P, Sawa A(1), Kai M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and Neuroscience, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. asawa1@jhmi.edu.

Methodologies for generating functional neuronal cells directly from human
fibroblasts [induced neuronal (iN) cells] have been recently developed, but the
research so far has only focused on technical refinements or recapitulation of
known pathological phenotypes. A critical question is whether this novel
technology will contribute to elucidation of novel disease mechanisms or
evaluation of therapeutic strategies. Here we have addressed this question by
studying Tay-Sachs disease, a representative lysosomal storage disease, and
Dravet syndrome, a form of severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy, using human iN
cells with feature of immature postmitotic glutamatergic neuronal cells. In
Tay-Sachs disease, we have successfully characterized canonical neuronal
pathology, massive accumulation of GM2 ganglioside, and demonstrated the
suitability of this novel cell culture for future drug screening. In Dravet
syndrome, we have identified a novel functional phenotype that was not suggested 
by studies of classical mouse models and human autopsied brains. Taken together, 
the present study demonstrates that human iN cells are useful for translational
neuroscience research to explore novel disease mechanisms and evaluate
therapeutic compounds. In the future, research using human iN cells with
well-characterized genomic landscape can be integrated into multidisciplinary
patient-oriented research on neuropsychiatric disorders to address novel disease 
mechanisms and evaluate therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC4428755
PMID: 25732146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Pathol Int. 2015 Jun;65(6):277-85. doi: 10.1111/pin.12267. Epub 2015 Feb 24.

Recent advances in histogenesis research of lung neuroendocrine cancers: Evidence
obtained from functional analyses of primitive neural/neuroendocrine
cell-specific transcription factors.

Yazawa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

Small cell carcinoma (SmCC) and large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LENEC) are
categorized as neuroendocrine cancers (NECs) of the lung and have extremely poor 
prognoses. The lack of an effective therapeutic strategy against SmCC and LCNEC
is a serious issue. Because the regulation of the cellular phenotype is
complicated by the actions of various transcription factors, investigations into 
the function of neural/neuroendocrine cell-specific transcription factors are
important for elucidating the cellular characteristics and histogenesis of SmCC
and LCNEC and for establishing innovative therapeutic strategies against them. In
this review, the functions of ASCL1, NeuroD1, REST, TTF1, and class III/IV POU,
that are specifically and highly expressed in lung NECs, are introduced. These
transcription factors transactivate and/or transrepress various genes and are
involved in neural progenitor phenotyping, neuroendocrine and stem cell marker
expression, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Based on the evidence that 
certain carcinoids express ASCL1, NeuroD1, TTF1, and class III/IV POU and that
lung NECs can develop from non-NE cells/non-NEC cells, the relationships among
lung NECs, carcinoid tumors, and non-NECs are discussed. Finally, a model of the 
histogenesis of lung NECs in view of similarities in the expression of primitive 
neural/neuroendocrine cell-specific transcription factors is proposed.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Pathology and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25708144  [PubMed - in process]


57. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(8):1188-96. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1012875.

Cell divisions are not essential for the direct conversion of fibroblasts into
neuronal cells.

Fishman VS(1), Shnayder TA, Orishchenko KE, Bader M, Alenina N, Serov OL.

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Cytology and Genetics ; Novosibirsk , Russia.

Direct lineage conversion is a promising approach for disease modeling and
regenerative medicine. Cell divisions play a key role in reprogramming of somatic
cells to pluripotency, however their role in direct lineage conversion is not
clear. Here we used transdifferentiation of fibroblasts into neuronal cells by
forced expression of defined transcription factors as a model system to study the
role of cellular division in the direct conversion process. We have shown that
conversion occurs in the presence of the cell cycle inhibitors aphidicolin or
mimosine. Moreover, overexpression of the cell cycle activator cMyc negatively
influences the process of direct conversion. Overall, our results suggest that
cell divisions are not essential for the direct conversion of fibroblasts into
neuronal cells.

PMCID: PMC4615072
PMID: 25695848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Apr;10(4):553-64. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000459.

The comparative pathology of genetically engineered mouse models for
neuroendocrine carcinomas of the lung.

Gazdar AF(1), Savage TK, Johnson JE, Berns A, Sage J, Linnoila RI, MacPherson D, 
McFadden DG, Farago A, Jacks T, Travis WD, Brambilla E.

Author information: 
(1)*Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research and Department of Pathology,
UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX; Department of Neuroscience, UT
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX; Cancer Genomics Centre, The Netherlands
Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; §Departments of Pediatrics and
Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA; <U+2016>Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD; ¶Division of Human Biology and Public
Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA; #David H.
Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142; **Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY; and Departementd'Anatomie et Cytologie
Pathologiques, INSERM Unit 823, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Albert
Michallon, and Institut Albert Bonniot University, Grenoble, France.

Comment in
    J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Apr;10(4):551-2.

INTRODUCTION: Because small-cell lung carcinomas (SCLC) are seldom resected,
human materials for study are limited. Thus, genetically engineered mouse models 
(GEMMs) for SCLC and other high-grade lung neuroendocrine (NE) carcinomas are
crucial for translational research.
METHODS: The pathologies of five GEMMs were studied in detail and consensus
diagnoses reached by four lung cancer pathology experts. Hematoxylin and Eosin
and immunostained slides of over 100 mice were obtained from the originating and 
other laboratories and digitalized. The GEMMs included the original Rb/p53 double
knockout (Berns Laboratory) and triple knockouts from the Sage, MacPherson, and
Jacks laboratories (double knockout model plus loss of p130 [Sage laboratory] or 
loss of Pten [MacPherson and Jacks laboratories]). In addition, a GEMM with
constitutive co-expression of SV40 large T antigen and Ascl1 under the Scgb1a1
promoter from the Linnoila laboratory were included.
RESULTS: The lung tumors in all of the models had common as well as distinct
pathological features. All three conditional knockout models resulted in multiple
pulmonary tumors arising mainly from the central compartment (large bronchi) with
foci of in situ carcinoma and NE cell hyperplasia. They consisted of inter- and
intra-tumor mixtures of SCLC and large-cell NE cell carcinoma in varying
proportions. Occasional adeno- or large-cell carcinomas were also seen. Extensive
vascular and lymphatic invasion and metastases to the mediastinum and liver were 
noted, mainly of SCLC histology. In the Rb/p53/Pten triple knockout model from
the MacPherson and Jacks laboratories and in the constitutive SV40/T antigen
model many peripherally arising non-small-cell lung carcinoma tumors having
varying degrees of NE marker expression were present (non-small-cell lung
carcinoma-NE tumors). The resultant histological phenotypes were influenced by
the introduction of specific genetic alterations, by inactivation of one or both 
alleles of specific genes, by time from Cre activation and by targeting of lung
cells or NE cell subpopulations.
CONCLUSION: The five GEMM models studied are representative for the entire
spectrum of human high-grade NE carcinomas and are also useful for the study of
multistage pathogenesis and the metastatic properties of these tumors. They
represent one of the most advanced forms of currently available GEMM models for
the study of human cancer.

PMCID: PMC4523224
PMID: 25675280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Dev Biol. 2015 Apr 15;400(2):210-23. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.01.026. Epub 2015 
Feb 4.

Lineage and stage specific requirement for Dicer1 in sympathetic ganglia and
adrenal medulla formation and maintenance.

Stubbusch J(1), Narasimhan P(2), Hennchen M(1), Huber K(2), Unsicker K(2),
Ernsberger U(3), Rohrer H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Brain Research, Research Group Developmental
Neurobiology, Max-von-Laue-Street 4, 60438 Frankfurt/Main, Germany.
(2)Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Institute of Anatomy& Cell Biology,
Albert-Street 17, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. (3)Max-Planck-Institute for Brain
Research, Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Max-von-Laue-Street 4, 60438
Frankfurt/Main, Germany; Institute of Clinical Neuroanatomy, Goethe-University
Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, Frankfurt/Main, Germany. (4)Max-Planck-Institute 
for Brain Research, Research Group Developmental Neurobiology,
Max-von-Laue-Street 4, 60438 Frankfurt/Main, Germany; Institute of Clinical
Neuroanatomy, Goethe-University Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, Frankfurt/Main,
Germany. Electronic address: hermann.rohrer@brain.mpg.de.

The development of sympathetic neurons and chromaffin cells is differentially
controlled at distinct stages by various extrinsic and intrinsic signals. Here we
use conditional deletion of Dicer1 in neural crest cells and noradrenergic
neuroblasts to identify stage specific functions in sympathoadrenal lineages.
Conditional Dicer1 knockout in neural crest cells of Dicer1(Wnt1Cre) mice results
in a rapid reduction in the size of developing sympathetic ganglia and adrenal
medulla. In contrast, Dicer1 elimination in noradrenergic neuroblasts of
Dicer1(DbhiCre) animals affects sympathetic neuron survival starting at late
embryonic stages and chromaffin cells persist at least until postnatal week 1. A 
differential function of Dicer1 signaling for the development of embryonic
noradrenergic and cholinergic sympathetic neurons is demonstrated by the
selective increase in the expression of Tlx3 and the cholinergic marker genes
VAChT and ChAT at E16.5. The number of Dbh, Th and TrkA expressing noradrenergic 
neurons is strongly decreased in Dicer1-deficient sympathetic ganglia at birth,
whereas Tlx3(+)/ Ret(+) cholinergic neurons cells are spared from cell death. The
postnatal death of chromaffin cells is preceded by the loss of Ascl1, mir-375 and
Pnmt and an increase in the markers Ret and NF-M, which suggests that Dicer1 is
required for the maintenance of chromaffin cell differentiation and survival.
Taken together, these findings demonstrate distinct stage and lineage specific
functions of Dicer1 signaling in differentiation and survival of sympathetic
neurons and adrenal chromaffin cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25661788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Chem Biol. 2015 Feb 19;22(2):169-74. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2014.12.011. Epub
2015 Jan 22.

CRISPR-Cas9-based photoactivatable transcription system.

Nihongaki Y(1), Yamamoto S(1), Kawano F(1), Suzuki H(1), Sato M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba,
Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan. (2)Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan. Electronic
address: cmsato@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Targeted endogenous gene activation is necessary for understanding complex gene
networks and has great potential in medical and industrial applications. The
CRISPR-Cas system offers simple and powerful tools for this purpose. However,
these CRISPR-Cas-based tools for activating user-defined genes are unable to
offer precise temporal control of gene expression, despite the fact that many
biological phenomena are regulated by highly dynamic patterns of gene expression.
Here we created a light-inducible, user-defined, endogenous gene activation
system based on CRISPR-Cas9. We demonstrated that this CRISPR-Cas9-based
transcription system can allow rapid and reversible targeted gene activation by
light. In addition, using this system, we have exemplified photoactivation of
multiple user-defined endogenous genes in mammalian cells. The present
CRISPR-Cas9-based transcription system offers simple and versatile approaches for
precise endogenous gene activation in basic biological research and biotechnology
applications.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25619936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Epigenetics. 2015;10(3):229-36. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1006506.

DNA methylation profiles and biomarkers of oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Li YF(1), Hsiao YH, Lai YH, Chen YC, Chen YJ, Chou JL, Chan MW, Lin YH, Tsou YA, 
Tsai MH, Tai CK.

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Biostatistics; China Medical University ; Taichung , Taiwan.

Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) constitutes >90% of oral cancers and is the
sixth most common malignancy among males worldwide and the fourth leading cause
of death due to cancer among males in Taiwan. However, most patients do not
receive a diagnosis of OSCC until the late stages, which have a lower survival
rate. The use of molecular marker analysis to identify early-stage OSCC would
permit optimal timing for treatments and consequently prolong survival. The aim
of this study was to identify biomarkers of OSCC using the Illumina GoldenGate
Methylation Cancer Panel, which comprised a total of 1,505 CpG sites covering 807
genes. Samples of buccal mucosa resected from 40 OSCC patients and normal tissue 
samples obtained from 15 patients (normal mucosa from OSCC patients or from
patients undergoing surgery unrelated to OSCC) were analyzed. Fms-related
tyrosine kinase 4 (FLT4) methylation exhibited a perfect specificity for
detecting OSCC, with an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of
0.91 for both all-stage and early-stage OSCC. Methylation of 7 genes (ASCL1,
FGF3, FLT4, GAS7, KDR, TERT, and TFPI2) constitutes the top-20 panels for
detecting OSCC. The top-20 panels for detecting early-stage OSCC contain 8 genes:
ADCYAP1, EPHA7, FLT4, GSTM2, KDR, MT1A, NPY, and TFPI2. FLT4 RNA expression and
methylation level were validated using RT-PCR and a pyrosequencing methylation
assay. The median level of FLT4 expression was 2.14-fold for normal relative to
OSCC tissue samples (P < 0.0001). Among the 8 pyrosequenced FLT4 CpG sites,
methylation level was much higher in the OSCC samples. In conclusion, methylation
statuses of selected genes, and especially FLT4, KDR, and TFPI2, might be of
great potential as biomarkers for early detection of buccal OSCC.

PMCID: PMC4622594
PMID: 25612142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Neurosci. 2015 Jan 21;35(3):906-19. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1423-14.2015.

Oligodendroglial maturation is dependent on intracellular protein shuttling.

Göttle P(1), Sabo JK(2), Heinen A(1), Venables G(2), Torres K(1), Tzekova N(1),
Parras CM(3), Kremer D(1), Hartung HP(1), Cate HS(2), Küry P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, University of Düsseldorf, 40225
Düsseldorf, Germany. (2)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, 3010 Victoria, Australia, and. (3)Université Pierre et
Marie Curie-Paris 6, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle
épinière, Inserm U1127, 75013 Paris, France. (4)Department of Neurology, Medical 
Faculty, University of Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany,
kuery@uni-duesseldorf.de.

Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune disease of the CNS resulting in degeneration 
of myelin sheaths and loss of oligodendrocytes, which means that protection and
electrical insulation of axons and rapid signal propagation are impaired, leading
to axonal damage and permanent disabilities. Partial replacement of lost
oligodendrocytes and remyelination can occur as a result of activation and
recruitment of resident oligodendroglial precursor cells. However, the overall
remyelination capacity remains inefficient because precursor cells often fail to 
generate new oligodendrocytes. Increasing evidence points to the existence of
several molecular inhibitors that act on these cells and interfere with their
cellular maturation. The p57kip2 gene encodes one such potent inhibitor of
oligodendroglial differentiation and this study sheds light on the underlying
mode of action. We found that subcellular distribution of the p57kip2 protein
changed during differentiation of rat, mouse, and human oligodendroglial cells
both in vivo and in vitro. Nuclear export of p57kip2 was correlated with promoted
myelin expression, higher morphological phenotypes, and enhanced myelination in
vitro. In contrast, nuclear accumulation of p57kip2 resulted in blocked
oligodendroglial differentiation. Experimental evidence suggests that the
inhibitory role of p57kip2 depends on specific interactions with binding proteins
such as LIMK-1, CDK2, Mash1, and Hes5 either by controlling their site of action 
or their activity. Because functional restoration in demyelinating diseases
critically depends on the successful generation of oligodendroglial cells, a
therapeutic need that is currently unmet, the regulatory mechanism described here
might be of particular interest for identifying suitable drug targets and
devising novel therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2015 Göttle et al.

PMCID: PMC4300332
PMID: 25609610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 3;112(5):1380-5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1424228112.
Epub 2015 Jan 20.

Enhancer-bound LDB1 regulates a corticotrope promoter-pausing repression program.

Zhang F(1), Tanasa B(2), Merkurjev D(3), Lin C(2), Song X(4), Li W(2), Tan Y(2), 
Liu Z(2), Zhang J(2), Ohgi KA(2), Krones A(2), Skowronska-Krawczyk D(2),
Rosenfeld MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Medicine, School of
Medicine, mrosenfeld@ucsd.edu fzhang@ucsd.edu. (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute
and Department of Medicine, School of Medicine. (3)Howard Hughes Medical
Institute and Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Bioinformatics and
Systems Biology Graduate Program, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA 92093; (4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Medicine, School
of Medicine, Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Brain Function and
Disease, and School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of
China, Hefei 230027, China.

Substantial evidence supports the hypothesis that enhancers are critical
regulators of cell-type determination, orchestrating both positive and negative
transcriptional programs; however, the basic mechanisms by which enhancers
orchestrate interactions with cognate promoters during activation and repression 
events remain incompletely understood. Here we report the required actions of LIM
domain-binding protein 1 (LDB1)/cofactor of LIM homeodomain protein 2/nuclear LIM
interactor, interacting with the enhancer-binding protein achaete-scute complex
homolog 1, to mediate looping to target gene promoters and target gene regulation
in corticotrope cells. LDB1-mediated enhancer:promoter looping appears to be
required for both activation and repression of these target genes. Although
LDB1-dependent activated genes are regulated at the level of transcriptional
initiation, the LDB1-dependent repressed transcription units appear to be
regulated primarily at the level of promoter pausing, with LDB1 regulating
recruitment of metastasis-associated 1 family, member 2, a component of the
nucleosome remodeling deacetylase complex, on these negative enhancers, required 
for the repressive enhancer function. These results indicate that LDB1-dependent 
looping events can deliver repressive cargo to cognate promoters to mediate
promoter pausing events in a pituitary cell type.

PMCID: PMC4321301
PMID: 25605944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Development. 2015 Feb 1;142(3):533-43. doi: 10.1242/dev.118745.

A transient wave of BMP signaling in the retina is necessary for Müller glial
differentiation.

Ueki Y(1), Wilken MS(2), Cox KE(1), Chipman LB(1), Bermingham-McDonogh O(1), Reh 
TA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195, USA. (2)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (3)Department of Biological Structure,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA tomreh@uw.edu.

The primary glial cells in the retina, the Müller glia, differentiate from
retinal progenitors in the first postnatal week. CNTF/LIF/STAT3 signaling has
been shown to promote their differentiation; however, another key glial
differentiation signal, BMP, has not been examined during this period of Müller
glial differentiation. In the course of our analysis of the BMP signaling
pathway, we observed a transient wave of Smad1/5/8 signaling in the inner nuclear
layer at the end of the first postnatal week, from postnatal day (P) 5 to P9,
after the end of neurogenesis. To determine the function of this transient wave, 
we blocked BMP signaling during this period in vitro or in vivo, using either a
BMP receptor antagonist or noggin (Nog). Either treatment leads to a reduction in
expression of the Müller glia-specific genes Rlbp1 and Glul, and the failure of
many of the Müller glia to repress the bipolar/photoreceptor gene Otx2. These
changes in normal Müller glial differentiation result in permanent disruption of 
the retina, including defects in the outer limiting membrane, rosette formation
and a reduction in functional acuity. Our results thus show that Müller glia
require a transient BMP signal at the end of neurogenesis to fully repress the
neural gene expression program and to promote glial gene expression.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4302996
PMID: 25605781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Front Neuroanat. 2014 Dec 2;8:140. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2014.00140. eCollection
2014.

Notch signaling and proneural genes work together to control the neural building 
blocks for the initial scaffold in the hypothalamus.

Ware M(1), Hamdi-Rozé H(1), Dupé V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et Développement de Rennes, Faculté de Médecine, CNRS
UMR6290, Université de Rennes 1 Rennes, France.

The vertebrate embryonic prosencephalon gives rise to the hypothalamus, which
plays essential roles in sensory information processing as well as control of
physiological homeostasis and behavior. While patterning of the hypothalamus has 
received much attention, initial neurogenesis in the developing hypothalamus has 
mostly been neglected. The first differentiating progenitor cells of the
hypothalamus will give rise to neurons that form the nucleus of the tract of the 
postoptic commissure (nTPOC) and the nucleus of the mammillotegmental tract
(nMTT). The formation of these neuronal populations has to be highly controlled
both spatially and temporally as these tracts will form part of the ventral
longitudinal tract (VLT) and act as a scaffold for later, follower axons. This
review will cumulate and summarize the existing data available describing initial
neurogenesis in the vertebrate hypothalamus. It is well-known that the Notch
signaling pathway through the inhibition of proneural genes is a key regulator of
neurogenesis in the vertebrate central nervous system. It has only recently been 
proposed that loss of Notch signaling in the developing chick embryo causes an
increase in the number of neurons in the hypothalamus, highlighting an early
function of the Notch pathway during hypothalamus formation. Further analysis in 
the chick and mouse hypothalamus confirms the expression of Notch components and 
Ascl1 before the appearance of the first differentiated neurons. Many newly
identified proneural target genes were also found to be expressed during neuronal
differentiation in the hypothalamus. Given the critical role that hypothalamic
neural circuitry plays in maintaining homeostasis, it is particularly important
to establish the targets downstream of this Notch/proneural network.

PMCID: PMC4251447
PMID: 25520625  [PubMed]


66. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014 Dec 2;8:412. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00412. eCollection
2014.

Transcriptional control of vertebrate neurogenesis by the proneural factor Ascl1.

Vasconcelos FF(1), Castro DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology, Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência Oeiras, Portugal.

Proneural transcription factors (TFs) such as Ascl1 function as master regulators
of neurogenesis in vertebrates, being both necessary and sufficient for the
activation of a full program of neuronal differentiation. Novel insights into the
dynamics of Ascl1 expression at the cellular level, combined with the progressive
characterization of its transcriptional program, have expanded the classical view
of Ascl1 as a differentiation factor in neurogenesis. These advances resulted in 
a new model, whereby Ascl1 promotes sequentially the proliferation and
differentiation of neural/stem progenitor cells. The multiple activities of Ascl1
are associated with the activation of distinct direct targets at progressive
stages along the neuronal lineage. How this temporal pattern is established is
poorly understood. Two modes of Ascl1 expression recently described (oscillatory 
vs. sustained) are likely to be of importance, together with additional
mechanistic determinants such as the chromatin landscape and other
transcriptional pathways. Here we revise these latest findings, and discuss their
implications to the gene regulatory functions of Ascl1 during neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4251449
PMID: 25520623  [PubMed]


67. Development. 2015 Jan 15;142(2):303-13. doi: 10.1242/dev.110767. Epub 2014 Dec
17.

Postnatal subventricular zone progenitors switch their fate to generate neurons
with distinct synaptic input patterns.

Ravi N(1), Li Z(2), Oettl LL(1), Bartsch D(3), Schönig K(3), Kelsch W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg
University, Mannheim 68159, Germany German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg
69120, Germany. (2)German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(3)Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg
University, Mannheim 68159, Germany. (4)Central Institute of Mental Health,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim 68159, Germany German
Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg 69120, Germany kelsch@uni-heidelberg.de.

New granule cell neurons (GCs) generated in the neonatal and adult subventricular
zone (SVZ) have distinct patterns of input synapses in their dendritic domains.
These synaptic input patterns determine the computations that the neurons
eventually perform in the olfactory bulb. We observed that GCs generated earlier 
in postnatal life had acquired an 'adult' synaptic development only in one
dendritic domain, and only later-born GCs showed an 'adult' synaptic development 
in both dendritic domains. It is unknown to what extent the distinct synaptic
input patterns are already determined in SVZ progenitors and/or by the brain
circuit into which neurons integrate. To distinguish these possibilities, we
heterochronically transplanted retrovirally labeled SVZ progenitor cells. Once
these transplanted progenitors, which mainly expressed Mash1, had differentiated 
into GCs, their glutamatergic input synapses were visualized by genetic tags. We 
observed that GCs derived from neonatal progenitors differentiating in the adult 
maintained their characteristic neonatal synapse densities. Grafting of adult SVZ
progenitors to the neonate had a different outcome. These GCs formed synaptic
densities that corresponded to neither adult nor neonatal patterns in two
dendritic domains. In summary, progenitors in the neonatal and adult brain
generate distinct GC populations and switch their fate to generate neurons with
specific synaptic input patterns. Once they switch, adult progenitors require
specific properties of the circuit to maintain their characteristic synaptic
input patterns. Such determination of synaptic input patterns already at the
progenitor-cell level may be exploited for brain repair to engineer neurons with 
defined wiring patterns.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25519243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Dev Biol. 2015 Feb 15;398(2):280-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.12.003. Epub 2014 
Dec 12.

Ascl1 and Helt act combinatorially to specify thalamic neuronal identity by
repressing Dlxs activation.

Song H(1), Lee B(1), Pyun D(1), Guimera J(2), Son Y(1), Yoon J(1), Baek K(1),
Wurst W(2), Jeong Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, College of Life Sciences and Graduate
School of Biotechnology, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si 446-701, Republic of
Korea. (2)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Developmental Genetics, D-85764
Neuherberg, Germany. (3)Department of Genetic Engineering, College of Life
Sciences and Graduate School of Biotechnology, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si
446-701, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: yongsu@khu.ac.kr.

The mammalian thalamus is an essential diencephalic derivative that plays unique 
roles in processing and relaying sensory and motor information to and from the
cerebral cortex. The profile of transcription factors and lineage tracing
experiments revealed a spatiotemporal relationship between diencephalic
progenitor domains and discrete differentiated neurons contributing to thalamic
nuclei. However, the precise molecular mechanisms by which heterogeneous thalamic
neurons become specified and assemble into distinct thalamic nuclei are still
poorly understood. Here, we show that a combinatorial interaction between the
bHLH transcription factors Ascl1 and Helt is required for acquiring thalamic
progenitor identity. Surprisingly, in the combined absence of Ascl1 and Helt,
rostral thalamic progenitors (TH-R) adopt a molecular profile of a more rostral
diencephalic derivative, the prethalamus. Furthermore, we show that the
prethalamic factors Dlxs upregulated by Ascl1/Helt deficiency play unique roles
in regulating thalamic progenitor specification, and that derepression of Dlx2
and Dlx5 suppress generation of TH-R neurons. Taken together, our results suggest
a model whereby the combined activity of two distinct bHLH factors plays a key
role in the development of discrete classes of thalamic interneurons.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25512300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Mar 1;24(5):1441-56. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu561. Epub 2014 Dec
5.

Epigenetic dysregulation of hairy and enhancer of split 4 (HES4) is associated
with striatal degeneration in postmortem Huntington brains.

Bai G(1), Cheung I(2), Shulha HP(3), Coelho JE(4), Li P(4), Dong X(3),
Jakovcevski M(2), Wang Y(4), Grigorenko A(2), Jiang Y(5), Hoss A(4), Patel K(1), 
Zheng M(1), Rogaev E(2), Myers RH(6), Weng Z(3), Akbarian S(7), Chen JF(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neural and Pain Sciences, University of Maryland Dental School, 
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. (2)Brudnick Neuropsychiatric Research Institute.
(3)Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01604, USA. (4)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of
Medicine, 715 Albany Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA. (5)Friedman Brain Institute, 
Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029,
USA. (6)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, 715 Albany
Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA, Genome Science Institute, Boston University School
of Medicine, 72 East Concord Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA. (7)Brudnick
Neuropsychiatric Research Institute, Friedman Brain Institute, Department of
Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(8)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, 715 Albany
Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA, chenjf@bu.edu.

To investigate epigenetic contributions to Huntington's disease (HD)
pathogenesis, we carried out genome-wide mapping of the transcriptional mark,
trimethyl-histone H3-lysine 4 (H3K4me3) in neuronal nuclei extracted from
prefrontal cortex of HD cases and controls using chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by deep-sequencing. Neuron-specific mapping of the genome-wide
distribution of H3K4me3 revealed 136 differentially enriched loci associated with
genes implicated in neuronal development and neurodegeneration, including GPR3,
TMEM106B, PDIA6 and the Notch signaling genes hairy and enhancer of split 4
(HES4) and JAGGED2, supporting the view that the neuronal epigenome is affected
in HD. Importantly, loss of H3K4me3 at CpG-rich sequences on the HES4 promoter
was associated with excessive DNA methylation, reduced binding of nuclear
proteins to the methylated region and altered expression of HES4 and HES4
targeted genes MASH1 and P21 involved in striatal development. Moreover,
hypermethylation of HES4 promoter sequences was strikingly correlated with
measures of striatal degeneration and age-of-onset in a cohort of 25 HD brains (r
= 0.56, P = 0.006). Lastly, shRNA knockdown of HES4 in human neuroblastoma cells 
altered MASH1 and P21 mRNA expression and markedly increased mutated HTT-induced 
aggregates and cell death. These findings, taken together, suggest that
epigenetic dysregulation of HES4 could play a critical role in modifying HD
disease pathogenesis and severity.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4321450
PMID: 25480889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Dec 9;3(6):1000-14. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.10.007.
Epub 2014 Nov 20.

Sox2-mediated conversion of NG2 glia into induced neurons in the injured adult
cerebral cortex.

Heinrich C(1), Bergami M(2), Gascón S(3), Lepier A(2), Viganò F(2), Dimou L(3),
Sutor B(2), Berninger B(4), Götz M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology, Ludwig-Maximilians University
Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany; INSERM U836, University Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble
Institute of Neurosciences, 38000 Grenoble, France. (2)Physiological Genomics,
Institute of Physiology, Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, 80336 Munich,
Germany. (3)Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology, Ludwig-Maximilians
University Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany; Institute for Stem Cell Research,
National Research Center for Environment and Health, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany.
(4)Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology, Ludwig-Maximilians University
Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany; Institute of Physiological Chemistry, University
Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, 55128 Mainz, Germany; Focus 
Program Translational Neuroscience, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, 55131
Mainz, Germany. Electronic address: berningb@uni-mainz.de. (5)Physiological
Genomics, Institute of Physiology, Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, 80336
Munich, Germany; Institute for Stem Cell Research, National Research Center for
Environment and Health, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany; Munich Cluster for Systems
Neurology (SyNergy), 80336 Munich, Germany. Electronic address:
magdalena.goetz@helmholtz-muenchen.de.

The adult cerebral cortex lacks the capacity to replace degenerated neurons
following traumatic injury. Conversion of nonneuronal cells into induced neurons 
has been proposed as an innovative strategy toward brain repair. Here, we show
that retrovirus-mediated expression of the transcription factors Sox2 and Ascl1, 
but strikingly also Sox2 alone, can induce the conversion of genetically
fate-mapped NG2 glia into induced doublecortin (DCX)(+) neurons in the adult
mouse cerebral cortex following stab wound injury in vivo. In contrast,
lentiviral expression of Sox2 in the unlesioned cortex failed to convert
oligodendroglial and astroglial cells into DCX(+) cells. Neurons induced
following injury mature morphologically and some acquire NeuN while losing DCX.
Patch-clamp recording of slices containing Sox2- and/or Ascl1-transduced cells
revealed that a substantial fraction of these cells receive synaptic inputs from 
neurons neighboring the injury site. Thus, NG2 glia represent a potential target 
for reprogramming strategies toward cortical repair.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4264057
PMID: 25458895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014 Dec 15;281(3):243-53. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2014.10.007. Epub 2014 Oct 30.

Arsenic inhibits hedgehog signaling during P19 cell differentiation.

Liu JT(1), Bain LJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Toxicology Program, Clemson University, 132 Long Hall, Clemson, 
SC 29634, USA. (2)Environmental Toxicology Program, Clemson University, 132 Long 
Hall, Clemson, SC 29634, USA; Department of Biological Sciences, Clemson
University, 132 Long Hall, Clemson, SC 29634, USA. Electronic address:
lbain@clemson.edu.

Arsenic is a toxicant found in ground water around the world, and human exposure 
mainly comes from drinking water or from crops grown in areas containing arsenic 
in soils or water. Epidemiological studies have shown that arsenic exposure
during development decreased intellectual function, reduced birth weight, and
altered locomotor activity, while in vitro studies have shown that arsenite
decreased muscle and neuronal cell differentiation. The sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling pathway plays an important role during the differentiation of both
neurons and skeletal muscle. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether
arsenic can disrupt Shh signaling in P19 mouse embryonic stem cells, leading to
changes muscle and neuronal cell differentiation. P19 embryonic stem cells were
exposed to 0, 0.25, or 0.5 µM of sodium arsenite for up to 9 days during cell
differentiation. We found that arsenite exposure significantly reduced transcript
levels of genes in the Shh pathway in both a time and dose-dependent manner. This
included the Shh ligand, which was decreased 2- to 3-fold, the Gli2 transcription
factor, which was decreased 2- to 3-fold, and its downstream target gene Ascl1,
which was decreased 5-fold. GLI2 protein levels and transcriptional activity were
also reduced. However, arsenic did not alter GLI2 primary cilium accumulation or 
nuclear translocation. Moreover, additional extracellular SHH rescued the
inhibitory effects of arsenic on cellular differentiation due to an increase in
GLI binding activity. Taken together, we conclude that arsenic exposure affected 
Shh signaling, ultimately decreasing the expression of the Gli2 transcription
factor. These results suggest a mechanism by which arsenic disrupts cell
differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4255151
PMID: 25448440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Neurosci. 2014 Nov 12;34(46):15223-33. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3403-14.2014.

Neurogenin3 restricts serotonergic neuron differentiation to the hindbrain.

Carcagno AL(1), Di Bella DJ(1), Goulding M(2), Guillemot F(3), Lanuza GM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Laboratory, Instituto Leloir and Consejo Nacional
de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (IIBBA-CONICET), Buenos Aires 1405,
Argentina. (2)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, and. (3)Division of Molecular
Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 
1AA, United Kingdom. (4)Developmental Neurobiology Laboratory, Instituto Leloir
and Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (IIBBA-CONICET),
Buenos Aires 1405, Argentina, GLanuza@Leloir.org.ar.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2015 May 20;35(20):8037.

The development of the nervous system is critically dependent on the production
of functionally diverse neuronal cell types at their correct locations. In the
embryonic neural tube, dorsoventral signaling has emerged as a fundamental
mechanism for generating neuronal diversity. In contrast, far less is known about
how different neuronal cell types are organized along the rostrocaudal axis. In
the developing mouse and chick neural tube, hindbrain serotonergic neurons and
spinal glutamatergic V3 interneurons are produced from ventral p3 progenitors,
which possess a common transcriptional identity but are confined to distinct
anterior-posterior territories. In this study, we show that the expression of the
transcription factor Neurogenin3 (Neurog3) in the spinal cord controls the
correct specification of p3-derived neurons. Gain- and loss-of-function
manipulations in the chick and mouse embryo show that Neurog3 switches ventral
progenitors from a serotonergic to V3 differentiation program by repressing Ascl1
in spinal p3 progenitors through a mechanism dependent on Hes proteins. In this
way, Neurog3 establishes the posterior boundary of the serotonergic system by
actively suppressing serotonergic specification in the spinal cord. These results
explain how equivalent p3 progenitors within the hindbrain and the spinal cord
produce functionally distinct neuron cell types.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3415223-11$15.00/0.

PMID: 25392491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Jul;75(7):721-37. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22244. Epub 2014 Nov 15.

Genetic dissection of Gata2 selective functions during specification of V2
interneurons in the developing spinal cord.

Francius C(1,)(2), Ravassard P(1), Hidalgo-Figueroa M(2), Mallet J(1), Clotman
F(2), Nardelli J(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)CRICM, UPMC/Inserm UMR_S 975; CNRS UMR 7225, Laboratoire de Biotechnologie et 
Biotherapie, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, CERVI, 83 bd de l'Hôpital, F-75013,
Paris, France. (2)Laboratory of Neural Differentiation (NEDI), Université
Catholique de Louvain (UCL), Institute of Neuroscience (IoNS), box UCL-5511, 55
Avenue Hippocrate, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium. (3)Inserm U676, Hôpital Robert
Debré, 48 bd Serurier, F-75019, Paris, France.

Motor activities are controlled by neural networks in the ventral spinal cord and
consist in motor neurons and a set of distinct cardinal classes of spinal
interneurons. These interneurons arise from distinct progenitor domains (p0-p3)
delineated according to a transcriptional code. Neural progenitors of each domain
express a unique combination of transcription factors (TFs) that largely
contribute to determine the fate of four classes of interneurons (V0-V3) and
motor neurons. In p2 domain, at least four subtypes of interneurons namely V2a,
V2b, V2c, and Pax6(+) V2 are generated. Although genetic and molecular mechanisms
that specify V2a and V2b are dependent on complex interplay between several TFs
including Nkx6.1, Irx3, Gata2, Foxn4, and Ascl1, and signaling pathways such as
Notch and TGF-ß, the sequence order of the activation of these regulators and
their respective contribution are not completely elucidated yet. Here, we provide
evidence by loss- or gain-of-function experiments that Gata2 is necessary for the
normal development of both V2a and V2b neurons. We demonstrate that Nkx6.1 and
Dll4 positively regulate the activation of Gata2 and Foxn4 in p2 progenitors.
Gata2 also participates in the maintenance of p2 domain by repressing motor
neuron differentiation and exerting a feedback control on patterning genes.
Finally, Gata2 promotes the selective activation of V2b program at the expense of
V2a fate. Thus our results provide new insights on the hierarchy and complex
interactions between regulators of V2 genetic program.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25369423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Neural Dev. 2014 Oct 29;9:23. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-9-23.

E-proteins orchestrate the progression of neural stem cell differentiation in the
postnatal forebrain.

Fischer B, Azim K, Hurtado-Chong A, Ramelli S, Fernández M, Raineteau O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, ETH Zurich/University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich,
Switzerland. raineteau@hifo.uzh.ch.

BACKGROUND: Neural stem cell (NSC) differentiation is a complex multistep process
that persists in specific regions of the postnatal forebrain and requires tight
regulation throughout life. The transcriptional control of NSC proliferation and 
specification involves Class II (proneural) and Class V (Id1-4) basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins. In this study, we analyzed the pattern of
expression of their dimerization partners, Class I bHLH proteins (E-proteins),
and explored their putative role in orchestrating postnatal subventricular zone
(SVZ) neurogenesis.
RESULTS: Overexpression of a dominant-negative form of the E-protein E47 (dnE47) 
confirmed a crucial role for bHLH transcriptional networks in postnatal
neurogenesis by dramatically blocking SVZ NSC differentiation. In situ
hybridization was used in combination with RT-qPCR to measure and compare the
level of expression of E-protein transcripts (E2-2, E2A, and HEB) in the neonatal
and adult SVZ as well as in magnetic affinity cell sorted progenitor cells and
neuroblasts. Our results evidence that E-protein transcripts, in particular E2-2 
and E2A, are enriched in the postnatal SVZ with expression levels increasing as
cells engage towards neuronal differentiation. To investigate the role of
E-proteins in orchestrating lineage progression, both in vitro and in vivo
gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments were performed for individual
E-proteins. Overexpression of E2-2 and E2A promoted SVZ neurogenesis by enhancing
not only radial glial cell differentiation but also cell cycle exit of their
progeny. Conversely, knock-down by shRNA electroporation resulted in opposite
effects. Manipulation of E-proteins and/or Ascl1 in SVZ NSC cultures indicated
that those effects were Ascl1 dependent, although they could not solely be
attributed to an Ascl1-induced switch from promoting cell proliferation to
triggering cell cycle arrest and differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: In contrast to former concepts, suggesting ubiquitous expression and
subsidiary function for E-proteins to foster postnatal neurogenesis, this work
unveils E-proteins as being active players in the orchestration of postnatal SVZ 
neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4274746
PMID: 25352248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Feb;11(2):881-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2809. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

Essential role of GATA3 in regulation of differentiation and cell proliferation
in SK-N-SH neuroblastoma cells.

Peng H(1), Ke XX(2), Hu R(2), Yang L(2), Cui H(2), Wei Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biotherapy, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R. China. (2)State
Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University, Chongqing
400716, P.R. China.

Neuroblastoma is a common solid malignant tumor of the sympathetic nervous
system, which contributes to 15% of cancer-related mortality in children. The
differentiation status of neuroblastoma is correlated with clinical outcome, and 
the induction of differentiation thus constitutes a therapeutic approach in this 
disease. However, the molecular mechanisms that control the differentiation of
neuroblastoma remain poorly understood. The present study aimed to define whether
GATA3 is involved in the differentiation of neuroblastoma cells. The results
demonstrated that GATA3 is a prognostic marker for survival in patients with
neuroblastoma, and that high-level GATA3 expression is associated with increased 
self-renewal and proliferation of neuroblastoma cells. Retinoic acid treatment
led to GATA3 downregulation together with neuronal differentiation, suppression
of cell proliferation and inhibition of tumorigenecity in neuroblastoma cells.
These findings suggest that GATA3 is a key regulator of neuroblastoma
differentiation, and provide a novel potential therapeutic strategy for the
induction of neuroblastoma differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4262502
PMID: 25351211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Neurosci. 2014 Oct 22;34(43):14403-19. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0498-14.2014.

Repressing notch signaling and expressing TNFa are sufficient to mimic retinal
regeneration by inducing Müller glial proliferation to generate committed
progenitor cells.

Conner C(1), Ackerman KM(1), Lahne M(1), Hobgood JS(1), Hyde DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and the Center for Zebrafish Research,
Galvin Life Sciences Building, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana
46556. (2)Department of Biological Sciences and the Center for Zebrafish
Research, Galvin Life Sciences Building, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
Indiana 46556 dhyde@nd.edu.

Retinal damage in teleosts, unlike mammals, induces robust Müller glia-mediated
regeneration of lost neurons. We examined whether Notch signaling regulates
Müller glia proliferation in the adult zebrafish retina and demonstrated that
Notch signaling maintains Müller glia in a quiescent state in the undamaged
retina. Repressing Notch signaling, through injection of the <U+03B3>-secretase
inhibitor RO4929097, stimulates a subset of Müller glia to reenter the cell cycle
without retinal damage. This RO4929097-induced Müller glia proliferation is
mediated by repressing Notch signaling because inducible expression of the Notch 
Intracellular Domain (NICD) can reverse the effect. This RO4929097-induced
proliferation requires Ascl1a expression and Jak1-mediated Stat3
phosphorylation/activation, analogous to the light-damaged retina. Moreover,
coinjecting RO4929097 and TNFa, a previously identified damage signal, induced
the majority of Müller glia to reenter the cell cycle and produced proliferating 
neuronal progenitor cells that committed to a neuronal lineage in the undamaged
retina. This demonstrates that repressing Notch signaling and activating TNFa
signaling are sufficient to induce Müller glia proliferation that generates
neuronal progenitor cells that differentiate into retinal neurons, mimicking the 
responses observed in the regenerating retina.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3414403-17$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4205560
PMID: 25339752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Comp Neurol. 2015 Feb 15;523(3):406-30. doi: 10.1002/cne.23686. Epub 2014 Oct
15.

Novel role of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator in maintaining 
adult mouse olfactory neuronal homeostasis.

Pfister S(1), Weber T, Härtig W, Schwerdel C, Elsaesser R, Knuesel I, Fritschy
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland; Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.

The olfactory epithelium (OE) of mice deficient in cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator (CFTR) exhibits ion transport deficiencies reported in
human CF airways, as well as progressive neuronal loss, suggesting defects in
olfactory neuron homeostasis. Microvillar cells, a specialized OE cell-subtype,
have been implicated in maintaining tissue homeostasis. These cells are endowed
with a PLCß2/IP3 R3/TRPC6 signal transduction pathway modulating release of
neuropeptide Y (NPY), which stimulates OE stem cell activity. It is unknown,
however, whether microvillar cells also mediate the deficits observed in
CFTR-null mice. Here we show that Cftr mRNA in mouse OE is exclusively localized 
in microvillar cells and CFTR immunofluorescence is coassociated with the
scaffolding protein NHERF-1 and PLCß2 in microvilli. In CFTR-null mice, PLCß2 was
undetectable, NHERF-1 mislocalized, and IP3 R3 more intensely stained, along with
increased levels of NPY, suggesting profound alteration of the PLCß2/IP3 R3
signaling pathway. In addition, basal olfactory neuron homeostasis was altered,
shown by increased progenitor cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis 
and by reduced regenerative capacity following methimazole-induced
neurodegeneration. The importance of CFTR in microvillar cells was further
underscored by decreased thickness of the OE mucus layer and increased numbers of
immune cells within this tissue in CFTR-KO mice. Finally, we observed enhanced
immune responses to an acute viral-like infection, as well as
hyper-responsiveness to chemical and physical stimuli applied intranasally. Taken
together, these data strengthen the notion that microvillar cells in the OE play 
a key role in maintaining tissue homeostasis and identify several mechanisms
underlying this regulation through the multiple functions of CFTR.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25271146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Oct 14;111(41):14788-93. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1410419111. Epub 2014 Sep 29.

ASCL1 is a lineage oncogene providing therapeutic targets for high-grade
neuroendocrine lung cancers.

Augustyn A(1), Borromeo M(2), Wang T(3), Fujimoto J(4), Shao C(1), Dospoy PD(1), 
Lee V(5), Tan C(5), Sullivan JP(6), Larsen JE(7), Girard L(8), Behrens C(4),
Wistuba II(4), Xie Y(3), Cobb MH(9), Gazdar AF(10), Johnson JE(11), Minna JD(12).

Author information: 
(1)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, Simmons Comprehensive Cancer
Center, and. (2)Departments of Neuroscience. (3)Simmons Comprehensive Cancer
Center, and Clinical Sciences. (4)Departments of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical
Oncology and Translational Molecular Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030; (5)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology
Research. (6)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114; and. (7)Oncogenomics Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer
Medical Research Institute, Herston, Brisbane, QLD 4006, Australia. (8)Hamon
Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center,
and Pharmacology. (9)Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, and Pharmacology.
(10)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, Simmons Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, and Pathology, and. (11)Departments of Neuroscience, Pharmacology.
(12)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, Simmons Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, and Pharmacology, Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75235; john.minna@utsouthwestern.edu.

Aggressive neuroendocrine lung cancers, including small cell lung cancer (SCLC)
and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), represent an understudied tumor subset
that accounts for approximately 40,000 new lung cancer cases per year in the
United States. No targeted therapy exists for these tumors. We determined that
achaete-scute homolog 1 (ASCL1), a transcription factor required for proper
development of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells, is essential for the survival of a
majority of lung cancers (both SCLC and NSCLC) with neuroendocrine features. By
combining whole-genome microarray expression analysis performed on lung cancer
cell lines with ChIP-Seq data designed to identify conserved transcriptional
targets of ASCL1, we discovered an ASCL1 target 72-gene expression signature that
(i) identifies neuroendocrine differentiation in NSCLC cell lines, (ii) is
predictive of poor prognosis in resected NSCLC specimens from three datasets, and
(iii) represents novel "druggable" targets. Among these druggable targets is
B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2, which when pharmacologically inhibited stops
ASCL1-dependent tumor growth in vitro and in vivo and represents a
proof-of-principle ASCL1 downstream target gene. Analysis of downstream targets
of ASCL1 represents an important advance in the development of targeted therapy
for the neuroendocrine class of lung cancers, providing a significant step
forward in the understanding and therapeutic targeting of the molecular
vulnerabilities of neuroendocrine lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC4205603
PMID: 25267614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Aug 12;3(2):282-96. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.05.020.
Epub 2014 Jul 4.

Generation of induced neuronal cells by the single reprogramming factor ASCL1.

Chanda S(1), Ang CE(2), Davila J(3), Pak C(4), Mall M(3), Lee QY(2), Ahlenius
H(3), Jung SW(5), Südhof TC(6), Wernig M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine and Department of
Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Department of Molecular 
and Cellular Physiology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (2)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine and Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305,
USA; Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 
(3)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine and Department of
Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (4)Department of
Molecular and Cellular Physiology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (5)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine and Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA 94305, USA; Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305,
USA. (6)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Electronic address:
tcs1@stanford.edu. (7)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine
and Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
Electronic address: wernig@stanford.edu.

Direct conversion of nonneural cells to functional neurons holds great promise
for neurological disease modeling and regenerative medicine. We previously
reported rapid reprogramming of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) into mature
induced neuronal (iN) cells by forced expression of three transcription factors: 
ASCL1, MYT1L, and BRN2. Here, we show that ASCL1 alone is sufficient to generate 
functional iN cells from mouse and human fibroblasts and embryonic stem cells,
indicating that ASCL1 is the key driver of iN cell reprogramming in different
cell contexts and that the role of MYT1L and BRN2 is primarily to enhance the
neuronal maturation process. ASCL1-induced single-factor neurons (1F-iN)
expressed mature neuronal markers, exhibited typical passive and active intrinsic
membrane properties, and formed functional pre- and postsynaptic structures.
Surprisingly, ASCL1-induced iN cells were predominantly excitatory, demonstrating
that ASCL1 is permissive but alone not deterministic for the inhibitory neuronal 
lineage.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4176533
PMID: 25254342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Development. 2014 Oct;141(19):3721-31. doi: 10.1242/dev.105270. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

Ascl1 controls the number and distribution of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes in 
the gray matter and white matter of the spinal cord.

Vue TY(1), Kim EJ(1), Parras CM(2), Guillemot F(2), Johnson JE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA. (2)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, London NW7 1AA, UK. (3)Department of Neuroscience, UT Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA jane.johnson@utsouthwestern.edu.

Glia constitute the majority of cells in the mammalian central nervous system and
are crucial for neurological function. However, there is an incomplete
understanding of the molecular control of glial cell development. We find that
the transcription factor Ascl1 (Mash1), which is best known for its role in
neurogenesis, also functions in both astrocyte and oligodendrocyte lineages
arising in the mouse spinal cord at late embryonic stages. Clonal fate mapping in
vivo reveals heterogeneity in Ascl1-expressing glial progenitors and shows that
Ascl1 defines cells that are restricted to either gray matter (GM) or white
matter (WM) as astrocytes or oligodendrocytes. Conditional deletion of Ascl1
post-neurogenesis shows that Ascl1 is required during oligodendrogenesis for
generating the correct numbers of WM but not GM oligodendrocyte precursor cells, 
whereas during astrocytogenesis Ascl1 functions in balancing the number of dorsal
GM protoplasmic astrocytes with dorsal WM fibrous astrocytes. Thus, in addition
to its function in neurogenesis, Ascl1 marks glial progenitors and controls the
number and distribution of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes in the GM and WM of
the spinal cord.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197573
PMID: 25249462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;110:75-127. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405943-6.00002-6.

Proneural bHLH genes in development and disease.

Huang C(1), Chan JA(2), Schuurmans C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute,
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. (2)Department of Pathology &
Laboratory Medicine, Southern Alberta Cancer Research Institute, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. Electronic address: jawchan@ucalgary.ca.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Alberta Children's Hospital 
Research Institute, Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary,
Alberta, Canada. Electronic address: cschuurm@ucalgary.ca.

Proneural genes encode evolutionarily conserved basic-helix-loop-helix
transcription factors. In Drosophila, proneural genes are required and sufficient
to confer a neural identity onto naïve ectodermal cells, inducing delamination
and subsequent neuronal differentiation. In vertebrates, proneural genes are
expressed in cells that already have a neural identity, but they are still
required and sufficient to initiate neurogenesis. In all organisms, proneural
genes control neurogenesis by regulating Notch-mediated lateral inhibition and
initiating the expression of downstream differentiation genes. The general mode
of proneural gene function has thus been elucidated. However, the regulatory
mechanisms that spatially and temporally control proneural gene function are only
beginning to be deciphered. Understanding how proneural gene function is
regulated is essential, as aberrant proneural gene expression has recently been
linked to a variety of human diseases-ranging from cancer to neuropsychiatric
illnesses and diabetes. Recent insights into proneural gene function in
development and disease are highlighted herein.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Brain Res. 2014 Nov 17;1589:26-36. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.09.031. Epub 2014
Sep 22.

Programmed hyperphagia secondary to increased hypothalamic SIRT1.

Desai M(1), Li T(2), Han G(2), Ross MG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Perinatal Research Laboratories, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Los 
Angeles Biomedical Research Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance,
California 90502. Electronic address: mdesai@obgyn.humc.edu. (2)Perinatal
Research Laboratories, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Los Angeles
Biomedical Research Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California
90502.

Small for gestational age (SGA) offspring exhibit reduced hypothalamic neural
satiety pathways leading to programmed hyperphagia and adult obesity. Appetite
regulatory site, the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus (ARC) contains appetite
(NPY/AgRP) and satiety (POMC) neurons. Using in vitro culture of hypothalamic
neuroprogenitor cells (NPC) which form the ARC, we demonstrated that SGA
offspring exhibit reduced NPC proliferation and neuronal differentiation. bHLH
protein Hes1 promotes NPC self-renewal and inhibits differentiation by repressing
neuronal differentiation genes (Mash1, neurogenin3). We hypothesized that
Hes1/Mash1 and ultimately ARC neuronal differentiation and expression of NPY/POMC
neurons are influenced by SIRT1 which is a nutrient sensor and a histone
deacetylase. Control dams received ad libitum food, whereas study dams were 50%
food-restricted from pregnancy day 10 to 21 (SGA). In vivo studies showed that
SGA newborns and adult offspring had increased protein expression of
hypothalamic/ARC SIRT1 and AgRP with decreased POMC. Additionally, SGA newborns
had decreased expression of hypothalamic neurogenic factors with reduced in vivo 
NPC proliferation. In vitro culture of hypothalamic NPCs showed similar changes
with elevated SIRT1 binding to Hes1 in SGA newborn. Silencing SIRT1 increased NPC
proliferation and Hes1 and Tuj1expression in both Control and SGA NPCs. Although 
SGA NPC proliferation remained below that of Controls, it was higher than Control
NPCs in the absence of SIRT1 siRNA. The direct impact of SIRT1 on NPC
proliferation and differentiation were further confirmed with pharmacologic SIRT1
inhibitor and activator. Thus, in SGA newborns elevated SIRT1 induces premature
differentiation of NPCs, reducing the NPC pool and cell proliferation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4254171
PMID: 25245521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Neuroscience. 2014 Nov 7;280:142-55. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.09.023.
Epub 2014 Sep 19.

Human dental pulp stem cells respond to cues from the rat retina and
differentiate to express the retinal neuronal marker rhodopsin.

Bray AF(1), Cevallos RR(2), Gazarian K(2), Lamas M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, México D.F., Mexico; Departamento de Farmacobiología, Centro de
Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del IPN, México D.F., Mexico. (2)Instituto 
de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México
D.F., Mexico. (3)Departamento de Farmacobiología, Centro de Investigación y de
Estudios Avanzados del IPN, México D.F., Mexico. Electronic address:
mlamas@cinvestav.mx.

Human adult dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) are self-renewing stem cells that
originate from the neural crest during development and remain within the dental
pulp niche through adulthood. Due to their multi-lineage differentiation
potential and their relative ease of access they represent an exciting
alternative for autologous stem cell-based therapies in neurodegenerative
diseases. In animal models, DPSCs transplanted into the brain differentiate into 
functional neurons or astrocytes in response to local environmental cues that
appear to influence the fate of the surviving cells. Here we tested the
hypothesis that DPSCs might be able to respond to factors present in the retina
enabling the regenerative potential of these cells. We evaluated the response of 
DPSCs to conditioned media from organotypic explants from control and chemically 
damaged rat retinas. To evaluate cell differentiation, we analyzed the expression
of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), early neuronal and retinal markers
(polysialic acid-neural cell adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM); Pax6; Ascl1; NeuroD1) 
and the late photoreceptor marker rhodopsin, by immunofluorescence and reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Exposure of DPSC cultures to
conditioned media from control retinas induced a 39% reduction on the number of
DPSCs that expressed GFAP; the expression of Pax6, Ascl1, PSA-NCAM or NeuroD1 was
undetectable or did not change significantly. Expression of rhodopsin was not
detectable in control or after exposure of the cultures with retinal conditioned 
media. By contrast, 44% of DPSCs exposed to conditioned media from damaged
retinas were immunopositive to this protein. This response could not be
reproduced when conditioned media from Müller-enriched primary cultures was used.
Finally, quantitative RT-PCR was performed to compare the relative expression of 
glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), nerve growth factor (NGF), ciliary
neurotrophic factor (CNTF) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in DPSC
co-cultured with retinal organotypic explants, where BDNF mRNA expression was
significantly upregulated in retinal-exposed cultures. Our data demonstrate that 
DPSC cultures respond to cues from the rat retina and differentiate to express
retinal neuronal markers.

Copyright © 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25242642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cancer Metab. 2014 Aug 18;2:13. doi: 10.1186/2049-3002-2-13. eCollection 2014.

Loss of HSulf-1 promotes altered lipid metabolism in ovarian cancer.

Roy D(1), Mondal S(1), Wang C(2), He X(1), Khurana A(1), Giri S(3), Hoffmann
R(1), Jung DB(4), Kim SH(4), Chini EN(5), Periera JC(5), Folmes CD(6), Mariani
A(7), Dowdy SC(7), Bakkum-Gamez JN(7), Riska SM(2), Oberg AL(2), Karoly ED(8),
Bell LN(8), Chien J(9), Shridhar V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (2)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (3)Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI
48202, USA. (4)Cancer Preventive Material Development Research Center (CPMRC),
College of Oriental Medicine, Kyunghee University, Seoul 130-701, Republic of
Korea. (5)Department of Anesthesiology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (6)Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Mayo Clinic
College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (7)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(8)Metabolon, Inc, Durham, NC 27713, USA. (9)Department of Cancer Biology,
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KN 66160, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Metab. 2014;2:24.

BACKGROUND: Loss of the endosulfatase HSulf-1 is common in ovarian cancer,
upregulates heparin binding growth factor signaling and potentiates tumorigenesis
and angiogenesis. However, metabolic differences between isogenic cells with and 
without HSulf-1 have not been characterized upon HSulf-1 suppression in vitro.
Since growth factor signaling is closely tied to metabolic alterations, we
determined the extent to which HSulf-1 loss affects cancer cell metabolism.
RESULTS: Ingenuity pathway analysis of gene expression in HSulf-1 shRNA-silenced 
cells (Sh1 and Sh2 cells) compared to non-targeted control shRNA cells (NTC
cells) and subsequent Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomics (KEGG) database
analysis showed altered metabolic pathways with changes in the lipid metabolism
as one of the major pathways altered inSh1 and 2 cells. Untargeted global
metabolomic profiling in these isogenic cell lines identified approximately 338
metabolites using GC/MS and LC/MS/MS platforms. Knockdown of HSulf-1 in OV202
cells induced significant changes in 156 metabolites associated with several
metabolic pathways including amino acid, lipids, and nucleotides. Loss of HSulf-1
promoted overall fatty acid synthesis leading to enhance the metabolite levels of
long chain, branched, and essential fatty acids along with sphingolipids.
Furthermore, HSulf-1 loss induced the expression of lipogenic genes including
FASN, SREBF1, PPAR<U+03B3>, and PLA2G3 stimulated lipid droplet accumulation.
Conversely, re-expression of HSulf-1 in Sh1 cells reduced the lipid droplet
formation. Additionally, HSulf-1 also enhanced CPT1A and fatty acid oxidation and
augmented the protein expression of key lipolytic enzymes such as MAGL, DAGLA,
HSL, and ASCL1. Overall, these findings suggest that loss of HSulf-1 by
concomitantly enhancing fatty acid synthesis and oxidation confers a lipogenic
phenotype leading to the metabolic alterations associated with the progression of
ovarian cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these findings demonstrate that loss of HSulf-1
potentially contributes to the metabolic alterations associated with the
progression of ovarian pathogenesis, specifically impacting the lipogenic
phenotype of ovarian cancer cells that can be therapeutically targeted.

PMCID: PMC4164348
PMID: 25225614  [PubMed]


85. Sci Rep. 2014 Sep 11;4:6330. doi: 10.1038/srep06330.

Highly efficient generation of induced neurons from human fibroblasts that
survive transplantation into the adult rat brain.

Pereira M(1), Pfisterer U(1), Rylander D(1), Torper O(1), Lau S(1), Lundblad
M(1), Grealish S(1), Parmar M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medical Science, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center and
Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund University, 221 84 Lund, Sweden.

Induced neurons (iNs) offer a novel source of human neurons that can be explored 
for applications of disease modelling, diagnostics, drug screening and cell
replacement therapy. Here we present a protocol for highly efficient generation
of functional iNs from fetal human fibroblasts, and also demonstrate the ability 
of these converted human iNs (hiNs) to survive transplantation and maintain their
phenotype in the adult rat brain. The protocol encompasses a delay in transgene
activation after viral transduction that resulted in a significant increase in
conversion efficiency. Combining this approach with treatment of small molecules 
that inhibit SMAD signalling and activate WNT signalling provides a further
increase in the conversion efficiency and neuronal purity, resulting in a
protocol that provides a highly efficient method for the generation of large
numbers of functional and transplantable iNs from human fibroblasts without the
use of a selection step. When transplanting the converted neurons from different 
stages of in vitro culture into the brain of adult rats, we observed robust
survival and maintenance of neuronal identity four weeks post-transplantation.
Interestingly, the positive effect of small molecule treatment observed in vitro 
did not result in a higher yield of iNs surviving transplantation.

PMCID: PMC4160709
PMID: 25208484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Mol Neurosci. 2015 Mar;55(3):684-705. doi: 10.1007/s12031-014-0408-2. Epub 2014
Sep 6.

Transcriptional regulatory events initiated by Ascl1 and Neurog2 during neuronal 
differentiation of P19 embryonic carcinoma cells.

Huang HS(1), Redmond TM, Kubish GM, Gupta S, Thompson RC, Turner DL, Uhler MD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience Institute, University of Michigan, 109
Zina Pitcher Pl, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109-2200, USA.

As members of the proneural basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription
factors, Ascl1 and Neurog2 direct the differentiation of specific populations of 
neurons at various times and locations within the developing nervous system. In
order to characterize the mechanisms employed by these two bHLH factors, we
generated stable, doxycycline-inducible lines of P19 embryonic carcinoma cells
that express comparable levels of Ascl1 and Neurog2. Upon induction, both Ascl1
and Neurog2 directed morphological and immunocytochemical changes consistent with
initiation of neuronal differentiation. Comparison of Ascl1- and
Neurog2-regulated genes by microarray analyses showed both shared and distinct
transcriptional changes for each bHLH protein. In both Ascl1- and
Neurog2-differentiating cells, repression of Oct4 mRNA levels was accompanied by 
increased Oct4 promoter methylation. However, DNA demethylation was not detected 
for genes induced by either bHLH protein. Neurog2-induced genes included
glutamatergic marker genes while Ascl1-induced genes included GABAergic marker
genes. The Neurog2-specific induction of a gene encoding a protein phosphatase
inhibitor, Ppp1r14a, was dependent on distinct, canonical E-box sequences within 
the Ppp1r14a promoter and the nucleotide sequences within these E-boxes were
partially responsible for Neurog2-specific regulation. Our results illustrate
multiple novel mechanisms by which Ascl1 and Neurog2 regulate gene repression
during neuronal differentiation in P19 cells.

PMID: 25189318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Neuron. 2014 Sep 3;83(5):1085-97. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.08.004.

A transcriptional mechanism integrating inputs from extracellular signals to
activate hippocampal stem cells.

Andersen J(1), Urbán N(2), Achimastou A(1), Ito A(1), Simic M(3), Ullom K(3),
Martynoga B(1), Lebel M(1), Göritz C(4), Frisén J(4), Nakafuku M(3), Guillemot
F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. (2)Division of Molecular Neurobiology,
MRC National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.
Electronic address: nurban@nimr.mrc.ac.uk. (3)Division of Developmental Biology, 
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039,
USA. (4)Department for Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institute, 17177
Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, MRC National Institute 
for Medical Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. Electronic address:
fguille@nimr.mrc.ac.uk.

The activity of adult stem cells is regulated by signals emanating from the
surrounding tissue. Many niche signals have been identified, but it is unclear
how they influence the choice of stem cells to remain quiescent or divide. Here
we show that when stem cells of the adult hippocampus receive activating signals,
they first induce the expression of the transcription factor Ascl1 and only
subsequently exit quiescence. Moreover, lowering Ascl1 expression reduces the
proliferation rate of hippocampal stem cells, and inactivating Ascl1 blocks
quiescence exit completely, rendering them unresponsive to activating stimuli.
Ascl1 promotes the proliferation of hippocampal stem cells by directly regulating
the expression of cell-cycle regulatory genes. Ascl1 is similarly required for
stem cell activation in the adult subventricular zone. Our results support a
model whereby Ascl1 integrates inputs from both stimulatory and inhibitory
signals and converts them into a transcriptional program activating adult neural 
stem cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4157576
PMID: 25189209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Front Neuroanat. 2014 Aug 13;8:82. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2014.00082. eCollection
2014.

The complexity of the calretinin-expressing progenitors in the human cerebral
cortex.

Radonjic NV(1), Ortega JA(2), Memi F(2), Dionne K(2), Jakovcevski I(3), Zecevic
N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut Health Center
Farmington, CT, USA ; Institute of Medical and Clinical Biochemistry, School of
Medicine, University of Belgrade Belgrade, Serbia. (2)Department of Neuroscience,
University of Connecticut Health Center Farmington, CT, USA. (3)Experimental
Neurophysiology, University Hospital Cologne Köln, Germany ; Experimental
Neurophysiology, German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Bonn, Germany.

The complex structure and function of the cerebral cortex critically depend on
the balance of excitation and inhibition provided by the pyramidal projection
neurons and GABAergic interneurons, respectively. The calretinin-expressing
(CalR(+)) cell is a subtype of GABAergic cortical interneurons that is more
prevalent in humans than in rodents. In rodents, CalR(+) interneurons originate
in the caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE) from Gsx2(+) progenitors, but in humans
it has been suggested that a subpopulation of CalR(+) cells can also be generated
in the cortical ventricular/subventricular zone (VZ/SVZ). The progenitors for
cortically generated CalR(+) subpopulation in primates are not yet characterized.
Hence, the aim of this study was to identify patterns of expression of the
transcription factors (TFs) that commit cortical stem cells to the CalR fate,
with a focus on Gsx2. First, we studied the expression of Gsx2 and its downstream
effectors, Ascl1 and Sp8 in the cortical regions of the fetal human forebrain at 
midgestation. Next, we established that a subpopulation of cells expressing these
TFs are proliferating in the cortical SVZ, and can be co-labeled with CalR. The
presence and proliferation of Gsx2(+) cells, not only in the ventral
telencephalon (GE) as previously reported, but also in the cerebral cortex
suggests cortical origin of a subpopulation of CalR(+) neurons in humans. In
vitro treatment of human cortical progenitors with Sonic hedgehog (Shh), an
important morphogen in the specification of interneurons, decreased levels of
Ascl1 and Sp8 proteins, but did not affect Gsx2 levels. Taken together, our
ex-vivo and in vitro results on human fetal brain suggest complex endogenous and 
exogenous regulation of TFs implied in the specification of different subtypes of
CalR(+) cortical interneurons.

PMCID: PMC4131197
PMID: 25165435  [PubMed]


89. Pathol Int. 2014 Aug;64(8):365-74. doi: 10.1111/pin.12183.

Expression of developing neural transcription factors in lung carcinoid tumors.

Endo T(1), Yazawa T, Shishido-Hara Y, Fujiwara M, Shimoyamada H, Ishii J, Sato H,
Tachibana K, Takei H, Kondo H, Goya T, Endo S, Kamma H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Mitaka, Japan; 
Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke,
Japan.

In lung tumors, the association between carcinoids and high-grade neuroendocrine 
tumors (HGNETs) is controversial. To understand the phenotypic
similarities/differences between lung carcinoids and HGNETs, we comparatively
investigated the expression of three kinds of developing neural transcription
factors (DNTFs: BRN2, TTF1 and ASCL1) and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1
(MEN1) as well as RB1 and P53 using 18 carcinoids and 16 HGNETs. The DNTFs were
expressed in 10 of the 18 carcinoids and in all the HGNETs, while normal
neuroendocrine cells, which are considered the major cell origin of lung
carcinoids and small cell carcinomas, did not express DNTFs. Both the DNTF(-) and
DNTF(+) carcinoids contained typical and atypical carcinoids. All the DNTF(-)
carcinoids examined were formed in the bronchial wall. All the MEN1(-) carcinoids
examined were classified into the DNTF(-) carcinoids, while all the HGNETs
expressed MEN1. This finding suggests that DNTF(-) MEN1(-) carcinoids are
unlikely to be precursors of HGNETs. Although the status of RB1 and P53 between
carcinoids and HGNETs were apparently different, the DNTF(+) carcinoids of two
male patients and one female patient revealed morphologies resembling HGNET cells
and relatively high Ki67 indices. Further investigation of DNTF expression in
carcinoids might provide important clues to understand the association between
carcinoids and HGNETs.

© 2014 Japanese Society of Pathology and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25143124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 26;289(39):26973-88. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.579391. Epub
2014 Aug 14.

Shutdown of achaete-scute homolog-1 expression by heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP)-A2/B1 in hypoxia.

Kasim M(1), Benko E(1), Winkelmann A(2), Mrowka R(3), Staudacher JJ(1), Persson
PB(1), Scholz H(1), Meier JC(2), Fähling M(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Institut für Vegetative Physiologie, Charité-Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, D-10117 Berlin. (2)the RNA Editing and Hyperexcitability Disorders
Helmholtz Group, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, D-13125 Berlin, and.
(3)the Klinik für Innere Medizin III, AG Experimentelle Nephrologie,
Universitätsklinikum Jena, D-07743 Jena, Germany. (4)From the Institut für
Vegetative Physiologie, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, D-10117 Berlin,
michael.faehling@charite.de.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor hASH1, encoded by the ASCL1 gene,
plays an important role in neurogenesis and tumor development. Recent findings
indicate that local oxygen tension is a critical determinant for the progression 
of neuroblastomas. Here we investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying the
oxygen-dependent expression of hASH1 in neuroblastoma cells. Exposure of human
neuroblastoma-derived Kelly cells to 1% O2 significantly decreased ASCL1 mRNA and
hASH1 protein levels. Using reporter gene assays, we show that the response of
hASH1 to hypoxia is mediated mainly by post-transcriptional inhibition via the
ASCL1 mRNA 5'- and 3'-UTRs, whereas additional inhibition of the ASCL1 promoter
was observed under prolonged hypoxia. By RNA pulldown experiments followed by
MALDI/TOF-MS analysis, we identified heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein
(hnRNP)-A2/B1 and hnRNP-R as interactors binding directly to the ASCL1 mRNA 5'-
and 3'-UTRs and influencing its expression. We further demonstrate that
hnRNP-A2/B1 is a key positive regulator of ASCL1, findings that were also
confirmed by analysis of a large compilation of gene expression data. Our data
suggest that a prominent down-regulation of hnRNP-A2/B1 during hypoxia is
associated with the post-transcriptional suppression of hASH1 synthesis. This
novel post-transcriptional mechanism for regulating hASH1 levels will have
important implications in neural cell fate development and disease.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4175337
PMID: 25124043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Ann Nutr Metab. 2014;64 Suppl 1:36-44. doi: 10.1159/000360508. Epub 2014 Jul 23.

Developmental programming of appetite/satiety.

Ross MG(1), Desai M.

Author information: 
(1)Perinatal Research Laboratories, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Calif.,
USA.

Obesity is often attributed to a Western lifestyle, a high-fat diet and decreased
activity. While these factors certainly contribute to adult obesity, compelling
data from our laboratory and others indicate that this explanation is
oversimplified. Recent studies strongly argue that maternal/fetal under- or
overnutrition predisposes the offspring to become hyperphagic and increases the
risk of later obesity. Both infants small for gestational age (SGA) or infants
born to obese mothers who consume a high-fat diet are at a markedly increased
risk of adult obesity. Specific alterations in the fetal metabolic/energy
environment directly influence the development of appetite regulatory pathways.
Specifically, SGA infants demonstrate (1) impaired satiety and anorexigenic cell 
signaling, (2) enhanced cellular orexigenic responses, (3) programmed dysfunction
of neuroprogenitor cell proliferation/differentiation, and (4) increased
expression of appetite (NPY) versus satiety (POMC) neurons. In both hypothalamic 
tissue and ex vivo culture, SGA newborns exhibit increased levels of the nutrient
sensor SIRT1, signifying reduced energy, whereas maternal high-fat-exposed
newborns exhibit reduced levels of pAMPK, signifying energy excess. Via
downstream regulation of bHLH neuroproliferation (Hes1) and neurodifferentiation 
factors (Mash1, Ngn3), neurogenesis is biased toward orexigenic and away from
anorexigenic neurons, resulting in excess appetite, reduced satiety and
development of obesity. Despite the developmental programming of appetite
neurogenesis, the potential for neuronal remodeling raises the opportunity for
novel interventions.

PMID: 25059804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Oct;10(4):1739-45. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2393. Epub 2014 Jul
18.

Combined effect of nerve growth factor and brain-derived neurotrophic factor on
neuronal differentiation of neural stem cells and the potential molecular
mechanisms.

Liu F(1), Xuan A(1), Chen Y(1), Zhang J(1), Xu L(1), Yan Q(2), Long D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510182, P.R. China. (2)Kingmed Diagnostics College, Guangzhou Medical
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510182, P.R. China.

Neural stem cells (NSCs) are important pluripotent stem cells, which have
potential applications in cell replacement therapy. Brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF) and nerve growth factor (NGF) have been demonstrated to exert a
marked impact on the proliferation and differentiation of NSCs. The effects of
NGF, BDNF, and BDNF combined with NGF on NSC neuronal differentiation and the
possible mechanisms for these effects were investigated in this study. An
adherent monolayer culture was employed to obtain highly homogeneous NSCs. The
cells were divided into four groups: Control, NGF, BDNF and combination (BDNF +
NGF) groups. Neuron differentiation was examined using immunocytochemistry and
phospho-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (p-ERK) levels were analyzed using 
western blotting. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction was used to
measure the mRNA expression levels of the HES1, HES5, MASH1, NGN1 and NeuroD
transcription factors at different time intervals following neurotrophin-induced 
differentiation. NGF and BDNF were observed to induce NSC neuronal
differentiation, and ß-tubulin III-positive cells and p-ERK expression levels
were highest in the NGF + BDNF combination group at all time points. The
proportion of ß-tubulin <U+2162>-positive neurons in each group was associated with the 
expression levels of MASH1, NGN1 and NeuroD in the group. In conclusion, BDNF
combined with NGF significantly improved NSC neuronal differentiation, which may 
provide support for the practical application of NSCs in neurodegenerative
diseases.

PMCID: PMC4148384
PMID: 25051506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014;2014:957548. doi: 10.1155/2014/957548. Epub 2014 Jun
1.

Efficient reprogramming of mouse fibroblasts to neuronal cells including
dopaminergic neurons.

Oh SI(1), Park HS(2), Hwang I(1), Park HK(2), Choi KA(3), Jeong H(1), Kim SW(4), 
Hong S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, School of Biosystem and Biomedical Science,
College of Health Science, Korea University, Jeongneung-dong, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 
136-703, Republic of Korea ; Department of Biomedical Science, College of Health 
Science, Korea University, Jeongneung-dong, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-703, Republic 
of Korea ; Department of Health Science, College of Health Science, Korea
University, Jeongneung-dong, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-703, Republic of Korea.
(2)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, School of Biosystem and Biomedical Science,
College of Health Science, Korea University, Jeongneung-dong, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 
136-703, Republic of Korea ; Department of Biomedical Science, College of Health 
Science, Korea University, Jeongneung-dong, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-703, Republic 
of Korea. (3)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, School of Biosystem and Biomedical 
Science, College of Health Science, Korea University, Jeongneung-dong,
Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-703, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Biomedical
Science, College of Health Science, Korea University, Jeongneung-dong,
Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-703, Republic of Korea.

Somatic cells were directly converted to functional neurons through the use of a 
combination of transcription factors, including Ascl1, Brn2, and Myt1l. However, 
a major limitation is the lack of a reliable source of cell-replacement therapy
for neurological diseases. Here, we show that a combination of the transcription 
factors Ascl1 and Nurr1 (AN) and neurotrophic factors including SHH and FGF8b
directly reprogrammed embryonic mouse fibroblasts to induced neuronal (iN) cells:
pan-neuronal cells and dopaminergic (DA) neurons under our systematic cell
culture conditions. Reprogrammed cells showed the morphological properties of
neuronal cells. Additionally, cells were analyzed using various markers,
including Tuj1 and Map2 for neuronal cells and Lmx1a, Th, Aadc and Vmat2 for DA
neurons in our immunostaining and reverse transcription (RT)-PCR experiments. We 
found that a combination of transcription factors and neurotrophic factors could 
directly reprogram fibroblasts to neuronal cells including DA neurons. Various
types of reprogrammed cells are promising cell sources for cell-based therapy of 
neurological disorders like Parkinson's disease and spinal cord injury.

PMCID: PMC4058809
PMID: 24991651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jul 15;111(28):E2885-94. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1408295111. Epub 2014 Jun 30.

Transcription factor induction of human oligodendrocyte progenitor fate and
differentiation.

Wang J(1), Pol SU(1), Haberman AK(1), Wang C(1), O'Bara MA(1), Sim FJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14214. (2)Department of Pharmacology
and Toxicology, School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at
Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14214 fjsim@buffalo.edu.

Human oligodendrocyte progenitor cell (OPC) specification and differentiation
occurs slowly and limits the potential for cell-based treatment of demyelinating 
disease. In this study, using FACS-based isolation and microarray analysis, we
identified a set of transcription factors expressed by human primary
CD140a(+)O4(+) OPCs relative to CD133(+)CD140a(-) neural stem/progenitor cells
(NPCs). Among these, lentiviral overexpression of transcription factors ASCL1,
SOX10, and NKX2.2 in NPCs was sufficient to induce Sox10 enhancer activity, OPC
mRNA, and protein expression consistent with OPC fate; however, unlike ASCL1 and 
NKX2.2, only the transcriptome of SOX10-infected NPCs was induced to a human OPC 
gene expression signature. Furthermore, only SOX10 promoted oligodendrocyte
commitment, and did so at quantitatively equivalent levels to native OPCs. In
xenografts of shiverer/rag2 animals, SOX10 increased the rate of mature
oligodendrocyte differentiation and axon ensheathment. Thus, SOX10 appears to be 
the principle and rate-limiting regulator of myelinogenic fate from human NPCs.

PMCID: PMC4104854
PMID: 24982138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Stem Cells. 2014 Oct;32(10):2583-95. doi: 10.1002/stem.1776.

Targeting the bHLH transcriptional networks by mutated E proteins in experimental
glioma.

Beyeler S(1), Joly S, Fries M, Obermair FJ, Burn F, Mehmood R, Tabatabai G,
Raineteau O.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, University of Zurich/Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Glioblastomas (GB) are aggressive primary brain tumors. Helix-loop-helix (HLH, ID
proteins) and basic HLH (bHLH, e.g., Olig2) proteins are transcription factors
that regulate stem cell proliferation and differentiation throughout development 
and into adulthood. Their convergence on many oncogenic signaling pathways
combined with the observation that their overexpression in GB correlates with
poor clinical outcome identifies these transcription factors as promising
therapeutic targets. Important dimerization partners of HLH/bHLH proteins are E
proteins that are necessary for nuclear translocation and DNA binding. Here, we
overexpressed a wild type or a dominant negative form of E47 (dnE47) that lacks
its nuclear localization signal thus preventing nuclear translocation of bHLH
proteins in long-term glioma cell lines and in glioma-initiating cell lines and
analyzed the effects in vitro and in vivo. While overexpression of E47 was
sufficient to induce apoptosis in absence of bHLH proteins, dnE47 was necessary
to prevent nuclear translocation of Olig2 and to achieve similar proapoptotic
responses. Transcriptional analyses revealed downregulation of the antiapoptotic 
gene BCL2L1 and the proproliferative gene CDC25A as underlying mechanisms.
Overexpression of dnE47 in glioma-initiating cell lines with high HLH and bHLH
protein levels reduced sphere formation capacities and expression levels of
Nestin, BCL2L1, and CDC25A. Finally, the in vivo induction of dnE47 expression in
established xenografts prolonged survival. In conclusion, our data introduce a
novel approach to jointly neutralize HLH and bHLH transcriptional networks
activities, and identify these transcription factors as potential targets in
glioma.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24965159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cancer Res. 2014 Aug 15;74(16):4526-35. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3663. Epub 
2014 Jun 16.

EWS-WT1 oncoprotein activates neuronal reprogramming factor ASCL1 and promotes
neural differentiation.

Kang HJ(1), Park JH(1), Chen W(2), Kang SI(1), Moroz K(1), Ladanyi M(3), Lee
SB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Tulane University School of Medicine, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana. (2)Genomics Core Facility, National Institute
of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland.
(3)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York. (4)Tulane University School of Medicine, Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana. slee30@tulane.edu.

The oncogenic fusion gene EWS-WT1 is the defining chromosomal translocation in
desmoplastic small round-cell tumors (DSRCT), a rare but aggressive soft tissue
sarcoma with a high rate of mortality. EWS-WT1 functions as an aberrant
transcription factor that drives tumorigenesis, but the mechanistic basis for its
pathogenic activity is not well understood. To address this question, we created 
a transgenic mouse strain that permits physiologic expression of EWS-WT1 under
the native murine Ews promoter. EWS-WT1 expression led to a dramatic induction of
many neuronal genes in embryonic fibroblasts and primary DSRCT, most notably the 
neural reprogramming factor ASCL1. Mechanistic analyses demonstrated that EWS-WT1
directly bound the proximal promoter of ASCL1, activating its transcription
through multiple WT1-responsive elements. Conversely, EWS-WT1 silencing in DSRCT 
cells reduced ASCL1 expression and cell viability. Notably, exposure of DSRCT
cells to neuronal induction media increased neural gene expression and induced
neurite-like projections, both of which were abrogated by silencing EWS-WT1.
Taken together, our findings reveal that EWS-WT1 can activate neural gene
expression and direct partial neural differentiation via ASCL1, suggesting agents
that promote neural differentiation might offer a novel therapeutic approach to
treat DSRCT.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24934812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Neuroscience. 2014 Sep 5;275:125-35. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.05.067.
Epub 2014 Jun 11.

Generation of induced neurons by direct reprogramming in the mammalian cochlea.

Nishimura K(1), Weichert RM(2), Liu W(3), Davis RL(4), Dabdoub A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biological Sciences, Sunnybrook Research Institute, 2075 Bayview Avenue,
Toronto, ON M4N 3M5, Canada. Electronic address: knishimu@sri.utoronto.ca.
(2)Department of Surgery/Otolaryngology, UCSD School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA. Electronic address: rmacki08@yahoo.com. (3)Department of Cell Biology
and Neuroscience, Nelson Laboratories, Rutgers University, 604 Allison Road,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA. Electronic address: wenkeliu@rutgers.edu.
(4)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Nelson Laboratories, Rutgers
University, 604 Allison Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA. Electronic address:
rldavis@dls.rutgers.edu. (5)Biological Sciences, Sunnybrook Research Institute,
2075 Bayview Avenue, Toronto, ON M4N 3M5, Canada; Department of Otolaryngology - 
Head and Neck Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of 
Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Electronic address: alain.dabdoub@sri.utoronto.ca.

Primary auditory neurons (ANs) in the mammalian cochlea play a critical role in
hearing as they transmit auditory information in the form of electrical signals
from mechanosensory cochlear hair cells in the inner ear to the brainstem. Their 
progressive degeneration is associated with disease conditions, excessive noise
exposure and aging. Replacement of ANs, which lack the ability to regenerate
spontaneously, would have a significant impact on research and advancement in
cochlear implants in addition to the amelioration of hearing impairment. The aim 
of this study was to induce a neuronal phenotype in endogenous non-neural cells
in the cochlea, which is the essential organ of hearing. Overexpression of a
neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, Ascl1, in the cochlear
non-sensory epithelial cells induced neurons at high efficiency at embryonic,
postnatal and juvenile stages. Moreover, induced neurons showed typical
properties of neuron morphology, gene expression and electrophysiology. Our data 
indicate that Ascl1 alone or Ascl1 and NeuroD1 is sufficient to reprogram
cochlear non-sensory epithelial cells into functional neurons. Generation of
neurons from non-neural cells in the cochlea is an important step for the
regeneration of ANs in the mature mammalian cochlea.

Copyright © 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24928351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Science. 2014 Jul 4;345(6192):82-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1253281. Epub 2014 Jun
12.

Neurodevelopment. Parasympathetic neurons originate from nerve-associated
peripheral glial progenitors.

Dyachuk V(1), Furlan A(2), Shahidi MK(3), Giovenco M(2), Kaukua N(4),
Konstantinidou C(5), Pachnis V(5), Memic F(2), Marklund U(2), Müller T(6),
Birchmeier C(6), Fried K(4), Ernfors P(7), Adameyko I(8).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. A.V. Zhirmunsky Institute
of Marine Biology of the Far Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences,
Vladivostok, Russia. (2)Unit of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Medical
Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Dental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, Medical Research Council (MRC) National
Institute for Medical Research, London, UK. (6)Department of Neuroscience, The
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin-Buch, Germany. (7)Unit of
Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. igor.adameyko@ki.se
patrik.ernfors@ki.se. (8)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. igor.adameyko@ki.se patrik.ernfors@ki.se.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2014 Aug;15(8):494.
    Cell Cycle. 2014;13(18):2805-6.
    Science. 2014 Jul 4;345(6192):32-3.

The peripheral autonomic nervous system reaches far throughout the body and
includes neurons of diverse functions, such as sympathetic and parasympathetic.
We show that the parasympathetic system in mice--including trunk ganglia and the 
cranial ciliary, pterygopalatine, lingual, submandibular, and otic ganglia--arise
from glial cells in nerves, not neural crest cells. The parasympathetic fate is
induced in nerve-associated Schwann cell precursors at distal peripheral sites.
We used multicolor Cre-reporter lineage tracing to show that most of these
neurons arise from bi-potent progenitors that generate both glia and neurons.
This nerve origin places cellular elements for generating parasympathetic neurons
in diverse tissues and organs, which may enable wiring of the developing
parasympathetic nervous system.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 24925909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Development. 2014 Jul;141(14):2803-12. doi: 10.1242/dev.105866. Epub 2014 Jun 12.

A transcription factor network specifying inhibitory versus excitatory neurons in
the dorsal spinal cord.

Borromeo MD(1), Meredith DM(1), Castro DS(2), Chang JC(1), Tung KC(1), Guillemot 
F(3), Johnson JE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA. (2)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory,
Oeiras, Portugal. (3)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, National Institute for
Medical Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. (4)Department of Neuroscience,
UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
jane.johnson@utsouthwestern.edu.

Erratum in
    Development. 2014 Aug;141(15):3102.

The proper balance of excitatory and inhibitory neurons is crucial for normal
processing of somatosensory information in the dorsal spinal cord. Two neural
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors (TFs), Ascl1 and Ptf1a, have
contrasting functions in specifying these neurons. To understand how Ascl1 and
Ptf1a function in this process, we identified their direct transcriptional
targets genome-wide in the embryonic mouse neural tube using ChIP-Seq and
RNA-Seq. We show that Ascl1 and Ptf1a directly regulate distinct homeodomain TFs 
that specify excitatory or inhibitory neuronal fates. In addition, Ascl1 directly
regulates genes with roles in several steps of the neurogenic program, including 
Notch signaling, neuronal differentiation, axon guidance and synapse formation.
By contrast, Ptf1a directly regulates genes encoding components of the
neurotransmitter machinery in inhibitory neurons, and other later aspects of
neural development distinct from those regulated by Ascl1. Moreover, Ptf1a
represses the excitatory neuronal fate by directly repressing several targets of 
Ascl1. Ascl1 and Ptf1a bind sequences primarily enriched for a specific E-Box
motif (CAGCTG) and for secondary motifs used by Sox, Rfx, Pou and homeodomain
factors. Ptf1a also binds sequences uniquely enriched in the CAGATG E-box and in 
the binding motif for its co-factor Rbpj, providing two factors that influence
the specificity of Ptf1a binding. The direct transcriptional targets identified
for Ascl1 and Ptf1a provide a molecular understanding of how these DNA-binding
proteins function in neuronal development, particularly as key regulators of
homeodomain TFs required for neuronal subtype specification.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197617
PMID: 24924197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Neurosci. 2014 Jun 11;34(24):8268-76. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0240-14.2014.

Wnt-responsive Lgr5<U+207A> globose basal cells function as multipotent olfactory
epithelium progenitor cells.

Chen M(1), Tian S(2), Yang X(3), Lane AP(4), Reed RR(5), Liu H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics and. (2)Department of
Microbiology and Molecular Genetics and Department of Ophthalmology, University
of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, and.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, and. (4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and
Neck Surgery and. (5)Center for Sensory Biology, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205. (6)Department of Microbiology and
Molecular Genetics and Department of Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, and liuh4@pitt.edu.

Persistent neurogenesis in the olfactory epithelium provides a unique model to
study neural stem cell self-renewal and fate determination. In the olfactory
neuroepithelium, globose basal cells (GBCs) are considered to be the direct
progenitors of olfactory neurons. However, the study of neurogenesis from GBCs
has been impeded by the paucity of GBC-specific markers. Here we report that
Lgr5, a recently discovered adult stem cell marker, is exclusively expressed in
GBCs in neonatal and adult mice. Lgr5(+) cells display characteristics of cycling
stem cells, including Ki67 expression and EdU incorporation. Lineage tracing
analysis demonstrates that Lgr5(+) GBCs regenerate multiple cell types under
normal turnover condition or after olfactory lesion. Furthermore, upregulation or
downregulation of Wnt signaling in vivo indicates a key role of Wnt signaling not
only in maintaining Lgr5(+) cell proliferation and promoting neuroregeneration,
but also in delaying sensory neuron maturation. Together, our observations
provided new insights into the dynamics of neurogenesis in the olfactory
epithelium.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/348268-09$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4051978
PMID: 24920630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Sep 10;327(1):37-47. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.05.020. Epub
2014 Jun 5.

EGF-FGF2 stimulates the proliferation and improves the neuronal commitment of
mouse epidermal neural crest stem cells (EPI-NCSCs).

Bressan RB(1), Melo FR(1), Almeida PA(1), Bittencourt DA(1), Visoni S(1),
Jeremias TS(1), Costa AP(2), Leal RB(2), Trentin AG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Celular, Embriologia e Genética, Centro de Ciências
Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Campus Universitário -
Trindade, 88040-900 Florianópolis SC, Brazil. (2)Departamento de Bioquímica,
Centro de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Campus
Universitário - Trindade, 88040-900 Florianópolis SC, Brazil. (3)Departamento de 
Biologia Celular, Embriologia e Genética, Centro de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Campus Universitário - Trindade,
88040-900 Florianópolis SC, Brazil. Electronic address: andrea.trentin@ufsc.br.

Epidermal neural crest stem cells (EPI-NCSCs), which reside in the bulge of hair 
follicles, are attractive candidates for several applications in cell therapy,
drug screening and tissue engineering. As suggested remnants of the embryonic
neural crest (NC) in an adult location, EPI-NCSCs are able to generate a wide
variety of cell types and are readily accessible by a minimally invasive
procedure. Since the combination of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and fibroblast 
growth factor type 2 (FGF2) is mitogenic and promotes the neuronal commitment of 
various stem cell populations, we examined its effects in the proliferation and
neuronal potential of mouse EPI-NCSCs. By using a recognized culture protocol of 
bulge whiskers follicles, we were able to isolate a population of EPI-NCSCs,
characterized by the migratory potential, cell morphology and expression of
phenotypic markers of NC cells. EPI-NCSCs expressed neuronal, glial and smooth
muscle markers and exhibited the NC-like fibroblastic morphology. The treatment
with the combination EGF and FGF2, however, increased their proliferation rate
and promoted the acquisition of a neuronal-like morphology accompanied by
reorganization of neural cytoskeletal proteins ßIII-tubulin and nestin, as well
as upregulation of the pan neuronal marker ßIII-tubulin and down regulation of
the undifferentiated NC, glial and smooth muscle cell markers. Moreover, the
treatment enhanced the response of EPI-NCSCs to neurogenic stimulation, as
evidenced by induction of GAP43, and increased expression of Mash-1 in
neuron-like cell, both neuronal-specific proteins. Together, the results suggest 
that the combination of EGF-FGF2 stimulates the proliferation and improves the
neuronal potential of EPI-NCSCs similarly to embryonic NC cells, ES cells and
neural progenitor/stem cells of the central nervous system and highlights the
advantage of using EGF-FGF2 in neuronal differentiation protocols.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24907656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Stem Cells. 2015 Jan;33(1):21-34. doi: 10.1002/stem.1767.

Notch1 stimulation induces a vascularization switch with pericyte-like cell
differentiation of glioblastoma stem cells.

Guichet PO(1), Guelfi S, Teigell M, Hoppe L, Bakalara N, Bauchet L, Duffau H,
Lamszus K, Rothhut B, Hugnot JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Hôpital St Eloi, Montpellier,
Cedex, France.

Glioblastoma multiforms (GBMs) are highly vascularized brain tumors containing a 
subpopulation of multipotent cancer stem cells. These cells closely interact with
endothelial cells in neurovascular niches. In this study, we have uncovered a
close link between the Notch1 pathway and the tumoral vascularization process of 
GBM stem cells. We observed that although the Notch1 receptor was activated, the 
typical target proteins (HES5, HEY1, and HEY2) were not or barely expressed in
two explored GBM stem cell cultures. Notch1 signaling activation by expression of
the intracellular form (NICD) in these cells was found to reduce their growth
rate and migration, which was accompanied by the sharp reduction in neural stem
cell transcription factor expression (ASCL1, OLIG2, and SOX2), while HEY1/2,
KLF9, and SNAI2 transcription factors were upregulated. Expression of OLIG2 and
growth were restored after termination of Notch1 stimulation. Remarkably, NICD
expression induced the expression of pericyte cell markers (NG2, PDGFRß, and
a-smooth muscle actin [aSMA]) in GBM stem cells. This was paralleled with the
induction of several angiogenesis-related factors most notably cytokines (heparin
binding epidermal growth factor [HB-EGF], IL8, and PLGF), matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP9), and adhesion proteins (vascular cell adhesion molecule
1 [VCAM1], intercellular adhesion molecule 1 [ICAM1], and integrin alpha 9
[ITGA9]). In xenotransplantation experiments, contrasting with the infiltrative
and poorly vascularized tumors obtained with control GBM stem cells, Notch1
stimulation resulted in poorly disseminating but highly vascularized grafts
containing large vessels with lumen. Notch1-stimulated GBM cells expressed
pericyte cell markers and closely associated with endothelial cells. These
results reveal an important role for the Notch1 pathway in regulating GBM stem
cell plasticity and angiogenic properties.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24898819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Vis Exp. 2014 May 12;(87). doi: 10.3791/51433.

Lineage-reprogramming of pericyte-derived cells of the adult human brain into
induced neurons.

Karow M(1), Schichor C(2), Beckervordersandforth R(3), Berninger B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology, Ludwig
Maximilians University Munich; marisa.karow@med.uni-muenchen.de. (2)Tumor Biology
Lab, Neurosurgical Clinic, Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich. (3)Institut für 
Biochemie, Emil-Fischer-Zentrum, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg. (4)Department of Physiological Genomics, Institute of
Physiology, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich; Institute of Physiological
Chemistry and Focus Program Translational Neuroscience, Johannes Gutenberg
University Mainz; berningb@uni-mainz.de.

Direct lineage-reprogramming of non-neuronal cells into induced neurons (iNs) may
provide insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying neurogenesis and enable
new strategies for in vitro modeling or repairing the diseased brain. Identifying
brain-resident non-neuronal cell types amenable to direct conversion into iNs
might allow for launching such an approach in situ, i.e. within the damaged brain
tissue. Here we describe a protocol developed in the attempt of identifying cells
derived from the adult human brain that fulfill this premise. This protocol
involves: (1) the culturing of human cells from the cerebral cortex obtained from
adult human brain biopsies; (2) the in vitro expansion (approximately requiring
2-4 weeks) and characterization of the culture by immunocytochemistry and flow
cytometry; (3) the enrichment by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) using
anti-PDGF receptor-ß and anti-CD146 antibodies; (4) the retrovirus-mediated
transduction with the neurogenic transcription factors sox2 and ascl1; (5) and
finally the characterization of the resultant pericyte-derived induced neurons
(PdiNs) by immunocytochemistry (14 days to 8 weeks following retroviral
transduction). At this stage, iNs can be probed for their electrical properties
by patch-clamp recording. This protocol provides a highly reproducible procedure 
for the in vitro lineage conversion of brain-resident pericytes into functional
human iNs.

PMID: 24893711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2014 Oct;34:85-90. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.04.038. Epub
2014 May 24.

The roles and mechanism of ultradian oscillatory expression of the mouse Hes
genes.

Harima Y(1), Imayoshi I(2), Shimojo H(3), Kobayashi T(3), Kageyama R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; Japan Science and Technology Agency, Core Research for
Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama
332-0012, Japan. (2)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University,
Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; World Premier International
Research Initiative-Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), 
Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan; The Hakubi Center, Kyoto University,
Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (3)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University,
Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), 4-1-8
Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan; World Premier International Research 
Initiative-Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (4)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto
University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; Japan Science and 
Technology Agency, Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), 
4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan; World Premier International
Research Initiative-Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), 
Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. Electronic address:
rkageyam@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Somites, metameric structures, give rise to the vertebral column, ribs, skeletal 
muscles and subcutaneous tissues. In mouse embryos, a pair of somites is formed
every 2h by segmentation of the anterior parts of the presomitic mesoderm. This
periodic event is regulated by a biological clock called the segmentation clock, 
which involves cyclic expression of the basic helix-loop-helix gene Hes7. Hes7
oscillation is regulated by negative feedback with a delayed timing. This process
has been mathematically simulated by differential-delay equations, which predict 
that negative feedback with shorter delays would abolish oscillations or produce 
dampened but more rapid oscillations. We found that reducing the number of
introns within the Hes7 gene shortens the delay and abolishes Hes7 oscillation or
results in a more rapid tempo of Hes7 oscillation, increasing the number of
somites and vertebrae in the cervical and upper thoracic region. We also found
that Hes1, a Hes7-related gene, is expressed in an oscillatory manner by many
cell types, including fibroblasts and neural stem cells. In these cells, Hes1
expression oscillates with a period of about 2-3h, and this oscillation is
important for cell cycle progression. Furthermore, in neural stem cells, Hes1
oscillation drives cyclic expression of the proneural genes Ascl1 and Neurogenin2
and regulates multipotency. Hes1 expression oscillates more slowly in embryonic
stem cells, and Hes1 oscillation regulates their fate preferences. Taken
together, these results suggest that oscillatory expression with short periods
(ultradian oscillation) is important for many biological events.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24865153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Cell Tissue Res. 2015 Jan;359(1):125-33. doi: 10.1007/s00441-014-1888-7. Epub
2014 May 22.

Dynamic expression and roles of Hes factors in neural development.

Kageyama R(1), Shimojo H, Imayoshi I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto, 606-8507, Japan, rkageyam@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

The basic helix-loop-helix factors Hes1 and Hes5 repress the expression of
proneural factors such as Ascl1, thereby inhibiting neuronal differentiation and 
maintaining neural progenitor cells (NPCs). Hes1 expression oscillates by
negative feedback with a period of about 2-3 h in proliferating NPCs. Induction
of sustained expression of Hes1 in NPCs inhibits their cell-cycle progression,
suggesting that the oscillatory expression of Hes1 is important for the
proliferation of NPCs. Hes1 oscillation drives the oscillatory expression of
proneural factors such as Ascl1 by periodic repression. By contrast, in
differentiating neurons, Hes1 expression disappears and the expression of
proneural factors is up-regulated and sustained. A new optogenetics approach that
induces Ascl1 expression by blue light illumination demonstrated that sustained
expression of Ascl1 induces neuronal differentiation, whereas oscillatory
expression of Ascl1 activates the proliferation of NPCs. These results together
indicate that Hes1 regulates the oscillatory versus sustained expression of the
proneural factor Ascl1, which in turn regulates the proliferation of NPCs and the
subsequent processes of cell-cycle exit and neuronal fate determination,
depending on the expression dynamics.

PMID: 24850276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Elife. 2014 May 7;3:e02669. doi: 10.7554/eLife.02669.

Prospective identification of functionally distinct stem cells and
neurosphere-initiating cells in adult mouse forebrain.

Mich JK(1), Signer RA(1), Nakada D(2), Pineda A(1), Burgess RJ(1), Vue TY(3),
Johnson JE(3), Morrison SJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Research Institute, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United
States. (2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, United States. (3)Department of Neuroscience, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United States. (4)Department of
Pediatrics, Children's Research Institute, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United States
sean.morrison@utsouthwestern.edu.

Neurosphere formation is commonly used as a surrogate for neural stem cell (NSC) 
function but the relationship between neurosphere-initiating cells (NICs) and
NSCs remains unclear. We prospectively identified, and isolated by flow
cytometry, adult mouse lateral ventricle subventricular zone (SVZ) NICs as
Glast(mid)EGFR(high)PlexinB2(high)CD24(-/low)O4/PSA-NCAM(-/low)Ter119/CD45(-)
(GEPCOT) cells. They were highly mitotic and short-lived in vivo based on
fate-mapping with Ascl1(CreERT2) and Dlx1(CreERT2). In contrast, pre-GEPCOT cells
were quiescent, expressed higher Glast, and lower EGFR and PlexinB2. Pre-GEPCOT
cells could not form neurospheres but expressed the stem cell markers
Slc1a3-CreER(T), GFAP-CreER(T2), Sox2(CreERT2), and Gli1(CreERT2) and were
long-lived in vivo. While GEPCOT NICs were ablated by temozolomide, pre-GEPCOT
cells survived and repopulated the SVZ. Conditional deletion of the Bmi-1
polycomb protein depleted pre-GEPCOT and GEPCOT cells, though pre-GEPCOT cells
were more dependent upon Bmi-1 for Cdkn2a (p16(Ink4a)) repression. Our data
distinguish quiescent NSCs from NICs and make it possible to study their
properties in vivo.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02669.001.

Copyright © 2014, Mich et al.

PMCID: PMC4038845
PMID: 24843006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jun 27;449(2):248-55. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.018. Epub 2014 May 14.

Carboxylation of cytosine (5caC) in the CG dinucleotide in the E-box motif
(CGCAG|GTG) increases binding of the Tcf3|Ascl1 helix-loop-helix heterodimer
10-fold.

Golla JP(1), Zhao J(1), Mann IK(1), Sayeed SK(1), Mandal A(1), Rose RB(2), Vinson
C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Room 3128, Building 37, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States. (2)Department 
of Biochemistry, North Carolina State University, 128 Polk Hall, Raleigh, NC
27695, United States. (3)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Room 3128, Building 37, Bethesda, MD 20892, United
States. Electronic address: vinsonc@mail.nih.gov.

Three oxidative products of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) occur in mammalian genomes. We
evaluated if these cytosine modifications in a CG dinucleotide altered DNA
binding of four B-HLH homodimers and three heterodimers to the E-Box motif
CGCAG|GTG. We examined 25 DNA probes containing all combinations of cytosine in a
CG dinucleotide and none changed binding except for carboxylation of cytosine
(5caC) in the strand CGCAG|GTG. 5caC enhanced binding of all examined B-HLH
homodimers and heterodimers, particularly the Tcf3|Ascl1 heterodimer which
increased binding ~10-fold. These results highlight a potential function of the
oxidative products of 5mC, changing the DNA binding of sequence-specific
transcription factors.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24835951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Development. 2014 Jun;141(11):2216-24. doi: 10.1242/dev.106377. Epub 2014 May 12.

The phosphorylation status of Ascl1 is a key determinant of neuronal
differentiation and maturation in vivo and in vitro.

Ali FR(1), Cheng K(2), Kirwan P(3), Metcalfe S(4), Livesey FJ(3), Barker RA(4),
Philpott A(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Oncology, Hutchison/MRC Research
Centre, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XZ, UK John van Geest Centre for Brain Repair,
University of Cambridge, Forvie Site, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0PY, UK.
(2)University of Cambridge, Department of Oncology, Hutchison/MRC Research
Centre, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XZ, UK. (3)Gurdon Institute, Department of
Biochemistry and Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Tennis
Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK. (4)John van Geest Centre for Brain Repair,
University of Cambridge, Forvie Site, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0PY, UK.
(5)University of Cambridge, Department of Oncology, Hutchison/MRC Research
Centre, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XZ, UK ap113@cam.ac.uk.

Generation of neurons from patient fibroblasts using a combination of
developmentally defined transcription factors has great potential in disease
modelling, as well as ultimately for use in regeneration and repair. However,
generation of physiologically mature neurons in vitro remains problematic. Here
we demonstrate the cell-cycle-dependent phosphorylation of a key reprogramming
transcription factor, Ascl1, on multiple serine-proline sites. This multisite
phosphorylation is a crucial regulator of the ability of Ascl1 to drive neuronal 
differentiation and maturation in vivo in the developing embryo; a phosphomutant 
form of Ascl1 shows substantially enhanced neuronal induction activity in Xenopus
embryos. Mechanistically, we see that this un(der)phosphorylated Ascl1 is
resistant to inhibition by both cyclin-dependent kinase activity and Notch
signalling, both of which normally limit its neurogenic potential. Ascl1 is a
central component of reprogramming transcription factor cocktails to generate
neurons from human fibroblasts; the use of phosphomutant Ascl1 in place of the
wild-type protein significantly promotes neuronal maturity after human fibroblast
reprogramming in vitro. These results demonstrate that cell-cycle-dependent
post-translational modification of proneural proteins directly regulates neuronal
differentiation in vivo during development, and that this regulatory mechanism
can be harnessed to promote maturation of neurons obtained by
transdifferentiation of human cells in vitro.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 24821983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Comput Biol. 2014 Jul;21(7):548-67. doi: 10.1089/cmb.2014.0022. Epub 2014 May
5.

Stochastic simulation of notch signaling reveals novel factors that mediate the
differentiation of neural stem cells.

Tzou WS(1), Lo YT, Pai TW, Hu CH, Li CH.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Life Sciences, National Taiwan Ocean University , Taiwan,
R.O.C.

Notch signaling controls cell fate decisions and regulates multiple biological
processes, such as cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis.
Computational modeling of the deterministic simulation of Notch signaling has
provided important insight into the possible molecular mechanisms that underlie
the switch from the undifferentiated stem cell to the differentiated cell. Here, 
we constructed a stochastic model of a Notch signaling model containing Hes1,
Notch1, RBP-Jk, Mash1, Hes6, and Delta. mRNA and protein were represented as a
discrete state, and 334 reactions were employed for each biochemical reaction
using a graphics processing unit-accelerated Gillespie scheme. We employed the
tuning of 40 molecular mechanisms and revealed several potential mediators
capable of enabling the switch from cell stemness to differentiation. These
effective mediators encompass different aspects of cellular regulations,
including the nuclear transport of Hes1, the degradation of mRNA (Hes1 and
Notch1) and protein (Notch1), the association between RBP-Jk and Notch
intracellular domain (NICD), and the cleavage efficiency of the NICD. These
mechanisms overlap with many modifiers that have only recently been discovered to
modulate the Notch signaling output, including microRNA action,
ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, and the competitive binding of the RBP-Jk-DNA
complex. Moreover, we identified the degradation of Hes1 mRNA and nuclear
transport of Hes1 as the dominant mechanisms that were capable of abolishing the 
cell state transition induced by other molecular mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4082354
PMID: 24798230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Oct 1;23(19):2311-27. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0452. Epub 2014 
Jun 18.

Oxidative stress increases neurogenesis and oligodendrogenesis in adult neural
progenitor cells.

Pérez Estrada C(1), Covacu R, Sankavaram SR, Svensson M, Brundin L.

Author information: 
(1)1 Neurology Unit, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, 
Karolinska University Hospital , Stockholm, Sweden .

Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is a reactive oxygen species that is involved in
immunity and neuroinflammation. Here, we investigated whether and how
pathophysiological levels of H2O2 influenced the differentiation of neural
progenitor cells (NPCs). H2O2 levels within the range measured at
neuroinflammatory events were applied to rat primary NPC cultures during 24 h,
and effects were assessed directly after exposure or in NPCs that were
differentiated for 7 days after H2O2 removal. Exposed differentiated NPCs showed 
significantly increased numbers of neurons and oligodendrocytes compared with
unexposed controls. To identify the possible origin of this differentiation
result, we characterized the undifferentiated culture and found a significant
increase in both OLIG2(+) cells and proliferative ASCL1(+) C cells that could
contribute to both more neurons and oligodendrocytes. In addition, H2O2-induced
neurogenesis was supported by western blot and paralleled by gene expression
analyses, which revealed an increased expression of the proneural gene Ngn2 and
the neuronally expressed gene ß-III tubulin. To investigate potential mechanisms 
for the observed effects on NPC differentiation, we performed gene expression
profile analyses for oxidative stress and antioxidant-related and chromatin
modification genes where the expression of several important genes was affected
by the exposure. Increased oligodendrocyte numbers correlated with increased
expression of the chromatin modification enzyme Sirt2, suggesting the involvement
of Sirt2 in oligodendrocyte differentiation. Our results suggest a modulatory
effect on the differentiation potential of NPCs by H2O2. Our findings indicate
that H2O2 exposure has significant effects on NPC proliferation, differentiation,
and vulnerability. These results have implications for regeneration after any
neuroinflammatory event.

PMID: 24773127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1150:237-46. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-0512-6_16.

Transdifferentiation of mouse fibroblasts and hepatocytes to functional neurons.

Marro S(1), Yang N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, 265 Campus Drive, 3rd Floor,
Stanford, CA, 94305, USA, smarro@stanford.edu.

Nuclear reprogramming by defined transcription factors became of broad interest
in 2006 with the work of Takahashi and Yamanaka (Cell 126:663-676, 2006), but the
first example of cell fate reshaping via ectopic expression of transcription
factor was provided back in 1987 when Davis and colleagues induced features of a 
muscle cell in fibroblast using the muscle transcription factor MyoD (Davis et
al., Cell 51:987-1000, 1987). In 2010 our laboratory described how forced
expression of the three neuronal transcription factors Ascl1, Brn2, and Myt1l
rapidly converts mouse fibroblasts into neuronal cells that exhibit biochemical
and electrophysiological properties of neurons. We named these cells induced
neuronal cells (iN cells) (Vierbuchen et al., Nature 463:1035-1041, 2010;
Vierbuchen and Wernig, Nat Biotechnol 29:892-907, 2011). Interestingly, iN cells 
can also be derived from defined endodermal cells such as primary hepatocytes,
suggesting the existence of a more general reprogramming paradigm (Marro et al., 
Cell Stem Cell 9:374-382, 2011). In this chapter we describe the detailed methods
used to attain the direct conversion.

PMID: 24744003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Apr 29;111(17):E1777-86. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1315024111. Epub 2014 Apr 14.

Transformation of the cerebellum into more ventral brainstem fates causes
cerebellar agenesis in the absence of Ptf1a function.

Millen KJ(1), Steshina EY, Iskusnykh IY, Chizhikov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98101.

Model organism studies have demonstrated that cell fate specification decisions
play an important role in normal brain development. Their role in human
neurodevelopmental disorders, however, is poorly understood, with very few
examples described. The cerebellum is an excellent system to study mechanisms of 
cell fate specification. Although signals from the isthmic organizer are known to
specify cerebellar territory along the anterior-posterior axis of the neural
tube, the mechanisms establishing the cerebellar anlage along the dorsal-ventral 
axis are unknown. Here we show that the gene encoding pancreatic transcription
factor PTF1A, which is inactivated in human patients with cerebellar agenesis, is
required to segregate the cerebellum from more ventral extracerebellar fates.
Using genetic fate mapping in mice, we show that in the absence of Ptf1a, cells
originating in the cerebellar ventricular zone initiate a more ventral brainstem 
expression program, including LIM homeobox transcription factor 1 beta and T-cell
leukemia homeobox 3. Misspecified cells exit the cerebellar anlage and contribute
to the adjacent brainstem or die, leading to cerebellar agenesis in Ptf1a
mutants. Our data identify Ptf1a as the first gene involved in the segregation of
the cerebellum from the more ventral brainstem. Further, we propose that
cerebellar agenesis represents a new, dorsal-to-ventral, cell fate
misspecification phenotype in humans.

PMCID: PMC4035921
PMID: 24733890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Development. 2014 Apr;141(8):1726-36. doi: 10.1242/dev.099002.

Msx1 and Msx2 act as essential activators of Atoh1 expression in the murine
spinal cord.

Duval N(1), Daubas P, Bourcier de Carbon C, St Cloment C, Tinevez JY, Lopes M,
Ribes V, Robert B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Morphogenesis Molecular Genetics, CNRS URA 2578, 75015
Paris, France.

Dorsal spinal neurogenesis is orchestrated by the combined action of signals
secreted from the roof plate organizer and a downstream transcriptional cascade. 
Within this cascade, Msx1 and Msx2, two homeodomain transcription factors (TFs), 
are induced earlier than bHLH neuralizing TFs. Whereas bHLH TFs have been shown
to specify neuronal cell fate, the function of Msx genes remains poorly defined. 
We describe dramatic alterations of neuronal patterning in Msx1/Msx2
double-mutant mouse embryos. The most dorsal spinal progenitor pool fails to
express the bHLH neuralizing TF Atoh1, which results in a lack of Lhx2-positive
and Barhl2-positive dI1 interneurons. Neurog1 and Ascl1 expression territories
are dorsalized, leading to ectopic dorsal differentiation of dI2 and dI3
interneurons. In proportion, the amount of Neurog1-expressing progenitors appears
unaffected, whereas the number of Ascl1-positive cells is increased. These
defects occur while BMP signaling is still active in the Msx1/Msx2 mutant
embryos. Cell lineage analysis and co-immunolabeling demonstrate that
Atoh1-positive cells derive from progenitors expressing both Msx1 and Msx2. In
vitro, Msx1 and Msx2 proteins activate Atoh1 transcription by specifically
interacting with several homeodomain binding sites in the Atoh1 3' enhancer. In
vivo, Msx1 and Msx2 are required for Atoh1 3' enhancer activity and ChIP
experiments confirm Msx1 binding to this regulatory sequence. These data support 
a novel function of Msx1 and Msx2 as transcriptional activators. Our study
provides new insights into the transcriptional control of spinal cord patterning 
by BMP signaling, with Msx1 and Msx2 acting upstream of Atoh1.

PMID: 24715462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Biomaterials. 2014 Jul;35(20):5327-36. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.03.034.
Epub 2014 Apr 4.

The effect of substrate topography on direct reprogramming of fibroblasts to
induced neurons.

Kulangara K(1), Adler AF(1), Wang H(2), Chellappan M(1), Hammett E(1), Yasuda
R(3), Leong KW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Durham, NC 27708, USA. (2)Department of 
Neurobiology, Durham, NC 27708, USA. (3)Department of Neurobiology, Durham, NC
27708, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708,
USA. (4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Durham, NC 27708, USA. Electronic
address: kam.leong@duke.edu.

Cellular reprogramming holds tremendous potential for cell therapy and
regenerative medicine. Recently, fibroblasts have been directly converted into
induced neurons (iNs) by overexpression of the neuronal transcription factors
Ascl1, Brn2 and Myt1L. Hypothesizing that cell-topography interactions could
influence the fibroblast-to-neuron reprogramming process, we investigated the
effects of various topographies on iNs produced by direct reprogramming. Final iN
purity and conversion efficiency were increased on micrograting substrates.
Neurite branching was increased on microposts and decreased on microgratings,
with a simplified dendritic arbor characterized by the reduction of MAP2(+)
neurites. Neurite outgrowth increased significantly on various topographies. DNA 
microarray analysis detected 20 differentially expressed genes in iNs
reprogrammed on smooth versus microgratings, and quantitative PCR (qPCR)
confirmed the upregulation of Vip and downregulation of Thy1 and Bmp5 on
microgratings. Electrophysiology and calcium imaging verified the functionality
of these iNs. This study demonstrates the potential of applying topographical
cues to optimize cellular reprogramming.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4023960
PMID: 24709523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Brain. 2014 Apr 3;7:24. doi: 10.1186/1756-6606-7-24.

Reprogramming non-human primate somatic cells into functional neuronal cells by
defined factors.

Zhou Z, Kohda K, Ibata K, Kohyama J, Akamatsu W, Yuzaki M, Okano HJ, Sasaki E,
Okano H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. hidokano@a2.keio.jp.

BACKGROUND: The common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus) is a New World primate
sharing many similarities with humans. Recently developed technology for
generating transgenic marmosets has opened new avenues for faithful
recapitulation of human diseases, which could not be achieved in rodent models.
However, the longer lifespan of common marmosets compared with rodents may result
in an extended period for in vivo analysis of common marmoset disease models.
Therefore, establishing rapid and efficient techniques for obtaining neuronal
cells from transgenic individuals that enable in vitro analysis of molecular
mechanisms underlying diseases are required. Recently, several groups have
reported on methods, termed direct reprogramming, to generate neuronal cells by
defined factors from somatic cells of various kinds of species, including mouse
and human. The aim of the present study was to determine whether direct
reprogramming technology was applicable to common marmosets.
RESULTS: Common marmoset induced neuronal (cjiN) cells with neuronal morphology
were generated from common marmoset embryonic skin fibroblasts (cjF) by
overexpressing the neuronal transcription factors: ASCL1, BRN2, MYT1L and
NEUROD1. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction of cjiN cells showed
upregulation of neuronal genes highly related to neuronal differentiation and
function. The presence of neuronal marker proteins was also confirmed by
immunocytochemistry. Electrical field stimulation to cjiN cells increased the
intracellular calcium level, which was reversibly blocked by the voltage-gated
sodium channel blocker, tetrodotoxin, indicating that these cells were
functional. The neuronal function of these cells was further confirmed by
electrophysiological analyses showing that action potentials could be elicited by
membrane depolarization in current-clamp mode while both fast-activating and
inactivating sodium currents and outward currents were observed in voltage-clamp 
mode. The 5-bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation assay showed that cjiN cells
were directly converted from cjFs without passing a proliferative state.
CONCLUSIONS: Functional common marmoset neuronal cells can be obtained directly
from embryonic fibroblasts by overexpressing four neuronal transcription factors 
under in vitro conditions. Overall, direct conversion technology on marmoset
somatic cells provides the opportunity to analyze and screen phenotypes of
genetically-modified common marmosets.

PMCID: PMC4021617
PMID: 24694048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Chem Senses. 2014 Jun;39(5):403-14. doi: 10.1093/chemse/bju010. Epub 2014 Mar 28.

Expression of GAD67 and Dlx5 in the taste buds of mice genetically lacking Mash1.

Kito-Shingaki A(1), Seta Y(2), Toyono T(3), Kataoka S(4), Kakinoki Y(5), Yanagawa
Y(6), Toyoshima K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Histology and Neurobiology, Kyushu Dental University, 2-6-1
Manaduru, Kokurakita-ku, Kitakyushu 803-8580, Japan, Division of Special Needs
and Geriatric Dentistry, Kyushu Dental University, 2-6-1 Manaduru, Kokurakita-ku,
Kitakyushu 803-8580, Japan. (2)Division of Oral Histology and Neurobiology,
Kyushu Dental University, 2-6-1 Manaduru, Kokurakita-ku, Kitakyushu 803-8580,
Japan, yujiseta@kyu-dent.ac.jp. (3)Division of Oral Histology and Neurobiology,
Kyushu Dental University, 2-6-1 Manaduru, Kokurakita-ku, Kitakyushu 803-8580,
Japan. (4)Division of Oral Anatomy, Kyushu Dental University, 2-6-1 Manaduru,
Kokurakita-ku, Kitakyushu 803-8580, Japan and. (5)Division of Special Needs and
Geriatric Dentistry, Kyushu Dental University, 2-6-1 Manaduru, Kokurakita-ku,
Kitakyushu 803-8580, Japan. (6)Department of Genetic and Behavioral Neuroscience,
Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, 3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi
371-8511, Japan.

It has been reported that a subset of type III taste cells express glutamate
decarboxylase (GAD)67, which is a molecule that synthesizes gamma-aminobutyric
acid (GABA), and that Mash1 could be a potential regulator of the development of 
GABAnergic neurons via Dlx transcription factors in the central nervous system.
In this study, we investigated the expression of GAD67 and Dlx in the embryonic
taste buds of the soft palate and circumvallate papilla using Mash1 knockout
(KO)/GAD67-GFP knock-in mice. In the wild-type animal, a subset of type III taste
cells contained GAD67 in the taste buds of the soft palate and the developing
circumvallate papilla, whereas GAD67-expressing taste bud cells were missing from
Mash1 KO mice. A subset of type III cells expressed mRNA for Dlx5 in the
wild-type animals, whereas Dlx5-expressing cells were not evident in the apical
part of the circumvallate papilla and taste buds in the soft palate of Mash1 KO
mice. Our results suggest that Mash1 is required for the expression of GAD67 and 
Dlx5 in taste bud cells.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24682237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 18;9(3):e92113. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092113. eCollection
2014.

Ascl1 as a novel player in the Ptf1a transcriptional network for GABAergic cell
specification in the retina.

Mazurier N(1), Parain K(1), Parlier D(2), Pretto S(1), Hamdache J(1), Vernier
P(3), Locker M(1), Bellefroid E(2), Perron M(1).

Author information: 
(1)UPR Centre national de la recherche scientifique 3294 Neurobiology and
Development, University Paris Sud, Orsay, France. (2)ULB-IBMM, Laboratoire
d'Embryologie Moléculaire, Gosselies, Belgium. (3)UPR Centre national de la
recherche scientifique 3294 Neurobiology and Development, Institut A. Fessard,
Gif-Sur-Yvette, France.

In contrast with the wealth of data involving bHLH and homeodomain transcription 
factors in retinal cell type determination, the molecular bases underlying
neurotransmitter subtype specification is far less understood. Using both gain
and loss of function analyses in Xenopus, we investigated the putative
implication of the bHLH factor Ascl1 in this process. We found that in addition
to its previously characterized proneural function, Ascl1 also contributes to the
specification of the GABAergic phenotype. We showed that it is necessary for
retinal GABAergic cell genesis and sufficient in overexpression experiments to
bias a subset of retinal precursor cells towards a GABAergic fate. We also
analysed the relationships between Ascl1 and a set of other bHLH factors using an
in vivo ectopic neurogenic assay. We demonstrated that Ascl1 has unique features 
as a GABAergic inducer and is epistatic over factors endowed with glutamatergic
potentialities such as Neurog2, NeuroD1 or Atoh7. This functional specificity is 
conferred by the basic DNA binding domain of Ascl1 and involves a specific
genetic network, distinct from that underlying its previously demonstrated
effects on catecholaminergic differentiation. Our data show that GABAergic
inducing activity of Ascl1 requires the direct transcriptional regulation of
Ptf1a, providing therefore a new piece of the network governing neurotransmitter 
subtype specification during retinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3958475
PMID: 24643195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Stem Cells. 2014 Aug;32(8):2201-14. doi: 10.1002/stem.1688.

BMP signaling regulates the tempo of adult hippocampal progenitor maturation at
multiple stages of the lineage.

Bond AM(1), Peng CY, Meyers EA, McGuire T, Ewaleifoh O, Kessler JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University's Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Novel environmental stimuli, such as running and learning, increase proliferation
of adult hippocampal neural stem cells (NSCs) and enlarge the population of new
neurons. However, it remains unclear how increased numbers of new neurons can be 
generated in a time frame far shorter than the time required for proliferating
stem cells to generate these neurons. Here, we show that bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) signaling in the subgranular zone regulates the tempo of neural
progenitor cell (NPC) maturation by directing their transition between states of 
quiescence and activation at multiple stages along the lineage. Virally mediated 
overexpression of BMP4 caused NPC cell cycle exit and slowed the normal
maturation of NPCs, resulting in a long-term reduction in neurogenesis.
Conversely, overexpression of the BMP inhibitor noggin promoted NPC cell cycle
entry and accelerated NPC maturation. Similarly, BMP receptor type 2 (BMPRII)
ablation in Ascl1(+) intermediate NPCs accelerated their maturation into neurons.
Importantly, ablation of BMPRII in GFAP(+) stem cells accelerated maturation
without depleting the NSC pool, indicating that an increased rate of neurogenesis
does not necessarily diminish the stem cell population. Thus, inhibition of BMP
signaling is a mechanism for rapidly expanding the pool of new neurons in the
adult hippocampus by tipping the balance between quiescence/activation of NPCs
and accelerating the rate at which they mature into neurons.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24578327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Nat Commun. 2014 Feb 27;5:3405. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4405.

An antagonistic interaction between PlexinB2 and Rnd3 controls RhoA activity and 
cortical neuron migration.

Azzarelli R(1), Pacary E(1), Garg R(2), Garcez P(3), van den Berg D(3), Riou
P(4), Ridley AJ(2), Friedel RH(5), Parsons M(2), Guillemot F(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Molecular Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK [2]. (2)Randall Division of Cell and
Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, London SE1 1UL, UK. (3)Division of
Molecular Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill,
London NW7 1AA, UK. (4)1] Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics,
King's College London, London SE1 1UL, UK [2]. (5)Department of Neuroscience,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1425 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 
10029, USA.

A transcriptional programme initiated by the proneural factors Neurog2 and Ascl1 
controls successive steps of neurogenesis in the embryonic cerebral cortex.
Previous work has shown that proneural factors also confer a migratory behaviour 
to cortical neurons by inducing the expression of the small GTP-binding proteins 
such as Rnd2 and Rnd3. However, the directionality of radial migration suggests
that migrating neurons also respond to extracellular signal-regulated pathways.
Here we show that the Plexin B2 receptor interacts physically and functionally
with Rnd3 and stimulates RhoA activity in migrating cortical neurons. Plexin B2
competes with p190RhoGAP for binding to Rnd3, thus blocking the Rnd3-mediated
inhibition of RhoA and also recruits RhoGEFs to directly stimulate RhoA activity.
Thus, an interaction between the cell-extrinsic Plexin signalling pathway and the
cell-intrinsic Ascl1-Rnd3 pathway determines the level of RhoA activity
appropriate for cortical neuron migration.

PMCID: PMC3939360
PMID: 24572910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 May;15(5):510-5. doi: 10.4161/cbt.28015. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Specific glycogen synthase kinase-3 inhibition reduces neuroendocrine markers and
suppresses neuroblastoma cell growth.

Carter YM(1), Kunnimalaiyaan S(2), Chen H(1), Gamblin TC(3), Kunnimalaiyaan M(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Endocrine Surgery Laboratory; Madison, WI USA.
(2)University of Wisconsin Endocrine Surgery Laboratory; Madison, WI USA; Medical
College of Wisconsin; Milwaukee, WI USA. (3)Medical College of Wisconsin;
Milwaukee, WI USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 May;15(5):481-2.

OBJECTIVE: Neuroblastoma is a common neuroendocrine (NE) tumor that presents in
early childhood, with a high incidence of malignancy and recurrence. The glycogen
synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) pathway is a potential therapeutic target, as this
pathway has been shown to be crucial in the management of other NE tumors.
However, it is not known which isoform is necessary for growth inhibition. In
this study, we investigated the effect of the GSK-3 inhibitor AR-A014418 on the
different GSK-3 isoforms in neuroblastoma.
METHODS: NGP and SH-5Y-SY cells were treated with 0-20 µM of AR-A014418 and cell 
viability was measured by MTT assay. Expression levels of NE markers CgA and
ASCL1, GSK-3 isoforms, and apoptotic markers were analyzed by western blot.
RESULTS: Neuroblastoma cells treated with AR-A014418 had a significant reduction 
in growth at all doses and time points (P<0.001). A reduction in growth was noted
in cell lines on day 6, with 10 µM (NGP-53% vs. 0% and SH-5Y-SY-38% vs. 0%,
P<0.001) treatment compared to control, corresponding with a noticeable reduction
in tumor marker ASCL1 and CgA expression.
CONCLUSION: Treatment of neuroblastoma cell lines with AR-A014418 reduced the
level of GSK-3a phosphorylation at Tyr279 compared to GSK-3ß phosphorylation at
Tyr216, and attenuated growth via the maintenance of apoptosis. This study
supports further investigation to elucidate the mechanism(s) by which GSK-3a
inhibition downregulates the expression of NE tumor markers and growth of
neuroblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4026073
PMID: 24521712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Neurosci. 2014 Feb 5;34(6):2169-90. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4077-13.2014.

RAS/ERK signaling controls proneural genetic programs in cortical development and
gliomagenesis.

Li S(1), Mattar P, Dixit R, Lawn SO, Wilkinson G, Kinch C, Eisenstat D, Kurrasch 
DM, Chan JA, Schuurmans C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Departments of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Hotchkiss Brain
Institute, Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute, and Southern Alberta
Cancer Research Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada, T2N
4N1, and Departments of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, T6G 2H7.

Neural cell fate specification is well understood in the embryonic cerebral
cortex, where the proneural genes Neurog2 and Ascl1 are key cell fate
determinants. What is less well understood is how cellular diversity is generated
in brain tumors. Gliomas and glioneuronal tumors, which are often localized in
the cerebrum, are both characterized by a neoplastic glial component, but
glioneuronal tumors also have an intermixed neuronal component. A core
abnormality in both tumor groups is overactive RAS/ERK signaling, a
pro-proliferative signal whose contributions to cell differentiation in
oncogenesis are largely unexplored. We found that RAS/ERK activation levels
differ in two distinct human tumors associated with constitutively active BRAF.
Pilocytic astrocytomas, which contain abnormal glial cells, have higher ERK
activation levels than gangliogliomas, which contain abnormal neuronal and glial 
cells. Using in vivo gain of function and loss of function in the mouse embryonic
neocortex, we found that RAS/ERK signals control a proneural genetic switch,
inhibiting Neurog2 expression while inducing Ascl1, a competing lineage
determinant. Furthermore, we found that RAS/ERK levels control Ascl1's fate
specification properties in murine cortical progenitors--at higher RAS/ERK
levels, Ascl1(+) progenitors are biased toward proliferative glial programs,
initiating astrocytomas, while at moderate RAS/ERK levels, Ascl1 promotes
GABAergic neuronal and less glial differentiation, generating glioneuronal
tumors. Mechanistically, Ascl1 is phosphorylated by ERK, and ERK phosphoacceptor 
sites are necessary for Ascl1's GABAergic neuronal and gliogenic potential.
RAS/ERK signaling thus acts as a rheostat to influence neural cell fate selection
in both normal cortical development and gliomagenesis, controlling Neurog2-Ascl1 
expression and Ascl1 function.

PMID: 24501358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. BMC Neurosci. 2014 Jan 16;15:13. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-15-13.

Skn-1a/Pou2f3 is required for the generation of Trpm5-expressing microvillous
cells in the mouse main olfactory epithelium.

Yamaguchi T, Yamashita J, Ohmoto M, Aoudé I, Ogura T, Luo W, Bachmanov AA, Lin W,
Matsumoto I(1), Hirota J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Graduate School of Bioscience and
Bioengineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.
imatsumoto@monell.org.

BACKGROUND: The main olfactory epithelium (MOE) in mammals is a specialized organ
to detect odorous molecules in the external environment. The MOE consists of four
types of cells: olfactory sensory neurons, supporting cells, basal cells, and
microvillous cells. Among these, development and function of microvillous cells
remain largely unknown. Recent studies have shown that a population of
microvillous cells expresses the monovalent cation channel Trpm5 (transient
receptor potential channel M5). To examine functional differentiation of
Trpm5-expressing microvillous cells in the MOE, we investigated the expression
and function of Skn-1a, a POU (Pit-Oct-Unc) transcription factor required for
functional differentiation of Trpm5-expressing sweet, umami, and bitter taste bud
cells in oropharyngeal epithelium and solitary chemosensory cells in nasal
respiratory epithelium.
RESULTS: Skn-1a is expressed in a subset of basal cells and apical non-neuronal
cells in the MOE of embryonic and adult mice. Two-color in situ hybridization
revealed that a small population of Skn-1a-expressing cells was co-labeled with
Mash1/Ascl1 and that most Skn-1a-expressing cells coexpress Trpm5. To investigate
whether Skn-1a has an irreplaceable role in the MOE, we analyzed Skn-1a-deficient
mice. In the absence of Skn-1a, olfactory sensory neurons differentiate normally 
except for a limited defect in terminal differentiation in ectoturbinate 2 of
some of MOEs examined. In contrast, the impact of Skn-1a deficiency on
Trpm5-expressing microvillous cells is much more striking: Trpm5, villin, and
choline acetyltransferase, cell markers previously shown to identify
Trpm5-expressing microvillous cells, were no longer detectable in
Skn-1a-deficient mice. In addition, quantitative analysis demonstrated that the
density of superficial microvillous cells was significantly decreased in
Skn-1a-deficient mice.
CONCLUSION: Skn-1a is expressed in a minority of Mash1-positive olfactory
progenitor cells and a majority of Trpm5-expressing microvillous cells in the
main olfactory epithelium. Loss-of-function mutation of Skn-1a resulted in
complete loss of Trpm5-expressing microvillous cells, whereas most of olfactory
sensory neurons differentiated normally. Thus, Skn-1a is a critical regulator for
the generation of Trpm5-expressing microvillous cells in the main olfactory
epithelium in mice.

PMCID: PMC3901341
PMID: 24428937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Cancer Med. 2013 Oct;2(5):734-43. doi: 10.1002/cam4.118. Epub 2013 Sep 17.

Thiocoraline alters neuroendocrine phenotype and activates the Notch pathway in
MTC-TT cell line.

Tesfazghi S(1), Eide J, Dammalapati A, Korlesky C, Wyche TP, Bugni TS, Chen H,
Jaskula-Sztul R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison, Wisconsin.

Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) is an aggressive neuroendocrine tumor (NET).
Previous research has shown that activation of Notch signaling has a tumor
suppressor role in NETs. The potential therapeutic effect of thiocoraline on the 
activation of the Notch pathway in an MTC cell line (TT) was investigated.
Thiocoraline was isolated from a marine bacterium Verrucosispora sp. MTT assay
(3-[4, 5-dimethylthiazole-2-yl]-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) was used to
determine the IC50 value and to measure cell proliferation. Western blot revealed
the expression of Notch isoforms, NET, and cell cycle markers. Cell cycle
progression was validated by flow cytometry. The mRNA expression of Notch
isoforms and downstream targets were measured using real-time PCR. The IC50 value
for thiocoraline treatment in TT cells was determined to be 7.6 nmol/L.
Thiocoraline treatment decreased cell proliferation in a dose- and time-dependent
manner. The mechanism of growth inhibition was found to be cell cycle arrest in
G1 phase. Thiocoraline activated the Notch pathway as demonstrated by the
dose-dependent increase in mRNA and protein expression of Notch isoforms.
Furthermore, treatment with thiocoraline resulted in changes in the expression of
downstream targets of the Notch pathway (HES1, HES2, HES6, HEY1, and HEY2) and
reduced expression of NET markers, CgA, and ASCL1. Thiocoraline is a potent Notch
pathway activator and an inhibitor of MTC-TT cell proliferation at low nanomolar 
concentrations. These results provide exciting evidence for the use of
thiocoraline as a potential treatment for intractable MTC.

© 2013 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3892805
PMID: 24403239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Glia. 2014 Mar;62(3):428-39. doi: 10.1002/glia.22614. Epub 2013 Dec 31.

Purines regulate adult brain subventricular zone cell functions: contribution of 
reactive astrocytes.

Boccazzi M(1), Rolando C, Abbracchio MP, Buffo A, Ceruti S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology of Purinergic Transmission, 
Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, Università degli Studi
di Milano, Milan, Italy.

Brain injuries modulate activation of neural stem cells (NSCs) in the adult
brain. In pathological conditions, the concentrations of extracellular
nucleotides (eNTs) raise several folds, contribute to reactive gliosis, and
possibly directly affect subventricular zone (SVZ) cell functioning. Among eNTs
and derived metabolites, the P2Y1 receptor agonist ADP strongly promotes
astrogliosis and might also influence SVZ progenitor activity. Here, we tested
the ability of the stable P2Y1 agonist adenosine 5'-O-(2-thiodiphosphate) (ADPßS)
to control adult NSC functions both in vitro and in vivo, with a focus on the
possible effects exerted by reactive astrocytes. In the absence of growth
factors, ADPßS promoted proliferation and differentiation of SVZ progenitors.
Moreover, ADPßS-activated astrocytes markedly changed the pattern of released
cytokines and chemokines, and strongly modulated neurosphere-forming capacity of 
SVZ progenitors. Notably, a significant enhancement in proliferation was observed
when SVZ cells, initially grown in the supernatant of astrocytes exposed to
ADPßS, were shifted to normal medium. In vivo, ADPßS administration in the
lateral ventricle of adult mice by osmotic minipumps caused diffused reactive
astrogliosis, and a strong response of SVZ progenitors. Indeed, proliferation of 
glial fibrillary acidic protein-positive NSCs increased and led to a significant 
expansion of SVZ transit-amplifying progenitors and neuroblasts. Lineage tracing 
experiments performed in the GLAST::CreERT2;Rosa-YFP transgenic mice further
demonstrated that ADPßS promoted proliferation of glutamate/aspartate
transporter-positive progenitors and sustained their progression toward the
generation of rapidly dividing progenitors. Altogether, our results show that the
purinergic system crucially affects SVZ progenitor activities both directly and
through the involvement of reactive astrocytes.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24382645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Nov 27;1(6):545-59. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.10.006.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of transcription factors for lineage-specific ESC differentiation.

Yamamizu K(1), Piao Y(1), Sharov AA(1), Zsiros V(2), Yu H(1), Nakazawa K(2),
Schlessinger D(1), Ko MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. (2)Unit on Genetics of Cognition and Behavior, 
National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA. (3)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA ; Department of Systems Medicine, 
Sakaguchi Laboratory, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan ;
Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST, Tokyo160-8582, Japan.

A network of transcription factors (TFs) determines cell identity, but identity
can be altered by overexpressing a combination of TFs. However, choosing and
verifying combinations of TFs for specific cell differentiation have been
daunting due to the large number of possible combinations of ~2,000 TFs. Here, we
report the identification of individual TFs for lineage-specific cell
differentiation based on the correlation matrix of global gene expression
profiles. The overexpression of identified TFs-Myod1, Mef2c, Esx1, Foxa1, Hnf4a, 
Gata2, Gata3, Myc, Elf5, Irf2, Elf1, Sfpi1, Ets1, Smad7, Nr2f1, Sox11, Dmrt1,
Sox9, Foxg1, Sox2, or Ascl1-can direct efficient, specific, and rapid
differentiation into myocytes, hepatocytes, blood cells, and neurons.
Furthermore, transfection of synthetic mRNAs of TFs generates their appropriate
target cells. These results demonstrate both the utility of this approach to
identify potent TFs for cell differentiation, and the unanticipated capacity of
single TFs directly guides differentiation to specific lineage fates.

PMCID: PMC3871400
PMID: 24371809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Cell Sci. 2014 Feb 1;127(Pt 3):641-52. doi: 10.1242/jcs.137612. Epub 2013 Dec
11.

The extracellular matrix glycoprotein tenascin-R regulates neurogenesis during
development and in the adult dentate gyrus of mice.

Xu JC(1), Xiao MF, Jakovcevski I, Sivukhina E, Hargus G, Cui YF, Irintchev A,
Schachner M, Bernreuther C.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Neurobiologie, Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
20246 Hamburg, Germany.

Abnormal generation of inhibitory neurons that synthesize <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid
(GABAergic) is characteristic of neuropsychological disorders. We provide
evidence that the extracellular matrix molecule tenascin-R (TNR) - which is
predominantly expressed by a subpopulation of interneurons - plays a role in the 
generation of GABAergic and granule neurons in the murine dentate gyrus by
regulating fate determination of neural stem or progenitor cells (NSCs). During
development, absence of TNR in constitutively TNR-deficient (TNR(-/-)) mice
results in increased numbers of dentate gyrus GABAergic neurons, decreased
expression of its receptor ß1 integrin, increased activation of p38 MAPK and
increased expression of the GABAergic specification gene Ascl1. Postnatally,
increased GABAergic input to adult hippocampal NSCs in TNR(-/-) mice is
associated not only with increased numbers of GABAergic and, particularly,
parvalbumin-immunoreactive neurons, as seen during development, but also with
increased numbers of granule neurons, thus contributing to the increased
differentiation of NSCs into granule cells. These findings indicate the
importance of TNR in the regulation of hippocampal neurogenesis and suggest that 
TNR acts through distinct direct and indirect mechanisms during development and
in the adult.

PMID: 24338367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2013 Dec;142(6):266-70.

[Using reprogramming techniques of human somatic cells to understand genetic risk
variations associated with psychiatric disorders].

[Article in Japanese]

Yoshimizu T, Tsai LH.

PMID: 24334923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Metabolism. 2014 Feb;63(2):250-62. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2013.10.001. Epub 2013 
Oct 24.

Effect of pre-existing maternal obesity, gestational diabetes and adipokines on
the expression of genes involved in lipid metabolism in adipose tissue.

Lappas M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia; Mercy Perinatal Research Centre, Mercy Hospital for Women, Heidelberg,
Victoria, Australia. Electronic address: mlappas@unimelb.edu.au.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of maternal obesity, gestational diabetes
mellitus (GDM) and adipokines on the expression of genes involved in fatty acid
uptake, transport, synthesis and metabolism.
MATERIALS/METHODS: Human subcutaneous and omental adipose tissues were obtained
from lean, overweight and obese normal glucose tolerant (NGT) women and women
with GDM. Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed to determine the level of
expression. Adipose tissue explants were performed to determine the effect of the
adipokines TNFa, IL-1ß and leptin on adipose tissue gene expression.
RESULTS: Pre-existing maternal obesity and GDM are associated with decreased
expression in genes involved in fatty acid uptake and intracellular transport
(LPL, FATP2, FATP6, FABPpm and ASCL1), triacylglyceride (TAG) biosynthesis
(MGAT1,7 MGAT2 and DGAT1), lipogenesis (FASN) and lipolysis (PNPLA2, HSL and
MGLL). Decreased gene expression was also observed for the transcription factors 
involved in lipid metabolism (LXRa, PPARa, PPARd, PPAR<U+03B3>, RXRa and SREBP1c). On
the other hand, the gene expression of the adipokines TNFa, IL-1ß and or leptin
was increased in adipose tissue from obese and GDM women. Functional in vitro
studies revealed that these adipokines decreased the gene expression of LPL,
FATP2, FATP6, ASCL1, PNPLA2, PPARd, PPAR<U+03B3> and RXRa.
CONCLUSIONS: Pregnancies complicated by pre-existing maternal obesity and GDM are
associated with abnormal adipose tissue lipid metabolism, which may play a role
in the pathogenesis of these diseases.

© 2014.

PMID: 24262292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Development. 2014 Jan;141(1):187-98. doi: 10.1242/dev.092536. Epub 2013 Nov 20.

Asymmetric activation of Dll4-Notch signaling by Foxn4 and proneural factors
activates BMP/TGFß signaling to specify V2b interneurons in the spinal cord.

Misra K(1), Luo H, Li S, Matise M, Xiang M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine and Department of Pediatrics,
Rutgers University-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 679 Hoes Lane West,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

During development of the ventral spinal cord, the V2 interneurons emerge from p2
progenitors and diversify into two major subtypes, V2a and V2b, that play key
roles in locomotor coordination. Dll4-mediated Notch activation in a subset of p2
precursors constitutes the crucial first step towards generating neuronal
diversity in this domain. The mechanism behind the asymmetric Notch activation
and downstream signaling events are, however, unknown at present. We show here
that the Ascl1 and Neurog basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proneural factors are
expressed in a mosaic pattern in p2 progenitors and that Foxn4 is required for
setting and maintaining this expression mosaic. By binding directly to a
conserved Dll4 enhancer, Foxn4 and Ascl1 activate Dll4 expression, whereas Neurog
proteins prevent this effect, thereby resulting in asymmetric activation of Dll4 
expression in V2 precursors expressing different combinations of proneural and
Foxn4 transcription factors. Lineage tracing using the Cre-LoxP system reveals
selective expression of Dll4 in V2a precursors, whereas Dll4 expression is
initially excluded from V2b precursors. We provide evidence that BMP/TGFß
signaling is activated in V2b precursors and that Dll4-mediated Notch signaling
is responsible for this activation. Using a gain-of-function approach and by
inhibiting BMP/TGFß signal transduction with pathway antagonists and RNAi
knockdown, we further demonstrate that BMP/TGFß signaling is both necessary and
sufficient for V2b fate specification. Our data together thus suggest that the
mosaic expression of Foxn4 and proneural factors may serve as the trigger to
initiate asymmetric Dll4-Notch and subsequent BMP/TGFß signaling events required 
for neuronal diversity in the V2 domain.

PMCID: PMC3865758
PMID: 24257627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Dec 3;110(49):19814-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1312009110. Epub 2013 Nov 18.

Analysis of DNA methylation reveals a partial reprogramming of the Müller glia
genome during retina regeneration.

Powell C(1), Grant AR, Cornblath E, Goldman D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience Institute, Department of Biological
Chemistry, and Bioinformatics Core, Department of Computational Medicine and
Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.

Upon retinal injury, zebrafish Müller glia (MG) transition from a quiescent
supportive cell to a progenitor cell (MGPC). This event is accompanied by the
induction of key transcription and pluripotency factors. Because somatic cell
reprogramming during induced pluripotent stem cell generation is accompanied by
changes in DNA methylation, especially in pluripotency factor gene promoters, we 
were interested in determining whether DNA methylation changes also underlie MG
reprogramming following retinal injury. Consistent with this idea, we found that 
genes encoding components of the DNA methylation/demethylation machinery were
induced in MGPCs and that manipulating MGPC DNA methylation with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine altered their properties. A comprehensive analysis of the 
DNA methylation landscape as MG reprogram to MGPCs revealed that demethylation
predominates at early times, whereas levels of de novo methylation increase at
later times. We found that these changes in DNA methylation were largely
independent of Apobec2 protein expression. A correlation between promoter DNA
demethylation and injury-dependent gene induction was noted. In contrast to
induced pluripotent stem cell formation, we found that pluripotency factor gene
promoters were already hypomethylated in quiescent MG and remained unchanged in
MGPCs. Interestingly, these pluripotency factor promoters were also found to be
hypomethylated in mouse MG. Our data identify a dynamic DNA methylation landscape
as zebrafish MG transition to an MGPC and suggest that DNA methylation changes
will complement other regulatory mechanisms to ensure gene expression programs
controlling MG reprogramming are appropriately activated during retina
regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3856824
PMID: 24248357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cell. 2013 Oct 24;155(3):621-35. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.09.028. Epub 2013 Oct
24.

Hierarchical mechanisms for direct reprogramming of fibroblasts to neurons.

Wapinski OL(1), Vierbuchen T, Qu K, Lee QY, Chanda S, Fuentes DR, Giresi PG, Ng
YH, Marro S, Neff NF, Drechsel D, Martynoga B, Castro DS, Webb AE, Südhof TC,
Brunet A, Guillemot F, Chang HY, Wernig M.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Program in Cancer Biology, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Nov 7;13(5):510-2.

Direct lineage reprogramming is a promising approach for human disease modeling
and regenerative medicine, with poorly understood mechanisms. Here, we reveal a
hierarchical mechanism in the direct conversion of fibroblasts into induced
neuronal (iN) cells mediated by the transcription factors Ascl1, Brn2, and Myt1l.
Ascl1 acts as an "on-target" pioneer factor by immediately occupying most cognate
genomic sites in fibroblasts. In contrast, Brn2 and Myt1l do not access
fibroblast chromatin productively on their own; instead, Ascl1 recruits Brn2 to
Ascl1 sites genome wide. A unique trivalent chromatin signature in the host cells
predicts the permissiveness for Ascl1 pioneering activity among different cell
types. Finally, we identified Zfp238 as a key Ascl1 target gene that can
partially substitute for Ascl1 during iN cell reprogramming. Thus, a precise
match between pioneer factors and the chromatin context at key target genes is
determinative for transdifferentiation to neurons and likely other cell types.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3871197
PMID: 24243019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Nov 7;13(5):510-2. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.10.007.

Trivalent chromatin marks the way in.

Hysolli E(1), Park IH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale Stem Cell Center, Yale School of Medicine, 10
Amistad, 201B, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Comment on
    Cell. 2013 Oct 24;155(3):621-35.

Recently in Cell, Wapinski et al. (2013) investigated the epigenetic mechanisms
underlying the direct conversion of fibroblasts to induced neurons (iNs). They
found that Ascl1 acts as a pioneer factor at neurogenic loci marked by a closed
"trivalent" chromatin state in cells permissive to direct conversion, but not in 
restrictive cell types.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4665996
PMID: 24209756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cell Reprogram. 2013 Dec;15(6):484-9. doi: 10.1089/cell.2013.0013. Epub 2013 Nov 
4.

Direct conversion of adipocyte progenitors into functional neurons.

Yang Y(1), Jiao J, Gao R, Yao H, Sun XF, Gao S.

Author information: 
(1)1 Key Laboratory for Major Obstetric Diseases of Guangdong Province, The Third
Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical College , Guangdong, 510150, P.R. China .

Ectopic expression of a set of transcription factors in somatic cells could
reprogram the differentiated cell fate into the pluripotent state, and the
resultant so-called induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) have been proposed as 
seed cells for cell therapy-based regenerative medicine. However, their
tumorigenicity limited the further application of iPSCs clinically. More
recently, collected evidence has shown that differentiated somatic cells could be
directly converted into other types of somatic cells through overexpression of
transcription factors enriched in the targeted cell types. Induced neurons have
been recently converted from fibroblasts; however, it remains unknown if other
cell types could be used for neuron induction. One easily accessible cell type,
adipocyte progenitor cells (APCs), has the advantage of steady proliferation in
vitro and lower mortality rate. In the present study, we demonstrated that APCs
could also be converted into functional neurons using the three transcriptional
factors (Ascl1, Brn2, Myt1l) that could convert fibroblasts into neurons.
Moreover, we also demonstrated that vitamin C could elevate the efficiency of
conversion of the APCs and fibroblasts into neurons. The converted cells
represent another appropriate cell resource for clinical application and disease 
modeling.

PMCID: PMC3848438
PMID: 24182316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Science. 2013 Dec 6;342(6163):1203-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1242366. Epub 2013 Oct
31.

Oscillatory control of factors determining multipotency and fate in mouse neural 
progenitors.

Imayoshi I(1), Isomura A, Harima Y, Kawaguchi K, Kori H, Miyachi H, Fujiwara T,
Ishidate F, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013 Dec;14(12):818.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors Ascl1/Mash1, Hes1, and Olig2
regulate fate choice of neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes, respectively. 
These same factors are coexpressed by neural progenitor cells. Here, we found by 
time-lapse imaging that these factors are expressed in an oscillatory manner by
mouse neural progenitor cells. In each differentiation lineage, one of the
factors becomes dominant. We used optogenetics to control expression of Ascl1 and
found that, although sustained Ascl1 expression promotes neuronal fate
determination, oscillatory Ascl1 expression maintains proliferating neural
progenitor cells. Thus, the multipotent state correlates with oscillatory
expression of several fate-determination factors, whereas the differentiated
state correlates with sustained expression of a single factor.

PMID: 24179156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Brain Res Bull. 2013 Oct;99:84-94. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2013.10.005. Epub 
2013 Oct 19.

Over-expression of Mash1 improves the GABAergic differentiation of bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells in vitro.

Wang K(1), Long Q, Jia C, Liu Y, Yi X, Yang H, Fei Z, Liu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Xijing Institute of Clinical Neuroscience, Fourth 
Military Medical University, No.17 Chang-le West Road, Xi'an 710032, China;
Department of Neurosurgery, Qingdao 401 Hospital of PLA, No. 22 Minjiang Road,
Qingdao 266071, China.

Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) have been shown to be a promising cell
type for the study of neuronal differentiation; however, few attempts had been
made to differentiate these cells into inhibitory gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA)ergic neurons. In this study, we over-expressed mammalian achaete-scute
homologue-1 (Mash1), a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, in
Sprague-Dawley rat BMSCs via lentiviral vectors, and then induced neuronal
differentiation of these cells using conditioned medium. Our Western blot results
show that, under conditions of differentiation, Mash1-overexpressing BMSCs
exhibit an increased expression of neuronal markers and a greater degree of
neuronal morphology compared to control, non-Mash1-overexpressing cells. Using
immunocytochemistry, we observed increased expression of glutamic acid
decarboxylase 67 (GAD67), as well as neuron-specific nuclear protein (NeuN) and
ß3-tubulin, in Mash1-overexpressing BMSCs compared to control cells. Moreover, we
also found the differentiated cells showed representative traces of action
potentials in electrophysiological characterization. In conclusion, our study
demonstrated that over-expression of Mash1 can improve GABAergic differentiation 
of BMSCs in vitro.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24144723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Dis Model Mech. 2014 Jan;7(1):107-17. doi: 10.1242/dmm.013219. Epub 2013 Oct 17.

Valproic acid silencing of ascl1b/Ascl1 results in the failure of serotonergic
differentiation in a zebrafish model of fetal valproate syndrome.

Jacob J(1), Ribes V, Moore S, Constable SC, Sasai N, Gerety SS, Martin DJ,
Sergeant CP, Wilkinson DG, Briscoe J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

Fetal valproate syndrome (FVS) is caused by in utero exposure to the drug sodium 
valproate. Valproate is used worldwide for the treatment of epilepsy, as a mood
stabiliser and for its pain-relieving properties. In addition to birth defects,
FVS is associated with an increased risk of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), which
is characterised by abnormal behaviours. Valproate perturbs multiple biochemical 
pathways and alters gene expression through its inhibition of histone
deacetylases. Which, if any, of these mechanisms is relevant to the genesis of
its behavioural side effects is unclear. Neuroanatomical changes associated with 
FVS have been reported and, among these, altered serotonergic neuronal
differentiation is a consistent finding. Altered serotonin homeostasis is also
associated with autism. Here we have used a chemical-genetics approach to
investigate the underlying molecular defect in a zebrafish FVS model. Valproate
causes the selective failure of zebrafish central serotonin expression. It does
so by downregulating the proneural gene ascl1b, an ortholog of mammalian Ascl1,
which is a known determinant of serotonergic identity in the mammalian brainstem.
ascl1b is sufficient to rescue serotonin expression in valproate-treated embryos.
Chemical and genetic blockade of the histone deacetylase Hdac1 downregulates
ascl1b, consistent with the Hdac1-mediated silencing of ascl1b expression by
valproate. Moreover, tonic Notch signalling is crucial for ascl1b repression by
valproate. Concomitant blockade of Notch signalling restores ascl1b expression
and serotonin expression in both valproate-exposed and hdac1 mutant embryos.
Together, these data provide a molecular explanation for serotonergic defects in 
FVS and highlight an epigenetic mechanism for genome-environment interaction in
disease.

PMCID: PMC3882053
PMID: 24135485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Schizophr Res. 2013 Dec;151(1-3):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2013.09.007. Epub
2013 Oct 7.

Effects of maternal immune activation on adult neurogenesis in the subventricular
zone-olfactory bulb pathway and olfactory discrimination.

Liu YH(1), Lai WS, Tsay HJ, Wang TW, Yu JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112, Taiwan.

Maternal infection and maternal immune activation (MIA) during pregnancy increase
risks for psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia and autism. Many deficits
related to psychiatric disorders are observed in adult offspring of MIA animal
models, including behavioral abnormalities, morphological defects in various
brain regions, and dysregulation of neurotransmitter systems. It has previously
been shown that MIA impairs adult neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the
hippocampus. In this study, we examined whether MIA affects adult neurogenesis in
the subventricular zone (SVZ)-olfactory bulb (OB) pathway.
Polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (PolyI:C), a synthetic analog of double-stranded 
RNA mimicking viral infection, was injected into pregnant mice on gestation day
9.5 to activate immune systems. In the SVZ-OB pathway of adult offspring,
different cell types of the neural stem cell lineage responded differently to
MIA. Neural stem cells and neuroblasts were decreased. Cell proliferation of
transit-amplifying cells was impaired. Consequently, newborn neurons were reduced
in the OB. Olfactory deficiency has been suggested as a biomarker for
schizophrenia. Here we found that olfactory discrimination was compromised in
adult MIA offspring. Taken together, these findings show that MIA leads to
defective adult neurogenesis in the SVZ-OB pathway, and the impairment of adult
neurogenesis may lead to deficits in olfactory functions.

© 2013.

PMID: 24113206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Nat Neurosci. 2013 Nov;16(11):1598-607. doi: 10.1038/nn.3538. Epub 2013 Oct 6.

Dual origins of functionally distinct O-LM interneurons revealed by differential 
5-HT(3A)R expression.

Chittajallu R(1), Craig MT, McFarland A, Yuan X, Gerfen S, Tricoire L, Erkkila B,
Barron SC, Lopez CM, Liang BJ, Jeffries BW, Pelkey KA, McBain CJ.

Author information: 
(1)1] Program in Developmental Neurobiology, Eunice Kennedy-Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. [2].

Forebrain circuits rely upon a relatively small but remarkably diverse population
of GABAergic interneurons to bind and entrain large principal cell assemblies for
network synchronization and rhythmogenesis. Despite the high degree of
heterogeneity across cortical interneurons, members of a given subtype typically 
exhibit homogeneous developmental origins, neuromodulatory response profiles,
morphological characteristics, neurochemical signatures and electrical features. 
Here we report a surprising divergence among hippocampal oriens-lacunosum
moleculare (O-LM) projecting interneurons that have hitherto been considered a
homogeneous cell population. Combined immunocytochemical, anatomical and
electrophysiological interrogation of Htr3a-GFP and Nkx2-1-cre:RCE mice revealed 
that O-LM cells parse into a caudal ganglionic eminence-derived subpopulation
expressing 5-HT(3A) receptors (5-HT(3A)Rs) and a medial ganglionic
eminence-derived subpopulation lacking 5-HT(3A)Rs. These two cohorts
differentially participate in network oscillations, with 5-HT(3A)R-containing
O-LM cell recruitment dictated by serotonergic tone. Thus, members of a seemingly
uniform interneuron population can exhibit unique circuit functions and
neuromodulatory properties dictated by disparate developmental origins.

PMCID: PMC3839306
PMID: 24097043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Jan 15;87(2):211-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.09.014. Epub 
2013 Sep 30.

Targets in small cell lung cancer.

Teicher BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States. Electronic address:
teicherba@mail.nih.gov.

Recurrent small cell lung cancer is a recalcitrant malgnancy. The application of 
genomic technologies has begun to elucidate the large number of genetic
abnormalities in SCLC. Several cell surface receptors are known to be
overexpressed by SCLC in clinic specimens and cell in culture including GPCRs
such as the bradykinin receptor, the chemokine receptor CXCR4, the vasopression
receeptor and the three bomebsin receptors. The glucose transporter GLUT1, the
tetraspanin family member PETA/CD151 and the immunoglobulin superfamily member
ALCAM/CD166 are also overexpressed by SCLC. NCAM/CD56 is overexpressed by nearly 
all SCLC and is currently the target for an antibody drug conjugate in Phase II
trial. Although SCLC is not considered a RTK driven disease, IGF1R and FGFRs are 
often overexpressed by SCLC. SCLC abberantly expresses several developmental
transcription factors including ASCL1, SOX2, 4, and 11, OCT4, NANOG, PAX5;
however, overexpression of MYC may be a driver in SCLC. Like other cancers, SCLC 
expresses survival factors and uses aerobic glycolysis as a major source of ATP. 
The drawback of many potential targets overexpressed by SCLC is expression of the
same proteins by normal tissues. We are slowly learning more about the molecular 
abnormalities that occur in SCLC; however, therapeutic impact from new findings
remains a goal to work toward.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24091017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 23;8(8):e73169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073169. eCollection
2013.

Knockdown of human TCF4 affects multiple signaling pathways involved in cell
survival, epithelial to mesenchymal transition and neuronal differentiation.

Forrest MP(1), Waite AJ, Martin-Rendon E, Blake DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, MRC Centre for
Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, United Kingdom.

Haploinsufficiency of TCF4 causes Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS): a severe form of 
mental retardation with phenotypic similarities to Angelman, Mowat-Wilson and
Rett syndromes. Genome-wide association studies have also found that common
variants in TCF4 are associated with an increased risk of schizophrenia. Although
TCF4 is transcription factor, little is known about TCF4-regulated processes in
the brain. In this study we used genome-wide expression profiling to determine
the effects of acute TCF4 knockdown on gene expression in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma
cells. We identified 1204 gene expression changes (494 upregulated, 710
downregulated) in TCF4 knockdown cells. Pathway and enrichment analysis on the
differentially expressed genes in TCF4-knockdown cells identified an
over-representation of genes involved in TGF-ß signaling, epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) and apoptosis. Among the most significantly
differentially expressed genes were the EMT regulators, SNAI2 and DEC1 and the
proneural genes, NEUROG2 and ASCL1. Altered expression of several mental
retardation genes such as UBE3A (Angelman Syndrome), ZEB2 (Mowat-Wilson Syndrome)
and MEF2C was also found in TCF4-depleted cells. These data suggest that TCF4
regulates a number of convergent signaling pathways involved in cell
differentiation and survival in addition to a subset of clinically important
mental retardation genes.

PMCID: PMC3751932
PMID: 24058414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Jul 11;1(2):114-22. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.06.003.
eCollection 2013.

Temporal control of retroviral transgene expression in newborn cells in the adult
brain.

Braun SM(1), Machado RA, Jessberger S.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Zurich, 8057
Zurich, Switzerland ; Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, Department of
Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich, 8093 Zurich,
Switzerland ; Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich,
8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

Neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) generate new neurons throughout life in
distinct areas of the adult mammalian brain. Besides classical transgenesis-based
approaches, retrovirus-mediated genetic manipulation is frequently used to study 
mechanisms that regulate neurogenesis in the nervous system. Here, we show that
fusion of a tamoxifen-regulatable estrogen receptor (ER(T2)) motif to
transcription factors (i.e., ASCL1 and NEUROD1) enables temporal control of
transgene expression in adult mouse NSPCs in vitro and in vivo. Thus, the
approach described here represents a versatile strategy for regulating gene
expression to study gene function in dividing cells and their progeny.

PMCID: PMC3757750
PMID: 24052947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Mar;25(3):631-45. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bht254. Epub 2013 Sep
18.

The early fetal development of human neocortical GABAergic interneurons.

Al-Jaberi N(1), Lindsay S(2), Sarma S(2), Bayatti N(3), Clowry GJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK. (2)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK. (3)Institute of Neuroscience
Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ,
UK Current address: Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience (SITraN), 
Department of Neuroscience, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2HQ, UK.
(4)Institute of Neuroscience.

GABAergic interneurons are crucial to controlling the excitability and
responsiveness of cortical circuitry. Their developmental origin may differ
between rodents and human. We have demonstrated the expression of 12 GABAergic
interneuron-associated genes in samples from human neocortex by quantitative
rtPCR from 8 to 12 postconceptional weeks (PCW) and shown a significant anterior 
to posterior expression gradient, confirmed by in situ hybridization or
immunohistochemistry for GAD1 and 2, DLX1, 2, and 5, ASCL1, OLIG2, and CALB2.
Following cortical plate (CP) formation from 8 to 9 PCW, a proportion of cells
were strongly stained for all these markers in the CP and presubplate. ASCL1 and 
DLX2 maintained high expression in the proliferative zones and showed extensive
immunofluorescent double-labeling with the cell division marker Ki-67.
CALB2-positive cells increased steadily in the SVZ/VZ from 10 PCW but were not
double-labeled with Ki-67. Expression of GABAergic genes was generally higher in 
the dorsal pallium than in the ganglionic eminences, with lower expression in the
intervening ventral pallium. It is widely accepted that the cortical
proliferative zones may generate CALB2-positive interneurons from mid-gestation; 
we now show that the anterior neocortical proliferative layers especially may be 
a rich source of interneurons in the early neocortex.

© The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4318531
PMID: 24047602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Oncogene. 2014 Jul 17;33(29):3776-83. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.359. Epub 2013 Sep
16.

ASCL1 and RET expression defines a clinically relevant subgroup of lung
adenocarcinoma characterized by neuroendocrine differentiation.

Kosari F(1), Ida CM(2), Aubry MC(2), Yang L(2), Kovtun IV(3), Klein JL(1), Li
Y(4), Erdogan S(2), Tomaszek SC(5), Murphy SJ(1), Bolette LC(2), Kolbert CP(6),
Yang P(4), Wigle DA(5), Vasmatzis G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA. (3)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (4)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (5)Department of Surgery and Advanced Genomic
Technology Center, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (6)Advanced Genomic
Technology Center, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

ASCL1 is an important regulatory transcription factor in pulmonary neuroendocrine
(NE) cell development, but its value as a biomarker of NE differentiation in lung
adenocarcinoma (AD) and as a potential prognostic biomarker remains unclear. We
examined ASCL1 expression in lung cancer samples of varied histologic subtype,
clinical outcome and smoking status and compared with expression of traditional
NE markers. ASCL1 mRNA expression was found almost exclusively in smokers with
AD, in contrast to non-smokers and other lung cancer subtypes. ASCL1 protein
expression by immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis correlated best with
synaptophysin compared with chromogranin and CD56/NCAM. Analysis of a compendium 
of 367 microarray-based gene expression profiles in stage I lung adenocarcinomas 
identified significantly higher expression levels of the RET oncogene in
ASCL1-positive tumors (ASCL1(+)) compared with ASCL1(-) tumors (q-value <10(-9)).
High levels of RET expression in ASCL1(+) but not in ASCL1(-) tumors was
associated with significantly shorter overall survival (OS) in stage 1 (P=0.007) 
and in all AD (P=0.037). RET protein expression by IHC had an association with OS
in the context of ASCL1 expression. In silico gene set analysis and in vitro
experiments by ASCL1 shRNA in AD cells with high endogenous expression of ASCL1
and RET implicated ASCL1 as a potential upstream regulator of the RET oncogene.
Also, silencing ASCL1 in AD cells markedly reduced cell growth and motility.
These results suggest that ASCL1 and RET expression defines a clinically relevant
subgroup of ~10% of AD characterized by NE differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4329973
PMID: 24037524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Immunity. 2013 Sep 19;39(3):470-81. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.08.016. Epub 2013 
Sep 5.

Histone methyltransferase Ash1l suppresses interleukin-6 production and
inflammatory autoimmune diseases by inducing the ubiquitin-editing enzyme A20.

Xia M(1), Liu J, Wu X, Liu S, Li G, Han C, Song L, Li Z, Wang Q, Wang J, Xu T,
Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou
310057, China; National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology and Institute of
Immunology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China.

Histone modifications play important roles in multiple physiological processes by
regulating gene expression. However, the roles of histone modifications in
immunity remain poorly understood. Here we report that Ash1l, a H3K4
methyltransferase, suppressed interleukin-6 (IL-6), and tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) production in Toll-like receptor (TLR)-triggered macrophages, protecting
mice from sepsis. Ash1l-silenced mice were more susceptible to autoimmune disease
as a result of enhanced IL-6 production. Ash1l enhanced A20 expression through
induction of H3K4 modification at the Tnfaip3 promoter via H3K4 methyltransferase
activity of Ash1l SET (Su[var]3-9, E[z] and trithorax) domain. Ash1l suppressed
NF-<U+03BA>B, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways, and subsequent IL-6
production via facilitating A20-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B signal modulator NEMO and
transducer TRAF6 deubiquitination. Therefore, Ash1l-mediated H3K4 methylation at 
the Tnfaip3 promoter is required for controlling innate IL-6 production and
suppressing inflammatory autoimmune diseases, providing mechanistic insight into 
epigenetic modulation of immune responses and inflammation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24012418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Neuroscience. 2013 Dec 3;253:256-73. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.08.029.
Epub 2013 Aug 30.

Proneural genes in neocortical development.

Wilkinson G(1), Dennis D, Schuurmans C.

Author information: 
(1)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute,
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes arise from CNS progenitor cells at
defined times and locations during development, with transcription factors
serving as key determinants of these different neural cell fates. An emerging
theme is that the transcription factors that specify CNS cell fates function in a
context-dependent manner, regulated by post-translational modifications and
epigenetic alterations that partition the genome (and hence target genes) into
active or silent domains. Here we profile the critical roles of the proneural
genes, which encode basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, in
specifying neural cell identities in the developing neocortex. In particular, we 
focus on the proneural genes Neurogenin 1 (Neurog1), Neurog2 and Achaete
scute-like 1 (Ascl1), which are each expressed in a distinct fashion in the
progenitor cell pools that give rise to all of the neuronal and glial cell types 
of the mature neocortex. Notably, while the basic functions of these proneural
genes have been elucidated, it is becoming increasingly evident that tight
regulatory controls dictate when, where and how they function. Current efforts to
better understand how proneural gene function is regulated will not only improve 
our understanding of neocortical development, but are also critical to the future
development of regenerative therapies for the treatment of neuronal degeneration 
or disease.

Copyright © 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23999125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jan 1;23(1):16-23. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0131. Epub 2013 Sep
17.

Generation of patient-specific induced neuronal cells using a direct
reprogramming strategy.

Wang P(1), Zhang HL, Li W, Sha H, Xu C, Yao L, Tang Q, Tang H, Chen L, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Neurosurgery, Fudan University Huashan Hospital , Shanghai,
China .

Direct reprogramming of human fibroblasts into functional neurons in vitro by
defined factors provides an invaluable resource for regenerative medicine.
However, clinical applications must consider the risk of immune rejection, thus
patient-specific induced neuronal cells (iNCs) may serve as an ideal source for
autologous cell replacement. In this study, we report a robust process for
functional neuronal cells from the patients' scalp by lentiviral gene delivery of
Ascl1, Myt1l, and Sox2. These three-factor iNCs are similar to human neuronal
cells in morphology, surface antigens, gene expression, and electrophysiological 
characteristics. Our findings might provide a source of patient-specific
functional neurons for cell therapy.

PMCID: PMC3870482
PMID: 23947933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Ann Surg Oncol. 2013 Nov;20(12):3862-8. doi: 10.1245/s10434-013-3168-2. Epub 2013
Jul 31.

MK-2206 causes growth suppression and reduces neuroendocrine tumor marker
production in medullary thyroid cancer through Akt inhibition.

Burke JF(1), Schlosser L, Harrison AD, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, K3/705 Clinical Science Center, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Development of targeted therapies for medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) 
has focused on inhibition of the rearranged during transfection (RET)
proto-oncogene. Akt has been demonstrated to be a downstream target of RET via
the key mediator phosphoinositide-3-kinase. MK-2206 is an orally administered
allosteric Akt inhibitor that has exhibited minimal toxicity in phase I trials.
We explored the antitumor effects of this compound in MTC.
METHODS: Human MTC-TT cells were treated with MK-2206 (0-20 µM) for 8 days.
Assays for cell viability were performed at multiple time points with MTT
(3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide). The mechanism of 
action, mechanism of growth inhibition, and production of neuroendocrine tumor
markers were assessed with Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: MK-2206 suppressed MTC cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner (p 
= 0.001). Levels of Akt phosphorylated at serine 473 declined with increasing
doses of MK-2206, indicating successful Akt inhibition. The apoptotic proteins
cleaved poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase and cleaved caspase-3 increased in a
dose-dependent manner with MK-2206, while the apoptosis inhibitor survivin was
markedly reduced. Importantly, the antitumor effects of MK-2206 were independent 
of RET inhibition, as the levels of RET protein were not blocked.
CONCLUSIONS: MK-2206 significantly suppresses MTC proliferation without RET
inhibition. Given its high oral bioavailability and low toxicity profile, phase
II studies with this drug alone or in combination with RET inhibitors are
warranted.

PMCID: PMC3955957
PMID: 23900743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cell Rep. 2013 Aug 15;4(3):477-91. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.06.035. Epub 2013
Jul 25.

FOXO3 shares common targets with ASCL1 genome-wide and inhibits ASCL1-dependent
neurogenesis.

Webb AE(1), Pollina EA, Vierbuchen T, Urbán N, Ucar D, Leeman DS, Martynoga B,
Sewak M, Rando TA, Guillemot F, Wernig M, Brunet A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

FOXO transcription factors are central regulators of longevity from worms to
humans. FOXO3, the FOXO isoform associated with exceptional human longevity,
preserves adult neural stem cell pools. Here, we identify FOXO3 direct targets
genome-wide in primary cultures of adult neural progenitor cells (NPCs).
Interestingly, FOXO3-bound sites are enriched for motifs for bHLH transcription
factors, and FOXO3 shares common targets with the proneuronal bHLH transcription 
factor ASCL1/MASH1 in NPCs. Analysis of the chromatin landscape reveals that
FOXO3 and ASCL1 are particularly enriched at the enhancers of genes involved in
neurogenic pathways. Intriguingly, FOXO3 inhibits ASCL1-dependent neurogenesis in
NPCs and direct neuronal conversion in fibroblasts. FOXO3 also restrains
neurogenesis in vivo. Our study identifies a genome-wide interaction between the 
prolongevity transcription factor FOXO3 and the cell-fate determinant ASCL1 and
raises the possibility that FOXO3's ability to restrain ASCL1-dependent
neurogenesis may help preserve the neural stem cell pool.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3838667
PMID: 23891001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Hum Gene Ther. 2013 Aug;24(8):766-75. doi: 10.1089/hum.2012.132.

Tat-PTD-modified oncolytic adenovirus driven by the SCG3 promoter and ASH1
enhancer for neuroblastoma therapy.

Jin C(1), Yu D, Cancer M, Nilsson B, Leja J, Essand M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Genetics, and Pathology, Science for Life
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala SE-75185, Sweden.

Secretogranin III (SGC3) belongs to the granin family and is highly expressed in 
endocrine and neural tissues. The human SCG3 promoter has not yet been
characterized. We identified that a 0.5-kb DNA fragment upstream of the SCG3 gene
can selectively drive transgene expression in neuroblastoma cell lines. The
strength of transgene expression was further increased, with specificity
maintained, by addition of the human achaete-scute complex homolog 1 (ASH1)
enhancer. We developed an oncolytic serotype 5-based adenovirus, in which the
SCG3 promoter and ASH1 enhancer drive E1A gene expression. The virus was further 
modified with a cell-penetrating peptide (Tat-PTD) in the viral capsid, which we 
have previously shown results in increased adenovirus transduction efficiency of 
many neuroblastoma cell lines. The virus, Ad5PTD(ASH1-SCG3-E1A), shows selective 
and efficient killing of neuroblastoma cell lines in vitro, including cisplatin-,
etoposide-, and doxorubicin-insensitive neuroblastoma cells. Furthermore, it
delays tumor growth and thereby prolonged survival for nude mice harboring
subcutaneous human neuroblastoma xenograft. In conclusion, we report a novel
oncolytic adenovirus with potential use for neuroblastoma therapy.

PMCID: PMC3746216
PMID: 23889332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Development. 2013 Sep;140(17):3511-21. doi: 10.1242/dev.098681. Epub 2013 Jul 24.

Notch/Rbpj<U+03BA> signaling regulates progenitor maintenance and differentiation of
hypothalamic arcuate neurons.

Aujla PK(1), Naratadam GT, Xu L, Raetzman LT.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 407 South Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, 
IL 61801, USA.

The hypothalamic arcuate nucleus (Arc), containing pro-opoiomelanocortin (POMC), 
neuropeptide Y (NPY) and growth hormone releasing hormone (GHRH) neurons,
regulates feeding, energy balance and body size. Dysregulation of this
homeostatic mediator underlies diseases ranging from growth failure to obesity.
Despite considerable investigation regarding the function of Arc neurons,
mechanisms governing their development remain unclear. Notch signaling factors
such as Hes1 and Mash1 are present in hypothalamic progenitors that give rise to 
Arc neurons. However, how Notch signaling controls these progenitor populations
is unknown. To elucidate the role of Notch signaling in Arc development, we
analyzed conditional loss-of-function mice lacking a necessary Notch co-factor,
Rbpj<U+03BA>, in Nkx2.1-cre-expressing cells (Rbpj<U+03BA> cKO), as well as mice with
expression of the constitutively active Notch1 intracellular domain (NICD) in
Nkx2.1-cre-expressing cells (NICD Tg). We found that loss of Rbpj<U+03BA> results in
absence of Hes1 but not of Hes5 within the primordial Arc at E13.5. Additionally,
Mash1 expression is increased, coincident with increased proliferation and
accumulation of Arc neurons at E13.5. At E18.5, Rbpj<U+03BA> cKO mice have few
progenitors and show increased numbers of differentiated Pomc, NPY and Ghrh
neurons. By contrast, NICD Tg mice have increased hypothalamic progenitors, show 
an absence of differentiated Arc neurons and aberrant glial differentiation at
E18.5. Subsequently, both Rbpj<U+03BA> cKO and NICD Tg mice have changes in growth and
body size during postnatal development. Taken together, our results demonstrate
that Notch/Rbpj<U+03BA> signaling regulates the generation and differentiation of Arc
neurons, which contribute to homeostatic regulation of body size.

PMCID: PMC3742139
PMID: 23884446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Neuroscience. 2013 Oct 10;250:381-93. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.07.001.
Epub 2013 Jul 13.

Induction of retinal ganglion-like cells from fibroblasts by adenoviral gene
delivery.

Meng F(1), Wang X, Gu P, Wang Z, Guo W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Eye & ENT Hospital, Fudan University, 83 Fenyang 
Road, Shanghai 200031, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Visual Impairment and
Restoration, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

Central nervous system neurons fail to regenerate after birth, which greatly
hampers the effective treatment of many neurodegenerative diseases. Neurons
differentiated from induced pluripotent stem cells have been considered a
possible option for cell-based therapies. Recent discoveries have revealed that
fibroblasts can be directly converted into neurons without a transition through a
pluripotent state. This approach might serve as a more efficient and convenient
method for the cellular therapy of neurodegenerative diseases. Currently, several
types of neurons have been directly generated from fibroblasts, including
dopamine neurons, motor neurons and neural progenitor cells. In our study, by
screening a series of candidate genes, we found that the adenovirus-mediated
transduction of Ascl1, Brn3b and Ngn2 can directly convert mouse fibroblasts to
retinal ganglion-like cells. The induced retinal ganglion-like cells co-express
multiple retinal ganglion cell markers, and exhibit membrane properties of
functional neurons. The reprogramming mediated by adenoviruses occurs much sooner
than that mediated by lentiviruses. Furthermore, the induced retinal
ganglion-like cells that are produced via adenoviral gene delivery are free of
exogenous gene integration. Retinal ganglion-like cells that are induced by
adenoviruses demonstrate great potential applicability in clinical therapy and
provide a novel platform for the research of retinal degenerative diseases.

Copyright © 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23856066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Dairy Sci. 2013 Sep;96(9):5670-81. doi: 10.3168/jds.2012-6277. Epub 2013 Jul 5.

Hepatic gene expression involved in glucose and lipid metabolism in transition
cows: effects of fat mobilization during early lactation in relation to milk
performance and metabolic changes.

Weber C(1), Hametner C, Tuchscherer A, Losand B, Kanitz E, Otten W, Sauerwein H, 
Bruckmaier RM, Becker F, Kanitz W, Hammon HM.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute for Farm Animal Biology (FBN), 18196 Dummerstorf, Germany.

Insufficient feed intake during early lactation results in elevated body fat
mobilization to meet energy demands for milk production. Hepatic energy
metabolism is involved by increasing endogenous glucose production and hepatic
glucose output for milk synthesis and by adaptation of postcalving fuel
oxidation. Given that cows differ in their degree of fat mobilization around
parturition, indicated by variable total liver fat concentration (LFC), the study
investigated the influence of peripartum fat mobilization on hepatic gene
expression involved in gluconeogenesis, fatty acid oxidation, ketogenesis, and
cholesterol synthesis, as well as transcriptional factors referring to energy
metabolism. German Holstein cows were grouped according to mean total LFC on d 1,
14, and 28 after parturition as low [<200mg of total fat/g of dry matter (DM);
n=10], medium (200-300 mg of total fat/g of DM; n=10), and high (>300 mg of total
fat/g of DM; n=7), indicating fat mobilization during early lactation. Cows were 
fed total mixed rations ad libitum and held under equal conditions. Liver
biopsies were taken at d 56 and 15 before and d 1, 14, 28, and 49 after
parturition to measure mRNA abundances of pyruvate carboxylase (PC);
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase; glucose-6-phosphatase; propionyl-coenzyme A
(CoA) carboxylase a; carnitine palmitoyl-transferase 1A (CPT1A); acyl-CoA
synthetase, long chain 1 (ASCL1); acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, very long chain;
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase 1 and 2; sterol regulatory
element-binding factor 1; and peroxisome proliferator-activated factor a. Total
LFC postpartum differed greatly among cows, and the mRNA abundance of most
enzymes and transcription factors changed with time during the experimental
period. Abundance of PC mRNA increased at parturition to a greater extent in
high- and medium-LFC groups than in the low-LFC group. Significant LFC × time
interactions for ACSL1 and CPT1A during the experimental period indicated
variable gene expression depending on LFC after parturition. Correlations between
hepatic gene expression and performance data and plasma concentrations of
metabolites and hormones showed time-specific relations during the transition
period. Elevated body fat mobilization during early lactation affected gene
expression involved in gluconeogenesis to a greater extent than gene expression
involved in lipid metabolism, indicating the dependence of hepatic glucose
metabolism on hepatic lipid status and fat mobilization during early lactation.

Copyright © 2013 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 23831100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Surg Res. 2013 Nov;185(1):212-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2013.05.089. Epub 2013 Jun 
19.

Leflunomide suppresses growth in human medullary thyroid cancer cells.

Alhefdhi A(1), Burke JF, Redlich A, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research, Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin,
and Carbon Cancer Center, Madison, Wisconsin.

BACKGROUND: Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) is a neuroendocrine tumor that arises 
from the calcitonin-secreting parafollicular cells of the thyroid gland.
Leflunomide (LFN) is a disease-modifying antirheumatic drug approved for the
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, and its active metabolite teriflunomide has
been identified as a potential anticancer drug. In this study we investigated the
ability of LFN to similarly act as an anticancer drug by examining the effects of
LFN treatment on MTC cells.
METHODS: Human MTC-TT cells were treated with LFN (25-150 µmol/L) and Western
blotting was performed to measure levels of neuroendocrine markers. MTT assays
were used to assess the effect of LFN treatment on cellular proliferation.
RESULTS: LFN treatment downregulated neuroendocrine markers ASCL1 and
chromogranin A. Importantly, LFN significantly inhibited the growth of MTC cells 
in a dose-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with LFN decreased neuroendocrine tumor marker expression 
and reduced the cell proliferation in MTC cells. As the safety of LFN in human
beings is well established, a clinical trial using this drug to treat patients
with advanced MTC may be warranted.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3805832
PMID: 23816245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Behav Brain Res. 2013 Sep 1;252:230-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.06.024. Epub 2013 
Jun 19.

Distinct functional brain regional integration of Casp3, Ascl1 and S100a6 gene
expression in spatial memory.

Gruden MA(1), Storozheva ZI, Sewell RD, Kolobov VV, Sherstnev VV.

Author information: 
(1)P. K. Anokhin Institute of Normal Physiology RAMS, Moscow, Russia.

Evaluating the brain structural expression of defined genes involved in basic
biological processes of neurogenesis, apoptosis or neural plasticity may
facilitate the understanding of genetic mechanisms underlying spatial memory. The
aim of the present study was to compare Ascl1, Casp3 and S100a6 gene expression
in the hippocampus, prefrontal cortex and cerebellum of adult rats in water maze 
spatial memory performance. After four days training, the mean platform time
(<10s) was evidence of stable long-term spatial memory formation. Real time PCR
analysis revealed a positive inter-structural correlation for S100a6/Casp gene
expression between the prefrontal cortex and the cerebellum but a negative
correlation for S100a6/Ascl1 transcribed genes between the prefrontal cortex and 
hippocampus during swimming in the active controls. However, during spatial
memory performance there was only one inter-structural correlation between the
prefrontal cortex and cerebellum with respect to Casp3 expression, though there
were intra-structural correlations between Casp3/Ascl1 transcriptions within the 
prefrontal cortex and hippocampus as well as between Ascl1/S100a6 in the
cerebellum. In active learners versus naive controls, the transcrption of all
genes was augmented in the prefrontal cortex but Casp3 and Ascl1 were also
elevated in hippocampus whilst only S100a6 increased in the cerebellum. The
findings endorsed the role of the hippocampus in memory acquisition in addition
to an integrative relationship with the prefrontal cortex and cerebellum. This
structural and molecular configuration is important for creation of novel neural 
circuitry for consolidation and reconsolidation of memory trace with an
involvement of coupled processes of neurogenesis, apoptosis or neural plasticity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23792135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. PLoS Genet. 2013 Jun;9(6):e1003533. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003533. Epub 2013 
Jun 6.

Distinct neuroblastoma-associated alterations of PHOX2B impair sympathetic
neuronal differentiation in zebrafish models.

Pei D(1), Luther W, Wang W, Paw BH, Stewart RA, George RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA, USA.

Heterozygous germline mutations and deletions in PHOX2B, a key regulator of
autonomic neuron development, predispose to neuroblastoma, a tumor of the
peripheral sympathetic nervous system. To gain insight into the oncogenic
mechanisms engaged by these changes, we used zebrafish models to study the
functional consequences of aberrant PHOX2B expression in the cells of the
developing sympathetic nervous system. Allelic deficiency, modeled by phox2b
morpholino knockdown, led to a decrease in the terminal differentiation markers
th and dbh in sympathetic ganglion cells. The same effect was seen on
overexpression of two distinct neuroblastoma-associated frameshift mutations,
676delG and K155X - but not the R100L missense mutation - in the presence of
endogenous Phox2b, pointing to their dominant-negative effects. We demonstrate
that Phox2b is capable of regulating itself as well as ascl1, and that phox2b
deficiency uncouples this autoregulatory mechanism, leading to inhibition of
sympathetic neuron differentiation. This effect on terminal differentiation is
associated with an increased number of phox2b(+), ascl1(+), elavl3(-) cells that 
respond poorly to retinoic acid. These findings suggest that a reduced dosage of 
PHOX2B during development, through either a heterozygous deletion or
dominant-negative mutation, imposes a block in the differentiation of sympathetic
neuronal precursors, resulting in a cell population that is likely to be
susceptible to secondary transforming events.

PMCID: PMC3675015
PMID: 23754957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Neurosci. 2013 Jun 5;33(23):9752-68. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0805-13.2013.

Ascl1/Mash1 promotes brain oligodendrogenesis during myelination and
remyelination.

Nakatani H(1), Martin E, Hassani H, Clavairoly A, Maire CL, Viadieu A, Kerninon
C, Delmasure A, Frah M, Weber M, Nakafuku M, Zalc B, Thomas JL, Guillemot F,
Nait-Oumesmar B, Parras C.

Author information: 
(1)Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut du
Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, 75013 Paris, France.

Oligodendrocytes are the myelin-forming cells of the CNS. They differentiate from
oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) that are produced from progenitors
throughout life but more actively during the neonatal period and in response to
demyelinating insults. An accurate regulation of oligodendrogenesis is required
to generate oligodendrocytes during these developmental or repair processes. We
hypothesized that this regulation implicates transcription factors, which are
expressed by OPCs and/or their progenitors. Ascl1/Mash1 is a proneural
transcription factor previously implicated in embryonic oligodendrogenesis and
operating in genetic interaction with Olig2, an essential transcriptional
regulator in oligodendrocyte development. Herein, we have investigated the
contribution of Ascl1 to oligodendrocyte development and remyelination in the
postnatal cortex. During the neonatal period, Ascl1 expression was detected in
progenitors of the cortical subventricular zone and in cortical OPCs. Different
genetic approaches to delete Ascl1 in cortical progenitors or OPCs reduced
neonatal oligodendrogenesis, showing that Ascl1 positively regulated both OPC
specification from subventricular zone progenitors as well as the balance between
OPC differentiation and proliferation. Examination of remyelination processes,
both in the mouse model for focal demyelination of the corpus callosum and in
multiple sclerosis lesions in humans, indicated that Ascl1 activity was
upregulated along with increased oligodendrogenesis observed in remyelinating
lesions. Additional genetic evidence indicated that remyelinating
oligodendrocytes derived from Ascl1(+) progenitors/OPCs and that Ascl1 was
required for proper remyelination. Together, our results show that Ascl1 function
modulates multiple steps of OPC development in the postnatal brain and in
response to demyelinating insults.

PMCID: PMC3892435
PMID: 23739972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Jul 17;105(14):1059-65. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt130. Epub
2013 Jun 5.

Selective tropism of Seneca Valley virus for variant subtype small cell lung
cancer.

Poirier JT(1), Dobromilskaya I, Moriarty WF, Peacock CD, Hann CL, Rudin CM.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Compre hensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

We assessed the efficacy of Seneca Valley virus (SVV-001), a neuroendocrine
cancer-selective oncolytic picornavirus, in primary heterotransplant mouse models
of small cell lung cancer (SCLC), including three lines each of classic and
variant SCLC. Half-maximal effective concentrations for cell lines derived from
three variant heterotransplants ranged from 1.6×10(-3) (95% confidence interval
[CI] = 1×10(-3) to 2.5×10(-3)) to 3.9×10(-3) (95% CI = 2.8×10(-3) to 5.5×10(-3)).
Sustained tumor growth inhibition in vivo was only observed in variant lines
(two-sided Student t test, P < .005 for each). Doses of 10(14) vp/kg were able to
completely and durably eradicate tumors in a variant SCLC heterotransplant model 
in two of six mice. Gene expression profiling revealed that permissive lines are 
typified by lower expression of the early neurogenic transcription factor ASCL1
and, conversely, by higher expression of the late neurogenic transcription factor
NEUROD1. This classifier demonstrates a sensitivity of .89, specificity of .92,
and accuracy of .91. The NEUROD1 to ASCL1 ratio may serve as a predictive
biomarker of SVV-001 efficacy.

PMCID: PMC3888137
PMID: 23739064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cell Rep. 2013 May 30;3(5):1567-79. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.04.021. Epub 2013 
May 23.

An aberrant transcription factor network essential for Wnt signaling and stem
cell maintenance in glioblastoma.

Rheinbay E(1), Suvà ML, Gillespie SM, Wakimoto H, Patel AP, Shahid M, Oksuz O,
Rabkin SD, Martuza RL, Rivera MN, Louis DN, Kasif S, Chi AS, Bernstein BE.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is thought to be driven by a subpopulation of cancer stem
cells (CSCs) that self-renew and recapitulate tumor heterogeneity yet remain
poorly understood. Here, we present a comparative analysis of chromatin state in 
GBM CSCs that reveals widespread activation of genes normally held in check by
Polycomb repressors. These activated targets include a large set of developmental
transcription factors (TFs) whose coordinated activation is unique to the CSCs.
We demonstrate that a critical factor in the set, ASCL1, activates Wnt signaling 
by repressing the negative regulator DKK1. We show that ASCL1 is essential for
the maintenance and in vivo tumorigenicity of GBM CSCs. Genome-wide binding
profiles for ASCL1 and the Wnt effector LEF-1 provide mechanistic insight and
suggest widespread interactions between the TF module and the signaling pathway. 
Our findings demonstrate regulatory connections among ASCL1, Wnt signaling, and
collaborating TFs that are essential for the maintenance and tumorigenicity of
GBM CSCs.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3774301
PMID: 23707066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Lung Cancer. 2013 Aug;81(2):174-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.04.022. Epub 2013 
May 23.

Involvement of intermediate filament nestin in cell growth of small-cell lung
cancer.

Takakuwa O(1), Maeno K, Kunii E, Ozasa H, Hijikata H, Uemura T, Kasai D, Ohkubo
H, Miyazaki M, Oguri T, Niimi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Immunology, Nagoya City University Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Nestin is a class VI intermediate filament protein expressed in
stem/progenitor cells during the development of the central nervous system.
Nestin is detected in various types of tumors and is involved in malignant
processes. This study investigated the expression and function of nestin in
small-cell lung cancer (SCLC).
METHODS: Expression of nestin and achaete-scute homolog 1 (ASH1) was studied in
21 lung cancer cell lines. To assess the function of nestin, a short hairpin RNA 
(shRNA) targeting nestin was transfected into two SCLC cell lines (DMS53 and
SBC3), and cloned cells that showed apparent down-regulation of nestin were
obtained. Nestin expression was also studied immunohistochemically in surgically 
resected SCLC primary tumors and metastatic SCLC tumors obtained from autopsy
cases.
RESULT: Nestin was expressed in nine of 10 SCLC cell lines. The nestin expression
level was significantly higher in SCLC cell lines than in NSCLC cell lines (P <
0.01). There was a statistically significant positive correlation between the
expression levels of nestin and ASH1 in SCLC cell lines. Nestin knock-down cells 
created by transfection with shRNA exhibited decreased invasion and cell
proliferation capabilities. Furthermore, nestin was detected in SCLC tumor cells 
and tumor vessels in all clinical tumor specimens.
CONCLUSION: Nestin is expressed in SCLC in association with neuroendocrine
features and participates in malignant phenotypes, including cell growth.
Therefore, nestin may be a novel therapeutic target for SCLC.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23706418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Genes Cells. 2013 Aug;18(8):636-49. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12061. Epub 2013 May 16.

Dmrta1 regulates proneural gene expression downstream of Pax6 in the mammalian
telencephalon.

Kikkawa T(1), Obayashi T, Takahashi M, Fukuzaki-Dohi U, Numayama-Tsuruta K, Osumi
N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neuroscience, United Centers for Advanced Research
and Translational Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan.

The transcription factor Pax6 balances cell proliferation and neuronal
differentiation in the mammalian developing neocortex by regulating the
expression of target genes. Using microarray analysis, we observed the
down-regulation of Dmrta1 (doublesex and mab-3-related transcription factor-like 
family A1) in the telencephalon of Pax6 homozygous mutant rats (rSey(2) /rSey(2) 
). Dmrta1 expression was restricted to the neural stem/progenitor cells of the
dorsal telencephalon. Overexpression of Dmrta1 induced the expression of the
proneural gene Neurogenin2 (Neurog2) and conversely repressed Ascl1 (Mash1), a
proneural gene expressed in the ventral telencephalon. We found that another Dmrt
family molecule, Dmrt3, induced Neurog2 expression in the dorsal telencephalon.
Our novel findings suggest that dual regulation of proneural genes mediated by
Pax6 and Dmrt family members is crucial for cortical neurogenesis.

© 2013 The Authors Genes to Cells © 2013 by the Molecular Biology Society of
Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23679989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2013 Jun;2(6):473-9. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2012-0133. Epub
2013 May 8.

Rapid generation of functional dopaminergic neurons from human induced
pluripotent stem cells through a single-step procedure using cell lineage
transcription factors.

Theka I(1), Caiazzo M, Dvoretskova E, Leo D, Ungaro F, Curreli S, Managò F,
Dell'Anno MT, Pezzoli G, Gainetdinov RR, Dityatev A, Broccoli V.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

Current protocols for in vitro differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem 
cells (hiPSCs) to generate dopamine (DA) neurons are laborious and
time-expensive. In order to accelerate the overall process, we have established a
fast protocol by expressing the developmental transcription factors ASCL1, NURR1,
and LMX1A. With this method, we were able to generate mature and functional
dopaminergic neurons in as few as 21 days, skipping all the intermediate steps
for inducting and selecting embryoid bodies and rosette-neural precursors.
Strikingly, the resulting neuronal conversion process was very proficient, with
an overall efficiency that was more than 93% of all the coinfected cells.
hiPSC-derived DA neurons expressed all the critical molecular markers of the DA
molecular machinery and exhibited sophisticated functional features including
spontaneous electrical activity and dopamine release. This one-step protocol
holds important implications for in vitro disease modeling and is particularly
amenable for exploitation in high-throughput screening protocols.

PMCID: PMC3673759
PMID: 23658252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Prostate. 2013 Aug;73(11):1241-9. doi: 10.1002/pros.22679. Epub 2013 May 8.

Human ASH-1 promotes neuroendocrine differentiation in androgen deprivation
conditions and interferes with androgen responsiveness in prostate cancer cells.

Rapa I(1), Volante M, Migliore C, Farsetti A, Berruti A, Vittorio Scagliotti G,
Giordano S, Papotti M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology at San Luigi Hospital, University of Turin, Orbassano, 
Turin, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Neuroendocrine differentiation in prostate cancer is a dynamic
process associated to the onset of hormone-refractory disease in vivo. The
molecular mechanisms underlying this process are poorly recognized. Our study
aimed at testing in vitro the role of hASH-1, a transcription factor implicated
in neuroendocrine differentiation, in the onset of neuroendocrine phenotype in
prostate cancer cells.
METHODS: Androgen sensitive LNCAP, androgen insensitive PC-3, and three
immortalized prostate cancer cell lines were cultured in standard and androgen
deprivation conditions. Expression of hASH-1 was modulated by either specific
lentiviral transduction or shRNA interference. Inhibitors of WNT-11, a WNT family
member associated to the development of neuroendocrine differentiation in
prostate cancer, were also used. Cell viability was measured using the MTS
method. Neuroendocrine phenotype was assessed by morphology, immunohistochemistry
and real time PCR for several neuroendocrine markers.
RESULTS: hASH-1 was up-modulated by androgen deprivation in LNCaP cells and in
androgen-sensitive immortalized prostate cancer cells, and associated with the
onset of a neuroendocrine phenotype. Silencing of hASH-1 prevented neuroendocrine
differentiation, as did also the selective interference with the WNT-11 pathway. 
Moreover, hASH-1 over-expression in LNCaP cells was sufficient to promote
neuroendocrine differentiation and increased cell viability at basal and
androgen-deprived growth conditions.
CONCLUSION: In summary, the present data support previous evidence that the
acquisition of a neuroendocrine phenotype is linked to androgen responsiveness
profiles and suggest a pivotal role of hASH-1 transcription factor, whose
activity might be explored as a potential therapeutic target in prostate cancer, 
with special reference to hormone refractory disease.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23657976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Dev Cell. 2013 Apr 29;25(2):182-95. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.02.015.

Prdm13 mediates the balance of inhibitory and excitatory neurons in somatosensory
circuits.

Chang JC(1), Meredith DM, Mayer PR, Borromeo MD, Lai HC, Ou YH, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA.

Generating a balanced network of inhibitory and excitatory neurons during
development requires precise transcriptional control. In the dorsal spinal cord, 
Ptf1a, a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription activator, maintains this
delicate balance by inducing homeodomain (HD) transcription factors such as Pax2 
to specify the inhibitory lineage while suppressing HD factors such as Tlx1/3
that specify the excitatory lineage. We uncover the mechanism by which Ptf1a
represses excitatory cell fate in the inhibitory lineage. We identify Prdm13 as a
direct target of Ptf1a and reveal that Prdm13 actively represses excitatory cell 
fate by binding to regulatory sequences near the Tlx1 and Tlx3 genes to silence
their expression. Prdm13 acts through multiple mechanisms, including interactions
with the bHLH factor Ascl1, to repress Ascl1 activation of Tlx3. Thus, Prdm13 is 
a key component of a highly coordinated transcriptional network that determines
the balance of inhibitory versus excitatory neurons in the dorsal spinal cord.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3644180
PMID: 23639443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Development. 2013 Jun;140(11):2289-98. doi: 10.1242/dev.091090. Epub 2013 May 1.

The homeobox gene Gsx2 controls the timing of oligodendroglial fate specification
in mouse lateral ganglionic eminence progenitors.

Chapman H(1), Waclaw RR, Pei Z, Nakafuku M, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Developmental Biology and Neurosurgery, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

The homeobox gene Gsx2 has previously been shown to be required for the
specification of distinct neuronal subtypes derived from lateral ganglionic
eminence (LGE) progenitors at specific embryonic time points. However, its role
in the subsequent generation of oligodendrocytes from these progenitors remains
unclear. We have utilized conditional gain-of-function and loss-of-function
approaches in order to elucidate the role of Gsx2 in the switch between
neurogenesis and oligodendrogenesis within the embryonic ventral telencephalon.
In the absence of Gsx2 expression, an increase in oligodendrocyte precursor cells
(OPCs) with a concomitant decrease in neurogenesis is observed in the
subventricular zone of the LGE at mid-stages of embryogenesis (i.e. E12.5-15.5), 
which subsequently leads to an increased number of Gsx2-derived OPCs within the
adjacent mantle regions of the cortex before birth at E18.5. Moreover, using
Olig2(cre) to conditionally inactivate Gsx2 throughout the ventral telencephalon 
with the exception of the dorsal (d)LGE, we found that the increase in cortical
OPCs in Gsx2 germline mutants are derived from dLGE progenitors. We also show
that Ascl1 is required for the expansion of these dLGE-derived OPCs in the cortex
of Gsx2 mutants. Complementing these results, gain-of-function experiments in
which Gsx2 was expressed throughout most of the late-stage embryonic
telencephalon (i.e. E15.5-18.5) result in a significant decrease in the number of
cortical OPCs. These results support the notion that high levels of Gsx2 suppress
OPC specification in dLGE progenitors and that its downregulation is required for
the transition from neurogenesis to oligodendrogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3653554
PMID: 23637331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Development. 2013 Jun;140(12):2619-31. doi: 10.1242/dev.091355. Epub 2013 May 1.

ASCL1 reprograms mouse Muller glia into neurogenic retinal progenitors.

Pollak J(1), Wilken MS, Ueki Y, Cox KE, Sullivan JM, Taylor RJ, Levine EM, Reh
TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195, USA.

Non-mammalian vertebrates have a robust ability to regenerate injured retinal
neurons from Müller glia (MG) that activate the gene encoding the proneural
factor Achaete-scute homolog 1 (Ascl1; also known as Mash1 in mammals) and
de-differentiate into progenitor cells. By contrast, mammalian MG have a limited 
regenerative response and fail to upregulate Ascl1 after injury. To test whether 
ASCL1 could restore neurogenic potential to mammalian MG, we overexpressed ASCL1 
in dissociated mouse MG cultures and intact retinal explants. ASCL1-infected MG
upregulated retinal progenitor-specific genes and downregulated glial genes.
Furthermore, ASCL1 remodeled the chromatin at its targets from a repressive to an
active configuration. MG-derived progenitors differentiated into cells that
exhibited neuronal morphologies, expressed retinal subtype-specific neuronal
markers and displayed neuron-like physiological responses. These results indicate
that a single transcription factor, ASCL1, can induce a neurogenic state in
mature MG.

PMCID: PMC3666387
PMID: 23637330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Control Release. 2013 Dec 10;172(2):589-600. doi:
10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.04.010. Epub 2013 Apr 25.

Recent advances in delivery of drug-nucleic acid combinations for cancer
treatment.

Li J(1), Wang Y, Zhu Y, Oupický D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Center for Drug Delivery and
Nanomedicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5830, USA.

Cancer treatment that uses a combination of approaches with the ability to affect
multiple disease pathways has been proven highly effective in the treatment of
many cancers. Combination therapy can include multiple chemotherapeutics or
combinations of chemotherapeutics with other treatment modalities like surgery or
radiation. However, despite the widespread clinical use of combination therapies,
relatively little attention has been given to the potential of modern nanocarrier
delivery methods, like liposomes, micelles, and nanoparticles, to enhance the
efficacy of combination treatments. This lack of knowledge is particularly
notable in the limited success of vectors for the delivery of combinations of
nucleic acids with traditional small molecule drugs. The delivery of drug-nucleic
acid combinations is particularly challenging due to differences in the
physicochemical properties of the two types of agents. This review discusses
recent advances in the development of delivery methods using combinations of
small molecule drugs and nucleic acid therapeutics to treat cancer. This review
primarily focuses on the rationale used for selecting appropriate drug-nucleic
acid combinations as well as progress in the development of nanocarriers suitable
for simultaneous delivery of drug-nucleic acid combinations.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3783568
PMID: 23624358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Neurosci. 2013 Apr 24;33(17):7299-307. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0491-13.2013.

Genome-wide expression analysis of Ptf1a- and Ascl1-deficient mice reveals new
markers for distinct dorsal horn interneuron populations contributing to
nociceptive reflex plasticity.

Wildner H(1), Das Gupta R, Bröhl D, Heppenstall PA, Zeilhofer HU, Birchmeier C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, CH-8057
Zurich, Switzerland. hwildner@pharma.uzh.ch

Inhibitory interneurons of the spinal dorsal horn play critical roles in the
processing of noxious and innocuous sensory information. They form a family of
morphologically and functionally diverse neurons that likely fall into distinct
subtypes. Traditional classifications rely mainly on differences in dendritic
tree morphology and firing patterns. Although useful, these markers are not
comprehensive and cannot be used to drive specific genetic manipulations targeted
at defined subsets of neurons. Here, we have used genome-wide expression
profiling of spinal dorsal horns of wild-type mice and of two strains of
transcription factor-deficient mice (Ptf1a(-/-) and Ascl1/Mash1(-/-) mice) to
identify new genetic markers for specific subsets of dorsal horn inhibitory
interneurons. Ptf1a(-/-) mice lack all inhibitory interneurons in the dorsal
horn, whereas only the late-born inhibitory interneurons are missing in
Ascl1(-/-) mice. We found 30 genes that were significantly downregulated in the
dorsal horn of Ptf1a(-/-) mice. Twenty-one of those also showed reduced
expression in Ascl1(-/-) mice. In situ hybridization analyses of all 30 genes
identified four genes with primarily non-overlapping expression patterns in the
dorsal horn. Three genes, pDyn coding the neuropeptide dynorphin, Kcnip2 encoding
a potassium channel associated protein, and the nuclear receptor encoding gene
Rorb, were expressed in Ascl1-dependent subpopulations of the superficial dorsal 
horn. The fourth gene, Tfap2b, encoding a transcription factor, is expressed
mainly in a Ascl1-independent subpopulation of the deep dorsal horn. Functional
experiments in isolated spinal cords showed that the Ascl1-dependent inhibitory
interneurons are key players of nociceptive reflex plasticity.

PMCID: PMC3684736
PMID: 23616538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Neurosci Methods. 2013 Jun 15;216(2):104-9. doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2013.03.020. Epub 2013 Apr 3.

Acute reduction in oxygen tension enhances the induction of neurons from human
fibroblasts.

Davila J(1), Chanda S, Ang CE, Südhof TC, Wernig M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305,
USA.

We and others have reported the successful conversion of human fibroblasts into
functional induced neuronal (iN) cells; however the reprogramming efficiencies
were very low. Robust reprogramming methods must be developed before iN cells can
be used for translational applications such as disease modeling or
transplantation-based therapies. Here, we describe a novel approach in which we
significantly enhance iN cell conversion efficiency of human fibroblast cells by 
reprogramming under hypoxic conditions (5% O2). Fibroblasts were derived under
high (21%) or low (5%) oxygen conditions and reprogrammed into iN cells using a
combination of the four transcription factors BRN2, ASCL1, MYT1L and NEUROD1. An 
increase in Map2 immunostaining was only observed when fibroblasts experienced an
acute drop in O2 tension upon infection. Interestingly, cells derived and
reprogrammed under hypoxic conditions did not produce more iN cells.
Approximately 100% of patched cells fired action potentials in low O2 conditions 
compared to 50% under high O2 growth conditions, confirming the beneficial aspect
of reprogramming under low O2. Further characterization showed no significant
difference in the intrinsic properties of iN cells reprogrammed in either
condition. Surprisingly, the acute drop in oxygen tension did not affect cell
proliferation or cell survival and was not synergistic with the blockade of GSK3ß
and Smad-mediated pathways. Our results showed that lowering the O2 tension at
the initiation of reprogramming is a simple and efficient strategy to enhance the
production of iN cells which will facilitate their use for basic discovery and
regenerative medicine.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4009399
PMID: 23562599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Nat Commun. 2013;4:1635. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2614.

Rnd3 coordinates early steps of cortical neurogenesis through actin-dependent and
-independent mechanisms.

Pacary E(1), Azzarelli R, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, London, UK. emilie.pacary@inserm.fr

The generation of neurons by neural stem cells is a highly choreographed process 
that requires extensive and dynamic remodelling of the cytoskeleton at each step 
of the process. The atypical RhoGTPase Rnd3 is expressed by progenitors in the
embryonic brain but its role in early steps of neurogenesis has not been
addressed. Here we show that silencing Rnd3 in the embryonic cerebral cortex
interferes with the interkinetic nuclear migration of radial glial stem cells,
disrupts their apical attachment and modifies the orientation of their cleavage
plane. These defects are rescued by co-expression of a constitutively active form
of cofilin, demonstrating that Rnd3-mediated disassembly of actin filaments
coordinates the cellular behaviour of radial glial. Rnd3 also limits the
divisions of basal progenitors via a distinct mechanism involving the suppression
of cyclin D1 translation. Interestingly, although Rnd3 expression is controlled
transcriptionally by Ascl1, this proneural factor is itself required in radial
glial progenitors only for proper orientation of cell divisions.

PMCID: PMC3920367
PMID: 23535656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Pathol Int. 2013 Mar;63(3):158-68. doi: 10.1111/pin.12042.

POU domain transcription factor BRN2 is crucial for expression of ASCL1, ND1 and 
neuroendocrine marker molecules and cell growth in small cell lung cancer.

Ishii J(1), Sato H, Sakaeda M, Shishido-Hara Y, Hiramatsu C, Kamma H, Shimoyamada
H, Fujiwara M, Endo T, Aoki I, Yazawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine,
Yokohama, Japan.

BRN2 is a developmental neural cell-specific POU domain transcription factor and 
is crucial for cell lineage determination. We investigated the importance of BRN2
in the expression of the lineage-specific transcription factors (achaete-scute
homolog-like 1 (ASCL1) and NeuroD1 (ND1)) and neural/neuroendocrine marker
molecules (neural cell adhesion molecule 1 (NCAM1), synaptophysin (SYP) and
chromogranin A (CHGA)) in small cell lung cancer (SCLC) using cultured lung
cancer cells. All examined SCLC cell lines expressed BRN2, as well as ASCL1, ND1,
NCAM1, SYP and CHGA. The expression levels of ASCL1, ND1, NCAM1, SYP and CHGA
considerably decreased when BRN2 was knocked down in SCLC cells, and the addition
of a BRN2 transgene into non-SCLC (NSCLC) cells induced the expression of ASCL1, 
ND1, NCAM1, SYP and CHGA. However, the BRN2 gene was not activated by the forced 
expression of ASCL1 or ND1 in NSCLC cells. The knockdown of BRN2 caused
significant growth retardation with decrease of S to G2 phase population and
mitotic cell rates and unaltered Ki-67-labeled or apoptotic cell rates in SCLC
cells, indicating increase of G1 phase population. These findings suggest that
BRN2 is a higher level regulator than ASCL1 and ND1 and BRN2 might be involved in
aggressiveness of SCLC.

© 2013 The Authors. Pathology International © 2013 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23530560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2013 May;54:108-20. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2013.02.004. Epub 2013 
Feb 26.

Heterochronic misexpression of Ascl1 in the Atoh7 retinal cell lineage blocks
cell cycle exit.

Hufnagel RB(1), Riesenberg AN, Quinn M, Brzezinski JA 4th, Glaser T, Brown NL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Retinal neurons and glia arise from a common progenitor pool in a temporal order,
with retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) appearing first, and Müller glia last. The
transcription factors Atoh7/Math5 and Ascl1/Mash1 represent divergent bHLH
clades, and exhibit distinct spatial and temporal retinal expression patterns,
with little overlap during early development. Here, we tested the ability of
Ascl1 to change the fate of cells in the Atoh7 lineage when misexpressed from the
Atoh7 locus, using an Ascl1-IRES-DsRed2 knock-in allele. In Atoh7(Ascl1KI/+) and 
Atoh7(Ascl1KI/Ascl1KI) embryos, ectopic Ascl1 delayed cell cycle exit and
differentiation, even in cells coexpressing Atoh7. The heterozygous retinas
recovered, and eventually produced a normal complement of RGCs, while homozygous 
substitution of Ascl1 for Atoh7 did not promote postnatal retinal fates
precociously, nor rescue Atoh7 mutant phenotypes. However, our analyses revealed 
two unexpected findings. First, ectopic Ascl1 disrupted cell cycle progression
within the marked Atoh7 lineage, but also nonautonomously in other retinal cells.
Second, the size of the Atoh7 retinal lineage was unaffected, supporting the idea
of a compensatory shift of the non-proliferative cohort to maintain lineage size.
Overall, we conclude that Ascl1 acts dominantly to block cell cycle exit, but is 
incapable of redirecting the fates of early RPCs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3622171
PMID: 23481413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 May;1829(5):469-79. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.02.008.
Epub 2013 Feb 24.

KSRP silencing favors neural differentiation of P19 teratocarcinoma cells.

Giovarelli M(1), Bucci G, Pasero M, Gherzi R, Briata P.

Author information: 
(1)University of Genova, Genova, Italy.

Understanding the molecular mechanisms that control the balance between
multipotency and differentiation is of great importance to elucidate the genesis 
of both developmental disorders and cell transformation events. To investigate
the role of the RNA binding protein KSRP in controlling neural differentiation,
we used the P19 embryonal carcinoma cell line that is able to differentiate into 
neuron-like cells under appropriate culture conditions. We have recently reported
that KSRP controls the differentiative fate of multipotent mesenchymal cells
owing to its ability to promote decay of unstable transcripts and to favor
maturation of selected micro-RNAs (miRNAs) from precursors. Here we report that
KSRP silencing in P19 cells favors neural differentiation increasing the
expression of neuronal markers. Further, the expression of two master
transcriptional regulators of neurogenesis, ASCL1 and JMJD3, was enhanced while
the maturation of miR-200 family members from precursors was impaired in KSRP
knockdown cells. These molecular changes can contribute to the reshaping of P19
cells transcriptome that follows KSRP silencing. Our data suggests that KSRP
function is required to maintain P19 cells in a multipotent undifferentiated
state and that its inactivation can orient cells towards neural differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23462617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Clin Pathol. 2013 May;66(5):386-91. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-201273. Epub
2013 Feb 19.

Notch1-Hes1 signalling axis in the tumourigenesis of biliary neuroendocrine
tumours.

Harada K(1), Sato Y, Ikeda H, Hsu M, Igarashi S, Nakanuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, , Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan. kenichih@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

AIMS: Biliary neuroendocrine tumours (NETs) are rare and mostly exist as a
component of mixed adenoneuroendocrine carcinomas (MANECs). Although the NET
component in biliary MANECs is generally more malignant and clinically more
important to the prognosis than the ordinary adenocarcinomatous component, the
histogenesis of biliary NET has not been clarified. In this study, the role of
the Notch1-Hes1 signalling axis in the histogenesis of biliary NETs was examined.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry for Notch1, its ligand Jagged1 and Hes1 was
performed using surgical specimens from 11 patients with biliary MANEC. Moreover,
after the knock-down of Notch1 mRNA expression in a cholangiocarcinoma cell line,
the expression of chromogranin A (a neuroendocrine marker) and Ascl1 (a
neuroendocrine-inducing molecule inhibited by activated Hes1) was examined by
quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: Histological examination revealed that the adenocarcinomatous components
were predominately located at the luminal surface of the MANEC and the majority
of stromal invasion involved NET components. Ordinary adenocarcinomas and
non-neoplastic biliary epithelium constantly expressed Notch1, Jagged1 and Hes1, 
but the expression of Notch1 and Hes1 was decreased or absent in NET components, 
suggesting interference with the Notch1-Hes1 signalling axis in biliary NET.
Moreover, in the cholangiocarcinoma cell line in which the expression of Notch1
mRNA was knocked down, the mRNA expression of Ascl1 and chromogranin A was
increased.
CONCLUSIONS: The Notch1-Hes1 signalling axis suppresses neuroendocrine
differentiation and maintains tubular/acinar features in adenocarcinoma and
non-neoplastic epithelium in the biliary tree. Moreover, a disruption of this
signalling axis may be associated with the tumourigenesis of NETs in biliary
MANEC.

PMID: 23423517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Curr Biol. 2013 Mar 4;23(5):412-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.01.046. Epub 2013 Feb 
14.

Retinoid acid specifies neuronal identity through graded expression of Ascl1.

Jacob J(1), Kong J, Moore S, Milton C, Sasai N, Gonzalez-Quevedo R, Terriente J, 
Imayoshi I, Kageyama R, Wilkinson DG, Novitch BG, Briscoe J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. jjacob@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Curr Biol. 2013 Apr 8;23(7):632. Kageyama, Ryoichoro [corrected to Kageyama,
Ryoichiro].

Cell diversity and organization in the neural tube depend on the integration of
extrinsic signals acting along orthogonal axes. These are believed to specify
distinct cellular identities by triggering all-or-none changes in expression of
combinations of transcription factors. Under the influence of a common
dorsoventral signal, sonic hedgehog, and distinct anterior-posterior (A-P)
inductive signals, two topographically related progenitor pools that share a
common transcriptional code produce serotonergic and V3 neurons in the hindbrain 
and spinal cord, respectively. These neurons have different physiological
properties, functions, and connectivity. Serotonergic involvement in
neuropsychiatric diseases has prompted greater characterization of their
postmitotic repertoire of fate determinants, which include Gata2, Lmx1b, and
Pet1, whereas V3 neurons express Sim1. How distinct serotonergic and V3 neuronal 
identities emerge from progenitors that share a common transcriptional code is
not understood. Here, we show that changes in retinoid activity in these two
progenitor pools determine their fates. Retinoids, via Notch signaling, control
the expression level in progenitors of the transcription factor Ascl1, which
selects serotonergic and V3 neuronal identities in a dose-dependent manner.
Therefore, quantitative differences in the expression of a single component of a 
transcriptional code can select distinct cell fates.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3659286
PMID: 23416099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Hum Pathol. 2013 Jul;44(7):1391-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.11.013. Epub 2013 
Jan 31.

Achaete-scute homolog 1 as a marker of poorly differentiated neuroendocrine
carcinomas of different sites: a validation study using immunohistochemistry and 
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction on 335 cases.

La Rosa S(1), Marando A, Gatti G, Rapa I, Volante M, Papotti M, Sessa F, Capella 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ospedale di Circolo, 21100 Varese, Italy.
stefano.larosa@ospedale.varese.it

Neuroendocrine carcinomas show overlapping morphological and immunohistochemical 
features independently of their site of origin, which makes identification of the
primary location problematic when they are diagnosed as metastases of unknown
origin. Neuroendocrine carcinomas are easily morphologically differentiated from 
neuroendocrine tumors in surgical material, although this distinction can be
difficult when using small biopsy specimens. The diagnostic usefulness of
different transcription factors as site-specific markers or as discriminating
markers between neuroendocrine carcinomas and neuroendocrine tumors has been
previously studied with sometimes contradictory results. In this respect, the
role of achaete-scute homolog 1 has been poorly investigated, although some
recent findings demonstrate its expression in neuroendocrine carcinomas. Using
immunohistochemistry and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, we
investigated the expression of achaete-scute homolog 1 in 335 neuroendocrine
neoplasms (194 neuroendocrine carcinomas and 141 neuroendocrine tumors) of
different sites, to check its possible utility as diagnostic marker. High
concordance between immunohistochemical and molecular findings was found.
Achaete-scute homolog 1 expression was identified in 82% of lung neuroendocrine
carcinomas and 70% of extrapulmonary neuroendocrine carcinomas. Achaete-scute
homolog 1 was not detected in any gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumor and
was found in only a minority of lung carcinoids. The diagnostic sensitivity and
specificity of achaete-scute homolog 1 expression were 82.4% and 89.7% in
distinguishing neuroendocrine carcinomas from neuroendocrine tumors of the lung, 
40.6% and 100% to differentiate extrapulmonary neuroendocrine carcinomas from
neuroendocrine tumors, and 82.4% and 59.4% in distinguishing lung from
extrapulmonary neuroendocrine carcinomas. Our data suggest that achaete-scute
homolog 1 is not a site-specific marker. However, achaete-scute homolog 1 may be 
proposed as a diagnostic marker of poor differentiation and may help to
differentiate neuroendocrine carcinomas from neuroendocrine tumors in difficult
cases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23375646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Exp Eye Res. 2013 May;110:125-35. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2012.12.006. Epub 2013 Jan 
30.

Characterization of a new murine retinal cell line (MU-PH1) with glial,
progenitor and photoreceptor characteristics.

Gómez-Vicente V(1), Flores A, Lax P, Murciano C, Yáñez A, Gil ML, Cuenca N,
Gozalbo D, Maneu V.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiología, Genética y Microbiología, Universidad de Alicante,
Spain.

Unlike fish and amphibians, mammals do not regenerate retinal neurons throughout 
life. However, neurogenic potential may be conserved in adult mammal retina and
it is necessary to identify the factors that regulate retinal progenitor cells
(RPC) proliferative capacity to scope their therapeutic potential. Müller cells
can be progenitors for retinal neuronal cells and can play an essential role in
the restoration of visual function after retinal injury. Some members of the
Toll-like receptor (TLR) family, TLR2, TLR3 and TLR4, are related to progenitor
cells proliferation. Müller cells are important in retinal regeneration and
stable cell lines are useful for the study of retinal stem cell biology. Our
purpose was to obtain a Müller-derived cell line with progenitor characteristics 
and potential interest in regeneration processes. We obtained and characterized a
murine Müller-derived cell line (MU-PH1), which proliferates indefinitely
in vitro. Our results show that (i) MU-PH1 cells expresses the Müller cell
markers Vimentin, S-100, glutamine synthetase and the progenitor and stem cell
markers Nestin, Abcg2, Ascl1, a-tubulin and ß-III-tubulin, whereas lacks the
expression of CRALBP, GFAP, Chx10, Pax6 and Notch1 markers; (ii) MU-PH1 cell line
stably express the photoreceptor markers recoverin, transducin, rhodopsin, blue
and red/green opsins and also melanopsin; (iii) the presence of opsins was
confirmed by the recording of intracellular free calcium levels during light
stimulation; (iv) MU-PH1 cell line also expresses the melatonin MT1 and MT2
receptors; (v) MU-PH1 cells express TLR1, 2, 4 and 6 mRNA; (vi) MU-PH1 express
TLR2 at cell surface level; (vii) Candida albicans increases TLR2 and TLR6 mRNA
expression; (viii) C. albicans or TLR selective agonists (Pam(3)CysSK(4), LPS)
did not elicit morphological changes nor TNF-a secretion; (ix) C. albicans and
Pam(3)CysSK(4) augmented MU-PH1 neurospheres formation in a statistically
significant manner. Our results indicate that MU-PH1 cell line could be of great 
interest both as a photoreceptor model and in retinal regeneration approaches and
that TLR2 may also play a role in retinal cell proliferation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23375594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2012 Jul 10;1:e32. doi: 10.1038/mtna.2012.25.

Nonviral direct conversion of primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts to neuronal
cells.

Adler AF(1), Grigsby CL, Kulangara K, Wang H, Yasuda R, Leong KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina,
USA.

Transdifferentiation, where differentiated cells are reprogrammed into another
lineage without going through an intermediate proliferative stem cell-like stage,
is the next frontier of regenerative medicine. Wernig et al. first described the 
direct conversion of fibroblasts into functional induced neuronal cells (iNs).
Subsequent reports of transdifferentiation into clinically relevant neuronal
subtypes have further endorsed the prospect of autologous cell therapy for
neurodegenerative disorders. So far, all published neuronal transdifferentiation 
protocols rely on lentiviruses, which likely precludes their clinical
translation. Instead, we delivered plasmids encoding neuronal transcription
factors (Brn2, Ascl1, Myt1l) to primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts with a
bioreducible linear poly(amido amine). The low toxicity and high transfection
efficiency of this gene carrier allowed repeated dosing to sustain high transgene
expression levels. Serial 0.5 µg cm(-2) doses of reprogramming factors delivered 
at 48-hour intervals produced up to 7.6% Tuj1(+) (neuron-specific class III
ß-tubulin) cells, a subset of which expressed MAP2 (microtubule-associated
protein 2), tau, and synaptophysin. A synapsin-red fluorescent protein (RFP)
reporter helped to identify more mature, electrophysiologically active cells,
with 24/26 patch-clamped RFP(+) cells firing action potentials. Some non-virally 
induced neuronal cells (NiNs) were observed firing multiple and spontaneous
action potentials. This study demonstrates the feasibility of nonviral neuronal
transdifferentiation, and may be amenable to other transdifferentiation
processes.

PMCID: PMC3411320
PMID: 23344148  [PubMed]


178. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52832. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052832. Epub 2012 Dec 26.

Achaete-scute complex homolog-1 promotes DNA repair in the lung carcinogenesis
through matrix metalloproteinase-7 and O(6)-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase.

Wang XY(1), Jensen-Taubman SM, Keefe KM, Yang D, Linnoila RI.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Cancer Biology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America. xiaoyangwang@gmail.com

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the world.
Achaete-scute complex homolog-1 (Ascl1) is a member of the basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factor family that has multiple functions in the normal and 
neoplastic lung such as the regulation of neuroendocrine differentiation,
prevention of apoptosis and promotion of tumor-initiating cells. We now show that
Ascl1 directly regulates matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7) and
O(6)-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT). Loss- and gain-of-function
experiments in human bronchial epithelial and lung carcinoma cell lines revealed 
that Ascl1, MMP-7 and MGMT are able to protect cells from the tobacco-specific
nitrosamine NNK-induced DNA damage and the alkylating agent cisplatin-induced
apoptosis. We also examined the role of Ascl1 in NNK-induced lung tumorigenesis
in vivo. Using transgenic mice which constitutively expressed human Ascl1 in
airway lining cells, we found that there was a delay in lung tumorigenesis. We
conclude that Ascl1 potentially enhances DNA repair through activation of MMP-7
and MGMT which may impact lung carcinogenesis and chemoresistance. The study has 
uncovered a novel and unexpected function of Ascl1 which will contribute to
better understanding of lung carcinogenesis and the broad implications of
transcription factors in tobacco-related carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3530493
PMID: 23300791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51737. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051737. Epub 2012 Dec 17.

Ascl1 (Mash1) knockout perturbs differentiation of nonneuronal cells in olfactory
epithelium.

Krolewski RC(1), Packard A, Jang W, Wildner H, Schwob JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.

The embryonic olfactory epithelium (OE) generates only a very few olfactory
sensory neurons when the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, ASCL1
(previously known as MASH1) is eliminated by gene mutation. We have closely
examined the structure and composition of the OE of knockout mice and found that 
the absence of neurons dramatically affects the differentiation of multiple other
epithelial cell types as well. The most prominent effect is observed within the
two known populations of stem and progenitor cells of the epithelium. The
emergence of horizontal basal cells, a multipotent progenitor population in the
adult epithelium, is anomalous in the Ascl1 knockout mice. The differentiation of
globose basal cells, another multipotent progenitor population in the adult OE,
is also aberrant. All of the persisting globose basal cells are marked by SOX2
expression, suggesting a prominent role for SOX2 in progenitors upstream of
Ascl1. However, NOTCH1-expressing basal cells are absent from the knockout; since
NOTCH1 signaling normally acts to suppress Ascl1 via HES1 and drives
sustentacular (Sus) cell differentiation during adult epithelial regeneration,
its absence suggests reciprocity between neurogenesis and the differentiation of 
Sus cells. Indeed, the Sus cells of the mutant mice express a markedly lower
level of HES1, strengthening that notion of reciprocity. Duct/gland development
appears normal. Finally, the expression of cKIT by basal cells is also
undetectable, except in those small patches where neurogenesis escapes the
effects of Ascl1 knockout and neurons are born. Thus, persistent neurogenic
failure distorts the differentiation of multiple other cell types in the
olfactory epithelium.

PMCID: PMC3524087
PMID: 23284756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mech Dev. 2013 Jun-Aug;130(6-8):324-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2012.11.004. Epub 2012 
Dec 3.

Resolved and open issues in chromaffin cell development.

Unsicker K(1), Huber K, Schober A, Kalcheim C.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular Embryology, University of Freiburg, Albertstr. 17, D-79104 
Freiburg, Germany. klaus.unsicker@anat.uni-freiburg.de

Ten years of research within the DFG-funded Collaborative Research Grant SFB 488 
at the University of Heidelberg have added many new facets to our understanding
of chromaffin cell development. Glucocorticoid signaling is no longer the key for
understanding the determination of the chromaffin phenotype, yet a novel role has
been attributed to glucocorticoids: they are essential for the postnatal
maintenance of adrenal and extra-adrenal chromaffin cells. Transcription factors,
as, e.g. MASH1 and Phox2B, have similar, but also distinct functions in
chromaffin and sympathetic neuronal development, and BMP-4 not only induces
sympathoadrenal (SA) cells at the dorsal aorta and within the adrenal gland, but 
also promotes chromaffin cell maturation. Chromaffin cells and sympathetic
neurons share a common progenitor in the dorsal neural tube (NT) in vivo, as
revealed by single cell electroporations into the dorsal NT. Thus, specification 
of chromaffin cells is likely to occur after cell emigration either during
migration or close to colonization of the target regions. Mechanisms underlying
the specification of chromaffin cells vs. sympathetic neurons are currently being
explored.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23220335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Arch Toxicol. 2013 Apr;87(4):721-33. doi: 10.1007/s00204-012-0984-2. Epub 2012
Dec 2.

A 3-dimensional human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived model to detect
developmental neurotoxicity of nanoparticles.

Hoelting L(1), Scheinhardt B, Bondarenko O, Schildknecht S, Kapitza M, Tanavde V,
Tan B, Lee QY, Mecking S, Leist M, Kadereit S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Universitaetsstrasse 10, 78457 
Konstanz, Germany.

Nanoparticles (NPs) have been shown to accumulate in organs, cross the
blood-brain barrier and placenta, and have the potential to elicit developmental 
neurotoxicity (DNT). Here, we developed a human embryonic stem cell
(hESC)-derived 3-dimensional (3-D) in vitro model that allows for testing of
potential developmental neurotoxicants. Early central nervous system PAX6(+)
precursor cells were generated from hESCs and differentiated further within 3-D
structures. The 3-D model was characterized for neural marker expression
revealing robust differentiation toward neuronal precursor cells, and gene
expression profiling suggested a predominantly forebrain-like development.
Altered neural gene expression due to exposure to non-cytotoxic concentrations of
the known developmental neurotoxicant, methylmercury, indicated that the 3-D
model could detect DNT. To test for specific toxicity of NPs, chemically inert
polyethylene NPs (PE-NPs) were chosen. They penetrated deep into the 3-D
structures and impacted gene expression at non-cytotoxic concentrations. NOTCH
pathway genes such as HES5 and NOTCH1 were reduced in expression, as well as
downstream neuronal precursor genes such as NEUROD1 and ASCL1. FOXG1, a
patterning marker, was also reduced. As loss of function of these genes results
in severe nervous system impairments in mice, our data suggest that the 3-D
hESC-derived model could be used to test for Nano-DNT.

PMCID: PMC3604581
PMID: 23203475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2012 Nov;1(11):783-91. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2012-0022. Epub
2012 Oct 29.

Isolation, characterization, and differentiation of progenitor cells from human
adult adrenal medulla.

Santana MM(1), Chung KF, Vukicevic V, Rosmaninho-Salgado J, Kanczkowski W, Cortez
V, Hackmann K, Bastos CA, Mota A, Schrock E, Bornstein SR, Cavadas C,
Ehrhart-Bornstein M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.

Comment in
    Stem Cells Transl Med. 2013 Dec;2(12):1020-1.
    Stem Cells Transl Med. 2013 Dec;2(12):1020.

Chromaffin cells, sympathetic neurons of the dorsal ganglia, and the intermediate
small intensely fluorescent cells derive from a common neural crest progenitor
cell. Contrary to the closely related sympathetic nervous system, within the
adult adrenal medulla a subpopulation of undifferentiated progenitor cells
persists, and recently, we established a method to isolate and differentiate
these progenitor cells from adult bovine adrenals. However, no studies have
elucidated the existence of adrenal progenitor cells within the human adrenal
medulla. Here we describe the isolation, characterization, and differentiation of
chromaffin progenitor cells obtained from adult human adrenals. Human chromaffin 
progenitor cells were cultured in low-attachment conditions for 10-12 days as
free-floating spheres in the presence of fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) and
epidermal growth factor. These primary human chromosphere cultures were
characterized by the expression of several progenitor markers, including nestin, 
CD133, Notch1, nerve growth factor receptor, Snai2, Sox9, Sox10, Phox2b, and
Ascl1 on the molecular level and of Sox9 on the immunohistochemical level. In
opposition, phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT), a marker for
differentiated chromaffin cells, significantly decreased after 12 days in
culture. Moreover, when plated on poly-l-lysine/laminin-coated slides in the
presence of FGF-2, human chromaffin progenitor cells were able to differentiate
into two distinct neuron-like cell types, tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH)(+)/ß-3-tubulin(+) cells and TH(-)/ß-3-tubulin(+) cells, and into chromaffin 
cells (TH(+)/PNMT(+)). This study demonstrates the presence of progenitor cells
in the human adrenal medulla and reveals their potential use in regenerative
medicine, especially in the treatment of neuroendocrine and neurodegenerative
diseases.

PMCID: PMC3659667
PMID: 23197690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. ACS Nano. 2012 Dec 21;6(12):10463-74. doi: 10.1021/nn304541h. Epub 2012 Nov 29.

Polymeric nanoparticles to control the differentiation of neural stem cells in
the subventricular zone of the brain.

Santos T(1), Ferreira R, Maia J, Agasse F, Xapelli S, Cortes L, Bragança J, Malva
JO, Ferreira L, Bernardino L.

Author information: 
(1)CNC - Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra,
3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal.

Herein, we report the use of retinoic acid-loaded polymeric nanoparticles as a
potent tool to induce the neuronal differentiation of subventricular zone neural 
stem cells. The intracellular delivery of retinoic acid by the nanoparticles
activated nuclear retinoic acid receptors, decreased stemness, and increased
proneurogenic gene expression. Importantly, this work reports for the first time 
a nanoparticle formulation able to modulate in vivo the subventricular zone
neurogenic niche. The work further compares the dynamics of initial stages of
differentiation between SVZ cells treated with retinoic acid-loaded polymeric
nanoparticles and solubilized retinoic acid. The nanoparticle formulation
developed here may ultimately offer new perspectives to treat neurodegenerative
diseases.

PMID: 23176155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 4;109(49):20107-12. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1217103109. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

Connexin45 modulates the proliferation of transit-amplifying precursor cells in
the mouse subventricular zone.

Khodosevich K(1), Zuccotti A, Kreuzberg MM, Le Magueresse C, Frank M, Willecke K,
Monyer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neurobiology, University Hospital and German Cancer
Research Center, DKFZ, Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Connexins have been implicated in the regulation of precursor cell migration and 
proliferation during embryonic development of the mammalian brain. However, their
function in postnatal neurogenesis is unclear. Here we demonstrate that connexin 
(Cx) 45 is expressed in transit-amplifying cells and neuroblasts in the postnatal
subventricular zone (SVZ) and modulated the proliferation of SVZ-derived
precursor cells in vivo. Thus, overexpression of Cx45 by retroviral injections
increased the proliferation of Mash-1-positive transit-amplifying precursor cells
in the SVZ. Conversely, conditional deletion of Cx45 in precursor cells decreased
proliferation. Finally, we established that Cx45 positively influences cell cycle
reentry via ATP signaling that involves intracellular calcium stores and ERK1/2
signaling.

PMCID: PMC3523819
PMID: 23169657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49087. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049087. Epub 2012 Nov 15.

3-dimensional examination of the adult mouse subventricular zone reveals
lineage-specific microdomains.

Azim K(1), Fiorelli R, Zweifel S, Hurtado-Chong A, Yoshikawa K, Slomianka L,
Raineteau O.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, University of Zürich/ETHZ, Zürich, Switzerland.

Recent studies suggest that the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral
ventricle is populated by heterogeneous populations of stem and progenitor cells 
that, depending on their exact location, are biased to acquire specific neuronal 
fates. This newly described heterogeneity of SVZ stem and progenitor cells
underlines the necessity to develop methods for the accurate quantification of
SVZ stem and progenitor subpopulations. In this study, we provide 3-dimensional
topographical maps of slow cycling "stem" cells and progenitors based on their
unique cell cycle properties. These maps revealed that both cell populations are 
present throughout the lateral ventricle wall as well as in discrete regions of
the dorsal wall. Immunodetection of transcription factors expressed in defined
progenitor populations further reveals that divergent lineages have clear
regional enrichments in the rostro-caudal as well as in the dorso-ventral span of
the lateral ventricle. Thus, progenitors expressing Tbr2 and Dlx2 were confined
to dorsal and dorso-lateral regions of the lateral ventricle, respectively, while
Mash1+ progenitors were more homogeneously distributed. All cell populations were
enriched in the rostral-most region of the lateral ventricle. This diversity and 
uneven distribution greatly impede the accurate quantification of SVZ progenitor 
populations. This is illustrated by measuring the coefficient of error of
estimates obtained by using increasing section sampling interval. Based on our
empirical data, we provide such estimates for all progenitor populations
investigated in this study. These can be used in future studies as guidelines to 
judge if the precision obtained with a sampling scheme is sufficient to detect
statistically significant differences between experimental groups if a biological
effect is present. Altogether, our study underlines the need to consider the SVZ 
of the lateral ventricle as a complex 3D structure and define methods to
accurately assess neural stem cells or progenitor diversity and population sizes 
in physiological or experimental paradigms.

PMCID: PMC3499551
PMID: 23166605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Anticancer Drugs. 2013 Jan;24(1):66-72. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0b013e3283584f75.

Neuroendocrine phenotype alteration and growth suppression through apoptosis by
MK-2206, an allosteric inhibitor of AKT, in carcinoid cell lines in vitro.

Somnay Y(1), Simon K, Harrison AD, Kunnimalaiyaan S, Chen H, Kunnimalaiyaan M.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratories, Department of Surgery and University 
of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine
and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA.

Erratum in
    Anticancer Drugs. 2013 Jul;24(6):658.

Carcinoids are neuroendocrine malignancies characterized by their overproduction 
of various bioactive hormones that lead to the carcinoid syndrome. We have shown 
previously that AKT serves as a key regulator of growth and phenotypic expression
of tumor markers in carcinoids by the genetic depletion of AKT expression.
However, no small-molecule inhibitor of AKT kinase activity has been developed
until recently. MK-2206, a novel allosteric inhibitor of AKT, is currently
undergoing clinical trials for the treatment of solid tumors. In this study, we
explored the effect of MK-2206 on carcinoid cell proliferation and bioactive
hormone production in vitro in two carcinoid cell lines - pancreatic carcinoid
BON and bronchopulmonary H727. Treatment with MK-2206 effectively suppressed AKT 
phosphorylation at serine 473 and significantly reduced cell proliferation in a
dose-dependent manner. Most importantly, MK-2206 treatment resulted in a
significant reduction in ASCL1, CgA, and NSE expression, collectively recognized 
as markers of neuroendocrine tumor malignancy. Furthermore, MK-2206-treated cells
showed an increase in levels of cleaved PARP and cleaved caspase-3, with a
concomitant reduction in levels of Mcl-1 and XIAP, indicating that the
antiproliferative effect of MK-2206 occurs through the induction of apoptosis. In
conclusion, MK-2206 suppresses carcinoid tumor growth, and alters its
neuroendocrine phenotype, indicating that this drug may be beneficial for
patients with carcinoid syndrome. These studies merit further clinical
investigation.

PMCID: PMC3510354
PMID: 23147412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48675. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048675. Epub 2012 Nov 6.

Expression at the imprinted dlk1-gtl2 locus is regulated by proneural genes in
the developing telencephalon.

Seibt J(1), Armant O, Le Digarcher A, Castro D, Ramesh V, Journot L, Guillemot F,
Vanderhaeghen P, Bouschet T.

Author information: 
(1)IRIBHM (Institute for Interdisciplinary Research), Université Libre de
Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium.

Imprinting is an epigenetic mechanism that restrains the expression of about 100 
genes to one allele depending on its parental origin. Several imprinted genes are
implicated in neurodevelopmental brain disorders, such as autism, Angelman, and
Prader-Willi syndromes. However, how expression of these imprinted genes is
regulated during neural development is poorly understood. Here, using single and 
double KO animals for the transcription factors Neurogenin2 (Ngn2) and
Achaete-scute homolog 1 (Ascl1), we found that the expression of a specific
subset of imprinted genes is controlled by these proneural genes. Using in situ
hybridization and quantitative PCR, we determined that five imprinted transcripts
situated at the Dlk1-Gtl2 locus (Dlk1, Gtl2, Mirg, Rian, Rtl1) are upregulated in
the dorsal telencephalon of Ngn2 KO mice. This suggests that Ngn2 influences the 
expression of the entire Dlk1-Gtl2 locus, independently of the parental origin of
the transcripts. Interestingly 14 other imprinted genes situated at other
imprinted loci were not affected by the loss of Ngn2. Finally, using Ngn2/Ascl1
double KO mice, we show that the upregulation of genes at the Dlk1-Gtl2 locus in 
Ngn2 KO animals requires a functional copy of Ascl1. Our data suggest a complex
interplay between proneural genes in the developing forebrain that control the
level of expression at the imprinted Dlk1-Gtl2 locus (but not of other imprinted 
genes). This raises the possibility that the transcripts of this selective locus 
participate in the biological effects of proneural genes in the developing
telencephalon.

PMCID: PMC3490856
PMID: 23139813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Feb 15;22(4):525-37. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0406. Epub 2013
Jan 11.

Fibroblast growth factor signaling regulates neurogenesis at multiple stages in
the embryonic olfactory epithelium.

Murdoch B(1), Roskams AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia.

Lifelong neurogenesis in the mouse olfactory epithelium (OE) is regulated by the 
response of stem/progenitor cells to local signals, but embryonic and adult OE
progenitors appear to be quite different--with potentially different mechanisms
of regulation. A recently identified progenitor unique to embryonic OE--the
nestin+ radial glial-like progenitor--precedes some Mash1+ progenitors in the
olfactory receptor neuron (ORN) lineage, which then gives rise to immediate
neuronal precursors and immature ORNs. Neurogenic drive at each stage is governed
largely by exogenous factors. Fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) is believed to
increase cell proliferation in both presumptive OE stem cells and immediate
neuronal precursors in explants, but whether FGF2 directly acts on different
target progenitors or stages in the embryonic OE is not known. Here we show that 
fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)1 and FGFR2 are found in a variety of
embryonic olfactory cells, including olfactory ensheathing cells and their
precursors, and neuronal nestin+ and Mash1+ progenitors. Combining gain and loss 
of function for FGF2 activity in a novel in vitro clonal progenitor assay, we
reveal that different colony phenotypes are formed by presumably different OE
progenitors. FGF2 is essential for the survival and expansion of colony-forming
cells of the OE, and also enhances the proliferation of embryonic Mash1+
progenitors, leading to long-lived enhancement of neurogenesis. Our data suggest 
that distinct OE progenitors yield different in vitro phenotypes with different
potentials, that colony-forming activity is profoundly altered by laminin and
collagen, that multiple ORNs can be produced from single colony-forming
progenitors, and demonstrate a broader progenitor range of FGF action in the
embryonic OE than previously demonstrated.

PMID: 23137310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. BMC Res Notes. 2012 Oct 31;5:607. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-5-607.

DNA copy number alterations and PPARG amplification in a patient with multifocal 
bladder urothelial carcinoma.

Conconi D(1), Panzeri E, Redaelli S, Bovo G, Volante M, Viganò P, Strada G,
Dalprà L, Bentivegna A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Biomedical Technologies, University of
Milan-Bicocca, Monza, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Bladder cancer is the seventh most common cancer worldwide and over
90% are transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). At the first time of diagnosis at
least 70% of TCC present as superficial bladder cancer. Because the clinical
outcome of superficial bladder tumors is relatively unpredictable, there is a
pressing need to identify markers that may predict tumor recurrence and
progression and new treatment strategies.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a unique case of a 67-year old male who underwent
total cystectomy after repeated trans-urethral resections of the bladder for
multifocal non-muscle invasive bladder cancer. The first and the third tumor were
diagnosed as high grade non-infiltrating (HGNI), while the second as carcinoma in
situ (CIS). We performed both array comparative genomic hybridization and a
targeted chromosomal profile by UroVysion in order to detect copy number
variations (CNVs) that may be involved with tumor recurrence and progression. The
overall data from this study provide new evidence for the monoclonal origin of
urothelial tumor multifocality as several genetic changes were found in different
tumors of the same patient. From the analysis of shared CNVs two gained regions
emerged at 3p25.2 and 12q23.2, including PPARG and ASCL1 genes, respectively. The
copy number level of these genes would seem inversely mutually correlated and
highly dependent on histological grade, because the highest level of
amplification at 3p25.2 was evidenced in the two HGNI samples, while the highest 
level of copy number gain at 12q23.2 was reported in the CIS.
CONCLUSION: We provide new evidence on the role of PPARG in initiation and
maintenance of bladder cancer. For the first time we also suggest a possible
explanation for the elevated expression of PPARG in this type of tumor through a 
focal high level amplification at 3p25.2. Furthermore, a new gene, ASCL1, emerged
as a potential candidate to assist PPARG in bladder carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3598781
PMID: 23114535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. BMC Neurosci. 2012 Oct 31;13:134. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-13-134.

Morphological and behavioural changes occur following the X-ray irradiation of
the adult mouse olfactory neuroepithelium.

Cunha C(1), Hort Y, Shine J, Doyle KL.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney,
Australia.

BACKGROUND: The olfactory neuroepithelium lines the upper nasal cavity and is in 
direct contact with the external environment and the olfactory bulbs. The ability
to self-renew throughout life and the reproducible recovery after injury, make it
a model tissue to study mechanisms underlying neurogenesis. In this study, X-rays
were used to disrupt proliferating olfactory stem cell populations and to assess 
their role in the cellular and morphological changes involved in olfactory
neurogenic processes.
RESULTS: We have analysed the histological and functional effects of a sub-lethal
dose of X-rays on the adult mouse olfactory neuroepithelium at 2 hours, 24 hours,
1 week, 2 weeks and 5 weeks. We have shown an immediate cessation of
proliferating olfactory stem cells as shown by BrdU, Ki67 and pH3 expression. At 
24 hours there was an increase in the neural transcription factors Mash1 and Pax6
expression, and a disruption of the basal lamina and increase in glandular cell
marker expression at 1 week post-irradiation. Coincident with these changes was
an impairment of the olfactory function in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: We have shown significant changes in basal cell proliferation as
well as morphological changes in the olfactory neuroepithelium following X-ray
irradiation. There is involvement of the basal lamina as well as a clear role for
glandular and sustentacular cells.

PMCID: PMC3536589
PMID: 23113950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2012 Sep;153(5):746-9.

Regional features of the expression of genes involved in neurogenesis and
apoptosis in the brain of adult rats.

Kolobov VV(1), Storozheva ZI, Gruden MA, Sherstnev VV.

Author information: 
(1)PK Anokhin Institute of Normal Physiology, Russian Academy of Medical
Sciences, Moscow, Russia. f.neurochemistry@gmail.com

The expression of mRNA of genes involved in neurogenesis and apoptosis (Apaf1,
Ascl1, Bax, Bcl2, Casp3, Casp8, Casp9, Dffb, Myh10, Naip2, Napa, Notch2, Numb,
Pura, S100a6, Tnf) in the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum was
studied in adult rats. The content of mRNA of these genes (except Apaf1) was
several-fold higher in the cerebellum than in the hippocampus and brain cortex.
In the hippocampus, the expression of Apaf1 was significantly lower than in the
prefrontal cortex, while the expression of Ascl1, Pura, S100b, and Tnf was
higher. Regional differences in the direction, strength, and numbers of
significant correlations between the expression of the studied genes were
detected. Documented differences in gene expression were regarded as validation
of the structural and functional cooperation of neurogenesis and apoptosis at the
molecular genetic level.

PMID: 23113275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Neurosci. 2012 Oct 24;32(43):15012-26. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2248-12.2012.

Mammalian target of rapamycin signaling is a key regulator of the
transit-amplifying progenitor pool in the adult and aging forebrain.

Paliouras GN(1), Hamilton LK, Aumont A, Joppé SE, Barnabé-Heider F, Fernandes KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Groupe de recherche sur le système
nerveux central and Center of Excellence in Neuroscience of the Université de
Montréal, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec, Canada, H3T 1J4.

Adult forebrain neurogenesis is dynamically regulated. Multiple families of
niche-derived cues have been implicated in this regulation, but the precise roles
of key intracellular signaling pathways remain vaguely defined. Here, we show
that mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling is pivotal in determining
proliferation versus quiescence in the adult forebrain neural stem cell (NSC)
niche. Within this niche, mTOR complex-1 (mTORC1) activation displays stage
specificity, occurring in transiently amplifying (TA) progenitor cells but not in
GFAP+ stem cells. Inhibiting mTORC1 depletes the TA progenitor pool in vivo and
suppresses epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced proliferation within neurosphere
cultures. Interestingly, mTORC1 inhibition induces a quiescence-like phenotype
that is reversible. Likewise, mTORC1 activity and progenitor proliferation
decline within the quiescent NSC niche of the aging brain, while EGF
administration reactivates the quiescent niche in an mTORC1-dependent manner.
These findings establish fundamental links between mTOR signaling, proliferation,
and aging-associated quiescence in the adult forebrain NSC niche.

PMID: 23100423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Nanoscale. 2012 Nov 21;4(22):7185-93. doi: 10.1039/c2nr31853a.

Co-delivery of doxorubicin and siRNA using octreotide-conjugated gold nanorods
for targeted neuroendocrine cancer therapy.

Xiao Y(1), Jaskula-Sztul R, Javadi A, Xu W, Eide J, Dammalapati A, Kunnimalaiyaan
M, Chen H, Gong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Wisconsin Institute for Discovery,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

A multifunctional gold (Au) nanorod (NR)-based nanocarrier capable of
co-delivering small interfering RNA (siRNA) against achaete-scute complex-like 1 
(ASCL1) and an anticancer drug (doxorubicin (DOX)) specifically to neuroendocrine
(NE) cancer cells was developed and characterized for combined chemotherapy and
siRNA-mediated gene silencing. The Au NR was conjugated with (1) DOX, an
anticancer drug, via a pH-labile hydrazone linkage to enable pH-controlled drug
release, (2) polyarginine, a cationic polymer for complexing siRNA, and (3)
octreotide (OCT), a tumor-targeting ligand, to specifically target NE cancer
cells with overexpressed somatostatin receptors. The Au NR-based nanocarriers
exhibited a uniform size distribution as well as pH-sensitive drug release. The
OCT-conjugated Au NR-based nanocarriers (Au-DOX-OCT, targeted) exhibited a much
higher cellular uptake in a human carcinoid cell line (BON cells) than
non-targeted Au NR-based nanocarriers (Au-DOX) as measured by both flow cytometry
and confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). Moreover, Au-DOX-OCT-ASCL1 siRNA
(Au-DOX-OCT complexed with ASCL1 siRNA) resulted in significantly higher gene
silencing in NE cancer cells than Au-DOX-ASCL1 siRNA (non-targeted Au-DOX
complexed with ASCL1 siRNA) as measured by an immunoblot analysis. Additionally, 
Au-DOX-OCT-ASCL1 siRNA was the most efficient nanocarrier at altering the NE
phenotype of NE cancer cells and showed the strongest anti-proliferative effect. 
Thus, combined chemotherapy and RNA silencing using NE tumor-targeting Au
NR-based nanocarriers could potentially enhance the therapeutic outcomes in
treating NE cancers.

PMCID: PMC3495135
PMID: 23070403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Prostate. 2013 May;73(6):582-9. doi: 10.1002/pros.22598. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Mash1 expression is induced in neuroendocrine prostate cancer upon the loss of
Foxa2.

Gupta A(1), Yu X, Case T, Paul M, Shen MM, Kaestner KH, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Stanford
University, Stanford, California, USA.

Neuroendocrine (NE) prostate tumors and neuroendocrine differentiation (NED) in
prostatic adenocarcinomas have been associated with poor prognosis. In this
study, we used the TRAMP mouse model that develops NE prostate tumors to identify
key factors that can lead to NED. We have previously reported that NE tumors
express the forkhead transcription factor, Foxa2, Mash1 (mouse achaete scute
homolog-1), as well as Synaptophysin. In TRAMP, the prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (PIN) first expresses Foxa2 and Synaptophysin, which then progresses to
NE cancer. In order to determine if Foxa2 is dispensable for development or
maintenance of NE cancer, a conditional knock-out of Foxa2 in TRAMP mice was
generated by breeding mice with two floxed alleles of Foxa2 and one copy of
Nkx3.1-Cre. Nkx3.1-Cre/Foxa2(loxP/loxP) mice showed loss of Foxa2 expression in
embryonic prostatic buds. No expression of Foxa2 was seen in the adult prostate
in either conditional null or control mice. Foxa2 is universally expressed in all
wild type TRAMP NE tumors, but Mash1 expression is seen only in a few samples in 
a few cells. With the loss of Foxa2 in the NE tumors of the
TRAMP/Nkx3.1-Cre/Foxa2(loxP/loxP) mice, the expression of the pro-neuronal gene
Mash1 is upregulated. NE tumors from both the TRAMP control and Foxa2-deficient
TRAMP prostate express Synaptophysin and SV40 Large T-antigen, and both show a
loss of androgen receptor expression in NE cells. These studies suggest that the 
TRAMP NE tumors can form in the absence of Foxa2 by an up regulation of Mash1.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3714015
PMID: 23060003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Comp Neurol. 2013 May 1;521(7):1561-84. doi: 10.1002/cne.23242.

Loss of Gsx1 and Gsx2 function rescues distinct phenotypes in Dlx1/2 mutants.

Wang B(1), Long JE, Flandin P, Pla R, Waclaw RR, Campbell K, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and the Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94158-2324, USA.

Mice lacking the Dlx1 and Dlx2 homeobox genes (Dlx1/2 mutants) have severe
deficits in subpallial differentiation, including overexpression of the Gsx1 and 
Gsx2 homeobox genes. To investigate whether Gsx overexpression contributes to the
Dlx1/2 mutant phenotypes, we made compound loss-of-function mutants. Eliminating 
Gsx2 function from the Dlx1/2 mutants rescued the increased expression of Ascl1
and Hes5 (Notch signaling mediators) and Olig2 (oligodendrogenesis mediator). In 
addition, Dlx1/2;Gsx2 mutants, like Dlx1/2;Ascl1 mutants, exacerbated the Gsx2
and Dlx1/2 patterning and differentiation phenotypes, particularly in the lateral
ganglionic eminence (LGE) caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE), and septum, including
loss of GAD1 expression. On the other hand, eliminating Gsx1 function from the
Dlx1/2 mutants (Dlx1/2;Gsx1 mutants) did not severely exacerbate their phenotype;
on the contrary, it resulted in a partial rescue of medial ganglionic eminence
(MGE) properties, including interneuron migration to the cortex. Thus, despite
their redundant properties, Gsx1 and -2 have distinct interactions with Dlx1 and 
-2. Gsx2 interaction is strongest in the LGE, CGE, and septum, whereas the Gsx1
interaction is strongest in the MGE. From these studies, and earlier studies, we 
present a model of the transcriptional network that regulates early steps of
subcortical development.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3615175
PMID: 23042297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Oct 5;11(4):471-6. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.07.007.

Reprogramming of pericyte-derived cells of the adult human brain into induced
neuronal cells.

Karow M(1), Sánchez R, Schichor C, Masserdotti G, Ortega F, Heinrich C, Gascón S,
Khan MA, Lie DC, Dellavalle A, Cossu G, Goldbrunner R, Götz M, Berninger B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Schillerstrasse 46,
D-80336 Munich, Germany.

Reprogramming of somatic cells into neurons provides a new approach toward
cell-based therapy of neurodegenerative diseases. A major challenge for the
translation of neuronal reprogramming into therapy is whether the adult human
brain contains cell populations amenable to direct somatic cell conversion. Here 
we show that cells from the adult human cerebral cortex expressing pericyte
hallmarks can be reprogrammed into neuronal cells by retrovirus-mediated
coexpression of the transcription factors Sox2 and Mash1. These induced neuronal 
cells acquire the ability of repetitive action potential firing and serve as
synaptic targets for other neurons, indicating their capability of integrating
into neural networks. Genetic fate-mapping in mice expressing an inducible Cre
recombinase under the tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase promoter
corroborated the pericytic origin of the reprogrammed cells. Our results raise
the possibility of functional conversion of endogenous cells in the adult human
brain to induced neuronal fates.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23040476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Development. 2012 Oct;139(20):3795-805.

Transcriptional regulatory mechanisms underlying the GABAergic neuron fate in
different diencephalic prosomeres.

Virolainen SM(1), Achim K, Peltopuro P, Salminen M, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Institute of Biotechnology, Viikki Biocenter, PO
Box 56, Viikinkaari 5, FIN00014-University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Diverse mechanisms regulate development of GABAergic neurons in different regions
of the central nervous system. We have addressed the roles of a proneural gene,
Ascl1, and a postmitotic selector gene, Gata2, in the differentiation of
GABAergic neuron subpopulations in three diencephalic prosomeres: prethalamus
(P3), thalamus (P2) and pretectum (P1). Although the different proliferative
progenitor populations of GABAergic neurons commonly express Ascl1, they have
distinct requirements for it in promotion of cell-cycle exit and GABAergic neuron
identity. Subsequently, Gata2 is activated as postmitotic GABAergic precursors
are born. In P1, Gata2 regulates the neurotransmitter identity by promoting
GABAergic and inhibiting glutamatergic neuron differentiation. Interestingly,
Gata2 defines instead the subtype of GABAergic neurons in the rostral thalamus
(pTh-R), which is a subpopulation of P2. Without Gata2, the GABAergic precursors 
born in the pTh-R fail to activate subtype-specific markers, but start to express
genes typical of GABAergic precursors in the neighbouring P3 domain. Thus, our
results demonstrate diverse mechanisms regulating differentiation of GABAergic
neuron subpopulations and suggest a role for Gata2 as a selector gene of both
GABAergic neuron neurotransmitter and prosomere subtype identities in the
developing diencephalon. Our results demonstrate for the first time that neuronal
identities between distinct prosomeres can still be transformed in postmitotic
neuronal precursors.

PMID: 22991444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Neuroendocrinology. 2013;97(2):183-92. doi: 10.1159/000341810. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Synergistic effect of pasireotide and teriflunomide in carcinoids in vitro.

Somnay Y(1), Chen H, Kunnimalaiyaan M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Endocrine
Surgery Research Laboratories, Department of Surgery, Madison, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Somatostatin (SST) analogs are mainstay for controlling tumor
proliferation and hormone secretion in carcinoid patients. Recent data suggest
that extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) phosphorylation may
potentiate the anti-tumor effects of SST analogs in carcinoids. Additionally,
ERK1/2 phosphorylating agents have been shown to suppress biomarker expression in
carcinoids. Thus, Raf-1/MEK/ERK1/2 pathway activating drugs may be synergistic
with SST analogs such as pasireotide (SOM230), which may be more effective than
others in its class given its elevated receptor affinity and broader binding
spectrum. Here, we investigate the effects of SOM230 in combination with
teriflunomide (TFN), a Raf-1 activator, in a human carcinoid cell line.
METHODS: Human pancreatic carcinoid cells (BON) were incubated in TFN, SOM230 or 
a combination. Cell proliferation was measured using a rapid colorimetric assay. 
Western analysis was performed to analyze expression levels of achaete-scute
complex-like 1 (ASCL1), chromogranin A (CgA), phosphorylated and total ERK1/2,
and markers for apoptosis.
RESULTS: Combination treatment with SOM230 and TFN reduced cell growth beyond the
additive effect of either drug alone. Combination indices (CI) fell below 1, thus
quantifiably verifying synergy between both drugs as per the Chou-Talalay CI
scale. Combined treatment also reduced ASCL1 and CgA expression beyond the
additive effect of either drug alone. Furthermore, it increased levels of
phosphorylated ERK1/2, cleaved poly(ADP)-ribose polymerase and caspase-3, and
reduced levels of anti-apoptotic biomarkers. Elevated phosphorylated ERK1/2
expression following combination therapy may underlie the synergistic interaction
between the two drugs.
CONCLUSION: Since efficacy is achieved at lower doses, combination therapy may
palliate symptoms at low toxicity levels. Because each drug has already been
evaluated in clinical trials, combinatorial drug trials are warranted.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3546174
PMID: 22965070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Dev Biol. 2012 Oct 15;370(2):250-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.08.002. Epub 2012 
Aug 10.

Neurogenin2 expression together with NeuroM regulates GDNF family neurotrophic
factor receptor a1 (GFRa1) expression in the embryonic spinal cord.

Shimada T(1), Yaginuma H, Sato N, Homma S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical University, 1
Hikarigaoka, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan.

In many regions of the nervous system, the combinatorial action of
transcriptional factors specifies the individual fate of neuronal subtypes.
Contrary to this, we report that a single transcriptional factor controls a
phenotype shared by different subtypes of neurons, namely the expression of a
neurotrophic factor receptor in the spinal cord. Along the dorsoventral axis of
the chick embryo spinal cord, the expression pattern of a specific receptor for
glial cell line derived-neurotrophic factor (GDNF family of receptors a1: GFRa1) 
was related to that of two basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcriptional factors 
(NeuroM and Neurogenin2: Ngn2). In ovo electroporation in the chick embryo
revealed that the overexpression of NeuroM alone was sufficient to induce ectopic
GFRa1 expression without overt neuronal differentiation, whereas the suppression 
of NeuroM activity resulted in the specific loss of GFRa1 expression, indicating 
that NeuroM may act as a differentiation factor for GFRa1 expression. Ngn2
overexpression was also sufficient to induce precocious GFRa1 expression.
However, the forced expression of both obligate suppressor and activator forms of
Ngn2 also induced aberrant GFRa1 expression. Thus, any deviation from an optimum 
level of Ngn2 expression resulted in aberrant GFRa1 expression. Consistent with
this, manipulation of Ngn2 expression levels by other bHLH factors also resulted 
in ectopic GFRa1 expression. For example, the downregulation by Ascl1 and the
upregulation by Ptf1a induced ectopic GFRa1 expression, irrespective of
endogenous expression patterns of Ascl1 and Ptf1a (Ascl1/Ptf1) in the spinal
cord. The suppression of Ascl1/Ptf1a activities abolished Ngn2 and GFRa1
expression, even in Ascl1/Ptf1a-negative regions. These data indicate the
presence of a distinct regulatory sequence for a determinant of GFRa1 expression,
in which Ascl1/Ptf1a may competitively intervene to stochastically modulate
default Ngn2 expression levels. Thus, Ngn2 together with NeuroM serves as readout
to regulate GFRa1 expression, which occurs in multiple subtypes of spinal
neurons.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22902531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2012 Dec;47(6):768-75. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0027OC. 
Epub 2012 Aug 9.

Multidirectional differentiation of Achaete-Scute homologue-1-defined progenitors
in lung development and injury repair.

Li Y(1), Linnoila RI.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Pathology Section, Cell and Cancer Biology Branch, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Multiple cells contribute to the function of lungs. Pulmonary neuroendocrine
cells (PNECs) are important for the regulation of breathing and carcinogenesis,
although they represent only a small population of the airway lining.
Achaete-Scute homologue-1 (Ascl1), a proneural basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor, is critical for the development of PNECs. We postulated
that Ascl1-defined cells (ASDCs) may be progenitors, and traced their fate during
development and injury repair. R26R-stop-lacZ (Rosa) reporter mice were crossed
with Ascl1-Cre or Ascl1-CreERTM mice, in which the Ascl1 promoter drives the
expression of Cre or inducible Cre recombinase, respectively. ASDCs and their
descendants will be permanently labeled. The labeled cells were characterized by 
immunohistochemistry, using highly specific differentiation markers. Lineage
studies revealed a population that proliferates before the pseudoglandular stage,
and widely contributes to different compartments. When ASDCs were labeled on
Embryonic Day 9.5, they gave rise to both airway and alveolar cells, but when
labeled on Embryonic Day 11.5, they only gave rise to airway cells. In postnatal 
naphthalene injury, ASDCs contributed to regenerating Clara cells. In conclusion,
Ascl1-defined cells in the lung represent a novel multipotent lineage, indicating
a close relationship of neuroendocrine cells with other cell types.

PMCID: PMC3547090
PMID: 22878413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41506. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041506. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Neuronal transcription factors induce conversion of human glioma cells to neurons
and inhibit tumorigenesis.

Zhao J(1), He H, Zhou K, Ren Y, Shi Z, Wu Z, Wang Y, Lu Y, Jiao J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Recent findings have demonstrated that the overexpression of lineage-specific
transcription factors induces cell fate changes among diverse cell types. For
example, neurons can be generated from mouse and human fibroblasts. It is well
known that neurons are terminally differentiated cells that do not divide.
Therefore, we consider how to induce glioma cells to become neurons by
introducing transcription factors. Here, we describe the efficient generation of 
induced neuronal (iN) cells from glioma cells by the infection with three
transcription factors: Ascl1, Brn2 and Ngn2 (ABN). iN cells expressed multiple
neuronal markers and fired action potentials, similar to the properties of
authentic neurons. Importantly, the proliferation of glioma cells following ABN
overexpression was dramatically inhibited in both in vitro and in vivo
experiments. In addition, iN cells that originated from human glioma cells did
not continue to grow when they were sorted and cultured in vitro. The strategies 
by which glioma cells are induced to become neurons may be used to clinically
study methods for inhibiting tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC3409237
PMID: 22859994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 31;109(31):12592-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1204710109. Epub 2012 Jul 13.

Neuroepithelial body microenvironment is a niche for a distinct subset of
Clara-like precursors in the developing airways.

Guha A(1), Vasconcelos M, Cai Y, Yoneda M, Hinds A, Qian J, Li G, Dickel L,
Johnson JE, Kimura S, Guo J, McMahon J, McMahon AP, Cardoso WV.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Center, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA. aguha@bu.edu

Clara cells of mammalian airways have multiple functions and are morphologically 
heterogeneous. Although Notch signaling is essential for the development of these
cells, it is unclear how Notch influences Clara cell specification and if
diversity is established among Clara cell precursors. Here we identify expression
of the secretoglobin Scgb3a2 and Notch activation as early events in a program of
secretory cell fate determination in developing murine airways. We show that
Scgb3a2 expression in vivo is Notch-dependent at early stages and ectopically
induced by constitutive Notch1 activation, and also that in vitro Notch signaling
together with the pan-airway transcription factor Ttf1 (Nkx2.1) synergistically
regulate secretoglobin gene transcription. Furthermore, we identified a
subpopulation of secretory precursors juxtaposed to presumptive neuroepithelial
bodies (NEBs), distinguished by their strong Scgb3a2 and uroplakin 3a (Upk3a)
signals and reduced Ccsp (Scgb1a1) expression. Genetic ablation of Ascl1
prevented NEB formation and selectively interfered with the formation of this
subpopulation of cells. Lineage labeling of Upk3a-expressing cells during
development showed that these cells remain largely uncommitted during embryonic
development and contribute to Clara and ciliated cells in the adult lung.
Together, our findings suggest a role for Notch in the induction of a Clara
cell-specific program of gene expression, and reveals that the NEB
microenvironment in the developing airways is a niche for a distinct subset of
Clara-like precursors.

PMCID: PMC3412014
PMID: 22797898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Cereb Cortex. 2013 Aug;23(8):1884-900. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs176. Epub 2012 Jun 
26.

Neurog2 simultaneously activates and represses alternative gene expression
programs in the developing neocortex.

Kovach C(1), Dixit R, Li S, Mattar P, Wilkinson G, Elsen GE, Kurrasch DM, Hevner 
RF, Schuurmans C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Calgary, Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Alberta Children's Hospital 
Research Institute, Health Sciences Centre, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Progenitor cells undergo a series of stable identity transitions on their way to 
becoming fully differentiated cells with unique identities. Each cellular
transition requires that new sets of genes are expressed, while alternative
genetic programs are concurrently repressed. Here, we investigated how the
proneural gene Neurog2 simultaneously activates and represses alternative gene
expression programs in the developing neocortex. By comparing the activities of
transcriptional activator (Neurog2-VP16) and repressor (Neurog2-EnR) fusions to
wild-type Neurog2, we first demonstrate that Neurog2 functions as an activator to
both extinguish Pax6 expression in radial glial cells and initiate Tbr2
expression in intermediate neuronal progenitors. Similarly, we show that Neurog2 
functions as an activator to promote the differentiation of neurons with a dorsal
telencephalic (i.e., neocortical) identity and to block a ventral fate,
identifying 2 Neurog2-regulated transcriptional programs involved in the latter. 
First, we show that the Neurog2-transcriptional target Tbr2 is a direct
transcriptional repressor of the ventral gene Ebf1. Secondly, we demonstrate that
Neurog2 indirectly turns off Etv1 expression, which in turn indirectly regulates 
the expression of the ventral proneural gene Ascl1. Neurog2 thus activates
several genetic off-switches, each with distinct transcriptional targets,
revealing an unappreciated level of specificity for how Neurog2 prevents
inappropriate gene expression during neocortical development.

PMID: 22735158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Cell Sci. 2012 Sep 15;125(Pt 18):4320-32. doi: 10.1242/jcs.102152. Epub 2012
Jun 20.

Notch-Rbpj signaling is required for the development of noradrenergic neurons in 
the mouse locus coeruleus.

Shi M(1), Hu ZL, Zheng MH, Song NN, Huang Y, Zhao G, Han H, Ding YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Arrhythmias, Ministry of Education of China East Hospital,
and Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200092, China. biomidas@163.com

The locus coeruleus (LC) is the main source of noradrenaline in the brain and is 
implicated in a broad spectrum of physiological and behavioral processes.
However, genetic pathways controlling the development of noradrenergic neurons in
the mammalian brain are largely unknown. We report here that Rbpj, a key nuclear 
effector in the Notch signaling pathway, plays an essential role in LC neuron
development in the mouse. Conditional inactivation of Rbpj in the dorsal
rhombomere (r) 1, where LC neurons are born, resulted in a dramatic increase in
the number of Phox2a- and Phox2b-expressing early-differentiating LC neurons, and
dopamine-ß-hydroxylase- and tyrosine-hydroxylase-expressing late-differentiating 
LC neurons. In contrast, other neuronal populations derived from the dorsal r1
were either reduced or unchanged. In addition, a drastic upregulation of Ascl1,
an essential factor for noradrenergic neurogenesis, was observed in dorsal r1 of 
conditional knockout mice. Through genomic sequence analysis and EMSA and ChIP
assays, a conserved Rbpj-binding motif was identified within the Ascl1 promoter. 
A luciferase reporter assay revealed that Rbpj per se could induce Ascl1
transactivation but this effect was counteracted by its downstream-targeted gene 
Hes1. Moreover, our in vitro gene transfection and in ovo electroporation assays 
showed that Rbpj upregulated Ascl1 expression when Hes1 expression was knocked
down, although it also exerted a repressive effect on Ascl1 expression in the
presence of Hes1. Thus, our results provide the first evidence that Rbpj
functions as a key modulator of LC neuron development by regulating Ascl1
expression directly, and indirectly through its target gene Hes1.

PMID: 22718343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Glia. 2012 Oct;60(10):1495-505. doi: 10.1002/glia.22369. Epub 2012 Jun 19.

The identification of transcriptional targets of Ascl1 in oligodendrocyte
development.

Ueno T(1), Ito J, Hoshikawa S, Ohori Y, Fujiwara S, Yamamoto S, Ohtsuka T,
Kageyama R, Akai M, Nakamura K, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation for the Movement Functions, Research Institute,
National Rehabilitation Center for Persons with Disabilities, Saitama, Japan.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Ascl1 plays crucial roles 
in both oligodendrocyte development and neuronal development; however, the
molecular target of Ascl1 in oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) remains
elusive. To identify the downstream targets of Ascl1 in OPCs, we performed gene
expression microarray analysis and identified Hes5 as a putative downstream
target of Ascl1. In vivo analysis revealed that Ascl1 and Hes5 were coexpressed
in early developmental oligodendrocytes in both the telencephalon and the ventral
spinal cord. We also found that Hes5 expression was reduced in the OPCs of Ascl1 
mutant mice. Furthermore, we demonstrated that Ascl1 directly binds to an E-box
region within the Hes5 promoter and regulates Hes5 expression at the
transcriptional level. Taken together, these in vivo and in vitro data suggest
that Ascl1 induces Hes5 expression in a cell-autonomous manner. Considering the
previously known function of Hes5 as a repressor of Ascl1, our data indicate that
Hes5 is involved in the negative feedback regulation of Ascl1.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22714260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Int J Obes (Lond). 2013 May;37(5):678-84. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2012.91. Epub 2012 Jun
5.

Liraglutide improves hippocampal synaptic plasticity associated with increased
expression of Mash1 in ob/ob mice.

Porter WD(1), Flatt PR, Hölscher C, Gault VA.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Group, The SAAD Centre for Pharmacy and Diabetes, School of 
Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulster, Coleraine, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Consumption of high-fat diet exerts adverse effects on learning and
memory formation, which is linked to impaired hippocampal function. Activation of
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) signalling ameliorates detrimental effects of
obesity-diabetes on cognitive function; however, mechanisms underlying these
beneficial actions remain unclear. This study examined effects of daily
subcutaneous treatment with GLP-1 mimetic, Liraglutide, on synaptic plasticity,
hippocampal gene expression and metabolic control in adult obese diabetic (ob/ob)
mice.
RESULTS: Long-term potentiation (LTP) induced by area CA1 was completely
abolished in ob/ob mice compared with lean controls. Deleterious effects on LTP
were rescued (P<0.001) with Liraglutide. Indeed, Liraglutide-treated mice
exhibited superior LTP profile compared with lean controls (P<0.01). Expression
of hippocampal brain-derived neurotropic factor and neurotrophic tyrosine kinase 
receptor-type 2 were not significantly different, but synaptophysin and Mash1
were decreased in ob/ob mice. Treatment with Liraglutide over 21 days increased
expression of Mash1 in ob/ob mice (2.0-fold; P<0.01). These changes were
associated with significantly reduced plasma glucose (21% reduction; P<0.05) and 
markedly improved plasma insulin concentrations (2.1- to 3.3-fold; P<0.05 to
P<0.01). Liraglutide also significantly reduced the glycaemic excursion following
an intraperitonal glucose load (area under curve (AUC) values: 22%; P<0.05) and
markedly enhanced the insulin response to glucose (AUC values: 1.6-fold; P<0.05).
O2 consumption, CO2 production, respiratory exchange ratio and energy expenditure
were not altered by Liraglutide therapy. On day 21, accumulated food intake (32% 
reduction; P<0.05) and number of feeding bouts (32% reduction; P<0.05) were
significantly reduced but simple energy restriction was not responsible for the
beneficial actions of Liraglutide.
CONCLUSION: Liraglutide elicits beneficial effects on metabolic control and
synaptic plasticity in mice with severe obesity and insulin resistance mediated
in part through increased expression of Mash1 believed to improve hippocampal
neurogenesis and cell survival.

PMID: 22665137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Sep 10;318(15):1877-88. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.05.005. Epub
2012 May 30.

YAP regulates neuronal differentiation through Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway.

Lin YT(1), Ding JY, Li MY, Yeh TS, Wang TW, Yu JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112, Taiwan.

Tight regulation of cell numbers by controlling cell proliferation and apoptosis 
is important during development. Recently, the Hippo pathway has been shown to
regulate tissue growth and organ size in Drosophila. In mammalian cells, it also 
affects cell proliferation and differentiation in various tissues, including the 
nervous system. Interplay of several signaling cascades, such as Notch, Wnt, and 
Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) pathways, control cell proliferation during neuronal
differentiation. However, it remains unclear whether the Hippo pathway
coordinates with other signaling cascades in regulating neuronal differentiation.
Here, we used P19 cells, a mouse embryonic carcinoma cell line, as a model to
study roles of YAP, a core component of the Hippo pathway, in neuronal
differentiation. P19 cells can be induced to differentiate into neurons by
expressing a neural bHLH transcription factor gene Ascl1. Our results showed that
YAP promoted cell proliferation and inhibited neuronal differentiation.
Expression of Yap activated Shh but not Wnt or Notch signaling activity during
neuronal differentiation. Furthermore, expression of Yap increased the expression
of Patched homolog 1 (Ptch1), a downstream target of the Shh signaling. Knockdown
of Gli2, a transcription factor of the Shh pathway, promoted neuronal
differentiation even when Yap was over-expressed. We further demonstrated that
over-expression of Yap inhibited neuronal differentiation in primary mouse
cortical progenitors and Gli2 knockdown rescued the differentiation defect in Yap
over-expressing cells. In conclusion, our study reveals that Shh signaling acts
downstream of YAP in regulating neuronal differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22659622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Hum Genet. 2012 Aug;57(8):485-93. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.54. Epub 2012 May 31.

Hirschsprung's disease and variants in genes that regulate enteric neural crest
cell proliferation, migration and differentiation.

Carter TC(1), Kay DM, Browne ML, Liu A, Romitti PA, Kuehn D, Conley MR, Caggana
M, Druschel CM, Brody LC, Mills JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Human Services, Division of Epidemiology, Statistics,
and Prevention Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, 
USA.

Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR) results from failed colonization of the embryonic
gut by enteric neural crest cells (ENCCs); colonization requires RET
proto-oncogene (RET) signaling. We sequenced RET to identify coding and
splice-site variants in a population-based case group and we tested for
associations between HSCR and common variants in RET and candidate genes (ASCL1, 
homeobox B5 (HOXB5), L1 cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM), paired-like homeobox 2b
(PHOX2B), PROK1 and PROKR1) chosen because they are involved in ENCC
proliferation, migration and differentiation in animal models. We conducted a
nested case-control study of 304 HSCR cases and 1215 controls. Among 38 (12.5%)
cases with 34 RET coding and splice-site variants, 18 variants were previously
unreported. We confirmed associations with common variants in HOXB5 and PHOX2B
but the associations with variants in ASCL1, L1CAM and PROK1 were not significant
after multiple comparisons adjustment. RET variants were strongly associated with
HSCR (P-values between 10(-3) and 10(-31)) but this differed by race/ethnicity:
associations were absent in African-Americans. Our population-based study not
only identified novel RET variants in HSCR cases, it showed that common RET
variants may not contribute to HSCR in all race/ethnic groups. The findings for
HOXB5 and PHOX2B provide supportive evidence that genes regulating ENCC
proliferation, migration and differentiation could be risk factors for HSCR.

PMCID: PMC3503526
PMID: 22648184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Neurochem. 2012 Aug;122(3):594-604. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07795.x. Epub
2012 Jun 12.

Bone morphogenetic protein 2 inhibits neurite outgrowth of motor neuron-like
NSC-34 cells and up-regulates its type II receptor.

Benavente F(1), Pinto C, Parada M, Henríquez JP, Osses N.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química, Facultad de Ciencias, Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Valparaíso, Chile.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) regulate several aspects of neuronal behavior.
For instance, BMP-2 has the ability to modulate, either positively or negatively,
the outgrowth of neuronal processes in diverse cell types. In Drosophila motor
neurons, the BMP type II receptor (BMPRII) homolog wishful thinking plays crucial
roles on neuromuscular synaptogenesis signaling through Smad-dependent and
Smad-independent pathways. However, a role for BMP signaling at the vertebrate
neuromuscular junction has not been addressed. Herein, we have analyzed the
expression of BMPRII and the effect of BMP-2 during the morphological
differentiation of motor neuron-like NSC-34 cells. Our data indicate that BMPRII 
is up-regulated and becomes accumulated in somas and growth cones upon motor
neuronal differentiation. BMP-2 inhibits the differentiation of NSC-34 cells, an 
effect that correlates with activation of a Smad-dependent pathway, induction of 
the inhibitory Id1 transcription factor, and down-regulation of the neurogenic
factor Mash1. BMP-2 also activates effectors of Smad-independent pathways.
Remarkably, BMP-2 treatment significantly increases the expression of BMPRII. Our
findings provide the first evidence to suggest a role for BMP pathways on the
differentiation of motor neurons leading to successful assembly and/or
regeneration of the vertebrate neuromuscular synapse.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2012 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 22612292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Jun 27;520(1):26-31. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.05.016. Epub 
2012 May 11.

The dynamic expression of Mash1 in the hippocampal subgranular zone after
fimbria-fornix transection.

Dong C(1), Zhao H, Chen W, Wang L, Zhang L, Zhang X, Shi J, Li H, Jin G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, the Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Neuroregeneration, Nantong University, People's Republic of China.

Mash1, a member of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor family,
has previously been considered essential for neuronal differentiation and
specification in the nervous system. In this study, we investigated the
expression of Mash1 in the hippocampus after fimbria-fornix (FF) transection.
Western blot showed that protein of Mash1 increased significantly and peaked at
day 7 after FF transection. Immunofluorescence indicated that after FF
transection, more newborn cells differentiated into Mash1 positive cells in the
deafferented side than that in the normal side, and we investigated that in the
neurogenic area, subgranular zone (SGZ), a part of Mash1 positive cells were NeuN
positive, and more Mash1/NeuN double positive neurons were identified in the
deafferented side than that in the normal side. Additionally, the number of
Mash1/NeuN double positive neurons in SGZ increased significantly and peaked at
day 7 after FF transection. In vitro, immunofluorescence revealed that extracts
of the deafferented hippocampus promoted neuronal differentiation to a greater
extent than extracts from normal hippocampus. Deafferented extracts also enhanced
Mash1 expression in MAP-2 positive neurons. This study concludes that after FF
transection, Mash1 expression in the deafferented hippocampus increased and might
play an important role in inducing local progenitors to differentiate into
neurons.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22583763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Hepatology. 2012 Sep;56(3):1129-39. doi: 10.1002/hep.25754.

Histone methyltransferase ASH1 orchestrates fibrogenic gene transcription during 
myofibroblast transdifferentiation.

Perugorria MJ(1), Wilson CL, Zeybel M, Walsh M, Amin S, Robinson S, White SA,
Burt AD, Oakley F, Tsukamoto H, Mann DA, Mann J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Transdifferentiation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) to a myofibroblast-like
phenotype is the pivotal event in liver fibrosis. The dramatic change in
phenotype associated with transdifferentiation is underpinned by a global change 
in gene expression. Orchestrated changes in gene expression take place at the
level of chromatin packaging which is regulated by enzymatic activity of
epigenetic regulators that in turn affect histone modifications. Using expression
profiling of epigenetic regulators in quiescent and activated primary HSCs we
found a number of histone methyltransferases including MLL1, MLL5, Set1 and ASH1 
to be highly up-regulated during transdifferentiation of HSCs. All of these
histone methyltransferases regulate methylation of lysine 4 of histone H3, which 
is a signature of actively transcribed genes. We therefore postulated that one or
more of these enzymes may be involved in positively influencing expression of
profibrogenic genes.CONCLUSION: We find that ASH1 directly binds to the
regulatory regions of alpha smooth muscle actin (aSMA), collagen I, tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP1) and transforming growth factor beta1
(TGFß1) in activated HSCs while depletion of ASH1 caused broad suppression of
fibrogenic gene expression. We also discovered that MeCP2 positively regulates
ASH1 expression and therefore identify ASH1 as a key transcriptional activator
component of the MeCP2 epigenetic relay pathway that orchestrates coordinated
induction of multiple profibrogenic genes.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3430805
PMID: 22488473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34762. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034762. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

Hoxb1 controls anteroposterior identity of vestibular projection neurons.

Chen Y(1), Takano-Maruyama M, Fritzsch B, Gaufo GO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas,
United States of America.

The vestibular nuclear complex (VNC) consists of a collection of sensory relay
nuclei that integrates and relays information essential for coordination of eye
movements, balance, and posture. Spanning the majority of the hindbrain alar
plate, the rhombomere (r) origin and projection pattern of the VNC have been
characterized in descriptive works using neuroanatomical tracing. However,
neither the molecular identity nor developmental regulation of individual nucleus
of the VNC has been determined. To begin to address this issue, we found that
Hoxb1 is required for the anterior-posterior (AP) identity of precursors that
contribute to the lateral vestibular nucleus (LVN). Using a gene-targeted
Hoxb1-GFP reporter in the mouse, we show that the LVN precursors originate
exclusively from r4 and project to the spinal cord in the stereotypic pattern of 
the lateral vestibulospinal tract that provides input into spinal motoneurons
driving extensor muscles of the limb. The r4-derived LVN precursors express the
transcription factors Phox2a and Lbx1, and the glutamatergic marker Vglut2, which
together defines them as dB2 neurons. Loss of Hoxb1 function does not alter the
glutamatergic phenotype of dB2 neurons, but alters their stereotyped spinal cord 
projection. Moreover, at the expense of Phox2a, the glutamatergic determinants
Lmx1b and Tlx3 were ectopically expressed by dB2 neurons. Our study suggests that
the Hox genes determine the AP identity and diversity of vestibular precursors,
including their output target, by coordinating the expression of neurotransmitter
determinant and target selection properties along the AP axis.

PMCID: PMC3317634
PMID: 22485187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Theriogenology. 2012 Jul 1;78(1):12-27. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2011.12.031. Epub 2012 Mar 29.

Effect of supplementation with different fat sources on the mechanisms involved
in reproductive performance in lactating dairy cattle.

Hutchinson IA(1), Hennessy AA, Waters SM, Dewhurst RJ, Evans AC, Lonergan P,
Butler ST.

Author information: 
(1)Teagasc, Animal and Grassland Research and Innovation Centre, Moorepark,
Fermoy, Co. Cork, Ireland.

Supplementary fat positively influences reproductive performance in dairy cattle,
although the mechanisms involved are not clearly defined. Our objective was to
determine the effects of four different fat supplements on follicle development, 
plasma steroid hormone concentrations and prostaglandin (PG) synthesis in
lactating dairy cattle. Forty-eight early lactation Holstein-Friesian cows (21
primiparous, 27 multiparous) were used in a completely randomized block design.
Cows were fed the same basal TMR diet and received one of four fat supplements:
(i) palmitic acid (18:0 fatty acid; Control), (ii) flaxseed (rich in 18:3 n-3
fatty acid; Flax), (iii) conjugated linoleic acid (a mixture of cis-9, trans-11
and trans-10, cis-12 isomers; CLA), and (iv) fish oil (rich in 20:5 and 22:6 n-3 
fatty acids; FO). All lipid supplements were formulated to be isolipidic;
palmitic acid was added as necessary to provide a total lipid supplement intake
of 500 g/day. Cows were synchronized to be in estrus on Day 15 of dietary
treatment. All antral follicles were counted, and dominant follicles, subordinate
follicles and corpora lutea were measured daily via transrectal ovarian
ultrasonography for one complete estrous cycle. Blood samples were collected
daily, and selected samples were analyzed for progesterone, estradiol,
insulin-like growth factor-1, insulin, cholesterol and non-esterified fatty
acids. Estrus was synchronized a second time, and liver and endometrial biopsies 
were collected on Day 7 of the estrous cycle. Gene expression was evaluated for a
number of genes involved in prostaglandin synthesis (endometrium) and fatty acid 
uptake and utilization (liver). Fat supplementation had little effect on follicle
development. Cows receiving supplementary n-3 fatty acids had lesser plasma
progesterone (P4) and smaller corpora lutea than cows receiving the CLA or
Control supplements. Effects of fat supplementation on the endometrial expression
of genes involved in PG synthesis were minor. Hepatic expression of SREBF1, ASCL1
and FABP1 was reduced by FO supplementation. Reduced plasma P4 in n-3
supplemented cows may lead to a suboptimal uterine environment for embryo
development and hence reduced fertility compared to cows receiving the control or
CLA supplements.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22464816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 1;21(13):2873-88. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds112. Epub 2012 Mar 
28.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome-associated mutations in TCF4 lead to variable impairment of
the transcription factor function ranging from hypomorphic to dominant-negative
effects.

Sepp M(1), Pruunsild P, Timmusk T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee
15, Tallinn, Estonia.

Transcription factor TCF4 (alias ITF2, SEF2 or E2-2) is a broadly expressed basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein that functions as a homo- or heterodimer.
Missense, nonsense, frame-shift and splice-site mutations as well as
translocations and large deletions encompassing TCF4 gene cause Pitt-Hopkins
syndrome (PTHS), a rare developmental disorder characterized by severe motor and 
mental retardation, typical facial features and breathing anomalies. Irrespective
of the mutation, TCF4 haploinsufficiency has been proposed as an underlying
mechanism for PTHS. We have recently demonstrated that human TCF4 gene is
transcribed using numerous 5' exons. Here, we re-evaluated the impact of all the 
published PTHS-associated mutations, taking into account the diversity of TCF4
isoforms, and assessed how the reading frame elongating and missense mutations
affect TCF4 functions. Our analysis revealed that not all deletions and
truncating mutations in TCF4 result in complete loss-of-function and the impact
of reading frame elongating and missense mutations ranges from subtle
deficiencies to dominant-negative effects. We show that (i) missense mutations in
TCF4 bHLH domain and the reading frame elongating mutation damage DNA-binding and
transactivation ability in a manner dependent on dimer context (homodimer versus 
heterodimer with ASCL1 or NEUROD2); (ii) the elongating mutation and the missense
mutation at the dimer interface of the HLH domain destabilize the protein; and
(iii) missense mutations outside of the bHLH domain cause no major functional
deficiencies. We conclude that different PTHS-associated mutations impair the
functions of TCF4 by diverse mechanisms and to a varying extent, possibly
contributing to the phenotypic variability of PTHS patients.

PMID: 22460224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Pathol Int. 2012 Apr;62(4):232-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2011.02781.x. Epub
2012 Jan 13.

Differences of molecular expression mechanisms among neural cell adhesion
molecule 1, synaptophysin, and chromogranin A in lung cancer cells.

Kashiwagi K(1), Ishii J, Sakaeda M, Arimasu Y, Shimoyamada H, Sato H, Miyata C,
Kamma H, Aoki I, Yazawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine,
Yokohama, Japan.

Neural cell adhesion molecule 1 (NCAM1), synaptophysin (SYPT), and chromogranin A
(CGA) are immunohistochemical markers for diagnosing lung neuroendocrine tumors
(LNETs). However, the precise expression mechanisms have not been studied in
enough detail. The purpose of the present study is to define the molecular
mechanisms of NCAM1, SYPT, and CGA gene expressions, using cultivated lung cancer
cells and focusing upon NeuroD1 (ND1), achaete-scute homolog-like 1 (ASCL1), and 
known transcription factors, repressor element 1 (RE1)-silencing transcription
factor (REST) and c-AMP responsive element-binding protein (CREB). Promoter
assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and transfection experiments revealed that
ND1 activated NCAM1, that ASCL1 weakly upregulated SYPT expression, and that CGA 
expression was not regulated by ND1 or ASCL1. REST expression was restricted in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells, and knockdown of REST could cause as
much SYPT expression as in SCLC cells and weak CGA expression in NSCLC cells.
However, CGA gene upregulation via CREB activation was not found in REST-lacking 
NSCLC cells, indicating the requirement of some additional mechanism for
sufficient expression. These results suggest that NCAM1, SYPT and CGA expressions
are differently regulated by neuroendocrine phenotype-specific transcription
factors and provide a reason why NCAM1 and SYPT are frequently expressed in
LNETs, irrespective of malignancy grade.

© 2011 The Authors. Pathology International © 2011 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 22449227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Aug 1;318(13):1528-41. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.02.040. Epub 
2012 Mar 8.

Direct reprogramming of human astrocytes into neural stem cells and neurons.

Corti S(1), Nizzardo M, Simone C, Falcone M, Donadoni C, Salani S, Rizzo F,
Nardini M, Riboldi G, Magri F, Zanetta C, Faravelli I, Bresolin N, Comi GP.

Author information: 
(1)Dino Ferrari Centre, Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Milan,
IRCCS Foundation Ca'Granda Maggiore Hospital Policlinico, Milan, Italy.

Generating neural stem cells and neurons from reprogrammed human astrocytes is a 
potential strategy for neurological repair. Here we show dedifferentiation of
human cortical astrocytes into the neural stem/progenitor phenotype to obtain
progenitor and mature cells with a neural fate. Ectopic expression of the
reprogramming factors OCT4, SOX2, or NANOG into astrocytes in specific
cytokine/culture conditions activated the neural stem gene program and induced
generation of cells expressing neural stem/precursor markers. Pure CD44+ mature
astrocytes also exhibited this lineage commitment change and did not require
passing through a pluripotent state. These astrocyte-derived neural stem cells
gave rise to neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes and showed in vivo
engraftment properties. ASCL1 expression further promoted neuronal phenotype
acquisition in vitro and in vivo. Methylation analysis showed that epigenetic
modifications underlie this process. The restoration of multipotency from human
astrocytes has potential in cellular reprogramming of endogenous central nervous 
system cells in neurological disorders.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3405531
PMID: 22426197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Virchows Arch. 2012 Apr;460(4):415-21. doi: 10.1007/s00428-012-1223-1. Epub 2012 
Mar 16.

Human achaete-scute homolog-1 expression in neuroendocrine breast carcinoma.

Righi L(1), Rapa I, Votta A, Papotti M, Sapino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Turin at San
Luigi Hospital, Orbassano, Turin, Italy. luisella.righi@unito.it

Neuroendocrine (NE) breast carcinoma is defined by morphological features similar
to those of NE tumors of other organs and NE marker expression in at least 50 %
of neoplastic cells. However, a NE morphology may be observed even in breast
carcinomas lacking NE markers. Human achaete-scute homolog-1 (hASH-1) is a
transcription factor that plays a key role in the regulation of mammalian neural 
and NE cell development and has been identified in several human NE tumors. The
aim of this study was to investigate hASH-1 expression in human breast cancers.
hASH-1 expression was evaluated in 482 consecutive non-NE invasive breast
carcinomas, in a series of 84 breast cancers with >50 % NE marker expression
(high NE differentiation) and 21 carcinomas with NE histology but negative or
focally (<50 %) positive for NE markers (low NE differentiation). hASH-1 protein 
was evaluated by a specific monoclonal antibody using immunohistochemistry and
gene expression by real-time polymerase chain reaction. None of the non-NE
invasive breast carcinomas expressed hASH-1 at any levels. hASH-1 was expressed
in tumor cell nuclei of 63 and 38 % of cases with high and low NE
differentiation, respectively. Strong correlation with protein and gene
expression levels was observed (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). hASH-1 expression was correlated to 
a low mitotic count (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02) and a low Ki67 proliferative index (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0062).
hASH-1 expression occurs in breast cancers with NE differentiation regardless of 
the extent of the NE cell population, and it is restricted to a subset of tumor
cells having a low proliferative potential.

PMID: 22422124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Neurosci Res. 2012 Jun;90(6):1126-35. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23008. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Neuropeptide Y and peptide YY have distinct roles in adult mouse olfactory
neurogenesis.

Doyle KL(1), Hort YJ, Herzog H, Shine J.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research,
Darlinghurst, New South Wales, Australia; University of New South Wales, New
South Wales, Australia. k.doyle@garvan.org.au

Neuropeptide Y (NPY) and peptide YY (PYY) are differentially expressed throughout
the olfactory neuroepithelium (ON), with NPY expression present in sustentacular 
cells, olfactory ensheathing cells, and olfactory receptor neurons and PYY
expressed only in sustentacular cells. Examination of the anatomical morphology
of the ON in NPY knockout (NPY<U+207B>/<U+207B>) and PYY knockout (PYY<U+207B>/<U+207B>) mice shows that
there are significantly more neurons in PYY<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice and significantly fewer
neurons in NPY<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice. Interestingly, the mature neurons of NPY<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice were
undergoing apoptosis. The transcription factor Mash1, which is critical in the
production of olfactory precursors, is also differentially expressed in NPY<U+207B>/<U+207B>
and PYY<U+207B>/<U+207B> ON. It is upregulated in the neurons of NPY<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice and unchanged in
PYY<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice. Furthermore, significantly fewer olfactory neurospheres are present 
in cultures prepared from PYY<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice in the first 2 weeks compared with NPY<U+207B>/<U+207B>
and wild-type mice. Together these results suggest that, during olfactory
neurogenesis, NPY acts as a trophic factor for the maturation and survival of
olfactory receptor neurons, whereas PYY has an important role in the regulation
of olfactory neuron differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22354615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Biochem J. 2012 May 1;443(3):821-8. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111491.

Induction of NANOG expression by targeting promoter sequence with small
activating RNA antagonizes retinoic acid-induced differentiation.

Wang X(1), Wang J, Huang V, Place RF, Li LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA 94158, USA.

RNAa (RNA activation) is a mechanism by which small dsRNA (double-stranded RNA), 
termed saRNA (small activating RNA), target promoter sequences to induce gene
expression. This technique represents a novel approach to gene overexpression
without the use of exogenous DNA. In the present study, we investigated whether
RNAa can modulate expression of the development-related gene NANOG and manipulate
cell fate. Using a lentivirus-based reporter system as a screening tool, we
identified synthetic saRNAs that stimulate NANOG expression in human NCCIT
embryonic carcinoma cells. Mismatch mutations to saRNA duplexes define sequence
requirement for gene activation. Functional analysis of NANOG induction reveals
saRNA treatment predictably modulates the expression of several known downstream 
target genes, including FOXH1 (forkhead box H1), REST (RE1-silencing
transcription factor), OCT4 (octamer-binding protein 4) and REX1 (reduced
expression protein 1). Treatment with RA (retinoic acid) triggers NCCIT cell
differentiation, reducing NANOG and OCT4 expression and up-regulating several
neural markers [i.e. ASCL1 (achaete-scute complex homologue 1), NEUROD1 (neuronal
differentiation 1) and PAX6 (paired box 6)]. However, co-treatment with saRNA
antagonizes NANOG down-regulation and RA-induced differentiation. Ectopic
overexpression of NANOG via lentiviral transduction further recapitulates saRNA
results, providing proof-of-concept that RNAa may be utilized to activate
development-related genes and manipulate cell fate.

PMCID: PMC3327998
PMID: 22339500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Nat Commun. 2012 Feb 14;3:670. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1670.

Homeostatic neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus does not involve amplification 
of Ascl1(high) intermediate progenitors.

Lugert S(1), Vogt M, Tchorz JS, Müller M, Giachino C, Taylor V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stubeweg 51, Freiburg D-79108, Germany.

Neural stem/progenitor cells generate neurons in the adult hippocampus. Neural
stem cells produce transient intermediate progenitors (type-2 cells), which
generate neuroblasts (type-3 cells) that exit the cell cycle, and differentiate
into neurons. The precise dynamics of neuron production from the neural stem
cells remains controversial. Here we lineage trace Notch-dependent neural stem
cells in the dentate gyrus and show that over 7-21 days, the progeny of the
neural stem cells progress through an Ascl1(high) intermediate stage (type-2a) to
neuroblasts. However, contrary to predictions, this Ascl1(high) population is not
an amplifying intermediate, but it differentiates into mitotic Tbr2(+) early
neuroblasts, which in turn expand the lineage. After 100 days, the majority of
the neural stem cell progeny are neuroblasts or postmitotic neurons. Hence, the
neural stem cells require many weeks to generate differentiated neurons. On the
basis of this temporal delay in differentiation and population expansion, we
propose that the neural stem cell and early neuroblast divisions drive dentate
gyrus neurogenesis and not the amplification of type-2a intermediate progenitors 
as was previously thought.

PMID: 22334073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. BMC Neurosci. 2012 Jan 6;13:6. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-13-6.

Differential effects of AdOx on gene expression in P19 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Yan L(1), Zhao HY, Zhang Y, Shen YF.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, 5 Dongdan Santiao, Beijing
100005, China.

BACKGROUND: Pluripotent cells maintain a unique gene expression pattern and
specific chromatin signature. In this study, we explored the effect of the
methyltransferase inhibitor adenosine dialdehyde (AdOx) on pluripotency
maintenance and gene expression in P19 embryonal carcinoma cells.
RESULTS: After AdOx treatment, the pluripotency-related gene network became
disordered, and the early developmental genes were released from the repression. 
Remarkably, AdOx caused contrasting effects on the expression of two key
pluripotency genes, nanog and oct3/4, with the reduction of the repressive
histone marks H3K27me3, H3K9me3 and H3K9me2 only in the nanog gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Key pluripotency genes were controlled by different mechanisms,
including the differential enrichment of repressive histone methylation marks.
These data provided novel clues regarding the critical role of histone
methylation in the maintenance of pluripotency and the determination of cell fate
in P19 pluripotent cells.

PMCID: PMC3276442
PMID: 22221422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28719. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028719. Epub 2011 Dec 9.

Efficient conversion of astrocytes to functional midbrain dopaminergic neurons
using a single polycistronic vector.

Addis RC(1), Hsu FC, Wright RL, Dichter MA, Coulter DA, Gearhart JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute for Regenerative
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America. raddis@mail.med.upenn.edu

Direct cellular reprogramming is a powerful new tool for regenerative medicine.
In efforts to understand and treat Parkinson's Disease (PD), which is marked by
the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the midbrain, direct reprogramming
provides a valuable new source of these cells. Astrocytes, the most plentiful
cells in the central nervous system, are an ideal starting population for the
direct generation of dopaminergic neurons. In addition to their potential utility
in cell replacement therapies for PD or in modeling the disease in vitro,
astrocyte-derived dopaminergic neurons offer the prospect of direct in vivo
reprogramming within the brain. As a first step toward this goal, we report the
reprogramming of astrocytes to dopaminergic neurons using three transcription
factors - ASCL1, LMX1B, and NURR1 - delivered in a single polycistronic
lentiviral vector. The process is efficient, with 18.2±1.5% of cells expressing
markers of dopaminergic neurons after two weeks. The neurons exhibit expression
profiles and electrophysiological characteristics consistent with midbrain
dopaminergic neurons, notably including spontaneous pacemaking activity,
stimulated release of dopamine, and calcium oscillations. The present study is
the first demonstration that a single vector can mediate reprogramming to
dopaminergic neurons, and indicates that astrocytes are an ideal starting
population for the direct generation of dopaminergic neurons.

PMCID: PMC3235158
PMID: 22174877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2012 Feb;44(2):177-82. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmr110. Epub 2011 Dec 15.

miR-375 is highly expressed and possibly transactivated by achaete-scute complex 
homolog 1 in small-cell lung cancer cells.

Zhao H(1), Zhu L, Jin Y, Ji H, Yan X, Zhu X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, China.

In this study, we identified five miRNAs highly expressed in the small-cell lung 
cancer (SCLC) cell line NCI-H209. Among them, the expression levels of miR-375
were dramatically elevated in all SCLC cell lines examined, coincident with the
expression of the transcription factor achaete-scute complex homolog 1 (ASCL1).
Moreover, miR-375 was upregulated and correlated with ASCL1 in the cell lines
generated from mouse SCLC-like tumors as well. Dual-luciferase assays further
showed that ASCL1 activated the expression of miR-375 by binding to the three
E-box elements in the miR-375 promoter. These results imply a role of ASCL1 in
SCLC via the upregulation of miR-375.

PMID: 22172490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Cell Sci. 2011 Dec 1;124(Pt 23):4051-63. doi: 10.1242/jcs.088120. Epub 2011 Dec
8.

Dermatan sulfotransferase Chst14/D4st1, but not chondroitin sulfotransferase
Chst11/C4st1, regulates proliferation and neurogenesis of neural progenitor
cells.

Bian S(1), Akyüz N, Bernreuther C, Loers G, Laczynska E, Jakovcevski I, Schachner
M.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Neurobiologie, Universitätskrankenhaus
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Universität Hamburg, Martinistr. 52, D-20246 Hamburg, Germany.

Chondroitin sulfates (CSs) and dermatan sulfates (DSs) are enriched in the
microenvironment of neural stem cells (NSCs) during development and in the adult 
neurogenic niche, and have been implicated in mechanisms governing neural
precursor migration, proliferation and differentiation. In contrast to previous
studies, in which a chondroitinaseABC-dependent unselective deglycosylation of
both CSs and DSs was performed, we used chondroitin 4-O-sulfotransferase-1
(Chst11/C4st1)- and dermatan 4-O-sulfotransferase-1 (Chst14/D4st1)-deficient NSCs
specific for CSs and DSs, respectively, to investigate the involvement of
specific sulfation profiles of CS and DS chains, and thus the potentially
distinct roles of CSs and DSs in NSC biology. In comparison to wild-type
controls, deficiency for Chst14 resulted in decreased neurogenesis and diminished
proliferation of NSCs accompanied by increased expression of GLAST and decreased 
expression of Mash-1, and an upregulation of the expression of the receptors for 
fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) and epidermal growth factor (EGF). By
contrast, deficiency in Chst11 did not influence NSC proliferation, migration or 
differentiation. These observations indicate for the first time that CSs and DSs 
play distinct roles in the self-renewal and differentiation of NSCs.

PMID: 22159417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;814:485-98. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-452-0_32.

Reprogramming of postnatal astroglia of the mouse neocortex into functional,
synapse-forming neurons.

Heinrich C(1), Götz M, Berninger B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany.

Direct conversion of glia into neurons by cellular reprogramming represents a
novel approach toward a cell-based therapy of neurodegenerative processes. Here
we describe a protocol that allows for the direct and efficient in vitro
reprogramming of mouse astroglia from the early postnatal neocortex by forced
expression of single neurogenic fate determinants. By selective
retrovirus-mediated expression of neurogenin-2 (Neurog2) on the one hand, or the 
mouse homologue of Distal-less Dlx2 or the mammalian homologue of
achaete-schute-1 (Mash1) on the other, it is possible to drive postnatal
astroglia in culture toward the genesis of fully functional, synapse-forming,
glutamatergic, i.e., excitatory, and GABAergic, i.e., inhibitory, neurons,
respectively.

PMID: 22144327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Aug 10;21(12):2239-51. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0607. Epub 2012
Jan 26.

Helios transcription factor expression depends on Gsx2 and Dlx1&2 function in
developing striatal matrix neurons.

Martín-Ibáñez R(1), Crespo E, Esgleas M, Urban N, Wang B, Waclaw R, Georgopoulos 
K, Martínez S, Campbell K, Vicario-Abejón C, Alberch J, Chan S, Kastner P,
Rubenstein JL, Canals JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Immunology and Neuroscience, and Cell Therapy
Program, Faculty of Medicine, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i
Sunyer-IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Development of the nervous system is finely regulated by consecutive expression
of cell-specific transcription factors. Here we show that Helios, a member of the
Ikaros transcription factor family, is expressed in ectodermal and
neuroectodermal-derived tissues. During embryonic development, Helios is
expressed by several brain structures including the lateral ganglionic eminence
(LGE, the striatal anlage); the cingulated, insular and retrosplenial cortex; the
hippocampus; and the accessory olfactory bulb. Moreover, Helios is also expressed
by Purkinje neurons during postnatal cerebellar development. Within the LGE,
Helios expression follows a dynamic spatio-temporal pattern starting at embryonic
stages (E14.5), peaking at E18.5, and completely disappearing during postnatal
development. Helios is expressed by a small population of nestin-positive neural 
progenitor cells located in the subventricular zone as well as by a larger
population of immature neurons distributed throughout the mantle zone. In the
later, Helios is preferentially expressed in the matrix compartment, where it
colocalizes with Bcl11b and Foxp1, well-known markers of striatal projection
neurons. In addition, we observed that Helios expression is not detected in
Dlx1/2 and Gsx2 null mutants, while its expression is maintained in Ascl1
mutants. These findings allow us to introduce a new transcription factor in the
cascade of events that take part of striatal development postulating the
existence of at least 4 different neural progenitors in the LGE. An
Ascl1-independent but Gsx2- & Dlx1/2-dependent precursor will express Helios
defining a new lineage for a subset of matrix striatal neurons.

PMCID: PMC3411368
PMID: 22142223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Thorac Oncol. 2012 Jan;7(1):105-14. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3182352a45.

Expression profiling-based subtyping identifies novel non-small cell lung cancer 
subgroups and implicates putative resistance to pemetrexed therapy.

Hou J(1), Lambers M, den Hamer B, den Bakker MA, Hoogsteden HC, Grosveld F,
Hegmans J, Aerts J, Philipsen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: A challenge of cancer therapy is to optimize therapeutical options 
to individual patients. Cancers with similar histology may show dramatically
different responses to therapy, indicating that a refined approach needs to be
developed to classify tumors by intrinsic characteristics that may predict
response to chemotherapy. Global expression profile-based classification has the 
potential to identify such tumor-intrinsic subclasses. Pemetrexed effectiveness
has been related to the expression of its target thymidylate synthase. The
relatively frequent resistance of squamous cell carcinoma to Pemetrexed is
correlated with high levels of thymidylate synthase expression.
METHODS: A global expression profile-based molecular classification of non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) was performed. Gene expression was used to predict
Pemetrexed responsiveness. The distinct molecular attributes of NSCLCs predicted 
likely to be resistant to Pemetrexed were bioinformatically characterized. We
tested if routine immunohistochemical markers can be used to distinguish putative
Pemetrexed responders, predicted by gene signatures, from nonresponders.
RESULTS: Ninety NSCLCs were divided into six subclasses by gene expression
signatures. The relevance of this novel phenotyping was linked to other tumor
characteristics. Two of the subclasses correlated to putative Pemetrexed
resistance. In addition, the identified signature genes characterizing putative
Pemetrexed responsiveness predicted therapeutic benefit in a subset of squamous
cell carcinoma.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene expression signatures can be used to identify NSCLC subgroups
and have potential to predict resistance to Pemetrexed therapy. We suggest that a
combination of classical pathological markers can be used to identify molecular
tumor subclasses associated with predicted Pemetrexed response.

PMID: 22134068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Eur J Neurosci. 2011 Dec;34(12):1906-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07922.x.
Epub 2011 Dec 2.

The genetic signature of perineuronal oligodendrocytes reveals their unique
phenotype.

Szuchet S(1), Nielsen JA, Lovas G, Domowicz MS, de Velasco JM, Maric D, Hudson
LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, 5841 S Maryland Ave., The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. szuchet@neurology.bsd.uchicago.edu

Oligodendrocytes--best known for assembling central nervous system myelin--can be
categorized as precursors, myelin-forming cells and non-myelinating perineuronal 
cells. Perineuronal oligodendrocytes have been well characterized morphologically
and ultrastructurally, but knowledge about their function remains scanty. It has 
been proposed that perineuronal oligodendrocytes support neurons and, following
injury, transform into myelin-synthesizing cells. Recent findings implicating
perineuronal oligodendrocytes in cytoarchitectural abnormalities in the
prefrontal cortex of schizophrenia and other psychiatric disorders shed new light
on these cells. We have obtained the genetic signature of perineuronal
oligodendrocytes by identifying gene expression differences between
oligodendrocyte subpopulations using cell-specific tags, microarray technology,
quantitative time-resolved polymerase chain reaction and bioinformatics tools. We
show that perineuronal cells are the progeny of oligodendrocyte progenitors and, 
hence, are members of the oligodendrocyte lineage. Physiologically they exhibit a
novel phenotype. Their expression of PDGFR-aß and its growth factor ligand
PDGF-CC sets them apart from members of their lineage as this receptor precludes 
their response to the same growth factors that act on myelinating cells. Their
coordinate expression and context-specific usage of transcription factors Olig2, 
Ascl1 and Pax6, together with the prominent presence of transcription factors
Pea3, Lhx2 and Otx2--not hitherto linked to the oligodendrocyte
lineage--suggested a cell with features that blur the boundary between a neuron
and a glial cell. But they also maintain a reservoir of untranslated transcripts 
encoding major myelin proteins presumably for a demyelinating episode. This first
molecular characterization of perineuronal oligodendrocytes revealed the striking
difference between the myelinating and non-myelinating phenotypes.

© 2011 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience © 2011 Federation of
European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4286392
PMID: 22132705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cell Res. 2012 Feb;22(2):321-32. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.181. Epub 2011 Nov 22.

Direct reprogramming of human fibroblasts into dopaminergic neuron-like cells.

Liu X(1), Li F, Stubblefield EA, Blanchard B, Richards TL, Larson GA, He Y, Huang
Q, Tan AC, Zhang D, Benke TA, Sladek JR, Zahniser NR, Li CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Transplantation of exogenous dopaminergic neuron (DA neurons) is a promising
approach for treating Parkinson's disease (PD). However, a major stumbling block 
has been the lack of a reliable source of donor DA neurons. Here we show that a
combination of five transcriptional factors Mash1, Ngn2, Sox2, Nurr1, and Pitx3
can directly and effectively reprogram human fibroblasts into DA neuron-like
cells. The reprogrammed cells stained positive for various markers for DA
neurons. They also showed characteristic DA uptake and production properties.
Moreover, they exhibited DA neuron-specific electrophysiological profiles.
Finally, they provided symptomatic relief in a rat PD model. Therefore, our
directly reprogrammed DA neuron-like cells are a promising source of
cell-replacement therapy for PD.

PMCID: PMC3271588
PMID: 22105488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cell Cycle. 2011 Dec 1;10(23):4026-31. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.23.18578. Epub 2011 Dec
1.

Old and new functions of proneural factors revealed by the genome-wide
characterization of their transcriptional targets.

Castro DS(1), Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal. dscastro@igc.gulbenkian.pt

In the developing vertebrate nervous system, bHLH proneural factors such as Ascl1
are known to play important regulatory roles at different stages of the
neurogenic differentiation process. In spite of the wealth of information
gathered on the cellular functions of proneural factors, little was known of the 
molecular basis for their activities, and in particular of the identity of their 
target genes. The development of genomic approaches is making possible the
characterization of transcriptional programs at an unprecedented scale. Recently,
we have used a combination of genomic location analysis by ChIP-on-chip and
expression profiling in order to characterize the proneural transcription program
regulated by Ascl1 in the ventral telencephalon of the mouse embryonic brain. Our
results demonstrate that Ascl1 directly controls successive steps of neurogenesis
and provide a molecular frame for previously described Ascl1 functions. In
addition, we uncovered an important but previously unrecognized role for Ascl1 in
promoting the proliferation of neural progenitors. Here we discuss our recent
findings and review them in light of efforts from other laboratories to
characterize the transcriptional programs downstream various proneural factors.

PMCID: PMC3272285
PMID: 22101262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26543. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026543. Epub 2011 Oct 27.

Expression of sympathetic nervous system genes in Lamprey suggests their
recruitment for specification of a new vertebrate feature.

Häming D(1), Simoes-Costa M, Uy B, Valencia J, Sauka-Spengler T, Bronner-Fraser
M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California,
United States of America.

The sea lamprey is a basal, jawless vertebrate that possesses many neural crest
derivatives, but lacks jaws and sympathetic ganglia. This raises the possibility 
that the factors involved in sympathetic neuron differentiation were either a
gnathostome innovation or already present in lamprey, but serving different
purposes. To distinguish between these possibilities, we isolated lamprey
homologues of transcription factors associated with peripheral ganglion formation
and examined their deployment in lamprey embryos. We further performed DiI
labeling of the neural tube combined with neuronal markers to test if neural
crest-derived cells migrate to and differentiate in sites colonized by
sympathetic ganglia in jawed vertebrates. Consistent with previous anatomical
data in adults, our results in lamprey embryos reveal that neural crest cells
fail to migrate ventrally to form sympathetic ganglia, though they do form dorsal
root ganglia adjacent to the neural tube. Interestingly, however, paralogs of the
battery of transcription factors that mediate sympathetic neuron differentiation 
(dHand, Ascl1 and Phox2b) are present in the lamprey genome and expressed in
various sites in the embryo, but fail to overlap in any ganglionic structures.
This raises the intriguing possibility that they may have been recruited during
gnathostome evolution to a new function in a neural crest derivative.

PMCID: PMC3203141
PMID: 22046306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 1;361(1):103-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.017. Epub 2011
Oct 18.

Negative regulation of Yap during neuronal differentiation.

Zhang H(1), Deo M, Thompson RC, Uhler MD, Turner DL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience Institute, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Regulated proliferation and cell cycle exit are essential aspects of
neurogenesis. The Yap transcriptional coactivator controls proliferation in a
variety of tissues during development, and this activity is negatively regulated 
by kinases in the Hippo signaling pathway. We find that Yap is expressed in
mitotic mouse retinal progenitors and it is downregulated during neuronal
differentiation. Forced expression of Yap prolongs proliferation in the postnatal
mouse retina, whereas inhibition of Yap by RNA interference (RNAi) decreases
proliferation and increases differentiation. We show Yap is subject to
post-translational inhibition in the retina, and also downregulated at the level 
of mRNA expression. Using a cell culture model, we find that expression of the
proneural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors Neurog2 or Ascl1
downregulates Yap mRNA levels, and simultaneously inhibits Yap protein via
activation of the Lats1 and/or Lats2 kinases. Conversely, overexpression of Yap
prevents proneural bHLH proteins from initiating cell cycle exit. We propose that
mutual inhibition between proneural bHLH proteins and Yap is an important
regulator of proliferation and cell cycle exit during mammalian neurogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3235039
PMID: 22037235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Cancer Res. 2011 Oct 1;71(19):6165-73. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1020. Epub
2011 Aug 19.

miR-375 is activated by ASH1 and inhibits YAP1 in a lineage-dependent manner in
lung cancer.

Nishikawa E(1), Osada H, Okazaki Y, Arima C, Tomida S, Tatematsu Y, Taguchi A,
Shimada Y, Yanagisawa K, Yatabe Y, Toyokuni S, Sekido Y, Takahashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Center for Neurological Diseases and
Cancer, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

Lung cancers with neuroendocrine (NE) features are often very aggressive but the 
underlying molecular mechanisms remain elusive. The transcription factor
ASH1/ASCL1 is a master regulator of pulmonary NE cell development that is
involved in the pathogenesis of lung cancers with NE features (NE-lung cancers). 
Here we report the definition of the microRNA miR-375 as a key downstream
effector of ASH1 function in NE-lung cancer cells. miR-375 was markedly induced
by ASH1 in lung cancer cells where it was sufficient to induce NE
differentiation. miR-375 upregulation was a prerequisite for ASH1-mediated
induction of NE features. The transcriptional coactivator YAP1 was determined to 
be a direct target of miR-375. YAP1 showed a negative correlation with miR-375 in
a panel of lung cancer cell lines and growth inhibitory activities in NE-lung
cancer cells. Our results elucidate an ASH1 effector axis in NE-lung cancers that
is functionally pivotal in controlling NE features and the alleviation from
YAP1-mediated growth inhibition.

PMID: 21856745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Development. 2011 Oct;138(19):4131-42. doi: 10.1242/dev.065870. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

Activin and GDF11 collaborate in feedback control of neuroepithelial stem cell
proliferation and fate.

Gokoffski KK(1), Wu HH, Beites CL, Kim J, Kim EJ, Matzuk MM, Johnson JE, Lander
AD, Calof AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental & Cell Biology, University of California, Irvine, 
CA 92697, USA.

Studies of the olfactory epithelium model system have demonstrated that
production of neurons is regulated by negative feedback. Previously, we showed
that a locally produced signal, the TGFß superfamily ligand GDF11, regulates the 
genesis of olfactory receptor neurons by inhibiting proliferation of the
immediate neuronal precursors (INPs) that give rise to them. GDF11 is antagonized
by follistatin (FST), which is also produced locally. Here, we show that Fst(-/-)
mice exhibit dramatically decreased neurogenesis, a phenotype that can only be
partially explained by increased GDF11 activity. Instead, a second FST-binding
factor, activin ßB (ACTßB), inhibits neurogenesis by a distinct mechanism:
whereas GDF11 inhibits expansion of INPs, ACTßB inhibits expansion of stem and
early progenitor cells. We present data supporting the concept that these latter 
cells, previously considered two distinct types, constitute a dynamic
stem/progenitor population in which individual cells alternate expression of Sox2
and/or Ascl1. In addition, we demonstrate that interplay between ACTßB and GDF11 
determines whether stem/progenitor cells adopt a glial versus neuronal fate.
Altogether, the data indicate that the transition between stem cells and
committed progenitors is neither sharp nor irreversible and that GDF11, ACTßB and
FST are crucial components of a circuit that controls both total cell number and 
the ratio of neuronal versus glial cells in this system. Thus, our findings
demonstrate a close connection between the signals involved in the control of
tissue size and those that regulate the proportions of different cell types.

PMCID: PMC3171217
PMID: 21852401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Nature. 2011 Aug 10;476(7359):158-9. doi: 10.1038/476158a.

Regenerative medicine: Bespoke cells for the human brain.

Sendtner M.

Comment on
    Nature. 2011 Aug 11;476(7359):220-3.
    Nature. 2011 Aug 11;476(7359):228-31.
    Nature. 2011 Aug 11;476(7359):224-7.

PMID: 21833079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e22817. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022817. Epub 2011 Aug 2.

Genome-wide analysis of Müller glial differentiation reveals a requirement for
Notch signaling in postmitotic cells to maintain the glial fate.

Nelson BR(1), Ueki Y, Reardon S, Karl MO, Georgi S, Hartman BH, Lamba DA, Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, United States of America.

Previous studies have shown that Müller glia are closely related to retinal
progenitors; these two cell types express many of the same genes and after damage
to the retina, Müller glia can serve as a source for new neurons, particularly in
non-mammalian vertebrates. We investigated the period of postnatal retinal
development when progenitors are differentiating into Müller glia to better
understand this transition. FACS purified retinal progenitors and Müller glia
from various ages of Hes5-GFP mice were analyzed by Affymetrix cDNA microarrays. 
We found that genes known to be enriched/expressed by Müller glia steadily
increase over the first three postnatal weeks, while genes associated with the
mitotic cell cycle are rapidly downregulated from P0 to P7. Interestingly,
progenitor genes not directly associated with the mitotic cell cycle, like the
proneural genes Ascl1 and Neurog2, decline more slowly over the first 10-14 days 
of postnatal development, and there is a peak in Notch signaling several days
after the presumptive Müller glia have been generated. To confirm that Notch
signaling continues in the postmitotic Müller glia, we performed in situ
hybridization, immunolocalization for the active form of Notch, and
immunofluorescence for BrdU. Using genetic and pharmacological approaches, we
found that sustained Notch signaling in the postmitotic Müller glia is necessary 
for their maturation and the stabilization of the glial identity for almost a
week after the cells have exited the mitotic cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC3149061
PMID: 21829655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Neurosci. 2011 Jul 27;31(30):11055-69. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0479-11.2011.

Ascl1 genetics reveals insights into cerebellum local circuit assembly.

Sudarov A(1), Turnbull RK, Kim EJ, Lebel-Potter M, Guillemot F, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York
10065, USA.

Comment in
    Cerebellum. 2012 Dec;11(4):829-33.

Two recently generated targeted mouse alleles of the neurogenic gene Ascl1 were
used to characterize cerebellum circuit formation. First, genetic inducible fate 
mapping (GIFM) with an Ascl1(CreER) allele was found to specifically mark all
glial and neuron cell types that arise from the ventricular zone (vz). Moreover, 
each cell type has a unique temporal profile of marking with Ascl1(CreER) GIFM.
Of great utility, Purkinje cells (Pcs), an early cohort of Bergmann glia, and
four classes of GABAergic interneurons can be genetically birth dated during
embryogenesis using Ascl1(CreER) GIFM. Astrocytes and oligodendrocytes, in
contrast, express Ascl1(CreER) throughout their proliferative phase in the white 
matter. Interestingly, the final position each neuron type acquires differs
depending on when it expresses Ascl1. Interneurons (including candelabrum) attain
a more outside position the later they express Ascl1, whereas Pcs have distinct
settling patterns each day they express Ascl1. Second, using a conditional Ascl1 
allele, we discovered that Ascl1 is differentially required for generation of
most vz-derived cells. Mice lacking Ascl1 in the cerebellum have a major decrease
in three types of interneurons with a tendency toward a loss of later-born
interneurons, as well as an imbalance of oligodendrocytes and astrocytes.
Double-mutant analysis indicates that a related helix-loop-helix protein, Ptf1a, 
functions with Ascl1 in generating interneurons and Pcs. By fate mapping
vz-derived cells in Ascl1 mutants, we further discovered that Ascl1 plays a
specific role during the time period when Pcs are generated in restricting vz
progenitors from becoming rhombic lip progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3153985
PMID: 21795554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Neurosci. 2011 Jul 27;31(30):10948-70. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0323-11.2011.

A blueprint for the spatiotemporal origins of mouse hippocampal interneuron
diversity.

Tricoire L(1), Pelkey KA, Erkkila BE, Jeffries BW, Yuan X, McBain CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Neurobiology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Although vastly outnumbered, inhibitory interneurons critically pace and
synchronize excitatory principal cell populations to coordinate cortical
information processing. Precision in this control relies upon a remarkable
diversity of interneurons primarily determined during embryogenesis by genetic
restriction of neuronal potential at the progenitor stage. Like their neocortical
counterparts, hippocampal interneurons arise from medial and caudal ganglionic
eminence (MGE and CGE) precursors. However, while studies of the early
specification of neocortical interneurons are rapidly advancing, similar lineage 
analyses of hippocampal interneurons have lagged. A "hippocampocentric"
investigation is necessary as several hippocampal interneuron subtypes remain
poorly represented in the neocortical literature. Thus, we investigated the
spatiotemporal origins of hippocampal interneurons using transgenic mice that
specifically report MGE- and CGE-derived interneurons either constitutively or
inducibly. We found that hippocampal interneurons are produced in two neurogenic 
waves between E9-E12 and E12-E16 from MGE and CGE, respectively, and invade the
hippocampus by E14. In the mature hippocampus, CGE-derived interneurons primarily
localize to superficial layers in strata lacunosum moleculare and deep radiatum, 
while MGE-derived interneurons readily populate all layers with preference for
strata pyramidale and oriens. Combined molecular, anatomical, and
electrophysiological interrogation of MGE/CGE-derived interneurons revealed that 
MGE produces parvalbumin-, somatostatin-, and nitric oxide synthase-expressing
interneurons including fast-spiking basket, bistratified, axo-axonic,
oriens-lacunosum moleculare, neurogliaform, and ivy cells. In contrast,
CGE-derived interneurons contain cholecystokinin, calretinin, vasoactive
intestinal peptide, and reelin including non-fast-spiking basket, Schaffer
collateral-associated, mossy fiber-associated, trilaminar, and additional
neurogliaform cells. Our findings provide a basic blueprint of the developmental 
origins of hippocampal interneuron diversity.

PMCID: PMC3163481
PMID: 21795545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Development. 2011 Aug;138(16):3519-31. doi: 10.1242/dev.064006. Epub 2011 Jul 19.

Ascl1 expression defines a subpopulation of lineage-restricted progenitors in the
mammalian retina.

Brzezinski JA 4th(1), Kim EJ, Johnson JE, Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195, USA.

The mechanisms of cell fate diversification in the retina are not fully
understood. The seven principal cell types of the neural retina derive from a
population of multipotent progenitors during development. These progenitors give 
rise to multiple cell types concurrently, suggesting that progenitors are a
heterogeneous population. It is thought that differences in progenitor gene
expression are responsible for differences in progenitor competence (i.e.
potential) and, subsequently, fate diversification. To elucidate further the
mechanisms of fate diversification, we assayed the expression of three
transcription factors made by retinal progenitors: Ascl1 (Mash1), Ngn2 (Neurog2) 
and Olig2. We observed that progenitors were heterogeneous, expressing every
possible combination of these transcription factors. To determine whether this
progenitor heterogeneity correlated with different cell fate outcomes, we
conducted Ascl1- and Ngn2-inducible expression fate mapping using the CreER/LoxP
system. We found that these two factors gave rise to markedly different
distributions of cells. The Ngn2 lineage comprised all cell types, but retinal
ganglion cells (RGCs) were exceedingly rare in the Ascl1 lineage. We next
determined whether Ascl1 prevented RGC development. Ascl1-null mice had normal
numbers of RGCs and, interestingly, we observed that a subset of Ascl1+ cells
could give rise to cells expressing Math5 (Atoh7), a transcription factor
required for RGC competence. Our results link progenitor heterogeneity to
different fate outcomes. We show that Ascl1 expression defines a
competence-restricted progenitor lineage in the retina, providing a new mechanism
to explain fate diversification.

PMCID: PMC3143566
PMID: 21771810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Nature. 2011 Jul 13;476(7359):228-31. doi: 10.1038/nature10323.

MicroRNA-mediated conversion of human fibroblasts to neurons.

Yoo AS(1), Sun AX, Li L, Shcheglovitov A, Portmann T, Li Y, Lee-Messer C,
Dolmetsch RE, Tsien RW, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Developmental Biology,
Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA. yooa@wustl.edu

Comment in
    Nature. 2011 Aug 11;476(7359):158-9.

Neurogenic transcription factors and evolutionarily conserved signalling pathways
have been found to be instrumental in the formation of neurons. However, the
instructive role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in neurogenesis remains unexplored. We
recently discovered that miR-9* and miR-124 instruct compositional changes of
SWI/SNF-like BAF chromatin-remodelling complexes, a process important for
neuronal differentiation and function. Nearing mitotic exit of neural
progenitors, miR-9* and miR-124 repress the BAF53a subunit of the
neural-progenitor (np)BAF chromatin-remodelling complex. After mitotic exit,
BAF53a is replaced by BAF53b, and BAF45a by BAF45b and BAF45c, which are then
incorporated into neuron-specific (n)BAF complexes essential for post-mitotic
functions. Because miR-9/9* and miR-124 also control multiple genes regulating
neuronal differentiation and function, we proposed that these miRNAs might
contribute to neuronal fates. Here we show that expression of miR-9/9* and
miR-124 (miR-9/9*-124) in human fibroblasts induces their conversion into
neurons, a process facilitated by NEUROD2. Further addition of neurogenic
transcription factors ASCL1 and MYT1L enhances the rate of conversion and the
maturation of the converted neurons, whereas expression of these transcription
factors alone without miR-9/9*-124 was ineffective. These studies indicate that
the genetic circuitry involving miR-9/9*-124 can have an instructive role in
neural fate determination.

PMCID: PMC3348862
PMID: 21753754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Lung Cancer. 2012 Jan;75(1):119-25. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.05.028. Epub 2011
Jul 6.

ASCL1-coexpression profiling but not single gene expression profiling defines
lung adenocarcinomas of neuroendocrine nature with poor prognosis.

Fujiwara T(1), Hiramatsu M, Isagawa T, Ninomiya H, Inamura K, Ishikawa S,
Ushijima M, Matsuura M, Jones MH, Shimane M, Nomura H, Ishikawa Y, Aburatani H.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Division, Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology
(RCAST), The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Lung adenocarcinoma is heterogeneous regarding histology, etiology
and prognosis. Although there have been several attempts to find a subgroup with 
poor prognosis, it is unclear whether or not adenocarcinoma with neuroendocrine
(NE) nature has unfavorable prognosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To elucidate whether a subtype of adenocarcinoma with NE
nature has poor prognosis, we performed gene expression profiling by cDNA
microarray for 262 Japanese lung cancer and 30 normal lung samples, including 171
adenocarcinomas, 56 squamous cell carcinomas and 35 NE tumors. A co-expression
gene set with ASCL1, an NE master gene, was utilized to classify tumors by
non-negative matrix factorization, followed by validation using an ASCL1
knock-down gene set in DMS79 cells as well as an independent cohort (n=139)
derived from public microarray databases as a test set.
RESULTS: The co-expression gene set classified the adenocarcinomas into alveolar 
cell (AL), squamoid, and NE subtypes. The NE subtype, which clustered together
almost all the NE tumors, had significantly poorer prognosis than the AL subtype 
that clustered with normal lung samples (p=0.0075). The knock-down gene set also 
classified the 171 adenocarcinomas into three subtypes and this NE subtype also
had the poorest prognosis. The co-expression gene set classified the independent 
database-derived American cohort into two subtypes, with the NE subtype having
poorer prognosis. None of the single NE gene expression was found to be linked to
survival difference.
CONCLUSION: Co-expression gene set with ASCL1, rather than single NE gene
expression, successfully identifies an NE subtype of lung adenocarcinoma with
poor prognosis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21737174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Nature. 2011 Jul 3;476(7359):224-7. doi: 10.1038/nature10284.

Direct generation of functional dopaminergic neurons from mouse and human
fibroblasts.

Caiazzo M(1), Dell'Anno MT, Dvoretskova E, Lazarevic D, Taverna S, Leo D,
Sotnikova TD, Menegon A, Roncaglia P, Colciago G, Russo G, Carninci P, Pezzoli G,
Gainetdinov RR, Gustincich S, Dityatev A, Broccoli V.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cells and Neurogenesis Unit, Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele
Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    Nature. 2011 Aug 11;476(7359):158-9.

Transplantation of dopaminergic neurons can potentially improve the clinical
outcome of Parkinson's disease, a neurological disorder resulting from
degeneration of mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons. In particular,
transplantation of embryonic-stem-cell-derived dopaminergic neurons has been
shown to be efficient in restoring motor symptoms in conditions of dopamine
deficiency. However, the use of pluripotent-derived cells might lead to the
development of tumours if not properly controlled. Here we identified a minimal
set of three transcription factors--Mash1 (also known as Ascl1), Nurr1 (also
known as Nr4a2) and Lmx1a--that are able to generate directly functional
dopaminergic neurons from mouse and human fibroblasts without reverting to a
progenitor cell stage. Induced dopaminergic (iDA) cells release dopamine and show
spontaneous electrical activity organized in regular spikes consistent with the
pacemaker activity featured by brain dopaminergic neurons. The three factors were
able to elicit dopaminergic neuronal conversion in prenatal and adult fibroblasts
from healthy donors and Parkinson's disease patients. Direct generation of iDA
cells from somatic cells might have significant implications for understanding
critical processes for neuronal development, in vitro disease modelling and cell 
replacement therapies.

PMID: 21725324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Histol Histopathol. 2011 Aug;26(8):965-78.

Molecular and morphological characterization of neural tube defects in embryos of
diabetic Swiss Albino mice.

Loh WT(1), Dheen ST, Jiang B, Kumar SD, Tay SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore.

BACKGROUND AND RESULTS: Embryos from diabetic mice exhibit several forms of
neural tube defects, including non-closure of the neural tube. In the present
study, embryos collected at embryonic day 11.5 from diabetic pregnancies
displayed open neural tube with architectural disruption of the surrounding
tissues. The percentage of proliferating cells was found to be increased in the
dorsal and ventral domains of the spinal neural tube of embryos from diabetic
mice, indicating a defect in the proliferation index. We have analyzed the
development of various cell types, including motoneurons, interneurons,
oligodendrocytes and migrating neurons, as well as radial glial cells in the open
neural tube using specific molecular markers. Immunofluorescence results revealed
a significantly reduced number of Pax2+ interneurons and increased number of
Isl-1+ motoneurons, as well as Olig2+ oligodendrocytes in the neural tube of
embryos from diabetic mice as compared to controls. In addition, these embryos
exhibited a decreased number of doublecortin positive migrating neurons and
Glast/Blbp positive radial glial cells with shortened processes in the neural
tube. Expression levels of several developmental control genes involved in the
generation of different neuronal cell types (such as Shh, Ngn, Ngn2, Ascl1) were 
also found to be altered in the neural tube of embryos from diabetic mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the open neural tube in embryos of diabetic mice exhibits
defects in the specification of different cell types, including motoneurons and
interneurons, as well as glial cells along the dorsoventral axis of the
developing spinal cord. Although these defects are associated with altered
expression of several development control genes, the exact mechanisms by which
maternal diabetes contributes to these changes remain to be investigated.

PMID: 21692030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Lung Cancer. 2012 Jan;75(1):58-65. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.05.019.

Insights into the achaete-scute homolog-1 gene (hASH1) in normal and neoplastic
human lung.

Miki M(1), Ball DW, Linnoila RI.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Cancer Biology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Achaete-scute homolog-1 (ASH1) is pivotal for the development of pulmonary
neuroendocrine (NE) cells. We examined human ASH1 (hASH1) expression across a
comprehensive panel of human lung cancer cell lines, primary human lung tumors
and normal fetal and post-natal lungs. While hASH1 was a cardinal feature of NE
carcinomas, a subgroup of non-NE lung cancers also exhibited expression of this
factor. Twenty lung cancer cell lines out of 33 were positive for hASH1 mRNA by
reverse transcription PCR, including 6/6 small cell carcinomas (SCLC), 5/5
carcinoids, 6/7 non-SCLC with NE features, and 3/14 other non-SCLC. Among human
primary tumors, 2/2 SCLC, 5/5 pulmonary carcinoids, and 10/41 non-SCLC (only 4 of
which had NE features) were positive for hASH1 by immunohistochemistry and
RNA-RNA in situ hybridization. In normal human fetal lung, the expression of
hASH1 and the neural marker synaptophysin was highly concordant in
neuroepithelial bodies and solitary NE cells, while the rest of the epithelium
was negative. In childhood and adulthood, the markers became progressively
discordant, with a majority of hASH1-immunoreactive foci (69%) being negative for
synaptophysin in adults, potentially representing dormant NE cell progenitors. We
conclude that hASH1 provides an early indication of NE program in human lung.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 21684625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Neurosci. 2011 Jun 15;31(24):8748-59. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0681-11.2011.

DeltaNp63 regulates stem cell dynamics in the mammalian olfactory epithelium.

Packard A(1), Schnittke N, Romano RA, Sinha S, Schwob JE.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cell, Molecular and Developmental Biology, Sackler School of
Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

The ability of the olfactory epithelium (OE) to regenerate after injury is
mediated by at least two populations of presumed stem cells-globose basal cells
(GBCs) and horizontal basal cells (HBCs). Of the two, GBCs are molecularly and
phenotypically analogous to the olfactory progenitors of the embryonic placode
(OPPs). In contrast, HBCs are a reserve stem cell population that appears later
in development and requires activation by severe epithelial damage before
contributing to epithelial reconstitution. Neither HBC emergence nor the
mechanism of activation after injury is understood. Here we show that the
transcription factor p63 (Trp63), which is expressed selectively by adult HBCs,
is required for HBC differentiation. The first evidence of HBC differentiation is
the expression of p63 by cells that closely resemble embryonic OPPs and adult
GBCs by morphology and expression of the transcription factors Sox2, Ascl1, and
Hes1. HBC formation is delayed in Ascl1 knock-out OE and is completely abrogated 
in p63-null mice. Strikingly, other cell types of the OE form normally in the p63
knock-out OE. The role of p63 in HBC differentiation appears to be conserved in
the regenerating rat OE, where HBCs disappear and then reappear after tissue
lesion. Finally, p63 protein is downregulated in HBCs activated by lesion to
become multipotent progenitor cells. Together, our data identify a novel
mechanism for the generation of a reserve stem cell population and suggest that a
p63-dependent molecular switch is responsible for activating reserve stem cells
when they are needed.

PMCID: PMC3119859
PMID: 21677159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Cancer Res. 2011 Aug 1;71(15):5175-81. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-4407. Epub
2011 Jun 15.

Genetic variation in an miRNA-1827 binding site in MYCL1 alters susceptibility to
small-cell lung cancer.

Xiong F(1), Wu C, Chang J, Yu D, Xu B, Yuan P, Zhai K, Xu J, Tan W, Lin D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 
China.

Genetic variations in microRNAs (miRNA) that affect control of their target genes
may alter individual susceptibilities to cancer. In this study, we took an in
silico approach to identify single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) within the
3'-untranslated region (UTR) of miRNA genes deregulated in human small-cell lung 
cancer (SCLC), and then investigated their associations with SCLC susceptibility 
in 666 SCLC patients and 758 controls. Odds ratios (OR) were estimated by
multivariate logistic regression, and biochemical assays were conducted to
investigate SNP functions. We identified 2 SNPs, rs3134615 and rs2291854, which
were located in the 3'-UTR of the L-MYC gene MYCL1 and the neuronal development
Achaete-Scute Complex homolog ASCL1. Case-control analyses showed that the
rs3134615T allele was associated with a significantly increased risk of SCLC,
with the OR for carrying the GT or TT genotype being 2.08 (95% confidence
interval, 1.39-3.21; P = 0.0004) compared with the GG genotype. In support of the
likelihood that these 3'-UTR SNPs may directly affect miRNA-binding sites,
reporter gene assays indicated MYCL1 as the target of hsa-miR-1827 and the
rs3134615 G>T change resulted in altered regulation of MYCL1 expression. Our
findings define a 3'-UTR SNP in the human L-MYC oncogene that may increase
susceptibility to SCLC, possibly resulting from attenuated interaction with the
miRNA hsa-miR-1827.

PMID: 21676885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jun 21;108(25):10343-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1105135108. Epub 2011 Jun 6.

Direct conversion of human fibroblasts to dopaminergic neurons.

Pfisterer U(1), Kirkeby A, Torper O, Wood J, Nelander J, Dufour A, Björklund A,
Lindvall O, Jakobsson J, Parmar M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medical Science, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center,
Lund University, SE-221 84 Lund, Sweden.

Comment in
    Regen Med. 2011 Nov;6(6):685-7.

Recent reports demonstrate that somatic mouse cells can be directly converted to 
other mature cell types by using combined expression of defined factors. Here we 
show that the same strategy can be applied to human embryonic and postnatal
fibroblasts. By overexpression of the transcription factors Ascl1, Brn2, and
Myt1l, human fibroblasts were efficiently converted to functional neurons. We
also demonstrate that the converted neurons can be directed toward distinct
functional neurotransmitter phenotypes when the appropriate transcriptional cues 
are provided together with the three conversion factors. By combining expression 
of the three conversion factors with expression of two genes involved in dopamine
neuron generation, Lmx1a and FoxA2, we could direct the phenotype of the
converted cells toward dopaminergic neurons. Such subtype-specific induced
neurons derived from human somatic cells could be valuable for disease modeling
and cell replacement therapy.

PMCID: PMC3121829
PMID: 21646515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Neurochem. 2012 Mar;120(5):667-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07332.x. Epub 
2011 Jun 24.

Ascl1-induced neuronal differentiation of P19 cells requires expression of a
specific inhibitor protein of cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase.

Huang HS(1), Turner DL, Thompson RC, Uhler MD.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-2200, USA.

cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) plays a critical role in nervous system
development by modulating sonic hedgehog and bone morphogenetic protein
signaling. In the current studies, P19 embryonic carcinoma cells were neuronally 
differentiated by expression of the proneural basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor Ascl1. After expression of Ascl1, but prior to expression of
neuronal markers such as microtubule associated protein 2 and neuronal ß-tubulin,
P19 cells demonstrated a large, transient increase in both mRNA and protein for
the endogenous protein kinase inhibitor (PKI)ß. PKIß-targeted shRNA constructs
both reduced the levels of PKIß expression and blocked the neuronal
differentiation of P19 cells. This inhibition of differentiation was rescued by
transfection of a shRNA-resistant expression vector for the PKIß protein, and
this rescue required the PKA-specific inhibitory sequence of the PKIß protein.
PKIß played a very specific role in the Ascl1-mediated differentiation process as
other PKI isoforms were unable to rescue the deficit conferred by shRNA-mediated 
knockdown of PKIß. Our results define a novel requirement for PKIß and its
inhibition of PKA during neuronal differentiation of P19 cells.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMCID: PMC3363362
PMID: 21623794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Nature. 2011 May 26;476(7359):220-3. doi: 10.1038/nature10202.

Induction of human neuronal cells by defined transcription factors.

Pang ZP(1), Yang N, Vierbuchen T, Ostermeier A, Fuentes DR, Yang TQ, Citri A,
Sebastiano V, Marro S, Südhof TC, Wernig M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, 265 Campus Drive, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2011 Aug 11;476(7359):158-9.

Somatic cell nuclear transfer, cell fusion, or expression of lineage-specific
factors have been shown to induce cell-fate changes in diverse somatic cell
types. We recently observed that forced expression of a combination of three
transcription factors, Brn2 (also known as Pou3f2), Ascl1 and Myt1l, can
efficiently convert mouse fibroblasts into functional induced neuronal (iN)
cells. Here we show that the same three factors can generate functional neurons
from human pluripotent stem cells as early as 6<U+2009>days after transgene activation. 
When combined with the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor NeuroD1, these
factors could also convert fetal and postnatal human fibroblasts into iN cells
showing typical neuronal morphologies and expressing multiple neuronal markers,
even after downregulation of the exogenous transcription factors. Importantly,
the vast majority of human iN cells were able to generate action potentials and
many matured to receive synaptic contacts when co-cultured with primary mouse
cortical neurons. Our data demonstrate that non-neural human somatic cells, as
well as pluripotent stem cells, can be converted directly into neurons by
lineage-determining transcription factors. These methods may facilitate robust
generation of patient-specific human neurons for in vitro disease modelling or
future applications in regenerative medicine.

PMCID: PMC3159048
PMID: 21617644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Lung Cancer. 2011 Dec;74(3):405-10. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.04.012. Epub 2011
May 20.

The balance between the expressions of hASH1 and HES1 differs between large cell 
neuroendocrine carcinoma and small cell carcinoma of the lung.

Nasgashio R(1), Sato Y, Matsumoto T, Kageyama T, Hattori M, Iyoda A, Satoh Y,
Ryuge S, Masuda N, Jiang SX, Saegusa M.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

To clarify the biological differences between small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC)
and large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC), we investigated the expression
of two bHLH type transcription factors, human achaete-scute homolog 1 (hASH1) and
hairy/enhancer of split 1 (HES1), which positively and negatively regulate the
neuroendocrine differentiation of respiratory epithelial cells, respectively.
Eighty-eight formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded pulmonary carcinomas (32 SCLC, 
32 LCNEC, 14 adenocarcinomas, and 10 squamous cell carcinomas) and 14 SCLC and 1 
LCNEC derived cell lines were used. hASH1 and HES1 mRNA were detected using a
highly sensitive in situ hybridization method with digoxigenin-labeled cRNA
probes and biotinylated tyramide. The staining results were scored from 0 to 12
by multiplying the staining intensity by the percentage of positive tumor cells. 
The mean staining score of hASH1 mRNA was significantly higher in SCLC than in
LCNEC (p<0.01); conversely, that of HES1 mRNA was lower in SCLC than in LCNEC
(p<0.01). These findings reveal that SCLC more strongly expresses the
neuroendocrine phenotype, while LCNEC shows characteristics more similar to the
ciliated epithelium phenotype, suggesting that the biological characteristics of 
these two tumors are different.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21601304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. PLoS One. 2011 May 5;6(5):e19297. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019297.

Oncogenic LMO3 collaborates with HEN2 to enhance neuroblastoma cell growth
through transactivation of Mash1.

Isogai E(1), Ohira M, Ozaki T, Oba S, Nakamura Y, Nakagawara A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Innovative Cancer Therapeutics, Chiba Cancer
Center Research Institute, Chuoh-ku, Chiba, Japan.

Expression of Mash1 is dysregulated in human neuroblastoma. We have also reported
that LMO3 (LIM-only protein 3) has an oncogenic potential in collaboration with
neuronal transcription factor HEN2 in neuroblastoma. However, the precise
molecular mechanisms of its transcriptional regulation remain elusive. Here we
found that LMO3 forms a complex with HEN2 and acts as an upstream mediator for
transcription of Mash1 in neuroblastoma. The high levels of LMO3 or Mash1 mRNA
expression were significantly associated with poor prognosis in 100 primary
neuroblastomas. The up-regulation of Mash1 remarkably accelerated the
proliferation of SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells, while siRNA-mediated knockdown of
LMO3 induced inhibition of growth of SH-SY5Y cells in association with a
significant down-regulation of Mash1. Additionally, overexpression of both LMO3
and HEN2 induced expression of Mash1, suggesting that they might function as a
transcriptional activator for Mash1. Luciferase reporter assay demonstrated that 
the co-expression of LMO3 and HEN2 attenuates HES1 (a negative regulator for
Mash1)-dependent reduction of luciferase activity driven by the Mash1 promoter.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that LMO3 and HEN2 reduce the amount
of HES1 recruited onto putative HES1-binding sites and E-box within the Mash1
promoter. Furthermore, both LMO3 and HEN2 are physically associated with HES1 by 
immunoprecipitation assay. Thus, our present results suggest that a
transcriptional complex of LMO3 and HEN2 may contribute to the genesis and
malignant phenotype of neuroblastoma by inhibiting HES1 which suppresses the
transactivation of Mash1.

PMCID: PMC3088666
PMID: 21573214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19174. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019174.

Ascl1/Mash1 is a novel target of Gli2 during Gli2-induced neurogenesis in P19 EC 
cells.

Voronova A(1), Fischer A, Ryan T, Al Madhoun A, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.

The Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is important for neurogenesis in vivo.
Gli transcription factors, effector proteins of the Shh signaling pathway, have
neurogenic properties in vivo, which are still poorly understood. To study the
molecular basis of neurogenic properties of Gli2, we used a well-established
embryonic stem cell model, the P19 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cell line, which can 
be induced to differentiate into neurons in the presence of retinoic acid (RA).
We found that, in the absence of RA, overexpression of Gli2 induced P19 EC cells 
to differentiate into neurons, but not astrocytes during the first ten days of
differentiation. To our knowledge, this is the first indication that the
expression of Gli factors can convert EC cells into neurons. Furthermore, Gli2
upregulated expression of the neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors,
such as NeuroD, Neurog1 and Ascl1/Mash1 in P19 EC cells. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we showed that Gli2 bound to multiple regulatory
regions in the Ascl1 gene, including promoter and enhancer regions during
Gli2-induced neurogenesis. In addition, Gli2 activated the Ascl1/Mash1 promoter
in vitro. Using the expression of a dominant-negative form of Gli2, fused to the 
Engrailed repression domain, we observed a reduction in gliogenesis and a
significant downregulation of the bHLH factors Ascl1/Mash1, Neurog1 and NeuroD,
leading to delayed neurogenesis in P19 EC cells, further supporting the
hypothesis that Ascl1/Mash1 is a direct target of Gli2. In summary, Gli2 is
sufficient to induce neurogenesis in P19 stem cells at least in part by directly 
upregulating Ascl1/Mash1. Our results provide mechanistic insight into the
neurogenic properties of Gli2 in vitro, and offer novel plausible explanations
for its in vivo neurogenic properties.

PMCID: PMC3084770
PMID: 21559470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Cell Stem Cell. 2011 May 6;8(5):538-51. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2011.03.011.

Human ESC-derived neural crest model reveals a key role for SOX2 in sensory
neurogenesis.

Cimadamore F(1), Fishwick K, Giusto E, Gnedeva K, Cattarossi G, Miller A,
Pluchino S, Brill LM, Bronner-Fraser M, Terskikh AV.

Author information: 
(1)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA. flavioc@burnham.org

The transcription factor SOX2 is widely known to play a critical role in the
central nervous system; however, its role in peripheral neurogenesis remains
poorly understood. We recently developed an hESC-based model in which migratory
cells undergo epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) to acquire properties of
neural crest (NC) cells. In this model, we found that migratory NC progenitors
downregulate SOX2, but then start re-expressing SOX2 as they differentiate to
form neurogenic dorsal root ganglion (DRG)-like clusters. SOX2 downregulation was
sufficient to induce EMT and resulted in massive apoptosis when neuronal
differentiation was induced. In vivo, downregulation of SOX2 in chick and mouse
NC cells significantly reduced the numbers of neurons within DRG. We found that
SOX2 binds directly to NGN1 and MASH1 promoters and is required for their
expression. Our data suggest that SOX2 plays a key role for NGN1-dependent
acquisition of neuronal fates in sensory ganglia.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4110917
PMID: 21549328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Dev Neurobiol. 2011 Dec;71(12):1153-69. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20899.

Dicer is required for the maintenance of notch signaling and gliogenic competence
during mouse retinal development.

Georgi SA(1), Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology and Behavior Program, Department of Biological Structure, School 
of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are 19-25 nucleotide RNAs that regulate messenger RNA
translation and stability. Recently, we performed a conditional knockout (CKO) of
the miRNA-processing enzyme Dicer during mouse retinal development and showed an 
essential role for miRNAs in the transition of retinal progenitors from an early 
to a late competence state (Georgi and Reh [2010]: J Neurosci 30:4048-4061).
Notably, Dicer CKO progenitors failed to express Ascl1 and generated ganglion
cells beyond their normal competence window. Because Ascl1 regulates multiple
Notch signaling components, we hypothesized that Notch signaling is downregulated
in Dicer CKO retinas. We show here that Notch signaling is severely reduced in
Dicer CKO retinas, but that retinal progenitors still retain a low level of Notch
signaling. By increasing Notch signaling in Dicer CKO progenitors through
constitutive expression of the Notch intracellular domain (NICD), we show that
transgenic rescue of Notch signaling has little effect on the competence of
retinal progenitors or the enhanced generation of ganglion cells, suggesting that
loss of Notch signaling is not a major determinant of these phenotypes.
Nevertheless, transgenic NICD expression restored horizontal cells, suggesting an
interaction between miRNAs and Notch signaling in the development of this cell
type. Furthermore, while NICD overexpression leads to robust glial induction in
control retinas, NICD overexpression was insufficient to drive Dicer-null retinal
progenitors to a glial fate. Surprisingly, the presence of transgenic NICD
expression did not prevent the differentiation of some types of retinal neurons, 
suggesting that Notch inactivation is not an absolute requirement for the initial
stages of neuronal differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21542136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Dev Biol. 2011 Jul 1;355(1):89-100. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.04.011. Epub 2011
Apr 22.

The transcription factors AP-2ß and AP-2a are required for survival of
sympathetic progenitors and differentiated sympathetic neurons.

Schmidt M(1), Huber L, Majdazari A, Schütz G, Williams T, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Max-Planck-Institute for Brain
Research, Deutschordenstrasse 46, Frankfurt/M, Germany.

Differentiation of sympathetic neurons is controlled by a group of transcription 
factors, including Phox2b, Ascl1, Hand2 and Gata3, induced by bone morphogenetic 
proteins (BMPs) in progenitors located in ganglion primordia at the dorsal aorta.
Here, we address the function of the transcription factors AP-2ß and AP-2a,
expressed in migrating neural crest cells (NCC) and maintained in sympathetic
progenitors and differentiated neurons. The elimination of both AP-2a and AP-2ß
results in the virtually complete absence of sympathetic and sensory ganglia due 
to apoptotic cell death of migrating NCC. In the AP-2ß knockout only sympathetic 
ganglia (SG) are targeted, leading to a reduction in ganglion size by about 40%, 
which is also caused by apoptotic death of neural crest progenitors. The
conditional double knockout of AP-2a and AP-2ß in sympathetic progenitors and
differentiated noradrenergic neurons results in a further decrease in neuron
number, leading eventually to small sympathetic ganglion rudiments postnatally.
The elimination of AP-2ß also leads to the complete absence of noradrenergic
neurons of the Locus coeruleus (LC). Whereas AP-2a/ß transcription factors are in
vivo not required for the onset or maintenance of noradrenergic differentiation, 
their essential survival functions are demonstrated for sympathetic progenitors
and noradrenergic neurons.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21539825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Genes Dev. 2011 May 1;25(9):930-45. doi: 10.1101/gad.627811.

A novel function of the proneural factor Ascl1 in progenitor proliferation
identified by genome-wide characterization of its targets.

Castro DS(1), Martynoga B, Parras C, Ramesh V, Pacary E, Johnston C, Drechsel D, 
Lebel-Potter M, Garcia LG, Hunt C, Dolle D, Bithell A, Ettwiller L, Buckley N,
Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council National Institute for Medical Research, Division of 
Molecular Neurobiology, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom. 
dscastro@igc.gulbenkian.pt

Proneural genes such as Ascl1 are known to promote cell cycle exit and neuronal
differentiation when expressed in neural progenitor cells. The mechanisms by
which proneural genes activate neurogenesis--and, in particular, the genes that
they regulate--however, are mostly unknown. We performed a genome-wide
characterization of the transcriptional targets of Ascl1 in the embryonic brain
and in neural stem cell cultures by location analysis and expression profiling of
embryos overexpressing or mutant for Ascl1. The wide range of molecular and
cellular functions represented among these targets suggests that Ascl1 directly
controls the specification of neural progenitors as well as the later steps of
neuronal differentiation and neurite outgrowth. Surprisingly, Ascl1 also
regulates the expression of a large number of genes involved in cell cycle
progression, including canonical cell cycle regulators and oncogenic
transcription factors. Mutational analysis in the embryonic brain and
manipulation of Ascl1 activity in neural stem cell cultures revealed that Ascl1
is indeed required for normal proliferation of neural progenitors. This study
identified a novel and unexpected activity of the proneural gene Ascl1, and
revealed a direct molecular link between the phase of expansion of neural
progenitors and the subsequent phases of cell cycle exit and neuronal
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3084027
PMID: 21536733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2010 Oct;20(7):1109-16.

Hes1/Hes5 gene inhibits differentiation via down-regulating Hash1 and promotes
proliferation in cervical carcinoma cells.

Liu J(1), Lu WG, Ye F, Cheng XD, Hong D, Hu Y, Chen HZ, Xie X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Womens Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

INTRODUCTION: Hairy and enhancer of split 1 (Hes1) and Hes5 are target genes for 
the mammalian Notch pathway, which are highly expressed in epithelia in the
process of embryogenesis or in neural stem cells, inhibit cell differentiation
via the Notch-Hes-Hash signaling, and promote the survival of stem cells. Either 
Hes1 or Hes5 overactivation is likely to affect cell differentiation, thereby
resulting in carcinogenesis.
METHODS: We transfected the diced small interference RNA into SiHa cells and
detected cell differentiation and proliferation by immunocytochemistry, Western
blot, and methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium assay.
RESULTS: Knockdown of Hes1 and Hes5 would up-regulate the downstream gene Hash1, 
but not the upstream gene Notch1 in the Notch-Hes-Hash pathway. After Hes1/Hes5
RNA interference, expression of differentiation-associated proteins (including
Nanog, stage-specific embryonic antigen 4, and tumor rejection antigen-1-60) was 
reduced, and the cell differentiation was promoted; meanwhile, the cell
proliferation was inhibited, which was verified by detecting
proliferation-associated proteins (eg, Ki-67, proliferating cell nuclear antigen)
and methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium assay.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that Hes1/Hes5 gene would inhibit the cell
differentiation via down-regulating Hash1 and promote the cell proliferation in
cervical carcinoma cells; the cell differentiation and proliferation can be
reversed simultaneously by Hes1/Hes5 knockdown using RNA interference.

PMID: 21495212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 31;6(3):e18472. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018472.

Ascl1 (Mash1) defines cells with long-term neurogenic potential in subgranular
and subventricular zones in adult mouse brain.

Kim EJ(1), Ables JL, Dickel LK, Eisch AJ, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, United States of America.

Ascl1 (Mash1) is a bHLH transcription factor essential for neural differentiation
during embryogenesis but its role in adult neurogenesis is less clear. Here we
show that in the adult brain Ascl1 is dynamically expressed during neurogenesis
in the dentate gyrus subgranular zone (SGZ) and more rostral subventricular zone 
(SVZ). Specifically, we find Ascl1 levels low in SGZ Type-1 cells and SVZ B cells
but increasing as the cells transition to intermediate progenitor stages. In vivo
genetic lineage tracing with a tamoxifen (TAM) inducible Ascl1CreERT2 knock-in
mouse strain shows that Ascl1 lineage cells continuously generate new neurons
over extended periods of time. There is a regionally-specific difference in
neuron generation, with mice given TAM at postnatal day 50 showing new dentate
gyrus neurons through 30 days post-TAM, but showing new olfactory bulb neurons
even 180 days post-TAM. These results show that Ascl1 is not restricted to
transit amplifying populations but is also found in a subset of neural stem cells
with long-term neurogenic potential in the adult brain.

PMCID: PMC3069117
PMID: 21483754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Stem Cells. 2011 Jun;29(6):928-39. doi: 10.1002/stem.640.

Directed expression of Gata2, Mash1, and Foxa2 synergize to induce the
serotonergic neuron phenotype during in vitro differentiation of embryonic stem
cells.

Nefzger CM(1), Haynes JM, Pouton CW.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Chemistry and Drug Action, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Monash University (Parkville Campus), Melbourne, Australia.

Investigation of serotonergic neuronal activity and its relationship to disease
has been limited by a lack of physiologically relevant in vitro cell models.
Serotonergic neurons derived from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) could provide a
platform for such studies and provide models for use in drug discovery. Here, we 
report enhancement of serotonergic differentiation using a genetic approach.
Expression of Gata2 increased the yield of serotonergic neurons. Enhancement was 
only achieved when Gata2 was expressed under the control of the tissue-specific
promoter of the transcription factor Nkx6.1. High levels of Gata2 expression in
ESCs compromised pluripotency and induced non-neuronal differentiation. Combined 
directed expression of Gata2, proneural gene Mash1, and forkhead transcription
factor Foxa2 further enhanced serotonergic neural differentiation, resulting in a
10-fold increase in serotonin content. These neurons were also capable of
depolarization (KCl, 30 mM)-induced elevations of intracellular Ca(2+) . The
presence of sonic hedgehog during differentiation produced a further modest
increase in numbers (1.5-fold). Transgene expression did not influence the number
of tyrosine hydroxylase positive neurons in the cultures after 20 days, implying 
that Gata2, Mash1, and Foxa2 modulate in vitro differentiation at a time beyond
the decision-point for dopaminergic or nondopaminergic commitment. This study
demonstrates that the directed expression of specific transcription factors
enhances serotonergic neuron differentiation in vitro and highlights the
importance of transgene expression at the right stage of ESC differentiation to
effect the generation of a desired neural subtype.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21472823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cereb Cortex. 2011 Nov;21(11):2599-611. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr046. Epub 2011 Apr
5.

Ascl1 participates in Cajal-Retzius cell development in the neocortex.

Dixit R(1), Zimmer C, Waclaw RR, Mattar P, Shaker T, Kovach C, Logan C, Campbell 
K, Guillemot F, Schuurmans C.

Author information: 
(1)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute,
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

Cajal-Retzius cells are essential pioneer neurons that guide neuronal migration
in the developing neocortex. During development, Cajal-Retzius cells arise from
distinct progenitor domains that line the margins of the dorsal telencephalon, or
pallium. Here, we show that the proneural gene Ascl1 is expressed in
Cajal-Retzius cell progenitors in the pallial septum, ventral pallium, and
cortical hem. Using a short-term lineage trace, we demonstrate that it is
primarily the Ascl1-expressing progenitors in the pallial septum and ventral
pallium that differentiate into Cajal-Retzius cells. Accordingly, we found a
small, albeit significant reduction in the number of Reelin(+) and Trp73(+)
Cajal-Retzius cells in the Ascl1(-/-) neocortex. Conversely, using a
gain-of-function approach, we found that Ascl1 induces the expression of both
Reelin, a Cajal-Retzius marker, and Tbr1, a marker of pallial-derived neurons, in
a subset of early-stage pallial progenitors, an activity that declines over
developmental time. Taken together, our data indicate that the proneural gene
Ascl1 is required and sufficient to promote the differentiation of a subset of
Cajal-Retzius neurons during early neocortical development. Notably, this is the 
first study that reports a function for Ascl1 in the pallium, as this gene is
best known for its role in specifying subpallial neuronal identities.

PMID: 21467208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Front Mol Neurosci. 2011 Feb 7;4:1. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2011.00001. eCollection
2011.

Phorbol-Ester Mediated Suppression of hASH1 Synthesis: Multiple Ways to Keep the 
Level Down.

Benko E(1), Winkelmann A, Meier JC, Persson PB, Scholz H, Fähling M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Vegetative Physiologie, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin
Berlin, Germany.

Human achaete-scute homolog-1 (hASH1), encoded by the human ASCL1 gene, belongs
to the family of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors. hASH1 and its
mammalian homolog Mash1 are expressed in the central and peripheral nervous
system during development, and promote early neuronal differentiation.
Furthermore, hASH1 is involved in the specification of neuronal subtype
identities. Misexpression of the transcription factor is correlated with a
variety of tumors, including lung cancer and neuroendocrine tumors. To gain
insights into the molecular mechanisms of hASH1 regulation, we screened for
conditions causing changes in hASH1 gene expression rate. We found that treatment
of human neuroblastoma-derived Kelly cells with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
(PMA) resulted in a fast, strong and long-lasting suppression of hASH1 synthesis.
Reporter gene assays with constructs, in which the luciferase activity was
controlled either by the ASCL1 promoter or by the hASH1 mRNA untranslated regions
(UTRs), revealed a mainly UTR-dependent mechanism. The hASH1 promoter activity
was decreased only after 48<U+2009>h of PMA administration. Our data indicate that
different mechanisms acting consecutively at the transcriptional and
post-transcriptional level are responsible for hASH1 suppression after PMA
treatment. We provide evidence that short term inhibition of hASH1 synthesis is
attributed to hASH1 mRNA destabilization, which seems to depend mainly on protein
kinase C activity. Under prolonged conditions (48<U+2009>h), hASH1 suppression is
mediated by decreased promoter activity and inhibition of mRNA translation.

PMCID: PMC3057490
PMID: 21441980  [PubMed]


262. Neuron. 2011 Mar 24;69(6):1069-84. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.02.018.

Proneural transcription factors regulate different steps of cortical neuron
migration through Rnd-mediated inhibition of RhoA signaling.

Pacary E(1), Heng J, Azzarelli R, Riou P, Castro D, Lebel-Potter M, Parras C,
Bell DM, Ridley AJ, Parsons M, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2011 Apr 19;20(4):409-10.

Little is known of the intracellular machinery that controls the motility of
newborn neurons. We have previously shown that the proneural protein Neurog2
promotes the migration of nascent cortical neurons by inducing the expression of 
the atypical Rho GTPase Rnd2. Here, we show that another proneural factor, Ascl1,
promotes neuronal migration in the cortex through direct regulation of a second
Rnd family member, Rnd3. Both Rnd2 and Rnd3 promote neuronal migration by
inhibiting RhoA signaling, but they control distinct steps of the migratory
process, multipolar to bipolar transition in the intermediate zone and locomotion
in the cortical plate, respectively. Interestingly, these divergent functions
directly result from the distinct subcellular distributions of the two Rnd
proteins. Because Rnd proteins also regulate progenitor divisions and neurite
outgrowth, we propose that proneural factors, through spatiotemporal regulation
of Rnd proteins, integrate the process of neuronal migration with other events in
the neurogenic program.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3383999
PMID: 21435554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Neurosci. 2011 Mar 23;31(12):4444-55. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4616-10.2011.

Gata2 is required for migration and differentiation of retinorecipient neurons in
the superior colliculus.

Willett RT(1), Greene LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.

The superior colliculus (SC)/optic tectum of the dorsal mesencephalon plays a
major role in responses to visual input, yet regulation of neuronal
differentiation within this layered structure is only partially understood. Here,
we show that the zinc finger transcription factor Gata2 is required for normal SC
development. Starting at embryonic day 15 (E15) (corresponding to the times at
which neurons of the outer and intermediate layers of the SC are generated),
Gata2 is transiently expressed in the rat embryonic dorsal mesencephalon within a
restricted region between proliferating cells of the ventricular zone and the
deepest neuronal layers of the developing SC. The Gata2-positive cells are
postmitotic and lack markers of differentiated neurons, but express markers for
immature neuronal precursors including Ascl1 and Pax3/7. In utero electroporation
with Gata2 small hairpin RNAs at E16 into cells along the dorsal mesencephalic
ventricle interferes with their normal migration into the SC and maintains them
in a state characterized by retention of Pax3 expression and the absence of
mature neuronal markers. Collectively, these findings indicate that Gata2 plays a
required role in the transition of postmitotic neuronal precursor cells of the
retinorecipient layers of the SC into mature neurons and that loss of Gata2
arrests them at an intermediate stage of differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3076930
PMID: 21430145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2011 May;47(1):53-60. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2011.03.001. Epub
2011 Mar 17.

Proneural transcription factors Dlx2 and Pax6 are altered in adult SVZ neural
precursor cells following striatal cell loss.

Jones KS(1), Connor B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology, Centre for Brain
Research, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, Private
Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand.

Compensatory replacement of neurons by endogenous subventricular zone
(SVZ)-derived neural precursor cells has been demonstrated in the adult brain
following striatal cell loss. Such cell replacement is associated with increased 
SVZ cell proliferation and neuroblast expansion in the rostral migratory stream
(RMS). SVZ-derived neural precursor cells co-express multiple transcription
factors involved in lineage restriction and cell fate determination. We propose
that compensatory neurogenesis in response to striatal cell loss will alter the
temporal expression of transcription factors in discrete populations of
SVZ-derived neural precursor cells. We therefore examined the expression of
Mash1, Dlx2, Pax6 and Olig2 in SVZ-derived neural precursor cell populations
across a range of times following quinolinic acid (QA) induced striatal cell
death. We have identified a heterogeneous population of SVZ-derived neural
precursor cells that respond independently to striatal cell loss. In both the
anterior SVZ (aSVZ) and RMS we observed an increase in a sub-population of Dlx2+ 
transit amplifying precursor (TAP) cells and neuroblasts following QA lesioning
when compared to controls. Subsequently, the number of Pax6+ TAPs and neuroblasts
in the QA lesioned aSVZ and RMS was also increased. Olig2 expression was not
however altered in response to QA-induced cell loss. Our results suggest Dlx2 and
Pax6 may play a prominent role in directing neural precursor cell proliferation
and neuroblast generation following striatal cell loss. Selective alteration of
specific transcription factors in the SVZ and during migration through the RMS in
response to cell loss may predetermine the subsequent generation of specific
neuronal subclasses for endogenous replacement.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21397028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Dev Dyn. 2011 Apr;240(4):775-84. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22576. Epub 2011 Feb 14.

Mash1 is required for the differentiation of AADC-positive type III cells in
mouse taste buds.

Seta Y(1), Oda M, Kataoka S, Toyono T, Toyoshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Histology and Neurobiology, Kyushu Dental College,
Kitakyushu, Japan. yujiseta@kyu-dent.ac.jp

Mash1 is expressed in subsets of neuronal precursors in both the central nervous 
system and the peripheral nervous system. However, involvement of Mash1 in taste 
cell differentiation has not previously been demonstrated. In this study, we
investigated the role of Mash1 in regulating taste bud differentiation using
Mash1 KO mice to begin to understand the mechanisms that regulate taste bud cell 
differentiation. We found that aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) cells
were not evident in either the circumvallate papilla epithelia or in taste buds
in the soft palates of Mash1 KO mice. However gustducin was expressed in taste
buds in the soft palates of Mash1 KO mice. These results suggest that Mash1 plays
an important role in regulating the expression of AADC in type III cells in taste
buds, which supports the hypothesis that different taste bud cell types have
progenitor cells that are specific to each cell type.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21322090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(10):1453-64. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.093041ki.

Six1 is indispensable for production of functional progenitor cells during
olfactory epithelial development.

Ikeda K(1), Kageyama R, Suzuki Y, Kawakami K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical University, 
Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan.

The rodent olfactory epithelium (OE) is a good model system for studying the
principles of stem and progenitor cell biology, because of its capacity for
continuous neurogenesis throughout life and relatively well-characterized
neuronal lineage. The development of mouse OE is divided into two stages, early
and established neurogenesis. In established neurogenesis, which starts at
embryonic day (E) 12.5, sustentacular cells and olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs)
are produced from apical and basal progenitors, respectively. We previously
reported that Six1(-/-) shows a lack of mature ORNs throughout development and
disorganization of OE after E12.5. However, the molecular bases for these defects
have not been addressed. Here, we show that Six1 is expressed in both apical and 
basal progenitors. In Six1(-/-) mice, apical proliferating cells were absent and 
no morphologically identifiable sustentacular cells were observed. Consistently, 
the expression of Notch2 and Jagged1 in the apical layer was absent in Six1(-/-) 
mice. On the other hand, basal proliferating cells were observed in Six1(-/-)
animals, but the expression of Ngn1, NeuroD, Notch1, and Jagged2 in the basal
layer was absent. The expression of Mash1, the determination gene for ORNs, and
Hes genes was enhanced in Six1(-/-) mice. The present findings suggest that Six1 
regulates production of functional apical and basal progenitors during OE
development, through the regulation of various genes, such as neuronal basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH), neuronal repressor bHLH, and genes involved in the Notch
signaling pathway.

PMID: 21302255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Circulation. 2011 Feb 22;123(7):731-8. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.948570.
Epub 2011 Feb 7.

Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies in >80 000 subjects identifies
multiple loci for C-reactive protein levels.

Dehghan A, Dupuis J, Barbalic M, Bis JC, Eiriksdottir G, Lu C, Pellikka N,
Wallaschofski H, Kettunen J, Henneman P, Baumert J, Strachan DP, Fuchsberger C,
Vitart V, Wilson JF, Paré G, Naitza S, Rudock ME, Surakka I, de Geus EJ, Alizadeh
BZ, Guralnik J, Shuldiner A, Tanaka T, Zee RY, Schnabel RB, Nambi V, Kavousi M,
Ripatti S, Nauck M, Smith NL, Smith AV, Sundvall J, Scheet P, Liu Y, Ruokonen A, 
Rose LM, Larson MG, Hoogeveen RC, Freimer NB, Teumer A, Tracy RP, Launer LJ,
Buring JE, Yamamoto JF, Folsom AR, Sijbrands EJ, Pankow J, Elliott P, Keaney JF, 
Sun W, Sarin AP, Fontes JD, Badola S, Astor BC, Hofman A, Pouta A, Werdan K,
Greiser KH, Kuss O, Meyer zu Schwabedissen HE, Thiery J, Jamshidi Y, Nolte IM,
Soranzo N, Spector TD, Völzke H, Parker AN, Aspelund T, Bates D, Young L, Tsui K,
Siscovick DS, Guo X, Rotter JI, Uda M, Schlessinger D, Rudan I, Hicks AA, Penninx
BW, Thorand B, Gieger C, Coresh J, Willemsen G, Harris TB, Uitterlinden AG,
Järvelin MR, Rice K, Radke D, Salomaa V, Willems van Dijk K, Boerwinkle E, Vasan 
RS, Ferrucci L, Gibson QD, Bandinelli S, Snieder H, Boomsma DI, Xiao X, Campbell 
H, Hayward C, Pramstaller PP, van Duijn CM, Peltonen L, Psaty BM, Gudnason V,
Ridker PM, Homuth G, Koenig W, Ballantyne CM, Witteman JC, Benjamin EJ, Perola M,
Chasman DI.

Comment in
    Biomark Med. 2011 Jun;5(3):373-4.

BACKGROUND: C-reactive protein (CRP) is a heritable marker of chronic
inflammation that is strongly associated with cardiovascular disease. We sought
to identify genetic variants that are associated with CRP levels.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We performed a genome-wide association analysis of CRP in 66
185 participants from 15 population-based studies. We sought replication for the 
genome-wide significant and suggestive loci in a replication panel comprising 16 
540 individuals from 10 independent studies. We found 18 genome-wide significant 
loci, and we provided evidence of replication for 8 of them. Our results confirm 
7 previously known loci and introduce 11 novel loci that are implicated in
pathways related to the metabolic syndrome (APOC1, HNF1A, LEPR, GCKR, HNF4A, and 
PTPN2) or the immune system (CRP, IL6R, NLRP3, IL1F10, and IRF1) or that reside
in regions previously not known to play a role in chronic inflammation (PPP1R3B, 
SALL1, PABPC4, ASCL1, RORA, and BCL7B). We found a significant interaction of
body mass index with LEPR (P<2.9×10(-6)). A weighted genetic risk score that was 
developed to summarize the effect of risk alleles was strongly associated with
CRP levels and explained 5% of the trait variance; however, there was no
evidence for these genetic variants explaining the association of CRP with
coronary heart disease.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified 18 loci that were associated with CRP levels. Our
study highlights immune response and metabolic regulatory pathways involved in
the regulation of chronic inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3147232
PMID: 21300955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Nat Protoc. 2011 Feb;6(2):214-28. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2010.188. Epub 2011 Feb 3.

Generation of subtype-specific neurons from postnatal astroglia of the mouse
cerebral cortex.

Heinrich C(1), Gascón S, Masserdotti G, Lepier A, Sanchez R, Simon-Ebert T,
Schroeder T, Götz M, Berninger B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany.

Instructing glial cells to generate neurons may prove to be a strategy to replace
neurons that have degenerated. Here, we describe a robust protocol for the
efficient in vitro conversion of postnatal astroglia from the mouse cerebral
cortex into functional, synapse-forming neurons. This protocol involves two
steps: (i) expansion of astroglial cells (7 d) and (ii) astroglia-to-neuron
conversion induced by persistent and strong retroviral expression of Neurog2
(encoding neurogenin-2) or Mash1 (also referred to as achaete-scute complex
homolog 1 or Ascl1) and/or distal-less homeobox 2 (Dlx2) for generation of
glutamatergic or GABAergic neurons, respectively (7-21 d for different degrees of
maturity). Our protocol of astroglia-to-neuron conversion by a single neurogenic 
transcription factor provides a stringent experimental system to study the
specification of a selective neuronal subtype, thus offering an alternative to
the use of embryonic or neural stem cells. Moreover, it can be a useful model for
studies of lineage conversion from non-neuronal cells, with potential for brain
regenerative medicine.

PMID: 21293461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Neural Dev. 2011 Feb 1;6:6. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-6-6.

Insm1 promotes the transition of olfactory progenitors from apical and
proliferative to basal, terminally dividing and neuronogenic.

Rosenbaum JN(1), Duggan A, García-Añoveros J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, 303 E, Chicago Avenue, Ward 10-070, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

BACKGROUND: Insm1 is a zinc-finger transcription factor transiently expressed
throughout the developing nervous system in late progenitors and nascent neurons.
Insm1 is also highly expressed in medulloblastomas and other neuroendocrine
tumors.
RESULTS: We generated mice lacking the Insm1 gene and used them to elucidate its 
role in neurogenic proliferation of the embryonic olfactory epithelium. We found 
that deletion of Insm1 results in more apical cells and fewer nascent and mature 
neurons. In the embryonic olfactory epithelium of Insm1 mutants we detect fewer
basal progenitors, which produce neurons, and more apical progenitors, which at
this stage produce additional progenitors. Furthermore, in the mutants we detect 
fewer progenitors expressing NEUROD1, a marker of terminally dividing,
neuronogenic (neuron-producing) progenitors (immediate neuronal precursors), and 
more progenitors expressing ASCL1, a marker of the transit amplifying progenitors
that migrate from the apical to the basal edges of the epithelium while dividing 
to generate the terminal, neuronogenic progenitors. Finally, with timed
administration of nucleoside analogs we demonstrate that the Insm1 mutants
contain fewer terminally dividing progenitors at embryonic day 12.5.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, these results suggest a role for Insm1 in promoting the 
transition of progenitors from apical and proliferative to basal, terminal and
neuronogenic. This role appears partially conserved with that of its nematode
ortholog, egl-46. The similar effects of Insm1 deletion on progenitors of
embryonic olfactory epithelium and cortex point to striking parallels in the
development of these neuroepithelia, and particularly between the basal
progenitors of olfactory epithelium and the subventricular zone progenitors of
cortex.

PMCID: PMC3057173
PMID: 21284846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Stem Cells. 2011 Jan;29(1):141-53. doi: 10.1002/stem.562.

Distinct roles for Wnt-4 and Wnt-11 during retinoic acid-induced neuronal
differentiation.

Elizalde C(1), Campa VM, Caro M, Schlangen K, Aransay AM, Vivanco Md, Kypta RM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell biology and Stem Cells Unit, Center for Cooperative Research in
Biosciences, CIC bioGUNE, 48160 Derio, Spain.

Retinoic acid and Wnt/ß-catenin signals play important roles during neuronal
differentiation but less is known about noncanonical Wnt signals in this context.
We examined retinoic acid and Wnt signaling in two human embryonal carcinoma cell
lines, NTERA-2 (clone D1), which undergoes neuronal differentiation in response
to retinoic acid, and 2102Ep, which does not. Retinoic acid treatment inhibited
ß-catenin/Tcf activity in NTERA-2 cells but not in 2102Ep cells. Inhibition
occurred downstream of ß-catenin but did not involve competition between retinoic
acid receptors and ß-catenin for binding to p300 or Tcf-4. Ectopic expression of 
FZD1 partially restored inhibition in 2102Ep cells, suggesting the involvement of
Wnt ligands. Retinoic acid treatment of NTERA-2 cells induced the expression of
Wnt-4 and Wnt-11, both of which were able to inhibit ß-catenin/Tcf activity.
Wnt-4 and Wnt-11 were found at cell borders in islands of cells that expressed
OCT4 and GFAP and were predominantly negative for Nestin, PAX6, and GATA6. Gene
silencing of Wnt-4, but not Wnt-11, reduced retinoic acid downregulation of OCT4 
and Nanog and upregulation of PAX6, ASCL1, HOXC5, and NEUROD1, suggesting that
Wnt-4 promotes early neuronal differentiation. Gene expression analysis of
NTERA-2 cells stably overexpressing Wnt-11 suggested that Wnt-11 potentiates
retinoic acid induction of early neurogenesis. Consistent with this,
overexpression of Wnt-11 maintained a population of proliferating progenitor
cells in cultures treated with retinoic acid for several weeks. These
observations highlight the distinct roles of two noncanonical Wnts during the
early stages of retinoic acid-induced neuronal differentiation.

Copyright © 2010 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21280163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Prague Med Rep. 2010;111(4):289-99.

Characterization of P19 cells during retinoic acid induced differentiation.

Babuka V(1), Kulda V, Houdek Z, Peta M, Cendelín J, Zech N, Pacherník J, Voeh 
F, Uher P, Králícková M.

Author information: 
(1)Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Medicine in Plzen, Department of
Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Plzen, Czech Republic.
vaclav.babuska@lfp.cuni.cz

The aim of our study was to characterize mouse embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells P19
in different stages of retinoic acid induced neurodifferentiation by two methods,
immunocytochemistry and RT qPCR. The characterization of the cells is crucial
before any transplantation into any model, e.g. in our case into the mouse brain 
with the aim to treat a neurodegenerative disease. Specific protein markers
(MAP-2, OCT-4, FORSE-1) were detected by immunocytochemistry in the cell
cultures. The mRNA expression levels of PAX-6, MASH-1, Brachyury, GATA-4 and AFP 
were determined by RT qPCR method. HPRT was used as a housekeeping gene. The
degree of differentiation can be characterized by expression of analyzed genes.
The presence of OCT-4 and FORSE-1 proteins in undifferentiated pluripotent cells 
and the presence of dendrite specific MAP-2 in neuroprogenitors was detected. The
expression levels of PAX-6 and MASH-1 increased and expression of Brachyury
decreased during the neurodifferentiation process. The expression levels of
GATA-4 and AFP were the highest after induction of differentiation with retinoic 
acid. Detailed characterization of cells before transplantation experiments can
contribute to better understanding of their effect.

PMID: 21189168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Ann Surg Oncol. 2011 May;18(5):1506-11. doi: 10.1245/s10434-010-1488-z. Epub 2010
Dec 24.

Resveratrol induces Notch2-mediated apoptosis and suppression of neuroendocrine
markers in medullary thyroid cancer.

Truong M(1), Cook MR, Pinchot SN, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Currently, complete surgical resection is the only curative option
for medullary thyroid cancer (MTC). Previous work has shown the Notch pathway is 
a potent tumor suppressor in MTC and that resveratrol activates the Notch pathway
in carcinoid cancer, a related neuroedocrine malignancy. In this study, we
hypothesized that the effects observed on carcinoid cells could be extended to
MTC.
METHODS: MTC cells treated with varying doses of resveratrol were assayed for
viability by the MTT (3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5 diphenyl tetrazolium
bromide) assay. Western blot analysis for achaete-scute complex-like 1 (ASCL1),
chromogranin A (CgA), full-length and cleaved caspase 3, and poly-ADP ribose
polymerase (PARP) was performed. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qPCR) was used to measure relative mRNA expression.
RESULTS: Treatment with resveratrol resulted in growth suppression and an
increase in the cleavage of caspase-3 and PARP. A dose-dependent inhibition of
ASCL1, a neuroedocrine transcription factor, was observed at the protein and mRNA
levels. Protein levels of CgA, a marker of hormone secretion, were also reduced
after treatment with resveratrol. A dose-dependent induction of Notch2 mRNA was
observed by qPCR.
CONCLUSIONS: Resveratrol suppresses in vitro growth, likely through apoptosis, as
demonstrated by cleavage of caspase-3 and PARP. Furthermore, resveratrol
decreased neuroedocrine markers ASCL1 and chromogranin A. Induction of Notch2
mRNA suggests that this pathway may be central in the anti-MTC effects observed.

PMCID: PMC3078954
PMID: 21184191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 15;350(2):496-510. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.017. Epub 2010
Dec 21.

Fgf15-mediated control of neurogenic and proneural gene expression regulates
dorsal midbrain neurogenesis.

Fischer T(1), Faus-Kessler T, Welzl G, Simeone A, Wurst W, Prakash N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Centre Munich, Technical
University Munich, Neuherberg, Germany.

The balanced proliferation and cell cycle exit of neural progenitors, by
generating the appropriate amount of postmitotic progeny at the correct time and 
in the proper location, is required for the establishment of the highly ordered
structure of the adult brain. Little is known about the extrinsic signals
regulating these processes, particularly in the midbrain. Fibroblast growth
factor (Fgf) 15, the mouse ortholog of FGF19 and member of an atypical Fgf
subfamily, is prominently expressed in the dorsolateral midbrain of the
midgestational mouse embryo. In the absence of Fgf15, dorsal midbrain neural
progenitors fail to exit the cell cycle and to generate the proper amount of
postmitotic neurons. We show here that this is due to the altered expression of
inhibitory/neurogenic and proneural/neuronal differentiation helix-loop-helix
transcription factor (TF) genes. The expression of Id1, Id3, and Hes5 was
strongly increased and ectopically expanded, whereas the expression of Ascl1
(Mash1), Neurog1 (Ngn1) and Neurog2 (Ngn2) was strongly decreased and
transcription of Neurod1 (NeuroD) was completely abolished in the dorsolateral
midbrain of Fgf15(-/-) mice. These abnormalities were not caused by the
mis-expression of cell cycle regulatory proteins such as cyclin-dependent kinase 
inhibitors or retinoblastoma proteins. Furthermore, human FGF19 promotes cell
cycle exit of murine dorsal neural progenitors in vitro. Therefore, our data
suggest that Fgf15 is a crucial signaling molecule regulating the postmitotic
transition of dorsal neural progenitors and thus the initiation and proper
progression of dorsal midbrain neurogenesis in the mouse, by controlling the
expression of neurogenic and proneural TFs.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21172336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jan 14;404(2):610-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.12.014. Epub 2010 Dec 7.

Inhibition of Sirt1 promotes neural progenitors toward motoneuron differentiation
from human embryonic stem cells.

Zhang Y(1), Wang J, Chen G, Fan D, Deng M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Peking University Third Hospital, Haidian District,
Beijing 100191, China.

Several protocols direct human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) toward
differentiation into functional motoneurons, but the efficiency of motoneuron
generation varies based on the human ESC line used. We aimed to develop a novel
protocol to increase the formation of motoneurons from human ESCs. In this study,
we tested a nuclear histone deacetylase protein, Sirt1, to promote neural
precursor cell (NPC) development during differentiation of human ESCs into
motoneurons. A specific inhibitor of Sirt1, nicotinamide, dramatically increased 
motoneuron formation. We found that about 60% of the cells from the total NPCs
expressed HB9 and ßIII-tubulin, commonly used motoneuronal markers found in
neurons derived from ESCs following nicotinamide treatment. Motoneurons derived
from ESC expressed choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), a positive marker of mature 
motoneuron. Moreover, we also examined the transcript levels of Mash1, Ngn2, and 
HB9 mRNA in the differentiated NPCs treated with the Sirt1 activator resveratrol 
(50 µM) or inhibitor nicotinamide (100 µM). The levels of Mash1, Ngn2, and HB9
mRNA were significantly increased after nicotinamide treatment compared with
control groups, which used the traditional protocol. These results suggested that
increasing Mash1 and Ngn2 levels by inhibiting Sirt1 could elevate HB9
expression, which promotes motoneuron differentiation. This study provides an
alternative method for the production of transplantable motoneurons, a key
requirement in the development of hESC-based cell therapy in motoneuron disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21144831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 1;350(1):198-207. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.10.025. Epub 2010 
Oct 27.

A cluster of non-redundant Ngn1 binding sites is required for regulation of
deltaA expression in zebrafish.

Madelaine R(1), Blader P.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Toulouse, UPS, Centre de Biologie du Développement, 118 route de
Narbonne, F-31062 Toulouse, France.

Proneural genes encode bHLH transcription factors that are key regulator of
neurogenesis in both vertebrates and invertebrates. How these transcription
factors regulate targets required for neural determination and/or specification
is beginning to be understood. In this study, we show that zebrafish deltaA is a 
transcriptional target of proneural factors. Using a combination of transient and
stable transgenic reporters, we show that regulation of deltaA by one such
proneural factor, Ngn1, requires three clustered E-box binding sites that act in 
a non-redundant manner. Furthermore, we show that as for other proneural targets,
members of the different proneural families regulate deltaA expression via
distinct cis-regulatory modules (CRMs). Interestingly, however, while the deltaA 
CRM regulated by a second proneural factor, Ascl1, has been conserved between
delta genes of different species, we show that the Ngn1 CRM has not. These
results suggest that evolutionary constraints on the mechanism by which Ngn1
regulates gene expression appear less strict than for Ascl1.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21034732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 7;5(10):e13187. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013187.

Real time imaging of human progenitor neurogenesis.

Keenan TM(1), Nelson AD, Grinager JR, Thelen JC, Svendsen CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 
United States of America.

Human neural progenitors are increasingly being employed in drug screens and
emerging cell therapies targeted towards neurological disorders where
neurogenesis is thought to play a key role including developmental disorders,
Alzheimer's disease, and depression. Key to the success of these applications is 
understanding the mechanisms by which neurons arise. Our understanding of
development can provide some guidance but since little is known about the
specifics of human neural development and the requirement that cultures be
expanded in vitro prior to use, it is unclear whether neural progenitors obey the
same developmental mechanisms that exist in vivo. In previous studies we have
shown that progenitors derived from fetal cortex can be cultured for many weeks
in vitro as undifferentiated neurospheres and then induced to undergo
neurogenesis by removing mitogens and exposing them to supportive substrates.
Here we use live time lapse imaging and immunocytochemical analysis to show that 
neural progenitors use developmental mechanisms to generate neurons. Cells with
morphologies and marker profiles consistent with radial glia and recently
described outer radial glia divide asymmetrically and symmetrically to generate
multipolar intermediate progenitors, a portion of which express ASCL1. These
multipolar intermediate progenitors subsequently divide symmetrically to produce 
CTIP2(+) neurons. This 3-cell neurogenic scheme echoes observations in rodents in
vivo and in human fetal slice cultures in vitro, providing evidence that hNPCs
represent a renewable and robust in vitro assay system to explore mechanisms of
human neurogenesis without the continual need for fresh primary human fetal
tissue. Knowledge provided by this and future explorations of human neural
progenitor neurogenesis will help maximize the safety and efficacy of new stem
cell therapies by providing an understanding of how to generate
physiologically-relevant cell types that maintain their identities when placed in
diagnostic or transplantation environments.

PMCID: PMC2951355
PMID: 20949053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Comp Neurol. 2010 Nov 1;518(21):4395-418. doi: 10.1002/cne.22463.

Expression of pax6 and sox2 in adult olfactory epithelium.

Guo Z(1), Packard A, Krolewski RC, Harris MT, Manglapus GL, Schwob JE.

Author information: 
(1)Cell, Molecular, and Developmental Biology Graduate Program, Sackler School of
Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

The olfactory epithelium maintains stem and progenitor cells that support the
neuroepithelium's life-long capacity to reconstitute after injury. However, the
identity of the stem cells--and their regulation--remain poorly defined. The
transcription factors Pax6 and Sox2 are characteristic of stem cells in many
tissues, including the brain. Therefore, we assessed the expression of Pax6 and
Sox2 in normal olfactory epithelium and during epithelial regeneration after
methyl bromide lesion or olfactory bulbectomy. Sox2 is found in multiple kinds of
cells in normal epithelium, including sustentacular cells, horizontal basal
cells, and some globose basal cells. Pax6 is co-expressed with Sox2 in all these,
but is also found in duct/gland cells as well as olfactory neurons that innervate
necklace glomeruli. Most of the Sox2/Pax6-positive globose basal cells are
actively cycling, but some express the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p27(Kip1), and are presumably mitotically quiescent. Among globose basal cells,
Sox2 and Pax6 are co-expressed by putatively multipotent progenitors (labeled by 
neither anti-Mash1 nor anti-Neurog1) and neuron-committed transit amplifying
cells (which express Mash1). However, Sox2 and Pax6 are expressed by only a
minority of immediate neuronal precursors (Neurog1- and NeuroD1-expressing). The 
assignment of Sox2 and Pax6 to these categories of globose basal cells is
confirmed by a temporal analysis of transcription factor expression during the
recovery of the epithelium from methyl bromide-induced injury. Each of the
Sox2/Pax6-colabeled cell types is at a remove from the birth of neurons; thus,
suppressing their differentiation may be among the roles of Sox2/Pax6 in the
olfactory epithelium.

PMCID: PMC2940252
PMID: 20852734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Mar;38(3):1515-21. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0259-z. Epub 2010
Sep 15.

Down-regulation of achaete-scute complex homolog 1 (ASCL1) in neuroblastoma cells
induces up-regulation of insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2).

Li J(1), Neumann I, Volkmer I, Staege MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Ernst
Grube Str 40, 06097 Halle, Germany.

Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extra-cranial solid pediatric tumor. The
prognosis of patients with NB has been improved during the last decades. However,
treatment results for patients with advanced tumor stages are still unsatisfying.
NB cells are characterized by a high tendency for spontaneous or induced
differentiation. During differentiation, down-regulation of the basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor achaete-scute complex homolog 1 (ASCL1) has
been observed but the consequences of ASCL1 down-regulation have not been
elucidated. We used RNA interference to knock-down ASCL1 in NB cells. DNA
microarray analysis was used for the identification of ASCL1-regulated genes.
Furthermore, conventional and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) was used for validation of ASCL1-regulated genes.
Down-regulation of ASCL1 influenced the expression of several genes. After
down-regulation of ASCL1, we observed very high expression of insulin-like growth
factor 2 (IGF2), a factor that is known to be induced during differentiation of
NB cells. RT-PCR indicated up-regulation of multiple IGF2 transcript variants
after ASCL1 knock-down. Our data suggest that the ASCL1-pathway is responsible
for the up-regulation of IGF2 during NB differentiation.

PMID: 20842449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Gastroenterology. 2010 Oct;139(4):1086-90. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.08.013.
Epub 2010 Aug 25.

Pathogenesis of achalasia: lessons from mutant mice.

Goyal RK, Chaudhury A.

Comment on
    Gastroenterology. 2010 Oct;139(4):1344-54.

PMID: 20800108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2011 Feb;31(2):614-25. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2010.134.
Epub 2010 Aug 25.

Ascl1 lineage cells contribute to ischemia-induced neurogenesis and
oligodendrogenesis.

Zhang RL(1), Chopp M, Roberts C, Jia L, Wei M, Lu M, Wang X, Pourabdollah S,
Zhang ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan 48202, USA.

Neural and oligodendrocyte progenitor cells in the adult brain express Ascl1
(also known as Mash1), a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor. We examined
the progeny and fate of this progenitor population in adult male
Ascl1-CreER(TM);R26R-stop-yellow fluorescent protein mice subjected to right
middle cerebral occlusion over 60 days after stroke using inducible Cre
recombination to label Ascl1-expressing cells at poststroke days 2 to 6 in vivo. 
Seven days after stroke, a substantial increase in Ascl1 lineage cells was
detected in the ipsilateral subventricular zone (SVZ), striatum, and corpus
callosum. These cells exhibited proliferating progenitor cell phenotypes
(Sox2(+), BrdU(+), and Ki67(+)). Although Ascl1 lineage cells in the ipsilateral 
SVZ gradually decreased during 14 to 60 days after stroke, Ascl1 lineage cells in
the ischemic striatum revealed a remarkable increase during this period. Thirty
and sixty days after stroke, Ascl1 lineage cells in the ischemic striatum gave
rise to GABAergic neurons and mature oligodendrocytes. In contrast, none of the
Ascl1 lineage cells in the contralateral striatum exhibited neuronal and
oligodendrocyte phenotypes. Moreover, Ascl1 lineage cells in the corpus callosum 
were only fated to become mature oligodendrocytes. Our data suggest that Ascl1
lineage cells contribute to stroke-induced neurogenesis and oligodendrogenesis in
the adult ischemic brain.

PMCID: PMC3049516
PMID: 20736965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2010 Dec;45(4):398-407. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.07.013. Epub
2010 Aug 6.

Uncx regulates proliferation of neural progenitor cells and neuronal survival in 
the olfactory epithelium.

Sammeta N(1), Hardin DL, McClintock TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536-0298,
USA.

Uncx (Phd1, Chx4) is a paired homeobox transcription factor gene. It and its
probable functional partners, Tle co-repressors, were expressed by neurally-fated
basal progenitor cells and olfactory sensory neurons of the olfactory epithelium.
Uncx expression was rare in olfactory epithelia of Ascl1(-/-) mice, but common in
Neurog1(-/-) mice. In Uncx(-/-) mice olfactory progenitor cell proliferation,
progenitor cell number, olfactory sensory neuron survival, and Umodl1 and Kcnc4
mRNAs were reduced. Evidence of sensory neuron activity and functional
connections to the olfactory bulb argue that decreased neuronal survival was not 
due to loss of trophic support or activity-dependent mechanisms. These data
suggest that UNCX acts downstream of neural determination factors to broadly
control transcriptional mechanisms used by neural progenitor cells to specify
neural phenotypes.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2962766
PMID: 20692344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2010 Apr;13(4):317-21. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2010.04.09.

[Expression and clinicopathologic significance of human achaete-scute homolog 1
in pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors].

[Article in Chinese]

Li F(1), Zhong Z, Li R, Huang H, Wang L, Zheng D, Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, China Medical
University, Shenyang 110001, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Human achaete-scute homolog 1 (hASH1) gene plays a
critical role in development of the central nervous system, automatic nervous
system, adrenal medullary chromaffin cells, thyroid C cells and pulmonary
neuroendocrine cells. The aim of this study is to determine hASH1 gene expression
in the normal lung tissue and various types of lung tumors, to analyze whether
its expression correlated with pulmonary neuroendocrine markers, and to explore
the possibility of hASH1 as clinical pathological markers in the neuroendocrine
tumors compared with previous neuroendocrine tumor markers.
METHODS: hASH1, Chromogranin A, Synaptophysin and CD56 expression were examined
in lung tumor specimens (lung inflammatory pseudotumor, squamous cell carcinoma, 
adenocarcinomas, large cell carcinoma, typical carcinoids, atypical carcinoids,
large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas and small cell lung carcinoma and
corresponding normal lung specimens) using immunohistochemistry (S-P method).
Western blot and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay
were applied to detect the expressions of hASH1 protein and mRNA in lung cancer
tissues.
RESULTS: hASH1 expression was positive in 2/16 (12.5%) typical carcinoids, 15/20 
(75%) atypical carcinoids, 6/10 (60%) large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas and
31/40 (77.5%) small cell lung carcinoma, respectively, but not in any normal lung
tissue (0/10), lung inflammatory pseudotumor (0/49), squamous cell carcinoma
(0/30), adenocarcinomas (0/30) or large cell carcinoma (0/20). There was a
significant difference in hASH1 expression between typical carcinoids and
atypical carcinoids (P < 0.01), but not in large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas
and small cell lung carcinoma (P > 0.05). hASH1 expression highly closely
correlated with Chromogranin A, Synaptophysin and CD56 expression (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: hASH1 is a new kind of highly specific markers of pulmonary
neuroendocrine tumours, and may be applied to clinical pathology diagnosis of the
pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors.

PMID: 20677557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2010 Aug;110(2):209-17. doi:
10.1016/j.tripleo.2010.04.007.

Oral cavity neuroendocrine carcinoma: a comparison study with cutaneous Merkel
cell carcinoma and other mucosal head and neck neuroendocrine carcinomas.

Lewis JS Jr(1), Duncavage E, Klonowski PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. jlewis@path.wustl.edu

OBJECTIVES: Published cases of oral high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma (HGNEC)
variably call the tumors Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) or small-cell/high-grade
neuroendocrine carcinoma. We studied cases of cutaneous MCC and mucosal HGNEC to 
better distinguish them and to better define oral cases.
STUDY DESIGN: Twelve cutaneous MCC and 14 mucosal HGNEC cases were identified. We
reviewed the hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) morphology and performed
immunohistochemistry for cytokeratin 20 (CK20), thyroid transcription factor 1
(TTF-1), p63, neurofilament (NF), and achaete-scute homolog 1 (MASH-1). We also
performed polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the Merkel cell polyomavirus
(MCPyV).
RESULTS: By morphology and immunohistochemistry, MCC and HGNEC showed many
differences. CK20, NF, and TTF-1 stains were the most discriminatory. MASH-1 was 
expressed by both MCC and HGNEC. MCPyV was present in MCC and absent in all
HGNEC. The 2 oral cavity mucosal carcinomas segregated into MCC and HGNEC types, 
the former having the H&E nuclear morphology and classic dot-like perinuclear
CK20 staining typically associated with MCC.
CONCLUSIONS: Oral cavity neuroendocrine carcinoma can be segregated into MCC and 
small-cell/HGNEC types by morphology and CK20 immunohistochemistry. MCPyV was
present by PCR in cutaneous MCC but was not found in mucosal HGNEC.

Copyright 2010 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20659699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Neuroscience. 2010 Aug 25;169(2):674-82. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.05.017.

Thymosin beta4 improves functional neurological outcome in a rat model of embolic
stroke.

Morris DC(1), Chopp M, Zhang L, Lu M, Zhang ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Henry Ford Health Systems, Detroit, MI, USA.

Thymosin beta4 (Tbeta4) is a developmentally expressed 43-amino acid peptide that
inhibits organization of the actin-cytoskeleton by sequestration of G-actin
monomers. Tbeta4 improves cardiac function after myocardial infarction in adult
mice and promotes healing properties in both dermal and corneal wounds. We tested
the hypothesis that Tbeta4 improves functional neurological outcome in a rat
model of embolic stroke.EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES: Male Wistar rats (n=18) were
subjected to embolic middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo). Tbeta4 (6 mg/kg,
IP) was administered 24 h after MCAo and then every 3 days for four additional
doses (n=9). Rats treated with saline were used as a control (n=9). The
adhesive-removal test (ART) and modified Neurological Severity Score (mNSS) were 
performed to measure functional outcome. Rats were sacrificed 56 days after MCAo.
Immunostaining was performed with antibodies against NG-2 (chondroitin sulfate
proteoglycan), CNPase (2", 3"-cyclic nucleotide 3'-phosphodiesterase) to detect
immature and mature oligodendrocytes. Neurofilament-H (NF-H) antibodies were used
to detect axons while myelinated axons were identified with Bielschowsky/Luxol
(B/L) Blue staining. EBA (endothelial barrier antigen) was used for detection of 
mature vessels.
RESULTS: Ischemic rats treated with Tbeta4 demonstrated a significant overall
improvement (P<0.01) in the ART and the mNSS when compared to controls.
Significant improvement was observed beginning at 14 and 35 days, respectively.
Lesion volumes showed no significant differences between the two groups.
Treatment with Tbeta4 increased myelinated axons and increased vessel density in 
the ischemic boundary (P<0.05) and augmented remyelination which was associated
with an increase of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) and myelinating
oligodendrocytes (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that Tbeta4 improves neurological
functional outcome after embolic stroke in rats. Axonal remodeling from
mobilization of OPCs is proposed as contributing to Tbeta4 induced functional
improvement.

Copyright (c)10 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2907184
PMID: 20627173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2010 Jul;10 Suppl 1:S158-68. doi:
10.1111/j.1447-0594.2010.00607.x.

Molecular mechanisms of regeneration in Alzheimer's disease brain.

Uchida Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology, Itabashiku, Tokyo, Japan.
57uchida@tmig.or.jp

Regenerative responses, including re-expression of developmentally regulated
proteins, occur in Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain and in beta-amyloid
(Abeta)-treated neuronal cultures. Brain microenvironment might also be altered
by Abeta or by unknown materials in AD brain to make neurons or progenitor cells 
regenerative. However, these responses and alterations might not be sufficient to
replace neuronal loss, but rather might act as an effecter of cell death. For
instance, downregulation of growth inhibitory factor/metallothionein-III and
upregulation of MAP1B result in both neurite sprouting and neuronal death. The
deteriorative regulation of Mash1 and Olig2 by Abeta also leads to
differentiation and death of progenitor cells. Clarifying the cell death
mechanism accompanied with regenerative responses might be necessary for
repairing the nervous system or slowing disease progression in AD.

PMID: 20590831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2010 Oct;45(2):121-31. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.06.003. Epub
2010 Jun 18.

TLX activates MASH1 for induction of neuronal lineage commitment of adult
hippocampal neuroprogenitors.

Elmi M(1), Matsumoto Y, Zeng ZJ, Lakshminarasimhan P, Yang W, Uemura A, Nishikawa
S, Moshiri A, Tajima N, Agren H, Funa K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Medical Chemistry and Cell Biology,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

The orphan nuclear receptor TLX has been proposed to act as a repressor of cell
cycle inhibitors to maintain the neural stem cells in an undifferentiated state, 
and prevents commitment into astrocyte lineages. However, little is known about
the mechanism of TLX in neuronal lineage commitment and differentiation. A
majority of adult rat hippocampus-derived progenitors (AHPs) cultured in the
presence of FGF express a high level of TLX and a fraction of these cells also
express the proneural gene MASH1. Upon FGF withdrawal, TLX rapidly decreased,
while MASH1 was intensely expressed within 1h, decreasing gradually to disappear 
at 24h. Adenoviral transduction of TLX in AHP cells in the absence of FGF
transiently increased cell proliferation, however, later resulted in neuronal
differentiation by inducing MASH1, Neurogenin1, DCX, and MAP2ab. Furthermore, TLX
directly targets and activates the MASH1 promoter through interaction with Sp1,
recruiting co-activators whereas dismissing the co-repressor HDAC4. Conversely,
silencing of TLX in AHPs decreased beta-III tubulin and DCX expression and
promoted glial differentiation. Our results thus suggest that TLX not only acts
as a repressor of cell cycle and glial differentiation but also activates
neuronal lineage commitment in AHPs.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20599619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Development. 2010 Aug 1;137(15):2471-81. doi: 10.1242/dev.049718. Epub 2010 Jun
23.

Proliferative and transcriptional identity of distinct classes of neural
precursors in the mammalian olfactory epithelium.

Tucker ES(1), Lehtinen MK, Maynard T, Zirlinger M, Dulac C, Rawson N, Pevny L,
Lamantia AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Neural precursors in the developing olfactory epithelium (OE) give rise to three 
major neuronal classes - olfactory receptor (ORNs), vomeronasal (VRNs) and
gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons. Nevertheless, the molecular and
proliferative identities of these precursors are largely unknown. We
characterized two precursor classes in the olfactory epithelium (OE) shortly
after it becomes a distinct tissue at midgestation in the mouse: slowly dividing 
self-renewing precursors that express Meis1/2 at high levels, and rapidly
dividing neurogenic precursors that express high levels of Sox2 and Ascl1.
Precursors expressing high levels of Meis genes primarily reside in the lateral
OE, whereas precursors expressing high levels of Sox2 and Ascl1 primarily reside 
in the medial OE. Fgf8 maintains these expression signatures and proliferative
identities. Using electroporation in the wild-type embryonic OE in vitro as well 
as Fgf8, Sox2 and Ascl1 mutant mice in vivo, we found that Sox2 dose and Meis1 - 
independent of Pbx co-factors - regulate Ascl1 expression and the transition from
lateral to medial precursor state. Thus, we have identified proliferative
characteristics and a dose-dependent transcriptional network that define distinct
OE precursors: medial precursors that are most probably transit amplifying
neurogenic progenitors for ORNs, VRNs and GnRH neurons, and lateral precursors
that include multi-potent self-renewing OE neural stem cells.

PMCID: PMC2927697
PMID: 20573694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Toxicol Sci. 2010 Sep;117(1):238-48. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq177. Epub 2010 Jun
16.

Achaete-scute homologue-1 tapers neuroendocrine cell differentiation in lungs
after exposure to naphthalene.

Jensen-Taubman S(1), Wang XY, Linnoila RI.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Cancer Biology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor achaete-scute homologue-1 (ASH1) 
plays a critical role in regulating the neuroendocrine (NE) phenotype in normal
and neoplastic lung. Transgenic (TG) mice that constitutively express human ASH1 
(hASH1) under control of the Clara cell 10-kDa protein (CC10) promoter in non-NE 
airway lining cells display progressive epithelial hyperplasia and bronchiolar
metaplasia or bronchiolization of the alveoli (BOA). However, little is known
about the involvement of hASH1 in regeneration of the conducting airway. In this 
study, we investigated the impact of hASH1 on airway cell injury and repair in
the TG mice following an intraperitoneal injection of naphthalene, which
specifically ablates bronchiolar Clara cells and induces pulmonary NE cell
hyperplasia. We discovered an overall attenuation of NE maturation coupled with
increased proliferation in TG mice during post-naphthalene repair. In addition,
BOA lesions revealed enhanced epithelial cell proliferation while preserving
Clara cell markers CC10 and the principal naphthalene-metabolizing enzyme
cytochrome P4502F2. These data suggest that ASH1 may play an important role in
maintaining a progenitor phenotype that promotes renewal of both NE and
epithelial cells. Moreover, ASH1 may propagate a stem cell microenvironment in
BOA where epithelium becomes resistant to naphthalene toxicity.

PMCID: PMC2923285
PMID: 20554700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Aug 15;110(6):1457-63. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22703.

Jmjd3 activates Mash1 gene in RA-induced neuronal differentiation of P19 cells.

Dai JP(1), Lu JY, Zhang Y, Shen YF.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

Covalent modifications of histone tails have fundamental roles in chromatin
structure and function. Tri-methyl modification on lysine 27 of histone H3
(H3K27me3) usually correlates with gene repression that plays important roles in 
cell lineage commitment and development. Mash1 is a basic helix-loop-helix
regulatory protein that plays a critical role in neurogenesis, where it expresses
as an early marker. In this study, we have shown a decreased H3K27me3
accompanying with an increased demethylase of H3K27me3 (Jmjd3) at the promoter of
Mash1 can elicit a dramatically efficient expression of Mash1 in RA-treated P19
cells. Over-expression of Jmjd3 in P19 cells also significantly enhances the
RA-induced expression and promoter activity of Mash1. By contrast, the mRNA
expression and promoter activity of Mash1 are significantly reduced, when Jmjd3
siRNA or dominant negative mutant of Jmjd3 is introduced into the P19 cells.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show that Jmjd3 is efficiently recruited to 
a proximal upstream region of Mash1 promoter that is overlapped with the specific
binding site of Hes1 in RA-induced cells. Moreover, the association between Jmjd3
and Hes1 is shown in a co-Immunoprecipitation assay. It is thus likely that Jmjd3
is recruited to the Mash1 promoter via Hes1. Our results suggest that the
demethylase activity of Jmjd3 and its mediator Hes1 for Mash1 promoter binding
are both required for Jmjd3 enhanced efficient expression of Mash1 gene in the
early stage of RA-induced neuronal differentiation of P19 cells.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20506217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Dev Biol. 2010 Jul 1;343(1-2):63-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.04.015. Epub 2010 
Apr 22.

Distinct requirements for Ascl1 in subpopulations of midbrain GABAergic neurons.

Peltopuro P(1), Kala K, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, P.O. Box 56, Viikinkaari 9, FIN00014-University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Midbrain GABAergic neurons regulate multiple aspects of behavior and play
important roles in psychiatric and neurological disease. These neurons constitute
several anatomical and functional subpopulations, but their molecular
heterogeneity and developmental regulatory mechanisms are poorly understood. Here
we have studied the involvement of the proneural gene Ascl1 in the development of
the midbrain GABAergic neurons. Analysis of Ascl1 mutant mice demonstrated highly
region-specific requirements for Ascl1 for development of different GABAergic
neuron subpopulations. Ascl1 is dispensable for the development of the
ventral-most midbrain GABAergic neurons associated with dopaminergic nuclei
substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNpr) and ventral tegmental area (VTA)
GABAergic neurons. In the ventrolateral midbrain, loss of Ascl1 results in
markedly delayed neurogenesis in the midbrain domains m3-m5. Within this region, 
Ascl1 has a unique role in m4, where it also regulates glutamatergic
neurogenesis. Our results suggest that the m3-m5 midbrain neuroepithelium gives
rise to the GABAergic neuron groups located in the midbrain reticular formation
and ventrolateral periaqueductal gray. In contrast to m3-m5, Ascl1 is absolutely 
required in the dorsal midbrain domains m1-m2, for generation of the GABAergic
neurons populating the superior and inferior colliculi as well as dorsal
periaqueductal gray. These studies demonstrate different molecular regulatory
mechanisms for the distinct midbrain GABAergic neuron subpopulations. Also, our
results have implications on understanding the origins of the various midbrain
GABAergic neuron groups in the embryonic neuroepithelium.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20417196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Feb;39(2):95-9.

[Regulation and mechanism of Notch signaling pathway in small cell lung cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang XM(1), Wang JX, Lei XG, Cheng H, Wang LL, Yao GY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the status of Notch signaling pathway in small cell
lung cancer (SCLC).
METHODS: Expression plasmids of pEFBOS-NIC-MYC and pEFBOS-neo were transfected
into NCI-H446 cells. Stably transfected cell lines were selected and their growth
rates were examined by MTT method. Expression of downstream genes along the Notch
signaling pathway were studied by RT-PCR. Protein expression of euroendocrine
markers of CgA and NSE were detected by Western blot analysis and
immunocytochemistry.
RESULTS: The expression of HES1 was increased in the pEFBOS-NIC-MYC group, but
the expression of hASH in the pEFBOS-NIC-MYC group was decreased significantly.
The transfected cells with pEFBOS-NIC-MYC plasmid showed a significantly slower
growth rate compared with that of two control groups (P < 0.05, Student's
t-test). Immunocytochemistry of NSE showed that PUs in the NIC transfected group,
sham group and negative control group were 7.21 ± 0.59, 28.25 ± 1.46, 30.57 ±
1.31 respectively, the former one was smaller than the values of the latter two
significantly (P < 0.01). Western blot analysis showed the grave scales of CgA in
NIC transfected group and sham group to be 0.54 ± 0.03 and 0.99 ± 0.05
respectively (grave scales of the negative control was set as 1.00), the former
one significantly smaller than that of the other two groups (P < 0.01). The grave
scales of NSE in the NIC transfected group and sham group were 0.43 ± 0.02 and
1.07 ± 0.09 respectively (grave scales of the negative control was set as 1.00)
and the former one was significantly smaller than the other two groups (P <
0.01).
CONCLUSION: Notch signaling pathway regulates SCLC cells through its inhibitory
effect on hASH1 transcription via HES1 along with an expression inhibition of
neuroendocrine markers in SCLC.

PMID: 20388374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Oncogene. 2010 Jun 10;29(23):3446-52. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.100. Epub 2010 Apr
12.

Loss of a cohesin-linked suppressor APRIN (Pds5b) disrupts stem cell programs in 
embryonal carcinoma: an emerging cohesin role in tumor suppression.

Denes V(1), Pilichowska M, Makarovskiy A, Carpinito G, Geck P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Tufts University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA, USA.

Cohesins appear to have critical functions beyond mitotic cohesion. Our data on a
cohesin-associated Pds5-paralog, APRIN, indicate a novel cohesin role in stem
cell differentiation. APRIN/Pds5B is lost in many cancers and it is a putative
tumor suppressor. Its mutations in the germ line, however, generate birth
defects. We reasoned that as both cancer and birth defects share disrupted stem
cell differentiation, the data suggest an APRIN/Pds5B cohesin function in stem
cells. We used an embryonal carcinoma stem cell model and show here that (i)
APRIN expression is precisely coordinated with stem cell differentiation; (ii)
this coordination involves surface-contact and endocrine pathways; and (iii)
APRIN/Pds5b coordination is critical in stem/progenitor exit decisions. APRIN
knockdown disrupted Oct4, Nanog and SOX2 patterns, differentiation failed and the
resulting immature proliferative cells did not progress beyond proneural
progenitor phase. Furthermore, the phenotype-blocked progenitor exit (Mash-1(+));
failed E-cadherin exit (E-Cadh(low+)); incomplete N-cadherin transition
(N-Cadh(low+)); retained proliferative capacity (c-myc(+)); irregular stemness
(SOX2(late++)) and lost response to contact and hormonal cues-shares similarities
with cancer-initiating cells. The data suggest novel APRIN/Pds5B-linked cohesin
roles in stem/progenitor programs and a new mechanism in tumor suppression.

PMID: 20383194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2010 Jul;44(3):282-96. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.03.014. Epub
2010 Apr 9.

Direct transcriptional induction of Gadd45gamma by Ascl1 during neuronal
differentiation.

Huang HS(1), Kubish GM, Redmond TM, Turner DL, Thompson RC, Murphy GG, Uhler MD.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48105,
USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Ascl1 plays a critical role in
the intrinsic genetic program responsible for neuronal differentiation. Here, we 
describe a novel model system of P19 embryonic carcinoma cells with
doxycycline-inducible expression of Ascl1. Microarray hybridization and real-time
PCR showed that these cells demonstrated increased expression of many neuronal
proteins in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Interestingly, the gene
encoding the cell cycle regulator Gadd45gamma was increased earliest and to the
greatest extent following Ascl1 induction. Here, we provide the first evidence
identifying Gadd45gamma as a direct transcriptional target of Ascl1.
Transactivation and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays identified two E-box
consensus sites within the Gadd45gamma promoter necessary for Ascl1 regulation,
and demonstrated that Ascl1 is bound to this region within the Gadd45gamma
promoter. Furthermore, we found that overexpression of Gadd45gamma itself is
sufficient to initiate some aspects of neuronal differentiation independent of
Ascl1.

PMCID: PMC2905796
PMID: 20382226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Nat Biotechnol. 2010 Apr;28(4):333-5. doi: 10.1038/nbt0410-333.

Stem cell biologists sure play a mean pinball.

Sareen D(1), Svendsen CN.

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Medicine Institute at the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, California, USA.

PMCID: PMC3142542
PMID: 20379177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Pathobiology. 2010;77(2):53-63. doi: 10.1159/000278292. Epub 2010 Mar 22.

Key genes in lung cancer translational research: a meta-analysis.

Amelung JT(1), Bührens R, Beshay M, Reymond MA.

Author information: 
(1)Westfalian Wilhelms University Münster, Münster, Germany.

In lung cancer, integrating translational data from various histologies obtained 
in different patients under different conditions can increase their robustness.
This is a meta-analysis of cDNA array data obtained in 688 tumor patients (541
non-small cell lung cancer, 33 small cell lung cancer and 114 others) and 205
controls. 1,206 genes were found to be dysregulated in one of the 12
transcriptomics studies available. 748 results (62%) were obtained only once and 
might be questioned. 38% of observations could be reproduced twice or more. 346
genes were reported twice, 80 three times, 27 four and 5 five times. A common set
of genes dysregulated in lung cancer was obtained, including BPA1, DUSP6, ASCL1, 
RNAS1 and S100P. p63 and CK 5/6 p63 are useful for differentiating adenocarcinoma
and small cell lung cancer from squamous cell carcinoma. TFF-3 and MUC1 are
over-expressed in adenocarcinoma. INSM1, SGNE1 and H2AFZ are typical for small
cell lung cancer. Using a meta-analysis approach, it was possible to detect a
robust set of genes differentially expressed in lung cancer and to determine a
limited number of key genes linked to subtypes in lung cancer molecular
pathology.

PMID: 20332665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Am J Surg. 2010 Mar;199(3):315-8; discussion 318. doi:
10.1016/j.amjsurg.2009.08.034.

Xanthohumol inhibits the neuroendocrine transcription factor achaete-scute
complex-like 1, suppresses proliferation, and induces phosphorylated ERK1/2 in
medullary thyroid cancer.

Cook MR(1), Luo J, Ndiaye M, Chen H, Kunnimalaiyaan M.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratory, Department of Surgery, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Achaete-scute complex-like 1 (ASCL1) is a transcription factor
important in the malignant development of medullary thyroid cancer (MTC).
Activation of Raf-1 signaling is associated with ASCL1 suppression and growth
inhibition. Xanthohumol, a natural compound, has recently been shown to have
anticancer properties. We thus hypothesized that xanthohumol would suppress
growth by activating Raf-1 signaling, thus altering the malignant phenotype of
MTC.
METHODS: Human MTC cells were treated with xanthohumol (0-30 micromol/L) for up
to 6 days. Proliferation was measured by a methylthiazolyldiphenyl-tetrazolium
bromide (MTT) colorimetric assay. Western blot analysis was performed for ASCL1
and markers of Raf-1 pathway activation.
RESULTS: Treatment of MTC cells with xanthohumol resulted in a dose dependent
inhibition of growth. Additionally, induction of phosphorylated ERK1/2 and a
reduction of ASCL1 protein was noted.
CONCLUSIONS: Xanthohumol is a potent Raf-1 activator in MTC cells. This compound 
suppresses MTC growth, alters the malignant phenotype, and warrants further
preclinical study.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2841322
PMID: 20226902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mol Cancer. 2010 Mar 10;9:55. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-55.

Wnt-11 promotes neuroendocrine-like differentiation, survival and migration of
prostate cancer cells.

Uysal-Onganer P(1), Kawano Y, Caro M, Walker MM, Diez S, Darrington RS, Waxman J,
Kypta RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Imperial College London, London, UK.
p.onganer@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Wnt-11 is a secreted protein that modulates cell growth,
differentiation and morphogenesis during development. We previously reported that
Wnt-11 expression is elevated in hormone-independent prostate cancer and that the
progression of prostate cancer from androgen-dependent to androgen-independent
proliferation correlates with a loss of mutual inhibition between Wnt-11- and
androgen receptor-dependent signals. However, the prevalence of increased
expression of Wnt-11 in patient tumours and the functions of Wnt-11 in prostate
cancer cells were not known.
RESULTS: Wnt-11 protein levels in prostate tumours were determined by
immunohistochemical analysis of prostate tumour tissue arrays. Wnt-11 protein was
elevated in 77/117 of tumours when compared with 27 benign prostatic hypertrophy 
specimens and was present in 4/4 bone metastases. In addition, there was a
positive correlation between Wnt-11 expression and PSA levels above 10 ng/ml.
Androgen-depleted LNCaP prostate cancer cells form neurites and express genes
associated with neuroendocrine-like differentiation (NED), a feature of prostate 
tumours that have a poor prognosis. Since androgen-depletion increases expression
of Wnt-11, we examined the role of Wnt-11 in NED. Ectopic expression of Wnt-11
induced expression of NSE and ASCL1, which are markers of NED, and this was
prevented by inhibitors of cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase, consistent with
the known role of this kinase in NED. In contrast, Wnt-11 did not induce NSE
expression in RWPE-1 cells, which are derived from benign prostate, suggesting
that the role of Wnt-11 in NED is specific to prostate cancer. In addition,
silencing of Wnt-11 expression in androgen-depleted LNCaP cells prevented NED and
resulted in apoptosis. Silencing of Wnt-11 gene expression in
androgen-independent PC3 cells also reduced expression of NSE and increased
apoptosis. Finally, silencing of Wnt-11 reduced PC3 cell migration and ectopic
expression of Wnt-11 promoted LNCaP cell invasion.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations suggest that the increased level of Wnt-11 found 
in prostate cancer contributes to tumour progression by promoting NED, tumour
cell survival and cell migration/invasion, and may provide an opportunity for
novel therapy in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2846888
PMID: 20219091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Neurosci Lett. 2010 Apr 19;474(1):46-51. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.03.004. Epub 
2010 Mar 7.

Interaction of MTG family proteins with NEUROG2 and ASCL1 in the developing
nervous system.

Aaker JD(1), Patineau AL, Yang HJ, Ewart DT, Nakagawa Y, McLoon SC,
Koyano-Nakagawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, United States; Stem Cell Institute, United States.

During neural development, members of MTG family of transcriptional repressors
are induced by proneural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors and 
in turn inhibit the activity of the bHLH proteins, forming a negative feedback
loop that regulates the normal progression of neurogenesis. Three MTG genes,
MTG8, MTG16 and MTGR1, are expressed in distinct patterns in the developing
nervous system. Various bHLH proteins are also expressed in distinct patterns. We
asked whether there is a functional relationship between specific MTG and bHLH
proteins in developing chick spinal cord. First, we examined if each MTG gene is 
induced by specific bHLH proteins. Although expression of NEUROG2, ASCL1 and MTG 
genes overlapped, the boundaries of gene expression did not match. Ectopic
expression analysis showed that MTGR1 and NEUROD4, which show similar expression 
patterns, are regulated differently by NEUROG2 and ASCL1. Thus, our results show 
that expression of MTG genes is not regulated by a single upstream bHLH protein, 
but represents an integration of the activity of multiple regulators. Next, we
asked if each MTG protein inhibits specific bHLH proteins. Transcription assay
showed that NEUROG2 and ASCL1 are inhibited by MTGR1 and MTG16, and less
efficiently by MTG8. Deletion mapping of MTGR1 showed that MTGR1 binds NEUROG2
and ASCL1 using multiple interaction surfaces, and all conserved domains are
required for its repressor activity. These results support the model that MTG
proteins form a higher-order repressor complex and modulate transcriptional
activity of bHLH proteins during neurogenesis.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2862279
PMID: 20214951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Genomics. 2010 Jun;95(6):363-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2010.02.011. Epub 2010 Mar
4.

Efficient discovery of ASCL1 regulatory sequences through transgene pooling.

McGaughey DM(1), McCallion AS.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. davidm@jhmi.edu

Zebrafish transgenesis is a powerful and increasingly common strategy to assay
vertebrate transcriptional regulatory control. Several challenges remain,
however, to the broader application of this technique; they include increasing
the rate with which transgenes can be analyzed and maximizing the informational
value of the data generated. Presently, many rely on the injection of individual 
constructs and the analysis of resulting reporter expression in mosaic G0
embryos. Here, we contrast these approaches, examining whether injecting pooled
transgene constructs can increase the efficiency with which regulatory sequences 
can be assayed, restricting analysis to the offspring of germ line transmitting
transgenic zebrafish in an effort to reduce potential subjectivity. We selected a
64kb interval encompassing the human ASCL1 locus as our model interval and report
the analysis of 9 highly conserved putative enhancers therein. We identified 32
transgene-positive zebrafish, transmitting one or more independent constructs
displaying ASCL1-like regulatory control. Through examination of embryos
harboring one or more transgenes, we demonstrate that five of the nine sequences 
account for the observed control and describe their likely roles in ASCL1
regulation. These data demonstrate the utility of this approach and its potential
for further adaptation and higher throughput application.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2904508
PMID: 20206680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Brain Res Bull. 2010 Apr 29;82(1-2):74-82. doi:
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2010.02.010. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

A refined map of early gene expression in the dorsal rhombomere 1 of mouse
embryos.

Liu ZR(1), Shi M, Hu ZL, Zheng MH, Du F, Zhao G, Ding YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Xijng Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
15 Changle-xi Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, China.

Rhombomere 1 (r1), a temporary structure in the early developing brain, is
bounded rostrally by the isthmus organizer and caudally by the r2 domain. Many
genes involved in r1 induction and patterning have been identified. However, our 
knowledge of a comprehensive map of r1 regionalization defined by these genes at 
early embryonic stages remains fragmentary. In the present study, we examined the
expression of a variety of genes in the dorsal r1 of E9.0-E10.5 mouse embryos.
The expression domains within ventricular zone of these genes examined allowed us
to define four distinct regions along the anterior-posterior (A-P) axis of the
dorsal r1: the Wnt1/Lmx1a/Gdf7/Msx1/Msx2-positive roof plate,
Math1/Olig3/Msx1/Msx2-positive, upper rhombic lip, Mash1/Ngn1/Ngn2-positive
intermediate domain, and Mash1/Ngn1/Ngn2-positive rostral domain. Moreover, we
defined the distribution of several genes expressed in the mantle zone of the
dorsal r1, including Lmx1b, Lhx2, Lhx9, Phox2a and Phox2b. Taken together, our
gene expression data identify a refined subdivision of the dorsal r1 with four
distinct domains along the A-P axis and a mantle zone at early embryonic stages.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20206242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Glia. 2010 Jun;58(8):975-83. doi: 10.1002/glia.20979.

Dose-dependent effect of EGF on migration and differentiation of adult
subventricular zone astrocytes.

Gonzalez-Perez O(1), Quiñones-Hinojosa A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroscience, Facultad de Psicología, Universidad de Colima,
Colima, Col. 28040, México. osglez@gmail.com

Adult neural stem cells (NSCs) are located in the subventricular zone (SVZ), a
specialized brain niche located on the walls of the lateral ventricle. Under
physiological conditions, NSCs generate a large number of young neurons and some 
oligodendrocytes, however the mechanisms controlling cell proliferation and
migration are unclear. In vitro, epidermal growth factor (EGF) signaling has been
shown to be an important mediator of cell proliferation and migration in the
adult brain; however, the primary SVZ progenitors that respond to EGF are not
well known. In this study, we isolated SVZ type-B astrocytes and cultured them
under different EGF concentrations. We found a dose-dependent effect of EGF on
proliferation rates and migration of SVZ type-B astrocytes. We found that GFAP+
type-B astrocytes gave rise to highly migratory and proliferating cells that
expressed Olig2 and NG2. After EGF withdrawal, a significant number of
EGF-stimulated cells differentiated into S100beta+/O4+ oligodendrocytes. This
study provides new insights about the production of oligodendrocytes derived from
the astrocyte NSCs residing in the adult SVZ. To be able to manipulate the
endogenous adult progenitors, it is crucial to identify and isolate the
responding primary precursors and determine the extracellular signals that
regulate their cell division, migration, and fate.

PMCID: PMC2915565
PMID: 20187143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Am J Transl Res. 2010 Feb 10;2(1):119-25.

Notch in the development of thyroid C-cells and the treatment of medullary
thyroid cancer.

Cook M(1), Yu XM, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Endocrine Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin
Madison, Wisconsin.

The Notch pathway plays an important role in the normal development of
neuroendocrine cells, including the calcitonin producing C-cells of the thyroid. 
This effect has been elucidated to be mediated through modulation of
Achaete-Scute Complex Like 1 (ASCL1), a transcription factor associated with poor
prognosis in neuroendocrine cancer. Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) is one of the 
neuroendocrine cancers derived from the thyroid C-cells. The Notch pathway has
been shown to be inactive in MTC which may lead to altered expression of ASCL1.
Artificial induction of Notch signaling in MTC cells can suppress ASCL1
expression, the cell growth as well as hormone secreting potential.
Pharmacological activation of the Notch pathway also successfully suppresses the 
tumor growth in an animal model, which sheds light on the targeted therapy of
Notch as a potential treatment for intractable MTC.

PMCID: PMC2826828
PMID: 20182588  [PubMed]


303. Nature. 2010 Feb 25;463(7284):1031-2. doi: 10.1038/4631031a.

Regenerative medicine: Cell reprogramming gets direct.

Nicholas CR, Kriegstein AR.

Comment on
    Nature. 2010 Feb 25;463(7284):1035-41.

PMID: 20182502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2009;668:87-95.

Role of menin in neuroendocrine tumorigenesis.

Lairmore TC(1), Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, Scott and White Memorial Hospital Clinic, Texas
A&M University System Health Sciences Center College of Medicine, 2401 S. 31st
Street, Temple, Texas 76508, USA. tlairmore@swmail.sw.org

The menin protein encoded by the MEN1 tumor suppressor gene is ubiquitously
expressed and highly conserved evolutionarily. The combination of findings from
current in vitro and in vivo studies has not yielded a comprehensive
understanding of the mechanisms of menin's tumor suppressor activity or the
specific role for menin in endocrine tumorigenesis, although its diverse
interactions suggest possible pivotal roles in transcriptional regulation, DNA
processing and repair and cytoskeletal integrity. This manuscript summarizes
recent research findings including studies of global gene expression in
MEN1-associated neuroendocrine tumors and pivotal changes in intracellular
signaling pathways associated with neuroendocrine tumorigenesis. Finally, the
clinical applications provided by the understanding of the effects of MEN1 gene
mutations on neuroendocrine tumor development in patients with this familial
cancer syndrome are discussed.

PMID: 20175456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Dev Biol. 2010 Apr 15;340(2):490-503. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.02.002. Epub 2010
Feb 6.

Neurog2 controls the leading edge of neurogenesis in the mammalian retina.

Hufnagel RB(1), Le TT, Riesenberg AL, Brown NL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Ophthalmology, Division of Developmental
Biology, Cincinnati Children's Research Foundation, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

In the mammalian retina, neuronal differentiation begins in the dorso-central
optic cup and sweeps peripherally and ventrally. While certain extrinsic factors 
have been implicated, little is known about the intrinsic factors that direct
this process. In this study, we evaluate the expression and function of proneural
bHLH transcription factors during the onset of mouse retinal neurogenesis.
Dorso-central retinal progenitor cells that give rise to the first postmitotic
neurons express Neurog2/Ngn2 and Atoh7/Math5. In the absence of Neurog2, the
spread of neurogenesis stalls, along with Atoh7 expression and RGC
differentiation. However, neurogenesis is eventually restored, and at birth
Neurog2 mutant retinas are reduced in size, with only a slight increase in the
retinal ganglion cell population. We find that the re-establishment of
neurogenesis coincides with the onset of Ascl1 expression, and that Ascl1 can
rescue the early arrest of neural development in the absence of Neurog2.
Together, this study supports the hypothesis that the intrinsic factors Neurog2
and Ascl1 regulate the temporal progression of retinal neurogenesis by directing 
overlapping waves of neuron formation.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2854206
PMID: 20144606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Oncogene. 2010 Apr 29;29(17):2477-87. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.10. Epub 2010 Feb 8.

Pim1 kinase synergizes with c-MYC to induce advanced prostate carcinoma.

Wang J(1), Kim J, Roh M, Franco OE, Hayward SW, Wills ML, Abdulkadir SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
TN 37232, USA.

The oncogenic PIM1 kinase has been implicated as a cofactor for c-MYC in prostate
carcinogenesis. In this study, we show that in human prostate tumors,
coexpression of c-MYC and PIM1 is associated with higher Gleason grades. Using a 
tissue recombination model coupled with lentiviral-mediated gene transfer we find
that Pim1 is weakly oncogenic in naive adult mouse prostatic epithelium. However,
it cooperates dramatically with c-MYC to induce prostate cancer within 6-weeks.
Importantly, c-MYC/Pim1 synergy is critically dependent on Pim1 kinase activity. 
c-MYC/Pim1 tumors showed increased levels of the active serine-62 (S62)
phosphorylated form of c-MYC. Grafts expressing a phosphomimetic c-MYCS62D mutant
had higher rates of proliferation than grafts expressing wild type c-MYC but did 
not form tumors like c-MYC/Pim1 grafts, indicating that Pim1 cooperativity with
c-MYC in vivo involves additional mechanisms other than enhancement of c-MYC
activity by S62 phosphorylation. c-MYC/Pim1-induced prostate carcinomas show
evidence of neuroendocrine (NE) differentiation. Additional studies, including
the identification of tumor cells coexpressing androgen receptor and NE cell
markers synaptophysin and Ascl1 suggested that NE tumors arose from
adenocarcinoma cells through transdifferentiation. These results directly show
functional cooperativity between c-MYC and PIM1 in prostate tumorigenesis in vivo
and support efforts for targeting PIM1 in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2861731
PMID: 20140016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Mol Cancer Res. 2010 Feb;8(2):194-203. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0185. Epub
2010 Feb 2.

ASCL1 regulates the expression of the CHRNA5/A3/B4 lung cancer susceptibility
locus.

Improgo MR(1), Schlichting NA, Cortes RY, Zhao-Shea R, Tapper AR, Gardner PD.

Author information: 
(1)Brudnick Neuropsychiatric Research Institute, Department of Psychiatry,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01604, USA.

Tobacco contains a variety of carcinogens as well as the addictive compound
nicotine. Nicotine addiction begins with the binding of nicotine to its cognate
receptor, the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR). Genome-wide association
studies have implicated the nAChR gene cluster, CHRNA5/A3/B4, in nicotine
addiction and lung cancer susceptibility. To further delineate the role of this
gene cluster in lung cancer, we examined the expression levels of these three
genes as well as other members of the nAChR gene family in lung cancer cell lines
and patient samples using quantitative reverse transcription-PCR. Overexpression 
of the clustered nAChR genes was observed in small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC), an
aggressive form of lung cancer highly associated with cigarette smoking. The
overexpression of the genomically clustered genes in SCLC suggests their
coordinate regulation. In silico analysis of the promoter regions of these genes 
revealed putative binding sites in all three promoters for achaete-scute complex 
homolog 1 (ASCL1), a transcription factor implicated in the pathogenesis of SCLC,
raising the possibility that this factor may regulate the expression of the
clustered nAChR genes. Consistent with this idea, knockdown of ASCL1 in SCLC, but
not in non-SCLC, led to a significant decrease in expression of the alpha 3 and
beta 4 genes without having an effect on any other highly expressed nAChR gene.
Our data indicate a specific role for ASCL1 in regulating the expression of the
CHRNA5/A3/B4 lung cancer susceptibility locus. This regulation may contribute to 
the predicted role that ASCL1 plays in SCLC tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2824774
PMID: 20124469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Nature. 2010 Feb 25;463(7284):1035-41. doi: 10.1038/nature08797. Epub 2010 Jan
27.

Direct conversion of fibroblasts to functional neurons by defined factors.

Vierbuchen T(1), Ostermeier A, Pang ZP, Kokubu Y, Südhof TC, Wernig M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Department of
Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 1050 Arastradero Road, Palo
Alto, California 94304, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Res. 2010 May;20(5):502-3.
    Nature. 2010 Feb 25;463(7284):1031-2.

Cellular differentiation and lineage commitment are considered to be robust and
irreversible processes during development. Recent work has shown that mouse and
human fibroblasts can be reprogrammed to a pluripotent state with a combination
of four transcription factors. This raised the question of whether transcription 
factors could directly induce other defined somatic cell fates, and not only an
undifferentiated state. We hypothesized that combinatorial expression of
neural-lineage-specific transcription factors could directly convert fibroblasts 
into neurons. Starting from a pool of nineteen candidate genes, we identified a
combination of only three factors, Ascl1, Brn2 (also called Pou3f2) and Myt1l,
that suffice to rapidly and efficiently convert mouse embryonic and postnatal
fibroblasts into functional neurons in vitro. These induced neuronal (iN) cells
express multiple neuron-specific proteins, generate action potentials and form
functional synapses. Generation of iN cells from non-neural lineages could have
important implications for studies of neural development, neurological disease
modelling and regenerative medicine.

PMCID: PMC2829121
PMID: 20107439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 Feb;9(2):429-37. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-0718. Epub
2010 Jan 26.

Identification of a novel Raf-1 pathway activator that inhibits gastrointestinal 
carcinoid cell growth.

Cook MR(1), Pinchot SN, Jaskula-Sztul R, Luo J, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratory, University of Wisconsin, and the
University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

Carcinoids are neuroendocrine tumors (NET) that secrete hormones, including
serotonin, resulting in the malignant carcinoid syndrome. In addition to the
significant morbidity associated with the syndrome, carcinoids are frequently
metastatic at diagnosis, and untreated mortality at 5 years exceeds 70%. Surgery 
is the only curative option, and the need for other therapies is clear. We have
previously shown that activation of Raf-1 inhibits carcinoid cell proliferation. 
We investigated the ability of leflunomide (LFN), a Food and Drug
Administration-approved medication for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, and
its active metabolite teriflunomide (TFN) as a potential anti-NET treatment. LFN 
and TFN inhibit the in vitro proliferation of gastrointestinal carcinoid cells
and induce G(2)-M phase arrest. Daily oral gavage of nude mice with subcutaneous 
xenografted carcinoid tumors confirms that LFN can inhibit NET growth in vivo.
Treatment with TFN suppresses the cellular levels of serotonin and chromogranin
A, a glycopeptide co-secreted with bioactive hormones. Additionally, TFN reduces 
the level of achaete-scute complex-like 1 (ASCL1), a NET marker correlated with
survival. These effects are associated with the activation of the
Raf-1/mitiogen-activated protein kinase kinase/extracellular signal-regulated
kinase-1/2 pathway, and blockade of mitiogen-activated protein kinase kinase
signaling reversed the effects of TFN on markers of the cell cycle and ASCL1
expression. In summary, LFN and TFN inhibit carcinoid cell proliferation in vitro
and in vivo and alter the expression of NET markers. This compound thus
represents an attractive target for further clinical investigation.

PMCID: PMC2820603
PMID: 20103603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Feb 19;392(4):548-50. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.01.061. Epub 2010 Jan 25.

Examination of the MASH1 gene in patients with Parkinson's disease.

Deng H(1), Yang H, Le W, Deng X, Xu H, Xiong W, Zhu S, Xie W, Song Z, Jankovic J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Medicine, The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, PR China.

Several genetic variants in transcription factor genes have been reported to be
associated with Parkinson's disease (PD). The mammalian achaete-scute homolog 1
gene (MASH1) controls development of the locus coeruleus. Furthermore,
polyglutamine length variation in MASH1 gene appears to confer protective effects
against PD, at least in Japanese population. To determine whether genetic
variation in the coding region of the MASH1 gene plays a role in the etiology of 
PD Caucasian patients, we analyzed the whole coding region of the MASH1 gene in
PD patients from North America. Case-control analysis showed nominal association 
between polyglutamine length variation in MASH1 and Caucasian PD, 8% of PD vs 13%
of normal controls had 13 CAG repeats (p=0.027, chi2=4.906). Our data support the
role of the polyglutamine length variants in the MASH1 gene in PD susceptibility.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20097173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 6;5(1):e8596. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008596.

Increased stathmin1 expression in the dentate gyrus of mice causes abnormal
axonal arborizations.

Yamada K(1), Matsuzaki S, Hattori T, Kuwahara R, Taniguchi M, Hashimoto H,
Shintani N, Baba A, Kumamoto N, Yamada K, Yoshikawa T, Katayama T, Tohyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) is involved in
multiple brain functions. To clarify the cause of abnormal behavior in PACAP
deficient-mice, we attempted the identification of genes whose expression was
altered in the dentate gyrus of PACAP-deficient mice using the differential
display method. Expression of stathmin1 was up-regulated in the dentate gyrus at 
both the mRNA and protein levels. PACAP stimulation inhibited stathmin1
expression in PC12 cells, while increased stathmin1expression in neurons of the
subgranular zone and in primary cultured hippocampal neurons induced abnormal
arborization of axons. We also investigated the pathways involved in PACAP
deficiency. Ascl1 binds to E10 box of the stathmin1 promoter and increases
stathmin1 expression. Inhibitory bHLH proteins (Hes1 and Id3) were rapidly
up-regulated by PACAP stimulation, and Hes1 could suppress Ascl1 expression and
Id3 could inhibit Ascl1 signaling. We also detected an increase of stathmin1
expression in the brains of schizophrenic patients. These results suggest that
up-regulation of stathmin1 in the dentate gyrus, secondary to PACAP deficiency,
may create abnormal neuronal circuits that cause abnormal behavior.

PMCID: PMC2797614
PMID: 20062533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Comp Neurol. 2010 Mar 15;518(6):851-71. doi: 10.1002/cne.22247.

Phylotypic expression of the bHLH genes Neurogenin2, Neurod, and Mash1 in the
mouse embryonic forebrain.

Osório J(1), Mueller T, Rétaux S, Vernier P, Wullimann MF.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, Institute of Neurobiology A. Fessard, Development, Evolution, Plasticity
of the Nervous System, Research Unit 2197, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

In the anamniote model animals, zebrafish and Xenopus laevis, highly comparable
early forebrain expression patterns of proneural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
genes relevant for neurogenesis (atonal homologs, i.e., neurogenins/NeuroD and
achaete-scute homologs, i.e., Ascl/ash) were previously revealed during a
particular period of development (zebrafish: 3 days; frog: stage 48).
Neurogenins/NeuroD on the one hand and Ascl1/ash1 on the other hand exhibit
essentially mutually exclusive spatial patterns, probably reflecting different
positional information received within the neural tube, and appear to underlie
glutamatergic versus GABAergic neuronal differentiation, respectively.
Significant data suggest that similar complementary localizations of these
proneural genes and corresponding differentiation pathways also exist in the
mouse, the prominent mammalian model. The present article reports on detailed
mouse brain bHLH gene expression patterns to fill existing gaps in the
identification of expression domains, especially outside the telencephalon.
Clearly, there are strong similarities in the complementarity of territories
expressing Ascl1/Mash 1 versus neurogenins/NeuroD in the entire mouse forebrain, 
except for the pretectal alar plate and basal plate of prosomeres 1-3. The
analysis substantiates localization of neurogenins/NeuroD in the pallium,
eminentia thalami, and dorsal thalamus, and expression of Ascl1/Mash 1 in the
striatal and septal subpallium, preoptic region, ventral thalamus, and
hypothalamus, which is highly similar to the situation described in Xenopus and
zebrafish. Thus, all three vertebrate model species display a "phylotypic stage
or period" corresponding to a temporally and spatially defined control of
neurogenesis during forebrain development, ultimately resulting in the
differentiation of distinct populations of glutamatergic versus GABAergic
neurons.

PMID: 20058311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Lab Invest. 2010 Feb;90(2):180-95. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2009.135. Epub 2009 Dec
21.

The role of hypoxia and neurogenic genes (Mash-1 and Prox-1) in the developmental
programming and maturation of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells in fetal mouse lung.

McGovern S(1), Pan J, Oliver G, Cutz E, Yeger H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, CIHR
Group on Lung Development, The Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G1X8.

Pulmonary neuroendocrine cells (PNECs) are the first cell type to differentiate
within the primitive airway epithelium, suggesting a possible role in lung
development. The differentiation of PNECs in fetal lung is governed by proneural 
genes such as the mammalian homolog of the achaete-scute complex (Mash-1) and a
related transcription factor, hairy and enhancer of split1 (Hes-1). We examined
the expression of Mash-1 and a downstream transcription factor Prox-1 in the
developing mouse lung of wild-type and respective knockout mouse models. During
early stages (embryonic day 12, E12) of development, only some PNECs expressed
Mash-1 and Prox-1, but by E15, all PNECs coexpressed both transcription factors. 
PNECs failed to develop in Mash-1 but not in Prox-1-null mice, indicating that
Mash-1 is essential for the initiation of the PNEC phenotype, whereas Prox-1 is
associated with the development of this phenotype. As lung develops within a low 
O(2) environment (fetal euoxia, pO(2) approximately 20 to 30 mm Hg), we examined 
the effects of hypoxia on PNEC differentiation. Organ cultures of fetal mouse
lungs at E12 and E16 were maintained under either 20% O(2) (normoxia, Nox) or 5% 
O(2) (hypoxia, Hox) and were examined every 24 h for up to 6 days in culture. In 
E12 explants, Hox enhanced branching morphogenesis and increased cell
proliferation, but PNEC numbers and Mash-1 expression were significantly reduced.
This effect could be reversed by switching the explants back to Nox. In contrast,
Hox had no apparent effect on Hes-1 expression. Similarly, Hox had no effect on
airway branching, PNEC numbers, or Mash-1 expression in E16 explants, indicating 
locked-in developmental programming. We suggest that during early stages of lung 
development, pO(2) concentration in concert with neurogenic gene expression
modulates PNEC phenotype. Thus, disturbances in intrauterine pO(2) homeostasis
could alter the functional maturation of the PNEC system and hence be involved in
the pathogenesis of various perinatal pulmonary disorders.

PMCID: PMC2853028
PMID: 20027181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Brain Res. 2010 Feb 22;1315:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.12.013. Epub 2009 
Dec 16.

The modulatory effects of bHLH transcription factors with the Wnt/beta-catenin
pathway on differentiation of neural progenitor cells derived from neonatal mouse
anterior subventricular zone.

Zhang C(1), Zhang Z, Shu H, Liu S, Song Y, Qiu K, Yang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, 2-V Xinqiao Street, Chongqing 400037, China.

The subventricular zone (SVZ) located adjacent to the lateral ventricles is the
major site where neural progenitor cells (NPCs) are concentrated in the adult
brain. NPCs in the anterior subventricular zone (SVZa) generate neuronal
precursors and migrate along a highly localized pathway--the rostral migratory
stream (RMS) to the olfactory bulb (OB), where they differentiate into
interneurons. To investigate the modulatory effects of basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factors on differentiation from SVZa NPCs, we firstly
examined the distribution of bHLH family members (Mash1, Id2, and Hes1) in
cultured mouse SVZa NPCs and evaluated their regulatory effects on
differentiation by transfection with Mash1, Id2, or Hes1 eukaryotic expression
plasmid. Furthermore, we assessed the effects of bHLH transcription factors on
the expression of downstream molecules of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway,
beta-catenin and (Glycogen synthase kinase-3beta). Our results demonstrated that 
Mash1, Id2, Hes1 were all widely expressed in in vitro progenies from mouse SVZa 
NPCs. Analyses of SVZa NPCs transfected with eukaryotic expression plasmids
showed that Mash1 promoted neuronal differentiation from SVZa NPCs, while Id2 and
Hes1 repressed neuronal differentiation. In addition, we found that Id2 and Hes1 
simulated expression of beta-catenin and GSK-3beta, while Mash1 inhibited their
expression. Our results suggest that the classic bHLH transcription factors,
Mash1, Id2 and Hes1, play important roles in the regulation of differentiation
from SVZa NPCs. This modulation is possibly mediated by a coordination of bHLH
and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling.

2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20018178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Am J Transl Res. 2009 Jan 31;1(2):178-83.

Sodium butyrate activates Notch1 signaling, reduces tumor markers, and induces
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in pheochromocytoma.

Cayo MA(1), Cayo AK, Jarjour SM, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin, H4/750 Clinical Science Center
600 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53792, USA.

BACKGROUND: Pheochromocytoma is a neuroendocrine (NE) tumor of the adrenal
medulla for which surgical resection is the only therapy. However, 10-46% of
tumors are metastatic or have malignant features, and are often inoperable. Our
lab has demonstrated the importance of the Notch1 signaling pathway in NE
neoplasia, indicating that this pathway could be a target for emergent treatments
in pheochromocytoma. It has recently become clear that histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors influence Notch1 signaling. We hypothesized that the HDAC inhibitor
Sodium Butyrate (NaB) might activate Notch1 in pheochromocytoma resulting in
altered tumor cell proliferation.
METHODS: Pheochromocytoma (PC-12) cells were treated with increasing
concentrations of NaB. MTT cellular proliferation assay was used to determine the
effect of NaB on PC-12 cell growth. Expression of Notch1, NE markers, and cell
cycle proteins was studied using Western analysis.
RESULTS: Untreated PC-12 cells lack Notch1 activity. Treatment with NaB led to a 
dose-dependent induction of Notch1 signaling, reduction of NE markers ASCL1 and
CgA, and a significant reduction in cellular proliferation. Levels of expression 
of cyclin D1, p21, cleaved PARP, and cleaved caspase 3 proteins indicated the
presence of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis following NaB treatment.
CONCLUSION: NaB activated Notch1 signaling, inhibited cellular proliferation,
reduced NE markers, and induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in
pheochromocytoma cells. This data indicates that activation of Notch1 signaling
is a promising potential therapy or palliative measure for pheochromocytoma that 
warrants further investigation.

PMCID: PMC2776315
PMID: 19956429  [PubMed]


316. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Nov 24;106(47):19895-900. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0910894106. Epub 2009 Nov 10.

Her6 regulates the neurogenetic gradient and neuronal identity in the thalamus.

Scholpp S(1), Delogu A, Gilthorpe J, Peukert D, Schindler S, Lumsden A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, New Hunt's House, Guy's Campus,
King's College London, London SE1 1UL, United Kingdom. steffen.scholpp@kit.edu

During vertebrate brain development, the onset of neuronal differentiation is
under strict temporal control. In the mammalian thalamus and other brain regions,
neurogenesis is regulated also in a spatially progressive manner referred to as a
neurogenetic gradient, the underlying mechanism of which is unknown. Here we
describe the existence of a neurogenetic gradient in the zebrafish thalamus and
show that the progression of neurogenesis is controlled by dynamic expression of 
the bHLH repressor her6. Members of the Hes/Her family are known to regulate
proneural genes, such as Neurogenin and Ascl. Here we find that Her6 determines
not only the onset of neurogenesis but also the identity of thalamic neurons,
marked by proneural and neurotransmitter gene expression: loss of Her6 leads to
premature Neurogenin1-mediated genesis of glutamatergic (excitatory) neurons,
whereas maintenance of Her6 leads to Ascl1-mediated production of GABAergic
(inhibitory) neurons. Thus, the presence or absence of a single upstream
regulator of proneural gene expression, Her6, leads to the establishment of
discrete neuronal domains in the thalamus.

PMCID: PMC2775703
PMID: 19903880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Dec;9(8):555-61. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2009.10.002. Epub
2009 Oct 13.

Organization of the human embryonic ventral mesencephalon.

Nelander J(1), Hebsgaard JB, Parmar M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medical Science and Lund Strategic Center for Stem 
Cell, Biology and Cell Therapy, Lund University, Sweden.

The neurons in the ventral mesencephalon (VM) are organized into several nuclei
consisting of distinct neuronal populations. These include the dopaminergic (DA) 
neurons of the substania nigra and ventral tegmental area, the oculomotor (OM)
neurons that innervate the muscles controlling eye movement, and the reticular
neurons of the red nucleus (RN) involved in motor control and coordination
reviewed in Puelles (2007). The factors and genes that control the
differentiation of the various neuronal populations in the VM have been
extensively studied in the mouse and other model organisms but little is known
about the progenitors and their protein expression in the developing human brain.
In this study we analyze if key regulators identified in rodents are also
expressed in the human VM during embryonic development. We report that BLBP and
LMX1A mark the floor plate and that FOXA2 is expressed in both the floor plate
and basal plate of the human VM. The proneural transcription factors NGN2 and
MASH1 are expressed in the ventricular zone of the human VM within and lateral to
the floor plate. The post-mitotic DA neurons express TH as well as NURR1 and
PITX3. ISL1 and BRN3A can be used to detect the cells of OM and RN, respectively.
We show that many key developmental control factors are expressed in a temporal
and spatial manner in the human VM essentially corresponding to what has been
observed in the mouse. This data therefore suggest similar roles for these
factors also in human VM development and dopamine neurogenesis.

PMID: 19825428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Development. 2009 Nov;136(21):3575-84. doi: 10.1242/dev.038133. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

BMP signaling regulates sympathetic nervous system development through
Smad4-dependent and -independent pathways.

Morikawa Y(1), Zehir A, Maska E, Deng C, Schneider MD, Mishina Y, Cserjesi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA
70118, USA.

Induction of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) from its neural crest (NC)
precursors is dependent on BMP signaling from the dorsal aorta. To determine the 
roles of BMP signaling and the pathways involved in SNS development, we
conditionally knocked out components of the BMP pathways. To determine if BMP
signaling is a cell-autonomous requirement of SNS development, the Alk3 (BMP
receptor IA) was deleted in the NC lineage. The loss of Alk3 does not prevent NC 
cell migration, but the cells die immediately after reaching the dorsal aorta.
The paired homeodomain factor Phox2b, known to be essential for survival of SNS
precursors, is downregulated, suggesting that Phox2b is a target of BMP
signaling. To determine if Alk3 signals through the canonical BMP pathway, Smad4 
was deleted in the NC lineage. Loss of Smad4 does not affect neurogenesis and
ganglia formation; however, proliferation and noradrenergic differentiation are
reduced. Analysis of transcription factors regulating SNS development shows that 
the basic helix-loop-helix factor Ascl1 is downregulated by loss of Smad4 and
that Ascl1 regulates SNS proliferation but not noradrenergic differentiation. To 
determine if the BMP-activated Tak1 (Map3k7) pathway plays a role in SNS
development, Tak1 was deleted in the NC lineage. We show that Tak1 is not
involved in SNS development. Taken together, our results suggest multiple roles
for BMP signaling during SNS development. The Smad4-independent pathway acts
through the activation of Phox2b to regulate survival of SNS precursors, whereas 
the Smad4-dependent pathway controls noradrenergic differentiation and regulates 
proliferation by maintaining Ascl1 expression.

PMCID: PMC2761108
PMID: 19793887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Pathol. 2009 Dec;219(4):463-72. doi: 10.1002/path.2614.

Cholinergic switch associated with morphological differentiation in
neuroblastoma.

Bourdeaut F(1), Janoueix-Lerosey I, Lucchesi C, Paris R, Ribeiro A, de Pontual L,
Amiel J, Lyonnet S, Pierron G, Michon J, Peuchmaur M, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U830, Institut Curie, Génétique et biologie des Cancers, Paris, France.

The morphology of malignant cells distinguishes between undifferentiated, poorly 
differentiated and differentiating neuroblastomas and constitutes a strong
prognostic factor. Spontaneous or treatment-induced maturation characterizes a
subset of neuroblastomas. It constitutes the basis of retinoic acid treatment to 
improve survival in aggressive neuroblastomas. However, the molecular events that
drive differentiation are poorly understood. In the present study we have
investigated the relationships between gene expression profiles and
differentiation criteria in stroma-poor neuroblastomas. This study included three
undifferentiated (UN), 20 poorly differentiated (PDN) and 11 differentiating (DN)
neuroblastomas. These groups could be clearly separated using unsupervised
clustering methods, which further enabled a major classification impact of genes 
involved in neural development, differentiation and function to be identified.
UNs are characterized by high ASCL1, high PHOX2B, low GATA2, low TH and low DBH
expressions. Most PDNs harbour a clear adrenergic phenotype, even in the presence
of missense PHOX2B mutations. Finally, all DN tumours demonstrate cholinergic
features. Depending upon their association with adrenergic characteristics, this 
enables dual 'cholinergic/adrenergic' and 'fully cholinergic' neuroblastomas to
be defined. This suggests that the cholinergic switch, a final specification
process that occurs physiologically in a minority of sympathetic neurons, is a
critical step of differentiation in some neuroblastic tumours. This switch is
associated with a down regulation of DBH that is apparently not strictly
dependent upon PHOX2B. Conversely, GATA2 and TFAP2B may play critical roles in
maintaining adrenergic features in poorly differentiated tumours.

PMID: 19768740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Cereb Cortex. 2010 May;20(5):1234-44. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp187. Epub 2009 Sep
18.

GABAergic differentiation induced by Mash1 is compromised by the bHLH proteins
Neurogenin2, NeuroD1, and NeuroD2.

Roybon L(1), Mastracci TL, Ribeiro D, Sussel L, Brundin P, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Neuronal Survival Unit, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Wallenberg
Neuroscience Center, 221 84 Lund, Sweden. lr2491@columbia.edu

During forebrain development, Mash1 directs gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic
neuron differentiation ventrally in the ganglionic eminences. Repression of Mash1
in the cortex is necessary to prevent the formation of GABAergic interneurons.
Negative regulation of Mash1 has been attributed to members of the Neurogenin
family; the genetic ablation of Neurogenin2 (Ngn2) leads to the derepression of
Mash1 and the formation of ectopic GABAergic neurons in the cortex. We have
developed an in vitro system to clarify the importance of NeuroD proteins in the 
Mash1 regulatory pathway. Using a neurosphere culture system, we show that the
downstream effectors of the Ngn2 pathway NeuroD1 and NeuroD2 can abrogate
GABAergic differentiation directed by Mash1. The ectopic expression of either of 
these genes in Mash1-expressing cells derived from the lateral ganglionic
eminence, independently downregulate Mash1 expression without affecting
expression of distal less homeodomain genes. This results in a complete loss of
the GABAergic phenotype. Moreover, we demonstrate that ectopic expression of
Mash1 in cortical progenitors is sufficient to phenocopy the loss of Ngn2 and
strongly enhances ectopic GABAergic differentiation. Collectively, our results
define the compensatory and cross-regulatory mechanisms that exist among basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors during neuronal fate specification.

PMID: 19767311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Surg Res. 2010 Jan;158(1):15-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2009.05.032.

MG-132 inhibits carcinoid growth and alters the neuroendocrine phenotype.

Chen JY(1), Cook MR, Pinchot SN, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratories, Department of Surgery, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53792, USA. chen@surgery.wisc.edu

BACKGROUND: Carcinoid cancers are the most common neuroendocrine (NE) tumors, and
limited treatment options exist. The inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta
(GSK-3beta) has been shown to be a potential therapeutic target for the treatment
of carcinoid disease. In this study, we investigate the ability of MG-132, a
proteasome inhibitor, to inhibit carcinoid growth, the neuroendocrine phenotype, 
and its association with GSK-3beta.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human pulmonary (NCI-H727) and gastrointestinal (BON)
carcinoid cells were treated with MG-132 (0-4microM). Cellular growth was
measured by the 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazole-2-yl]-2,5 diphenyl tetrazolium bromide
(MTT) assay. Levels of total and phosphorylated GSK-3beta and the NE markers
chromogranin A (CgA), Achaete-Scute complex-like 1 (ASCL1), as well as the
apoptotic markers poly (ADP-ribose), polymerase (PARP), and cleaved caspase-3
were determined by Western blot.
RESULTS: Treating carcinoid cells with MG-132 resulted in growth inhibition, a
dose-dependent inhibition of CgA and ASCL1, as well as an increase in the levels 
of cleaved PARP and cleaved caspase-3. Additionally, an increase in the level of 
phosphorylated GSK-3beta was observed.
CONCLUSION: MG-132 inhibits cellular growth and the neuroendocrine phenotype.
This proteasome inhibitor warrants further preclinical investigation as a
possible therapeutic strategy for intractable carcinoid disease.

PMCID: PMC2795050
PMID: 19765735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. No To Hattatsu. 2009 Sep;41(5):365-7.

[Case of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Fukumura S, Tachi N.

PMID: 19764459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. BMC Cancer. 2009 Sep 10;9:321. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-321.

Identification of Achaete-scute complex-like 1 (ASCL1) target genes and
evaluation of DKK1 and TPH1 expression in pancreatic endocrine tumours.

Johansson TA(1), Westin G, Skogseid B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala University
Hospital, SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden. terese.johansson@medsci.uu.se

BACKGROUND: ASCL1 role in pancreatic endocrine tumourigenesis has not been
established. Recently it was suggested that ASCL1 negatively controls expression 
of the Wnt signalling antagonist DKK1. Notch signalling regulates expression of
TPH1, the rate limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of serotonin. Understanding
the development and proliferation of pancreatic endocrine tumours (PETs) is
essential for the development of new therapies.
METHODS: ASCL1 target genes in the pancreatic endocrine tumour cell line BON1
were identified by RNA interference and microarray expression analysis. Protein
expressions of selected target genes in PETs were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: 158 annotated ASCL1 target genes were identified in BON1 cells, among
them DKK1 and TPH1 that were negatively regulated by ASCL1. An inverse relation
of ASCL1 to DKK1 protein expression was observed for 15 out of 22 tumours (68%). 
Nine tumours displayed low ASCL1/high DKK1 and six tumours high ASCL1/low DKK1
expression. Remaining PETs showed high ASCL1/high DKK1 (n = 4) or low ASCL1/low
DKK1 (n = 3) expression. Nine of twelve analysed PETs (75%) showed TPH1
expression with no relation to ASCL1.
CONCLUSION: A number of genes with potential importance for PET tumourigenesis
have been identified. ASCL1 negatively regulated the Wnt signalling antagonist
DKK1, and TPH1 expression in BON1 cells. In concordance with these findings DKK1 
showed an inverse relation to ASCL1 expression in a subset of PETs, which may
affect growth control by the Wnt signalling pathway.

PMCID: PMC2749870
PMID: 19744316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Cell Biol Int. 2009 Nov;33(11):1173-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cellbi.2009.08.004. Epub
2009 Aug 23.

Mesenchymal stem cells regulate the proliferation and differentiation of neural
stem cells through Notch signaling.

Wang Y(1), Tu W, Lou Y, Xie A, Lai X, Guo F, Deng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Urology, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330006, China.

The effects of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) on proliferation and cell fate
determination of neural stem cells (NSCs) have been investigated. NSCs were
co-cultured with MSCs or NIH3T3 cells using an in vitro transwell system. After 4
days, immunofluorescence staining showed that the number of cells positive for
the cell proliferation antigen, ki-67, in neurospheres in MSCs was greater than
in NIH3T3 cells. In some experiments, the top-layers of MSCs and NIH3T3 cells
were removed to induce NSCs differentiation. Seven days after initiating
differentiation, the levels of the neuronal marker, NSE, were higher in NSCs in
MSCs co-culture group, and those of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) were
lower, compared with NIH3T3 cells co-culture group. These were confirmed by
immunofluorescence. The role of the Notch signaling pathway analyzed with the
specific inhibitor, DAPT, and by examining the expression of Notch-related genes 
using RT-PCR showed that after co-culturing with MSCs for 24h, NSCs expressed
much higher levels of ki-67, Notch1, and Hes1 than did NSCs co-cultured with
NIH3T3 cells. Treatment with DAPT decreased ki-67, Notch1 and Hes1 expression in 
NCSs, and increased Mash1 expression. The data indicate that the interactions
between MSCs and NSCs promote NSCs proliferation and are involved in specifying
neuronal fate, mediated in part by Notch signaling.

PMID: 19706332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Scand J Immunol. 2009 Sep;70(3):216-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2009.02286.x.

Expression of CD4 on Epstein-Barr virus-immortalized B cells.

Hoennscheidt C(1), Max D, Richter N, Staege MS.

Author information: 
(1)University Clinic and Polyclinic for Child and Adolescent Medicine,
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, D-06097 Halle, Germany.

Human antigen presenting cells commonly express CD4 but the significance of this 
phenomenon has not been clarified. We analyzed a panel of Epstein-Barr
virus-immortalized B cells (so called lymphoblastoid cell lines, LCL) by using
flow cytometry, DNA-microarray analysis, and reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR). The number of CD4(+) cells varied from cell line to cell
line but expression of CD4 was detected by flow cytometry and RT-PCR in all
investigated cell lines. To characterize CD4 expressing LCL in more detail, we
separated CD4(+) and CD4(-) cells from single cell lines by using immunomagnetic 
beads. When we cultured sorted CD4(+) and CD4(-) cells, we observed that CD4
expression was stable for several passages. However, the number of CD4(+) cells
decreased with time in culture. We never observed that CD4(-) cell lines returned
back to a CD4(+) phenotype. DNA-microarray analysis of isolated CD4(+) and CD4(-)
cells indicated that the overall gene expression profile of both cell populations
was highly similar. In addition, CD4(+) and CD4(-) cells showed the same
allostimulatory capacity. CD4(+) LCL showed a slightly increased interleukin-16
induced chemotaxis. Differences in the gene expression profile of CD4(+) and
CD4(-) cell lines suggested that loss of CD4 expression occurred during a
differentiation step involving achaete-scute complex homolog-like 1.

PMID: 19703011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. World J Surg. 2009 Nov;33(11):2452-7. doi: 10.1007/s00268-009-0175-3.

Inhibition of the PI3K pathway suppresses hormonal secretion and limits growth in
pheochromocytoma cells.

Adler JT(1), Hottinger DG, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratories, Department of Surgery, University of 
Wisconsin, H4/722 Clinical Science Center, 600 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI
53792, USA. jtadler@wisc.edu

BACKGROUND: Operative resection is the only curative treatment for
pheochromocytomas. Inhibition of the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K)-Akt
pathway has been shown to be an effective treatment of neuroendocrine (NE) tumors
in vitro. We hypothesized that inhibition of the PI3K-Akt pathway would be a
viable strategy to inhibit growth and hormonal secretion in pheochromocytoma
cells.
METHODS: Sixteen pheochromocytomas were analyzed for expression of phosphorylated
Akt and the NE marker achaete scute complex-like 1 (ASCL1). Pheochromocytoma
PC-12 cells were treated with up to 100 microM of the PI3K-specific inhibitor
LY294002 for 48 h. Western blot analysis was used to measure phosphorylated Akt, 
total Akt, ASCL1, chromogranin A (CgA), and markers of apoptosis. Growth was
assessed by a methylthiazolyldiphenyl-tetrazolium (MTT) bromide cellular
proliferation assay for six days.
RESULTS: Human pheochromocytomas expressed significant amounts of phosphorylated 
Akt, and there was a significant correlation between malignant pheochromocytomas 
and the amount of expressed ASCL1. LY294002 significantly inhibited the PI3K-Akt 
pathway. Treatment led to a dose-dependent decrease in both ASCL1 and CgA,
indicating an alteration in the NE phenotype and hormonal suppression. Treatment 
decreased cellular proliferation, and cleavage of the apoptotic markers caspase-3
and PARP was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Human pheochromocytoma tumor samples express high levels of
phosphorylated Akt. LY294002 effectively inhibits the PI3K-Akt pathway,
suppresses NE tumor markers, and decreases cellular proliferation via apoptosis
in vitro. Inhibition of the PI3K pathway may represent a new strategy in the
treatment of pheochromocytomas.

PMCID: PMC3088764
PMID: 19669229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Dev Dyn. 2009 Aug;238(8):2095-102. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22021.

Regional expression of MTG genes in the developing mouse central nervous system.

Alishahi A(1), Koyano-Nakagawa N, Nakagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Stem Cell Institute, University of Minnesota
Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Myeloid translocation gene (MTG) proteins are transcriptional repressors that are
highly conserved across species. We studied the expression of three members of
this gene family, MTGR1, MTG8, and MTG16 in developing mouse central nervous
system by in situ hybridization. All of these genes are detected as early as
embryonic day 11.5. Because these genes are known to be induced by proneural
genes during neurogenesis, we analyzed the expression of MTG genes in relation to
two proneural genes, Neurog2 (also known as Ngn2 or Neurogenin 2) and Ascl1 (also
known as Mash1). While MTGR1 are generally expressed in regions that also express
Neurog2, MTG8 and MTG16 expression is associated more tightly with that of
Ascl1-expressing neural progenitor cells. These results suggest the possibility
that expression of MTG genes is differentially controlled by specific proneural
genes during neurogenesis.

Copyright (c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2742708
PMID: 19618476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Ann Surg Oncol. 2009 Oct;16(10):2936-42. doi: 10.1245/s10434-009-0591-5. Epub
2009 Jul 9.

Inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling suppresses tumor cell
proliferation and neuroendocrine marker expression in GI carcinoid tumors.

Pitt SC(1), Chen H, Kunnimalaiyaan M.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratory, Department of Surgery, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Overactivation of PI3K/Akt signaling facilitates tumor proliferation 
in several cancers. We have shown that various signal transduction pathways
promote tumorigenesis in carcinoid tumors, which exhibit endogenously high levels
of active, phosphorylated Akt. Therefore, we hypothesized that inhibition of the 
PI3K/Akt pathway would suppress carcinoid tumor cell growth and neuroendocrine
(NE) marker production.
METHODS: Human carcinoid BON cells were treated in vitro with LY294002, a
PI3-kinase inhibitor, or transfected with Akt1 siRNA. Tumor cell proliferation
was measured by MTT for 6 days. The effect of LY294002 or Akt1 siRNA treatment
was assessed by Western analysis. We examined the levels of phosphorylated Akt,
total Akt, Akt1, and the NE markers human achaete-scute homolog1 (ASCL1) and
chromogranin A (CgA).
RESULTS: Treatment of BON cells with LY294002 reduced tumor cell proliferation
(76%) in a dose-dependent manner. Growth also decreased in Akt1 siRNA transfected
cells (26%). Levels of active, phosphorylated Akt and the NE tumor markers, ASCL1
and CgA, were diminished with both LY294002 and Akt1 siRNA treatments
proportional to the degree of Akt inhibition. Total Akt, Akt2, and Akt3 levels
were unaffected by these experiments.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that PI3K/Akt signaling performs a critical role
in human carcinoid tumor cell survival and NE hormone generation. Furthermore,
the development of novel therapeutics targeting Akt1 or components of the
PI3K/Akt pathway may enhance the management of carcinoid disease.

PMCID: PMC2917194
PMID: 19588205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2009 Jun;34(6):492-7.

[Role of Notch signaling in differentiation of retinal progenitor cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang K(1), Lu G, Gao L, Tang L, Wang J, Wang T, Hu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha 410011, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of Notch signaling in differentiation of
Sprague-Dawley (SD) rat retinal progenitor cells (RPCs).
METHODS: RPCs were isolated from 16-day embryonic SD rats and cultured in
suspension. RPCs were cultured respectively in media with (treatment group) or
without (control group) gamma-secretase inhibitor X which was used to block Notch
signaling. Morphological observation and immunocytochemistry were applied at day 
14 to determine the cell types and analyze the expression of Notch pathway genes 
in both groups.
RESULTS: Most RPCs expressed Notch1 intracellular domains or its downstream
transcriptional factor Hes1. A few expressed bHLH transcriptional factors NeuroD 
and Mash1. Most auto-differentiated RPCs expressed NeuroD or Mash1, while a few
of them expressed Notch1 intracellular domains or Hes1. In the group treated with
gamma-secretase inhibitor X, the positive rate of Nestin or GFAP was much lower
than that in the control group while the positive rate of beta-tubulin was much
higher than that in the control group. The difference in the positive rate of
recovering between the two groups was not significant.
CONCLUSION: In vitro Notch signaling may inhibit retinal stem cells
differentiation. Inhibiting Notch signaling in vitro may promote differentiation 
to neurons and partially inhibit glial differentiation.

PMID: 19587430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 4;106(31):13064-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0808400106. Epub 2009 Jun 19.

Selective induction of neocortical GABAergic neurons by the PDK1-Akt pathway
through activation of Mash1.

Oishi K(1), Watatani K, Itoh Y, Okano H, Guillemot F, Nakajima K, Gotoh Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1
Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

Extracellular stimuli regulate neuronal differentiation and subtype specification
during brain development, although the intracellular signaling pathways that
mediate these processes remain largely unclear. We now show that the PDK1-Akt
pathway regulates differentiation of telencephalic neural precursor cells (NPCs).
Active Akt promotes differentiation of NPC into gamma-aminobutyric
acid-containing (GABAergic) but not glutamatergic neurons. Disruption of the Pdk1
gene or expression of dominant-negative forms of Akt suppresses insulin-like
growth factor (IGF)-1 enhancement of NPC differentiation into neurons in vitro
and production of neocortical GABAergic neurons in vivo. Furthermore, active Akt 
increased the protein levels and transactivation activity of Mash1, a proneural
basic helix-loop-helix protein required for the generation of neocortical
GABAergic neurons, and Mash1 was required for Akt-induced neuronal
differentiation. These results have unveiled an unexpected role of the PDK1-Akt
pathway: a key mediator of extracellular signals regulating the production of
neocortical GABAergic neurons.

PMCID: PMC2722283
PMID: 19549840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Development. 2009 Jul;136(14):2477-85. doi: 10.1242/dev.034546.

Insm1 (IA-1) is an essential component of the regulatory network that specifies
monoaminergic neuronal phenotypes in the vertebrate hindbrain.

Jacob J(1), Storm R, Castro DS, Milton C, Pla P, Guillemot F, Birchmeier C,
Briscoe J.

Author information: 
(1)MRC National Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London
NW7 1AA, UK. jjacob@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Monoaminergic neurons include the physiologically important central serotonergic 
and noradrenergic subtypes. Here, we identify the zinc-finger transcription
factor, Insm1, as a crucial mediator of the differentiation of both subtypes, and
in particular the acquisition of their neurotransmitter phenotype. Insm1 is
expressed in hindbrain progenitors of monoaminergic neurons as they exit the cell
cycle, in a pattern that partially overlaps with the expression of the proneural 
factor Ascl1. Consistent with this, a conserved cis-regulatory sequence
associated with Insm1 is bound by Ascl1 in the hindbrain, and Ascl1 is essential 
for the expression of Insm1 in the ventral hindbrain. In Insm1-null mutant mice, 
the expression of the serotonergic fate determinants Pet1, Lmx1b and Gata2 is
markedly downregulated. Nevertheless, serotonergic precursors begin to
differentiate in Insm1 mutants, but fail to produce serotonin because of a
failure to activate expression of tryptophan hydroxylase 2 (Tph2), the key enzyme
of serotonin biosynthesis. We find that both Insm1 and Ascl1 coordinately specify
Tph2 expression. In brainstem noradrenergic centres of Insm1 mutants, expression 
of tyrosine hydroxylase is delayed in the locus coeruleus and is markedly
deficient in the medullary noradrenergic nuclei. However, Insm1 is dispensable
for the expression of a second key noradrenergic biosynthetic enzyme, dopamine
beta-hydroxylase, which is instead regulated by Ascl1. Thus, Insm1 regulates the 
synthesis of distinct monoaminergic neurotransmitters by acting combinatorially
with, or independently of, Ascl1 in specific monoaminergic populations.

PMCID: PMC2729354
PMID: 19542360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Development. 2009 Jul;136(14):2329-34. doi: 10.1242/dev.032128.

Cux2 functions downstream of Notch signaling to regulate dorsal interneuron
formation in the spinal cord.

Iulianella A(1), Sharma M, Vanden Heuvel GB, Trainor PA.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 E. 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA. ani@stowers.org

Obtaining the diversity of interneuron subtypes in their appropriate numbers
requires the orchestrated integration of progenitor proliferation with the
regulation of differentiation. Here we demonstrate through loss-of-function
studies in mice that the Cut homeodomain transcription factor Cux2 (Cutl2) plays 
an important role in regulating the formation of dorsal spinal cord interneurons.
Furthermore, we show that Notch regulates Cux2 expression. Although Notch
signaling can be inhibitory to the expression of proneural genes, it is also
required for interneuron formation during spinal cord development. Our findings
suggest that Cux2 might mediate some of the effects of Notch signaling on
interneuron formation. Together with the requirement for Cux2 in cell cycle
progression, our work highlights the mechanistic complexity in balancing neural
progenitor maintenance and differentiation during spinal cord neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2729345
PMID: 19542352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. PLoS Genet. 2009 Jun;5(6):e1000511. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000511. Epub 2009 
Jun 12.

The level of the transcription factor Pax6 is essential for controlling the
balance between neural stem cell self-renewal and neurogenesis.

Sansom SN(1), Griffiths DS, Faedo A, Kleinjan DJ, Ruan Y, Smith J, van Heyningen 
V, Rubenstein JL, Livesey FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gurdon Institute and Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.

Neural stem cell self-renewal, neurogenesis, and cell fate determination are
processes that control the generation of specific classes of neurons at the
correct place and time. The transcription factor Pax6 is essential for neural
stem cell proliferation, multipotency, and neurogenesis in many regions of the
central nervous system, including the cerebral cortex. We used Pax6 as an entry
point to define the cellular networks controlling neural stem cell self-renewal
and neurogenesis in stem cells of the developing mouse cerebral cortex. We
identified the genomic binding locations of Pax6 in neocortical stem cells during
normal development and ascertained the functional significance of genes that we
found to be regulated by Pax6, finding that Pax6 positively and directly
regulates cohorts of genes that promote neural stem cell self-renewal, basal
progenitor cell genesis, and neurogenesis. Notably, we defined a core network
regulating neocortical stem cell decision-making in which Pax6 interacts with
three other regulators of neurogenesis, Neurog2, Ascl1, and Hes1. Analyses of the
biological function of Pax6 in neural stem cells through phenotypic analyses of
Pax6 gain- and loss-of-function mutant cortices demonstrated that the
Pax6-regulated networks operating in neural stem cells are highly dosage
sensitive. Increasing Pax6 levels drives the system towards neurogenesis and
basal progenitor cell genesis by increasing expression of a cohort of basal
progenitor cell determinants, including the key transcription factor Eomes/Tbr2, 
and thus towards neurogenesis at the expense of self-renewal. Removing Pax6
reduces cortical stem cell self-renewal by decreasing expression of key cell
cycle regulators, resulting in excess early neurogenesis. We find that the
relative levels of Pax6, Hes1, and Neurog2 are key determinants of a dynamic
network that controls whether neural stem cells self-renew, generate cortical
neurons, or generate basal progenitor cells, a mechanism that has marked
parallels with the transcriptional control of embryonic stem cell self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC2686252
PMID: 19521500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Neurosci Lett. 2009 May 8;455(1):14-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2009.03.062. Epub
2009 Mar 24.

Ventromedial hypothalamic lesions change the expression of neuron-related genes
and immune-related genes in rat liver.

Kiba T(1), Kintaka Y, Suzuki Y, Nakata E, Ishigaki Y, Inoue S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Nutrition & Physiology, Kyoritsu Women's University,
2-2-1 Hitotsubashi Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8433, Japan.

There are no reports that hypothalamus can directly affect the expression of
neuron-related genes and immune-related genes in liver. We identified genes of
which expression profiles showed significant modulation in rat liver after
ventromedial hypothalamic (VMH) lesions. Total RNA was extracted, and differences
in the gene expression profiles between rats at day 3 after VMH lesioning and
sham-VMH lesioned rats were investigated using DNA microarray analysis. The
result revealed that VMH lesions regulated the genes that were involved in
functions related to neuronal development and immunofunction in the liver.
Real-time PCR also confirmed that gene expression of SULT4A1 was upregulated, but
expression of ACSL1 and CISH were downregulated at day 3 after VMH lesions. VMH
lesions may change the expression of neuron-related genes and immune-related
genes in rat liver.

PMID: 19429097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Jul 1;515(1):56-71. doi: 10.1002/cne.22027.

Combined extrinsic and intrinsic manipulations exert complementary neuronal
enrichment in embryonic rat neural precursor cultures: an in vitro and in vivo
analysis.

Furmanski O(1), Gajavelli S, Lee JW, Collado ME, Jergova S, Sagen J.

Author information: 
(1)The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, University of Miami, Miller School of
Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.

Numerous central nervous system (CNS) disorders share a common pathology in
dysregulation of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) inhibitory signaling.
Transplantation of GABA-releasing cells at the site of disinhibition holds
promise for alleviating disease symptoms with fewer side effects than traditional
drug therapies. We manipulated fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2 deprivation and
mammalian achaete-scute homolog (MASH)1 transcription factor levels in an attempt
to amplify the default GABAergic neuronal fate in cultured rat embryonic neural
precursor cells (NPCs) for use in transplantation studies. Naïve and MASH1
lentivirus-transduced NPCs were maintained in FGF-2 or deprived of FGF-2 for
varying lengths of time. Immunostaining and quantitative analysis showed that
GABA- and beta-III-tubulin-immunoreactive cells generally decreased through
successive passages, suggesting a loss of neurogenic potential in rat
neurospheres expanded in vitro. However, FGF-2 deprivation resulted in a small,
but significantly increased population of GABAergic cells derived from passaged
neurospheres. In contrast to naïve and GFP lentivirus-transduced clones, MASH1
transduction resulted in increased bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation and
clonal colony size. Western blotting showed that MASH1 overexpression and FGF-2
deprivation additively increased beta-III-tubulin and decreased cyclic nucleotide
phosphodiesterase (CNPase) expression, whereas FGF-2 deprivation alone attenuated
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) expression. These results suggest that low
FGF-2 signaling and MASH1 activity can operate in concert to enrich NPC cultures 
for a GABA neuronal phenotype. When transplanted into the adult rat spinal cord, 
this combination also yielded GABAergic neurons. These findings indicate that,
even for successful utilization of the default GABAergic neuronal precursor fate,
a combination of both extrinsic and intrinsic manipulations will likely be
necessary to realize the full potential of NSC grafts in restoring function.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2745258
PMID: 19399893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Endocr Pathol. 2009 Summer;20(2):101-7. doi: 10.1007/s12022-009-9072-4.

Small cell lung cancer: significance of RB alterations and TTF-1 expression in
its carcinogenesis, phenotype, and biology.

Kitamura H(1), Yazawa T, Sato H, Okudela K, Shimoyamada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama City
University, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, 236-0004, Japan.
pathola@med.yokohama-cu.ac.jp

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) exhibits highly aggressive behavior and has a poor 
prognosis. While numerous investigations have been carried out, the exact
mechanism of its carcinogenesis and aggressiveness is still unclear. SCLC is
categorized as a neuroendocrine neoplasia and has a genetic profile characterized
by universal alterations of the RB and TP53 genes. Epidemiological studies
indicate the majority of SCLCs to be caused by smoking and the TP53 mutational
pattern to be consistent with that evoked by smoke carcinogens; however, there is
no direct evidence that such carcinogens induce alterations to RB in SCLC. While 
the importance of these alterations in the carcinogenesis of SCLC is strongly
suggested, the exact molecular mechanism has been only little elucidated. SCLC
cells almost always express mammalian achaete-scute homolog-1 (MASH1) and thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1). MASH1 plays a critical role in neuroendocrine
differentiation. TTF-1 is a characteristic marker of distal airway cells and
pulmonary adenocarcinomas, but is also expressed in extrapulmonary neuroendocrine
cancers. Thus, TTF-1 may well play a significant role in the development of
neuroendocrine cancers. Recent studies indicate that the airway stem cell is
committed to the neuroendocrine lineage through MASH1 and Notch signaling and
that only RB-deleted neuroendocrine cells selectively proliferate in response to 
E2F3, eventually undergoing transformation to neuroendocrine cancer cells,
probably in concert with TP53 gene aberrations. Thus, alterations of both the RB 
and TP53 genes are central to the carcinogenesis of SCLC, while many other
factors including MASH1 and TTF-1 contribute to the development and biological
behavior of SCLC.

PMID: 19390995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Dev Biol. 2009 Apr 15;328(2):529-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.01.007. Epub 2009 
Jan 14.

Ascl1 and Neurog2 form novel complexes and regulate Delta-like3 (Dll3) expression
in the neural tube.

Henke RM(1), Meredith DM, Borromeo MD, Savage TK, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA.

Delta-like 3 (Dll3) is a Delta family member expressed broadly in the developing 
nervous system as neural progenitor cells initiate differentiation. A proximal
promoter sequence for Dll3 is conserved across multiple species and is sufficient
to direct GFP expression in a Dll3-like pattern in the neural tube of transgenic 
mice. This promoter contains multiple E-boxes, the consensus binding site for
bHLH factors. Dll3 expression and the activity of the Dll3-promoter in the dorsal
neural tube depends on the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors
Ascl1 (Mash1) and Neurog2 (Ngn2). Mutations in each E-box identified in the
Dll3-promoter allowed distinct enhancer or repressor properties to be assigned to
each site individually or in combination. In addition, each E-box has distinct
characteristics relative to binding of bHLH factors Ascl1, Neurog1, and Neurog2. 
Surprisingly, novel Ascl1 containing DNA binding complexes are identified that
interact with specific E-box sites within the Dll3-promoter in vitro. These
complexes include Ascl1/Ascl1 homodimers and Ascl1/Neurog2 heterodimers,
complexes that in some cases require additional undefined factors for efficient
DNA binding. Thus, a complex interplay of E-box binding proteins spatially and
temporally regulate Dll3 levels during neural tube development.

PMCID: PMC2698949
PMID: 19389376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Cereb Cortex. 2009 Jul;19 Suppl 1:i96-106. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp045. Epub 2009 
Apr 22.

Dlx1&2 and Mash1 transcription factors control MGE and CGE patterning and
differentiation through parallel and overlapping pathways.

Long JE(1), Cobos I, Potter GB, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and the Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94158-2324, USA.

Here we define the expression of approximately 100 transcription factors (TFs) in
progenitors and neurons of the developing mouse medial and caudal ganglionic
eminences, anlage of the basal ganglia and pallial interneurons. We have begun to
elucidate the transcriptional hierarchy of these genes with respect to the Dlx
homeodomain genes, which are essential for differentiation of most
gamma-aminobutyric acidergic projection neurons of the basal ganglia. This
analysis identified Dlx-dependent and Dlx-independent pathways. The
Dlx-independent pathway depends in part on the function of the Mash1 basic
helix-loop-helix (b-HLH) TF. These analyses define core transcriptional
components that differentially specify the identity and differentiation of the
globus pallidus, basal telencephalon, and pallial interneurons.

PMCID: PMC2693539
PMID: 19386638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Sep;297(3):E563-7. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00064.2009. Epub 2009 Apr 21.

Transcription factors in the development of medial hypothalamic structures.

Jo YH(1), Chua S Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The hypothalamus has historically been subdivided into nuclei, agglomerations of 
cell bodies that are visually distinct in histological sections. Regulatory
functions of metabolism have been assigned to the various hypothalamic nuclei
principally by analysis of animals with lesions of individual nuclei but also via
various means of stimulation, such as cooling or heating probes. Biochemical and 
molecular specificity of these studies became possible with the identification
and synthesis of neurotransmitters as well as the means to manipulate the
expression of endogenous neurotransmitters and their receptors by genetic means .
The arcuate nucleus (ARC) is likely to be the primary site for neurons that sense
circulating fuels and energy reserves (POMC/CART neurons, NPY/AGRP neurons),
whereas the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) receives input from the ARC and harbors
many of the releasing factors (CRF, TRH, vasopressin, and oxytocin) that control 
pituitary hormone release. The ventromedial nucleus (VMN) receives input from the
ARC and plays a critical role in energy balance in parallel with the ARC. The VMN
and PVN also send descending projections to the autonomic nervous system and
other pathways that control ingestive behavior and metabolism. Developmental
analyses have revealed that the neurons that comprise the hypothalamic nuclei
arise by differentiation and migration from stem cells within the ventricular
zone. Based on recent work, it is becoming clear that coordination between
numerous transcription factors that determine specification, survival, and
migration is necessary for the formation of the hypothalamus, with each nucleus
being determined by its own unique set of factors. In this minireview, we will
provide a selective view of the roles that transcription factors play in the
developing hypothalamus.

PMCID: PMC2739694
PMID: 19383874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Apr;8(4):914-20. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0712.

Tautomycetin and tautomycin suppress the growth of medullary thyroid cancer cells
via inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta.

Adler JT(1), Cook M, Luo Y, Pitt SC, Ju J, Li W, Shen B, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Chen
H.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratories, Department of Surgery, University of 
Wisconsin, H4/750 Clinical Science Center, 600 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI
53792, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 May;9(5):1482.

Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) is a relatively uncommon neuroendocrine tumor that
arises from the calcitonin-secreting parafollicular cells of the thyroid gland.
Unfortunately, MTC frequently metastasizes, precluding curative surgical
resection and causing significant morbidity. Thus, there is an urgent need for
new treatment modalities. Tautomycin and tautomycetin are antifungal antibiotics 
isolated from Streptomyces spiroverticillatus and Streptomyces griseochromogens, 
respectively. Glycogen synthase kinase-3beta is a serine/threonine protein kinase
that regulates multiple cellular processes and is important in various cancers,
including MTC. Treatment with tautomycin and tautomycetin decreased
neuroendocrine markers, suppressed hormonal secretion, and inhibited growth
through apoptosis in MTC cells. Importantly, we describe a novel action of these 
compounds: inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta.

PMCID: PMC2670470
PMID: 19372564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Stem Cells. 2009 Apr;27(4):847-56. doi: 10.1002/stem.17.

Engineering of dominant active basic helix-loop-helix proteins that are resistant
to negative regulation by postnatal central nervous system antineurogenic cues.

Geoffroy CG(1), Critchley JA, Castro DS, Ramelli S, Barraclough C, Descombes P,
Guillemot F, Raineteau O.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Repair Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Neural precursor cells (NPCs) are present in most regions of the adult central
nervous system (CNS). Using NPCs in a therapeutical perspective, that is, to
regenerate CNS tissue after injury or in neurodegenerative diseases, will require
the efficient manipulation of their fate. Proneural gene overexpression in NPCs
represents a promising strategy to promote neuronal differentiation. The activity
of the proneural proteins is, however, context-dependent and can be
inhibited/modulated by binding with other bHLH (basic helix-loop-helix) or HLH
transcription factors. In this study, we show that the two proneural proteins,
Ngn2 and Mash1, are differentially sensitive to negative regulation by gliogenic 
factors or a gliogenic substrate (i.e., postnatal spinal cord slices).
Coexpressing E-proteins with proneural proteins was efficient to rescue proneural
proteins neurogenic activity, suggesting a central role for E-protein
sequestration in mediating postnatal CNS gliogenic inhibition. Tethering of
proneural proteins with E47 further insulated Mash1 from negative environmental
influences whereas this strategy was not successful with Ngn2, suggesting that
mechanisms of inhibition differ in between these two proneural proteins. Our
results demonstrate that a better understanding of proneural protein modulation
by environmental cues is a prerequisite to develop innovative approaches that
will permit the manipulation of the fate of NPCs in the adult CNS after trauma or
disease.

PMID: 19350686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Mar 6;380(2):361-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.01.099. Epub 2009 Jan 23.

Transcriptional activation by TLX1/HOX11 involves Gro/TLE corepressors.

Riz I(1), Lee HJ, Baxter KK, Behnam R, Hawley TS, Hawley RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, The George Washington
University Medical Center, 2300 I Street NW, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

The role of Groucho/transducin-like Enhancer of split (Gro/TLE) family members as
corepressors of transcription is well documented. TLX1 is a homeodomain
transcription factor involved in splenogenesis and neuron formation, and its
aberrant expression gives rise to T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. We
demonstrate by glutathione-S-transferase pull-down assays, in vivo biotinylation 
tagging and confocal laser microscopy that TLX1 interacts with TLE1 via an
Eh1-like motif. Paradoxically, we found that this motif is essential for optimal 
transcriptional activation of two TLX1 target genes, Aldh1a1 and Fhl1. Using a
well characterized target of the Hairy/Enhancer of split 1 (HES1).TLE1 repressor 
complex, the ASCL1 gene, we show that TLX1 counteraction of ASCL1 repression by
HES1 in SK-N-BE(2) neuroblastoma cells is associated with dismissal of TLE1 from 
the ASCL1 promoter and requires the Eh1-like motif for maximal effect.
Collectively, these results indicate that TLX1-mediated target gene activation
can occur in part via derepression strategies involving Gro/TLE corepressors.

PMCID: PMC2654413
PMID: 19250647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Dev Biol. 2009 Apr 15;328(2):422-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.02.008. Epub 2009 
Feb 13.

Origins and control of the differentiation of inhibitory interneurons and glia in
the cerebellum.

Grimaldi P(1), Parras C, Guillemot F, Rossi F, Wassef M.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8542, Biology Department, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 Rue d'Ulm,
75005 Paris, France.

Cerebellar GABAergic interneurons and glia originate from progenitors that
delaminate from the ventricular neuroepithelium and proliferate in the
prospective white matter. Even though this population of progenitor cells is
multipotent as a whole, clonal analysis indicates that different lineages are
already separated during postnatal development and little is known about the
mechanisms that regulate the specification and differentiation of these
cerebellar types at earlier stages. Here, we investigate the role of Ascl1 in the
development of inhibitory interneurons and glial cells in the cerebellum. This
gene is expressed by maturing oligodendrocytes and GABAergic interneurons and is 
required for the production of appropriate quantities of these cells, which are
severely reduced in Ascl1(-/-) mouse cerebella. Nevertheless, the two lineages
are not related and the majority of oligodendrocytes populating the developing
cerebellum actually derive from extracerebellar sources. Targeted electroporation
of Ascl1-expression vectors to ventricular neuroepithelium progenitors enhances
the production of interneurons and completely suppresses astrocytic
differentiation, whereas loss of Ascl1 function has opposite effects on both cell
types. Our results indicate that Ascl1 directs ventricular neuroepithelium
progenitors towards inhibitory interneuron fate and restricts their ability to
differentiate along the astroglial lineage.

PMID: 19217896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Nature. 2009 Mar 26;458(7237):529-33. doi: 10.1038/nature07726. Epub 2009 Feb 11.

Chromatin remodelling factor Mll1 is essential for neurogenesis from postnatal
neural stem cells.

Lim DA(1), Huang YC, Swigut T, Mirick AL, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Wysocka J, Ernst P, 
Alvarez-Buylla A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco,
505 Parnassus Street M779, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.
limd@neurosurg.ucsf.edu

Epigenetic mechanisms that maintain neurogenesis throughout adult life remain
poorly understood. Trithorax group (trxG) and Polycomb group (PcG) gene products 
are part of an evolutionarily conserved chromatin remodelling system that
activate or silence gene expression, respectively. Although PcG member Bmi1 has
been shown to be required for postnatal neural stem cell self-renewal, the role
of trxG genes remains unknown. Here we show that the trxG member Mll1
(mixed-lineage leukaemia 1) is required for neurogenesis in the mouse postnatal
brain. Mll1-deficient subventricular zone neural stem cells survive, proliferate 
and efficiently differentiate into glial lineages; however, neuronal
differentiation is severely impaired. In Mll1-deficient cells, early proneural
Mash1 (also known as Ascl1) and gliogenic Olig2 expression are preserved, but
Dlx2, a key downstream regulator of subventricular zone neurogenesis, is not
expressed. Overexpression of Dlx2 can rescue neurogenesis in Mll1-deficient
cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrates that Dlx2 is a direct target of
MLL in subventricular zone cells. In differentiating wild-type subventricular
zone cells, Mash1, Olig2 and Dlx2 loci have high levels of histone 3
trimethylated at lysine 4 (H3K4me3), consistent with their transcription. In
contrast, in Mll1-deficient subventricular zone cells, chromatin at Dlx2 is
bivalently marked by both H3K4me3 and histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 27
(H3K27me3), and the Dlx2 gene fails to properly activate. These data support a
model in which Mll1 is required to resolve key silenced bivalent loci in
postnatal neural precursors to the actively transcribed state for the induction
of neurogenesis, but not for gliogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3800116
PMID: 19212323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Cell Sci. 2009 Mar 1;122(Pt 5):595-9. doi: 10.1242/jcs.037556. Epub 2009 Feb
10.

Expression of the proneural gene encoding Mash1 suppresses MYCN mitotic activity.

Alvarez-Rodríguez R(1), Pons S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Death and Proliferation, Institute for Biomedical Research 
of Barcelona, IIBB-CSIC-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.

Murine Mash1 (Ascl1) is a member of the basic helix-loop-helix family of
transcription factors and has been described to promote differentiation in some
neural precursors. The process of differentiation is coordinated with a
concomitant cell-cycle arrest, but the molecular mechanism of this process is
unclear. Here, we describe for the very first time a direct regulation of an
oncogene by a proneural gene. When expressed in proliferating cerebellar granular
precursors, expression of the proneural gene encoding Mash1 promotes cell-cycle
exit and differentiation, whereas expression of the oncogene MYCN has the
opposite effect, promoting the proliferation of these cells in the absence of
sonic hedgehog. Moreover, Mash1 overexpression neutralizes MYCN-induced
proliferation. We now propose that the mechanism of antagonism between both
molecules is based on opposite functions in the transcriptional regulation of the
E-box motif, particularly in the E-boxes within the cyclin-D2 promoter, with MYCN
acting as a transcriptional activator and Mash1 as a repressor. In agreement with
this result, overexpression of cyclin D2 suppressed the anti-proliferative
activity of Mash1.

PMID: 19208763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Neural Dev. 2009 Feb 10;4:5. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-4-5.

Ascl1 is a required downstream effector of Gsx gene function in the embryonic
mouse telencephalon.

Wang B(1), Waclaw RR, Allen ZJ 2nd, Guillemot F, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati OH 45229, USA.
bei.wang@ucsf.edu

BACKGROUND: The homeobox gene Gsx2 (formerly Gsh2) is known to regulate
patterning in the lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) of the embryonic
telencephalon. In its absence, the closely related gene Gsx1 (previously known as
Gsh1) can partially compensate in the patterning and differentiation of ventral
telencephalic structures, such as the striatum. However, the cellular and
molecular mechanisms underlying this compensation remain unclear.
RESULTS: We show here that in the Gsx2 mutants Gsx1 is expressed in only a subset
of the ventral telencephalic progenitors that normally express Gsx2. Based on the
similarities in the expression of Gsx1 and Ascl1 (Mash1) within the Gsx2 mutant
LGE, we examined whether Ascl1 plays an integral part in the Gsx1-based recovery.
Ascl1 mutants show only modest alterations in striatal development; however, in
Gsx2;Ascl1 double mutants, striatal development is severely affected, similar to 
that seen in the Gsx1;Gsx2 double mutants. This is despite the fact that Gsx1 is 
expressed, and even expands, in the Gsx2;Ascl1 mutant LGE, comparable to that
seen in the Gsx2 mutant. Finally, Notch signaling has recently been suggested to 
be required for normal striatal development. In spite of the fact that Notch
signaling is severely disrupted in Ascl1 mutants, it actually appears to be
improved in the Gsx2;Ascl1 double mutants.
CONCLUSION: These results, therefore, reveal a non-proneural requirement of Ascl1
that together with Gsx1 compensates for the loss of Gsx2 in a subset of LGE
progenitors.

PMCID: PMC2644683
PMID: 19208224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Eur J Neurosci. 2009 Jan;29(2):232-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06595.x.

Involvement of Ngn2, Tbr and NeuroD proteins during postnatal olfactory bulb
neurogenesis.

Roybon L(1), Deierborg T, Brundin P, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Neuronal Survival Unit, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Wallenberg
Neuroscience Center, BMC A10, 22184 Lund, Sweden. laurent.roybon@med.lu.se

Comment in
    Eur J Neurosci. 2009 Jan;29(2):231.

Postnatal neurogenesis takes place in two brain regions, the hippocampus and the 
subventricular zone (SVZ). The transcriptional cascade controlling hippocampal
neurogenesis has been described in detail; however, the transcriptional control
of olfactory bulb neurogenesis is still not well mapped. In this study, we
provide insights into the molecular events controlling postnatal olfactory bulb
neurogenesis. We first show the existence of diverse neural stem cell/progenitor 
populations along the SVZ-rostral migratory stream (RMS) axis, focusing on those 
expressing the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Mash1. We
provide evidence that Mash1-derived progenies generate oligodendrocytic and
neuronal precursors through the transient expression of the bHLH transcription
factors Olig2 and neurogenin2 (Ngn2), respectively. Furthermore, we reveal that
Ngn2-positive progenies express the T-box transcription factors Tbr2 and Tbr1,
which are usually present during cortical and hippocampal glutamatergic neuronal 
differentiation. We also highlight a cell population expressing another bHLH
transcription factor, neuroD1 (ND1). The ND1-positive cells are located in the
SVZ-RMS axis and also co-express Tbr2, Tbr1 and neuroD2. The observations that
these cells incorporate bromodeoxyuridine and express both doublecortin and
polysialylated form of neural cell adhesion molecule suggest that they are
newborn neurons. Finally, using an in vitro assay, we demonstrate that Ngn2 and
ND1 equally and exclusively direct differentiation of Mash1-expressing precursors
into calbindin-expressing and calretinin-expressing neurons, which are both
neuronal subtypes normally found in the olfactory bulb. Taken together, our data 
illustrate that Ngn2, neuroD and Tbr transcription factors are involved in
postnatal neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb.

PMID: 19200230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Dev Dyn. 2009 Sep;238(9):2163-78. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21848.

Acheate-scute like 1 (Ascl1) is required for normal delta-like (Dll) gene
expression and notch signaling during retinal development.

Nelson BR(1), Hartman BH, Ray CA, Hayashi T, Bermingham-McDonogh O, Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, School of Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. branden.nelson@seattlechildrens.org

Delta gene expression in Drosophila is regulated by proneural basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, such as acheate-scute. In
vertebrates, multiple Delta-like and proneural bHLH genes are expressed during
neurogenesis, especially in the retina. We recently uncovered a relationship
between Acheate-scute like 1 (Ascl1), Delta-like genes, and Notch in chick
retinal progenitors. Here, we report that mammalian retinal progenitors are also 
the primary source of Delta-like genes, likely signaling through Notch among
themselves, while differentiating neurons expressed Jagged2. Ascl1 is coexpressed
in Delta-like and Notch active progenitors, and required for normal Delta-like
gene expression and Notch signaling. We also reveal a role for Ascl1 in the
regulation of Hes6, a proneurogenic factor that inhibits Notch signaling to
promote neural rather than glial differentiation. Thus, these results suggest a
molecular mechanism whereby attenuated Notch levels coupled with reduced
proneurogenic activity in progenitors leads to increased gliogenesis and
decreased neurogenesis in the Ascl1-deficient retina.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2905851
PMID: 19191219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Apr 1;513(4):375-84. doi: 10.1002/cne.21973.

Regional differences in olfactory epithelial homeostasis in the adult mouse.

Vedin V(1), Molander M, Bohm S, Berghard A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, Sweden.

The olfactory sensory neurons in the nasal cavity of the adult mouse are
organized into a few regions that differ in their molecular properties, as
several classes of genes show regional expression. Most renowned is the fact that
expression of each of hundreds of different odorant receptor genes is limited to 
one such region, or zone, of the olfactory neuroepithelial sheet. Zone
differences are in place at birth, as exemplified here by the expression of
neuronal progenitor marker Foxg1. We herein describe that an adult pattern
showing regional differences in neurogenesis develops during the first few weeks 
of postnatal life which, e.g., is reflected in the temporal and regional
regulation of the neuronal progenitor marker Ascl1. The most dorsomedial zone
shows significantly fewer cells in S-phase in the adult but not in newborn mice
by two different measures. Moreover, we show that there are regional differences 
in the relative differentiation, cell survival, and thickness of the olfactory
epithelium. These findings are compatible with the view that zones are inherently
distinct and that such differences contribute to generate regional differences in
cellular homeostasis that in turn may modulate the capacity of a region to adjust
to extrinsic influence.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19177519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Cancer Res. 2009 Feb 1;69(3):845-54. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2762. Epub
2009 Jan 27.

Achaete-scute complex homologue 1 regulates tumor-initiating capacity in human
small cell lung cancer.

Jiang T(1), Collins BJ, Jin N, Watkins DN, Brock MV, Matsui W, Nelkin BD, Ball
DW.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor achaete-scute complex homologue 1
(ASCL1) is essential for the development of normal lung neuroendocrine cells as
well as other endocrine and neural tissues. Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and
non-SCLC with neuroendocrine features express ASCL1, where the factor may play a 
role in the virulence and primitive neuroendocrine phenotype of these tumors. In 
this study, RNA interference knockdown of ASCL1 in cultured SCLC resulted in
inhibition of soft agar clonogenic capacity and induction of apoptosis. cDNA
microarray analyses bolstered by expression studies, flow cytometry, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation identified two candidate stem cell marker genes,
CD133 and aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A1 (ALDH1A1), to be directly regulated by ASCL1
in SCLC. In SCLC direct xenograft tumors, we detected a relatively abundant
CD133(high)-ASCL1(high)-ALDH1(high) subpopulation with markedly enhanced
tumorigenicity compared with cells with weak CD133 expression. Tumorigenicity in 
the CD133(high) subpopulation depended on continued ASCL1 expression. Whereas
CD133(high) cells readily reconstituted the range of CD133 expression seen in the
original xenograft tumor, CD133(low) cells could not. Our findings suggest that a
broad range of SCLC cells has tumorigenic capacity rather than a small discrete
population. Intrinsic tumor cell heterogeneity, including variation in key
regulatory factors such as ASCL1, can modulate tumorigenicity in SCLC.

PMCID: PMC2919317
PMID: 19176379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Hum Pathol. 2009 Mar;40(3):283-92. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.07.019. Epub 2009 
Jan 15.

Molecular and phenotypic analysis of poorly differentiated sinonasal neoplasms:
an integrated approach for early diagnosis and classification.

Cordes B(1), Williams MD, Tirado Y, Bell D, Rosenthal DI, Al-Dhahri SF, Hanna EY,
El-Naggar AK.

Author information: 
(1)Bobby R. Alford Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Primary poorly differentiated (small round and non-small) sinonasal neoplasms
comprise histogenetically and biologically diverse entities with overlapping
morphologic features. Because of the limited initial biopsy tissue materials,
differential diagnostic difficulties may arise and complicate timely management
of some cases. We used immunohistochemical and molecular marker analyses in a
large cohort of these tumors to optimize their early diagnosis and
classification. Fifty-two tumors of the skull base and sinonasal regions and, for
comparison, 19 poorly differentiated neoplasms of other head and neck sites were 
analyzed by a panel of immunohistochemical markers including those of epithelial,
mesenchymal, melanocytic, and neuroectodermal origin using tissue microarray.
Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis of messenger RNA for
EWS-FLI1 and PAX-FKHR fusion transcripts and the human achaete-scute homolog-1
gene was performed on 24 of the 52 sinonasal tumors and the 19 tumors of other
sites for comparison. The immunohistochemical results substantiated the
phenotypic assessment and the initial diagnosis in 49 of the 52 tumors. In 4
instances the integrated markers and phenotypic analyses led to reclassification 
of 3 tumors and confirmed the histogenesis of a mesenchymal tumor with aberrant
cytokeratin expression. Molecular analysis of the EWS-FLI1 fusion gene transcript
revealed 4 (9.3%) of the 43 tumors to be positive; all were Ewing sarcomas. The
human achaete-scute homolog-1 gene transcript was identified in 10 (23.8%) of 42 
tumors: 3 of 6 neuroblastomas, all 4 neuroendocrine carcinomas, and 1 each in
sinonasal undifferentiated carcinoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and melanoma. The
PAX-FKHR fusion transcript was not detected in any tumors. We conclude that (1)
an integrated morphologic and biomarker algorithm may better optimize the early
diagnosis of poorly differentiated sinonasal and skull-base tumors; (2) molecular
analysis may assist in future biological stratification of certain classes of
these tumors; and (3) the human achaete-scute homolog-1 gene transcript is a
nonspecific marker for the diagnosis of neuroblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4573623
PMID: 19150107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2009 Feb;30(2):61-5. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2008.11.003. Epub 
2009 Jan 8.

Fate plasticity of adult hippocampal progenitors: biological relevance and
therapeutic use.

Jessberger S(1), Gage FH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich,
Switzerland. jessberger@cell.biol.ethz.ch

Adult hippocampal stem/progenitor cells (AHPs) continuously give rise to new
neurons throughout life, which might be an important determinant of
hippocampus-dependent function. Strikingly, the fate potential of AHPs is not
restricted to the neuronal lineage because AHPs can be genetically induced to
generate oligodendrocytes within their in vivo niche by AHP-specific ectopic
expression of the basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor
achaete-scute complex-like 1 (ASCL1). Fate plasticity of AHPs is controlled by
cell-autonomous and also niche-dependent mechanisms. Here, we discuss the
biological importance and potential therapeutic applications of retained fate
plasticity of AHPs in the adult mammalian brain in addition to the future
scientific inquiries indicated by this finding.

PMCID: PMC2752320
PMID: 19135265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2009 May;29(3):423-38. doi: 10.1007/s10571-008-9338-2. Epub
2009 Jan 7.

Gene expression profiling of human neural progenitor cells following the
serum-induced astrocyte differentiation.

Obayashi S(1), Tabunoki H, Kim SU, Satoh J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and Molecular Neuropathology, Meiji
Pharmaceutical University, 2-522-1 Noshio, Kiyose, Tokyo, 204-8588, Japan.

Neural stem cells (NSC) with self-renewal and multipotent properties could
provide an ideal cell source for transplantation to treat spinal cord injury,
stroke, and neurodegenerative diseases. However, the majority of transplanted NSC
and neural progenitor cells (NPC) differentiate into astrocytes in vivo under
pathological environments in the central nervous system, which potentially cause 
reactive gliosis. Because the serum is a potent inducer of astrocyte
differentiation of rodent NPC in culture, we studied the effect of the serum on
gene expression profile of cultured human NPC to identify the gene signature of
astrocyte differentiation of human NPC. Human NPC spheres maintained in the
serum-free culture medium were exposed to 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) for 72 h, 
and processed for analyzing on a Whole Human Genome Microarray of 41,000 genes,
and the microarray data were validated by real-time RT-PCR. The serum elevated
the levels of expression of 45 genes, including ID1, ID2, ID3, CTGF, TGFA, METRN,
GFAP, CRYAB and CSPG3, whereas it reduced the expression of 23 genes, such as
DLL1, DLL3, PDGFRA, SOX4, CSPG4, GAS1 and HES5. Thus, the serum-induced astrocyte
differentiation of human NPC is characterized by a counteraction of ID family
genes on Delta family genes. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis identified ID1 as a
direct binding partner of a proneural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factor MASH1. Luciferase assay indicated that activation of the DLL1 promoter by 
MASH1 was counteracted by ID1. Bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) elevated the
levels of ID1 and GFAP expression in NPC under the serum-free culture conditions.
Because the serum contains BMP4, these results suggest that the serum factor(s), 
most probably BMP4, induces astrocyte differentiation by upregulating the
expression of ID family genes that repress the proneural bHLH protein-mediated
Delta expression in human NPC.

PMID: 19130216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Neurosci. 2008 Dec 24;28(52):14074-86. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3188-08.2008.

Id2 is required for specification of dopaminergic neurons during adult olfactory 
neurogenesis.

Havrda MC(1), Harris BT, Mantani A, Ward NM, Paolella BR, Cuzon VC, Yeh HH,
Israel MA.

Author information: 
(1)Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, New Hampshire 
03756, USA. Matthew.C.Havrda@Dartmouth.edu

Understanding the biology of adult neural stem cells has important implications
for nervous system development and may contribute to our understanding of
neurodegenerative disorders and their treatment. We have characterized the
process of olfactory neurogenesis in adult mice lacking inhibitor of DNA binding 
2(-/-) (Id2(-/-)). We found a diminished olfactory bulb containing reduced
numbers of granular and periglomerular neurons with a distinct paucity of
dopaminergic periglomerular neurons. While no deficiency of the stem cell
compartment was detectable, migrating neuroblasts in Id2(-/-) mutant mice
prematurely undergo astroglial differentiation within a disorganized rostral
migratory stream. Further, when evaluated in vitro loss of Id2 results in
decreased proliferation of neural progenitors and decreased expression of the
Hes1 and Ascl1 (Mash1) transcription factors, known mediators of neuronal
differentiation. These data support a novel role for sustained Id2 expression in 
migrating neural progenitors mediating olfactory dopaminergic neuronal
differentiation in adult animals.

PMCID: PMC2692601
PMID: 19109490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 13;284(7):4255-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807354200. Epub 2008
Dec 19.

Translational regulation of the human achaete-scute homologue-1 by fragile X
mental retardation protein.

Fähling M(1), Mrowka R, Steege A, Kirschner KM, Benko E, Förstera B, Persson PB, 
Thiele BJ, Meier JC, Scholz H.

Author information: 
(1)Charité, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Institut für Vegetative Physiologie,
Tucholskystrasse 2, D-10117 Berlin.

Fragile X syndrome is a common inherited cause of mental retardation that results
from loss or mutation of the fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP). In this
study, we identified the mRNA of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor 
human achaete-scute homologue-1 (hASH1 or ASCL1), which is required for normal
development of the nervous system and has been implicated in the formation of
neuroendocrine tumors, as a new FMRP target. Using a double-immunofluorescent
staining technique we detected an overlapping pattern of both proteins in the
hippocampus, temporal cortex, subventricular zone, and cerebellum of newborn
rats. Forced expression of FMRP and gene silencing by small interference RNA
transfection revealed a positive correlation between the cellular protein levels 
of FMRP and hASH1. A luciferase reporter construct containing the 5'-untranslated
region of hASH1 mRNA was activated by the full-length FMRP, but not by naturally 
occurring truncated FMR proteins, in transient co-transfections. The responsible 
cis-element was mapped by UV-cross-linking experiments and reporter mutagenesis
assays to a (U)(10) sequence located in the 5'-untranslated region of the hASH1
mRNA. Sucrose density gradient centrifugation revealed that hASH1 transcripts
were translocated into a translationally active polysomal fraction upon transient
transfection of HEK293 cells with FMRP, thus indicating translational activation 
of hASH1 mRNA. In conclusion, we identified hASH1 as a novel downstream target of
FMRP. Improved translation efficiency of hASH1 mRNA by FMRP may represent an
important regulatory switch in neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 19097999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Surgery. 2008 Dec;144(6):956-61; discussion 961-2. doi:
10.1016/j.surg.2008.08.027.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors upregulate Notch-1 and inhibit growth in
pheochromocytoma cells.

Adler JT(1), Hottinger DG, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratories, Department of Surgery, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison, Wis, USA.

BACKGROUND: The histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors valproic acid (VPA) and
suberoyl bis-hydroxamic acid (SBHA) have been demonstrated recently to be strong 
Notch-1 activators. Upregulation of the Notch-1 pathway has been shown to limit
growth and suppress hormonal secretion in neuroendocrine (NE) neoplasms. We
hypothesized that HDAC inhibition would be an effective strategy to activate the 
Notch-1 pathway and inhibit growth and hormonal secretion in pheochromocytoma
cells.
METHODS: Pheochromocytoma PC-12 cells were treated with up to 8 mmol/L VPA or 40 
micromol/L SBHA for 2 days. NE tumor markers achaete-scute complex-like 1 (ASCL1)
and chromogranin A (CgA) were measured by Western analysis after treatment.
Growth was assessed by a cellular proliferation assay; Western analysis was used 
to determine the mechanism of growth regulation.
RESULTS: HDAC inhibitor treatment caused a dose-dependent decrease in ASCL1 and
CgA while increasing the amount of active Notch-1 protein; with a 6-day
treatment, dose-dependent growth inhibition and cleavage of the apoptotic markers
caspase-3 and poly-ADP ribose phosphate was observed.
CONCLUSION: VPA and SBHA upregulate Notch-1 effectively, suppress NE tumor
markers, and decrease growth via apoptosis of pheochromocytoma cells in vitro.
Activation of the Notch-1 signaling pathway with HDAC inhibitors may represent a 
new strategy for treating pheochromocytomas.

PMCID: PMC2638099
PMID: 19041003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Feb 1;512(4):556-72. doi: 10.1002/cne.21854.

Dlx1&2 and Mash1 transcription factors control striatal patterning and
differentiation through parallel and overlapping pathways.

Long JE(1), Swan C, Liang WS, Cobos I, Potter GB, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and the Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94158-2324, USA.

Here we define the expression of approximately 100 transcription factors in
progenitors and neurons of the developing basal ganglia. We have begun to
elucidate the transcriptional hierarchy of these genes with respect to the Dlx
homeodomain genes, which are essential for differentiation of most GABAergic
projection neurons of the basal ganglia. This analysis identified Dlx-dependent
and Dlx-independent pathways. The Dlx-independent pathway depends in part on the 
function of the Mash1 b-HLH transcription factor. These analyses define core
transcriptional components that differentially specify the identity and
differentiation of the striatum, nucleus accumbens, and septum.

2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2761428
PMID: 19030180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Dev Biol. 2009 Feb 1;326(1):75-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.10.039. Epub 2008
Nov 7.

Initiation of olfactory placode development and neurogenesis is blocked in mice
lacking both Six1 and Six4.

Chen B(1), Kim EH, Xu PX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine of
NYU, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Mouse olfactory epithelium (OE) originates from ectodermally derived placode, the
olfactory placode that arises at the anterior end of the neural plate. Tissue
grafting and recombination experiments suggest that the placode is derived from a
common preplacodal domain around the neural plate and its development is directed
by signals arising from the underlying mesoderm and adjacent neuroectoderm. In
mice, loss of Six1 affects OE morphogenesis but not placode formation. We show
here that embryos lacking both Six1 and Six4 failed to form the olfactory placode
but the preplacodal region appeared to be specified as judged by the expression
of Eya2, which marks the common preplacodal domain, suggesting a synergistic
requirement of Six1 and Six4 in patterning the preplacodal ectoderm to a
morphologic placode. Our results show that Six1 and Six4 are coexpressed in the
preplacodal ectoderm from E8.0. In the olfactory pit, Six4 expression was
observed in the peripheral precursors that overlap with Mash1-expressing cells,
the early committed neuronal lineage. In contrast, Six1 is highly distributed in 
the peripheral regions where stem cells reside at E10.5 and it overlaps with Sox2
expression. Both genes are expressed in the basal and apical neuronal progenitors
in the OE. Analyses of Six1;Six4 double mutant embryos demonstrated that the
slightly thickened epithelium observed in the mutant was not induced for neuronal
development. In contrast, in Six1(-/-) embryos, all neuronal lineage markers were
initially expressed but the pattern of their expression was altered. Although
very few, the pioneer neurons were initially present in the Six1 mutant OE.
However, neurogenesis ceased by E12.5 due to markedly increased cell apoptosis
and reduced proliferation, thus defining the cellular defects occurring in
Six1(-/-) OE that have not been previously observed. Our findings demonstrate
that Six1/4 function at the top of early events controlling olfactory placode
formation and neuronal development. Our analyses show that the threshold of
Six1/4 may be crucial for the expression of olfactory specific genes and that
Six1 and Six4 may act synergistically to mediate olfactory placode specification 
and patterning through Fgf and Bmp signaling pathways.

PMID: 19027001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Stem Cells. 2009 Feb;27(2):390-8. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-1047.

Regionally specified human neural progenitor cells derived from the mesencephalon
and forebrain undergo increased neurogenesis following overexpression of ASCL1.

Kim HJ(1), McMillan E, Han F, Svendsen CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin,
USA. hyunjungkim@ucsd.edu

Human neural progenitor cells (hNPC) derived from the developing brain can be
expanded in culture and subsequently differentiated into neurons and glia. They
provide an interesting source of tissue for both modeling brain development and
developing future cellular replacement therapies. It is becoming clear that hNPC 
are regionally and temporally specified depending on which brain region they were
isolated from and its developmental stage. We show here that hNPC derived from
the developing cortex (hNPC(CTX)) and ventral midbrain (hNPC(VM)) have similar
morphological characteristics and express the progenitor cell marker nestin.
However, hNPC(CTX) cultures were highly proliferative and produced large numbers 
of neurons, whereas hNPC(VM) divided slowly and produced fewer neurons but more
astrocytes. Microarray analysis revealed a similar expression pattern for some
stemness markers between the two growing cultures, overlaid with a regionally
specific profile that identified some important differentially expressed
neurogenic transcription factors. By overexpressing one of these, the
transcription factor ASCL1, we were able to regain neurogenesis from hNPC(VM)
cultures, which produced larger neurons with more neurites than hNPC(CTX) but no 
fully mature dopamine neurons. Thus, hNPC are regionally specified and can be
induced to undergo neurogenesis following genetic manipulation. Although this
restores neuronal production with a region-specific phenotype, it does not
restore full neurochemical maturation, which may require additional factors.

PMID: 19008346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Jan 10;512(2):232-42. doi: 10.1002/cne.21888.

Prokineticin receptor 2 expression identifies migrating neuroblasts and their
subventricular zone transient-amplifying progenitors in adult mice.

Puverel S(1), Nakatani H, Parras C, Soussi-Yanicostas N.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Equipe Avenir,
Zebrafish Neurogenesis, IFR70, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, 75651 Paris,
France.

The adult subventricular zone (SVZ) contains progenitors cells, which continually
give rise to new neurons that migrate along the rostral migratory stream (RMS) to
the olfactory bulbs (OB). Prokineticin receptor 2 (ProKR2) is a G-protein-coupled
receptor that plays an essential role in this migration process. However, the
identity of the prokr2-expressing cells has not yet been clearly established.
Here, we have characterized in detail the identity of the prokr2-expressing cells
in the SVZ/RMS/OB pathway in adult mice. In the SVZ, accumulation of prokr2
transcripts was detected in almost all migrating neuroblasts or type A cells as
well as in a large population of their precursors, the rapidly dividing type C
cells. Moreover, we observed that, in dissociated SVZ cells from Mash1::GFP
postnatal mice, ProKR2 protein is also present in type C and type A cells. We
found that, along the RMS and in the OB, prokr2 expression was restricted to
migrating type A cells and was absent in astrocytes. Finally, we observed a
highly marked decrease of prokr2 expression in Mash1-/- mutant mice, suggesting
that this transcription factor directly or indirectly regulates prokr2
expression. Although the expression of ProKR2 in migrating type A cells is in
good agreement with the essential role played by this receptor during this
migration process, its expression in a large population of their progenitors
suggests an additional function for ProKR2, providing novel insights into the
role of ProKR2/ProK2 signalling in adult neurogenesis.

PMID: 19003791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 2008 Oct;54(5):353-6.

Effects of folate on notch signaling and cell proliferation in neural stem cells 
of neonatal rats in vitro.

Zhang X(1), Liu H, Cong G, Tian Z, Ren D, Wilson JX, Huang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Tianjin
Medical University, Tianjin, China.

The aim of the present study was to determine if folate alters Notch signaling
and cell proliferation in neural stem cells (NSCs). NSCs were isolated from
neonatal rats and grown in serum-free suspension culture. The cells were
identified as NSCs by their expression of immunoreactive nestin. Individual
cultures were assigned to one of three treatment groups: vehicle control,
low-dose folate group (Folate-L, liquid media contained 4 mg/L folate), or
high-dose folate group (Folate-H, liquid media contained 40 mg/L folate).
Proliferating cells were identified by labeling with 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine
(BrdU). Cell proliferation was quantitated by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. Gene
expression of components of the Notch signaling system (Notch1, Hes1 and Mash1)
was quantified by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay. We observed
that Nestin-positive NSCs grew as neurospheres in the serum-free suspension
cultures. Folate increased the rate of cell proliferation compared to vehicle
control (p<0.05). During cell proliferation, folate also increased Notch1 and
Hes1 expression and decreased Mash1 expression compared to vehicle control
(p<0.05). These results suggest that NSCs cultured from neonatal rats respond to 
folate with altered Notch signaling and increased cell proliferation.

PMID: 19001765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Nat Neurosci. 2008 Dec;11(12):1383-91. doi: 10.1038/nn.2226. Epub 2008 Nov 9.

Beta-catenin-mediated Wnt signaling regulates neurogenesis in the ventral
telencephalon.

Gulacsi AA(1), Anderson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 1300
York Avenue, Box 244, New York, New York, 10065, USA.

Development of the telencephalon involves the coordinated growth of diversely
patterned brain structures. Previous studies have demonstrated the importance of 
beta-catenin-mediated Wnt signaling in proliferation and fate determination
during cerebral cortical development. We found that beta-catenin-mediated Wnt
signaling critically maintained progenitor proliferation in the subcortical
(pallidal) telencephalon. Targeted deletion of beta-catenin in mice severely
impaired proliferation in the medial ganglionic eminence without grossly altering
differentiated fate. Several lines of evidence suggest that this phenotype is
primarily the result of a loss of canonical Wnt signaling. As previous studies
have suggested that the ventral patterning factor Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) also
stimulates dorsal telencephalic proliferation, we propose a model whereby Wnt and
Shh signaling promote distinct dorsal-ventral patterning while also having
broader effects on proliferation that serve to coordinate the growth of
telencephalic subregions.

PMCID: PMC2737268
PMID: 18997789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Dev Biol. 2009 Jan 1;325(1):151-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.10.010. Epub 2008
Nov 1.

Premature differentiation and aberrant movement of pituitary cells lacking both
Hes1 and Prop1.

Himes AD(1), Raetzman LT.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

In the pituitary, the transition from proliferating progenitor cell into
differentiated hormone producing cell is carefully regulated in a time-dependent 
and spatially-restricted manner. We report that two targets of Notch signaling,
Hes1 and Prop1, are needed to maintain progenitors within Rathke's pouch and for 
the restriction of differentiated cells to the ventral pituitary. We observed
ACTH and alphaGSU producing cells that had prematurely differentiated within
Rathke's pouch along with correlated ectopic expression of Mash1 only when both
Prop1 and Hes1 were lost. We also discovered that downregulation of N-cadherin
expression in cells as they transition from Rathke's pouch to the anterior lobe
appears to be essential for their movement. In the Prop1 mutant, cells are
trapped in Rathke's pouch and N-cadherin expression remains high. Also, Slug, a
marker of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, is absent in the dorsal anterior 
lobe. When Hes1 is lost in the Prop1 mutant, N-cadherin is downregulated and
cells are able to exit Rathke's pouch but have lost their migrational cues and
form ectopic foci surrounding Rathke's pouch. Our data reveal important
overlapping functions of Hes1 and Prop1 in cell differentiation and movement that
are critical for pituitary organogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2642967
PMID: 18996108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Stem Cells. 2008 Dec;26(12):3182-93. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0300. Epub 2008 
Sep 18.

Regulation of prenatal human retinal neurosphere growth and cell fate potential
by retinal pigment epithelium and Mash1.

Gamm DM(1), Wright LS, Capowski EE, Shearer RL, Meyer JS, Kim HJ, Schneider BL,
Melvan JN, Svendsen CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA. dgamm@wisc.edu

During development of the central nervous system, stem and progenitor cell
proliferation and differentiation are controlled by complex inter- and
intracellular interactions that orchestrate the precise spatiotemporal production
of particular cell types. Within the embryonic retina, progenitor cells are
located adjacent to the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), which differentiates
prior to the neurosensory retina and has the capacity to secrete a multitude of
growth factors. We found that secreted proteinaceous factors in human prenatal
RPE conditioned medium (RPE CM) prolonged and enhanced the growth of human
prenatal retinal neurospheres. The growth-promoting activity of RPE CM was
mitogen-dependent and associated with an acute increase in transcription factor
phosphorylation. Expanded populations of RPE CM-treated retinal neurospheres
expressed numerous neurodevelopmental and eye specification genes and markers
characteristic of neural and retinal progenitor cells, but gradually lost the
potential to generate neurons upon differentiation. Misexpression of Mash1
restored the neurogenic potential of long-term cultures, yielding neurons with
phenotypic characteristics of multiple inner retinal cell types. Thus, a novel
combination of extrinsic and intrinsic factors was required to promote both
progenitor cell proliferation and neuronal multipotency in human retinal
neurosphere cultures. These results support a pro-proliferative and antiapoptotic
role for RPE in human retinal development, reveal potential limitations of human 
retinal progenitor culture systems, and suggest a means for overcoming cell fate 
restriction in vitro.

PMCID: PMC3127245
PMID: 18802035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Tissue Eng Part A. 2009 Feb;15(2):307-18. doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2008.0071.

Kinetic analysis of neurotrophin-3-mediated differentiation of embryonic stem
cells into neurons.

Willerth SM(1), Sakiyama-Elbert SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis,
Missouri 63130, USA.

The goal of this study was to develop a kinetic analysis that could predict the
behavior of embryonic stem cell-derived neural progenitor cells (ESNPCs) in
response to treatment with neurotrophin-3 (NT-3). Previous studies have shown
that NT-3 activates the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascade in
embryonic stem cells and promotes differentiation of ESNPCs into neurons. MAP
kinase activation after NT-3 stimulation was confirmed experimentally, and a
kinetic analysis was developed using rate constants obtained from the literature.
Concentrations of select signaling components were estimated for ESNPCs using
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction by comparing mRNA
levels to those of cell types with known protein concentrations. This assumption 
was validated using Western blots, and incorporated into the analysis. This
analysis was used to predict the minimum NT-3 concentration necessary to promote 
neuronal differentiation of ESNPCs based on the activation of MAP kinase. These
predictions were then tested experimentally to confirm the validity of the
analysis. Finally, expression of the transcription factor mammalian achate schute
homolog 1 and beta-tubulin III (an early neuronal marker) was examined in
response to the different NT-3 doses to confirm the link between MAP kinase
activation and neuronal differentiation. Overall, this study provides insight
into the kinetics of the intracellular processes that promote ESNPC
differentiation to neurons.

PMCID: PMC2750852
PMID: 18800878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Radiology. 2008 Oct;249(1):268-77. doi: 10.1148/radiol.2491072000.

Relationship between gene expression and enhancement in glioblastoma multiforme: 
exploratory DNA microarray analysis.

Pope WB(1), Chen JH, Dong J, Carlson MR, Perlina A, Cloughesy TF, Liau LM,
Mischel PS, Nghiemphu P, Lai A, Nelson SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiological Sciences, David Geffen School of Medicine at
University of California-Los Angeles (UCLA) Medical Center, 10833 Le Conte Ave,
BL-428/CHS, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1721, USA. wpope@mednet.ucla.edu

PURPOSE: To determine the difference in gene expression between completely versus
incompletely enhancing glioblastoma multiforme (GBM).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Gene expression was determined for 52 newly diagnosed GBMs
by using DNA microarrays, and the relationship to enhancement pattern and
survival was analyzed. This study was approved by the institutional review board 
and was HIPAA compliant; informed consent was obtained.
RESULTS: Thirty-eight percent (20 of 52) of GBMs were incompletely enhancing
(IE). The expression of eight genes was increased more than twofold in IE GBM
when compared with completely enhancing (CE) GBM. Among these were tight junction
protein-2 (2.2-fold increase, P = .019), and the oligodendroglioma markers
oligodendrocyte lineage transcription factor 2 (2.4-fold increase, P = .029) and 
Achaete-scute complex-like 1 (ASCL1; 2.7-fold increase, P = .023). The expression
of 71 genes showed relative overexpression in CE when compared with IE GBM. These
included several proangiogenic and edema-related genes, including vascular
endothelial growth factor (2.1-fold, P = .005) and neuronal pentraxin-2
(3.0-fold, P = .029). Several genes associated with primary GBM were
overexpressed in CE tumors, whereas ASCL1, which is associated with secondary
GBM, was overexpressed in IE tumors. Many genes overexpressed in IE GBM were
associated with longer survival, whereas several genes overexpressed in CE GBM
correlated with shortened survival.
CONCLUSION: The enhancement pattern divides GBM in two groups with differing
prognoses. By comparing gene expression between IE and CE GBMs, it was possible
to identify genes that may affect magnetic resonance imaging features of edema
and enhancement, and genes whose expression levels are predictive of both
improved and shortened survival.

(c) RSNA, 2008.

PMCID: PMC2798090
PMID: 18796682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Mol Ther. 2008 Nov;16(11):1873-82. doi: 10.1038/mt.2008.189. Epub 2008 Sep 9.

Mash1 and neurogenin 2 enhance survival and differentiation of neural precursor
cells after transplantation to rat brains via distinct modes of action.

Yi SH(1), Jo AY, Park CH, Koh HC, Park RH, Suh-Kim H, Shin I, Lee YS, Kim J, Lee 
SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang
University, Seoul, Korea.

Neural precursor cells (NPCs) are regarded as a promising source of donor cells
in transplantation-based therapies for neurodegenerative disorders. However, poor
survival and limited neuronal differentiation of the transplanted NPCs remain
critical limitations for developing therapeutic strategies. In this study, we
investigated the effects of the proneural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factors Mash1 and Neurogenin 2 (Ngn2) in neuronal differentiation
and survival of NPCs. Induction of Mash1 or Ngn2 expression strikingly enhanced
neuronal differentiation of cultured NPCs in vitro. Ngn2-transduced NPCs
underwent a rapid cell cycle arrest, which often accompanies differentiation. In 
contrast, cells continuously expanded upon Mash1 expression during NPC
differentiation. Notably, sonic hedgehog (SHH) was upregulated by Mash1 and
mediated the proliferative and survival effects of Mash1 on NPCs. Upon
transplantation into adult rat brains, Mash1-expressing NPCs yielded large grafts
enriched with neurons compared to control LacZ-transduced NPCs. Interestingly,
enhancements in neuronal yield, as well as in donor cell survival, were also
achieved by transplanting Ngn2-transduced NPCs. We show that a differentiation
stage- and cell density-dependent survival effect of Ngn2 involves neurotrophin3 
(NT3)/TrkC-mediated signaling. Together, these findings suggest potential
benefits of bHLH gene manipulation to develop successful transplantation
strategies for brain disorders.

PMID: 18781144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2008 Nov 25;295(1-2):106-14. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.07.017.
Epub 2008 Aug 6.

NeuroD1 and Mash1 temporally regulate GnRH receptor gene expression in
immortalized mouse gonadotrope cells.

Cherrington BD(1), Bailey JS, Diaz AL, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine and The Center for Reproductive Science
and Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Accurate spatial and temporal expression of gonadotrope-specific genes, such as
the gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor (GnRHR) gene, is critical for
gonadotrope maturation. Herein, we show that a specific E-box in the mouse GnRHR 
promoter binds two group A basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors.
Mutation of this E-box decreases expression in mouse gonadotrope-derived
alphaT3-1 and LbetaT2 cell lines. Microarray and western blots show that the bHLH
transcription factor NeuroD1 is strongly expressed in the gonadotrope progenitor,
alphaT3-1, whereas Mash1 is strongly expressed in the more mature gonadotrope,
LbetaT2. Over-expression of NeuroD1 or Mash1 increases expression of the GnRHR
gene or a multimer of the E-box and this increase is lost upon mutation of the
E-box. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays reveal that the GnRHR E-box binds
NeuroD1 from alphaT3-1 cells, but binds Mash1 from LbetaT2 cells. The sequential 
binding of different members of the group A bHLH transcription factor family to
mouse GnRHR E-box 3 as the gonadotrope differentiates may represent a mechanism
necessary for proper spatial and temporal expression of the GnRHR during
gonadotrope development.

PMCID: PMC2640340
PMID: 18760324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Surg Today. 2008;38(9):857-61. doi: 10.1007/s00595-007-3732-0. Epub 2008 Aug 28.

Clinical implications of unusual NeuroD and mASH1 expression in a patient with
primary large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the duodenum: report of a case.

Miura S(1), Yoshidome H, Shida T, Kimura F, Shimizu H, Otsuka M, Kato A,
Yoshitomi H, Nozawa S, Furukawa K, Mitsuhashi N, Takeuchi D, Miyazaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Chiba University Graduate School of Medicine,
1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba, 260-8670, Japan.

A 69-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for investigation of tarry
stools. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a slightly enhanced
heterogeneous mass in the first to second part of the duodenum, adjacent to the
gallbladder and head of the pancreas. Endoscopy showed a huge protruding tumor
with ulceration in the first part of the duodenum. The preoperative
histopathological diagnosis was neuroendocrine carcinoma with expression of
synaptophysin. Thus, we performed pancreaticoduodenectomy with gallbladder bed
resection. Histopathologically, the tumor was a large-cell neuroendocrine
carcinoma (LCNEC) of the duodenum. To our knowledge, this is the first report of 
duodenal LCNEC arising outside the ampulla of Vater. The patient has been
disease-free for 24 months since her operation, without additional therapy.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells revealed positive expression to NeuroD and
faint expression to mASH1 (hASH1): both essential transcriptional factors for
normal neural development. The expression patterns of NeuroD and mASH1 suggest a 
favorable prognosis.

PMID: 18751955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Aug 7;3(2):125-6. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.07.006.

A niche-defying feat: induced oligoneogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus.

Goldman SA(1), Natesan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY
14580, USA. steven_goldman@urmc.rochester.edu

In a recent paper in Nature Neuroscience, Jessberger et al. (2008) report that
overexpression of ASCL1 (mash1) directs adult hippocampal progenitors to adopt an
oligodendrocytic fate. The effect is specific to the hippocampal niche in vivo,
indicating that cell-autonomous and niche-defined factors collaborate to instruct
cell fate choices.

PMID: 18682232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Pediatr Res. 2008 Dec;64(6):689-94. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e318187dd0e.

Delineation of late onset hypoventilation associated with hypothalamic
dysfunction syndrome.

De Pontual L(1), Trochet D, Caillat-Zucman S, Abou Shenab OA, Bougneres P, Crow
Y, Cunningham S, Esteva B, Heberle LC, Leger J, Pinto G, Polak M, Shafik MH,
Straus C, Trang H, Munnich A, Lyonnet S, Desguerre I, Amiel J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, 75015, France.
depontual@necker.fr

Late Onset Central Hypoventilation Syndrome associated with Hypothalamic
Dysfunction (LO-CHS/HD) is a distinct entity among the clinical and genetic
heterogeneous group of patients with late onset central hypoventilation. Here we 
report a series of 13 patients with LO-CHS/HD. Rapid onset obesity is the first
symptom of HD followed by hypoventilation with a mean delay of 18 mos. The
outcome remains poor for this group of patients and would benefit from early
diagnosis to anticipate ventilation and possible metabolic disorders. Tumor
predisposition is more frequent than initially suspected and as high as 40% in
this series. These tumors of the sympathetic nervous system (TSNS) are usually
differentiated and do not significantly worsen the prognosis. We report a
familial case with recurrence in siblings. The cause underlying LO-CHS/HD remains
poorly understood although recurrence in siblings argues for a monogenic
disorder. We ruled out PHOX2B, ASCL1, and NECDIN as disease-causing genes by
direct sequencing in our series of patients and discuss possible disease-causing 
mechanisms.

PMID: 18670370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Cell Biochem Funct. 2008 Aug;26(6):692-700. doi: 10.1002/cbf.1494.

TGF-alpha induces upregulation and nuclear translocation of Hes1 in glioma cell.

Zheng Y(1), Lin L, Zheng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Research Center of Molecular
Medicine, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, PR China.

Both the Notch-signaling pathway and extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK) 
cascade are involved in a wide variety of biological processes, such as
proliferation, differentiation, survival, and tumorigenesis. Their dysregulation 
in recent studies have been shown to be associated with glioma formation. Here,
we show that transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-alpha) stimulated glioma cell 
line U251 growth and can partly compensate for the inhibitory effect of
Notch-signaling inhibitor DAPT. The effect of TGF-alpha on ERK1/2 phosphorylation
was prompt and transient and could be inhibited by
mitogen-activated/extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase 1/2 (MEK1/2)
specific inhibitor PD98059. Moreover, TGF-alpha was capable of up-regulating
Hairy-enhancer of split1 (Hes1) expression which was independent of Notch1
activation, and of introducing Hes1 nuclear import in the presence of ERK1/2
activation. Collectively, our data suggest a potential linkage between ERK
activation and the Notch-signaling pathway.

Copyright 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 18636433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Dev Dyn. 2008 Aug;237(8):2147-57. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21621.

Xenopus zinc finger transcription factor IA1 (Insm1) expression marks
anteroventral noradrenergic neuron progenitors in Xenopus embryos.

Parlier D(1), Ariza A, Christulia F, Genco F, Vanhomwegen J, Kricha S, Souopgui
J, Bellefroid EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Embryologie Moléculaire, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Institut
de Biologie et de Médecine Moléculaires (IBMM), Gosselies, Belgium.

The evolutionarily conserved IA1 (Insm1) gene is strongly expressed in the
developing nervous system. Here, we show that IA1 is expressed during Xenopus
laevis embryogenesis in neural plate primary neurons as well as in a population
of uncharacterized anteroventral cells that form in front of the cement gland and
that we identified as noradrenergic neurons. We also show that the formation of
those anteroventral cells is dependent on BMPs and inhibited by Notch and that it
is regulated by the transcription factors Xash1, Phox2, and Hand2. Finally, we
provide functional evidence suggesting that IA1 may also play a role in their
formation. Together, our results reveal that IA1 constitutes a novel player
downstream of Xash1 in the formation of a previously unidentified population of
Xenopus noradrenergic primary neurons.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18627098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Nat Neurosci. 2008 Aug;11(8):888-93. doi: 10.1038/nn.2148. Epub 2008 Jun 29.

Directed differentiation of hippocampal stem/progenitor cells in the adult brain.

Jessberger S(1), Toni N, Clemenson GD Jr, Ray J, Gage FH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 N.
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA. jessberger@cell.biol.ethz.ch

Adult neurogenesis is a lifelong feature of brain plasticity; however, the
potency of adult neural stem/progenitor cells in vivo remains unclear. We found
that retrovirus-mediated overexpression of a single gene, the bHLH transcription 
factor Ascl1, redirected the fate of the proliferating adult hippocampal
stem/progenitor (AHP) progeny and lead to the exclusive generation of cells of
the oligodendrocytic lineage at the expense of newborn neurons, demonstrating
that AHPs in the adult mouse brain are not irrevocably specified in vivo. These
data indicate that AHPs have substantial plasticity, which might have important
implications for the potential use of endogenous AHPs in neurological disease.

PMCID: PMC2795354
PMID: 18587391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Mod Pathol. 2008 Nov;21(11):1357-62. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.118. Epub 2008
Jun 27.

MASH1: a useful marker in differentiating pulmonary small cell carcinoma from
Merkel cell carcinoma.

Ralston J(1), Chiriboga L, Nonaka D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 
10016, USA.

Merkel cell carcinoma is the cutaneous counterpart of small cell carcinoma, and
the most important differential diagnosis is cutaneous metastasis of small cell
carcinoma of the lung. There have been a handful of studies reporting on the
utility of a variety of immunohistochemical markers that distinguish between the 
two entities. Achaete-scute complex-like 1 (MASH1, ASCL1) is important in the
development of the brain and the diffuse neuroendocrine system including
pulmonary neuroendocrine cells. A recent study, using a cDNA array, identified
Mash1 as one of the best classifier genes to differentiate pulmonary small cell
carcinoma from Merkel cell carcinoma. We immunohistochemically applied this
finding to the diagnostic setting. A total of 30 cases of Merkel cell carcinoma
and 59 cases of small cell carcinoma of the lung were immunostained with
anti-MASH1 and TTF-1 antibodies. Of 59 small cell carcinomas, 49 (83%) expressed 
MASH1 in nuclear staining whereas out of 59 small cell carcinomas, 43 (73%)
expressed TTF-1 in nuclear staining. MASH1 was completely negative in all 30
Merkel cell carcinomas whereas TTF-1 expression was seen in 1 of the 30 Merkel
cell carcinomas (3%). MASH1 is a useful adjunct marker for differentiating small 
cell carcinoma of the lung from Merkel cell carcinoma.

PMID: 18587322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Mod Pathol. 2008 Nov;21(11):1363-70. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.121. Epub 2008
Jun 27.

The expression of NeuroD and mASH1 in the gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine
tumors.

Shida T(1), Furuya M, Kishimoto T, Nikaido T, Tanizawa T, Koda K, Oda K, Takano
S, Kimura F, Shimizu H, Yoshidome H, Ohtsuka M, Nakatani Y, Miyazaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Chiba University Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba, Japan. shidax812@yahoo.co.jp

Gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors are uncommon and their tumor biology
has not been well elucidated to date. Currently the WHO classification is widely 
used for the diagnosis and distinction of this tumor entity, which is sometimes
cumbersome. Although neuroendocrine tumor markers do exist (ie chromograninA,
synaptopyhsin, etc), sensitive and specific markers that accurately predict tumor
growth and tumor behavior are still absent. In the present study, we assessed the
expression of transcription factors (NeuroD and mASH1) essential for the normal
fetal neuronal development in 33 gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumor
patients (12 well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors, 7 well-differentiated
neuroendocrine carcinomas, and 14 poorly differentiated neuroendocrine
carcinomas). NeuroD was less expressed in poorly differentiated neuroendocrine
carcinoma (small-cell type) compared to well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor 
(carcinoid) by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
Immunohistochemical staining revealed that mASH1 was highly (sensitivity of 71%) 
and specifically (specificity of 95%) expressed in poorly differentiated
neuroendocrine carcinoma. High NeuroD expression was seen in all
well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma and tumor (carcinoid) patients. Low 
NeuroD expression was seen in 36% (5 of 14) of poorly differentiated
neuroendocrine carcinoma patients, which was associated with significant shorter 
overall survival. The expression pattern of these transcription factors may
represent the biological and pathophysiological difference of
gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors and may become a new marker for the 
distinction of gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.

PMID: 18587321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008 Aug;38(4):595-606. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.05.008. Epub
2008 May 20.

Ascl1 (Mash1) lineage cells contribute to discrete cell populations in CNS
architecture.

Kim EJ(1), Battiste J, Nakagawa Y, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA.

Ascl1 (previously Mash1) is a bHLH transcription factor essential for neuronal
differentiation and specification in the nervous system. Although it has been
studied for its role in several neural lineages, the full complement of lineages 
arising from Ascl1 progenitor cells remains unknown. Using an inducible Cre-flox 
genetic fate-mapping strategy, Ascl1 lineages were determined throughout the
brain. Ascl1 is present in proliferating progenitor cells but these cells are
actively differentiating as evidenced by rapid migration out of germinal zones.
Ascl1 lineage cells contribute to distinct cell types in each major brain
division: the forebrain including the cerebral cortex, olfactory bulb,
hippocampus, striatum, hypothalamus, and thalamic nuclei, the midbrain including 
superior and inferior colliculi, and the hindbrain including Purkinje and deep
cerebellar nuclei cells and cells in the trigeminal sensory system. Ascl1
progenitor cells at early stages in each CNS region preferentially become
neurons, and at late stages they become oligodendrocytes. In conclusion,
Ascl1-expressing progenitor cells in the brain give rise to multiple, but not
all, neuronal subtypes and oligodendrocytes depending on the temporal and spatial
context, consistent with a broad role in neural differentiation with some subtype
specification.

PMCID: PMC2570020
PMID: 18585058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Surg Res. 2008 Jul;148(1):31-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2008.03.008. Epub 2008 Apr
10.

Valproic acid induces Notch1 signaling in small cell lung cancer cells.

Platta CS(1), Greenblatt DY, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratories, Department of Surgery and Paul P.
Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 
53792, USA.

BACKGROUND: Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive malignancy. Current
treatments yield dismal survival rates. We have previously demonstrated that
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors can inhibit neuroendocrine tumor growth.
Activation of the Notch1 signaling pathway also impairs SCLC cell viability. In
this study, we investigated the ability of the HDAC inhibitor valproic acid (VPA)
to activate Notch1 signaling and inhibit proliferation in SCLC cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: DMS53 human SCLC cells were treated with VPA (0-10 mM) for
2 d. Light microscopy was used to examine changes in cell morphology. Western
analysis was performed using antibodies against various Notch1 pathway proteins
to assess Notch1 activation. Additionally, immunoblotting was performed for two
neuroendocrine tumor markers, chromogranin A and achaete-scute complex-like 1.
Finally, a cell proliferation assay was used to measure the effects of VPA on
SCLC growth over 8 d.
RESULTS: After treatment with VPA, DMS53 cells underwent dramatic changes in
morphology. VPA induced expression of the full-length and active forms of Notch1 
protein. Furthermore, VPA suppressed levels of neuroendocrine tumor markers
chromogranin A and ASLC-1. Importantly, VPA treatment led to dose-dependent
inhibition of SCLC cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: The HDAC inhibitor VPA activates Notch1 signaling in SCLC cells. VPA
induces changes in cell morphology and suppresses neuroendocrine tumor markers,
indicating a change in phenotype. Additionally, VPA profoundly inhibits SCLC cell
growth. These results suggest that VPA has potential as a novel therapeutic agent
for SCLC.

PMCID: PMC2900385
PMID: 18570928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2008 Sep;466(9):2147-55. doi: 10.1007/s11999-008-0343-z.
Epub 2008 Jun 19.

Neuronal differentiation of synovial sarcoma and its therapeutic application.

Ishibe T(1), Nakayama T, Aoyama T, Nakamura T, Toguchida J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tissue Regeneration, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences,
Kyoto University, Shogoin, Kyoto, Japan.

Synovial sarcoma is a rare sarcoma of unknown histologic origin. We previously
reported the gene expression profile of synovial sarcoma was closely related to
that of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, and the fibroblast growth
factor (FGF) signal was one of the main growth signals in synovial sarcoma. Here 
we further demonstrate the neural origin of synovial sarcoma using primary tumors
and cell lines. The expression of neural tissue-related genes was confirmed in
synovial sarcoma tumor tissues, but the expression of some genes was absent in
synovial sarcoma cell lines. Treatment of synovial sarcoma cell lines with BMP4
or FGF2 enhanced or restored the expression of neural tissue-related genes and
induced a neuron-like morphology with positive Tuj-1 expression. Treatment with
all-trans-retinoic acid also induced the expression of neural tissue-related
genes in association with growth inhibition, which was not observed in other cell
lines except a malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor cell line. A
growth-inhibitory effect of all-trans-retinoic acid was also observed for
xenografted tumors in athymic mice. The simultaneous treatment with FGF signal
inhibitors enhanced the growth-inhibitory effect of all-trans-retinoic acid,
suggesting the combination of growth signaling inhibition and differentiation
induction could be a potential molecular target for treating synovial sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC2493002
PMID: 18563503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Ann Surg Oncol. 2008 Sep;15(9):2600-5. doi: 10.1245/s10434-008-0006-z. Epub 2008 
Jun 18.

Suberoyl bishydroxamic acid activates notch1 signaling and suppresses tumor
progression in an animal model of medullary thyroid carcinoma.

Ning L(1), Jaskula-Sztul R, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratories, Department of Surgery, University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, and the University of Wisconsin
Paul P. Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center, Madison, WI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is a neuroendocrine malignancy that
frequently metastasizes and has few treatments. This study was aimed at assessing
the antitumor effects of suberoyl bishydroxamic acid (SBHA) in an in vivo model
of MTC.
METHODS: Nude mice were injected with human MTC cells, and the groups were
treated with SBHA (200 mg/kg) or vehicle (dimethyl sulfoxide) in saline injection
every other day for 12 days. Tumors were measured every 4 days and collected at
12 days for Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Treatment with SBHA resulted in an average 55% inhibition of tumor
growth in the treatment group (P < .05). Analysis of SBHA-treated MTC tumors
revealed a marked increase in the active form of Notch1 (NICD) with a concomitant
decrease in achaete-scute complex-like 1 (ASCL1), a downstream target of Notch1
signaling, as well as the neuroendocrine tumor marker chromogranin A.
Importantly, SBHA treatment resulted in an increase in protein levels of
p21(CIP1/WAF1), p27(KIP1), cleaved caspase-9, cleaved caspase-3, and cleaved poly
ADP-ribose polymerase and concomitant with a decrease in cyclin D1 and cyclin B1,
indicating that the growth inhibition was due to both cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis. Moreover, SBHA downregulated cell survival proteins Bcl-2 and
Bcl-X(L), but upregulated apoptotic proteins Bax, Bad, and Bmf.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that SBHA inhibits MTC growth in vivo. SBHA
is a promising candidate for further preclinical and clinical studies in MTC.

PMCID: PMC2737668
PMID: 18563491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Ann Surg. 2008 Jun;247(6):1036-40. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e3181758d0e.

Valproic acid activates Notch1 signaling and induces apoptosis in medullary
thyroid cancer cells.

Greenblatt DY(1), Cayo MA, Adler JT, Ning L, Haymart MR, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Chen
H.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratories, Department of Surgery, University of 
Wisconsin, University of Wisconsin Paul P. Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the effects of valproic acid (VPA) on Notch1 expression and
cancer cell proliferation in medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) cells.
BACKGROUND: Other than surgery, there are no effective treatments for MTC, a
neuroendocrine malignancy that frequently metastasizes. We have previously shown 
that over-expression of Notch1 in MTC cells inhibits cell growth and hormone
production. VPA, a drug long used for the treatment of epilepsy, has recently
been identified as a potential Notch1 activator. We hypothesized that VPA might
activate Notch1 signaling in MTC cells, with antiproliferative effects.
METHODS: Human MTC cells were treated with VPA (0-5 mM) and Western blotting was 
performed to measure levels of Notch1 pathway proteins and neuroendocrine tumor
markers. After confirming that VPA is a Notch1 activator in MTC cells, we
performed cell proliferation assay. Finally, to determine the mechanism of growth
inhibition, we measured protein levels of various markers of apoptosis.
RESULTS: Notch1 was absent in MTC cells at baseline. VPA treatment resulted in an
increase in both full-length and active Notch1 protein. Notch1 activation with
VPA suppressed 2 neuroendocrine tumor markers, ASCL1 and chromogranin A.
Importantly, VPA inhibited the growth of MTC cells in a dose-dependent manner.
Immunoblot analysis demonstrated caspase activation and poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase cleavage, indicating the induction of apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: VPA activates Notch1 signaling in MTC cells and inhibits their
growth by inducing apoptosis. As the safety of VPA in human beings is well
established, a clinical trial using this drug to treat patients with advanced MTC
could be initiated in the near future.

PMCID: PMC2904809
PMID: 18520232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Dev Dyn. 2008 Jun;237(6):1726-35. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21571.

Comparative analysis of proneural gene expression in the embryonic cerebellum.

Zordan P(1), Croci L, Hawkes R, Consalez GG.

Author information: 
(1)San Raffaele Scientific Institute and San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.

The embryonic cerebellum contains two germinative epithelia: the rhombic lip and 
the ventricular zone. While the lineage of glutamatergic neurons arising from the
rhombic lip has been characterized, plenty remains to be learned about the
factors giving rise to the array of ventricular zone-derived gamma-aminobutyric
acid (GABA)ergic neurons. In the present study, we describe the expression of
proneural genes Mash1/Ascl1, Ngn1/Neurog1, and Ngn2/Neurog2 in the cerebellar
primordium at key stages of Purkinje cell and interneuron development, and
compare them with the expression of other genes active in the same context. Our
results indicate that Ngn1, Ngn2 and Mash1 are expressed at relevant stages of
cerebellar neurogenesis in the prospective cerebellar nuclei and in the
ventricular zone, excluding the Math1/Atoh1-positive rhombic lip. Their
expression domains are only partially overlapping, suggesting that they may
contribute selectively to ventricular zone regionalization, giving rise to the
diversity of cerebellar GABA neurons and, possibly, Purkinje cell subtypes.

PMID: 18498101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Horm Metab Res. 2008 May;40(5):354-9. doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1076695.

Lack of nuclear expression of hairy and enhancer of split-1 (HES1) in pancreatic 
endocrine tumors.

Johansson T(1), Lejonklou MH, Ekeblad S, Stålberg P, Skogseid B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.

The Notch signaling cascade plays a vital role in the proliferation and
differentiation of cells during pancreatic development. Cell line experiments
have suggested the involvement of Notch signaling in pancreatic endocrine
tumorigenesis. We investigated the expression of NOTCH1, HES1, HEY1 and ASCL1 in 
pancreatic endocrine tumors and compared the data to tumor phenotype including
hormone production, heredity, and WHO classification. Real-time quantitative PCR 
and immunohistochemistry were performed on samples of 26 pancreatic endocrine
tumors. For comparison, 10 specimens of macroscopically normal pancreas were
analyzed using immunohistochemistry. The subcellular localization of proteins was
determined. Neither hormone production, nor heredity, or WHO classification was
found to be associated with the expression of these proteins. There were
discrepancies between mRNA and protein expression levels. All tumors displayed
ASCL1 immunoreactivity. HES1 immunoreactivity was lacking altogether in 46% of
the tumors, and in the remaining lesions its expression was weak and confined to 
the cytoplasm. In the nontumorous pancreatic endocrine cells, weak nuclear
expression of HES1 as well as of HEY1 and NOTCH1 was observed. There was a
significant positive correlation between NOTCH1 and HES1 mRNA levels, but no
indication that HES1 was inhibiting ASCL1 transcription was found. No nuclear
expression of HES1 was found in the tumors. This lack of nuclear expression of
HES1 may contribute to the abundance of ASCL1 and to tumorigenesis in the
endocrine pancreas.

PMID: 18491256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. BMC Med Genomics. 2008 May 19;1:17. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-1-17.

Pro-neural transcription factors as cancer markers.

Vias M(1), Massie CE, East P, Scott H, Warren A, Zhou Z, Nikitin AY, Neal DE,
Mills IG.

Author information: 
(1)Uro-Oncology Research Group, Cancer Research UK Cambridge Research Institute, 
Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UK.
maria.vias@cancer.org.uk

BACKGROUND: The aberrant transcription in cancer of genes normally associated
with embryonic tissue differentiation at various organ sites may be a hallmark of
tumour progression. For example, neuroendocrine differentiation is found more
commonly in cancers destined to progress, including prostate and lung. We sought 
to identify proteins which are involved in neuroendocrine differentiation and
differentially expressed in aggressive/metastatic tumours.
RESULTS: Expression arrays were used to identify up-regulated transcripts in a
neuroendocrine (NE) transgenic mouse model of prostate cancer. Amongst these were
several genes normally expressed in neural tissues, including the pro-neural
transcription factors Ascl1 and Hes6. Using quantitative RT-PCR and
immuno-histochemistry we showed that these same genes were highly expressed in
castrate resistant, metastatic LNCaP cell-lines. Finally we performed a
meta-analysis on expression array datasets from human clinical material. The
expression of these pro-neural transcripts effectively segregates metastatic from
localised prostate cancer and benign tissue as well as sub-clustering a variety
of other human cancers.
CONCLUSION: By focussing on transcription factors known to drive normal tissue
development and comparing expression signatures for normal and malignant mouse
tissues we have identified two transcription factors, Ascl1 and Hes6, which
appear effective markers for an aggressive phenotype in all prostate models and
tissues examined. We suggest that the aberrant initiation of differentiation
programs may confer a selective advantage on cells in all contexts and this
approach to identify biomarkers therefore has the potential to uncover proteins
equally applicable to pre-clinical and clinical cancer biology.

PMCID: PMC2413260
PMID: 18489756  [PubMed]


385. J Comp Neurol. 2008 Jul 10;509(2):211-24. doi: 10.1002/cne.21738.

Expression of the basal cell markers of taste buds in the anterior tongue and
soft palate of the mouse embryo.

Nakayama A(1), Miura H, Shindo Y, Kusakabe Y, Tomonari H, Harada S.

Author information: 
(1)Oral Physiology, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan.

Although embryonic expression of Shh in the fungiform papilla placodes has a
critical role in fungiform papilla patterning, it remains unclear whether its
appearance indicates the differentiation of the basal cells of taste buds. To
examine the embryonic development of the basal cells, the expression of Shh,
Prox1, and Mash1 was determined in the anterior tongue and soft palate in mouse
embryos by in situ hybridization. In the anterior tongue, Prox1 was coexpressed
with Shh from the beginning of Shh expression in the fungiform papilla placodes
at E12.5. Shh was expressed in the soft palate in a band-like pattern in the
anteriormost region and in a punctate pattern in the posterior region at E14.5.
The number (21.4 +/- 4.3, at E14.5) of locations where Shh was observed (i.e.,
spots) rapidly increased and reached a peak level (54.8 +/- 4.0 at E15.5). Also
in the soft palate, Prox1 was coexpressed with Shh from the beginning of Shh
expression. These results suggest that basal cell differentiation occurs
synchronously with the patterning of Shh spots both in the anterior tongue and in
the soft palate. In contrast, Mash1 expression lagged behind the expression of
Shh and Prox1 and began after the number of Shh spots had reached its peak level 
in the soft palate. Furthermore, immunohistochemistry of PGP9.5 and Shh revealed 
that epithelial innervation slightly preceded Mash1 expression both in the tongue
and in the soft palate. This is the first report describing the time courses of
the embryonic expression of basal cell markers of taste buds.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18465790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Development. 2008 Jun;135(11):2031-41. doi: 10.1242/dev.015115. Epub 2008 Apr 30.

Neurogenin 2 has an essential role in development of the dentate gyrus.

Galichet C(1), Guillemot F, Parras CM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, National Institute of Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, NW7 1AA London, UK.

The dentate gyrus (DG) of the hippocampus has a central role in learning and
memory in adult rodents. The DG is generated soon after birth, although new
neurons continue to be generated in the DG throughout life. The proneural factors
Mash1 (Ascl1) and neurogenin 2 (Ngn2) are expressed during formation of the DG
but their role in the development of this structure has not yet been addressed.
Here, we show that Ngn2 is essential for the development of the DG. Ngn2 mutant
mice have fewer DG progenitors and these cells present defects in neuronal
differentiation. By contrast, the DG is normal in Mash1 mutant mice at birth, and
loss of both Mash1 and Ngn2 does not aggravate the defect observed in Ngn2 single
mutants. These data establish a unique role of Ngn2 in DG neurogenesis during
development and raise the possibility that Ngn2 has a similar function in adult
neurogenesis.

PMID: 18448566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Hippocampus. 2008;18(8):758-65. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20434.

Aberrant dentate gyrus cytoarchitecture and fiber lamination in Lis1 mutant mice.

Wang Y(1), Baraban SC.

Author information: 
(1)Epilepsy Research Laboratory, Department of Neurological Surgery, University
of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Mutant mice with a heterozygous deletion of LIS1, show varying degrees of
hippocampal abnormality and enhanced excitability. To examine how LIS1 affects
cytoarchitecture and fiber lamination in dentate gyrus (DG), we performed a
series of immunohistochemistry studies. By using different neuronal- and
glial-specific antibodies, we found that the majority of hippocampal cell
populations were affected by heterozygous mutation of LIS1; some reelin-positive 
Cajal-Retzius cells were left undisturbed. Granule cell dispersion was
significant in hippocampal sections from Lis1-deficient mice. However, the fiber 
termination of commissural/associational fibers and mossy fibers appeared
relatively compact despite obvious granule cell dispersion and CA1-CA3 pyramidal 
cell disorganization. vGlut1-immunoreactive axon terminals were found aberrantly 
traversing the dispersed granule cell layer. Consistent with previous
observations, we also found that immature granule cells in Lis1 mutants, here
stained with antibodies to doublecortin (DCX) and Mash-1, are aberrantly located 
and bear an abnormal cellular morphology. Our findings suggest that LIS1 mutants 
exhibit abnormal cell positioning and aberrant hippocampal neurogenesis, but
maintain relatively normal fiber termination patterns. The functional
consequences of hippocampal granule cell dispersion could offer critical insight 
to the epileptic and cognitive disorder associated with LIS1 haploinsufficiency.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18446829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Dev Dyn. 2008 Jun;237(6):1565-80. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21550.

Relationship between Delta-like and proneural bHLH genes during chick retinal
development.

Nelson BR(1), Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, School of Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. brandn@u.washington.edu

Notch signaling in the retina maintains a pool of progenitor cells throughout
retinogenesis. However, two Notch-ligands from the Delta-like gene family, Dll1
and Dll4, are present in the developing retina. To understand their relationship,
we characterized Dll1 and Dll4 expression with respect to proliferating
progenitor cells and newborn neurons in the chick retina. Dll4 matched the
pattern of neural differentiation. By contrast, Dll1 was primarily expressed in
progenitor cells. We compared Dll1 and Dll4 kinetic profiles with that of the
transiently up-regulated cascade of proneural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) genes
after synchronized progenitor cell differentiation, which suggested a potential
role for Ascl1 in the regulation of Delta-like genes. Gain-of-function assays
demonstrate that Ascl1 does influence Delta-like gene expression and Notch
signaling activity. These data suggest that multiple sources of Notch signaling
from newborn neurons and progenitors themselves coordinate retinal histogenesis.

PMID: 18435466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Cancer Gene Ther. 2008 Sep;15(9):563-75. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2008.24. Epub 2008 Apr 
18.

A chimeric fusion of the hASH1 and EZH2 promoters mediates high and specific
reporter and suicide gene expression and cytotoxicity in small cell lung cancer
cells.

Poulsen TT(1), Pedersen N, Juel H, Poulsen HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Biology, Finsen Center, National University Hospital, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Transcriptionally targeted gene therapy is a promising experimental modality for 
treatment of systemic malignancies such as small cell lung cancer (SCLC). We have
identified the human achaete-scute homolog 1 (hASH1) and enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2) genes as highly upregulated in SCLC compared to a panel of
representative normal tissues. Here, we evaluate the use of regulatory regions
from the hASH1- and EZH2-promoter regions alone and in combination for suicide
gene therapy of SCLC. Two hASH1-promoter regions comprising 0.3 and 0.7 kb
immediately upstream of (and including) the transcription start site were tested.
Both constructs induced reporter gene activity (up to sevenfold SV40-promoter
activity) in all tested classic (hASH1 positive) SCLC and in two hASH1-negative
SCLC cell lines, whereas gene activity was low or absent (<4% of SV40 activity)
in one hASH1-negative SCLC and in all control cell lines tested. To evaluate its 
therapeutic potential, the 0.7 kb hASH1 proximal-promoter region was evaluated
for cytotoxicity in a suicide gene assay. The construct induced SCLC cytotoxicity
at levels equivalent to those observed with the SV40 promoter, while control
cells remained unaffected by the treatment. Analogously, a 1.1 kb EZH2-promoter
region was evaluated by reporter and suicide gene assays. The EZH2 promoter
potently induced reporter gene activity in SCLC (up to 25-fold of SV40 activity) 
while moderate reporter activity (up to 12% of SV40 activity), was detected in
the control cells. However, in the suicide gene assay both control and SCLC cells
demonstrated sensitivity indicating lack of promoter specificity. Finally, we
fused the 0.7 kb hASH1 promoter to the EZH2 promoter generating a chimeric
hASH1EZH2 regulatory construct. The chimeric promoter demonstrated increased
activity in SCLC cells compared to the hASH1 promoter alone while retaining
specificity in control cells. The hASH1EZH2 promoter thus constitutes a promising
transcriptional regulator for SCLC gene therapy.

PMID: 18421308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Apr 15;105(15):5780-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0708704105. Epub 2008 Apr 7.

Tlx3 exerts context-dependent transcriptional regulation and promotes neuronal
differentiation from embryonic stem cells.

Kondo T(1), Sheets PL, Zopf DA, Aloor HL, Cummins TR, Chan RJ, Hashino E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Stark Neurosciences
Research Institute, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA.

The T cell leukemia 3 (Tlx3) gene has been implicated in specification of
glutamatergic sensory neurons in the spinal cord. In cranial sensory ganglia,
Tlx3 is highly expressed in differentiating neurons during early embryogenesis.
To study a role of Tlx3 during neural differentiation, mouse embryonic stem (ES) 
cells were transfected with a Tlx3 expression vector. ES cells stably expressing 
Tlx3 were grown in the presence or absence of a neural induction medium. In
undifferentiated ES cells, there was no significant difference in gene expression
in the presence or absence of Tlx3, even after ES cells were cultured for an
extensive time period. In contrast, expression levels of Mash1, Ngn1, and NeuroD 
were significantly higher in Tlx3-expressing cells after neural induction for 4
days compared with those in cells expressing the control vector. At 7 days after 
neural induction, whereas expression of the proneural genes was down-regulated,
VGLUT2, GluR2, and GluR4 were significantly increased in ES cell-derived neurons 
expressing Tlx3. The sequential and coordinated expression of the proneural and
neuronal subtype-specific genes identifies Tlx3 as a selector gene in ES cells
undergoing neural differentiation. In addition, the differential effects of Tlx3 
overexpression in undifferentiated ES cells compared with ES cell-derived neurons
suggest that Tlx3 exerts context-dependent transcriptional signals on its
downstream target genes. The context-dependent function of Tlx3 as a selector
gene may be used to establish a novel strategy to conditionally generate
excitatory glutamatergic neurons from ES cells to cure various types of
neurodegenerative disorders.

PMCID: PMC2311353
PMID: 18391221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;10(4):373-4. doi: 10.1038/ncb0408-373.

Neurogenesis directed by Sirt1.

Libert S(1), Cohen D, Guarente L.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;10(4):385-94.

Differentiation of neuronal stem cells into astrocytes or neurons is important in
maintaining brain function. Oxidative stress and inflammation are now shown to
bias differentiation toward astrocytes by modulating activity of the anti-ageing 
gene Sirt1. These findings link a longevity gene to the activity of neuronal stem
cells and their response to stress.

PMCID: PMC2703710
PMID: 18379594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. BMC Biol. 2008 Mar 31;6:15. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-6-15.

Characterization of the proneural gene regulatory network during mouse
telencephalon development.

Gohlke JM(1), Armant O, Parham FM, Smith MV, Zimmer C, Castro DS, Nguyen L,
Parker JS, Gradwohl G, Portier CJ, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Systems Biology Group, Laboratory of Molecular Toxicology,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, RTP, NC 27709, USA.
gohlkej@niehs.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: The proneural proteins Mash1 and Ngn2 are key cell autonomous
regulators of neurogenesis in the mammalian central nervous system, yet little is
known about the molecular pathways regulated by these transcription factors.
RESULTS: Here we identify the downstream effectors of proneural genes in the
telencephalon using a genomic approach to analyze the transcriptome of mice that 
are either lacking or overexpressing proneural genes. Novel targets of Ngn2
and/or Mash1 were identified, such as members of the Notch and Wnt pathways, and 
proteins involved in adhesion and signal transduction. Next, we searched the
non-coding sequence surrounding the predicted proneural downstream effector genes
for evolutionarily conserved transcription factor binding sites associated with
newly defined consensus binding sites for Ngn2 and Mash1. This allowed us to
identify potential novel co-factors and co-regulators for proneural proteins,
including Creb, Tcf/Lef, Pou-domain containing transcription factors, Sox9, and
Mef2a. Finally, a gene regulatory network was delineated using a novel
Bayesian-based algorithm that can incorporate information from diverse datasets.
CONCLUSION: Together, these data shed light on the molecular pathways regulated
by proneural genes and demonstrate that the integration of experimentation with
bioinformatics can guide both hypothesis testing and hypothesis generation.

PMCID: PMC2330019
PMID: 18377642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Cell Stem Cell. 2007 Nov;1(5):529-40. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2007.08.011.

Neurotrophin receptor-mediated death of misspecified neurons generated from
embryonic stem cells lacking Pax6.

Nikoletopoulou V(1), Plachta N, Allen ND, Pinto L, Götz M, Barde YA.

Author information: 
(1)Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland.

Pax6-positive radial glial (RG) cells are the progenitors of most glutamatergic
neurons in the cortex, a lineage that can be recapitulated in vitro using
embryonic stem (ES) cells. We show here that ES cells lacking Pax6, a
transcription factor long known to be essential for cortical development,
generate Mash1-positive RG cells that differentiate in GABAergic neurons. These
neurons express high levels of the neurotrophin receptor p75NTR causing their
rapid death. Pax6 function was also investigated following transplantation of ES 
cells in the developing chick telencephalon and in mice lacking both Pax6 and
p75NTR. Taken together, our results indicate that reliable predictions can be
made with cultured ES cells when used to explore the role of genes impacting
early aspects of mammalian neurogenesis. They also provide a novel opportunity to
compare the molecular constituents of glutamatergic with those of GABA-ergic
neurons and to explore the mechanisms of their generation.

PMID: 18371392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;10(4):385-94. doi: 10.1038/ncb1700. Epub 2008 Mar 16.

Sirt1 contributes critically to the redox-dependent fate of neural progenitors.

Prozorovski T(1), Schulze-Topphoff U, Glumm R, Baumgart J, Schröter F, Ninnemann 
O, Siegert E, Bendix I, Brüstle O, Nitsch R, Zipp F, Aktas O.

Author information: 
(1)Cecilie Vogt Clinic for Neurology in the Helios Klinikum Berlin-Buch, Charité 
- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, and Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine,
Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;10(4):373-4.

Repair processes that are activated in response to neuronal injury, be it
inflammatory, ischaemic, metabolic, traumatic or other cause, are characterized
by a failure to replenish neurons and by astrogliosis. The underlying molecular
pathways, however, are poorly understood. Here, we show that subtle alterations
of the redox state, found in different brain pathologies, regulate the fate of
mouse neural progenitor cells (NPCs) through the histone deacetylase (HDAC)
Sirt1. Mild oxidation or direct activation of Sirt1 suppressed proliferation of
NPCs and directed their differentiation towards the astroglial lineage at the
expense of the neuronal lineage, whereas reducing conditions had the opposite
effect. Under oxidative conditions in vitro and in vivo, Sirt1 was upregulated in
NPCs, bound to the transcription factor Hes1 and subsequently inhibited
pro-neuronal Mash1. In utero shRNA-mediated knockdown of Sirt1 in NPCs prevented 
oxidation-mediated suppression of neurogenesis and caused upregulation of Mash1
in vivo. Our results provide evidence for an as yet unknown metabolic master
switch that determines the fate of neural progenitors.

PMID: 18344989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mod Pathol. 2008 Jun;21(6):700-7. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.39. Epub 2008 Feb
29.

Human ASH1 expression in prostate cancer with neuroendocrine differentiation.

Rapa I(1), Ceppi P, Bollito E, Rosas R, Cappia S, Bacillo E, Porpiglia F, Berruti
A, Papotti M, Volante M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, San
Luigi Hospital, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.

Neuroendocrine differentiation in prostate cancer correlates with overall
prognosis and disease progression after androgen-deprivation therapy, although
its specific mechanisms are currently poorly understood. A role of Notch pathway 
has been reported in determining neuroendocrine phenotype of normal and
neoplastic tissues. The aim of this study was to analyze whether this pathway
might affect neuroendocrine differentiation in prostate cancer. Human
achaete-scute homolog 1 (hASH1), a pivotal member of the Notch pathway, was
investigated in 80 prostate cancers selected and grouped according to
chromogranin A immunohistochemistry, as follows: prostate cancers without
neuroendocrine differentiation, untreated (25 cases); prostate cancers with
neuroendocrine differentiation, untreated (40 cases); prostate cancers with
previous androgen-deprivation therapy, all having neuroendocrine differentiation 
(15 cases). Human ASH1 protein was analyzed by immunohistochemistry, whereas the 
presence of hASH1 mRNA transcripts was investigated on paraffin material by
real-time PCR. By immunohistochemistry, hASH1 was colocalized with chromogranin A
in neuroendocrine cells of normal prostatic gland. It was absent in all but one
prostate cancers without neuroendocrine differentiation, whereas it was positive 
in 25% of prostate cancers with neuroendocrine differentiation/untreated, with a 
significant correlation with the extent of neuroendocrine features (P=0.02).
Moreover, comparing untreated and treated prostate cancers with neuroendocrine
differentiation, a positive association with androgen-deprivation therapy was
observed (P=0.01). In prostate cancers with neuroendocrine differentiation, RNA
analysis confirmed the association of higher transcript levels in androgen
deprivation-treated compared with untreated patients (P=0.01). In addition, hASH1
mRNA analysis in microdissected chromogranin A-positive and chromogranin
A-negative areas within the same tumor demonstrated a two- to sevenfold increase 
of hASH1 mRNA expression in chromogranin A-positive tumor cell populations.

PMID: 18311112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Development. 2008 Apr;135(7):1271-81. doi: 10.1242/dev.015370. Epub 2008 Feb 20.

Ascl1 is required for oligodendrocyte development in the spinal cord.

Sugimori M(1), Nagao M, Parras CM, Nakatani H, Lebel M, Guillemot F, Nakafuku M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, 3333 Burnet Avenue, and Department of Pediatrics, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Development of oligodendrocytes, myelin-forming glia in the central nervous
system (CNS), proceeds on a protracted schedule. Specification of oligodendrocyte
progenitors (OLPs) begins early in development, whereas their terminal
differentiation occurs at late embryonic and postnatal periods. How these
distinct steps are controlled remains unclear. Our previous study demonstrated an
important role of the helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factor Ascl1 in early 
generation of OLPs in the developing spinal cord. Here, we show that Ascl1 is
also involved in terminal differentiation of oligodendrocytes late in
development. Ascl1-/- mutant mice showed a deficiency in differentiation of
myelin-expressing oligodendrocytes at birth. In vitro culture studies demonstrate
that the induction and maintenance of co-expression of Olig2 and Nkx2-2 in OLPs, 
and thyroid hormone-responsive induction of myelin proteins are impaired in
Ascl1-/- mutants. Gain-of-function studies further showed that Ascl1 collaborates
with Olig2 and Nkx2-2 in promoting differentiation of OLPs into oligodendrocytes 
in vitro. Overexpression of Ascl1, Olig2 and Nkx2-2 alone stimulated the
specification of OLPs, but the combinatorial action of Ascl1 and Olig2 or Nkx2-2 
was required for further promoting their differentiation into oligodendrocytes.
Thus, Ascl1 regulates multiple aspects of oligodendrocyte development in the
spinal cord.

PMID: 18287202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Cell Tissue Res. 2008 Apr;332(1):25-35. doi: 10.1007/s00441-007-0563-7. Epub 2008
Jan 15.

Differentiation of autonomic neurons by BMP-independent mechanisms.

Nakajima T(1), Ota M, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Osaka
University, 1-1 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan.

A number of signaling molecules and transcription factors play important roles in
the development of the autonomic nervous system. Here, we show that mouse trunk
neural crest cells can differentiate into autonomic neurons expressing mammalian 
achaete-scute homolog 1 (mash1), Phox2b, tyrosine hydroxylase, and/or
dopamine-beta-hydroxylase in the absence of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-4.
The expression of mash1 and Phox2b is induced even in the presence of noggin or
chordin, which are inhibitors of BMP signaling. Whereas these autonomic neurons
do not express c-ret, the receptor for glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic
factor (GDNF), GDNF promotes the differentiation of c-ret-positive autonomic
neurons in the presence of noggin. Autonomic neurogenesis is completely prevented
by fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2 treatment or by activation of Notch
signaling. Furthermore, the suppression of Phox2b expression by FGF-2 can be
recovered by treatment with Notch-1 small interfering RNA. Our data suggest that 
BMP-independent mechanisms promote the differentiation of autonomic neurons, and 
that FGF-2 suppresses autonomic neurogenesis by means of the activation of Notch 
signaling.

PMID: 18196275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Genes Cells. 2008 Jan;13(1):41-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2007.01146.x.

Mash1 is required for neuroendocrine cell development in the glandular stomach.

Kokubu H(1), Ohtsuka T, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

In the epithelium of the developing glandular stomach, neuroendocrine cells
differentiate from common progenitors, but the mechanism of how these cells are
specified remains to be determined. Here, we show that the basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) gene, mammalian achaete-scute homologue 1 (Mash1), is highly expressed in 
the glandular stomach epithelium. In Mash1-null mice, almost all gastric
neuroendocrine cells are missing, whereas development of non-neuroendocrine cells
is not significantly affected. The bHLH gene Neurogenin3 (Ngn3), which is known
to regulate formation of subsets of gastric neuroendocrine cells (gastrin-,
glucagon- and somatostatin-producing cells), is expressed normally in the
Mash1-null stomach. Thus, Ngn3 alone is not sufficient but Mash1 is additionally 
required for the differentiation of these neuroendocrine cells. Taken together,
these results indicate that formation of gastrin-, glucagon- and
somatostatin-producing cells depends on both Mash1 and Ngn3, while that of other 
neuroendocrine cells depends on Mash1 alone, suggesting that combinations of bHLH
genes may contribute to cell type diversity.

PMID: 18173746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Development. 2008 Feb;135(3):473-81. Epub 2007 Dec 19.

Insm1 (IA-1) is a crucial component of the transcriptional network that controls 
differentiation of the sympatho-adrenal lineage.

Wildner H(1), Gierl MS, Strehle M, Pla P, Birchmeier C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Centrum for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13125
Berlin, Germany.

Insm1 (IA-1) encodes a Zn-finger factor that is expressed in the developing
nervous system. We demonstrate here that the development of the sympatho-adrenal 
lineage is severely impaired in Insm1 mutant mice. Differentiation of
sympatho-adrenal precursors, as assessed by the expression of neuronal
subtype-specific genes such as Th and Dbh, is delayed in a pronounced manner,
which is accompanied by a reduced proliferation. Sympathetic neurons eventually
overcome the differentiation blockade and mature correctly, but sympathetic
ganglia remain small. By contrast, terminal differentiation of adrenal chromaffin
cells does not occur. The transcription factors Mash1 (Ascl1), Phox2a, Gata3 and 
Hand2 (previously dHand) control the differentiation of sympatho-adrenal
precursor cells, and their deregulated expression in Insm1 mutant mice
demonstrates that Insm1 acts in the transcriptional network that controls
differentiation of this lineage. Pronounced similarities between Mash1 and Insm1 
phenotypes are apparent, which suggests that Insm1 might mediate aspects of Mash1
function in the subtype-specific differentiation of sympatho-adrenal precursors. 
Noradrenaline is the major catecholamine produced by developing sympatho-adrenal 
cells and is required for fetal survival. We demonstrate that the fetal lethality
of Insm1 mutant mice is caused by catecholamine deficiency, which highlights the 
importance of Insm1 in the development of the sympatho-adrenal lineage.

PMID: 18094025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Neurosci. 2007 Nov 21;27(47):12764-74.

In vivo analysis of Ascl1 defined progenitors reveals distinct developmental
dynamics during adult neurogenesis and gliogenesis.

Kim EJ(1), Leung CT, Reed RR, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

In the adult mammalian brain, new neurons and glia are continuously generated but
molecular factors regulating their differentiation and lineage relationships are 
largely unknown. We show that Ascl1, a bHLH (basic helix-loop-helix)
transcription factor, transiently labels neuronal and oligodendrocyte precursors 
in the adult brain. Using in vivo lineage tracing with inducible Cre recombinase,
we followed the maturation of these precursors in four distinct regions. In the
hippocampus, Ascl1 mostly marks type-2a progenitor cells with some late stage
type-1 stem cells. Thirty days after Ascl1 expression, although a majority of the
cells matured to granule neurons, a few cells remained as immature progenitors.
By 6 months, however, essentially all Ascl1 lineage cells were granule neurons.
In contrast, in the olfactory bulb neuronal lineage, Ascl1 is restricted to
transit amplifying cells, and by 30 d all cells matured into GABAergic
interneurons. Ascl1 also broadly marks oligodendrocyte precursors in subcortical 
gray and white matter regions. In the corpus callosum, Ascl1 defines a ventral
layer of early oligodendrocyte precursors that do not yet express other early
markers of this lineage like PDGFRalpha and Olig2. By 30 d, most had transitioned
to mature oligodendrocytes. In contrast, Ascl1 expressing oligodendrocyte
precursors in gray matter already coexpressed the early oligodendrocyte markers, 
but by 30 d they mostly remained as precursors. Our results reveal that Ascl1 is 
a common molecular marker of early progenitors of both neurons and
oligodendrocytes in the adult brain, and these Ascl1 defined progenitors mature
with distinct dynamics in different brain regions.

PMID: 18032648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Prostate. 2008 Jan 1;68(1):50-60.

Neuroendocrine differentiation in the 12T-10 transgenic prostate mouse model
mimics endocrine differentiation of pancreatic beta cells.

Gupta A(1), Wang Y, Browne C, Kim S, Case T, Paul M, Wills ML, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2765, USA.

BACKGROUND: Neuroendocrine (NE) prostate cancer develops as an aggressive disease
that does not respond to androgen ablation therapy. It has been demonstrated that
the paracrine action of NE cells facilitates the progression of androgen
dependent adenocarcinoma to an androgen independent state, suggesting a
significant role for NE cells during failure of androgen ablation therapy.
METHODS: To investigate the pathways that are involved in NE differentiation of
prostate cancer, we have looked at the expression of genes known to be involved
in endocrine differentiation of beta-cells in the pancreas. This study has been
performed using the NE prostate cancer mouse model (12T-10) and the derivative
allograft model (NE-10).
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical studies have shown that the neuroendocrine prostate 
tumors express the transcription factors Foxa2, mouse achaete-scute homolog-1
(mash-1), neurogenin3 (Ngn3) and Nkx2.2. These tumors show a loss of
hairy/enhancer of split (Hes-1), a gene that inhibits NE differentiation. Human
NE prostate cancers also express Foxa2 and human achaete-scute homolog-1
(HASH-1). These genes are expressed in NE prostate tumors in the similar
sequential manner as they appear in a pancreatic beta-cell endocrine
differentiation. Foxa2 expression is detected in early prostatic intraepithelial 
neoplasia (PIN). Mash-1 expression is detected in a few clusters within low grade
PIN lesions and Nkx2.2 expression is rarely detected in individual scattered
cells within the PIN lesion. Ngn3 and Nkx2.2 frequently appear in the invasive NE
cancer. Subsequent NE metastasis to lung and liver show a distinct gene
expression pattern. The lung metastasis expresses Ngn3 but does not express
Nkx2.2 whereas liver metastases do not express Ngn3 but express Nkx2.2.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that Ngn3 and Nkx2.2 expression are markers
for site-specific metastasis and/or transcriptionally regulated genes that are
required for organ-specific metastasis. This study indicates that a pathway
similar to pancreatic beta-cell differentiation is involved in NE differentiation
of prostate cancer.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18004726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jan 18;365(3):589-94. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

Regulation of early T cell development by the PHD finger of histone lysine
methyltransferase ASH1.

Tanaka Y(1), Nakayama Y, Taniguchi M, Kioussis D.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Structure and Expression, School of Biomedical Science, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyoku, Tokyo 113-8610, Japan.

We have previously isolated a mammalian homologue of Drosophila discsabsent,
small, orhomeotic-1 (ash1) from the murine thymus, and recently shown that its
SET domain methylates histone H3 lysine 36 (K36). Expression of ASH1 has been
reported to be increased in NOD thymocytes in a BDC2.5 clonotype background, but 
its function in T cell development has remained elusive. Here we report that the 
ash1 gene is expressed at high levels in thymocytes of mice deficient for rag1 or
tcra genes. ASH1 proteins are present at peri-nuclei and as nuclear speckles in
thymocytes. Some of the nuclear ASH1 co-localize with RAG2. Expression of the
evolutionarily conserved PHD finger of ASH1 impairs T cell development at the DP 
stage, and causes increased transcription from the HoxA9 promoter in vitro.
Moreover, the C-terminal part of ASH1 interacts with HDAC1 repression complexes, 
suggesting that the PHD finger of ASH1 may be involved in down-regulation of
genes for normal development of alphabeta T cells.

PMID: 17981149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Exp Cell Res. 2007 Nov 15;313(19):4066-81. Epub 2007 Sep 8.

Contrasting and brain region-specific roles of neurogenin2 and mash1 in GABAergic
neuron differentiation in vitro.

Jo AY(1), Park CH, Aizawa S, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hanyang University, Seoul
133-791, South Korea.

We have cultivated highly uniform populations of neural precursor cells, which
retain their region-specific identities, from various rat embryonic brain
regions. The roles of the proneural basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors
neurogenin2 (Ngn2) and Mash1 in gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) neuron
differentiation were explored in the region-specific cultures. Consistent with
previous in vivo studies, forced expression of Mash1 promoted GABA neuron
formation from the precursors derived from the developing forebrains, whereas
Ngn2 displayed an inhibitory role in forebrain GABA neuron differentiation.
Functional analyses of mutant bHLH proteins indicated that the helix-loop-helix
domains of Mash1 and Ngn2, known as the structures for protein-protein
interactions, impart the distinct activities. Intriguingly, the regulatory
activities of Mash1 and Ngn2 in GABA neuron differentiation from the hindbrain-
and spinal cord-derived precursor cells were completely opposite of those
observed in the forebrain-derived cultures: increased GABA neuron yield by Ngn2
and decreased yield by Mash1 were shown in the precursors of those posterior
brain regions. No clear difference that depended on dorsal-ventral brain regions 
was observed in the bHLH-mediated activities. Finally, we demonstrated that Otx2,
the expression of which is developmentally confined to the regions anterior to
the isthmus, is a factor responsible for the anterior-posterior region-dependent 
opposite effects of the bHLH proteins.

PMID: 17936272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Gastrointest Surg. 2007 Nov;11(11):1515-20; discussion 1520. Epub 2007 Sep 15.

Suberoyl bishydroxamic acid inhibits cellular proliferation by inducing cell
cycle arrest in carcinoid cancer cells.

Greenblatt DY(1), Cayo M, Ning L, Jaskula-Sztul R, Haymart M, Kunnimalaiyaan M,
Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratories, Department of Surgery, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53792, USA.

Carcinoid cancers arise from the neuroendocrine cell system of the
gastrointestinal tract, lungs, and other organs. Hepatic metastases are common,
and patients often suffer from endocrinopathies secondary to tumor secretion of
various hormones and peptides. As complete surgical resection is often not
possible because of widespread disease, new therapeutic and palliative treatments
are needed. In this study, we characterized the effects of suberoyl bishydroxamic
acid (SBHA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, on the growth and neuroendocrine
phenotype of carcinoid cancer cells. SBHA treatment of human gastrointestinal and
pulmonary carcinoid cancer cells resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of cell 
proliferation. Western blot analysis showed a decrease in cyclin D1 and an
increase in p21 and p27, indicating that the mechanism of this growth inhibition 
is cell cycle arrest. Furthermore, SBHA treatment suppressed two neuroendocrine
tumor markers, chromogranin A and achaete-scute complex-like 1. These changes in 
the growth and neuroendocrine phenotype of carcinoid cells were associated with
activation of the Notch1 signaling cascade. We conclude that SBHA shows promise
as a potential anticancer agent for the treatment of patients with advanced
carcinoid tumor disease.

PMID: 17874277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Mol Histol. 2007 Dec;38(6):581-99. Epub 2007 Sep 13.

Olfactory epithelium progenitors: insights from transgenic mice and in vitro
biology.

Murdoch B(1), Roskams AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Zoology and Medicine, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.

The rodent olfactory epithelium (OE) is capable of prolonged neurogenesis,
beginning at E10 in the embryo and continuing throughout adulthood. Significant
progress has been made over the last 10 years in revealing the signals that drive
induction, differentiation and survival of its Olfactory Receptor Neurons (ORNs).
Our understanding of the identity of specific progenitors or precursors that
respond to these signals is, however, less well developed, and the search is
still on for the elusive, definitive multipotent neuro-glial OE "Stem cell".
Here, we review several lines of evidence that support the existence of a
heterogeneous population of neural and glial progenitors in the olfactory mucosa,
and highlight the differences in the identity and activity of progenitors found
in the embryonic and adult OE. In particular, we show how recent advances in
mouse transgenesis, and in the development of in vitro assays of progenitor
activity, have helped to demonstrate the existence of multiple classes of
olfactory mucosa-based progenitors.

PMID: 17851769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 2;282(44):32462-70. Epub 2007 Sep 5.

The Sonic hedgehog pathway mediates carbamylated erythropoietin-enhanced
proliferation and differentiation of adult neural progenitor cells.

Wang L(1), Zhang ZG, Gregg SR, Zhang RL, Jiao Z, LeTourneau Y, Liu X, Feng Y,
Gerwien J, Torup L, Leist M, Noguchi CT, Chen ZY, Chopp M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Health Sciences Center, Detroit, Michigan 
48202, USA.

Carbamylated erythropoietin (CEPO), a well characterized erythropoietin (EPO)
derivative, does not bind to the classical EPO receptor and does not stimulate
erythropoiesis. Using neural progenitor cells derived from the subventricular
zone of the adult mouse, we investigated the effect of CEPO on neurogenesis and
the associated signaling pathways in vitro. We found that CEPO significantly
increased neural progenitor cell proliferation and promoted neural progenitor
cell differentiation into neurons, which was associated with up-regulation of
Sonic hedgehog (Shh), its receptor ptc, and mammalian achaete-scute homolog 1
(Mash1), a pro-neuron basic helix-loop-helix protein transcription factor.
Blockage of the Shh signaling pathway with a pharmacological inhibitor,
cyclopamine, abolished the CEPO-induced neurogenesis. Attenuation of endogenous
Mash1 expression by short-interfering RNA blocked CEPO-promoted neuronal
differentiation. In addition, recombinant mouse Shh up-regulated Mash1 expression
in neural progenitor cells. These results demonstrate that the Shh signaling
pathway mediates CEPO-enhanced neurogenesis and Mash1 is a downstream target of
the Shh signaling pathway that regulates CEPO-enhanced neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 17804404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Development. 2007 Oct;134(19):3427-36. Epub 2007 Aug 29.

A regulatory network involving Foxn4, Mash1 and delta-like 4/Notch1 generates V2a
and V2b spinal interneurons from a common progenitor pool.

Del Barrio MG(1), Taveira-Marques R, Muroyama Y, Yuk DI, Li S, Wines-Samuelson M,
Shen J, Smith HK, Xiang M, Rowitch D, Richardson WD.

Author information: 
(1)Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology,
University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

In the developing central nervous system, cellular diversity depends in part on
organising signals that establish regionally restricted progenitor domains, each 
of which produces distinct types of differentiated neurons. However, the
mechanisms of neuronal subtype specification within each progenitor domain remain
poorly understood. The p2 progenitor domain in the ventral spinal cord gives rise
to two interneuron (IN) subtypes, V2a and V2b, which integrate into local
neuronal networks that control motor activity and locomotion. Foxn4, a forkhead
transcription factor, is expressed in the common progenitors of V2a and V2b INs
and is required directly for V2b but not for V2a development. We show here in
experiments conducted using mouse and chick that Foxn4 induces expression of
delta-like 4 (Dll4) and Mash1 (Ascl1). Dll4 then signals through Notch1 to
subdivide the p2 progenitor pool. Foxn4, Mash1 and activated Notch1 trigger the
genetic cascade leading to V2b INs, whereas the complementary set of progenitors,
without active Notch1, generates V2a INs. Thus, Foxn4 plays a dual role in V2 IN 
development: (1) by initiating Notch-Delta signalling, it introduces the
asymmetry required for development of V2a and V2b INs from their common
progenitors; (2) it simultaneously activates the V2b genetic programme.

PMID: 17728344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2007 Oct;36(2):248-59. Epub 2007 Jul 21.

Mechanism of MASH1 induction by ASK1 and ATRA in adult neural progenitors.

Elmi M(1), Faigle R, Yang W, Matsumoto Y, Rosenqvist E, Funa K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Medical Chemistry and Cell Biology,
Göteborg University, Box 420, SE-405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden. muna.elmi@gu.se

The molecular mechanisms underlying differentiation and lineage commitment in
neural stem cells are just beginning to be understood, however the molecules
involved in this process and their functions remain largely unknown. Here we
studied the effects and downstream signals of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 
1 (ASK1) together with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) on neuronal differentiation
in adult hippocampus-derived progenitor (AHP) cells. Following ASK1
over-expression and ATRA treatment in AHPs, a larger number of cells
differentiated into neurons and the MASH1 promoter became activated. Analyzing
downstream effector molecules of ASK1 or ATRA targeting the MASH1 promoter
revealed that the myocyte enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C) mediated ASK1 signalling,
while activation of Sp1 was involved in ATRA signalling. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay on the promoter revealed that ASK1 induced binding of
MEF2C and Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent kinase II to the MASH1 promoter. Taken
together, ASK1 and ATRA activate MEF2C and Sp1, respectively, and up-regulate
MASH1 protein expression.

PMID: 17728141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Brain Res. 2007 Sep 26;1171:9-17. Epub 2007 Aug 7.

Features and a possible role of Mash1-immunoreactive cells in the dentate gyrus
of the hippocampus in the adult rat.

Uda M(1), Ishido M, Kami K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sport and Health Sciences, Graduate School of Sport Sciences,
Osaka University of Health and Sport Sciences, Asashirodai1-1, Sennan-Gun, Osaka,
Japan. uda@ouhs.ac.jp

Neurogenesis occurs throughout life in both the subventricular zone (SVZ) and
subgranular zone (SGZ) of the dentate gyrus (DG) in the hippocampus in the adult 
brain. In the SVZ, it has been demonstrated that transit-amplifying neural
progenitor cells, which appear between neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) and
neuroblasts during the neuronal differentiation process, express mammalian
achaete-scute homolog 1 (Mash1), which regulates differentiation during
neurogenesis. Although Mash1-positive cells (Mash1+ cells) are observed in the
SGZ, the importance of Mash1 in hippocampal neurogenesis is not sufficiently
understood. In the present study, using immunohistochemical techniques, we
examined whether Mash1+ cells in the SGZ act as transit-amplifying neural
progenitor cells, and whether chronic treadmill running can induce alterations of
the Mash1+ cells in the SGZ of the DG. The present results indicated that Mash1
immunoreactivity is detected in proliferative cells, and that astrocytes or NSPCs
and neuroblasts express Mash1. A quantitative analysis of Mash1-positive
astrocytes or NSPCs and Mash1-positive neuroblasts indicated that approximately
90% of Mash1+ cells did not belong to astrocytic and neuronal cells. Furthermore,
chronic treadmill running induced an increase in the number of proliferating
Mash1+ cells. The present study suggests that the majority of the Mash1+ cells in
the SGZ may be transit-amplifying neural progenitor cells. In addition, the
proliferation of Mash1-positive transit-amplifying neural progenitor cells may
contribute to the exercise-induced neurogenesis that is associated with the
improvement of learning and memory function.

PMID: 17727826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Neuron. 2007 Aug 2;55(3):417-33.

Dlx1 and Dlx2 control neuronal versus oligodendroglial cell fate acquisition in
the developing forebrain.

Petryniak MA(1), Potter GB, Rowitch DH, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94158-2611, USA.

Progenitors within the ventral telencephalon can generate GABAergic neurons and
oligodendrocytes, but regulation of the neuron-glial switch is poorly understood.
We investigated the combinatorial expression and function of Dlx1&2, Olig2, and
Mash1 transcription factors in the ventral telencephalon. We show that Dlx
homeobox transcription factors, required for GABAergic interneuron production,
repress oligodendrocyte precursor cell (OPC) formation by acting on a common
progenitor to determine neuronal versus oligodendroglial cell fate acquisition.
We demonstrate that Dlx1&2 negatively regulate Olig2-dependant OPC formation and 
that Mash1 promotes OPC formation by restricting the number of Dlx+ progenitors. 
Progenitors transplanted from Dlx1&2 mutant ventral telencephalon into newborn
wild-type mice do not produce neurons but differentiate into myelinating
oligodendrocytes that survive into adulthood. Our results identify another role
for Dlx genes as modulators of neuron versus oligodendrocyte development in the
ventral embryonic forebrain.

PMCID: PMC2039927
PMID: 17678855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan. 2007 Apr;38(2):125-8.

[Progress in research of genes controlling development of respiratory centers].

[Article in Chinese]

Li D(1), Zheng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, West China School of Preclinical and Forensic
Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

The respiratory centers in the brainstem form a complex network which generates
and controls the process of rhythmic respiration. It was reported in the past
decade that a targeted gene inactivation of some transcription factors could
specifically affect the development of some groups of neurons in the brainstem
and then resulted in distinct respiratory phenotypes. Recently, corresponding
mutations were discovered in some human central respiratory disorders. Therefore 
the study at gene level is obviously a new pathway for investigating the
mechanism of genesis and regulation of the rhythmic respiratory activity. This
review focuses on the recent progress in research of some regulatory genes
participating in the development of respiratory centers.

PMID: 17633225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Pediatr Surg. 2007 Jul;42(7):1231-7.

Pulmonary epithelial cell differentiation in the nitrofen-induced congenital
diaphragmatic hernia.

Santos M(1), Nogueira-Silva C, Baptista MJ, Soares-Fernandes J, Moura RS,
Correia-Pinto J.

Author information: 
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences,
University of Minho, 4709-057 Braga, Portugal.

BACKGROUND/AIM: In congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), there is pulmonary
neuroendocrine cell (PNEC) hyperplasia and Clara (nonendocrine) cell hypoplasia, 
the meaning of which remains unknown. In embryonic/fetal lung, an intricate cross
talk between Notch pathway and basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors Mash1
and Hes1 determines the balance between endocrine and nonendocrine epithelial
cell fate. Differences at the molecular level in pulmonary epithelial cell
differentiation between control and CDH hypoplastic lungs were investigated.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The nitrofen-induced CDH rat model was used. At 15.5 days
postconception (dpc), fetuses were assigned to 2 experimental groups: control and
nitrofen (exposed to nitrofen, without CDH), whereas at 17.5, 19.5, and 21.5 dpc,
fetuses were assigned to 3 experimental groups: control, nitrofen, and CDH
(exposed to nitrofen, with CDH). The fetal lungs were processed for expression
quantification of CC10, Hes1, Mash1, and Dll1 by real-time polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: In control fetuses, expression of all studied genes increased with
gestational age. In nitrofen-exposed fetal lungs, endocrine cell marker Mash1 was
downregulated only at the earliest studied gestational age, whereas Dll1
expression levels were significantly increased in the CDH group at 19.5 and 21.5 
dpc. Regarding nonendocrine markers, Hes1 presented increased expression at 15.5 
and 19.5 dpc, whereas CC10 was downregulated at 17.5 and 19.5 dpc but not at
term.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that PNEC hyperplasia in CDH fetal lung is
likely because of Notch signaling deregulation, whereas Clara cell hypoplasia in 
CDH lungs could be a consequence of protein synthesis delay, reflecting a
functional maturation hindrance and not a cell fate commitment problem.

PMID: 17618886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Nat Neurosci. 2007 Aug;10(8):990-1002. Epub 2007 Jul 8.

A functional role for EGFR signaling in myelination and remyelination.

Aguirre A(1), Dupree JL, Mangin JM, Gallo V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's National Medical Center, 111
Michigan Ave., NW, Washington, DC 20010-2970, USA.

Cellular strategies for oligodendrocyte regeneration and remyelination involve
characterizing endogenous neural progenitors that are capable of generating
oligodendrocytes during normal development and after demyelination, and
identifying the molecular signals that enhance oligodendrogenesis from these
progenitors. Using both gain- and loss-of-function approaches, we explored the
role of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling in adult myelin repair 
and in oligodendrogenesis. We show that 2',3'-cyclic nucleotide
3'-phosphodiesterase (CNP) promoter-driven overexpression of human EGFR (hEGFR)
accelerated remyelination and functional recovery following focal demyelination
of mouse corpus callosum. Lesion repopulation by Cspg4+ (also known as NG2)
Ascl1+ (also known as Mash1) Olig2+ progenitors and functional remyelination were
accelerated in CNP-hEGFR mice compared with wild-type mice. EGFR overexpression
in subventricular zone (SVZ) and corpus callosum during early postnatal
development also expanded this NG2+Mash1+Olig2+ progenitor population and
promoted SVZ-to-lesion migration, enhancing oligodendrocyte generation and axonal
myelination. Analysis of hypomorphic EGFR-mutant mice confirmed that EGFR
signaling regulates oligodendrogenesis and remyelination by NG2+Mash1+Olig2+
progenitors. EGFR targeting holds promise for enhancing oligodendrocyte
regeneration and myelin repair.

PMID: 17618276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Eur J Neurosci. 2007 May;25(9):2581-90.

Directing neurotransmitter identity of neurones derived from expanded adult
neural stem cells.

Berninger B(1), Guillemot F, Götz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany. benedikt.berninger@gsf.de

In-vitro expanded neural stem cells (NSCs) of the adult subependymal zone (SEZ)
may serve as a source for replacing degenerating neurones in disease and trauma. 
Crucial for the viability of this approach is the ability to selectively generate
specific types of neurones from these cells. Here we show that NSCs derived from 
the adult mouse SEZ and expanded in vitro as neurosphere cells lose their in-vivo
specification and generate a mixture of progeny comprising both GABAergic and
also, surprisingly, glutamatergic neurones. When forced to express the pro-neural
transcription factor neurogenin 2, virtually all progeny of in-vitro expanded
adult NSCs acquire a glutamatergic identity, whereas only GABAergic neurones are 
generated upon expression of the transcription factor Mash1. Respecification of
expanded NSCs from the adult SEZ by neurogenin 2 was accompanied by upregulation 
of the T-box transcription factor Tbr1, suggesting that their progeny had
acquired a dorsal telencephalic identity. Thus, in-vitro expanded adult NSCs have
the competence to become directed towards distinct functional neurotransmitter
phenotypes when the appropriate transcriptional cues are provided.

PMID: 17561834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Int J Biol Markers. 2007 Apr-Jun;22(2):114-23.

Basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor profiling of lung tumors shows
aberrant expression of the proneural gene atonal homolog 1 (ATOH1, HATH1, MATH1) 
in neuroendocrine tumors.

Westerman BA(1), Breuer RH, Poutsma A, Chhatta A, Noorduyn LA, Koolen MG, Postmus
PE, Blankenstein MA, Oudejans CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Microarray-based expression profiling studies of lung adenocarcinomas have
defined neuroendocrine subclasses with poor prognosis. As neuroendocrine
development is regulated by members of the achaete-scute and atonal classes of
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, we analyzed lung tumors for 
expression of these factors. Out of 13 bHLH genes tested, 4 genes, i.e.,
achaete-scute complex-like 1 (ASCL1, HASH1, Mash1), atonal homolog 1 (ATOH1,
HATH1, MATH1), NEUROD4 (ATH-3, Atoh3, MATH-3) and neurogenic differentiation
factor 1 (NEUROD1, NEUROD, BETA2), showed differential expression among lung
tumors and absent or low expression in normal lung. As expected, tumors that have
high levels of ASCL1 also express neuroendocrine markers, and we found that this 
is accompanied by increased levels of NEUROD1. In addition, we found ATOH1
expression in 9 (16%) out of 56 analyzed adenocarcinomas and these tumors showed 
neuroendocrine features as shown by dopa decarboxylase mRNA expression and
immunostaining for neuroendocrine markers. ATOH1 expression as well as NEUROD4
was observed in small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC), a known neuroendocrine tumor.
Since ATOH1 is not known to be involved in normal lung development, our results
suggest that aberrant activation of ATOH1 leads to a neuroendocrine phenotype
similar to what is observed for ASCL1 activation during normal neuroendocrine
development and in lung malignancies. Our preliminary data indicate that patients
with ATOH1-expressing adenocarcinomas might have a worse prognosis.

PMID: 17549667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jul 6;282(27):19700-9. Epub 2007 May 8.

Differential regulation of basic helix-loop-helix factors Mash1 and Olig2 by
beta-amyloid accelerates both differentiation and death of cultured neural
stem/progenitor cells.

Uchida Y(1), Nakano S, Gomi F, Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Research Group, Research Team for Geriatric Disorders, Tokyo
Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology, 35-2 Sakaecho, Itabashiku, Tokyo 173-0015,
Japan. 57uchida@tmig.or.jp

Despite increased neurogenic differentiation markers in the hippocampal CA1 in
Alzheimer disease, neurons are not replaced in CA1 and the neocortex in the
disease. beta-Amyloid (Abeta) might cause deterioration of the brain
microenvironment supporting neurogenesis and the survival of immature neurons. To
test this possibility, we examined whether Abeta alters the expression of cell
fate determinants in cerebral cortical cultures and in an Alzheimer disease mouse
model (PrP-APP(SW)). Up-regulation of Mash1 and down-regulation of Olig2 were
found in cerebral cortical cultures treated with Abeta-(1-42). Mash1 was
expressed in nestin-positive immature cells. The majority of Mash1-positive cells
in untreated cortical culture co-expressed Olig2. Abeta increased the proportion 
of Olig2-negative/Mash1-positive cells. A decrease in Olig2+ cells was also
observed in the cerebral cortex of adult PrP-APP(SW) mice. Cotransfection
experiments with Mash1 cDNA and Olig2 siRNA revealed that overexpression of Mash1
in neurosphere cells retaining Olig2 expression enhanced neural differentiation
but accelerated death of Olig2-depleted cells. Growth factor deprivation, which
down-regulated Olig2, accelerated death of Mash1-overexpressing neurosphere
cells. We conclude that cooperation between Mash1 and Olig2 is necessary for
neural stem/progenitor cells to develop into fully mature neurons and that
down-regulation of Olig2 by Abeta in Mash1-overexpressing cells switches the cell
fate to death. Maintaining Olig2 expression in differentiating cells could have
therapeutic potential.

PMID: 17488716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Nat Neurosci. 2007 Jun;10(6):720-6. Epub 2007 Apr 29.

Contribution of olfactory neural stem cells to tissue maintenance and
regeneration.

Leung CT(1), Coulombe PA, Reed RR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sensory Biology and the Department of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 725 N. Wolfe Street, PCTB 
801, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2007 Jun;10(6):673-4.

The olfactory neuroepithelium undergoes continual neurogenesis and, after
extensive lesions, fully regenerates to maintain sensory function. The stem cell 
population underlying this regenerative capacity remains elusive. Here we show
that mouse horizontal basal cells (HBCs) function as adult olfactory
neuroepithelium neural stem cells and examine their distinct dynamics in
olfactory neuroepithelium maintenance and regeneration. Fate-mapping analysis
after olfactory neuroepithelium lesioning shows that HBCs are competent to
regenerate both neuronal and non-neuronal olfactory neuroepithelium lineages.
HBCs serve as a reservoir of long-lived progenitors that remain largely quiescent
during normal neuronal turnover or even after acute, selective loss of mature
neurons. Under these conditions, previously identified progenitors are largely
responsible for tissue maintenance. Yet after extensive injuries that deplete
resident neuronal precursors, HBCs transiently proliferate and their progeny
fully reconstitute the neuroepithelium. Our data support a new model of adult
neurogenesis in which distinct cell populations mediate normal neuronal turnover 
and neuronal replacement upon traumatic injury.

PMID: 17468753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Neurosci. 2007 Apr 18;27(16):4233-42.

The proneural gene Mash1 specifies an early population of telencephalic
oligodendrocytes.

Parras CM(1), Hunt C, Sugimori M, Nakafuku M, Rowitch D, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical Research,
London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

The bHLH (basic helix-loop-helix) transcription factor Mash1 is best known for
its role in the regulation of neurogenesis. However, Mash1 is also expressed in
oligodendrocyte precursors and has recently been shown to promote the generation 
of oligodendrocytes in cell culture, suggesting that it may regulate
oligodendrogenesis as well. Here, we show that in the developing ventral
forebrain, Mash1 is expressed by a subset of oligodendrocyte precursors (OPCs) as
soon as they are generated in the ventricular zone. Using reporter mice, we
demonstrate that a subset of OPCs in both the embryonic and postnatal forebrain
originate from Mash1-positive progenitors, including a large fraction of adult
NG2-positive OPCs. Using Mash1 null mutant mice, we show that Mash1 is required
for the generation of an early population of OPCs in the ventral forebrain
between embryonic day 11.5 (E11.5) and E13.5, whereas OPCs generated later in
embryonic development are not affected. Overexpression of Mash1 in the dorsal
telencephalon induces expression of PDGFRalpha (platelet-derived growth factor
receptor alpha) but not other OPC markers, suggesting that Mash1 specifies
oligodendrogenesis in cooperation with other factors. Analysis of double-mutant
mice suggests that Olig2 is one of the factors that cooperate with Mash1 for
generation of OPCs. Together, our results show for the first time that Mash1
cooperates in vivo with Olig2 in oligodendrocyte specification, demonstrating an 
essential role for Mash1 in the generation of a subset of oligodendrocytes and
revealing a genetic heterogeneity of oligodendrocyte lineages in the mouse
forebrain.

PMID: 17442807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 May;80(5):994-1001. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

Haploinsufficiency of TCF4 causes syndromal mental retardation with intermittent 
hyperventilation (Pitt-Hopkins syndrome).

Zweier C(1), Peippo MM, Hoyer J, Sousa S, Bottani A, Clayton-Smith J, Reardon W, 
Saraiva J, Cabral A, Gohring I, Devriendt K, de Ravel T, Bijlsma EK, Hennekam RC,
Orrico A, Cohen M, Dreweke A, Reis A, Nurnberg P, Rauch A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital 
Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is a rarely reported syndrome of so-far-unknown etiology
characterized by mental retardation, wide mouth, and intermittent
hyperventilation. By molecular karyotyping with GeneChip Human Mapping 100K SNP
arrays, we detected a 1.2-Mb deletion on 18q21.2 in one patient. Sequencing of
the TCF4 transcription factor gene, which is contained in the deletion region, in
30 patients with significant phenotypic overlap revealed heterozygous stop,
splice, and missense mutations in five further patients with severe mental
retardation and remarkable facial resemblance. Thus, we establish the
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome as a distinct but probably heterogeneous entity caused by
autosomal dominant de novo mutations in TCF4. Because of its phenotypic overlap, 
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome evolves as an important differential diagnosis to Angelman 
and Rett syndromes. Both null and missense mutations impaired the interaction of 
TCF4 with ASCL1 from the PHOX-RET pathway in transactivating an E box-containing 
reporter construct; therefore, hyperventilation and Hirschsprung disease in
patients with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome might be explained by altered development of 
noradrenergic derivatives.

PMCID: PMC1852727
PMID: 17436255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Development. 2007 May;134(9):1755-65. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

The proneural determinant MASH1 regulates forebrain Dlx1/2 expression through the
I12b intergenic enhancer.

Poitras L(1), Ghanem N, Hatch G, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics (CAREG Department of
Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Establishment of neuronal networks is an extremely complex process involving the 
interaction of a diversity of neuronal cells. During mammalian development, these
highly organized networks are formed through the differentiation of multipotent
neuronal progenitors into multiple neuronal cell lineages. In the developing
forebrain of mammals, the combined function of the Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5 and Dlx6
homeobox genes is necessary for the differentiation of the GABAergic interneurons
born in the ventricular and subventricular zones of the ventral telencephalon, as
well as for the migration of these neurons to the hippocampus, cerebral cortex
and olfactory bulbs. The 437 bp I12b enhancer sequence in the intergenic region
of the Dlx1/2 bigene cluster is involved in the forebrain regulation of Dlx1/2.
Using DNase I footprinting, we identified six regions of I12b potentially bound
by transcription factors. Mutagenesis of each binding site affected the
expression of reporter constructs in transgenic mice. However, the effects of
impairing protein-DNA interactions were not uniform across the forebrain Dlx1/2
expression domains, suggesting that distinct regulatory interactions are taking
place in the different populations of neuronal precursors. Analyses of
protein-DNA interactions provide evidence of a direct role for MASH1 in Dlx1/2
regulation in the forebrain. DLX proteins play a crucial role in the maintenance 
of their own expression, as shown by transgenic and co-transfection experiments. 
These studies suggest that the seemingly continuous domains of Dlx gene
expression in the telencephalon and diencephalon are in fact the combination of
distinct cell populations within which different genetic regulatory interactions 
take place.

PMID: 17409112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Development. 2007 Apr;134(8):1617-29. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

Combinatorial actions of patterning and HLH transcription factors in the
spatiotemporal control of neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the developing spinal
cord.

Sugimori M(1), Nagao M, Bertrand N, Parras CM, Guillemot F, Nakafuku M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

During development, the three major neural cell lineages, neurons,
oligodendrocytes and astrocytes, differentiate in specific temporal orders at
topologically defined positions. How the timing and position of their generation 
are coordinately regulated remains poorly understood. Here, we provide evidence
that the transcription factors Pax6, Olig2 and Nkx2.2 (Nkx2-2), which define the 
positional identity of multipotent progenitors early in development, also play
crucial roles in controlling the timing of neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the
developing ventral spinal cord. We show that each of these factors has a unique
ability to either enhance or inhibit the activities of the proneural
helix-loop-helix (HLH) factors Ngn1 (Neurog1), Ngn2 (Neurog2), Ngn3 (Neurog3) and
Mash1 (Ascl1), and the inhibitory HLH factors Id1 and Hes1, thereby regulating
both the timing of differentiation of multipotent progenitors and their fate.
Consistent with this, dynamic changes in their co-expression pattern in vivo are 
closely correlated to stage- and domain-specific generation of three neural cell 
lineages. We also show that genetic manipulations of their temporal expression
patterns in mice alter the timing of differentiation of neurons and glia. We
propose a molecular code model whereby the combinatorial actions of two classes
of transcription factors coordinately regulate the domain-specific temporal
sequence of neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the developing spinal cord.

PMID: 17344230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Arch Histol Cytol. 2006 Dec;69(4):209-25.

Cell lineage and differentiation in taste buds.

Miura H(1), Kusakabe Y, Harada S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Physiology, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical
and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan. hmiura@denta.hal.kagoshima-u.ac.jp

Mammalian taste buds are maintained through continuous cell renewal so that taste
bud cells are constantly generated from progenitor cells throughout life. Taste
bud cells are composed of basal cells and elongated cells. Elongated cells are
derived from basal cells and contain taste receptor cells (TRC). Morphologically,
elongated cells consist of three distinct types of cells: Types I, II and III. In
contrast to the remarkable progress in understanding of the molecular basis for
taste reception, the mechanisms of taste bud maintenance have remained a major
area of inquiry. In this article, we review the expression of regulatory genes in
taste buds and their involvement in taste bud cell differentiation. Three major
topics include: 1) the Sonic hedgehog (Shh)-expressing cell in the basal cell in 
taste buds as a transient precursor of elongated cells and as a signal center for
the proliferation of progenitor cells; 2) the Mash1-expressing cell as an
immature cell state of both Type II and Type III cells and as a mature cell state
of Type III cell; and 3) the nerve dependency of gene expression in taste buds.
Problems in the application of NCAM for the type III cell marker are also
discussed.

PMID: 17287576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Surgery. 2007 Feb;141(2):161-5; discussion 165.

Lithium ions: a novel treatment for pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas.

Kappes A(1), Vaccaro A, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratories, Section of
Endocrine Surgery, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53792, USA.

BACKGROUND: Operative resection is the only curative treatment for patients with 
pheochromocytomas, paragangliomas, and other catecholamine-producing neoplasms.
Activation of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) is thought to promote
tumor growth and neuroendocrine (NE) peptide secretion in NE neoplasms. Thus, we 
hypothesized that inhibition of this signaling pathway with lithium chloride
(LiCl), a well-known GSK3beta inhibitor, could be a potential therapeutic
strategy to control tumor growth and hormone production.
METHODS: Pheochromocytoma PC-12 cells were treated with varying concentrations of
LiCl (0 to 30 mM). Levels of active and inactive GSK3beta and NE peptides
chromogranin A (CgA) and Mash1 were determined by Western blot. Cellular growth
was measured by MTT cell-proliferation assay.
RESULTS: At baseline, PC-12 cells had increased active GSK3beta signaling.
Treatment of PC-12 cells with increasing dosages of LiCl resulted in
dose-dependent inhibition of GSK3beta. Importantly, LiCl inhibited
pheochromocytoma cellular proliferation significantly. Furthermore, inhibition of
GSK3beta by LiCl was associated with marked suppression of CgA and Mash1 levels.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that GSK3beta inhibition may be a novel strategy 
to treat pheochromocytoma and other catecholamine-producing neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC1945109
PMID: 17263970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 9;282(10):6917-21. Epub 2007 Jan 26.

Prokineticin 2 is a target gene of proneural basic helix-loop-helix factors for
olfactory bulb neurogenesis.

Zhang C(1), Ng KL, Li JD, He F, Anderson DJ, Sun YE, Zhou QY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, Irvine, California
92697, USA.

Prokineticin 2, a cysteine-rich secreted protein, regulates diverse biological
functions including the neurogenesis of olfactory bulb. Here we show that the PK2
gene is a functional target gene of proneural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
factors. Neurogenin 1 and MASH1 activate PK2 transcription by binding to E-box
motifs on the PK2 promoter with the same set of E-boxes critical for another pair
of bHLH factors, CLOCK and BMAL1, in the regulation of circadian clock. Our
results establish PK2 as a common functional target gene for different bHLH
transcriptional factors in mediating their respective functions.

PMID: 17259180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Dev Dyn. 2007 Mar;236(3):696-705.

A switch in numb isoforms is a critical step in cortical development.

Bani-Yaghoub M(1), Kubu CJ, Cowling R, Rochira J, Nikopoulos GN, Bellum S, Verdi 
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neural Stem Cell Biology, Robarts Research Institute, Ontario,
Canada.

Erratum in
    Dev Dyn. 2007 Apr;236(4):1158.

Loss of numb function suggests that numb maintains progenitors in an
undifferentiated state. Herein, we demonstrate that numb1 and numb3 are expressed
in undifferentiated cortical progenitors, whereas numb2 and numb4 become
prominent throughout differentiation. To further assess the role of different
numb isoforms in cortical neural development, we first created a Numb-null state 
with antisense morpholino, followed by the re-expression of specific numb
isoforms. The re-expression of numb1 or numb3 resulted in a significant reduction
of neural differentiation, correlating with an expansion of the cortical
progenitor pool. In contrast, the expression of numb2 or numb4 resulted in a
reduction of proliferating progenitors and a corresponding increase in mammalian 
achete-scute homologue (MASH1) expression, concurrent with the appearance of the 
microtubule[corrected]-associated [corrected] protein-2-positive neurons. Of
interest, the effect of numb isoforms on neural differentiation could not be
directly related to Notch, because classic canonical Notch signaling assays
failed to uncover any differences in the four isoforms to inhibit the Notch
downstream events. This finding suggests that numb may have other signaling
properties during neuronal differentiation in addition to augmenting notch signal
strength.

PMID: 17253625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Surgery. 2006 Dec;140(6):1009-14; discussion 1014-5. Epub 2006 Nov 1.

Apoptosis-mediated medullary thyroid cancer growth suppression by the PI3K
inhibitor LY294002.

Kunnimalaiyaan M(1), Ndiaye M, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Section of Endocrine Surgery, Endocrine Surgery
Research Laboratories, The University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public 
Health, Madison, WI 53792, USA.

BACKGROUND: Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) cells exhibit frequent activation of
the PI3K pathway as evidenced by the presence of hyperactivation of Akt kinases
and overexpression of neuroendocrine (NE) markers. We hypothesized that the
inhibition of the PI3K pathway in MTC may lead to a reduction in cell growth and 
NE tumor marker production.
METHODS: Human MTC-TT cells were treated with the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 (0-60
micromol/L) for 8 days, and cellular growth was measured. Further, TT cells were 
treated with nontoxic concentrations of LY294002 for 2 days, and Western blot
analyses were performed for phospho-Akt, total Akt, and the NE tumor markers CgA 
and human achaete-scute homolog1 (ASCL1).
RESULTS: Treatment of TT cells with LY294002 significantly suppressed levels of
phospho-Akt. Notably, a dose-dependent reduction in cellular proliferation was
also observed. Importantly, NE marker production was also reduced.
Mechanistically, we show that cell growth inhibition by PI3K inactivation is
mediated by apoptosis attributable to an increase in the levels of cleaved
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase and caspase-3.
CONCLUSIONS: MTC cell growth and NE marker production appear to depend on
activation of the PI3K-signaling cascade. Inhibition of this important signal
transduction pathway may lead to a possible therapeutic strategy to treat
patients with MTC.

PMID: 17188151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Development. 2007 Jan;134(2):285-93. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

Ascl1 defines sequentially generated lineage-restricted neuronal and
oligodendrocyte precursor cells in the spinal cord.

Battiste J(1), Helms AW, Kim EJ, Savage TK, Lagace DC, Mandyam CD, Eisch AJ,
Miyoshi G, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Basic Neuroscience, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390, USA.

The neural basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Ascl1 (previously Mash1)
is present in ventricular zone cells in restricted domains throughout the
developing nervous system. This study uses genetic fate mapping to define the
stage and neural lineages in the developing spinal cord that are derived from
Ascl1-expressing cells. We find that Ascl1 is present in progenitors to both
neurons and oligodendrocytes, but not astrocytes. Temporal control of the
fate-mapping paradigm reveals rapid cell-cycle exit and differentiation of
Ascl1-expressing cells. At embryonic day 11, Ascl1 identifies neuronal-restricted
precursor cells that become dorsal horn neurons in the superficial laminae. By
contrast, at embryonic day 16, Ascl1 identifies oligodendrocyte-restricted
precursor cells that distribute throughout the spinal cord. These data
demonstrate that sequentially generated Ascl1-expressing progenitors give rise
first to dorsal horn interneurons and subsequently to late-born oligodendrocytes.
Furthermore, Ascl1-null cells in the spinal cord have a diminished capacity to
undergo neuronal differentiation, with a subset of these cells retaining
characteristics of immature glial cells.

PMID: 17166924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2006 Dec;65(12):1149-56.

Expression of oligodendroglial and astrocytic lineage markers in diffuse gliomas:
use of YKL-40, ApoE, ASCL1, and NKX2-2.

Rousseau A(1), Nutt CL, Betensky RA, Iafrate AJ, Han M, Ligon KL, Rowitch DH,
Louis DN.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, 149 13th Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

The phenotypic heterogeneity of astrocytic and oligodendroglial tumor cells
complicates establishing accurate diagnostic criteria, and lineage-specific
markers would facilitate diagnosis of glioma subtypes. Based on data from the
literature and from expression microarrays, we selected molecules relevant to
gliogenesis and glial lineage specificity and then used immunohistochemistry to
assess expression of these molecules in 55 diffuse gliomas, including 8 biphasic 
oligoastrocytomas, 21 oligodendrogliomas (all with 1p/19qloss), 21 astrocytomas, 
and 5 glioblastomas. For the astrocytic lineage markers (GFAP, YKL-40, and ApoE),
GFAP expression was significantly higher in the astrocytic component of
oligoastrocytomas compared with the oligodendroglial part; similar patterns were 
detected for YKL-40 and ApoE, although the differences were not significant.
GFAP, YKL-40, and ApoE reliably distinguished grade II-III oligodendrogliomas
from grade II-IV astrocytomas (p < 0.0001, p = 0.002, and p < 0.0001,
respectively). Among the oligodendroglial lineage markers (Olig2, Sox10, ASCL1,
and NKX2-2), ASCL1 and NKX2-2 displayed significantly different immunostaining
between oligodendrogliomas and astrocytomas (p = 0.017 and 0.004, respectively), 
but none clearly differentiated between the 2 glial populations of
oligoastrocytomas. In addition to GFAP, therefore, YKL-40, ApoE, ASCL1, and
NKX2-2 represent promising tumor cell markers to distinguish oligodendrogliomas
from astrocytomas.

PMID: 17146289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Dev Cell. 2006 Dec;11(6):831-44.

Proneural bHLH and Brn proteins coregulate a neurogenic program through
cooperative binding to a conserved DNA motif.

Castro DS(1), Skowronska-Krawczyk D, Armant O, Donaldson IJ, Parras C, Hunt C,
Critchley JA, Nguyen L, Gossler A, Göttgens B, Matter JM, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Proneural proteins play a central role in vertebrate neurogenesis, but little is 
known of the genes that they regulate and of the factors that interact with
proneural proteins to activate a neurogenic program. Here, we demonstrate that
the proneural protein Mash1 and the POU proteins Brn1 and Brn2 interact on the
promoter of the Notch ligand Delta1 and synergistically activate Delta1
transcription, a key step in neurogenesis. Overexpression experiments in vivo
indicate that Brn2, like Mash1, regulates additional aspects of neurogenesis,
including the division of progenitors and the differentiation and migration of
neurons. We identify by in silico screening a number of additional candidate
target genes, which are recognized by Mash1 and Brn proteins through a
DNA-binding motif similar to that found in the Delta1 gene and present a broad
range of activities. We thus propose that Mash1 synergizes with Brn factors to
regulate multiple steps of neurogenesis.

PMID: 17141158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Cancer Gene Ther. 2007 Mar;14(3):287-96. Epub 2006 Nov 24.

A novel MASH1 enhancer with N-myc and CREB-binding sites is active in
neuroblastoma.

Watt F(1), Watanabe R, Yang W, Agren N, Arvidsson Y, Funa K.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Institute Australia for Medical Research, Randwick, New
South Wales, Australia.

Neuroblastoma is one of the most common solid tumors in childhood. With the aim
of developing a targeting vector for neuroblastoma, we cloned and characterized
an enhancer in the 5'-flanking regions of the MASH1 gene by a random-trap method 
from a 36 kb cosmid DNA. The enhancer-containing clone was identified by the
expression of GFP when transfected into neuroblastoma cell lines. The
enhancer-luciferase activity is higher in neuroblastoma cell lines, IMR32, BE2
and SH-SY5Y, compared with those in non-neuroblastoma cell lines, U1242 glioma,
N417 small cell lung cancer and EOMA hemangioma. The core enhancer was determined
within a 0.2 kb fragment, yielding three- to fourfold higher activity than that
of the MASH1 promoter alone in IMR32 and BE2. This area possesses GATA- and
CREB-binding sites, as well as the E-box. EMSA on this area demonstrated that
CREB/ATF could bind the DNA. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that
N-myc, CREB, and co-activators CBP and PCAF, but not HDAC1, are bound to the core
enhancer at the same time as the co-activators and N-myc bind to the promoter.
This supports the idea that the commonly overexpressed genes HASH1 and N-myc are 
regulated in concert, confirming their importance as prognostic markers or
targets for therapy.

PMID: 17124508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Neurosci. 2006 Nov 15;26(46):11948-60.

Growth factor treatment and genetic manipulation stimulate neurogenesis and
oligodendrogenesis by endogenous neural progenitors in the injured adult spinal
cord.

Ohori Y(1), Yamamoto S, Nagao M, Sugimori M, Yamamoto N, Nakamura K, Nakafuku M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Neurons and oligodendrocytes are highly vulnerable to various insults, and their 
spontaneous replacement occurs to only a limited extent after damage in the adult
spinal cord. The environment of injured tissue is thus thought to restrict the
regenerative capacity of endogenous neural stem/progenitor cells; strategies for 
overcoming such restrictions remain to be developed. Here, we combined growth
factor treatment and genetic manipulation to stimulate neurogenesis and
oligodendrogenesis by endogenous progenitors in vivo. The recombinant retrovirus 
pMXIG, which was designed to coexpress green fluorescent proteins (GFPs) and a
neurogenic/gliogenic transcription factor, was directly injected into the injured
spinal cord parenchyma to manipulate proliferative cells in situ. We found that
cells expressing Olig2, Nkx2.2, and NG2 were enriched among virus-infected,
GFP-positive (GFP+) cells. Moreover, a fraction of GFP+ cells formed neurospheres
and differentiated into neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes in vitro,
demonstrating that GFP retroviruses indeed infected endogenous neural progenitors
in vivo. Neuronal differentiation of control virus-infected cells did not occur
at a detectable level in the injured spinal cord. We found, however, that direct 
administration of fibroblast growth factor 2 and epidermal growth factor into
lesioned tissue could induce a significant fraction of GFP-labeled cells to
express immature neuronal markers. Moreover, retrovirus-mediated overexpression
of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors Neurogenin2 and Mash1,
together with growth factor treatment, enhanced the production and maturation of 
new neurons and oligodendrocytes, respectively. These results demonstrate that
endogenous neural progenitors can be manipulated to replace neurons and
oligodendrocytes lost to insults in the injured spinal cord.

PMID: 17108169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Dev Dyn. 2007 Jan;236(1):262-70.

Mash1 regulates the development of C cells in mouse thyroid glands.

Kameda Y(1), Nishimaki T, Miura M, Jiang SX, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa, Japan. kameda@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

In mammals, the ultimobranchial body derived from the fourth pharyngeal pouch
gives rise to thyroid C cells. The C cells of newborn mice are immunoreactive for
calcitonin, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), protein gene product (PGP)
9.5 and NeuroD, and transiently exhibit the neuronal markers TuJ1 and
somatostatin during fetal development. The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factor Mash1 plays a role in the differentiation of autonomic
neurons. We show that in wild-type mouse embryos, Mash1 is expressed in the
ultimobranchial body at embryonic day (E) 12.5, when the body is located close to
the great arch arteries. It is also expressed in the ultimobanchial body fused
with the thyroid lobe at E 13.5. Targeted disruption of Mash1 resulted in the
absence of C cells in the mouse thyroid glands, since cells displaying the C-cell
markers and expressing NeuroD were not detected during fetal development or at
birth. The failure of C-cell formation in the null mutant thyroids was also
confirmed by electron microscopy. While the formation and migration of the
ultimobranchial body were not affected in the Mash1 null mutants, at E 12.5-E
13.5 both the ultimobranchial body located close to the arteries and the organ
populating the thyroid lobe exhibited a marked increase in apoptotic cell
numbers. Thus, in the mutant mice, the ultimobranchial body fails to complete its
differentiation program and finally dies. These results indicate that Mash1
enhances survival of the C-cell progenitors by inhibiting apoptosis.

PMID: 17103415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 29;281(52):39819-30. Epub 2006 Nov 7.

Overexpression of the NOTCH1 intracellular domain inhibits cell proliferation and
alters the neuroendocrine phenotype of medullary thyroid cancer cells.

Kunnimalaiyaan M(1), Vaccaro AM, Ndiaye MA, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratories, Department of Surgery, University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53792, USA.

The role of NOTCH1 as an oncogene or tumor suppressor appears to be cell
type-specific. Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) cells characteristically express
the transcription factor ASCL1 (achaete-scute complex-like 1) as well as high
levels of the neuroendocrine (NE) markers calcitonin and chromogranin A (CgA). In
this study, we show that the active NOTCH1 intracellular domain is absent in
human MTC tumor tissue samples and MTC-TT cells. To determine the effects of
NOTCH1 expression, we created a doxycycline-inducible NOTCH1 intracellular domain
in MTC cells (TT-NOTCH cells). Treatment of TT-NOTCH cells with doxycycline led
to dose-dependent induction of NOTCH1 protein with corresponding decreases in
ASCL1 protein and NE hormones. ASCL1 promoter-reporter assay and Northern
analysis revealed that ASCL1 reduction by NOTCH1 activation is predominantly via 
silencing of ASCL1 gene transcription. Overexpression of ASCL1 in MTC cells
indicated that CgA expression is highly dependent on the levels of ASCL1. This
was further confirmed by experiments using small interfering RNA against ASCL1,
in which reduction in ASCL1 led to reduction in both CgA and calcitonin.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that NOTCH1 signaling activation leads to ERK1/2
phosphorylation, but that reduction in NE markers is independent of ERK1/2
activation. Activation of NOTCH1 resulted in significant MTC cell growth
inhibition. Notably, reduction in MTC cell growth was dependent on the level of
NOTCH1 protein present. Moreover, no increase in growth upon expression of ASCL1 
in NOTCH1-activated cells was observed, indicating that the growth suppression
observed upon NOTCH1 activation is independent of ASCL1 reduction.
Mechanistically, we show that MTC cell growth inhibition by NOTCH1 is mediated by
cell cycle arrest associated with up-regulation of p21.

PMID: 17090547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. FASEB J. 2006 Dec;20(14):2553-5. Epub 2006 Oct 31.

Acquisition of in vitro and in vivo functionality of Nurr1-induced dopamine
neurons.

Park CH(1), Kang JS, Shin YH, Chang MY, Chung S, Koh HC, Zhu MH, Oh SB, Lee YS,
Panagiotakos G, Tabar V, Studer L, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University,
Sungdong-gu, Seoul 133-791, Korea.

Neural precursor cells provide an expandable source of neurons and glia for basic
and translational applications. However, little progress has been made in
directing naive neural precursors toward specific neuronal fates such as midbrain
dopamine (DA) neurons. We have recently demonstrated that transgenic expression
of the nuclear orphan receptor Nurr1 is sufficient to drive dopaminergic
differentiation of forebrain embryonic rat neural precursors in vitro. However,
Nurr1-induced DA neurons exhibit immature neuronal morphologies and functional
properties and are unable to induce behavioral recovery in rodent models of
Parkinson's disease (PD). Here, we report on the identification of key genetic
factors that drive morphological and functional differentiation of Nurr1-derived 
DA neurons. We show that coexpression of Nurr1, Bcl-XL, and Sonic hedgehog (SHH) 
or Nurr1 and the proneural bHLH factor Mash1 is sufficient to drive naive rat
forebrain precursors into neurons exhibiting the biochemical,
electrophysiological, and functional properties of DA neuron in vitro. On
transplantation into the striatum of Parkinsonian rats, precursor cells
engineered with Nurr1/SHH/Bcl-XL or Nurr1/Mash1 survived in vivo and
differentiated into mature DA neurons that can reverse the behavioral deficits in
the grafted animals.

PMID: 17077287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Cell Sci. 2006 Nov 15;119(Pt 22):4678-88. Epub 2006 Oct 24.

Cellular uptake of fatty acids driven by the ER-localized acyl-CoA synthetase
FATP4.

Milger K(1), Herrmann T, Becker C, Gotthardt D, Zickwolf J, Ehehalt R, Watkins
PA, Stremmel W, Füllekrug J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Im Neuenheimer Feld 345, University of
Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Long-chain fatty acids are important metabolites for the generation of energy and
the biosynthesis of lipids. The molecular mechanism of their cellular uptake has 
remained controversial. The fatty acid transport protein (FATP) family has been
named according to its proposed function in mediating this process at the plasma 
membrane. Here, we show that FATP4 is in fact localized to the endoplasmic
reticulum and not the plasma membrane as reported previously. Quantitative
analysis confirms the positive correlation between expression of FATP4 and uptake
of fatty acids. However, this is dependent on the enzymatic activity of FATP4,
catalyzing the esterification of fatty acids with CoA. Monitoring fatty acid
uptake at the single-cell level demonstrates that the ER localization of FATP4 is
sufficient to drive transport of fatty acids. Expression of a mitochondrial
acyl-CoA synthetase also enhances fatty acid uptake, suggesting a general
relevance for this mechanism. Our results imply that cellular uptake of fatty
acids can be regulated by intracellular acyl-CoA synthetases. We propose that the
enzyme FATP4 drives fatty acid uptake indirectly by esterification. It is not a
transporter protein involved in fatty acid translocation at the plasma membrane.

PMID: 17062637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Stem Cells. 2007 Feb;25(2):340-53. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

NG2 and Olig2 expression provides evidence for phenotypic deregulation of
cultured central nervous system and peripheral nervous system neural precursor
cells.

Dromard C(1), Bartolami S, Deleyrolle L, Takebayashi H, Ripoll C, Simonneau L,
Prome S, Puech S, Tran VB, Duperray C, Valmier J, Privat A, Hugnot JP.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U583, Physiopathologie et Thérapie des Déficits Sensoriels et Moteurs
Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Hôpital St ELOI, BP 74103 80, avenue
Augustin Fliche 34091 Montpellier Cedex 05, France.

Neural stem cells cultured with fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2)/epidermal
growth factor (EGF) generate clonal expansions called neurospheres (NS), which
are widely used for therapy in animal models. However, their cellular composition
is still poorly defined. Here, we report that NS derived from several embryonic
and adult central nervous system (CNS) regions are composed mainly of remarkable 
cells coexpressing radial glia markers (BLBP, RC2, GLAST),
oligodendrogenic/neurogenic factors (Mash1, Olig2, Nkx2.2), and markers that in
vivo are typical of the oligodendrocyte lineage (NG2, A2B5, PDGFR-alpha). On NS
differentiation, the latter remain mostly expressed in neurons, together with
Olig2 and Mash1. Using cytometry, we show that in growing NS the small population
of multipotential self-renewing NS-forming cells are A2B5(+) and NG2(+).
Additionally, we demonstrate that these NS-forming cells in the embryonic spinal 
cord were initially NG2(-) and rapidly acquired NG2 in vitro. NG2 and Olig2 were 
found to be rapidly induced by cell culture conditions in spinal cord neural
precursor cells. Olig2 expression was also induced in astrocytes and embryonic
peripheral nervous system (PNS) cells in culture after EGF/FGF treatment. These
data provide new evidence for profound phenotypic modifications in CNS and PNS
neural precursor cells induced by culture conditions.

PMID: 17053213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Exp Neurol. 2007 Feb;203(2):394-405. Epub 2006 Oct 10.

Control of neurogenesis and tyrosine hydroxylase expression in neural progenitor 
cells through bHLH proteins and Nurr1.

Kim HJ(1), Sugimori M, Nakafuku M, Svendsen CN.

Author information: 
(1)The Waisman Center and Department of Anatomy, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, WI 53705, USA.

The production of dopamine (DA) neurons from neural progenitor cells (NPC) is of 
particular interest as these neurons degenerate in Parkinson's disease. Here, we 
report that the characteristics of NPC from the ventral midbrain (NPC(VM)) and
the striatum (NPC(STR)) are intrinsically determined. A detailed analysis of the 
VM during development revealed Ngn2 and Mash1 expression in a DA progenitor
domain. Interestingly, over-expression of either Ngn2 or Mash1 induced
neurogenesis from expanded NPC(VM). Whereas Ngn2 inhibited cell division and the 
production of neurons even in the presence of mitogens, Mash1 allowed the
progenitors to divide while retaining neurogenic potential. However, none of the 
new neurons derived by over-expressing Ngn2 or Mash1 were positive for DA
neuronal markers such as tyrosine hydroxylase. Nurr1 over-expression increased TH
levels in a dose-dependant manner within both neurons and glia, suggesting a
non-neuronal-specific activation of this enzyme by Nurr1. Double infection with
Nurr1 and either Ngn2 or Mash1 resulted in the production of small numbers of TH+
neurons, which were larger in size when derived from NPC(VM) compared to
NPC(STR). These data provide proof of concept that over-expression of multiple
transcription factors can drive the fate of NPC first towards neurons, and then
towards the DA phenotype. However, further factors may be required to generate
fully functional DA neurons.

PMID: 17034791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Arch Histol Cytol. 2006 Sep;69(3):189-98.

The bHLH transcription factors, Hes6 and Mash1, are expressed in distinct subsets
of cells within adult mouse taste buds.

Seta Y(1), Stoick-Cooper CL, Toyono T, Kataoka S, Toyoshima K, Barlow LA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Histology and Neurobiology, Department of Bioscience, Kyushu 
Dental College, Kitakyushu, Japan. yujiseta@kyu-dent.ac.jp

Taste buds are multicellular receptor organs embedded in the lingual epithelium
of vertebrates. Taste cells within these buds are modified epithelial cells as
they lack axons and turnover rapidly throughout life, yet have neuronal
properties enabling them to transduce taste stimuli and transmit this information
to the nervous system. Taste cells are heterogeneous, comprising types I, II, III
and basal cells, and are continually replaced during adult life, raising the
question of how these different cells are generated. The molecular mechanisms
governing taste cell differentiation are unknown, but the Notch signaling system 
has been implicated in this process based upon recent gene expression data. Here 
we investigate the expression in mature taste buds of Notch related transcription
factors, Hes6 and Mash1, which are among the first genes expressed in embryonic
taste buds. We further compare these patterns with those of immunocytochemical
markers of discrete taste cell types. We find that Hes6 is expressed in a subset 
of basally located, possibly progenitor cells, yet is rarely coexpressed with
taste cell markers. In contrast, Mash1 is detected in some basal cells and in the
majority of differentiated type III taste cells, but never in type II cells.
These data suggest a role for Notch signaling in taste cell differentiation in
adult taste buds.

PMID: 17031025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Development. 2006 Oct;133(20):4015-24.

The bHLH transcription factor hand2 is essential for noradrenergic
differentiation of sympathetic neurons.

Lucas ME(1), Müller F, Rüdiger R, Henion PD, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Neurobiology, Molecular, Cellular and Developmental
Biology Program, Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State University, 105
Rightmire Hall, 1060 Carmack Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hand2, together with Ascl1,
Phox2a, Phox2b and Gata2/Gata3, is induced by bone morphogenetic proteins in
neural crest-derived precursor cells during sympathetic neuron generation. Hand2 
overexpression experiments and the analysis of its function at the Dbh promotor
implicated Hand2 in the control of noradrenergic gene expression. Using the
zebrafish hand2 deletion mutant hands off, we have now investigated the
physiological role of hand2 in the development of sympathetic ganglia. In hands
off mutant embryos, sympathetic precursor cells aggregate to form normal
sympathetic ganglion primordia characterized by the expression of phox2b, phox2a 
and the achaete-scute family member zash1a/ascl1. The expression of the
noradrenergic marker genes th and dbh is strongly reduced, as well as the
transcription factors gata2 and tfap2a (Ap-2alpha). By contrast, generic neuronal
differentiation seems to be unaffected, as the expression of elavl3 (HuC) is not 
reduced in hands off sympathetic ganglia. These results demonstrate in vivo an
essential and selective function of hand2 for the noradrenergic differentiation
of sympathetic neurons, and implicates tfap2a and gata2 as downstream effectors.

PMID: 17008447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. EMBO J. 2006 Oct 18;25(20):4833-42. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

A molecular insight of Hes5-dependent inhibition of myelin gene expression: old
partners and new players.

Liu A(1), Li J, Marin-Husstege M, Kageyama R, Fan Y, Gelinas C, Casaccia-Bonnefil
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, UMDNJ, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

This study identifies novel mechanisms of Hes5 function in developmental
myelination. We report here upregulation of myelin gene expression in Hes5-/-
mice compared to wild-type siblings and downregulation in overexpressing
progenitors. This effect was only partially explained by the ability to regulate 
the levels of Mash1 and bind to N boxes in myelin promoters, as deletion of the
DNA-binding domain of Hes5 did not suppress its inhibitory role on myelin gene
expression. Novel mechanisms of Hes5 function in the oligodendrocyte lineage
include the regulation of feedback loops with the cell-specific transcriptional
activator Sox10. In progenitors with low levels of Sox10, Hes5 further decreases 
the bioavailability of this protein by transcriptional inhibition and direct
sequestration of this activator. Increasing levels of Sox10 in progenitors, in
turn, bind to Hes5 and titrate out its inhibitory effect by sequestration and
displacement of the repressive complexes from myelin promoters. Thus,
Hes5-dependent modulation of myelin gene expression involves old players (i.e.
Mash1) and novel mechanisms of transcriptional regulation that include
cell-specific regulatory loops with transcriptional activators (i.e. Sox10).

PMCID: PMC1618116
PMID: 17006542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Dev Biol. 2007 Feb 1;302(1):50-65. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

Pax6 controls cerebral cortical cell number by regulating exit from the cell
cycle and specifies cortical cell identity by a cell autonomous mechanism.

Quinn JC(1), Molinek M, Martynoga BS, Zaki PA, Faedo A, Bulfone A, Hevner RF,
West JD, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Centres for
Integrative Physiology and Neuroscience Research, University of Edinburgh, Hugh
Robson Building, George Square, Edinburgh, UK.

Many cerebral cortical neurons and glia are produced by apical progenitors
dividing at the ventricular surface of the embryonic dorsal telencephalon. Other 
neurons are produced by basal progenitor cells, which are derived from apical
progenitors, dividing away from the ventricular surface. The transcription factor
Pax6 is expressed in apical progenitors and is downregulated in basal
progenitors, which upregulate the transcription factor Tbr2. Here we show that
Pax6(-/-) cells are under-represented in the cortex of Pax6(+/+)<-->Pax6(-/-)
chimeras early in corticogenesis, indicating that Pax6 is required for the
production of normal numbers of cortical cells. We provide evidence that this
underproduction is attributable to an early depletion of the progenitor pool
caused by greater than normal proportions of newly divided cells exiting the cell
cycle. We show that most progenitor cells dividing away from the ventricular
surface in Pax6(-/-) embryos fail to express the transcription factor Tbr2 and
that Pax6 is required cell autonomously for Tbr2 expression in the developing
cortex of Pax6(+/+)<-->Pax6(-/-) chimeras. Transcription factors normally
expressed ventrally in the telencephalic ganglionic eminences (Mash1, Dlx2 and
Gsh2) are upregulated cell autonomously in mutant cells in the developing cortex 
of Pax6(+/+)<-->Pax6(-/-) chimeras; Nkx2.1, which is expressed only in the medial
ganglionic eminence, is not. These data indicate that early functions of Pax6 in 
developing cortical cells are to repress expression of transcription factors
normally found in the lateral ganglionic eminence, to prevent precocious
differentiation and depletion of the progenitor pool, and to induce normal
development of cortical basal progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC2384163
PMID: 16979618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Neuroscience. 2006 Oct 27;142(3):727-37. Epub 2006 Sep 14.

Transition of mouse de novo methyltransferases expression from Dnmt3b to Dnmt3a
during neural progenitor cell development.

Watanabe D(1), Uchiyama K, Hanaoka K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Embryology, Department of Bioscience, Kitasato
University School of Science, 1-15-1, Kitasato, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555,
Japan. watanabe@kitasato-u.ac.jp

Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b, which are known as functional de novo methyltransferases, are 
responsible for creating genomic methylation patterns during mammalian
development. Recently, we have shown that specific expression of Dnmt3b in
epiblast, embryonic ectoderm, hematopoietic progenitor cells and spermatogonia
cells is followed by Dnmt3a expression (Watanabe D, Suetake I, Tada T, Tajima S
(2002) Stage- and cell-specific expression of Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b during
embryogenesis. Mech Dev 118:187-190; Watanabe D, Suetake I, Tajima S, Hanaoka K
(2004) Expression of Dnmt3b in mouse hematopoietic progenitor cells and
spermatogonia at specific stages. Gene Expr Patterns 5:43-49). In this study, we 
analyzed the expression of mouse de novo methyltransferases during development of
the nervous systems. In the embryonic olfactory epithelium (OE), Dnmt3b was
specifically expressed in Mash1 positive globose basal cells (i.e. transiently
amplifying neural progenitor cells), while Dnmt3a was expressed in immature
olfactory receptor neurons. Dnmt3b-positive cells were rarely observed in the
adult OE, but were increased in regenerating OE with intranasal ZnSO(4)
administration. Dnmt3b was also detected in the E8.5 neural plate, E10.5 spinal
cord and retina cells, while Dnmt3a was expressed in postmitotic young neurons.
Furthermore, Dnmt3b was specifically expressed in ES cells, while Dnmt3a was
transiently expressed during neural cell differentiation of ES cells. Dnmt3b is
specifically expressed in progenitor cells during hematopoiesis, spermatogenesis 
and neurogenesis, suggesting an important role in the initial steps of progenitor
cell differentiation. Dnmt3a is expressed in postmitotic young neurons following 
the Dnmt3b expression. Dnmt3a may be required for the establishment of
tissue-specific methylation patterns of the genome. The coordinated expression of
de novo methyltransferases from Dnmt3b to Dnmt3a suggests conserved mechanisms of
de novo methylation of the genome and different functions for Dnmt3b and Dnmt3a
during progenitor cell development.

PMID: 16973295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Endocrine. 2006 Jun;29(3):435-44.

Patterns of gene expression in pituitary carcinomas and adenomas analyzed by
high-density oligonucleotide arrays, reverse transcriptase-quantitative PCR, and 
protein expression.

Ruebel KH(1), Leontovich AA, Jin L, Stilling GA, Zhang H, Qian X, Nakamura N,
Scheithauer BW, Kovacs K, Lloyd RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, 200 First Street, SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Very few of the genes that are important in pituitary tumor initiation,
progression, and metastasis have been identified to date. To identify potential
genes that may be important in pituitary tumor progression and carcinoma
development, we used Affymetrix GeneChip HGU-133A-oligonucleotide arrays, which
contain more than 15,000 characterized genes from the human genome to study gene 
expression in an ACTH pituitary carcinoma metastatic to the liver and four
pituitary adenomas. Reverse-transcriptase real-time quantitative- PCR (RT-qPCR)
was then used to analyze 4 nonneoplastic pituitaries, 19 adenomas, and the ACTH
carcinoma. A larger series of pituitary adenomas and carcinomas were also
analyzed for protein expression using tissue microarrays (TMA) (n = 233) and by
Western blotting (n = 18). There were 4298 genes that were differentially
expressed among the adenomas compared to the carcinoma, with 2057 genes
overexpressed and 2241 genes underexpressed in the adenomas. The beta-galactoside
binding protein galactin-3 was underexpressed in some adenomas compared to the
carcinomas. Prolactin (PRL) and ACTH tumors had the highest levels of expression 
of galectin-3. The human achaetescute homolog-1 ASCL1 (hASH-1) gene was also
underexpressed in some adenomas compared to the carcinoma. Prolactin and ACTH
tumors had the highest levels of expression of hASH-1. ID2, which has an
important role in cell development and tumorigenesis, was underexpressed in some 
adenomas compared to the carcinomas. Transducin-like enhancer of split four/
Groucho (TLE-4) was over-expressed in adenomas compared to the ACTH carcinoma.
The differential expression of these genes was validated by RT-qPCR, by
immunohistochemistry using TMA and by Western blotting. These results indicate
that the LGALS3, hASH1, ID2, and TLE-4 genes may have important roles in the
development of pituitary carcinomas.

PMID: 16943582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Schizophr Res. 2006 Dec;88(1-3):275-82. Epub 2006 Aug 8.

Analysis of coding-polymorphisms in NOTCH-related genes reveals NUMBL
poly-glutamine repeat to be associated with schizophrenia in Brazilian and Danish
subjects.

Passos Gregorio S(1), Gattaz WF, Tavares H, Kieling C, Timm S, Wang AG, Berg
Rasmussen H, Werge T, Dias-Neto E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences (LIM-27), Department and Institute of Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo, Brazil, and University Department
of Psychiatry, H:S Frederiksberg Hospital, Denmark.

Abnormality in neurodevelopment is one of the most robust hypotheses on the
etiology of schizophrenia and has found substantial support from brain imaging
and genetic studies. Neurodevelopmental processes involve several signaling
pathways, including the Notch, but little is known at present regarding their
possible involvement in schizophrenia. In the present study we investigated the
link of non-synonymous variants of five genes of the Notch pathway (NOTCH2,
NOTCH3, JAGGED2, ASCL1 and NUMBL) to schizophrenia in a group of 200 Brazilian
patients and 200-paired controls. Also, we replicated the association of the
NUMBL variant, our most promising finding, in an unrelated set of 684 Danish
patients and controls. When the Brazilian and Danish cohorts were merged, a total
of 1084 subjects, we found the allele 18 CAG of NUMBL (p=0.003, x2=8.88, OR=1.30,
95% CI 1.09-1.56) as well as the 18/18 CAG genotype (p=0.002, x2=9.46, OR=1.46,
95% CI 1.15-1.87) to be associated with schizophrenia. The consistency of this
finding in two independent and unrelated populations reinforces the veracity of
this association.

PMID: 16899352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Int J Oncol. 2006 Sep;29(3):567-75.

Gene expression profiles of small-cell lung cancers: molecular signatures of lung
cancer.

Taniwaki M(1), Daigo Y, Ishikawa N, Takano A, Tsunoda T, Yasui W, Inai K, Kohno
N, Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

To characterize the molecular mechanisms involved in the carcinogenesis and
progression of small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) and identify molecules to be applied
as novel diagnostic markers and/or for development of molecular-targeted drugs,
we applied cDNA microarray profile analysis coupled with purification of cancer
cells by laser-microbeam microdissection (LMM). Expression profiles of 32,256
genes in 15 SCLCs identified 252 genes that were commonly up-regulated and 851
transcripts that were down-regulated in SCLC cells compared with non-cancerous
lung tissue cells. An unsupervised clustering algorithm applied to the expression
data easily distinguished SCLC from the other major histological type of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and identified 475 genes that may represent
distinct molecular features of each of the two histological types. In particular,
SCLC was characterized by altered expression of genes related to neuroendocrine
cell differentiation and/or growth such as ASCL1, NRCAM, and INSM1. We also
identified 68 genes that were abundantly expressed both in advanced SCLCs and
advanced adenocarcinomas (ADCs), both of which had been obtained from patients
with extensive chemotherapy treatment. Some of them are known to be transcription
factors and/or gene expression regulators such as TAF5L, TFCP2L4, PHF20, LMO4,
TCF20, RFX2, and DKFZp547I048 as well as those encoding nucleotide-binding
proteins such as C9orf76, EHD3, and GIMAP4. Our data provide valuable information
for better understanding of lung carcinogenesis and chemoresistance.

PMID: 16865272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Mod Pathol. 2006 Oct;19(10):1358-68. Epub 2006 Jul 7.

Distinction of pulmonary large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma from small cell lung
carcinoma: a morphological, immunohistochemical, and molecular analysis.

Hiroshima K(1), Iyoda A, Shida T, Shibuya K, Iizasa T, Kishi H, Tanizawa T,
Fujisawa T, Nakatani Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan. kenzo@faculty.chiba-u.jp

The distinction between pulmonary large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma and small
cell carcinoma is difficult in some cases. Some propose that these carcinomas
should be classified as one high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma. We examined
biological features of small cell carcinoma (n=23), large cell neuroendocrine
carcinoma (n=17), and classic large cell carcinoma (n=12). The average ratio of
nuclear diameter of the tumor cells to that of lymphocytes for small cell
carcinoma was smaller than that for large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma
(P<0.0001). The frequencies of the expressions of CD56, mASH1, TTF-1, and p16
were higher and that of NeuroD was lower in small cell carcinoma than in large
cell neuroendocrine carcinoma. The frequency of loss of heterozygosity at 3p was 
higher in high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas than in classic large cell
carcinoma (P=0.0002). Allelic losses at D5S422 (5q33) were more frequent in small
cell carcinoma than in large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (P=0.0091). Mean
fractional regional loss indices of the tumors were 0.38, 0.65, and 0.72 for
patients with classic large cell carcinoma, large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, 
and small cell carcinoma, respectively (P=0.0003). Five-year overall survivals of
patients with classic large cell carcinoma, large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma
and small cell carcinoma in stage I were 67, 73, 60%, respectively. Patients with
NeuroD expression had better survivals, and those with p63 expression had poorer 
survivals in large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma. Patients with TTF-1 expression 
had poorer survivals in small cell carcinoma. Our data suggest that large cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma and small cell carcinoma are different morphologically, 
phenotypically, and genetically, although there are some overlapping features.
Although further studies are needed to analyze the biological behavior of
high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas including sensitivity to chemotherapy, the
pathological distinction of large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma from small cell
carcinoma may be necessary to treat the patients with neuroendocrine tumors.

PMID: 16862075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Neuroscience. 2006 Sep 15;141(4):2129-38. Epub 2006 Jul 14.

Taste bud contains both short-lived and long-lived cell populations.

Hamamichi R(1), Asano-Miyoshi M, Emori Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, The
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
hamamich@biochem.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Taste bud cells undergo continual turnover even in adulthood, and their average
lifespan has been estimated as approximately 10 days. However, it is not clear
whether this figure can be applied to all the different cell types contained in a
taste bud. Here, we describe the age and life cycle of taste bud cells in rat
circumvallate papillae, and indicate that the lifespan is heterogeneous, ranging 
from 2 days to over 3 weeks. Taste bud cells were incorporated from the basal
proliferative layer in 1-2 days after birth. After incorporation, approximately
half of the cells were eliminated within 2-3 days, and the remaining half were
maintained with gradual decrease, suggesting that there are at least two types of
cells; short-lived cells and long-lived cells. Moreover, above 10% of the
incorporated cells were maintained at 3 weeks. In order to gain information about
the relationship between the cell functions and the cell age, we carried out
double-labeling experiments using 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine and each of two markers
for in situ hybridization: mammalian achaete-scute homolog 1 (Mash1) and
phospholipase C beta 2 (PLCbeta2) as markers of early differentiation and
functional taste signaling, respectively. Mash1 expression began immediately
after the incorporation and reached a maximum at 5-6 days after birth. Fewer but 
distinct Mash1-positive cells were still observed after 3 weeks. PLCbeta2
expression was observed from day 5, reached a maximum at day 12, and continued
over 3 weeks. Taken together, a taste bud contains both short-lived and
long-lived cells: the short-lived cells are eliminated in a time course similar
to the surrounding epithelial cells, and the long-lived cells including taste
receptor cells have a lifespan longer than the previous estimation.

PMID: 16843606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Cereb Cortex. 2006 Jul;16 Suppl 1:i138-51.

A role for proneural genes in the maturation of cortical progenitor cells.

Britz O(1), Mattar P, Nguyen L, Langevin LM, Zimmer C, Alam S, Guillemot F,
Schuurmans C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, UK.

We showed previously that the proneural genes Neurogenin1 (Ngn1) and Ngn2 are
required to specify the phenotypes of early- and not late-born neurons in the
neocortex, acting in part through repression of Mash1, a third cortically
expressed proneural gene. The precise timing of Ngn1/2 specification activity was
unexpected given these genes are expressed throughout cortical development,
prompting us to search for a later function. Here we reveal that Ngn2 and Mash1
are expressed in a dynamic fashion, acquiring a cell cycle-biased, nonoverlapping
distribution, with preferential expression in prospective basal progenitors,
during mid corticogenesis. We also identified a new function for Ngn2 during this
latter period, demonstrating that it is required to regulate the transit of
cortical progenitors from the ventricular zone (VZ) to the subventricular zone.
Notably, Ngn2 regulates progenitor maturation at least in part through repression
of Mash1 as misexpression of Mash1 strongly enhanced progenitor cell exit from
the VZ. Significantly, the ability of Mash1 to promote progenitor cell maturation
occurred independently of its ability to respecify cortical cells and is thus a
novel function for Mash1. Taken together, these data support a model whereby Ngn2
and Mash1 function together to regulate the zonal distribution of progenitors in 
the developing neocortex.

PMID: 16766700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Neuroscience. 2006 Aug 25;141(2):737-44. Epub 2006 May 30.

Vascular endothelial growth factor mediates atorvastatin-induced mammalian
achaete-scute homologue-1 gene expression and neuronal differentiation after
stroke in retired breeder rats.

Chen J(1), Zacharek A, Li A, Zhang C, Ding J, Roberts C, Lu M, Kapke A, Chopp M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Health Sciences Center, Detroit, MI 48202,
USA.

Neurogenesis declines with advancing age. The mammalian achaete-scute homologue-1
encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, which controls neuronal
differentiation. In this study, we first tested whether atorvastatin treatment
enhances neurological functional outcome and neuronal differentiation after
stroke in retired breeder 12 month rats. Rats were subjected to middle cerebral
artery occlusion and treated with or without atorvastatin (3 mg/kg) for 7 days.
Atorvastatin significantly increased expression of mammalian achaete-scute
homologue-1, beta-tubulin III, and vascular endothelial growth factor in the
ischemic brain, and concomitantly improved functional outcome compared with
middle cerebral artery occlusion control rats. Increased neurogenesis
significantly correlated with functional recovery after stroke. To further
investigate the mechanisms of atorvastatin-induced neuronal differentiation,
experiments were performed on neurospheres derived from retired breeder rat
subventricular zone cells. Atorvastatin increased neuronal differentiation and
upregulated vascular endothelial growth factor and mammalian achaete-scute
homologue-1 gene expression in cultured neurospheres. Vascular endothelial growth
factor-treated neurospheres significantly increased mammalian achaete-scute
homologue-1 and beta-tubulin III expression. Inhibition of vascular endothelial
growth factor decreased atorvastatin-induced mammalian achaete-scute homologue-1 
and beta-tubulin III expression. These data indicate that atorvastatin increases 
neuronal differentiation in retired breeder rats. In addition, atorvastatin
upregulation of vascular endothelial growth factor expression, influences
mammalian achaete-scute homologue-1 transcription factor, which in turn,
facilitates an increase in subventricular zone neuronal differentiation. These
atorvastatin-mediated molecular events may contribute to the improved functional 
outcome in retired breeder rats subjected to stroke.

PMCID: PMC2791335
PMID: 16730914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Cell Sci. 2006 Jun 1;119(Pt 11):2310-20.

Differential actions of the proneural genes encoding Mash1 and neurogenins in
Nurr1-induced dopamine neuron differentiation.

Park CH(1), Kang JS, Kim JS, Chung S, Koh JY, Yoon EH, Jo AY, Chang MY, Koh HC,
Hwang S, Suh-Kim H, Lee YS, Kim KS, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea.

The steroid receptor-type transcription factor Nurr1 has a crucial role in the
development of the mesencephalic dopamine (DA) neurons. Although ectopic
expression of Nurr1 in cultured neural precursor cells is sufficient in
establishing the DA phenotype, Nurr1-induced DA cells are morphologically and
functionally immature, suggesting the necessity of additional factor(s) for full 
neuronal differentiation. In this study, we demonstrate that neurogenic basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors Mash1, neurogenins (Ngns) and NeuroD play
contrasting roles in Nurr1-induced DA neuronal differentiation. Mash1, but not
Ngn2, spatially and temporally colocalized with aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (AHD2), 
a specific midbrain DA neuronal progenitor marker, in the early embryonic ventral
mesencephalon. Forced expression of Mash1 caused immature Nurr1-induced DA cells 
to differentiate into mature and functional DA neurons as judged by
electrophysiological characteristics, release of DA, and expression of
presynaptic DA neuronal markers. By contrast, atonal-related bHLHs, represented
by Ngn1, Ngn2 and NeuroD, repressed Nurr1-induced expression of DA neuronal
markers. Domain-swapping experiments with Mash1 and NeuroD indicated that the
helix-loop-helix domain, responsible for mediating dimerization of bHLH
transcription factors, imparts the distinct effect. Finally, transient
co-transfection of the atonal-related bHLHs with Nurr1 resulted in an
E-box-independent repression of Nurr1-induced transcriptional activation of a
reporter containing Nurr1-binding element (NL3) as well as a reporter driven by
the native tyrosine hydroxylase gene promoter. Taken together, these findings
suggest that Mash1 contributes to the generation of DA neurons in cooperation
with Nurr1 in the developing midbrain whereas atonal-related bHLH genes inhibit
the process.

PMID: 16723737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Nat Neurosci. 2006 Jun;9(6):770-8. Epub 2006 May 21.

Ascl1 and Gsh1/2 control inhibitory and excitatory cell fate in spinal sensory
interneurons.

Mizuguchi R(1), Kriks S, Cordes R, Gossler A, Ma Q, Goulding M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Sensory information from the periphery is integrated and transduced by excitatory
and inhibitory interneurons in the dorsal spinal cord. Recent studies have
identified a number of postmitotic factors that control the generation of these
sensory interneurons. We show that Gsh1/2 and Ascl1 (Mash1), which are expressed 
in sensory interneuron progenitors, control the choice between excitatory and
inhibitory cell fates in the developing mouse spinal cord. During the early phase
of neurogenesis, Gsh1/2 and Ascl1 coordinately regulate the expression of Tlx3,
which is a critical postmitotic determinant for dorsal glutamatergic sensory
interneurons. However, at later developmental times, Ascl1 controls the
expression of Ptf1a in dIL(A) progenitors to promote inhibitory neuron
differentiation while at the same time upregulating Notch signaling to ensure the
proper generation of dIL(B) excitatory neurons. We propose that this switch in
Ascl1 function enables the cogeneration of inhibitory and excitatory sensory
interneurons from a common pool of dorsal progenitors.

PMID: 16715081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Development. 2006 Jun;133(11):2105-13.

dILA neurons in the dorsal spinal cord are the product of terminal and
non-terminal asymmetric progenitor cell divisions, and require Mash1 for their
development.

Wildner H(1), Müller T, Cho SH, Bröhl D, Cepko CL, Guillemot F, Birchmeier C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Centrum for Molecular Medicine, Berlin-Buch, Germany.

dILA and dILB neurons comprise the major neuronal subtypes generated in the
dorsal spinal cord, and arise in a salt-and-pepper pattern from a broad
progenitor domain that expresses the bHLH factor Mash1. In this domain,
Mash1-positive and Mash1-negative cells intermingle. Using a Mash1(GFP) allele in
mice, we show here that Mash1+ progenitors give rise to dILA and dILB neurons.
Using retroviral tracing in the chick, we demonstrate that a single progenitor
can give rise to a dILA and a dILB neuron, and that dILA neurons are the product 
of asymmetric progenitor cell divisions. In Mash1-null mutant mice, the
development of dILA, but not of dILB neurons is impaired. We provide evidence
that a dual function of Mash1 in neuronal differentiation and specification
accounts for the observed changes in the mutant mice. Our data allow us to assign
to Mash1 a function in asymmetric cell divisions, and indicate that the factor
coordinates cell cycle exit and specification in the one daughter that gives rise
to a dILA neuron.

PMID: 16690754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2006;580:93-7; discussion 351-9.

Dual origins of the mouse carotid body revealed by targeted disruption of Hoxa3
and Mash1.

Kameda Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan.

PMID: 16683703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan. 2006 Jan;37(1):61-4.

[The progress of Mash-1 gene associated with neural development and
differentiation].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen XS, Yao ZX.

PMID: 16683550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 1;295(1):67-75. Epub 2006 May 4.

Delays in neuronal differentiation in Mash1/Ascl1 mutants.

Pattyn A(1), Guillemot F, Brunet JF.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8542, Département de Biologie, Ecole normale supérieure, 75005 Paris,
France.

The inactivation of a developmental transcription factor may lead to the complete
absence of a specific cell type. More commonly, though, it only partially impairs
its generation. The modalities of this partial effect have rarely been documented
in any detail. Here, we report a novel function for the bHLH transcription factor
Ascl1/Mash1 in the generation of the nucleus of the solitary tract (nTS). In
Mash1(-/-) late embryos, the nTS is markedly atrophic. Tracing back the origin of
this atrophy, we show that nTS precursors appear in the mutants 1 day later than 
in the wild type and then accumulate at a slower pace. We also show that the
previously reported atrophy of the sympathetic chain in Mash1 mutants is
similarly preceded by a delay of 1 to 2 days in the appearance of differentiated 
ganglionic cells. Finally, we provide evidence that the acceleration imposed by
Mash1, regardless of the production of post-mitotic cells, affects
differentiation itself, both generic and type-specific.

PMID: 16677628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Lab Invest. 2006 May;86(5):425-44.

Functional facets of the pulmonary neuroendocrine system.

Linnoila RI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Cancer Biology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. linnoila@nih.gov

Pulmonary neuroendocrine cells (PNECs) have been around for 60 years in the
scientific literature, although phylogenetically they are ancient. Their
traditionally ascribed functions include chemoreception and regulation of lung
maturation and growth. There is recent evidence that neuroendocrine (NE)
differentiation in the lung is regulated by genes and pathways that are conserved
in the development of the nervous system from Drosophila to humans (such as
achaete-scute homolog-1), or implicated in the carcinogenesis of the nervous or
NE system (such as the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor gene). In addition,
complex neural networks are in place to regulate chemosensory and other
functions. Even solitary PNECs appear to be innervated. For the first time ever, 
we have mouse models for lung NE carcinomas, including the most common and
virulent small cell lung carcinoma. Moreover, PNECs may be important for
inflammatory responses, and pivotal for lung stem cell niches. These discoveries 
signify an exciting new era for PNECs and are likely to have therapeutic and
diagnostic applications.

PMID: 16568108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Neurochem. 2006 Jun;97(5):1269-78. Epub 2006 Mar 15.

Notch and NGF/p75NTR control dendrite morphology and the balance of
excitatory/inhibitory synaptic input to hippocampal neurones through Neurogenin
3.

Salama-Cohen P(1), Arévalo MA, Grantyn R, Rodríguez-Tébar A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal de Neurobiología, CSIC, Madrid, Spain.

We have previously shown that dendrite morphology of cultured hippocampal
neurones is controlled by Notch receptor activation or binding of nerve growth
factor (NGF) to its low affinity receptor p75NTR, i.e. processes that up-regulate
the expression of the Homologue of enhancer of split 1 and 5. Thus, the increased
expression of these genes decreases the number of dendrites, whereas abrogation
of Homologue of enhancer of split 1/5 activity stimulates the outgrowth of new
dendrites. Here, we show that Neurogenin 3 is a proneural gene that is negatively
regulated by Homologue of enhancer of split 1/5. It also influences dendrite
morphology. Hence, a deficit of Notch or NGF/p75NTR activation can lead to the
production of high levels of Neurogenin 3, which stimulates the outgrowth of new 
dendrites. Conversely, activation of either Notch or p75NTR depressed Neurogenin 
3 expression, which not only decreased the number of dendrites but also favoured 
inhibitory (GABAergic) synaptogenesis, thereby diminishing the ratios of
excitatory/inhibitory inputs. NGF also augmented the levels of mRNA encoding the 
vesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter, but it did not affect the fraction
of GAD65/67-positive neurones. Conversely, overexpression of Neurogenin 3 largely
reduced the number of inhibitory synaptic contacts and, consequently, produced a 
strong increase in the ratios of excitatory/inhibitory synaptic terminals. Our
results reveal a hitherto unknown contribution of NGF/p75NTR to dendritic and
synaptic plasticity through Neurogenin 3 signalling.

PMID: 16539652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Diabetologia. 2006 May;49(5):1027-38. Epub 2006 Mar 1.

High glucose alters the expression of genes involved in proliferation and
cell-fate specification of embryonic neural stem cells.

Fu J(1), Tay SS, Ling EA, Dheen ST.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School 
of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Maternal diabetes induces neural tube defects during
embryogenesis. Since the neural tube is derived from neural stem cells (NSCs), it
is hypothesised that in diabetic pregnancy neural tube defects result from
altered expression of developmental control genes, leading to abnormal
proliferation and cell-fate choice of NSCs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cell viability, proliferation index and apoptosis of NSCs 
and differentiated cells from mice exposed to physiological or high glucose
concentration medium were examined by a tetrazolium salt assay,
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation, terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labelling and immunocytochemistry. Expression 
of developmental genes, including sonic hedgehog (Shh), bone morphogenetic
protein 4 (Bmp4), neurogenin 1/2 (Neurog1/2), achaete-scute complex-like 1
(Ascl1), oligodendrocyte transcription factor 1 (Olig1), oligodendrocyte lineage 
transcription factor 2 (Olig2), hairy and enhancer of split 1/5 (Hes1/5) and
delta-like 1 (Dll1), was analysed by real-time RT-PCR. Proliferation index and
neuronal specification in the forebrain of embryos at embryonic day 11.5 were
examined histologically.
RESULTS: High glucose decreased the proliferation of NSCs and differentiated
cells. The incidence of apoptosis was increased in NSCs treated with high
glucose, but not in the differentiated cells. High glucose also accelerated
neuronal and glial differentiation from NSCs. The decreased proliferation index
and early differentiation of neurons were evident in the telencephalon of embryos
derived from diabetic mice. Exposure to high glucose altered the mRNA expression 
levels of Shh, Bmp4, Neurog1/2, Ascl1, Hes1, Dll1 and Olig1 in NSCs and Shh,
Dll1, Neurog1/2 and Hes5 in differentiated cells.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The changes in proliferation and differentiation of
NSCs exposed to high glucose are associated with altered expression of genes that
are involved in cell-cycle progression and cell-fate specification during
neurulation. These changes may form the basis for the defective neural tube
patterning observed in embryos of diabetic pregnancies.

PMID: 16508779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Neurobiol Dis. 2006 Jun;22(3):509-22. Epub 2006 Feb 23.

Introduction of the MASH1 gene into mouse embryonic stem cells leads to
differentiation of motoneuron precursors lacking Nogo receptor expression that
can be applicable for transplantation to spinal cord injury.

Hamada M(1), Yoshikawa H, Ueda Y, Kurokawa MS, Watanabe K, Sakakibara M, Tadokoro
M, Akashi K, Aoki H, Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Medicine, St. Marianna University School of
Medicine, 2-16-1, Sugao, Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 216-8511, Japan.

ES cells transfected with the MASH1 gene yielded purified spinal motoneuron
precursors expressing HB9 and Islet1. The cells lacked the expression of Nogo
receptor that was of great advantage for axon growth after transplantation to an 
injured spinal cord. After transplantation, mice with the complete transection of
spinal cord exhibited excellent improvement of the motor functions.
Electrophysiological assessment confirmed the quantitative recovery of
motor-evoked potential in the transplanted spinal cord. In the grafted spinal
cord, gliosis was inhibited and Nogo receptor expression was scarcely detected.
The transplanted cells labeled with GFP showed extensive outgrowth of axons
positive for neurofilament middle chain, connected to each other and expressed
Synaptophysin, Lim1/2 and Islet1. Thus, the in vivo differentiation into mature
spinal motoneurons and the reconstitution of neuronal pathways were suggested.
The grafted cell population was purified for neurons and was free from teratoma
development. These therapeutic strategies may contribute to a potent treatment
for spinal cord injury in future.

PMID: 16497507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Jul;20(7):1623-32. Epub 2006 Feb 9.

Mash1 is required for generic and subtype differentiation of hypothalamic
neuroendocrine cells.

McNay DE(1), Pelling M, Claxton S, Guillemot F, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, Medical Research Council, The National
Institute of Medical Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The neuroendocrine hypothalamus regulates a number of critical biological
processes and underlies a range of diseases from growth failure to obesity.
Although the elucidation of hypothalamic function has progressed well, knowledge 
of hypothalamic development is poor. In particular, little is known about the
processes underlying the neurogenesis and specification of neurons of the ventral
nuclei, the arcuate and ventromedial nuclei. The proneural gene Mash1 is
expressed throughout the basal retrochiasmatic neuroepithelium and loss of Mash1 
results in hypoplasia of both the arcuate and ventromedial nuclei. These defects 
are due to a failure of neurogenesis and apoptosis, a defect that can be rescued 
by ectopic Ngn2 under the control of the Mash1 promoter. In addition to its role 
in neurogenesis, analysis of Mash1(-/-), Mash1(+/-), Mash1(KINgn2/KINgn2), and
Mash1(KINgn2/+) mice demonstrates that Mash1 is specifically required for Gsh1
expression and subsequent GHRH expression, positively regulates SF1 expression,
and suppresses both tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and neuropeptide Y (NPY)
expression. Although Mash1 is not required for propiomelanocortin (POMC)
expression, it is required for normal development of POMC(+) neurons. These data 
demonstrate that Mash1 is both required for the generation of ventral
neuroendocrine neurons as well as playing a central role in subtype specification
of these neurons.

PMID: 16469766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Development. 2006 Feb;133(3):495-505.

Neurogenin 2 is required for the development of ventral midbrain dopaminergic
neurons.

Kele J(1), Simplicio N, Ferri AL, Mira H, Guillemot F, Arenas E, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, MBB, Karolinska Institutet, Retzius
building A1, Stockholm, Sweden.

Proneural genes are crucial regulators of neurogenesis and subtype specification 
in many areas of the nervous system; however, their function in dopaminergic
neuron development is unknown. We report that proneural genes have an intricate
pattern of expression in the ventricular zone of the ventral midbrain, where
mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons are generated. Neurogenin 2 (Ngn2) and Mash1
are expressed in the ventral midline, while Ngn1, Ngn2 and Mash1 are co-localized
more laterally in the ventricular zone. Ngn2 is also expressed in an intermediate
zone immediately adjacent to the ventricular zone at the ventral midline. To
examine the function of these genes, we analyzed mutant mice in which one or two 
of these genes were deleted (Ngn1, Ngn2 and Mash1) or substituted (Mash1 in the
Ngn2 locus). Our results demonstrate that Ngn2 is required for the
differentiation of Sox2(+) ventricular zone progenitors into Nurr1(+) postmitotic
dopaminergic neuron precursors in the intermediate zone, and that it is also
likely to be required for their subsequent differentiation into tyrosine
hydroxylase-positive dopaminergic neurons in the marginal zone. Although Mash1
normally has no detectable function in dopaminergic neuron development, it could 
partially rescue the generation of dopaminergic neuron precursors in the absence 
of Ngn2. These results demonstrate that Ngn2 is uniquely required for the
development of midbrain dopaminergic neurons.

PMID: 16410412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Cell Sci. 2006 Jan 1;119(Pt 1):132-40.

Neural induction promotes large-scale chromatin reorganisation of the Mash1
locus.

Williams RR(1), Azuara V, Perry P, Sauer S, Dvorkina M, Jørgensen H, Roix J,
McQueen P, Misteli T, Merkenschlager M, Fisher AG.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK.
ruth.williams@csc.mrc.ac.uk

Determining how genes are epigenetically regulated to ensure their correct
spatial and temporal expression during development is key to our understanding of
cell lineage commitment. Here we examined epigenetic changes at an important
proneural regulator gene Mash1 (Ascl1), as embryonic stem (ES) cells commit to
the neural lineage. In ES cells where the Mash1 gene is transcriptionally
repressed, the locus replicated late in S phase and was preferentially positioned
at the nuclear periphery with other late-replicating genes (Neurod, Sprr2a). This
peripheral location was coupled with low levels of histone H3K9 acetylation at
the Mash1 promoter and enhanced H3K27 methylation but surprisingly location was
not affected by removal of the Ezh2/Eed HMTase complex or several other
chromatin-silencing candidates (G9a, SuV39h-1, Dnmt-1, Dnmt-3a and Dnmt-3b). Upon
neural induction however, Mash1 transcription was upregulated (>100-fold),
switched its time of replication from late to early in S phase and relocated
towards the interior of the nucleus. This spatial repositioning was selective for
neural commitment because Mash1 was peripheral in ES-derived mesoderm and other
non-neural cell types. A bidirectional analysis of replication timing across a 2 
Mb region flanking the Mash1 locus showed that chromatin changes were focused at 
Mash1. These results suggest that Mash1 is regulated by changes in chromatin
structure and location and implicate the nuclear periphery as an important
environment for maintaining the undifferentiated state of ES cells.

PMID: 16371653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Surgery. 2005 Dec;138(6):1137-42; discussion 1142.

Hairy Enhancer of Split-1 (HES-1), a Notch1 effector, inhibits the growth of
carcinoid tumor cells.

Kunnimalaiyaan M(1), Yan S, Wong F, Zhang YW, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Wisconsin Medical School, University 
of Wisconsin Comprehensive Cancer Center, Madison, WI, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Notch1-signaling pathway has been shown to regulate the
differentiation and growth of carcinoid tumor cells. However, the molecules that 
mediate Notch1 signaling, as well as their potential roles in regulating the
growth of carcinoid tumors, have not been characterized. We and others have shown
previously that the transcription factor Hairy Enhancer of Split-1 (HES-1) is
upregulated in response to Notch1 signaling, demonstrating that it is a Notch1
effector. We hypothesized that HES-1 may be the essential downstream factor in
Notch1-mediated growth regulation of carcinoid tumors.
METHODS: H727 carcinoid tumor cells were transduced stably with a
doxycycline-inducible HES-1 construct, creating H727-HES-1 cells. H727-TRE
(vector-only control) and H727-HES-1 cells were then treated with varying
concentrations of doxycycline to achieve increasing levels of HES-1 protein
expression. Cell proliferation was determined with the use of a cell viability
assay.
RESULTS: Treatment of H727-HES-1 cells with increasing dosages of doxycycline
resulted in dose-dependent increases in HES-1 protein by Western blot analysis.
Importantly, induction of HES-1 in carcinoid tumor cells led to suppression of
tumor cellular proliferation. Moreover, the degree of carcinoid growth inhibition
appeared to be proportional to the level of HES-1 induction.
CONCLUSIONS: HES-1 alone can regulate the growth of carcinoid tumor cells.
Furthermore, these results suggest that HES-1 may be the critical downstream
effector in the Notch1-signaling pathway.

PMID: 16360401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Brain Res. 2005 Dec 20;1066(1-2):24-36. Epub 2005 Dec 5.

Multipotency of FBD-103a, a neural progenitor cell line from the p53-deficient
mouse.

Horiuchi M(1), Itoh T, Pleasure DE, Tomooka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, 
2641 Yamazaki, Noda City, Chiba 278-8510, Japan.

We previously established cell lines from brains of p53-deficient embryos, and
have now characterized one of these lines, FBD-103a, in detail. Recloning
FBD-103a yielded 3 types of subclones: 5 generated the neuronal lineage (Type 1),
3 generated the glial lineage (Type 2), and 10 gave rise to both lineages as the 
parental line (Type 3), indicating that FBD-103a is a multipotent neural
progenitor cell line indistinguishable from true neural stem cells. RT-PCR
analyses of transcription factor expression indicated that the transition of
multipotent Type 3 clones to either neuronally or glially differentiated progeny 
was marked by down-regulation of Ascl1/Mash1 and Olig1 and up-regulation of
Nrsf/Rest. As expected for neural stem cells, FBD-103a and Type 3 clones formed
neurospheres when cultured on a non-adhesive substrate in a serum-free medium
containing fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF2). Interestingly, the transition
between Type 3 and Type 1 neuronal- or Type 2 glial-specified cells proved to be 
reversible; Type 1 and Type 2 subclones could also form neurospheres, from which 
both neuron-generating and glia-generating progenies could be derived. Moreover, 
when maintained on an adherent substratum that prevented neurosphere formation,
but with FGF2 and without serum, Type 2 clones could generate Type 3 multipotent 
cells. Thus, at least in the absence of p53, specialized cell-cell interactions
within neurospheres are not essential for persistence or recapture of the
capacity for self-renewal and multipotency by cells differentiating along glial
pathways, a result of possible significance to the pathogenesis of malignant
brain tumors.

PMID: 16336944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 1;65(23):10680-5.

ASH1 gene is a specific therapeutic target for lung cancers with neuroendocrine
features.

Osada H(1), Tatematsu Y, Yatabe Y, Horio Y, Takahashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Chikusa, Nagoya, Japan. hosada@aichi-cc.jp

Lung cancers with neuroendocrine features are usually aggressive, although the
underlying molecular mechanisms largely remain to be determined. The basic
helix-loop-helix protein, achaete-scute complex-like 1/achaete-scute homologue 1 
(ASH1), is expressed in normal fetal pulmonary neuroendocrine cells and lung
cancers with neuroendocrine elements and is suggested to be involved in lung
carcinogenesis. In the present study, we show inhibition of ASH1 expression by
plasmid-based RNA interference (RNAi) to significantly suppress growth of lung
cancer cells with ASH1 expression through G2-M cell cycle arrest and accumulation
of sub-G1 populations, possibly linked to cleavage of caspase-9 and caspase-7.
However, lung cancer cell lines without ASH1 expression and immortalized normal
BEAS2B bronchial epithelial cells were not affected. The RNAi-resistant mutant
ASH1 clearly induced rescue from G2-M arrest, suggesting a target-specific effect
of RNAi. An ASH1-RNAi adenovirus was also established and significantly inhibited
not only in vitro cell proliferation but also in vivo xenograft growth of
ASH1-positive NCI-H460 cells. Elevated levels of apoptosis were also observed in 
NCI-H460 xenografts with the ASH1-RNAi adenovirus. The present study therefore
suggests that ASH1 plays a crucial role in lung cancer development and may be an 
effective therapeutic target in lung cancers with neuroendocrine features.

PMID: 16322211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Stem Cells. 2006 Apr;24(4):918-27. Epub 2005 Oct 27.

Neural stem cells express non-neural markers during embryoid body coculture.

Denham M(1), Huynh T, Dottori M, Allen G, Trounson A, Mollard R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Reproduction and Development, Monash Institute of Medical Research,
Clayton, Australia.

The capacity of neural stem cells (NSC) to transdifferentiate into a wide range
of non-neuronal lineages is the subject of debate. One approach to test NSC
plasticity is to ectopically place NSCs in permissive or instructive
microenvironments in which the signals driving differentiation of multiple cell
types are being elicited. Here we produce embryoid body neurosphere aggregates by
combining neurosphere derivatives from fetal mice constitutively expressing green
fluorescent protein with embryonic stem (ES) cells isolated from Zin40 mice
constitutively expressing nuclear beta-galacosidase. Under these conditions, we
assess neurosphere-derivative-immunoreactivity to anti-neurofilament heavy chain,
anti-pan-cytokeratin, anti-smooth muscle alpha-actinin and
anti-alpha-fetoprotein-specific antibodies. Furthermore, we determine
lineage-specific transgene expression and undertake fluorescence in situ
hybridization to assess ES cell-neural stem cell-fusion indices. Our data
demonstrate that following coculture in hanging drops with ES cells, neurosphere 
derivatives display immunoreactivity to non-neural markers, in particular smooth 
muscle, which is not dependent upon cell-cell fusion. These results suggest that 
given an appropriate environment, NSC may lose their in vivo restrictions and
display non-neuronal phenotypes.

PMID: 16253983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Oct;125(4):805-17.

Altered melanocyte differentiation and retinal pigmented epithelium
transdifferentiation induced by Mash1 expression in pigment cell precursors.

Lanning JL(1), Wallace JS, Zhang D, Diwakar G, Jiao Z, Hornyak TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, Michigan, USA.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Oct;125(4):x-xi.

Transcription factor genes governing pigment cell development that are associated
with spotting mutations in mice include members of several structural
transcription factor classes but not members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
class, important for neurogenesis and myogenesis. To determine the effects of
bHLH factor expression on pigment cell development, the neurogenic bHLH factor
Mash1 was expressed early in pigment cell development in transgenic mice from the
dopachrome tautomerase (Dct) promoter. Dct:Mash1 transgenic founders exhibit
variable microphthalmia and patchy coat color hypopigmentation. Transgenic F1
mice exhibit microphthalmia with complete coat color dilution. Marker analysis
demonstrates that Mash1 expression in the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE)
initiates neurogenesis in this cell layer, whereas expression in remaining neural
crest-derived melanocytes alters their differentiation, in part by profoundly
downregulating expression of the p (pink-eyed dilution) gene, while maintaining
their cell fate. The effects of transcriptional perturbation of pigment cell
precursors by Mash1 further highlight differences between pigment cells of
distinct developmental origins, and suggest a mechanism for the alteration of
melanogenesis to result in marked coat color dilution.

PMID: 16185282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Oct;125(4):x-xi.

When pigment cells turn into neurons.

Bharti K(1), Arnheiter H.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Development Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Comment on
    J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Oct;125(4):805-17.

PMID: 16185257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Oct;289(4):G636-42.

Conservation of the Notch1 signaling pathway in gastrointestinal carcinoid cells.

Kunnimalaiyaan M(1), Traeger K, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison, WI 53792,
USA.

Gastrointestinal (GI) carcinoid cells secrete multiple neuroendocrine (NE)
markers and hormones including 5-hydroxytryptamine and chromogranin A. We were
interested in determining whether activation of the Notch1 signal transduction
pathway in carcinoid cells could modulate production of NE markers and hormones. 
Human pancreatic carcinoid cells (BON cells) were stably transduced with an
estrogen-inducible Notch1 construct, creating BON-NIER cells. In the present
study, we found that Notch1 is not detectable in human GI carcinoid tumor cells. 
The induction of Notch1 in human BON carcinoid cells led to high levels of
functional Notch1, as measured by CBF-1 binding studies, resulting in activation 
of the Notch1 pathway. Similar to its developmental role in the GI tract, Notch1 
pathway activation led to an increase in hairy enhancer of split 1 (HES-1)
protein and a concomitant silencing of human Notch1/HES-1/achaete-scute homolog
1. Furthermore, Notch1 activation led to a significant reduction in NE markers.
Most interestingly, activation of the Notch1 pathway caused a significant
reduction in 5-hydroxytryptamine, an important bioactive hormone in carcinoid
syndrome. In addition, persistent activation of the Notch1 pathway in BON cells
led to a notable reduction in cellular proliferation. These results demonstrate
that the Notch1 pathway, which plays a critical role in the differentiation of
enteroendocrine cells, is highly conserved in the gut. Therefore, manipulation of
the Notch1 signaling pathway may be useful for expanding the targets for
therapeutic and palliative treatment of patients with carcinoid tumors.

PMID: 16160079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Dev Dyn. 2005 Nov;234(3):613-21.

The basic helix-loop-helix factor Hand 2 regulates autonomic nervous system
development.

Morikawa Y(1), Dai YS, Hao J, Bonin C, Hwang S, Cserjesi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans,
Louisiana 70118, USA.

Mammalian autonomic nervous system (ANS) development requires the combinatorial
action of a number of transcription factors, which include Mash 1, Phox 2b, and
GATA 3. Here we show that the bHLH transcription factor, Hand 2 (dHAND), is
expressed concurrently with Mash 1 during sympathetic nervous system (SNS)
development and that the expression of Hand 2 is not dependent on Mash 1. This
suggests that these two bHLH factors work in parallel during SNS development. We 
also show that ectopic expression of Hand 2 activates the neuronal program and
promotes the acquisition of a phenotype corresponding to peripheral neurons
including neurons of the SNS lineage in P19 embryonic carcinoma cells. We propose
that Hand 2 works in parallel with other members of the transcriptional network
to regulate ANS developmental but can ectopically activate the program by a
cross-regulatory mechanism that includes the activation of Mash 1. We show that
this function is dependent on its interaction with the histone acetyltransferase 
p300/CBP, indicating that Hand 2 functions to promote ANS development as part of 
a larger transcriptional complex.

Developmental Dynamics 234:602-612, 2005. (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2653092
PMID: 16145670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Gene Expr. 2005;12(3):137-49.

An in vitro approach to test the possible role of candidate factors in the
transcriptional regulation of the RET proto-oncogene.

Bachetti T(1), Borghini S, Ravazzolo R, Ceccherini I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Istituto G. Gaslini, 16148 Genova, Italy.

Neural crest cells arise from the epithelium of the dorsal neural tube and
migrate to various districts giving origin, among others, to sympathetic,
parasympathetic, and enteric ganglia. It has been shown that the transcription
factors HOX11L1, HOX11L2, MASH1, PHOX2A, and PHOX2B are all necessary, to various
extents, to the correct development of the autonomic nervous system. To
investigate their possible role in the transcriptional regulation of the RET
proto-oncogene, a gene playing a crucial role in correct intestinal innervation, 
we undertook a specific in vitro experimental strategy. Two neuroblastoma cell
lines (SK-N-MC and SK-N-BE) were cotransfected with each transcription factor
expressing plasmids and sequential deletion constructs of the 5' c-RET flanking
region cloned upstream of the Luciferase reporter gene. Here we show that HOX11L1
enhances the activity of the c-RET promoter in SK-N-MC cell line by stimulating a
region between -166 bp and -35 bp. Gel shift assays performed with
oligonucleotides spanning this promoter sequence showed a change of the SP1
interaction with its binding sites, consequent to transfection with HOX11L1.
While HOX11L2 showed no effect in both the cell lines, we have observed PHOX2A,
PHOX2B, and MASH1 triggering a reproducible increase in the Luciferase activity
in SK-N-BE cell line. A sequence responsible of the PHOX2A-dependent activation
has been identified, while PHOX2B seems to act indirectly, as no physical binding
has been demonstrated on c-RET promoter.

PMID: 16127999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Oncogene. 2005 Oct 27;24(47):7073-83.

Upregulation of ASCL1 and inhibition of Notch signaling pathway characterize
progressive astrocytoma.

Somasundaram K(1), Reddy SP, Vinnakota K, Britto R, Subbarayan M, Nambiar S,
Hebbar A, Samuel C, Shetty M, Sreepathi HK, Santosh V, Hegde AS, Hegde S,
Kondaiah P, Rao MR.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Malleswaram, Bangalore 560012, India.

Astrocytoma is the most common type of brain cancer constituting more than half
of all brain tumors. With an aim to identify markers describing astrocytoma
progression, we have carried out microarray analysis of astrocytoma samples of
different grades using cDNA microarray containing 1152 cancer-specific genes.
Data analysis identified several differentially regulated genes between normal
brain tissue and astrocytoma as well as between grades II/III astrocytoma and
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM; grade IV). We found several genes known to be
involved in malignancy including Achaete-scute complex-like 1 (Drosophila)
(ASCL1; Hash 1). As ASCL has been implicated in neuroendocrine, medullary thyroid
and small-cell lung cancers, we chose to examine the role of ASCL1 in the
astrocytoma development. Our data revealed that ASCL1 is overexpressed in
progressive astrocytoma as evidenced by increased levels of ASCL1 transcripts in 
85.71% (6/7) of grade II diffuse astrocytoma (DA), 90% (9/10) of grade III
anaplastic astrocytoma (AA) and 87.5% (7/8) of secondary GBMs, while the majority
of primary de novo GBMs expressed similar to or less than normal brain levels
(66.67%; 8/12). ASCL1 upregulation in progressive astrocytoma is accompanied by
inhibition of Notch signaling as seen by uninduced levels of HES1, a
transcriptional target of Notch1, increased levels of HES6, a dominant-negative
inhibitor of HES1-mediated repression of ASCL1, and increased levels of Notch
ligand Delta1, which is capable of inhibiting Notch signaling by forming
intracellular Notch ligand autonomous complexes. Our results imply that
inhibition of Notch signaling may be an important early event in the development 
of grade II DA and subsequent progression to grade III AA and secondary GBM.
Furthermore, ASCL1 appears to be a putative marker to distinguish primary GBM
from secondary GBM.

PMID: 16103883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Thyroid. 2005 Jun;15(6):511-21.

Medullary thyroid cancer: the functions of raf-1 and human achaete-scute
homologue-1.

Chen H(1), Kunnimalaiyaan M, Van Gompel JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin Medical School, the University 
of Wisconsin Comprehensive Cancer Center, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
chen@surgery.wisc.edu

Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) is a prototypic neuroendocrine tumor of the
thyroid C cells. Other than surgery, there are no curative therapies for MTC. In 
this review, we detail recent studies that suggest that targeting specific
signaling pathways may be a viable strategy to control MTC tumor progression.
Specifically, we discuss the role of the raf-1 and achaete-scute homologue-1
pathways in the MTC tumor growth and differentiation.

PMID: 16029117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Hum Genet. 2005 Oct;117(6):520-7. Epub 2005 Jul 14.

Genetic association analyses of PHOX2B and ASCL1 in neuropsychiatric disorders:
evidence for association of ASCL1 with Parkinson's disease.

Ide M(1), Yamada K, Toyota T, Iwayama Y, Ishitsuka Y, Minabe Y, Nakamura K,
Hattori N, Asada T, Mizuno Y, Mori N, Yoshikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Psychiatry, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1
Hirosawa, Wako-city, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

We previously identified frequent deletion/insertion polymorphisms in the
20-alanine homopolymer stretch of PHOX2B (PMX2B), the gene for a transcription
factor that plays important roles in the development of oculomotor nerves and
catecholaminergic neurons and regulates the expression of both tyrosine
hydroxylase and dopamine beta-hydroxylase genes. An association was detected
between gene polymorphisms and overall schizophrenia, and more specifically,
schizophrenia with ocular misalignment. These prior results implied the existence
of other schizophrenia susceptibility genes that interact with PHOX2B to increase
risk of the combined phenotype. ASCL1 was considered as a candidate interacting
partner of PHOX2B, as ASCL1 is a transcription factor that co-regulates
catecholamine-synthesizing enzymes with PHOX2B. The genetic contributions of
PHOX2B and ASCL1 were examined separately, along with epistatic interactions with
broader candidate phenotypes. These phenotypes included not only schizophrenia,
but also bipolar affective disorder and Parkinson's disease (PD), each of which
involve catecholaminergic function. The current case-control analyses detected
nominal associations between polyglutamine length variations in ASCL1 and PD
(P=0.018), but supported neither the previously observed weak association between
PHOX2B and general schizophrenia, nor other gene-disease correlations. Logistic
regression analysis revealed the effect of ASCL1 dominant x PHOX2B additive
(P=0.008) as an epistatic gene-gene interaction increasing risk of PD. ASCL1
controls development of the locus coeruleus (LC), and accumulating evidence
suggests that the LC confers protective effects against the dopaminergic
neurodegeneration inherent in PD. The present genetic data may thus suggest that 
polyglutamine length polymorphisms in ASCL1 could influence predispositions to PD
through the fine-tuning of LC integrity.

PMID: 16021468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Jul 26;102(30):10688-93. Epub 2005 Jul 14.

Foxn4 acts synergistically with Mash1 to specify subtype identity of V2
interneurons in the spinal cord.

Li S(1), Misra K, Matise MP, Xiang M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine and Department of Pediatrics,
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, 679 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Neuronal subtype diversification is essential for the establishment of functional
neural circuits, and yet the molecular events underlying neuronal diversity
remain largely to be defined. During spinal neurogenesis, the p2 progenitor
domain, unlike others in the ventral spinal cord, gives rise to two intermingled 
but molecularly distinct subtypes of interneurons, termed V2a and V2b. We show
here that the Foxn4 winged helix/forkhead transcription factor is coexpressed
with the bHLH factor Mash1 in a subset of p2 progenitors. Loss of Foxn4 function 
eliminates Mash1 expression and V2b neurons and causes a fate-switch to V2a
neurons, whereas the absence of Mash1 displays a similar but less severe
phenotype. Overexpression of Foxn4 alone in spinal neural progenitors promotes
the V2a fate at the expense of the V2b fate, whereas Mash1 suppresses both the
V2a and V2b fates. However, coexpression of both Foxn4 and Mash1 promotes the V2b
fate while inhibiting the V2a fate, indicating that Foxn4 cooperates with Mash1
to specify the identity of V2b neurons from bipotential p2 progenitors.

PMCID: PMC1180804
PMID: 16020526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Science. 2005 Jun 24;308(5730):1927-30.

GDF11 controls the timing of progenitor cell competence in developing retina.

Kim J(1), Wu HH, Lander AD, Lyons KM, Matzuk MM, Calof AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of California, Irvine, CA
92697, USA.

The orderly generation of cell types in the developing retina is thought to be
regulated by changes in the competence of multipotent progenitors. Here, we show 
that a secreted factor, growth and differentiation factor 11 (GDF11), controls
the numbers of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), as well as amacrine and
photoreceptor cells, that form during development. GDF11 does not affect
proliferation of progenitors-a major mode of GDF11 action in other tissues-but
instead controls duration of expression of Math5, a gene that confers competence 
for RGC genesis, in progenitor cells. Thus, GDF11 governs the temporal windows
during which multipotent progenitors retain competence to produce distinct neural
progeny.

PMID: 15976303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Neurosci. 2005 Jun 22;25(25):5857-65.

Mash1 and Math3 are required for development of branchiomotor neurons and
maintenance of neural progenitors.

Ohsawa R(1), Ohtsuka T, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are known to play important
roles in neuronal determination and differentiation. However, their exact roles
in neural development still remain to be determined because of the functional
redundancy. Here, we examined the roles of neural bHLH genes Mash1 and Math3 in
the development of trigeminal and facial branchiomotor neurons, which derive from
rhombomeres 2-4. In Math3-null mutant mice, facial branchiomotor neurons are
misspecified, and both trigeminal and facial branchiomotor neurons adopt abnormal
migratory pathways. In Mash1;Math3 double-mutant mice, trigeminal and facial
branchiomotor neurons are severely reduced in number partly because of increased 
apoptosis. In addition, neurons with migratory defects are intermingled over the 
midline from either side of the neural tube. Furthermore, oligodendrocyte
progenitors of rhombomere 4 are reduced in number. In the absence of Mash1 and
Math3, expression of Notch signaling components is severely downregulated in
rhombomere 4 and neural progenitors are not properly maintained, which may lead
to intermingling of neurons and a decrease in oligodendrocyte progenitors. These 
results indicate that Mash1 and Math3 not only promote branchiomotor neuron
development but also regulate the subsequent oligodendrocyte development and the 
cytoarchitecture by maintaining neural progenitors through Notch signaling.

PMID: 15976074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mech Dev. 2005 Jul;122(7-8):900-13.

A BMP-mediated transcriptional cascade involving Cash1 and Tlx-3 specifies
first-order relay sensory neurons in the developing hindbrain.

Hornbruch A(1), Ma G, Ballermann MA, Tumova K, Liu D, Cairine Logan C.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Research Group, Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, 
Institute of Maternal and Child Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Calgary, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, AB, Canada.

The divergent homeobox-containing transcription factor, Tlx-3 (also known as
Hox11L2/Rnx), is required for proper formation of first-order relay sensory
neurons in the developing vertebrate brainstem. To date, however, the inductive
signals and transcriptional regulatory cascade underlying their development are
poorly understood. We previously isolated the chick Tlx-3 homologue and showed it
is expressed early (i.e. beginning at HH15) in distinct subcomponents of both the
trigeminal/solitary and vestibular nuclei. Here we show via in vivo rhombomere
inversions that expression of Tlx-3 is under control of local environmental
signals. Our RNA in situ analysis shows expression of the BMP-specific receptor, 
Bmpr-1b, correlates well with Tlx-3. Furthermore, manipulation of the BMP
signaling pathway in vivo via electroporation of expression vectors encoding
either BMP or NOGGIN coupled with MASH1 gain-of-function experiments demonstrate 
that a BMP-mediated transcriptional cascade involving Cash1 and Tlx-3 specifies
first-order relay sensory neurons in the developing brainstem. Notably,
high-level Noggin misexpression results in an increase in newly differentiated
Tlx-3+ neurons that correlates with a corresponding increase in the number of
Calretinin+ neurons in vestibular nuclei at later developmental stages strongly
suggesting that Tlx-3, in addition to being required for proper formation of
somatic as well as visceral sensory neurons in the trigeminal and solitary
nuclei, respectively, is sufficient for proper formation of special somatic
sensory neurons in vestibular nuclei.

PMID: 15922575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Development. 2005 Jun;132(12):2709-19. Epub 2005 May 18.

Sequential roles for Mash1 and Ngn2 in the generation of dorsal spinal cord
interneurons.

Helms AW(1), Battiste J, Henke RM, Nakada Y, Simplicio N, Guillemot F, Johnson
JE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Basic Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The dorsal spinal cord contains a diverse array of neurons that connect sensory
input from the periphery to spinal cord motoneurons and brain. During
development, six dorsal neuronal populations (dI1-dI6) have been defined by
expression of homeodomain factors and position in the dorsoventral axis. The bHLH
transcription factors Mash1 and Ngn2 have distinct roles in specification of
these neurons. Mash1 is necessary and sufficient for generation of most dI3 and
all dI5 neurons. Unexpectedly, dI4 neurons are derived from cells expressing low 
levels or no Mash1, and this population increases in the Mash1 mutant. Ngn2 is
not required for any specific neuronal cell type but appears to modulate the
composition of neurons that form. In the absence of Ngn2, there is an increase in
the number of dI3 and dI5 neurons, in contrast to the effects produced by
activity of Mash1. Mash1 is epistatic to Ngn2, and, unlike the relationship
between other neural bHLH factors, cross-repression of expression is not
detected. Thus, bHLH factors, particularly Mash1 and related family members Math1
and Ngn1, provide a code for generating neuronal diversity in the dorsal spinal
cord with Ngn2 serving to modulate the number of neurons in each population
formed.

PMCID: PMC1351036
PMID: 15901662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Dev Biol. 2005 Jul 1;283(1):128-39.

Mash1 is required for glomus cell formation in the mouse carotid body.

Kameda Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan. kameda@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

The carotid body consists of chemoreceptive glomus cells, sustentacular cells and
nerve endings. The murine carotid body, located at the carotid bifurcation, is
always joined to the superior cervical ganglion of the sympathetic trunk. Glomus 
cells and sympathetic neurons are immunoreactive for the TuJ1, PGP9.5, tyrosine
hydroxylase (TH) and neuropeptide Y (NPY) markers. Glomus cells are also
immunoreactive for serotonin (5-HT). A targeted mutation of Mash1, a mouse
homolog of the Drosophila achaete-scute complex, results in the elimination of
sympathetic ganglia. In Mash1 null mutant mice, the carotid body primordium forms
normally in the wall of the third arch artery at embryonic day (E) 13.0 and
continues to develop, although the superior cervical ganglion is completely
absent. However, no cells in the mutant carotid body display the TuJ1, PGP 9.5,
TH, NPY and 5-HT markers throughout development. The absence of glomus cells was 
also confirmed by electron microscopy. The carotid body of newborn null mutants
is composed of mesenchymal-like cells and nerve fibers. Many cells immunoreactive
for the S-100 protein, a sustentacular cell marker, appear in the mutant carotid 
body during fetal development. The Mash1 gene is thus required for the genesis of
glomus cells but not for sustentacular cells.

PMID: 15878769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Jul;90(7):4350-6. Epub 2005 May 3.

Regulation of neuroendocrine differentiation in gastrointestinal carcinoid tumor 
cells by notch signaling.

Nakakura EK(1), Sriuranpong VR, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Hsiao EC, Schuebel KE, Borges
MW, Jin N, Collins BJ, Nelkin BD, Chen H, Ball DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, California
94115, USA. NakakuraE@surgery.ucsf.edu

CONTEXT: Gastrointestinal (GI) carcinoid tumors elaborate serotonin and other
vasoactive substances, causing the carcinoid syndrome. Based on developmental
biology data, we hypothesized that basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors, 
including achaete-scute complex homolog-like 1 (Ascl1)/hASH1, and the Notch
signaling pathway might regulate the neuroendocrine phenotype in GI carcinoids.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate expression of developmental
transcription factors and Notch signaling components in GI carcinoids and model
their interaction in a relevant GI carcinoid cell line.
DESIGN: Fourteen GI carcinoid tumor specimens, five paired adjacent normal
tissues, fetal tissues, and tumor cell lines were analyzed by RT-PCR and
immunoblot. BON carcinoid cells were further analyzed after Notch overexpression 
for neuroendocrine marker expression, serotonin production, and growth.
SETTING: The study was conducted in an academic referral center.
PATIENTS OR OTHER PARTICIPANTS: Deidentified archival pathology specimens were
examined.
RESULTS: Among a panel of six developmental transcription factors tested, only
Ascl1 mRNA was overexpressed compared with surrounding normal tissue (seven of 10
GI carcinoid tumors and in BON cells, none of five normal tissues). Ascl1 protein
was also expressed in four of four carcinoid tumors and BON cells). Notch pathway
ligands, receptors, and downstream effectors were widely expressed in tumor and
normal specimens. Overexpression of activated Notch1 in BON cells led to
induction of the Notch effector hairy and enhancer of split 1 (Hes1), loss of
Ascl1, reductions in neuron-specific enolase, synaptophysin, and chromogranin A, 
and most significantly, an 89% decrease in serotonin concentration and equivalent
reductions in serotonin-reactive cells and repression of tryptophan hydroxylase 1
mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: The Notch signaling pathway is a significant regulator of
neuroendocrine differentiation and serotonin production in GI carcinoid tumors.

PMID: 15870121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Neurosci Lett. 2005 May 20-27;380(1-2):17-20. Epub 2005 Jan 21.

Changes in the expression of Hes5 and Mash1 mRNA in the adult rat dentate gyrus
after transient forebrain ischemia.

Kawai T(1), Takagi N, Nakahara M, Takeo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Tokyo University of
Pharmacy and Life Science, 1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0392, Japan.

Accumulating evidence indicates that neurogenesis in the adult brain occurs in
restricted brain regions, including the hippocampal dentate gyrus and is promoted
by ischemia. The mechanism responsible for ischemia-induced neurogenesis in the
adult brain, however, remains unclear. Notch pathway plays a pivotal role in the 
regulation of the timing for differentiation and determination of the fate of
neural progenitor cells in the developing nervous system. To elucidate the
mechanism underlying ischemia-induced neurogenesis, we investigated changes in
the expression of mRNAs of Hes5, which is a downstream target of Notch, and
Mash1, a neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix factor, which is negatively regulated 
by Hes5, in the adult hippocampal dentate gyrus after transient forebrain
ischemia. Transient forebrain ischemia was produced by four-vessel occlusion
procedure in rats. The levels of Hes5 mRNA decreased on days 1 and 3 after the
start of reperfusion and the decreased levels of the mRNA returned to the basal
level by 5 days after ischemia. In contrast, the level of Mash1 mRNA increased on
day 1 and then returned to the basal level by 3 days after ischemia. These
results suggest that an inhibition of Notch activity and subsequent expression of
neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix factors, including Mash1, may, at least in
part, contribute to ischemia-induced neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus.

PMID: 15854743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Chem Senses. 2005 May;30(4):367-75. Epub 2005 Mar 30.

Temporal changes in NCAM immunoreactivity during taste cell differentiation and
cell lineage relationships in taste buds.

Miura H(1), Kato H, Kusakabe Y, Ninomiya Y, Hino A.

Author information: 
(1)National Food Research Institute, 2-1-12 Kannondai, Ibaraki 305-8642, Japan.
hmiura@affrc.go.jp

Neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) is a type III cell marker in the taste buds.
In order to clarify the cell type of Mash1-expressing cells in taste buds,
expression of NCAM was examined in Mash1-expressing taste cells of adult mice in 
comparison with gustducin- and T1r3-expressing cells, using a combination of NCAM
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization. About 98% of Mash1-expressing
cells were NCAM immunopositive (IP), suggesting that Mash1-expressing cells
should be categorized as type III cells. Unexpectedly, small subsets of
gustducin- and T1r3-expressing cells were also found to be NCAM-IP, contradicting
previous immunohistochemical studies in rats, in which gustducin-IP cells were
observed specifically in type II cells, which do not have NCAM immunoreactivity. 
Examinations of developing taste buds showed temporal changes in the ratio of
NCAM-IP cells in gustducin- and T1r3-expressing cells; the ratio of NCAM-IP cells
in these gene-expressing cells were approximately 90% at 0.5 days after birth and
decreased markedly during development. In contrast, the majority of
Mash1-expressing cells showed constant NCAM immunoreactivity throughout
development. In addition, BrdU-labeling experiments showed that the
differentiation of Mash1-expressing cells precedes those of gustducin- and
T1r3-expressing cells in taste buds of adult mice. These results suggest that
T1r3- and gustducin-expressing cells are NCAM-IP at the beginning of cell
differentiation, and that NCAM immunoreactivity in gustducin- and T1r3-expressing
cells might remain from the previous developmental stage expressing Mash1.

PMID: 15800217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Exp Lung Res. 2005 Jan-Feb;31(1):37-55.

Mouse lung neuroendocrine carcinomas: distinct morphologies, same transcription
factors.

Linnoila RI(1), Naizhen X, Meuwissen R, Berns A, DeMayo FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Cancer Biology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland 20850, USA.
ill7@nih.gov

Constitutive expression of human achaete-scute homolog-1 (hASH-1) in combination 
with simian virus large Tantigen under the Clara cell 10-kDa secretory protein
(CC10) promoter results in adenocarcinomas with focal neuroendocrine (NE)
differentiation. Mice carrying conditional alleles for both Rb-1 and p53 in lung 
epithelial cells develop aggressive lung tumors with similarities to human small 
cell lung cancers, including high level expression of ASH-1, NE markers, and
extra-pulmonary metastases. Tumors in both models originate from bronchiolar
epithelium, reveal a range of premalignant changes, express thyroid transcription
factor-1 (TTF-1), a marker of peripheral airway cell lineage, and display varying
degrees of bidirectional epithelial/NE differentiation.

PMID: 15765918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Chem Senses. 2005 Jan;30 Suppl 1:i50-1.

Shh signaling and regulatory gene expression in mouse taste buds.

Miura H(1), Kato H, Kusakabe Y, Tagami M, Miura-Ohnuma J, Ookura T, Shindo Y,
Ninomiya Y, Hino A.

Author information: 
(1)National Food Research Institute, Asahi Breweries Ltd and Kyushu University.
hmiura@affrc.go.jp

PMID: 15738190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Chem Senses. 2005 Jan;30 Suppl 1:i125-6.

Expression of bHLH transcription factors and IGFs in the non-sensory patches,
olfactory epithelium and vomeronasal organ.

Suzuki Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy, School of Dentistry, Health Sciences University of
Hokkaido, Ishikari-Tobetsu 061-0293, Japan. suzuki@hoku-iryo-u.ac.jp

PMID: 15738072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Dev Biol. 2005 Mar 15;279(2):501-8.

The role of Phox2B in chromaffin cell development.

Huber K(1), Karch N, Ernsberger U, Goridis C, Unsicker K.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroanatomy, Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences, University of
Heidelberg, INF 307, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
katrin.huber@ana.uni-heidelberg.de

Phox2B, a homeodomain transcription factor closely related to Phox2A, is
expressed in peripheral and central noradrenergic neurons. In neural crest (NC)
derivatives Phox2B is restricted to sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia,
enteric neurons, and adrenal and extraadrenal chromaffin cells. Similar to
MASH-1, Phox2B has been implicated in synchronizing pan-neuronal and
catecholaminergic phenotype-specific aspects of neurogenesis. The role of Phox2B 
for the differentiation of the neuroendocrine NC derivatives, the adrenal
medullary chromaffin cells, has not been explored. We have previously reported
that in MASH-1-deficient mice most chromaffin cells are arrested at the early
neuroblast stage and lack catecholaminergic differentiation. We show now that in 
Phox2B knockout/lacZ knockin mice the maturation of presumptive chromaffin cells 
is arrested at an even earlier stage of development. The cells lack the
catecholaminergic marker enzyme TH and fail to form a centrally located medulla. 
In contrast to MASH-1 (-/-) mice they do not express dHand, Phox2A, c-ret,
neurofilament, neuron-specific tubulin, and NCAM and appear ultrastructurally
more immature. Many of these cells die by apoptosis. Despite the complete lack of
differentiation, few lacZ-positive adrenal cells can still be found at E16.5. We 
conclude that Phox2B regulates very early events in the differentiation of
adrenal chromaffin cells distinct to steps, which essentially require MASH-1.

PMID: 15733675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Dev Biol. 2005 Mar 15;279(2):308-21.

Precocious retinal neurons: Pax6 controls timing of differentiation and
determination of cell type.

Philips GT(1), Stair CN, Young Lee H, Wroblewski E, Berberoglu MA, Brown NL,
Mastick GS.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, University of Nevada, Biology/200, 1664 N. Virginia
Street, Reno, NV 89557, USA.

The transcription factor Pax6 plays a pivotal role in eye development, as eye
morphogenesis is arrested at a primitive optic vesicle stage in homozygous Pax6
mutant mouse embryos. The arrested optic vesicle development has led to the
assumption that cellular differentiation programs are unable to initiate.
Contrary to this, we found that neurogenesis in Pax6 mutant optic vesicles was
not arrested, but instead accelerated as numerous neurons differentiated
precociously, more than a day earlier than normal. To identify potential
mechanisms for Pax6 repression of neuron differentiation, we examined retinal
proliferation and differentiation. Mutant optic vesicles had reduced
proliferation, coupled with precocious activation of the proneural gene, Mash1.
Ectopic expression of Mash1 was sufficient to induce precocious neuron
differentiation. Subsequently, precocious neurons adopted a generic rather than a
specific retinal neuron fate. Thus, Pax6 regulates the timing of retinal
neurogenesis and couples it with specific neuron differentiation programs.

PMCID: PMC4128400
PMID: 15733660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Development. 2005 Mar;132(6):1327-36. Epub 2005 Feb 16.

A splice variant of the Wilms' tumour suppressor Wt1 is required for normal
development of the olfactory system.

Wagner N(1), Wagner KD, Hammes A, Kirschner KM, Vidal VP, Schedl A, Scholz H.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U636, Centre de Biochimie, Faculté des Sciences, Nice, France.

Neuronal lineage formation in the developing olfactory epithelium has been
extensively studied at the cellular level, but little is known about the genes
that control proliferation and differentiation of neuronal progenitor cells.
Here, we report that the Wilms' tumour zinc-finger protein, Wt1, is required for 
normal formation of the olfactory epithelium. Wt1 was detected by
immunohistochemistry in the developing olfactory epithelium of wild-type embryos 
between gestational days E9.5 and E18.5. Embryos with complete lack of Wt1 and
embryos with selective ablation of the alternatively spliced Wt1(+KTS) isoform
both had thinner olfactory epithelia and fewer neuronal progenitor cells than do 
normal animals. Mash1 and neurogenin 1, two basic helix-loop-helix transcription 
factors with critical functions during olfactory neuron development, were reduced
in the Wt1(+KTS)-/- mutants compared with the wild-type mice. Stable expression
of the Wt1(+KTS) isoform, but not of the Wt1(-KTS) variant, upregulated Mash1
mRNA and protein in vitro. The olfactory epithelia of mouse embryos, which lacked
the Wt1(-KTS) protein, appeared normal. However, formation of the neural retina
was severely impaired in the Wt1(-KTS)-/- mutants. These findings demonstrate
that the Wt1(+KTS) protein, which has been proposed to play a role in mRNA
processing, acts upstream of Mash1 to promote the development of the olfactory
epithelium. Furthermore, neuron formation depends on distinct functions of
alternatively spliced Wt1 products in the embryonic retina and the olfactory
epithelium.

PMID: 15716344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Jan 15;11(2 Pt 1):450-8.

Aberrant expression of human achaete-scute homologue gene 1 in the
gastrointestinal neuroendocrine carcinomas.

Shida T(1), Furuya M, Nikaido T, Kishimoto T, Koda K, Oda K, Nakatani Y, Miyazaki
M, Ishikura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

PURPOSE: Gastrointestinal neuroendocrine carcinoma (NEC) is extremely aggressive,
but its pathophysiologic features remain poorly understood. There have been no
biologically specific markers for this disease. In this study, distinctive
up-regulation of human achaete-scute homologue 1 (hASH1) in gastrointestinal NECs
was clarified.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Expression of hASH1 in NECs (n=10), carcinoid tumors (n =
10), other tumors (10 adenocarcinomas, 2 squamous cell carcinomas and 1 malignant
lymphoma), and the corresponding normal mucosa were investigated by in situ
hybridization, reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR), real-time RT-PCR, and
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: By in situ hybridization, mild to intense signals of hASH1 mRNA were
detected in 9 of 10 NECs, but not in other tumors or normal mucosa, except for
focally weak signals in one carcinoid tumor. RT-PCR showed strong expression of
hASH1 in a small cell NEC, followed by a moderately differentiated NEC, and a
carcinoid tumor, whereas it is undetectable in adenocarcinomas or normal mucosa. 
By real-time RT-PCR, the amounts of hASH1 mRNA in a small cell NEC were 16,600
times higher than those in adenocarcinomas and 110 times higher than those in a
carcinoid tumor. Immunohistochemically, mammalian homologue of hASH1 was positive
in 7 of 10 NECs but was negative in the other tumors. Pan-endocrine markers
chromogranin A and synaptophysin were positive in almost all carcinoid tumors, in
4 and 7 of the 10 NECs, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings revealed that hASH1 is distinctly up-regulated in
gastrointestinal NECs. hASH1 may be used as a more sensitive and specific marker 
than conventional pan-endocrine markers for clinical diagnosis of
gastrointestinal NECs.

PMID: 15701827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Br J Cancer. 2005 Feb 28;92(4):751-9.

Effects of the histone deacetylase inhibitor valproic acid on Notch signalling in
human neuroblastoma cells.

Stockhausen MT(1), Sjölund J, Manetopoulos C, Axelson H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine, Lund
University, University Hospital MAS, S-205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

Neuroblastoma (NB), a sympathetically derived childhood tumour, shows
characteristics of neuronal precursor cells, suggesting a halted differentiation 
process. We have previously shown that the Notch signalling cascade, a key player
during normal neurogenesis, also might be involved in NB differentiation.
Valproic acid (VPA), a well-tolerated antiepileptic drug, has been shown to
induce differentiation and cell death of NB cells, possibly associated with its
recently described HDAC inhibiting activity. Stimulation of NB cells with VPA led
to increased cell death and phenotypic changes associated with differentiation,
that is, neurite extension and upregulation of neuronal markers. VPA treatment
also led to an activated Notch signalling cascade as shown by increased levels of
intracellular Notch-1 and Hes-1, mimicking the initial phase of induced
differentiation. These results reinforce that VPA potentially could be used in
differentiation therapy of NB and that the effects in part could be a consequence
of interference with the Notch signalling cascade.

PMCID: PMC2361888
PMID: 15685243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Development. 2005 Feb;132(3):565-78. Epub 2005 Jan 5.

CNTF/LIF/gp130 receptor complex signaling maintains a VZ precursor
differentiation gradient in the developing ventral forebrain.

Gregg C(1), Weiss S.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Research Group, Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of
Calgary Faculty of Medicine, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1,
Canada.

The extrinsic signaling pathways responsible for the formation and maintenance of
the unique laminar organization of the forebrain germinal zones are largely
unknown. In the present study, we asked whether ciliary neurotrophic factor
(CNTF)/leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF)/gp130 signaling plays a role in the
development of the germinal layers in the lateral ganglionic eminence. We found
that CNTF/LIF/gp130 receptor signaling promotes the self-renewal/expansion of a
subpopulation of fibroblast growth factor-responsive ventricular zone (VZ)
precursors in the ventral forebrain. Analysis of Lifr-/- mice suggests that
CNTF/LIF/gp130 signaling maintains a subpopulation of GSH2+ VZ precursors, which 
are necessary for normal growth of the early ventral forebrain and for
maintaining a gradient of VZ precursor differentiation in the lateral ganglionic 
eminence, as defined by GSH2, MASH1 and DLX2 expression. Furthermore, addition of
exogenous CNTF to embryonic forebrain explant cultures deprived of choroid
plexus-derived CNTF, was sufficient to promote a VZ differentiation gradient. In 
contrast to the forebrain, CNTF/LIF/gp130 signaling reduced, rather than
enhanced, precursor self-renewal/expansion in the spinal cord. These results
demonstrate a novel region-specific role for CNTF/LIF/gp130 signaling in the
development of the germinal layers of the embryonic telencephalon.

PMID: 15634701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Neuron. 2005 Jan 6;45(1):41-53.

Generation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells from mouse dorsal spinal cord
independent of Nkx6 regulation and Shh signaling.

Cai J(1), Qi Y, Hu X, Tan M, Liu Z, Zhang J, Li Q, Sander M, Qiu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, School of Medicine,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2005 Jan 6;45(1):1-3.

In the developing spinal cord, early progenitor cells of the oligodendrocyte
lineage are induced in the motor neuron progenitor (pMN) domain of the ventral
neuroepithelium by the ventral midline signal Sonic hedgehog (Shh). The ventral
generation of oligodendrocytes requires Nkx6-regulated expression of the bHLH
gene Olig2 in this domain. In the absence of Nkx6 genes or Shh signaling, the
initial expression of Olig2 in the pMN domain is completely abolished. In this
study, we provide the in vivo evidence for a late phase of Olig gene expression
independent of Nkx6 and Shh gene activities and reveal a brief second wave of
oligodendrogenesis in the dorsal spinal cord. In addition, we provide genetic
evidence that oligodendrogenesis can occur in the absence of hedgehog receptor
Smoothened, which is essential for all hedgehog signaling.

PMID: 15629701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2005 Apr;288(4):L672-82. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

Overexpression of lunatic fringe does not affect epithelial cell differentiation 
in the developing mouse lung.

van Tuyl M(1), Groenman F, Kuliszewski M, Ridsdale R, Wang J, Tibboel D, Post M.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Biology Research Program, Hospital for Sick Children Research Inst., 555 
Univ. Ave., Toronto, Ontario M5G1X8, Canada.

The Notch/Notch-ligand pathway regulates cell fate decisions and patterning in
various tissues. Several of its components are expressed in the developing lung, 
suggesting that this pathway is important for airway cellular patterning. Fringe 
proteins, which modulate Notch signaling, are crucial for defining morphogenic
borders in several organs. Their role in controlling cellular differentiation
along anterior-posterior axis of the airways is unknown. Herein, we report the
temporal-spatial expression patterns of Lunatic fringe (Lfng) and Notch-regulated
basic helix-loop-helix factors, Hes1 and Mash-1, during murine lung development. 
Lfng was only expressed during early development in epithelial cells lining the
larger airways. Those epithelial cells also expressed Hes1, but at later
gestation Hes1 expression was confined to epithelium lining the terminal
bronchioles. Mash-1 displayed a very characteristic expression pattern. It
followed neural crest migration in the early lung, whereas at later stages Mash-1
was expressed in lung neuroendocrine cells. To clarify whether Lfng influences
airway cell differentiation, Lfng was overexpressed in distal epithelial cells of
the developing mouse lung. Overexpression of Lfng did not affect spatial or
temporal expression of Hes1 and Mash-1. Neuroendocrine CGRP and protein gene
product 9.5 expression was not altered by Lfng overexpression. Expression of
proximal ciliated (beta-tubulin IV), nonciliated (CCSP), and distal epithelial
cell (SP-C, T1alpha) markers also was not influenced by Lfng excess.
Overexpression of Lfng had no effect on mesenchymal cell marker (alpha-sma, vWF, 
PECAM-1) expression. Collectively, the data suggest that Lunatic fringe does not 
play a significant role in determining cell fate in fetal airway epithelium.

PMID: 15591414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. EMBO J. 2004 Nov 10;23(22):4495-505. Epub 2004 Oct 21.

Mash1 specifies neurons and oligodendrocytes in the postnatal brain.

Parras CM(1), Galli R, Britz O, Soares S, Galichet C, Battiste J, Johnson JE,
Nakafuku M, Vescovi A, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Illkirch,
France.

Progenitors in the telencephalic subventricular zone (SVZ) remain mitotically
active throughout life, and produce different cell types at embryonic, postnatal 
and adult stages. Here we show that Mash1, an important proneural gene in the
embryonic telencephalon, is broadly expressed in the postnatal SVZ, in
progenitors for both neuronal and oligodendrocyte lineages. Moreover, Mash1 is
required at birth for the generation of a large fraction of neuronal and
oligodendrocyte precursors from the olfactory bulb. Clonal analysis in culture
and transplantation experiments in postnatal brain demonstrate that this
phenotype reflects a cell-autonomous function of Mash1 in specification of these 
two lineages. The conservation of Mash1 function in the postnatal SVZ suggests
that the same transcription mechanisms operate throughout life to specify cell
fates in this structure, and that the profound changes in the cell types produced
reflect changes in the signalling environment of the SVZ.

PMCID: PMC526464
PMID: 15496983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1213-21.

Ubiquilin-1 is a novel HASH-1-complexing protein that regulates levels of
neuronal bHLH transcription factors in human neuroblastoma cells.

Persson P(1), Stockhausen MT, Påhlman S, Axelson H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine, Lund
University, University Hospital MAS, S-205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor mammalian achaete-scute
homologue-1 (MASH-1 in mouse and HASH-1 in humans) is expressed in specific
subsets of embryonic neuronal precursors of both the peripheral and central
nervous systems. This gene is essential for development of olfactory and most
peripheral autonomic neurons. Neuro-blastoma is a pediatric malignancy derived
from sympathetic nervous system precursors and HASH-1 is expressed in a majority 
of neuroblastoma tumors and cell lines, indicating the immature phenotype of
these cells. Using a human neuroblastoma cDNA library and the yeast two-hybrid
system to identify novel HASH-1-interacting proteins, we isolated ubiquilin-1
(DA41, hPLIC-1), a gene that contains multiple ubiquitin-related domains. Further
analyses showed that ubiquilin-1 interacts not only with HASH-1, but also with
other tissue-specific bHLH proteins, including HES-1. Overexpression of
ubiquilin-1 led to accumulation of HASH-1 and HES-1. Moreover, ubiquilin-1 was
translocated from the cytoplasm to the nucleus upon co-expression with HASH-1.
These results indicate that ubiquilin-1 plays an active role in the precise
regulation of HASH-1 and of other tissue-specific bHLH proteins.

PMID: 15492808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Neurobiol. 2005 Feb 5;62(2):243-61.

Differential properties of dentate gyrus and CA1 neural precursors.

Becq H(1), Jorquera I, Ben-Ari Y, Weiss S, Represa A.

Author information: 
(1)INMED/INSERM U29, Marseille, France.

In the present article we investigated the properties of CA1 and dentate gyrus
cell precursors in adult rodents both in vivo and in vitro. Cell proliferation in
situ was investigated by rating the number of cells incorporating BrdU after
kainate-induced seizures. CA1 precursors displayed a greater proliferation
capacity than dentate gyrus precursors. The majority of BrdU-labeled cells in CA1
expressed Nestin and Mash-1, two markers of neural precursors. BrdU-positive
cells in the dentate gyrus expressed Nestin, but only a few expressed Mash-1. In 
animals pretreated with the antimitotic azacytidine, the capacity of kainate to
enhance the proliferation was higher in CA1 than in the dentate gyrus.
Differences in intrinsic progenitor cell activity could underlie these different 
expansion capacities. Thus, we compared the renewal- expansion and multipotency
of dentate gyrus and CA1 precursors isolated in vitro. We found that the
dissected CA1 region, including the periventricular zone, is enriched in
neurosphere-forming cells (presumed stem cells), which respond to either EGF or
FGF-2. Dentate gyrus contains fewer neurosphere-forming cells and none that
respond to FGF-2 alone. Neurospheres generated from CA1 were multipotent and
produced neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes, while dentate gyrus
neurospheres mostly produced glial cells. The analysis of the effects of EGF on
organotypic cultures of hippocampal slices depicted similar features: BrdU and
Nestin immunoreactivities increased after EGF treatment in CA1 but not in the
dentate gyrus. These results suggest that CA1 precursors are more stem-cell-like 
than granule cell precursors, which may represent a more restricted precursor
cell.

2004 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 15459894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2005 Jan;44(1):77-84.

Neuroblastoma-specific cytotoxicity mediated by the Mash1-promoter and E. coli
purine nucleoside phosphorylase.

Arvidsson Y(1), Sumantran V, Watt F, Uramoto H, Funa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Göteborg
University, Gothenburg, Sweden. yvonne.arvidsson@llcr.med.gu.se

BACKGROUND: Neuroblastoma is derived from cells of neural crest origin and often 
expresses the transcription factor human achaete-scute homolog 1 (HASH1). The aim
of this study was to selectively kill neuroblastoma cells by expressing the
suicide gene E. coli purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) under the control of
the Mash1 promoter, the murine homolog of HASH1.
PROCEDURE: The E. coli PNP gene regulated by the Mash1 promoter was cloned into
an expression vector and transfected into neuroblastoma and non-neuroblastoma
cell lines. After addition of the prodrug M2-fluoroadenine
9-beta-D-arabinofuranoside (F-araA) the cell-specific toxicity was examined. To
optimize the cell specific activity, different sizes of the Mash1 promoter were
analyzed in neuroblastoma cell lines and compared with the activity in
non-neuroblastoma cells.
RESULTS: Estimated as the percentages of CMV enhancer-promoter, the activity was 
significantly higher in the neuroblastoma cells, ranging from 17 to 58% when the 
shortest and the most active promoter was measured. The non-neuroblastoma cells
yielded only 1-6% of the CMV promoter activity. When the shortest Mash1 promoter 
was combined with the E. coli PNP gene the cytotoxicity was 65% in the
neuroblastoma cells with low cell death in the non-neuroblastoma cell lines,
relative to the cytotoxicity where the E.coli PNP gene was regulated by the
strong but non-specific CMV enhancer-promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: We show here that the Mash1 promoter regulating the PNP gene confers
a cell-type selective toxicity in neuroblastoma cell lines. These results
indicate the feasibility to use the Mash1 promoter for regulating E.coli PNP
expression in gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy (GDEPT) of neuroblastoma.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15390277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Exp Neurol. 2004 Oct;189(2):280-92.

Transplantation of motoneurons derived from MASH1-transfected mouse ES cells
reconstitutes neural networks and improves motor function in hemiplegic mice.

Ikeda R(1), Kurokawa MS, Chiba S, Yoshikawa H, Hashimoto T, Tadokoro M, Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Medicine, St. Marianna University School of
Medicine, 2-16-1, Sugao, Miyamae, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 216-8511, Japan.

Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells were transfected with a MASH1 expression vector
and G418-resistant cells were selected. The MASH1-transfected cells became
neuron-like appearance and expressed betaIIItubulin and panNCAM. Glial fibrillary
acidic protein (GFAP) and galactocerebroside (GalC)-expressing cells were rarely 
detected. Half of the neural cells differentiated into the Islet1+ motoneuron
lineage. Thus, we obtained motoneuron lineage-enriched neuronal cells by
transfection of ES cells with MASH1. A hemiplegic model of mice was developed by 
cryogenic injury of the motor cortex, and motoneuron lineage-enriched neuronal
cells were transplanted underneath the injured motor cortex neighboring the
periventricular region. The motor function of the recipients was assessed by a
beam walking and rotarod tests, whereby the results gradually improved, but
little improvement was observed in vehicle injected control mice. We found that
the grafted cells not only remained close to the implantation site, but also
exhibited substantial migration, penetrating into the damaged lesion in a
directed manner up to the cortical region. Grafted neuronal cells that had
migrated into the cortex were elongated axon-positive for neurofilament middle
chain (NFM). Synaptophysin immunostaining showed a positive staining pattern
around the graft, suggesting that the transplanted neurons interacted with the
recipient neurons to form a neural network. Our study suggests that the
motoneuron lineage can be induced from ES cells, and grafted cells adapt to the
host environment and can reconstitute a neural network to improve motor function 
of a paralyzed limb.

PMID: 15380479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Dev Dyn. 2004 Nov;231(3):609-13.

Xenopus paraxis homologue shows novel domains of expression.

Carpio R(1), Honoré SM, Araya C, Mayor R.

Author information: 
(1)Millennium Nucleus in Developmental Biology, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad
de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

The paraxis gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that is
expressed in paraxial mesoderm and whose mutant displays an inability to form
epithelial somites. Here, the molecular characterization of Xenopus paraxis is
reported. paraxis is expressed in the paraxial mesoderm and somites but is
down-regulated during muscle differentiation. In addition to its paraxial
mesodermal expression, described in other organisms, two novel expression domains
of paraxis were found: the neural tube and the head mesoderm. paraxis expression 
in the neural tube was compared with the expression of the neural markers Xash
and Xiro1, and we concluded that paraxis is expressed in a broad band in the
prospective sulcus limitans of the neural tube.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15376281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Neurochem. 2004 Sep;90(6):1339-47.

Erk1/2 but not PI3K pathway is required for neurotrophin 3-induced
oligodendrocyte differentiation of post-natal neural stem cells.

Hu X(1), Jin L, Feng L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shanghai, China.

Neurotrophin 3 (NT3) induces mouse cortical stem cells to an asymmetric division 
from a symmetric division, suggesting that NT3 may work as an early
differentiative signal for neural stem cells (NSCs). Here, using cultured
post-natal hippocampal stem cells as a model, we demonstrated that
NT3-stimulation causes NSCs to differentiate into oligodendrocyte precursors
(OLPs) through an extracellular signal-related kinase1/2 (Erk1/2)-dependent
pathway. Following the treatment of NT3 for 24 h, NSCs differentiated into more
OLPs and fewer neurons, whereas the proliferation and survival of OLPs were not
affected. NT3 induced a series of intracellular responses including enhancement
of phosphorylation of Erk1/2 or Akt and increase of expression of oligodendrocyte
lineage gene (Olig)-1, a transcriptional factor known to participate in
oligodendrocyte development. Application of U0126, a specific inhibitor of MEK1/2
which are upstream to Erk1/2, blocked the phosphorylation of Erk1/2, suppressed
the expression of Olig-1 and prevented NSC differentiation into OLPs in response 
to NT3 stimulation. Blockade of TrkC also inhibited the differentiation of NSCs
to OLPs induced by NT3. However, administration of LY294002, an inhibitor of
phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K), blocked the phosphorylation of Akt but did 
not affect the effect of NT3 on the expression of Olig-1 and on NSC
differentiation into OLPs. Taken together, these results suggest that NT3 induce 
NSCs to differentiate into OLPs by enhancing the expression of Olig-1 through an 
Erk1/2-dependent pathway.

PMID: 15341518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. EMBO J. 2004 Sep 1;23(17):3527-37. Epub 2004 Aug 19.

BMP-2 decreases Mash1 stability by increasing Id1 expression.

Viñals F(1), Reiriz J, Ambrosio S, Bartrons R, Rosa JL, Ventura F.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques II, Campus de Bellvitge, Universitat de 
Barcelona, Feixa Llarga s/n, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.

In neural development, bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) restrict neuronal
differentiation, thereby promoting the maintenance of progenitor cells or even
inducing astrocytogenesis. We report that exposure of neuroendocrine lung
carcinoma cells to BMP-2 leads to a rapid decline in steady-state levels of Mash1
protein and some neuron-specific markers. BMP-2 induces a post-transcriptional
decrease in Mash1 levels through enhanced degradation. We demonstrate that Mash1 
protein stability is tightly regulated by the E47/Id1 expression ratio. Transient
induction of Id1 by BMP-2 negatively correlates with Mash1 levels. Furthermore,
an ectopic increase in Id1 levels is sufficient to induce degradation of either
ectopic or endogenous Mash1, whereas expression of Mash1 in Id1-deficient cells
or overexpression of E47 makes Mash1 levels refractory to the addition of BMP-2. 
Furthermore, we show that the E47/Id1 expression ratio also regulates
CK2-mediated phosphorylation of Mash1 on Ser152, which increases interaction of
Mash1-E47 heterodimers. We propose a novel mechanism in which the balance between
Id and E protein levels regulates not only the transcriptional function but also 
protein stability of the neurogenic bHLH transcription factor Mash1.

PMCID: PMC516632
PMID: 15318167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Am J Clin Pathol. 2004 Jul;122(1):100-5.

Human achaete-scute homologue (hASH1) mRNA level as a diagnostic marker to
distinguish esthesioneuroblastoma from poorly differentiated tumors arising in
the sinonasal tract.

Mhawech P(1), Berczy M, Assaly M, Herrmann F, Bouzourene H, Allal AS, Dulguerov
P, Schwaller J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Geneva University Hospital, Switzerland.

Distinction of high-grade esthesioneuroblastomas from other poorly differentiated
tumors arising in the nasal cavity is an important diagnostic challenge because
it determines patient management and prognosis. The human achaete-scute homologue
(hASH1) gene is critical in olfactory neuronal differentiation and is expressed
in immature olfactory cells; therefore, it could have potential use as a
diagnostic marker The aim of the present study was to determine the value of
hASH1 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels in differentiating esthesioneuroblastoma from
other poorly differentiated tumors. A real-time polymerase chain reaction assay
was developed, permitting the comparative determination of hASH1 mRNA levels in
triplicate in a double-blind pilot study including 24 frozen cases of
esthesioneuroblastoma and poorly differentiated tumors. All 4 positive cases were
esthesioneuroblastomas, and all 19 poorly differentiated tumors were negative. In
addition, there was an inverse association between the grade of
esthesioneuroblastomas and hASH1 mRNA levels. The hASH1 mRNA level might
represent a useful tool for distinguishing esthesioneuroblastoma from poorly
differentiated tumors of the sinonasal region.

PMID: 15272537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Sep;4(5):601-7.

Characterization of Xenopus Phox2a and Phox2b defines expression domains within
the embryonic nervous system and early heart field.

Talikka M(1), Stefani G, Brivanlou AH, Zimmerman K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, The Rockefeller University, 1230
York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The closely related homeodomain containing genes, Phox2a and Phox2b, are
essential for neuronal specification and differentiation within discrete subsets 
of neurons during vertebrate embryogenesis. We have isolated Xenopus Phox2
homologs, termed Xphox2a and Xphox2b, and characterized their expression during
early development. In addition, we have characterized a Phox2a splice variant,
termed Xphox2a.2, which lacks homeo- and C-terminal protein coding domains.
Xphox2a, Xphox2a.2 and Xphox2b transcripts are expressed in dynamic temporal and 
regional patterns during nervous system development. The expression of Xphox2a
and Xphox2b is only partially overlapping and includes cranial motor and
interneuron populations as well as peripheral sympathetic and cranial ganglion
neurons, sites linked to Phox2 expression in other species. In addition, we have 
identified an early domain of Xphox2a and subsequent Xphox2b expression in
ventral regions of the embryo, within the developing heart field. XPhox2
expression within this domain is preceded by the gastrula-stage expression of the
proneural basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, Xash1, pointing to a new
region of action for this group transcription factors during vertebrate
development.

PMID: 15261839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Neurosci. 2004 Jun 23;24(25):5694-703.

Control of roof plate development and signaling by Lmx1b in the caudal vertebrate
CNS.

Chizhikov VV(1), Millen KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, 
USA.

Numerous studies have identified the roof plate as an important signaling center 
controlling dorsal interneuron specification and differentiation in the
developing spinal cord. Currently, the molecular pathways of roof plate formation
and function are poorly understood. We determined that the LIM-homeodomain
transcription factor Lmx1b is sufficient to induce functional roof plate in the
early chick developing spinal cord. In the chick, Lmx1b acts upstream of Lmx1a in
the roof plate developmental program. Once the roof plate forms, we show that Bmp
and Wnt signaling are the major components of Lmx1a/b-dependent roof plate dorsal
patterning activity. The roof plate function of Lmx1b is not conserved across
vertebrates because Lmx1b is not expressed in mouse roof plate progenitors.
Instead, mouse caudal CNS roof plate formation relies entirely on Lmx1a. Lmx1b
can, however, partially rescue roof plate development in dreher (Lmx1a-/-) mice, 
indicating that Lmx1b has some functional redundancy to Lmx1a. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that the roof plate-inducing activity of Lmx1b can be suppressed by
Mash1 (Cash1), which is normally expressed in intermediate neural tube in both
chick and mouse. Our data identify Lmx1b as a key regulator of spinal cord roof
plate induction and function.

PMID: 15215291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Seikagaku. 2004 May;76(5):453-6.

[Recent advances in neuroblastoma research].

[Article in Japanese]

Imaizumi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Miyagi Children's Hospital, 4-3-17
Ochiai, Aoba-ku, Sendai 989-3126, Japan.

PMID: 15212235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Neurochem. 2004 Jul;90(1):142-54.

Mapping spatio-temporal activation of Notch signaling during neurogenesis and
gliogenesis in the developing mouse brain.

Tokunaga A(1), Kohyama J, Yoshida T, Nakao K, Sawamoto K, Okano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Notch1 plays various important roles including the maintenance of the stem cell
state as well as the promotion of glial fates in mammalian CNS development.
However, because of the very low amount of the activated form of Notch1 present
in vivo, its precise activation pattern has remained unknown. In this study, we
mapped the active state of this signaling pathway in situ in the developing mouse
brain using a specific antibody that recognizes the processed form of the
intracellular domain of Notch1 cleaved by presenilin/gamma-secretase activity. By
using this antibody, active state of Notch1 came to be detectable with a higher
sensitivity than using conventional antibody against Notch1. We found that
activated Notch1 was mainly detected in the nuclei of a subpopulation of radial
glial cells, the majority of proliferating precursor cells in the ventricular
zone (VZ). However, Notch1 activation was not detected in neuronal precursor
cells positive for neuronal basic helix-loop-helix proteins or in differentiating
neurons in the embryonic forebrain. Interestingly, we found that Notch1 was
transiently activated in the astrocytic lineage during perinatal CNS development.
Taken together, the present method has enabled us to determine the timing,
gradients, and boundaries of the activation of Notch signaling.

PMID: 15198674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Cell Biol. 2004 May 24;165(4):575-89.

NG2-expressing cells in the subventricular zone are type C-like cells and
contribute to interneuron generation in the postnatal hippocampus.

Aguirre AA(1), Chittajallu R, Belachew S, Gallo V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's Research Institute, Rm. 5345,
Children's National Medical Center, 111 Michigan Ave., N.W., Washington, DC
20010, USA.

The subventricular zone (SVZ) is a source of neural progenitors throughout brain 
development. The identification and purification of these progenitors and the
analysis of their lineage potential are fundamental issues for future brain
repair therapies. We demonstrate that early postnatal NG2-expressing (NG2+)
progenitor cells located in the SVZ self-renew in vitro and display phenotypic
features of transit-amplifier type C-like multipotent cells. NG2+ cells in the
SVZ are highly proliferative and express the epidermal growth factor receptor,
the transcription factors Dlx, Mash1, and Olig2, and the Lewis X (LeX) antigen.
We show that grafted early postnatal NG2+ cells generate hippocampal GABAergic
interneurons that propagate action potentials and receive functional
glutamatergic synaptic inputs. Our work identifies
Dlx+/Mash1+/LeX+/NG2+/GFAP-negative cells of the SVZ as a new class of postnatal 
multipotent progenitor cells that may represent a specific cellular reservoir for
renewal of postnatal and adult inhibitory interneurons in the hippocampus.

PMCID: PMC2172347
PMID: 15159421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Nat Neurosci. 2004 Jun;7(6):589-95. Epub 2004 May 9.

Ascl1/Mash1 is required for the development of central serotonergic neurons.

Pattyn A(1), Simplicio N, van Doorninck JH, Goridis C, Guillemot F, Brunet JF.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8542, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75005 Paris, France.

The transcriptional control of the differentiation of central serotonergic (5-HT)
neurons in vertebrates has recently come under scrutiny and has been shown to
involve the homeobox genes Nkx2-2 and Lmx1b, the Ets-domain gene Pet1 (also known
as Fev) and the zinc-finger gene Gata3. The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) gene
Ascl1 (also known as Mash1) is coexpressed with Nkx2-2 in the neuroepithelial
domain of the hindbrain, which gives rise to 5-HT neurons. Here we show in the
mouse that Ascl1 is essential for the birth of 5-HT neurons, both as a proneural 
gene for the production of postmitotic neuronal precursors and as a determinant
of the serotonergic phenotype for the parallel activation of Gata3, Lmx1b and
Pet1. Thus Ascl1, which is essential for noradrenergic differentiation, is also a
determinant of the serotonergic phenotype.

PMID: 15133515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nat Neurosci. 2004 May;7(5):421-2.

Tlx genes make an exciting choice.

Anderson S.

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2004 May;7(5):510-7.

PMID: 15114349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 2;279(27):28492-8. Epub 2004 Apr 22.

Requirement of multiple basic helix-loop-helix genes for retinal neuronal subtype
specification.

Akagi T(1), Inoue T, Miyoshi G, Bessho Y, Takahashi M, Lee JE, Guillemot F,
Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Retinal precursor cells give rise to six types of neurons and one type of glial
cell during development, and this process is controlled by multiple basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) genes. However, the precise mechanism for specification
of retinal neuronal subtypes, particularly horizontal neurons and photoreceptors,
remains to be determined. Here, we examined retinas with three different
combinations of triple bHLH gene mutations. In retinas lacking the bHLH genes
Ngn2, Math3, and NeuroD, horizontal neurons as well as other neurons such as
bipolar cells were severely decreased in number. In the retina lacking the bHLH
genes Mash1, Ngn2, and Math3, horizontal and other neurons were severely
decreased, whereas ganglion cells were increased. In the retina lacking the bHLH 
genes Mash1, Math3, and NeuroD, photoreceptors were severely decreased, whereas
ganglion cells were increased. In all cases, glial cells were increased. The
increase and decrease of these cells were the result of cell fate changes and
cell death and seem to be partly attributable to the remaining bHLH gene
expression, which also changes because of triple bHLH gene mutations. These
results indicate that multiple bHLH genes cross-regulate each other,
cooperatively specify neuronal subtypes, and regulate neuronal survival in the
developing retina.

PMID: 15105417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Neurosci. 2004 Apr 7;24(14):3672-82.

Identification of a novel basic helix-loop-helix gene, Heslike, and its role in
GABAergic neurogenesis.

Miyoshi G(1), Bessho Y, Yamada S, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Neuronal subtype specification depends on multiple transcription factors such as 
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors. However, transcription factor codes for
most neurons remain to be determined. Here, we report identification of a novel
mouse bHLH factor, termed Heslike, that has Hes1-like bHLH domain and
transcriptional repressor activity. Heslike is coexpressed with the bHLH factor
Mash1 in brain regions that give rise to GABAergic neurons. In the mesencephalon 
and the caudal diencephalon, coexpression of Heslike and Mash1 is initially
restricted to small regions but expanded dorsally from embryonic day 9.5 onward, 
and this expansion of coexpression is followed by GABAergic neurogenesis.
Misexpression of Heslike in mouse embryos generates ectopic GABAergic neurons
only from the Mash1(+) region. In contrast, in the mesencephalon and the caudal
diencephalon of Mash1-null mice, GABAergic neurons are almost completely missing 
and, instead, other neurons are generated, although Heslike is still expressed.
Furthermore, coexpression of Heslike and Mash1 significantly promotes formation
of GABAergic neurons, compared with each gene alone, in neural precursor cell
culture. Thus, Heslike or Mash1 alone is not sufficient, but their coexpression
may be important for generation of GABAergic neurons. These results suggest that 
combinations of distinct bHLH factors promote formation of distinct neuronal
subtypes, thereby increasing neuronal diversity.

PMID: 15071116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Comp Neurol. 2004 May 3;472(3):292-307.

Loss of Gli3 and Shh function disrupts olfactory axon trajectories.

Balmer CW(1), LaMantia AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell & Molecular Physiology, Curriculum in Neurobiology and
University of North Carolina Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

The transcriptional regulator Gli3 and the secreted signal Shh influence
induction, patterning, and differentiation at several sites of
mesenchymal/epithelial (M/E) interaction including the limbs, heart, face, and
forebrain. We asked whether loss of function of these two genes has specific
consequences for early differentiation of the primary olfactory pathway-which
comprises both craniofacial and forebrain structures and depends on M/E induction
during initial stages of development. Loss of Gli3 or Shh function does not
compromise several aspects of olfactory receptor neuron (ORN) and olfactory
ensheathing cell maturation; however, directed outgrowth of ORN axons and their
initial targeting to the telencephalon is altered. In Gli3 mutant extra
toes-Jackson (Xt(J)Xt(J)) embryos, ORN axons defasciculate and project aberrantly
near the forebrain. They rarely enter the central nervous system, and their
association with mesenchymal laminin is disrupted. In Shh-/-embryos, ORN axons
exit a single olfactory epithelium (OE) that develops centrally within an altered
mesenchymal environment in a dysmorphic proboscis. These axons project as a
single nerve toward the mutant forebrain; however, their trajectory varies
according to the position of the proboscis relative to the forebrain. These
alterations in axon outgrowth probably reflect compromised inductive interactions
in the olfactory primordia because neither Gli3 nor Shh are expressed in
olfactory neurons. Thus, two genes that influence induction and subsequent
differentiation of craniofacial structures and the forebrain have distinct
consequences for ORN axon growth during the initial genesis of the olfactory
pathway.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15065125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Apr 13;101(15):5559-64. Epub 2004 Apr 1.

RNA interference of achaete-scute homolog 1 in mouse prostate neuroendocrine
cells reveals its gene targets and DNA binding sites.

Hu Y(1), Wang T, Stormo GD, Gordon JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

We have previously characterized a transgenic mouse model (CR2-TAg) of metastatic
prostate cancer arising in the neuroendocrine (NE) cell lineage. Biomarkers of NE
differentiation in this model are expressed in conventional adenocarcinoma of the
prostate with NE features. To further characterize the pathways that control NE
proliferation, differentiation, and survival, we established prostate NE cancer
(PNEC) cell lines from CR2-TAg prostate tumors and metastases. GeneChip analyses 
of cell lines harvested at different passages, and as xenografted tumors,
indicated that PNECs express consistent features ex vivo and in vivo and share a 
remarkable degree of similarity with primary CR2-TAg prostate NE tumors. PNECs
express mAsh1, a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor essential for
NE cell differentiation in other tissues. RNA interference knockdown of mAsh1,
GeneChip comparisons of treated and control cell populations, and a computational
analysis of down-regulated genes identified 12 transcriptional motifs enriched in
the gene set. Affected genes, including Adcy9, Hes6, Iapp1, Ndrg4, c-Myb, and
Mesdc2, are enriched for a palindromic E-box motif, CAGCTG, indicating that it is
a physiologically relevant mAsh1 binding site. The enrichment of a c-Myb binding 
site and the finding that c-Myb is down-regulated by mAsh1 RNA interference
suggest that mAsh1 and c-Myb are in the same signaling pathway. Our data indicate
that mAsh1 negatively regulates the cell cycle (e.g., via enhanced Cdkn2d, Bub1
expression), promotes differentiation (e.g., through effects on cAMP), and
enhances survival by inhibiting apoptosis. PNEC cell lines should be generally
useful for genetic and/or pharmacologic studies of the regulation of NE cell
proliferation, differentiation, and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC397422
PMID: 15060276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2004 Feb;15(1):83-9.

Retinal cell fate determination and bHLH factors.

Hatakeyama J(1), Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Retinal development is controlled antagonistically by multiple basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcriptional activators and repressors. bHLH
repressors suppress bHLH activators and promote maintenance of progenitors and
generation of glial cells. In contrast, bHLH activators override activities of
bHLH repressors and promote neuronal differentiation. However, bHLH activators
alone are not sufficient but homeodomain factors are additionally required for
neuronal subtype specification. It is likely that homeodomain factors regulate
the layer specificity but not the neuronal fate while bHLH activators determine
the neuronal fate within the homedomain factor-specified layers. Thus,
combinations of proper bHLH and homeodomain factors are required for neuronal
subtype specification.

PMID: 15036211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cancer Lett. 2004 Feb 20;204(2):171-8.

The Notch signaling cascade in neuroblastoma: role of the basic helix-loop-helix 
proteins HASH-1 and HES-1.

Axelson H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, University Hospital MAS,
Entrance 78, Malmö S-205 02, Sweden. hakan.axelson@molmed.mas.lu.se

Neuroblastoma is a childhood tumor originating from cells of the developing
sympathetic nervous system. The disease exhibits a remarkable phenotypic
diversity reflected in the outcome, ranging from spontaneous regression to fatal 
disease. Mammalian achaete-scute homologue 1 (MASH-1 or HASH-1 in humans), a
basic helix-loop-helix transcription (bHLH) factor, is transiently expressed in
migrating sympatho-adrenal precursor cells. This gene, which is essential for
proper development of the sympathetic nervous system, is expressed in a majority 
of primary neuroblastomas and neuroblastoma cell lines indicating an embryonal
origin of the tumor. One important negative regulator of MASH-1 expression is the
bHLH factor hairy and Enhancer of split homolog-1 (HES-1), which in turn is under
positive control of the Notch signaling cascade. When neuroblastoma cells are
induced to differentiate, as indicated by neuronal morphology and upregulation of
neuronal marker genes, the HASH-1 expression is rapidly downregulated with a
concomitant, transient upregulation of HES-1. Furthermore, a constitutively
active form of Notch-1 inhibits induced differentiation of neuroblastoma cells.
In this review, the role of the Notch-signaling cascade in neuroblastoma, with
focus on the bHLH factors HASH-1 and HES-1, will be discussed.

PMID: 15013216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cancer Lett. 2004 Feb 20;204(2):159-69.

Achaete-scute homolog-1 and Notch in lung neuroendocrine development and cancer.

Ball DW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Bunting-Blaustein Cancer Research Building, John's Hopkins Medical Institutions, 
Room 553, 1620 Orleans Street, Baltimore, MD 21231-1000, USA. dball@jhmi.edu

Achaete-scute homolog-1 (termed Mash1 in rodents, hASH1 in humans) is a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor important in early development of neural
and neuroendocrine (NE) progenitor cells in multiple tissues including the CNS,
autonomic nervous system, adrenal medulla, thyroid, lung, and prostate, among
others. This review discusses how progress in developmental neurobiology of Mash1
has translated into novel insights in NE tumor biology, particularly for small
cell lung cancer. Inhibition of this factor by the Notch pathway is essential in 
regulating NE commitment in airway epithelial precursor cells, and may play a
comparable role in modulating phenotypes of lung cancer and other tumors.

PMID: 15013215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Neurosci. 2004 Feb 11;24(6):1330-9.

Enteric dopaminergic neurons: definition, developmental lineage, and effects of
extrinsic denervation.

Li ZS(1), Pham TD, Tamir H, Chen JJ, Gershon MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Columbia University, College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA. ZL64@columbia.edu

The existence of enteric dopaminergic neurons has been suspected; however, the
innervation of the gut by sympathetic nerves, in which dopamine (DA) is the
norepinephrine precursor, complicates analyses of enteric DA. We now report that 
transcripts encoding tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and the DA transporter (DAT) are
present in the murine bowel (small intestine > stomach or colon; proximal colon >
distal colon). Because sympathetic neurons are extrinsic, transcripts encoding TH
and DAT in the bowel are probably derived from intrinsic neurons. TH protein was 
demonstrated immunocytochemically in neuronal perikarya (submucosal >> myenteric 
plexus; small intestine > stomach or colon). TH, DA, and DAT immunoreactivities
were coincident in subsets of neurons (submucosal > myenteric) in guinea pig and 
mouse intestines in situ and in cultured guinea pig enteric ganglia. Surgical
ablation of sympathetic nerves by extrinsic denervation of loops of the bowel did
not affect DAT immunoreactivity but actually increased numbers of
TH-immunoreactive neurons, expression of mRNA encoding TH and DAT, and enteric
DOPAC (the specific dopamine metabolite). The fetal gut contains transiently
catecholaminergic (TC) cells. TC cells are the proliferating crest-derived
precursors of mature neurons that are not catecholaminergic and, thus, disappear 
after embryonic day (E) 14 (mouse) or E15 (rat). TC cells appear early in
ontogeny, and their development/survival is dependent on mash-1 gene expression. 
In contrast, the intrinsic TH-expressing neurons of the murine bowel appear late 
(perinatally) and are mash-1 independent. We conclude that the enteric nervous
system contains intrinsic dopaminergic neurons that arise from a
mash-1-independent lineage of noncatecholaminergic precursors.

PMID: 14960604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Surgery. 2003 Dec;134(6):866-71; discussion 871-3.

The role of human achaete-scute homolog-1 in medullary thyroid cancer cells.

Sippel RS(1), Carpenter JE, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Wisconsin Medical School and the
University of Wisconsin Comprehensive Cancer Center, 600 Highland Avenue,
Madison, WI 53792, USA.

BACKGROUND: Human achaete-scute homolog-1 (hASH1) is a transcription factor that 
is expressed highly in neuroendocrine tumors such as medullary thyroid cancer
(MTC). Thyroid C-cells do not develop in hASH1 knockout mice, which suggests that
hASH1 is essential for normal C-cell development.
METHODS: To determine the effect of raf-1 induction on hASH1 and hormone
production, we used an estrogen inducible raf-1 construct in MTC cell line (TT)
cells (TT-raf cells). TT or TT-raf cells were treated with control or 1 microM
estradiol. After 48 hours, the cells were analyzed for levels of hASH1 and
chromogranin A by Western blotting and for calcitonin production by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: Activation of raf-1 in the TT-raf cells resulted in high levels of
phosphorylated MEK and ERK1/2, a morphologic transdifferentiation, and a decrease
in chromogranin A and calcitonin levels that are associated with a reduction in
hASH1 production. Furthermore, using MEK inhibitors, we demonstrated that these
raf-1-mediated changes are dependent on MEK but not ERK1/2 activation.
CONCLUSION: hASH1 down-regulation by raf-1 in MTC cells is associated with a
significant decrease in hormone production. Thus, hASH1 appears to be important
in the endocrine phenotype of MTC tumors and may serve as a molecular target for 
the treatment of patients with MTC.

PMID: 14668716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mod Pathol. 2004 Feb;17(2):222-9.

hASH1 expression is closely correlated with endocrine phenotype and
differentiation extent in pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors.

Jiang SX(1), Kameya T, Asamura H, Umezawa A, Sato Y, Shinada J, Kawakubo Y,
Igarashi T, Nagai K, Okayasu I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa, Japan. sxjiang@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

The human homolog 1 of the Drosophila neurogenic achaete-scute genes, hASH1, is
specifically expressed in fetal pulmonary neuroendocrine cells and in some
neuroendocrine tumor cell lines. However, no data have been gathered regarding
its in vivo expression in tumors. hASH1 mRNA expression was investigated by in
situ hybridization in 238 surgically resected lung carcinomas, and the
correlations between hASH1 expression status and immunostaining results of
neuroendocrine markers chromogranin A, neural cell adhesion molecule,
gastrin-releasing peptide and calcitonin, and clinical outcome were analyzed.
hASH1 expression was detected in 2/20 (10%) adenocarcinomas, 4/30 (13.3%) typical
carcinoids, 11/13 (84.6%) atypical carcinoids, 38/67 (56.7%) large-cell
neuroendocrine carcinomas and 56/78 (71.8%) small-cell carcinomas, respectively, 
but not in any squamous cell carcinoma (0/21) or large-cell carcinoma (0/9). The 
2 hASH1+ adenocarcinomas also expressed multiple neuroendocrine markers. Thus,
hASH1 expression was restricted to lung cancers with neuroendocrine phenotypes.
However, not all neuroendocrine tumors expressed hASH1. Within the entities of
large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma and small-cell carcinoma, hASH1 expression
correlated very closely with chromogranin A, gastrin-releasing peptide and
calcitonin expression (P<0.0001, r=0.852), but was not related to neural cell
adhesion molecule expression (P=0.8892), suggesting that hASH1 expression, at
least in lung cancer, is associated with endocrine phenotype expression other
than 'neuroendocrine differentiation' in a broad sense. The fact that hASH1 was
virtually absent in almost fully differentiated typical carcinoids, but was
expressed in most, if not all, less differentiated atypical carcinoids as well as
large-cell neuroendocrine carcinomas and small-cell carcinomas, suggests that
hASH1 expression in lung cancer imitates its early and transient expression in
fetal development, and that hASH1 is instrumental in the establishment, but not
in the maintenance, of a cellular endocrine phenotype. Finally, hASH1 expression 
correlated with a significantly shortened survival in small-cell carcinoma
patients (P=0.041).

PMID: 14657947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Neurosci. 2003 Nov 19;23(33):10613-21.

Dynamic expression of RGS4 in the developing nervous system and regulation by the
neural type-specific transcription factor Phox2b.

Grillet N(1), Dubreuil V, Dufour HD, Brunet JF.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 8542,
Département de Biologie, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75005 Paris, France.

Previous studies have shown that members of the family of regulators of G-protein
signaling (RGS), including RGS4, have a discrete expression pattern in the adult 
brain (Gold et al., 1997). Here, we describe for RGS4 a distinct, mostly
transient phase of neuronal expression, during embryonic development:
transcription of RGS4 occurs in a highly dynamic manner in a small set of
peripheral and central neuronal precursors. This expression pattern overlaps
extensively with that of the paired-like homeodomain protein Phox2b, a
determinant of neuronal identity. In embryos deficient for Phox2b, RGS4
expression is downregulated in the locus coeruleus, sympathetic ganglia, and
cranial motor and sensory neurons. Moreover, Phox2b cooperates with the basic
helix-loop-helix protein Mash1 to transiently switch on RGS4 after ectopic
expression in the chicken spinal cord. Intriguingly, we also identify a
heterotrimeric G-protein alpha-subunit, gustducin, as coexpressed with RGS4 in
developing facial motor neurons, also under the control of Phox2b. Altogether,
these data identify components of the heterotrimeric G-protein signaling pathway 
as part of the type-specific program of neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 14627646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Dec 1;12(23):3173-80. Epub 2003 Oct 7.

Noradrenergic neuronal development is impaired by mutation of the proneural
HASH-1 gene in congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (Ondine's curse).

de Pontual L(1), Népote V, Attié-Bitach T, Al Halabiah H, Trang H, Elghouzzi V,
Levacher B, Benihoud K, Augé J, Faure C, Laudier B, Vekemans M, Munnich A,
Perricaudet M, Guillemot F, Gaultier C, Lyonnet S, Simonneau M, Amiel J.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherches sur les Handicaps Génétiques de l'Enfant INSERM U-393, and
Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS, Ondine's curse) is a rare
disorder of the chemical control of breathing. It is frequently associated with a
broad spectrum of dysautonomic symptoms, suggesting the involvement of genes
widely expressed in the autonomic nervous system. In particular, the
HASH-1-PHOX2A-PHOX2B developmental cascade was proposed as a candidate pathway
because it controls the development of neurons with a definitive or transient
noradrenergic phenotype, upstream from the RET receptor tyrosine kinase and
tyrosine hydroxylase. We recently showed that PHOX2B is the major CCHS locus,
whose mutation accounts for 60% of cases. We also studied the proneural HASH-1
gene and identified a heterozygous nucleotide substitution in three CCHS
patients. To analyze the functional consequences of HASH-1 mutations, we
developed an in vitro model of noradrenergic differentiation in neuronal
progenitors derived from the mouse vagal neural crest, reproducing in vitro the
HASH-PHOX-RET pathway. All HASH-1 mutant alleles impaired noradrenergic neuronal 
development, when overexpressed from adenoviral constructs. Thus, HASH-1
mutations may contribute to the CCHS phenotype in rare cases, consistent with the
view that the abnormal chemical control of breathing observed in CCHS patients is
due to the impairment of noradrenergic neurons during early steps of brainstem
development.

PMID: 14532329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cancer Cell. 2003 Sep;4(3):181-9.

Induction of small cell lung cancer by somatic inactivation of both Trp53 and Rb1
in a conditional mouse model.

Meuwissen R(1), Linn SC, Linnoila RI, Zevenhoven J, Mooi WJ, Berns A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics and Center of Biomedical Genetics, The
Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a highly aggressive human tumor with a more than
95% mortality rate. Its ontogeny and molecular pathogenesis remains poorly
understood. We established a mouse model for neuroendocrine (NE) lung tumors by
conditional inactivation of Rb1 and Trp53 in mouse lung epithelial cells. Mice
carrying conditional alleles for both Rb1 and Trp53 developed with high incidence
aggressive lung tumors with striking morphologic and immunophenotypic
similarities to SCLC. Most of these tumors, which we designate MSCLC (murine
small cell lung carcinoma), diffusely spread through the lung and gave rise to
extrapulmonary metastases. In our model, inactivation of both Rb1 and p53 was a
prerequisite for the pathogenesis of SCLC.

PMID: 14522252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Dev Biol. 2003 Aug 15;260(2):484-95.

A disrupted balance between Bmp/Wnt and Fgf signaling underlies the
ventralization of the Gli3 mutant telencephalon.

Kuschel S(1), Rüther U, Theil T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Developmental and Molecular Biology,
Heinrich-Heine-University, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

Regionalization of the neural plate and the early neural tube is controlled by
several signaling centers that direct the generation of molecularly distinct
domains. In the developing telencephalon, the anterior neural ridge (ANR) and the
roof and floor plate act as such organizing centers via the production of Fgfs,
Bmps/Wnts, and Shh, respectively. It remains largely unknown, however, how the
combination of these different signals is used to coordinate the generation of
different telencephalic territories. In the present study, we report on
telencephalic development in Pdn mutant mice, which carry an integration of a
retrotransposon in the Gli3 locus. Homozygous mutant animals are characterized by
a partial dorsal-to-ventral transformation of the telencephalon and by an
increased size of the septum. On a molecular level, these alterations correlate
with a reduction and/or loss of Bmp/Wnt expression and a concomitant expansion of
Fgf8 transcription. Finally, we provide evidence that the ectopic activation of
Fgf signaling in the dorsal telencephalon provides an explanation for the
ventralization of the Gli3 mutant telencephalon as application of Fgf8-soaked
beads to dorsal telencephalic explants led to the specific induction and
repression of ventral marker and dorsal marker genes, respectively.

PMID: 12921747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 Aug;3(4):427-30.

Co-expression pattern of Shh with Prox1 and that of Nkx2.2 with Mash1 in mouse
taste bud.

Miura H(1), Kusakabe Y, Kato H, Miura-Ohnuma J, Tagami M, Ninomiya Y, Hino A.

Author information: 
(1)National Food Research Institute, 2-1-12 Kannondai, Ibaraki Tsukuba-shi
305-8642, Japan. hmiura@nfri.affrc.go.jp

In mammals, taste buds are maintained by continuous turnover of cells, even in
adulthood. Cell proliferation and differentiation continue to produce taste
cells, which express various genes related to taste reception. We found the
co-expression of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) with Prox1 and that of Nkx2.2 with Mash1 in
adult mouse taste buds. Whereas Prox1was expressed strongly in cells in the basal
region of mouse taste buds where Shh was co-expressed, it was expressed weakly in
almost all taste bud cells lacking Shh expression. At 0.5 day after birth, when
taste cells have not yet differentiated, the expressions of Shh and Prox1
completely overlapped in the epithelium of circumvallate papillae. Nkx2.2 was
observed in cells expressing Mash1, but not in cells expressing genes related to 
taste reception, such as gustducin and T1R3. Almost all fusiform cells expressing
Mash1 co-expressed Nkx2.2, while the majority of round cells expressing Mash1 in 
the basal region of taste buds lacked Nkx2.2 expression.

PMID: 12915306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Dev Biol. 2003 Aug 1;260(1):46-57.

Role of Phox2b and Mash1 in the generation of the vestibular efferent nucleus.

Tiveron MC(1), Pattyn A, Hirsch MR, Brunet JF.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 6156, NMDA-IBDM, Case 907 Parc Scientifique de Luminy, 13288,
Marseille Cedex 9, France.

The inner ear (vestibular and cochlear) efferent neurons are a group of atypical 
motor-like hindbrain neurons which innervate inner ear hair cells and their
sensory afferents. They are born in the fourth rhombomere, in close association
with facial branchial motor neurons, from which they subsequently part through a 
specific migration route. Here, we demonstrate that the inner ear efferents
depend on Phox2b for their differentiation, behaving in that respect like
hindbrain visceral and branchial motor neurons. We also show that the vestibular 
efferent nucleus is no longer present at its usual site in mice inactivated for
the bHLH transcription factor Mash 1. The concomitant appearance of an ectopic
branchial-like nucleus at the location where both inner ear efferents and facial 
branchial motor neurons are born suggests that Mash1 is required for the
migration of a subpopulation of rhombomere 4-derived efferents.

PMID: 12885554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Comp Neurol. 2003 Sep 8;464(1):49-61.

Notch-associated gene expression in embryonic and adult taste papillae and taste 
buds suggests a role in taste cell lineage decisions.

Seta Y(1), Seta C, Barlow LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology and the Rocky Mountain Taste and
Smell Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado
80262, USA.

The Notch signaling pathway is involved in cell fate decisions during
development. To explore the role of this signaling cascade in the taste system,
we investigated the expression patterns of Notch signaling genes in fetal and
adult mouse tongues using in situ hybridization. Three of the four murine Notch
receptors, their ligands, Delta-like 1 (Dll-1), Jagged1, and Jagged2, as well as 
three transcription factors, Hes1, Hes6, and Mash1, are expressed in the
embryonic taste epithelium. Expression is first detected in the circumvallate
papilla at embryonic day E14.5, when Notch1, Jagged1, and Jagged2 are expressed
broadly in the papilla and general lingual epithelium. In contrast, Mash1 and
Hes6 are restricted to only a few epithelial cells in the apical region of the
developing papilla. By E18.5, many of the genes now exhibit a bimodal expression 
pattern in the papillary epithelium: apically and dorsally they are expressed in 
sparse clusters of cells, while more ventrally expression typically occurs
throughout the lower regions of the trenches. The extent of papilla innervation
was compared with Mash1 and Hes6 expression. At E14.5, when Hes6 and Mash1 are
already expressed in small numbers of epithelial cells, PGP9.5 immunoreactive
fibers have not yet invaded the epithelium, consistent with the specification of 
taste bud primordia prior to nerve contact. All of the genes examined (except
Notch2) are also expressed in subsets of cells within circumvallate taste buds in
adult mice, although Notch1 is restricted to basal cells adjacent to taste buds. 
The onset of embryonic Notch associated gene expression after the morphological
differentiation of the circumvallate papilla argues that this signaling cascade
may specify taste receptor cell lineages within an already specified taste
papilla. Similarly, Notch gene expression in adult taste buds suggests continued 
roles in cell lineage determination and cell turnover.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12866128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2003 May;23(1):107-20.

Dlx transcription factors regulate differentiation of dopaminergic neurons of the
ventral thalamus.

Andrews GL(1), Yun K, Rubenstein JL, Mastick GS.

Author information: 
(1)Biology and Biochemistry Departments, Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate
Program, University of Nevada, Reno 89557, USA.

Recent studies have provided many lines of evidence that specific homeodomain
factors act to regulate differentiation into specific neuron types. However,
these studies have mainly focused on the caudal CNS, while in the forebrain, the 
regulation of neuron specification remains relatively unknown. To investigate the
genetic regulatory networks that control neuron differentiation in the forebrain,
we have analyzed the expression patterns and functions of DLX homeodomain factors
in the ventral thalamus of early mouse embryos. During initial neurogenesis
(E9.5-E10.5), DLX(+) cells are the first progenitors to make terminal divisions
and differentiate as neurons. We have defined a set of regulatory genes
coexpressed with DLX, in both progenitors (PAX6 and MASH1) and in the
differentiating neurons (PAX6, along with a combination of LIM-type homeodomain
factors, including ISL1, Lhx1/Lim1, and Lhx5/Lim2). These initial neurons express
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), and become the PAX6-expressing A13 dopaminergic
neurons of the zona incerta. To test for DLX function, the initial
differentiation of the ventral thalamic neurons was examined in embryos mutant
for Dlx1 and Dlx2. Dlx1/2 double homozygous mutants formed ventral thalamic
neurons, but these neurons lacked PAX6, ISL1, and TH expression. These data
suggest that DLX genes act as forebrain-specific factors linking general
neuron-inducing signals to region-specific neuron differentiation programs.

PMID: 12799141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Neuron. 2003 Apr 24;38(2):161-75.

Single-cell transcriptional analysis of neuronal progenitors.

Tietjen I(1), Rihel JM, Cao Y, Koentges G, Zakhary L, Dulac C.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

The extraordinary cellular heterogeneity of the mammalian nervous system has
largely hindered the molecular analysis of neuronal identity and diversity. In
order to uncover mechanisms involved in neuronal differentiation and
diversification, we have monitored the expression profiles of individual neurons 
and progenitor cells collected from dissociated tissue or captured from intact
slices. We demonstrate that this technique provides a sensitive and reproducible 
representation of the single-cell transcriptome. In the olfactory system,
hundreds of transcriptional differences were identified between olfactory
progenitors and mature sensory neurons, enabling us to define the large variety
of signaling pathways expressed by individual progenitors at a precise
developmental stage. Finally, we show that regional differences in gene
expression can be predicted from transcriptional analysis of single neuronal
precursors isolated by laser capture from defined areas of the developing brain.

PMID: 12718852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Prostate. 2003 Apr 1;55(1):55-64.

Molecular characterization of prostatic small-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma.

Clegg N(1), Ferguson C, True LD, Arnold H, Moorman A, Quinn JE, Vessella RL,
Nelson PS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, University 
of Washington-Seattle, 1100 Fairview Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109-1024, USA.

OBJECTIVES: A subset of prostate carcinomas is composed predominantly, even
exclusively, of neuroendocrine (NE) cells. In this report, we sought to
characterize the gene expression profile of a prostate small cell NE carcinoma by
assessing the diversity and abundance of transcripts in the LuCaP 49 prostate
small cell carcinoma xenograft.
METHODS: We constructed a cDNA library (PRCA3) from the LuCap 49 prostate small
cell xenograft. Single pass DNA sequencing of randomly selected cDNA clones
followed by sequence assembly and annotation produced a library of Expressed
Sequence Tags (ESTs) representing the LuCaP 49 transcriptome. Comparative
sequence analysis with ESTs derived from prostate adenocarcinoma libraries was
performed using statistical algorithms designed to identify differentially
expressed sequences. Putative NE cell-specific genes were further examined by
Northern analysis.
RESULTS: Sequence assembly and analysis identified 1,447 distinct genes expressed
in the LuCaP 49 cDNA library. These include cDNAs encoding the NE markers
secretogranin (SCG2), CD24, and ENO2. Northern analysis revealed that three
additional genes, ASCL1, INA, and SV2B are expressed in LuCaP 49 but not in
various prostate cancer cell lines or xenografts. Fifteen genes were identified
with a statistical probability (P > 0.9) of being up-regulated in LuCaP 49 small 
cell carcinoma relative to prostate adenocarcinoma (two primary prostate
adenocarcinomas and the LNCaP prostate adenocarcinoma cell line).
CONCLUSIONS: Prostate small cell carcinoma expresses a diverse repertoire of
genes that reflect characteristics of their NE cell of origin. ASCL1, INA, and
SV2B are potential molecular markers for small cell NE tumors and NE cells of the
prostate. This small cell NE carcinoma gene expression profile may yield insights
into the development, progression, and treatment of subtypes of prostate cancer.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12640661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Brain Res Gene Expr Patterns. 2002 Oct;1(3-4):187-92.

Expression of Zash-1a in the postembryonic zebrafish brain allows comparison to
mouse Mash1 domains.

Wullimann MF(1), Mueller T.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, FB 2, University of Bremen, P.O. Box 330440, 2834
Bremen, Germany. wulliman@uni-bremen.de

Four areas in the late embryonic murine forebrain, i.e. the subpallium
(striatum), the preoptic region, the ventral thalamus, and the hypothalamus, have
been described to express the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) gene mammalian
achaete-scute homolog Mash1 (Ascl1, Mouse Genome Informatics) in a complementary 
fashion to another bHLH gene, neurogenin1 (ngn1) (Neurod3, Mouse Genome
Informatics), which is expressed in directly adjacent forebrain regions. We
report here that the four regions previously identified as subpallium, preoptic
region, ventral thalamus and hypothalamus (i.e. ventral inferior lobe) in the
postembryonic zebrafish brain show Zash-1a expression at 3 days postfertilization
(dpf), whereas none of those areas express the bHLH gene neuroD (nrd) between 2
and 5 dpf. This indicates that two well established alternative genetic pathways 
involved in neurogenesis in the amniote (mammalian) brain are present in
homologous phenotypic locations in the anamniote (zebrafish) brain as well and
that these pathways possibly act similarly in the generation of different
neuronal phenotypes (e.g. subpallial GABAergic interneurons versus pallial
glutamatergic projection neurons, or dopaminergic neurons versus other
neurotransmitter phenotypes). Furthermore, previous initial identification of
early postembryonic brain subdivisions in the zebrafish is strongly corroborated 
by these expression patterns.

PMID: 12638130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Neurosci. 2003 Mar 1;23(5):1769-80.

Widespread defects in the primary olfactory pathway caused by loss of Mash1
function.

Murray RC(1), Navi D, Fesenko J, Lander AD, Calof AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Developmental Biology Center,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California 92697-2300, USA.

MASH1, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, is widely expressed by
neuronal progenitors in the CNS and PNS, suggesting that it plays a role in the
development of many neural regions. However, in mice lacking a functional Mash1
gene, major alterations have been reported in only a few neuronal populations;
among these is a generalized loss of olfactory receptor neurons of the olfactory 
epithelium. Here, we use a transgenic reporter mouse line, in which the cell
bodies and growing axons of subsets of central and peripheral neurons are marked 
by expression of a tau-lacZ reporter gene (the Tattler-4 allele), to look both
more broadly and deeply at defects in the nervous system of Mash1-/- mice. In
addition to the expected lack of olfactory receptor neurons in the main olfactory
epithelium, developing Mash1-/-;Tattler-4+/- mice exhibited reductions in
neuronal cell number in the vomeronasal organ and in the olfactory bulb; the
morphology of the rostral migratory stream, which gives rise to olfactory bulb
interneurons, was also abnormal. Further examination of cell proliferation, cell 
death, and cell type-specific markers in Mash1-/- animals uncovered parallels
between the main olfactory epithelium and the vomeronasal organ in the regulation
of sensory neuron development. Interestingly, this analysis also revealed that,
in the olfactory epithelium of Mash1-/- animals, there is an overproduction of
proliferating cells that co-express markers of both neuronal progenitors and
supporting cells. This finding suggests that olfactory receptor neurons and
olfactory epithelium supporting cells may share a common progenitor, and that
expression of Mash1 may be an important factor in determining whether these
progenitors ultimately generate neurons or glia.

PMID: 12629181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Neurosci Res. 2003 Mar 1;71(5):648-58.

Neurotrophins facilitate neuronal differentiation of cultured neural stem cells
via induction of mRNA expression of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors 
Mash1 and Math1.

Ito H(1), Nakajima A, Nomoto H, Furukawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, Gifu, Japan.

Neurogenesis is promoted by basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors
Mash1, Math1, or NeuroD but suppressed by another set, Hes1 and Hes5. It remains 
unknown what kinds of extracellular signals are involved in their regulation;
therefore, the effects of neurotrophins on the expression of bHLH factors and
neuronal differentiation were investigated by the use of cultured mouse neural
stem cells. Each neurotrophin increased Mash1 and Math1 mRNAs of the stem cells
growing in the presence of fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2), but did not alter 
Hes1, Hes5, or NeuroD mRNA levels. Simultaneously, most of the cells expressed
nestin but not microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2), and remained
undifferentiated. FGF-2 removal from the medium reduced the levels of Hes1 and
Hes5 mRNAs and increased those of Mash1, Math1, and NeuroD mRNAs, resulting in
substantial neuronal differentiation. When the cells were pretreated with
brain-derived neurotrophic factor, a neurotrophin, FGF-2 removal enhanced earlier
NeuroD expression and generated many more MAP2-positive cells. The high level of 
Mash1 and Math1 that had been elevated at FGF-2 withdrawal accelerated NeuroD
expression in cooperation with the reduced Hes1 and Hes5 expression. Our present 
results suggest that neurotrophins stimulate neuronal differentiation by altering
the balance of expression of various bHLH transcription factors.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12584723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Neurobiol. 2003 Mar;54(4):539-54.

Vitamin A deficiency leads to increased cell proliferation in olfactory
epithelium of mature rats.

Asson-Batres MA(1), Zeng MS, Savchenko V, Aderoju A, McKanna J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tennessee State University, P.O. Box 1116, 
3500 John A. Merritt Blvd., Nashville, Tennessee 37209, USA.
massonbatres@tnstate.edu

We have shown previously that vitamin A deficiency (VAD) leads to the decreased
expression of gene products that are specifically synthesized by mature neurons
in the olfactory epithelium (OE) of adult rats. These results support the
hypothesis that retinoic acid, a derivative of vitamin A, is required for
neurogenesis and neuron replacement in vivo. VAD does not cause gross
degeneration of the OE, raising the question: what types of cells continue to
populate VAD OE? In this study, we compared the cell densities of VAD and
VA-sufficient (VAS) OE and investigated whether cell proliferation is upregulated
in VAD OE. The results show that (1) total cell number in VAD and VAS OE are
comparable; (2) localized areas of hyperplasia are present in the basal regions
of VAD, but not VAS, OE; (3) there is a substantial increase in the number of
PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear antigen) positive cells in the basal region of
VAD OE relative to VAS OE; and (4) there is a relative increase in the levels of 
mRNA encoding the transcription factor, MASH I, in VAD OE. We conclude that
reduced availability of vitamin A derivatives, such as retinoic acid, leads to a 
loss of control over proliferation, hyperplasia, and increased numbers of
pro-neural cells in vivo.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Neurobiol 54: 539-554, 2003

PMCID: PMC3223104
PMID: 12555267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Comp Neurol. 2003 Feb 10;456(3):203-16.

EphA family gene expression in the developing mouse neocortex: regional patterns 
reveal intrinsic programs and extrinsic influence.

Yun ME(1), Johnson RR, Antic A, Donoghue MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Neurobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06510, USA.

Parcellation of the mammalian cerebral cortex into distinct areas is essential
for proper cortical function; however, the developmental program that results in 
the genesis of distinct areas is not fully understood. We examined the expression
of members of the EphA family-the EphA receptor tyrosine kinases and the ephrin-A
ligands-within the developing mouse cerebral cortex, with the aim of
characterizing this component of the molecular landscape during cortical
parcellation. We found that specific embryonic zones, such as the ventricular,
subventricular, intermediate, subplate, and marginal zones, as well as the
cortical plate, were positive for particular EphA genes early in corticogenesis
(E12-E15). Along with this zone-selective expression, several genes (EphA3,
EphA4, EphA5) were evenly expressed along the axes of the developing cortex,
whereas one family member (EphA7) was expressed in a distinct anteroposterior
pattern. Later in corticogenesis (E16-E18), other EphA family members became
selectively expressed, but only within the cortical plate: EphA6 was present
posteriorly, and ephrin-A5 was expressed within a middle region. At birth,
patterning of EphA gene expression was striking. Thus, we found that the
expression of a single EphA gene or a combination of family members can define
distinct embryonic zones and anteroposterior regions of the neocortex during
development. To examine whether cellular context affects the patterning of EphA
expression, we examined gene expression in embryonic cortical cells grown in
vitro, such that all cellular contacts are lacking, and in Mash-1 mutant mice, in
which thalamocortical connections do not form. We found that the expression
patterns of most EphA family members remained stable in these scenarios, whereas 
the pattern of ephrin-A5 was altered. Taken together, this work provides a
comprehensive picture of EphA family expression during mouse corticogenesis and
demonstrates that most EphA expression profiles are cell intrinsically based,
whereas ephrin-A5 is plastically regulated.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12528186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Methods. 2002 Dec;28(4):387-95.

Retrovirus-mediated gene transfer to retinal explants.

Hatakeyama J(1), Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Japan.

Neural retina can be isolated from mouse embryos and maintained in culture for
2-3 weeks. In such retinal explant cultures, precursor cells differentiate into
neurons and glial cells and form three cellular layers, mimicking well the normal
development. This explant culture system is suitable for genetic manipulation,
such as retrovirus-mediated gene transfer. Retroviral vectors can efficiently
transfer genes into retinal precursors, and the copy of the viral genome is
precisely transmitted to the progeny of infected cells. Thus, this is an
excellent method to change stably the phenotypes of dividing cells. It has been
shown that retroviruses carrying transcription factor genes efficiently change
the fates of infected cells. Bicistronic expression by retroviral vectors is
useful to test the effects of various combinations of many transcription factors.
With this method, the transcriptional codes for retinal cell type specification
are now being elucidated. Thus, retrovirus-mediated gene transfer to the retinal 
explant culture system offers a powerful and unique tool to analyze the molecular
mechanism of neural development.

PMID: 12507456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Neurobiol Dis. 2002 Nov;11(2):246-56.

Neonatal viral infection decreases neuronal progenitors and impairs adult
neurogenesis in the hippocampus.

Sharma A(1), Valadi N, Miller AH, Pearce BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

While adult neurogenesis has been demonstrated in the hippocampal dentate gyrus
of several mammalian species, including humans, the impact of viral infections
has not been well studied. To examine this question we used a model in which
neonatal rats are infected with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) leading
to a gradual loss of dentate granule cells (DGCs), which becomes fully evident in
adulthood. Stereological cell counts performed 8 months after infection revealed 
that the loss of mature DGCs was accompanied by an 84.2% reduction in
proliferation of DGCs as measured by BrdU uptake. Moreover, there was a severe
loss of Mash1-labeled neuronal progenitor cells (87 and 83% decrease in the
granule cell layer and hilus, respectively). Thus, neurogenesis is impaired in
this model of chronic DGC loss, perhaps due to a virus-induced impoverishment of 
DGC neuronal progenitors. The LCMV model could be exploited to examine
pathophysiological mechanisms of neurodegeneration and to test pharmacological
strategies aimed at increasing neurogenesis or rescuing multipotent progenitors.

PMID: 12505418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Cancer Res. 2002 Dec;1(2):147-54.

Extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase signaling is uncoupled from initial
differentiation of central nervous system stem cells to neurons.

Enarsson M(1), Erlandsson A, Larsson H, Forsberg-Nilsson K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.

Knowledge about signaling pathways in response to external signals is needed to
understand the regulation of stem cell proliferation and differentiation toward
particular cell fates. The Ras/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
pathway has been suggested to play an essential role in neuronal differentiation.
We have examined ERK signaling in the transition from multipotent stem cell to
post-mitotic progeny using primary stem cells from the rat embryonic cortex.
Fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) is a stem cell mitogen, whereas
platelet-derived growth factor AA (PDGF-AA) expands a pool of committed neuronal 
precursors from stem cells. When comparing ERK activation by these growth
factors, we found that FGF-2 stimulates high and PDGF-AA lower levels of ERK
phosphorylation in stem cells. Differentiation was monitored as down-regulation
of the bHLH transcription factor mammalian achaete-scute homologue-1 (MASH1).
Even in the absence of active ERK, MASH1 became down-regulated and
microtubule-associated protein 2-positive cells could form. Thus, ERK activation 
seems dispensable for the earliest steps of CNS stem cell differentiation.

PMID: 12496361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Dec 10;99(25):16273-8. Epub 2002 Dec 2.

Differential modulation of BMP signaling promotes the elaboration of cerebral
cortical GABAergic neurons or oligodendrocytes from a common sonic
hedgehog-responsive ventral forebrain progenitor species.

Yung SY(1), Gokhan S, Jurcsak J, Molero AE, Abrajano JJ, Mehler MF.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience, Rose F. Kennedy Center for Research in Mental
Retardation and Developmental Disabilities, Einstein Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

During cerebral cortical development, excitatory glutamatergic projection neurons
are generated from neural stem cells intrinsic to the early embryonic cortical
ventricular zone by a process of radial migration, whereas most inhibitory
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic interneurons and oligodendrocytes (OLs)
appear to be elaborated from ventral forebrain stem cells that initially undergo 
tangential cortical migration before terminal lineage maturation. In contrast to 
the more compartmentalized developmental organization of the spinal cord, the
generation of neurons and OLs from a common ventral forebrain stem cell would
expose these cells to the sequential actions of ventral and dorsal gradient
morphogens [sonic hedgehog (Shh) and bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs)] that
normally mediate opposing developmental programs. Here we report that Shh
promotes GABAergic neuronalOL lineage restriction of forebrain stem cells, in
part, by activation of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors, Olig2
and Mash1. In mutant mice with a generalized defect in tangential cortical
migration (Dlx12--), there is a profound and selective reduction in the
elaboration of both cortical GABAergic neurons and OLs. Our studies further
demonstrate that the sequential elaboration of cortical GABAergic neurons and OLs
from common Shh-responsive ventral forebrain progenitors requires the spatial and
temporal modulation of cortical BMP signaling by BMP ligands and the BMP
antagonist, noggin, respectively. These findings suggest an integrative model for
cerebral cortical GABAergic neuronal and OL lineage maturation that would
incorporate the sequential contributions of the ventral and dorsal forebrain, and
the potential role of regional developmental cues in modulating transcriptional
codes within evolving neural lineage species.

PMCID: PMC138601
PMID: 12461181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002 Oct;971:554-9.

Generation of neuroendocrine chromaffin cells from sympathoadrenal progenitors:
beyond the glucocorticoid hypothesis.

Huber K(1), Combs S, Ernsberger U, Kalcheim C, Unsicker K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences,
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

The developmental diversification of neural crest-derived sympathoadrenal (SA)
progenitor cells into neuroendocrine adrenal chromaffin cells and sympathetic
neurons has been thought to be largely understood. Based on two decades of in
vitro studies with isolated SA progenitor and chromaffin cells, it was widely
assumed that chromaffin cell development crucially depends on glucocorticoid
hormones provided by adrenal cortical cells. However, analysis of mice lacking
the glucocorticoid receptor has revealed that the chromaffin cell phenotype
develops largely normally in these mice, except for the induction of the
adrenaline synthesizing enzyme phenylethylamine N-methyl transferase. In a search
for novel candidate genes that might be involved in triggering the sympathetic
neuron/chromaffin cell decision, we have studied putative contributions of
transforming growth factor (TGF)-alpha, BMP-4, and the transcription factor
MASH-1, molecules with distinct expressions in SA progenitor cells, in their
migratory pathways and final destinations. TGF-beta2 and -beta3 and BMP-4 are
highly expressed in the wall of the dorsal aorta and in the adrenal anlagen
during and after immigration of SA progenitors but expressed at much lower levels
in sympathetic ganglia. We found that neutralizing antibodies against all three
TGF-beta isoforms applied to the chorionic-allantoic membrane (CAM) of quail
embryos interfere with proliferation of immigrated adrenal chromaffin cells but
do not affect their specific neuroendocrine ultrastructural phenotype. Grafting
of noggin-producing cells to the CAM, which scavenges BMPs, interferes with
visceral arch and limb development but does not overtly affect the chromaffin
phenotype. The transcription factor MASH-1 promotes early differentiation of SA
progenitors. Mice deficient for MASH-1 lack sympathetic ganglia, whereas the
adrenal medulla previously has been reported to be present. We show here that
most adrenal medullary cells in MASH-1(-/-) mice identified by Phox2b
immunoreactivity lack the catecholaminergic marker tyrosine hydroxylase. More
surprisingly, most cells do not contain chromaffin granules and display a
neuroblast-like ultrastructure and show strongly enhanced expression of c-RET
comparable to that observed in sympathetic ganglia. Together, our data suggest
that TGF-betas and BMP-4 do not seem to be essential for chromaffin cell
differentiation. In contrast with previous reports, however, MASH-1 apparently
plays a crucial role in chromaffin cell development.

PMID: 12438182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Development. 2002 Nov;129(21):5029-40.

Modulation of the notch signaling by Mash1 and Dlx1/2 regulates sequential
specification and differentiation of progenitor cell types in the subcortical
telencephalon.

Yun K(1), Fischman S, Johnson J, Hrabe de Angelis M, Weinmaster G, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, LPPI, University of California, San Francisco, 401 Parnassus, Box
0984, 94143-0984, USA.

Notch signaling has a central role in cell fate specification and
differentiation. We provide evidence that the Mash1 (bHLH) and Dlx1 and Dlx2
(homeobox) transcription factors have complementary roles in regulating Notch
signaling, which in turn mediates the temporal control of subcortical
telencephalic neurogenesis in mice. We defined progressively more mature
subcortical progenitors (P1, P2 and P3) through their combinatorial expression of
MASH1 and DLX2, as well as the expression of proliferative and postmitotic cell
markers at E10.5-E11.5. In the absence of Mash1, Notch signaling is greatly
reduced and 'early' VZ progenitors (P1 and P2) precociously acquire SVZ
progenitor (P3) properties. Comparing the molecular phenotypes of the delta-like 
1 and Mash1 mutants, suggests that Mash1 regulates early neurogenesis through
Notch-and Delta-dependent and -independent mechanisms. While Mash1 is required
for early neurogenesis (E10.5), Dlx1 and Dlx2 are required to downregulate Notch 
signaling during specification and differentiation steps of 'late' progenitors
(P3). We suggest that alternate cell fate choices in the developing telencephalon
are controlled by coordinated functions of bHLH and homeobox transcription
factors through their differential affects on Notch signaling.

PMID: 12397111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Histol Histopathol. 2002 Oct;17(4):1121-7.

Modulation of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells in idiopathic interstitial
pneumonia.

Ito T(1), Ogura T, Ogawa N, Udaka N, Hayashi H, Inayama Y, Yazawa T, Kitamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yokohama City University School of Medicine, 3-9
Fuku-Ura, Kanazawa ku, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan. takaito@med-yokohama-cu.ac.jp

In order to reveal modulation of the number of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells
(PNEC) in interstitial lung diseases and to clarify significance of cell
proliferation activity in occurrence of PNEC, we counted airway PNEC of the
patients of idiopathic interstitial pneumonia, secondary interstitial pneumonia
and control lungs, and compared the number of PNEC with airway Ki-67 labeling.
The lung tissue samples were obtained by video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery
from 22 patients with usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP), 7 with non-specific
interstitial pneumonia (NSIP), 8 with chronic hypersensitivity pneumonia (CHP),
13 with collagen vascular disease (CVD), and were compared with age-matched
control lungs. The tissues were immunostained for chromogranin A and for Ki-67.
Average incidence of bronchiolar PNEC in normal, UIP, NSIP, CHP, CVD lungs was
0.169%, 0.348%, 0.326%, 0.175% and 0.201%, respectively, and average Ki-67
labeling index in them was 0.241%, 1.186%, 1.605%, 1.058%, and 2.353%,
respectively. And, in UIP lungs, PNEC incidence or Ki-67 labeling index was
different according to pathological lesions. Thus, PNEC increase in the
bronchiole of UIP, and the incidence of PNEC varies according to degree of
activity of epithelial cell proliferation probably related to epithelial cell
injury. Moreover, enhanced expression of human homolog of achaete-scute complex
(hASH1) mRNA in UIP lungs suggests that hASH1 could play roles in the regulation 
of PNEC.

PMID: 12371140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Development. 2002 Oct;129(20):4729-38.

Development of chromaffin cells depends on MASH1 function.

Huber K(1), Brühl B, Guillemot F, Olson EN, Ernsberger U, Unsicker K.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroanatomy, Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences (IZN), University of 
Heidelberg, INF 307, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The sympathoadrenal (SA) cell lineage is a derivative of the neural crest (NC),
which gives rise to sympathetic neurons and neuroendocrine chromaffin cells.
Signals that are important for specification of these two types of cells are
largely unknown. MASH1 plays an important role for neuronal as well as
catecholaminergic differentiation. Mash1 knockout mice display severe deficits in
sympathetic ganglia, yet their adrenal medulla has been reported to be largely
normal suggesting that MASH1 is essential for neuronal but not for neuroendocrine
differentiation. We show now that MASH1 function is necessary for the development
of the vast majority of chromaffin cells. Most adrenal medullary cells in
Mash1(-/-) mice identified by Phox2b immunoreactivity, lack the catecholaminergic
marker tyrosine hydroxylase. Mash1 mutant and wild-type mice have almost
identical numbers of Phox2b-positive cells in their adrenal glands at embryonic
day (E) 13.5; however, only one-third of the Phox2b-positive adrenal cell
population seen in Mash1(+/+) mice is maintained in Mash1(-/-) mice at birth.
Similar to Phox2b, cells expressing Phox2a and Hand2 (dHand) clearly outnumber
TH-positive cells. Most cells in the adrenal medulla of Mash1(-/-) mice do not
contain chromaffin granules, display a very immature, neuroblast-like phenotype, 
and, unlike wild-type adrenal chromaffin cells, show prolonged expression of
neurofilament and Ret comparable with that observed in wild-type sympathetic
ganglia. However, few chromaffin cells in Mash1(-/-) mice become PNMT positive
and downregulate neurofilament and Ret expression. Together, these findings
suggest that the development of chromaffin cells does depend on MASH1 function
not only for catecholaminergic differentiation but also for general chromaffin
cell differentiation.

PMID: 12361965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Neurosci. 2002 Oct 1;22(19):8523-31.

Disruption of early events in thalamocortical tract formation in mice lacking the
transcription factors Pax6 or Foxg1.

Pratt T(1), Quinn JC, Simpson TI, West JD, Mason JO, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, United
Kingdom.

Early events in the formation of the thalamocortical tract remain poorly
understood. Recent work has suggested that thalamocortical axons follow a path
pioneered by transient thalamic afferents originating from the medial part of the
ventral telencephalon. We studied the development of these transient afferents
and the thalamocortical tract in mutant mice lacking transcription factors
normally expressed in the dorsal thalamus or ventral telencephalon. Pax6 is
expressed in the dorsal thalamus, but not in the medial part of the ventral
telencephalon, and the thalamocortical tract fails to form in Pax6(-/-) embryos. 
We found that transient thalamic afferents from the ventral telencephalon do not 
form in Pax6(-/-) embryos; this may contribute to the failure of their
thalamocortical development. The distribution of Pax6(-/-) cells in Pax6(-/-)<-->
Pax6(+/+) chimeras supports conclusions drawn from forebrain marker gene
expression that Pax6 is not required for the normal development of the medial
part of the ventral telencephalon but is required in the dorsal thalamus. Failure
of the transient afferent pathway to develop is therefore likely a cell
nonautonomous defect reflecting primary defects in the thalamus. We then examined
the formation of thalamic afferents and efferents in Foxg1(-/-) embryos, which
lack recognizable ventral telencephalic structures. In these embryos thalamic
efferents navigate correctly through the thalamus but fail to turn laterally into
the telencephalon, whereas other axons are able to cross the
diencephalic/telencephalic boundary. Our results support a role for the ventral
telencephalon in guiding the early development of the thalamocortical tract and
identify a new role for the transcription factor Pax6 in regulating the ability
of the thalamus to attract ventral telencephalic afferents.

PMID: 12351726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Dev Dyn. 2002 Oct;225(2):126-34.

Chimeric analysis of Notch2 function: a role for Notch2 in the development of the
roof plate of the mouse brain.

Kadokawa Y(1), Marunouchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita 
Health University, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan. ykado@fujita-hu.ac.jp

Notch proteins are transmembrane receptors involved in cell-fate determination
throughout development. Targeted disruption of either the Notch1 or Notch2 gene
in mice results in embryonic lethality around embryonic day (E) 10.5 with
widespread cell death. Although Notch1-deficient mice show disorganized
somitogenesis, Notch2 mutants did not show definitive abnormalities in any tissue
expressing high levels of the Notch2 gene, including the central nervous system. 
To study Notch2 function in development beyond the embryonic lethal stage, we
performed chimeric analysis between Notch2 mutant and wild-type mouse embryos.
Chimeric embryos developed normally and homozygous Notch2 mutant-specific cell
death was not observed. Although chimeric embryos showed normal mosaicism until
E9.5 in all tissues studied to date, Notch2 homozygous mutant cells failed to
contribute to formation of the roof plate of the diencephalon and mesencephalon
at later developmental stages, when Notch2 is normally expressed at high levels
at there. Furthermore, Notch2 heterozygous mutant cells were also excluded from
the roof plate of the chimera, however, Notch2 heterozygous mutant mice developed
normally. We also showed that Wnt-1 and Mash1 expression patterns at the roof
plate were disorganized in Notch2 homozygous mutant embryos. These results
indicate that Notch2 plays an important role in development of the roof plate of 
the diencephalon and mesencephalon, and suggest that cellular rearrangement is
involved in this process.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12242712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 15;277(46):44462-74. Epub 2002 Sep 11.

Molecular characterization of a metastatic neuroendocrine cell cancer arising in 
the prostates of transgenic mice.

Hu Y(1), Ippolito JE, Garabedian EM, Humphrey PA, Gordon JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The features and functions of prostatic neuroendocrine (NE) cells remain
ill-defined. Neuroendocrine differentiation (NED) in adenocarcinoma of the human 
prostate (CaP) is associated with more aggressive disease, but the underlying
mediators are poorly understood. We examined these issues in transgenic mice that
utilize regulatory elements from the cryptdin-2 gene (Defcr2) to express simian
virus 40 large T antigen (TAg) in prostatic NE cells. CR2-TAg mice develop
prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia at 8 weeks of age, 1 week after the onset of 
TAg expression. An invasive phase follows 2-4 weeks later, with lymph node,
liver, lung, brain, and bone metastases appearing within 16 weeks. DNA microarray
studies revealed 122 mRNAs that were increased >/=2-fold in duplicate assays of
16-week-old CR2-TAg versus normal prostates. Thirty two transcripts encode
proteins associated with neurons and endocrine cells (e.g. basic helix loop
helix, SRY-related high mobility group box and sine-oculis homeobox transcription
factors, Hu RNA-binding proteins, neuronatin, Racgap1, collapsin response
mediator protein-1, synaptotagmin-1, proprotein convertase, and secretogranins). 
Follow-up studies of candidate mediators and biomarkers of differentiation/growth
in the microarray data set involved real time quantitative reverse
transcriptase-PCR assays of laser capture microdissected NE cells from CR2-TAg
prostates plus liver metastases, and immunohistochemical comparisons of
transgenic mouse prostates and 35 human CaP samples. Our findings include (a)
expression of the bHLH mouse achaete-scute homolog (mASH1) in normal and CR2-TAg 
NE cells and foci of NED in human CaP, (b) glutamic acid decarboxylase and its
product (gamma-aminobutyric acid) in neoplastic NE cells juxtaposed next to
cohorts of normal gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor expressing secretory cells (a 
potential route for paracrine interactions between these two epithelial
lineages), and (c) aromatic l-amino-acid decarboxylase, but not its
dopamine/serotonin products, in CR2-TAg NE cells and NED. These results
underscore the value of CR2-TAg mice for characterizing normal NE cell biology
and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12228243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Dev Biol. 2002 Sep 1;249(1):174-90.

N-twist, an evolutionarily conserved bHLH protein expressed in the developing
CNS, functions as a transcriptional inhibitor.

Verzi MP(1), Anderson JP, Dodou E, Kelly KK, Greene SB, North BJ, Cripps RM,
Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Univerity of California, San Francisco,
California 94143-0130, USA.

Members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor family play an 
essential role in multiple developmental processes. During neurogenesis, positive
and negative regulation by bHLH proteins is essential for proper development.
Here we report the identification and initial characterization of the bHLH gene, 
Neuronal twist (N-twist), named for its neural expression pattern and high
sequence homology and physical linkage to the mesodermal inhibitor, M-twist.
N-twist is expressed in the developing mouse central nervous system in the
midbrain, hindbrain, and neural tube. This neural expression is conserved in
invertebrates, as expression of the Drosophila ortholog of N-twist is also
restricted to the central nervous system. Like other bHLH family members, N-Twist
heterodimerizes with E protein and binds DNA at a consensus bHLH-binding site,
the E box. We show that N-Twist inhibits MASH1-dependent transcriptional
activation by sequestering E protein in a dominant negative fashion. Thus, these 
studies support the notion that N-Twist represents a novel negative regulator of 
neurogenesis.

PMID: 12217327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Int J Cancer. 2002 Sep 10;101(2):103-10.

Proneural and proneuroendocrine transcription factor expression in cutaneous
mechanoreceptor (Merkel) cells and Merkel cell carcinoma.

Leonard JH(1), Cook AL, Van Gele M, Boyle GM, Inglis KJ, Speleman F, Sturm RA.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Radium Institute Research Unit, Queensland Institute of Medical
Research, Herston, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. helenL@qimr.edu.au

Erratum in
    Int J Cancer. 2004 Dec 20;112(6):1086.

Merkel cells form part of the peripheral neuroendocrine system of the skin and
act as mechanoreceptors in touch response. Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a rare,
aggressive disease with similarities to small cell lung cancer (SCLC), which is
also of neuroendocrine origin. We previously identified a novel DNA binding
protein complex specific for MCC suspension cell lines, termed Merkel nuclear
factor (MNF) by its binding to the POU-IV family DNA binding consensus sequence. 
Here we report that MNF contains the POU-IV family member Brn-3c and that Brn-3c 
is expressed in normal Merkel cells. Additionally, Brn-3c protein reactivity is
restricted to a subset of MCC biopsies and is not seen in biopsies revealing
adherent, variant cell lines lacking neuroendocrine markers. Recently, proper
development of murine Merkel cells was shown to require the proneural basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor, atonal family member, MATH1. We
demonstrate a correlation between Brn-3c and HATH1 reactivity in MCC biopsies and
cell lines with retention of neuroendocrine phenotype. In SCLC, the related basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor HASH1 is responsible for neuroendocrine
phenotype, but HASH1 transcripts were not detected in MCC cell lines. We propose 
that HATH1 and Brn-3c may form a transcriptional hierarchy responsible for
determining neuroendocrine phenotype in Merkel cells and that lack of Brn-3c
and/or HATH1 in MCC may indicate a more aggressive disease requiring closer
patient follow-up.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12209986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Am J Pathol. 2002 Jul;161(1):291-300.

Complicated mechanisms of class II transactivator transcription deficiency in
small cell lung cancer and neuroblastoma.

Yazawa T(1), Ito T, Kamma H, Suzuki T, Okudela K, Hayashi H, Horiguchi H, Ogata
T, Mitsui H, Ikeda M, Kitamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yokohama City University School of Medicine,
Kanagawa, Japan. tkyazawa@med.yokohama-cu.ac.jp

Comment in
    Am J Pathol. 2003 Jul;163(1):373-5; author reply 375-6.

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and neuroblastoma (NB), the most aggressive adult
and infant neuroendocrine cancers, respectively, are immunologically
characterized by a severe reduction in major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
that is indispensable for anti-tumor immunity. We had reported that the severe
reduction of MHC in SCLC was caused by a deficient interferon
(IFN)-gamma-inducible expression of class II transactivator (CIITA) that is known
as a very important transcription factor for IFN-gamma-inducible class II and
class I MHC expression (Yazawa T, Kamma H, Fujiwara M, Matsui M, Horiguchi H,
Satoh H, Fujimoto M, Yokohama K, Ogata T: Lack of class II transactivator causes 
severe deficiency of HLA-DR expression in small cell lung cancer. J Pathol 1999, 
187:191-199). Here, we demonstrate that the reduction of MHC in NB was also
caused by a deficient IFN-gamma-inducible expression of CIITA and that the
deficiency in SCLC and NB was caused by similar mechanisms. Human achaete-scute
complex homologue (HASH)-1, L-myc, and N-myc, which are specifically
overexpressed in SCLC and NB, bound to the E-box in CIITA promoter IV and reduced
the transcriptional activity. Anti-sense oligonucleotide experiments revealed
that overexpressed L-myc and N-myc lie upstream in the regulatory pathway of
HASH-1 expression. The expression of HASH-1 was also up-regulated by IFN-gamma.
Our results suggest that SCLC and NB have complicated mechanisms of
IFN-gamma-inducible CIITA transcription deficiency through the overexpressed
HASH-1, L-myc, and N-myc. These complicated mechanisms may play an important role
in the escape from anti-tumor immunity.

PMCID: PMC1850684
PMID: 12107114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Dev Biol. 2002 Jul 1;247(1):137-48.

Distinct patterns of downstream target activation are specified by the
helix-loop-helix domain of proneural basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factors.

Talikka M(1), Perez SE, Zimmerman K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, The Rockefeller University, 1230
York Avenue, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Both gain- and loss-of-function analyses indicate that proneural
basic/helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins direct not only general aspects of
neuronal differentiation but also specific aspects of neuronal identity within
neural progenitors. In order to better understand the function of this family of 
transcription factors, we have used hormone-inducible fusion constructs to assay 
temporal patterns of downstream target regulation in response to proneural bHLH
overexpression. In these studies, we have compared two distantly related Xenopus 
proneural bHLH genes, Xash1 and XNgnr1. Our findings indicate that both Xash1 and
XNgnr1 induce expression of the general neuronal differentiation marker,
N-tubulin, with a similar time course in animal cap progenitor populations. In
contrast, these genes each induce distinct patterns of early downstream target
expression. Both genes induce expression of the HLH-containing gene, Xcoe2, at
early time points, but only XNgnr1 induces early expression of the bHLH genes,
Xath3 and XNeuroD. Structure:function analyses indicate that the distinct pattern
of XNgnr1-induced downstream target activation is linked to the XNgnr1 HLH
domain, demonstrating a novel role for this domain in mediating the differential 
function of individual members of the proneural bHLH gene family.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12074558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Neuron. 2002 May 16;34(4):551-62.

The homeodomain factor lbx1 distinguishes two major programs of neuronal
differentiation in the dorsal spinal cord.

Müller T(1), Brohmann H, Pierani A, Heppenstall PA, Lewin GR, Jessell TM,
Birchmeier C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine,
13122 Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2002 May 16;34(4):491-3.

Dorsal horn neurons in the spinal cord integrate and relay sensory information.
Here, we show that the expression of the homeobox gene Lbx1 distinguishes two
major neuronal classes generated in the dorsal spinal cord. The Lbx1(-) (class A)
and Lbx1(+) (class B) neurons differ in their dependence on roof plate BMP
signals for specification and settle in the deep and superficial dorsal horn,
respectively. Lbx1 misexpression blocks the differentiation of class A neurons.
Conversely, in Lbx1 mutant mice, class B neurons assume the identity of class A
neurons. As a consequence, the morphology and neuronal circuitry of the dorsal
horn are aberrant. We conclude that Lbx1 distinguishes two major neuronal classes
in the dorsal spinal cord and is an important determinant of their distinct
differentiation programs.

PMID: 12062039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Chem Senses. 2002 Jun;27(5):445-51.

The neural differentiation gene Mash-1 has a distinct pattern of expression from 
the taste reception-related genes gustducin and T1R2 in the taste buds.

Kusakabe Y(1), Miura H, Hashimoto R, Sugiyama C, Ninomiya Y, Hino A.

Author information: 
(1)National Food Research Institute, 2-1-12 Kannondai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8642,
Japan. ykusa@nfri.affrc.go.jp

Taste bud cells have a limited lifespan and are continuously replaced just like
other epithelial cells. Although there is some evidence that taste buds may arise
from the local epithelium, taste receptor cells have neuronal properties. This
implies that there must be a critical stage at which the epithelial precursor
cells for taste receptor cells start to exhibit neural properties during the
differentiation of the taste receptor cells. The expression of the
neural-specific transcription factors Mash-1 and Prox-1 in the nervous system is 
transient and precedes neuronal differentiation. Therefore, we examined the
expression of Mash-1 and Prox-1 in the epithelium of circumvallate papillae of
the tongue in order to clarify the localization of the precursor cells with
neural properties and observed that both expressions are restricted to the taste 
buds. Two-colour in situ hybridization showed that the signals for Mash-1 did not
overlap those for taste receptor cell-specific genes such as gustducin and T1R2. 
In the process of development and regeneration of the taste buds, the expression 
of Mash-1 preceded that of gustducin and T1R2. These observations suggest that
Mash-1 could be a candidate for a marker of immature taste receptor cells,
including the cells that express gustducin and/or T1R2 at a later stage.

PMID: 12052781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nature. 2002 Jun 6;417(6889):645-9.

Origin of GABAergic neurons in the human neocortex.

Letinic K(1), Zoncu R, Rakic P.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Section of Neurobiology, New Haven,
Connecticut 06510, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2002 Jun 6;417(6889):605-6.

The mammalian neocortex contains two major classes of neurons, projection and
local circuit neurons. Projection neurons contain the excitatory neurotransmitter
glutamate, while local circuit neurons are inhibitory, containing GABA. The
complex function of neocortical circuitry depends on the number and diversity of 
GABAergic (gamma-aminobutyric-acid-releasing) local circuit neurons. Using
retroviral labelling in organotypic slice cultures of the embryonic human
forebrain, we demonstrate the existence of two distinct lineages of neocortical
GABAergic neurons. One lineage expresses Dlx1/2 and Mash1 transcription factors, 
represents 65% of neocortical GABAergic neurons in humans, and originates from
Mash1-expressing progenitors of the neocortical ventricular and subventricular
zone of the dorsal forebrain. The second lineage, characterized by the expression
of Dlx1/2 but not Mash1, forms around 35% of the GABAergic neurons and originates
from the ganglionic eminence of the ventral forebrain. We suggest that
modifications in the expression pattern of transcription factors in the forebrain
may underlie species-specific programmes for the generation of neocortical local 
circuit neurons and that distinct lineages of cortical interneurons may be
differentially affected in genetic and acquired diseases of the human brain.

PMID: 12050665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Genes Dev. 2002 May 15;16(10):1220-33.

Proper development of relay somatic sensory neurons and D2/D4 interneurons
requires homeobox genes Rnx/Tlx-3 and Tlx-1.

Qian Y(1), Shirasawa S, Chen CL, Cheng L, Ma Q.

Author information: 
(1)The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Trigeminal nuclei and the dorsal spinal cord are first-order relay stations for
processing somatic sensory information such as touch, pain, and temperature. The 
origins and development of these neurons are poorly understood. Here we show that
relay somatic sensory neurons and D2/D4 dorsal interneurons likely derive from
Mash1-positive neural precursors, and depend on two related homeobox genes, Rnx
and Tlx-1, for proper formation. Rnx and Tlx-1 maintain expression of Drg11, a
homeobox gene critical for the development of pain circuitry, and are essential
for the ingrowth of trkA+ nociceptive/thermoceptive sensory afferents to their
central targets. We showed previously that Rnx is necessary for proper formation 
of the nucleus of solitary tract, the target for visceral sensory afferents.
Together, our studies demonstrate a central role for Rnx and Tlx-1 in the
development of two major classes of relay sensory neurons, somatic and visceral.

PMCID: PMC186282
PMID: 12023301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 May 14;99(10):7021-6.

Hypoxia alters gene expression in human neuroblastoma cells toward an immature
and neural crest-like phenotype.

Jögi A(1), Øra I, Nilsson H, Lindeheim A, Makino Y, Poellinger L, Axelson H,
Påhlman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine, Lund
University, University Hospital MAS, S-205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

Insufficient oxygen and nutrient supply often restrain solid tumor growth, and
the hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF) 1 alpha and HIF-2 alpha are key transcription
regulators of phenotypic adaptation to low oxygen levels. Moreover, mouse gene
disruption studies have implicated HIF-2 alpha in embryonic regulation of
tyrosine hydroxylase, a hallmark gene of the sympathetic nervous system.
Neuroblastoma tumors originate from immature sympathetic cells, and therefore we 
investigated the effect of hypoxia on the differentiation status of human
neuroblastoma cells. Hypoxia stabilized HIF-1 alpha and HIF-2 alpha proteins and 
activated the expression of known hypoxia-induced genes, such as vascular
endothelial growth factor and tyrosine hydroxylase. These changes in gene
expression also occurred in hypoxic regions of experimental neuroblastoma
xenografts grown in mice. In contrast, hypoxia decreased the expression of
several neuronal/neuroendocrine marker genes but induced genes expressed in
neural crest sympathetic progenitors, for instance c-kit and Notch-1. Thus,
hypoxia apparently causes dedifferentiation both in vitro and in vivo. These
findings suggest a novel mechanism for selection of highly malignant tumor cells 
with stem-cell characteristics.

PMCID: PMC124521
PMID: 12011461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25297-304. Epub 2002 May 8.

Activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway by retinoic
acid is required for neural differentiation of SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells.

López-Carballo G(1), Moreno L, Masiá S, Pérez P, Barettino D.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientificas, Spain.

Retinoic acid (RA) induces neural differentiation of SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells.
We show that the mRNA levels of the differentiation-inhibiting basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors ID1, ID2, and ID3 are down-regulated
during RA-induced differentiation of SH-SY5Y cells. The levels of ID proteins
decreased in parallel to the observed transcriptional repression. The expression 
of other basic helix-loop-helix genes changed during RA-induced differentiation: 
expression of neuroblast-specific ASCL1 (HASH-1) gene was promptly reduced after 
RA treatment, whereas expression of differentiation-promoting genes NEUROD6
(NEX-1, HATH-2) and NEUROD1 was increased. Treatments with
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, another inducer of neuroblastoma cell
differentiation, also resulted in coordinated down-regulation of ID gene
expression, underscoring the role of ID genes in differentiation. Down-regulation
of ID gene expression by RA involves a complex mechanism because full
transcriptional repression required newly synthesized proteins and signaling by
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). RA treatment activates the PI3K/Akt
signaling pathway, resulting in increased PI3K activity in extracts from
RA-treated cells and a rapid increase in phosphorylation of Akt in Ser-473.
Inhibition of PI3K by LY294002 impaired RA-induced differentiation, as assessed
by morphological and biochemical criteria. We propose that RA, by activating the 
PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, plays an important role in the regulation of neuronal
cell survival.

PMID: 12000752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Clin Cancer Res. 2002 Apr;8(4):1082-6.

Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction measurement of HASH1
(ASCL1), a marker for small cell lung carcinomas with neuroendocrine features.

Westerman BA(1), Neijenhuis S, Poutsma A, Steenbergen RD, Breuer RH, Egging M,
van Wijk IJ, Oudejans CB.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Clinical Chemistry, VU University 
Medical Center, 1081 HV Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

PURPOSE: The Human Achaete-Scute homologue 1 (HASH1, ASCL1), a lineage-specific
basic helix-loop-helix member of the achaete-scute family, is essential for the
generation of pulmonary neuroendocrine (NE) cells during lung development. In
small cell lung cancer (SCLC), the most lethal form of lung cancer, the gene is
highly expressed and the expression of HASH1 correlates with NE features found in
SCLCs. Here we describe a highly sensitive reverse transcription-PCR method for
quantifying HASH1 mRNA in clinical samples, using real-time fluorescence
resonance energy transfer technology (LightCycler).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The HASH1-positive NE cell line NCI-H187 was compared with
the non-NE cell line NCI-N417 by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR. Signals 
were normalized using the housekeeping gene PBGD, which is pseudogene free.
Subsequently, HASH1 expression in RNA isolated from biopsies from SCLC patients
(n = 4) was compared with biopsies from non-SCLC (NSCLC) patients (n = 2) or
normal bronchus (n = 2).
RESULTS: The HASH1-positive NE cell line NCI-H187 showed 50,000-fold higher
normalized expression of HASH1 than did the non-NE cell line NCI-N417, indicating
that the method is applicable over a wide dynamic range. Normalized average mRNA 
expression levels in SCLC clinical samples were 1,000-fold higher than in the
NSCLC samples. Expression in normal bronchus was comparable to the expression
levels in the NSCLC.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that marked and measurable differences exist
between SCLCs and other lung tissues (either NSCLC or normal bronchus). We show
that the method is applicable to small biopsy samples and can discriminate SCLC
from NSCLC. This method could contribute to diagnosis based on molecular
profiling of tumors.

PMID: 11948117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 May;22(9):3129-39.

Notch signaling induces rapid degradation of achaete-scute homolog 1.

Sriuranpong V(1), Borges MW, Strock CL, Nakakura EK, Watkins DN, Blaumueller CM, 
Nelkin BD, Ball DW.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Oncology Center, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

In neural development, Notch signaling plays a key role in restricting neuronal
differentiation, promoting the maintenance of progenitor cells. Classically,
Notch signaling causes transactivation of Hairy-enhancer of Split (HES) genes
which leads to transcriptional repression of neural determination and
differentiation genes. We now report that in addition to its known
transcriptional mechanism, Notch signaling also leads to rapid degradation of the
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor human achaete-scute homolog 1 
(hASH1). Using recombinant adenoviruses expressing active Notch1 in small-cell
lung cancer cells, we showed that the initial appearance of Notch1 coincided with
the loss of hASH1 protein, preceding the full decay of hASH1 mRNA. Overexpression
of HES1 alone was capable of down-regulating hASH1 mRNA but could not replicate
the acute reduction of hASH1 protein induced by Notch1. When adenoviral hASH1 was
coinfected with Notch1, we still observed a dramatic and abrupt loss of the
exogenous hASH1 protein, despite high levels of ongoing hASH1 RNA expression.
Notch1 treatment decreased the apparent half-life of the adenoviral hASH1 protein
and increased the fraction of hASH1 which was polyubiquitinylated. The proteasome
inhibitor MG132 reversed the Notch1-induced degradation. The Notch RAM domain was
dispensable but a lack of the OPA and PEST domains inactivated this Notch1
action. Overexpression of the hASH1-dimerizing partner E12 could protect hASH1
from degradation. This novel function of activated Notch to rapidly degrade a
class II bHLH protein may prove to be important in many contexts in development
and in cancer.

PMCID: PMC133746
PMID: 11940670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Development. 2002 Apr;129(8):1871-80.

Mash1 and Ngn1 control distinct steps of determination and differentiation in the
olfactory sensory neuron lineage.

Cau E(1), Casarosa S, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)IGBMC, 1 rue Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch cedex, CU de Strasbourg, France.

bHLH transcription factors are expressed sequentially during the development of
neural lineages, suggesting that they operate in genetic cascades. In the
olfactory epithelium, the proneural genes Mash1 and neurogenin1 are expressed at 
distinct steps in the same olfactory sensory neuron lineage. Here, we show by
loss-of-function analysis that both genes are required for the generation of
olfactory sensory neurons. However, their mutant phenotypes are strikingly
different, indicating that they have divergent functions. In Mash1 null mutant
mice, olfactory progenitors are not produced and the Notch signalling pathway is 
not activated, establishing Mash1 as a determination gene for olfactory sensory
neurons. In neurogenin1 null mutant mice, olfactory progenitors are generated but
they express only a subset of their normal repertoire of regulatory molecules and
their differentiation is blocked. Thus neurogenin1 is required for the activation
of one of several parallel genetic programs functioning downstream of Mash1 in
the differentiation of olfactory sensory neurons. These results illustrate the
versatility of neural bHLH genes which adopt either a determination or a
differentiation function, depending primarily on the timing of their expression
in neural progenitors.

PMID: 11934853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Development. 2002 Apr;129(7):1553-67.

Comparison of the generic neuronal differentiation and neuron subtype
specification functions of mammalian achaete-scute and atonal homologs in
cultured neural progenitor cells.

Lo L(1), Dormand E, Greenwood A, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 216-76, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA.

In the vertebrate peripheral nervous system, the proneural genes neurogenin 1 and
neurogenin 2 (Ngn1 and Ngn2), and Mash1 are required for sensory and autonomic
neurogenesis, respectively. In cultures of neural tube-derived, primitive PNS
progenitors NGNs promote expression of sensory markers and MASH1 that of
autonomic markers. These effects do not simply reflect enhanced neuronal
differentiation, suggesting that both bHLH factors also specify neuronal identity
like their Drosophila counterparts. At high concentrations of BMP2 or in neural
crest stem cells (NCSCs), however, NGNs like MASH1 promote only autonomic marker 
expression. These data suggest that that the identity specification function of
NGNs is more sensitive to context than is that of MASH1. In NCSCs, MASH1 is more 
sensitive to Notch-mediated inhibition of neurogenesis and cell cycle arrest,
than are the NGNs. Thus, the two proneural genes differ in other functional
properties besides the neuron subtype identities they can promote. These
properties may explain cellular differences between MASH1- and NGN-dependent
lineages in the timing of neuronal differentiation and cell cycle exit.

PMID: 11923194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cell Tissue Res. 2002 Mar;307(3):423-8. Epub 2002 Feb 2.

Expression of NeuroD in the mouse taste buds.

Suzuki Y(1), Takeda M, Obara N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy, School of Dentistry, Health Sciences University of
Hokkaido, Ishikari-Tobetsu, Hokkaido 061-0293, Japan. suzuki@hoku-iryo-u.ac.jp

NeuroD, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, has been shown to play a
role in the differentiation of neurons, olfactory cells, and neuroendocrine
tissues. Since the taste buds have characteristics of typical paraneurons, we
examined the expression of NeuroD in the taste buds of mice. By RT-PCR analysis, 
NeuroD mRNA was found to be expressed in the epithelium of circumvallate
papillae-containing taste buds, but not in the lingual epithelium lacking them.
NeuroD immunoreactivity was detected in a subset of taste bud cells in the
circumvallate, foliate, and fungiform papillae and in the soft palate.
NeuroD-expressing cells had a spindle-like shape, first appeared at postnatal day
3, and increased in number during postnatal development. After bisection of the
glossopharyngeal nerves, NeuroD-expressing cells decreased in number at day 4 and
disappeared from the trench wall of the circumvallate papillae by day 14. A few
NeuroD-expressing taste buds reappeared at postoperative day 28. Denervation and 
regeneration experiments showed that expression of NeuroD in the taste buds was
dependent upon gustatory innervation. Double immunolabeling with gustducin or
with neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) showed that NeuroD-expressing cells did
not express NCAM, but did express gustducin. These results suggest that NeuroD is
expressed in a mature cell type, type-II cells, but not in type-III cells.

PMID: 11904779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Development. 2002 Feb;129(3):671-80.

Requirement of neuropilin 1-mediated Sema3A signals in patterning of the
sympathetic nervous system.

Kawasaki T(1), Bekku Y, Suto F, Kitsukawa T, Taniguchi M, Nagatsu I, Nagatsu T,
Itoh K, Yagi T, Fujisawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Developmental Neurobiology, Division of Biological Science, Nagoya
University Graduate School of Science, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan.

Neuropilin 1 is the specific receptor for Sema3A and plays a role in nerve fiber 
guidance. We report that neuropilin 1 and Sema3A mutant mouse embryos, generated 
by targeted gene disruption, showed displacement of sympathetic neurons and their
precursors and abnormal morphogenesis in the sympathetic trunk. We also show that
Sema3A suppressed the cell migration activity of sympathetic neurons from
wild-type but not neuropilin 1 mutant embryos in vitro and instead promoted their
accumulation into compact cell masses and fasciculation of their neurites. These 
findings suggest that the neuropilin 1-mediated Sema3A signals regulate arrest
and aggregation of sympathetic neuron precursors and sympathetic neurons
themselves at defined target sites and axon fasciculation to produce the
stereotyped sympathetic nerve pattern.

PMID: 11830568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Genes Dev. 2002 Feb 1;16(3):324-38.

Divergent functions of the proneural genes Mash1 and Ngn2 in the specification of
neuronal subtype identity.

Parras CM(1), Schuurmans C, Scardigli R, Kim J, Anderson DJ, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur, 67404 Illkirch cedex, C.U. de Strasbourg,
France.

The neural bHLH genes Mash1 and Ngn2 are expressed in complementary populations
of neural progenitors in the central and peripheral nervous systems. Here, we
have systematically compared the activities of the two genes during neural
development by generating replacement mutations in mice in which the coding
sequences of Mash1 and Ngn2 were swapped. Using this approach, we demonstrate
that Mash1 has the capacity to respecify the identity of neuronal populations
normally derived from Ngn2-expressing progenitors in the dorsal telencephalon and
ventral spinal cord. In contrast, misexpression of Ngn2 in Mash1-expressing
progenitors does not result in any overt change in neuronal phenotype. Taken
together, these results demonstrate that Mash1 and Ngn2 have divergent functions 
in specification of neuronal subtype identity, with Mash1 having the
characteristics of an instructive determinant whereas Ngn2 functions as a
permissive factor that must act in combination with other factors to specify
neuronal phenotypes. Moreover, the ectopic expression of Ngn2 can rescue the
neurogenesis defects of Mash1 null mutants in the ventral telencephalon and
sympathetic ganglia but not in the ventral spinal cord and the locus coeruleus,
indicating that Mash1 contribution to the specification of neuronal fates varies 
greatly in different lineages, presumably depending on the presence of other
determinants of neuronal identity.

PMCID: PMC155336
PMID: 11825874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Neurosci Res. 2002 Feb 1;67(3):309-20.

Central nervous system myelination in mice with deficient expression of Notch1
receptor.

Givogri MI(1), Costa RM, Schonmann V, Silva AJ, Campagnoni AT, Bongarzone ER.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiochemistry Group, Mental Retardation Research Center, School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90024, USA.

Activity of the Notch1 gene is known to inhibit oligodendrocyte (OL)
differentiation in vitro. We tested the hypothesis that the Notch1 pathway
regulates in vivo myelin formation, by examining brain myelination of Notch1
receptor null heterozygotes mutant animals (Notch1(+/-)). We show that a
deficiency in Notch1 expression leads to increased abundance of products of
specific myelin genes in myelinated areas of the brain during the first 2 weeks
of postnatal life. We observed increased numbers of myelinated axons in optic
nerves and the presence of myelinated fibers in the molecular layer (ML) of the
Notch1(+/-) cerebella. These findings were accompanied by up-regulation of Mash1 
and down-regulation of Hes5 proteins. In addition, we found expression of
Jagged1, one of the Notch1 activators, in unmyelinated axons of the cerebellar ML
during normal development. Our findings indicate that the Jagged/Notch signaling 
pathway might actively participate in the regulation of myelination during
central nervous system development and suggest that certain neuronal populations 
might regulate whether their axons are myelinated by the expression of inhibitory
signals such as Jagged1.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11813235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Neurosci Lett. 2002 Feb 1;318(3):129-32.

Retinoic acid influences the expression of the neuronal regulatory genes Mash-1
and c-ret in the developing rat heart.

Shoba T(1), Dheen ST, Tay SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, MD 10, 4 Medical Drive, National
University of Singapore, 117 597, Singapore, Singapore.

We analyzed the expression of neuronal regulatory genes Mash-1 and c-ret by
immunohistochemistry and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction in the
developing heart of rat embryos following exogenous retinoic acid (RA) treatment 
of the pregnant dams. On E12, expression of Mash-1 and c-ret was confined to
cells migrating via the common cardinal vein. On E16.5, Mash-1 and c-ret
expression were restricted to cardiac ganglia around the great vessels and
posterior atrial wall. While Mash-1 expression was down-regulated at birth, that 
of c-Ret was maintained. RA-treated hearts showed a down-regulation of both
Mash-1 and c-Ret at the mRNA as well as at the protein level on E16.5. The
present results show that differentiation of cardiac ganglionic cells is affected
after RA treatment, by the down-regulation of Mash-1 and c-Ret.

PMID: 11803116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Physiol Genomics. 2001 Dec 21;7(2):149-57.

MASH-1/RET pathway involvement in development of brain stem control of
respiratory frequency in newborn mice.

Dauger S(1), Guimiot F, Renolleau S, Levacher B, Boda B, Mas C, Nepote V,
Simonneau M, Gaultier C, Gallego J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurologie et Physiologie du Développement, Institut National
de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale E9935, Service de Pédiatrie Réanimation, 
Hôpital Robert Debré, Service de Physiologie, Hôpital Robert Debré, 75019 Paris, 
France.

Respiratory abnormalities have been described in MASH-1 (mammalian achaete-scute 
homologous gene) and c-RET ("rearranged during transfection") mutant newborn
mice. However, the neural mechanisms underlying these abnormalities have not been
studied. We tested the hypothesis that the MASH-1 mutation may impair c-RET
expression in brain stem neurons involved in the control of breathing. To do
this, we analyzed brain stem c-RET expression and respiratory phenotype in MASH-1
+/+ wild-type, MASH-1 +/- heterozygous, and MASH-1 -/- knock-out newborn mice
during the first 2 h of life. In MASH-1 -/- newborns, c-RET gene expression was
absent in the noradrenergic nuclei (A2, A5, A6, A7) that contribute to modulate
respiratory frequency and in scattered cells of the rostral ventrolateral
medulla. The c-RET transcript levels measured by quantitative RT-PCR were lower
in MASH-1 -/- and MASH-1 +/- than in MASH-1 +/+ brain stems (P = 0.001 and P =
0.003, respectively). Breath durations were shorter in MASH-1 -/- and MASH-1 +/- 
than in MASH-1 +/+ mice (P = 0.022) and were weakly correlated with c-RET
transcript levels (P = 0.032). Taken together, these results provide evidence
that MASH-1 is upstream of c-RET in noradrenergic brain stem neurons important
for respiratory rhythm modulation.

PMID: 11773601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 15;277(11):9118-26. Epub 2001 Dec 27.

Modulation of basic helix-loop-helix transcription complex formation by Id
proteins during neuronal differentiation.

Jögi A(1), Persson P, Grynfeld A, Påhlman S, Axelson H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine, Lund
University, University Hospital MAS, S-205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

It is assumed that the Id helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins act by associating with
ubiquitously expressed basic HLH (bHLH) transcription factors, such as E47 and
E2-2, which prevents these factors from forming functional hetero- or homodimeric
DNA binding complexes. Several tissue-specific bHLH proteins, including HASH-1,
dHAND, and HES-1, are important for development of the nervous system.
Neuroblastoma tumors are derived from the sympathetic nervous system and exhibit 
neural crest features. In differentiating neuroblastoma cells, HASH-1 is
down-regulated, and there is coincident up-regulation of the transcriptional
repressor HES-1, which is known to bind the HASH-1 promoter. We found that the
three Id proteins expressed in neuroblastoma cells (Id1, Id2, and Id3) were
down-regulated during induced differentiation, indicating that Id proteins help
keep the tumor cells in an undifferentiated state. Studying interactions, we
noted that all four Id proteins could dimerize with E47 or E2-2, but not with
HASH-1 or dHAND. However, the Id proteins did complex with HES-1, and increased
levels of Id2 reduced the DNA binding activity of HES-1. Furthermore, HES-1
interfered with Id2/E2-2 complex formation. The ability of Id proteins to affect 
HES-1 activity is of particular interest in neuronal cells, where regulation of
HES-1 is essential for the timing of neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 11756408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. FEBS Lett. 2002 Jan 2;510(1-2):50-6.

NGF-dependent and tissue-specific transcription of vgf is regulated by a
CREB-p300 and bHLH factor interaction.

Mandolesi G(1), Gargano S, Pennuto M, Illi B, Molfetta R, Soucek L, Mosca L, Levi
A, Jucker R, Nasi S.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Acidi Nucleici CNR, Dipartimento Genetica e Biologia Molecolare,
Università La Sapienza, P. le A. Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy.

Neurotrophins support neuronal survival, development, and plasticity through
processes requiring gene expression. We studied how vgf target gene transcription
is mediated by a critical promoter region containing E-box, CCAAT and cAMP
response element (CRE) sites. The p300 acetylase was present in two distinct
protein complexes bound to this region. One complex, containing HEB (ubiquitous
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)), bound the promoter in non-neuronal cells and was 
involved in repressing vgf expression. Neurotrophin-dependent transcription was
mediated by the second complex, specific for neuronal cells, which included CRE
binding protein and MASH1 (neuro-specific bHLH), bound the CCAAT motif, and was
target of neurotrophin signalling. The interaction, mediated by p300, of
different transcription factors may add specificity to the neurotrophin response.

PMID: 11755530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Neurochem. 2001 Dec;79(6):1225-36.

Structural and functional characterization of the 5' upstream promoter of the
human Phox2a gene: possible direct transactivation by transcription factor
Phox2b.

Hong SJ(1), Kim CH, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Belmont, Massachusetts 02478, USA.

The specification of neurotransmitter identity is a critical step in neural
development. Recent progresses have indicated that the closely related
homeodomain factors Phox2a and 2b are essential for development of noradrenergic 
(NA) neuron differentiation, and may directly determine the neurotransmitter
identity. With a long-term goal of understanding the regulatory cascade of NA
phenotype determination, we isolated and characterized a hPhox2a genomic clone
encompassing approximately 7.5 kb of the 5' upstream promoter region, the entire 
exon-intron structure, and approximately 4 kb of the 3' flanking region. Using
mRNAs isolated from the Phox2a-expressing human cell line, both primer extension 
and 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends analyses identified a single
transcription start site that resides 172 nucleotides upstream of the start
codon. The transcription start site was preceded by a TATA-like sequence motif
and transcripts from this site contained an additional G residue at the 5'
position, supporting the authenticity of this site as the transcriptional start
site of hPhox2a. We assembled hPhox2a-luciferase reporter constructs containing
different lengths of the 5' upstream sequences. Transient transfection assays of 
these reporter constructs in both hPhox2a-positive and -negative cell lines show 
that 1.3-kb or longer upstream sequences of the hPhox2a gene may confer NA
cell-specific reporter gene expression. Furthermore, cotransfection assays in the
Phox2a-negative HeLa cell line show that forced expression of Phox2b, but not
that of Phox2a or MASH1, significantly transactivates the transcriptional
activity of hPhox2a. This study will provide a frame to further delineate the
regulatory cascade of NA neuron differentiation.

PMID: 11752063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Development. 2001 Dec;128(24):5149-59.

The transcription factor neurogenin 2 restricts cell migration from the cortex to
the striatum.

Chapouton P(1), Schuurmans C, Guillemot F, Götz M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Neurobiology, Am Klopferspitz 18A, D-82152
Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.

The dorsal and ventral domains of the telencephalon are delineated by a unique
boundary structure that restricts the migration of dorsal and ventral cells to a 
different extent. While many cells invade the dorsal cortex from the ventral
ganglionic eminence (GE), hardly any cortical cells cross the boundary into the
GE. Several molecules have been implicated in the regulation of ventral to dorsal
cell migration, but so far nothing is known about the molecular mechanisms
restricting cortical cell migration in vivo. Here we show that in the absence of 
the transcription factor neurogenin 2, cells from the cortex migrate into the GE 
in vitro and in vivo as detected in transgenic mice containing a lacZ gene in the
neurogenin 2 locus. In contrast, the migration of cells from the GE is not
affected. Molecular and cellular analysis of the cortico-striatal boundary
revealed that neurogenin 2 regulates the fasciculation of the cortico-striatal
boundary which may explain the non cell-autonomous nature of the migration defect
as detected by in vitro transplantation. Taken together, these results show that 
distinct cues located in the cortico-striatal boundary restrict cells in the
dorsal and ventral telencephalon.

PMID: 11748150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Neurosci. 2001 Dec 15;21(24):9733-43.

Erythropoietin regulates the in vitro and in vivo production of neuronal
progenitors by mammalian forebrain neural stem cells.

Shingo T(1), Sorokan ST, Shimazaki T, Weiss S.

Author information: 
(1)Genes & Development Research Group, Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy,
University of Calgary, Faculty of Medicine, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

Recent studies have shown that neurogenesis is enhanced after hypoxia and that
erythropoietin (EPO), an inducible cytokine, is produced in the brain as part of 
the intrinsic hypoxia response. Thus, we asked whether EPO might regulate
neurogenesis by forebrain neural stem cells (NSCs). We found that EPO receptors
are expressed in the embryonic germinal zone during neurogenesis as well as in
the adult subventricular zone, which continues to generate neurons throughout
adulthood. Cultured NSCs exposed to a modest hypoxia produced two- to threefold
more neurons, which was associated with an elevation in EPO gene expression. The 
enhanced neuron production attributable to hypoxia was mimicked by EPO and
blocked by coadministration of an EPO neutralizing antibody. EPO appears to act
directly on NSCs, promoting the production of neuronal progenitors at the expense
of multipotent progenitors. EPO infusion into the adult lateral ventricles
resulted in a decrease in the numbers of NSCs in the subventricular zone, an
increase in newly generated cells migrating to the olfactory bulb, and an
increase in new olfactory bulb interneurons. Infusion of anti-EPO antibodies had 
the opposite effect: an increase in the number of NSCs in the subventricular zone
and a decrease in the number of newly generated cells migrating to the bulb.
These findings suggest that EPO is an autocrine-paracrine factor, capable of
regulating the production of neuronal progenitor cells by forebrain NSCs.

PMID: 11739582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Biochem J. 2001 Dec 15;360(Pt 3):683-9.

Proprotein convertase PACE4 is down-regulated by the basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor hASH-1 and MASH-1.

Yoshida I(1), Koide S, Hasegawa SI, Nakagawara A, Tsuji A, Matsuda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Faculty of Engineering, The
University of Tokushima, 2-1 Minamijosanjima, Tokushima 770-8506, Japan.

PACE4 is a mammalian subtilisin-like proprotein convertase that activates
transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta-related proteins such as bone morphogenetic
protein 2 (BMP2), BMP4 and Nodal and exhibits a dynamic expression pattern during
embryogenesis. We recently determined that the 1 kb 5'-upstream region of the
PACE4 gene contains 12 E-box (E1-E12) elements and that an E-box cluster (E4-E9) 
acts as a negative regulator [Tsuji, Yoshida, Hasegawa, Bando, Yoshida, Koide,
Mori and Matsuda (1999) J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 126, 494-502]. It is known that the
mammalian achaete-scute homologue 1 (MASH-1) binds specifically to an E-box
(CACCTG) sequence in collaboration with E47, a ubiquitously expressed basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factor. To identify the roles of the bHLH factor and
E-box elements in regulating PACE4 gene expression in neural development, we
analysed the effects of human achaete-scute homologue 1 (hASH-1) on PACE4 gene
expression with various neuroblastoma cell lines. The expressions of PACE4 and
hASH-1 are correlated inversely in these cell lines. The overexpression of hASH-1
or MASH-1 causes a marked decrease in endogenous PACE4 gene expression but has no
effect on the expression of other subtilisin-like proprotein convertases such as 
furin, PC5/6 and PC7/8. In contrast, other neural bHLH factors (MATH-1, MATH-2,
neurogenin 1, neurogenin 2, neurogenin 3 and E47) did not affect PACE4 gene
expression. Furthermore, an E-box cluster was a negative regulatory element for
the promoter activity in NBL-S cells expressing hASH-1 at high level as
determined by a luciferase assay. Binding of hASH-1 to the E-box cluster was
confirmed by gel mobility-shift assay. In the present study we identified the
PACE4 gene as one of the targets of hASH-1, which is a key factor in the
initiation of neural differentiation. These results suggest that the alteration
of PACE4 gene expression by hASH-1 causes rapid changes in the biological
activities of TGF-beta-related proteins via post-translational modification of
these proteins.

PMCID: PMC1222273
PMID: 11736660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 30;276(48):45031-40. Epub 2001 Sep 19.

Role of Deltex-1 as a transcriptional regulator downstream of the Notch receptor.

Yamamoto N(1), Yamamoto S, Inagaki F, Kawaichi M, Fukamizu A, Kishi N, Matsuno K,
Nakamura K, Weinmaster G, Okano H, Nakafuku M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Intercellular signaling through the cell-surface receptor Notch plays important
roles in a variety of developmental processes as well as in pathogenesis of some 
human cancers and genetic disorders. However, the mechanisms by which Notch
signals are transduced into cells still remain elusive. Here we investigated the 
signaling mechanisms for Notch in the cell fate control of neural progenitor
cells. We show that Deltex-1 (DTX1), a mammalian homolog of Drosophila Deltex,
mediates a Notch signal to block differentiation of neural progenitor cells. We
found that a significant fraction of DTX1 proteins were localized in the nucleus 
and physically interacted with the transcriptional coactivator p300. Through its 
binding to p300, DTX1 inhibited transcriptional activation by the neural-specific
helix-loop-helix-type transcription factor MASH1, and this mechanism is likely
responsible for the differentiation inhibition of neural progenitor cells. Our
results further suggest that DTX1 regulates transcription independently of the
previously characterized Notch signaling pathway involving RBP-J and HES1/HES5.
Thus, DTX1 serves as an important signaling component downstream of Notch that
regulates transcription in the nucleus.

PMID: 11564735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Neuroscience. 2001;106(1):79-88.

Differential regulation of basic helix-loop-helix mRNAs in the dentate gyrus
following status epilepticus.

Elliott RC(1), Khademi S, Pleasure SJ, Parent JM, Lowenstein DH.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Brain Plasticity and Epilepsy, Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck 
Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

In various chemoconvulsant models of human temporal lobe epilepsy, the induction 
of epileptogenesis by a prolonged period of continuous seizure activity is
accompanied by significant changes in hippocampal structure. These changes
include an increase in neurogenesis within the proliferative subgranular zone
(SGZ) of the dentate gyrus and induction of mossy fiber sprouting in mature
dentate granule cells. As dentate granule cell neurogenesis and axon outgrowth
are also hallmarks of hippocampal development, we hypothesized that molecules
involved in normal development may also play a role in similar changes associated
with epileptogenesis. To begin to test this hypothesis, we have analyzed the
expression patterns of multiple members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
family of transcription factors in both normal and epileptic adult rats. bHLH
protein expression has been found recently in dentate granule cells at specific
developmental stages, and analysis of developmental models suggests specific
neural differentiation functions for these molecules. We show that mRNA
expression of all seven bHLH family members examined in this study, as well as
the divergent homeobox protein Prox1, is present in the adult. Patterns of
expression varied considerably between family members, ranging from the limited
expression of Mash1 in the neurogenic SGZ of the dentate gyrus to the scattered, 
widespread profile of Hes5 throughout the dentate gyrus and the hippocampus
proper. Moreover, these varied profiles of expression were differentially
regulated following status epilepticus, with some increasing (Mash1, Id2), some
falling (Hes5, Prox1), and others remaining mostly unchanged (NeuroD/BETA2,
NeuroD2/NDRF, Id3, Rath2/Nex1). While the function of these molecules in the
adult brain remains to be characterized, our findings support the idea that
molecules controlling cell-fate decisions in the developing dentate gyrus are
also operative during seizure-induced neurogenesis and plasticity.

PMID: 11564418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Neuron. 2001 Aug 2;31(2):219-32.

Crossinhibitory activities of Ngn1 and Math1 allow specification of distinct
dorsal interneurons.

Gowan K(1), Helms AW, Hunsaker TL, Collisson T, Ebert PJ, Odom R, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Basic Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Distinct classes of neurons are generated from progenitor cells distributed in
characteristic dorsoventral patterns in the developing spinal neural tube. We
define restricted neural progenitor populations by the discrete, nonoverlapping
expression of Ngn1, Math1, and Mash1. Crossinhibition between these bHLH factors 
is demonstrated and provides a mechanism for the generation of discrete bHLH
expression domains. This precise control of bHLH factor expression is essential
for proper neural development since as demonstrated in both loss- and
gain-of-function experiments, expression of Math1 or Ngn1 in dorsal progenitor
cells determines whether LH2A/B- or dorsal Lim1/2-expressing interneurons will
develop. Together, the data suggest that although Math1 and Ngn1 appear to be
redundant with respect to neurogenesis, they have distinct functions in
specifying neuronal subtype in the dorsal neural tube.

PMID: 11502254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mech Dev. 2001 Aug;106(1-2):155-8.

Irx1 and Irx2 expression in early lung development.

Becker MB(1), Zülch A, Bosse A, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry, Am Fassberg, 37077, Göttingen, Germany.

We describe a comparative lung expression analysis of the murine Irx1 and Irx2
genes. At embryonic day 8.5 (E8.5), the Irx1 and Irx2 expression starts in the
foregut region, where the laryngo-tracheal groove will form. The expression is
prominent in the lung epithelium during glandular development. It declines at the
end of the canalicular phase. We further compare the Irx1 and Irx2 expression
domains to Gli1, 2, 3 and Mash1. Their homologues in Drosophila melanogaster are 
known as regulative partners of the iroquois complex. The Irx and Gli genes are
coexpressed in the developing lungs at the same time. Their transcripts are not
localised in the same cells but adjacent to each other in either mesenchymal or
epithelial structures. It is thought that the lung development is regulated by
the mesenchymal/epithelial interactions.

PMID: 11472847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Med Pediatr Oncol. 2001 Jan;36(1):132-4.

Downregulation of hASH1 is associated with the retinoic acid-induced
differentiation of human neuroblastoma cell lines.

Ichimiya S(1), Nimura Y, Seki N, Ozaki T, Nagase T, Nakagawara A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Chiba Cancer Center Research Institute, Japan.

BACKGROUND: MASH1, a transcription factor with basic helix-loop-helix domain, has
a pivotal function to promote differentiation of neural crest cells into
autonomic neurons.
PROCEDURE: To investigate the functional significance of human MASH1 (hASH1) in
the pathogenesis of neuroblastoma, which is originated from autonomic precursor
cells, we studied hASH1 gene expression in primary neuroblastomas and human
nueroblastoma cell lines.
RESULTS: The follovving results were obtained: (i) hASH1 was expressed in 40 out 
of 61 (66%) primary neuroblastomas, (ii) hASH1 transcripts were downregulated in 
several cell lines prior to differentiation induced by all-trans retinoic acid
(RA), (iii) a neuroblasotma cell line without expression of endogenous hASH1 did 
not respond to RA at all, and (iv) the analysis of the hASH1 genomic DNA revealed
two possible transcription initiation sites, which may correspond to 3.0 kb and
3.5 kb transcripts.
CONCLUSIONS: Our observations suggest that, although hASH1 may not preserve the
growth capacity of neuroblastomas, downregulation of hASH1 may be necessary to
promote neuronal differentiation of neuroblastoma.

PMID: 11464865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Mol Med (Berl). 2001;78(12):721-4.

Large de novo deletion in chromosome 12 affecting the PAH, IGF1, ASCL1, and TRA1 
genes.

Mallolas J(1), Vilaseca MA, Pavia C, Lambruschini N, Cambra FJ, Campistol J,
Gómez D, Carrió A, Estivill X, Milà M.

Author information: 
(1)Servei Genètica, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.

Phenylketonuria is one of the most common genetic diseases in humans, affecting 1
in 10,000 whites. Deletions are generally uncommon in genes in which no long
highly homologous segments are present, and in phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH)
deficiency they represent only 5% of cases. We present the case of a girl
affected by classical phenylketonuria who has been screened for mutations in the 
PAH gene. During the molecular study a large de novo deletion has detected in
12qter, including PAH, and the genes for insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1),
human achaete-scute homolog 1 (ASCL1), and tumor rejection antigen (TRA1). The
patient showed phenylketonuria, short stature, and pathological
electro-oculography results in both eyes, with high affectation of the relative
electrogenesis of the photoreceptor-pigment epithelium complex. She had
previously been misdiagnosed as homozygous for the IVS8nt-7A-G mutation, instead 
of heterozygous for a mutation and a de novo deletion. As a result incorrect
genetic counseling had been given. The deletion of the PAH, IGF1, and ASCL1 genes
could explain the patient's phenotype corresponding to a contiguous gene
syndrome. We stress the relevance of polymorphic marker haplotype analysis and
the importance of family study in genetic recessive diseases, such as
phenylketonuria, to avoid incorrect diagnosis and genetic counseling.

PMID: 11434725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Neurosci Res. 2001 Jul 1;65(1):17-23.

Human medulloblastoma cell line DEV is a potent tool to screen for factors
influencing differentiation of neural stem cells.

Buzanska L(1), Spassky N, Belin MF, Giangrande A, Guillemot F, Klämbt C,
Labouesse M, Thomas JL, Domanska-Janik K, Zalc B.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.

The aim of our study was to investigate whether a human neural cell line could be
used as a reliable screening tool to examine the functional conservation, in
humans, of transcription factors involved in neuronal or glial specification in
other species. Gain-of-function experiments were performed on DEV cells, a cell
line derived from a human medulloblastoma. Genes encoding nine different
transcription factors were tested for their influence on the process of
specification of human DEV cells towards a neuronal or glial fate. In a first
series of experiments, DEV cells were transfected with murine genes encoding
transcription factors known to be involved in the neuronal differentiation
cascade. Neurogenins-1, -2, and -3; Mash-1; and NeuroD increased the
differentiation of DEV cells towards a neuronal phenotype by a factor of 2-3.5.
In a second series of experiments, we tested transcription factors involved in
invertebrate glial specification. In the embryonic Drosophila CNS, the
development of most glial cells depends on the master regulatory gene glial cell 
missing (gcm). Expression of gcm in DEV cells induced a twofold increase of
astrocytic and a sixfold increase of oligodendroglial cell types. Interestingly, 
expression of tramtrack69, which is required in all Drosophila glial cells,
resulted in a fourfold increase of only the oligodendrocyte phenotype. Expression
of the related tramtrack88 protein, which is not expressed in the fly glia, or
the C. elegans lin26 protein showed no effect. These results show that the
Drosophila transcription factor genes tested can conserve their function upon
transfection into the human DEV cells, qualifying this cell line as a screening
tool to analyze the mechanisms of neuronal and glial specification.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11433425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2001 Jun;46(7):821-8.

[Cell-intrinsic timer regulating oligodendrocyte development].

[Article in Japanese]

Kondo T(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London.

PMID: 11431925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mech Dev. 2001 Jul;105(1-2):93-104.

Differentiation of embryonic stem cell-derived dopaminergic neurons is enhanced
by survival-promoting factors.

Rolletschek A(1), Chang H, Guan K, Czyz J, Meyer M, Wobus AM.

Author information: 
(1)'In vitro Differentiation' Group, Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant
Research, Corrensstrasse 3, D-06466, Gatersleben, Germany.

Here, we describe the generation of viable and dopamine-producing neurons derived
from pluripotent mouse embryonic stem cells. Neurotrophic factors in combination 
with survival-promoting factors, such as interleukin-1beta, glial cell
line-derived neurotrophic factor, neurturin, transforming growth factor-beta(3)
and dibutyryl-cyclic AMP, significantly enhanced Nurr1 and tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH) mRNA levels, whereas En-1, mash-1 and dopamine-2-receptor mRNA levels were
not upregulated. In parallel, mRNA levels of the anti-apoptotic gene bcl-2 were
found to be upregulated at terminal stages. Double immunofluorescence analysis
revealed increased numbers of TH- and dopamine transporter-, but not
gamma-aminobutyric acid- and serotonin-positive neurons in relation to
synaptophysin-labeled cells by survival-promoting factors. Moreover,
high-performance liquid chromatography analysis showed detectable levels of
intracellular dopamine. We conclude that survival-promoting factors enhance
differentiation, survival and maintenance of dopaminergic neurons derived from
embryonic stem cells.

PMID: 11429285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 May 8;98(10):5868-73. Epub 2001 May 1.

BMP2-mediated alteration in the developmental pathway of fetal mouse brain cells 
from neurogenesis to astrocytogenesis.

Nakashima K(1), Takizawa T, Ochiai W, Yanagisawa M, Hisatsune T, Nakafuku M,
Miyazono K, Kishimoto T, Kageyama R, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Fate Modulation, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

We show that when telencephalic neural progenitors are briefly exposed to bone
morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) in culture, their developmental fate is changed
from neuronal cells to astrocytic cells. BMP2 significantly reduced the number of
cells expressing microtubule-associated protein 2, a neuronal marker, and cells
expressing nestin, a marker for undifferentiated neural precursors, but BMP2
increased the number of cells expressing S100-beta, an astrocytic marker. In
telencephalic neuroepithelial cells, BMP2 up-regulated the expression of negative
helix-loop-helix (HLH) factors Id1, Id3, and Hes-5 (where Hes is homologue of
hairy and Enhancer of Split) that inhibited the transcriptional activity of
neurogenic HLH transcription factors Mash1 and neurogenin. Ectopic expression of 
either Id1 or Id3 (where Id is inhibitor of differentiation) inhibited
neurogenesis of neuroepithelial cells, suggesting an important role for these HLH
proteins in the BMP2-mediated changes in the neurogenic fate of these cells.
Because gliogenesis in the brain and spinal cord, derived from implanted neural
stem cells or induced by injury, is responsible for much of the failure of
neuronal regeneration, this work may lead to a therapeutic strategy to minimize
this problem.

PMCID: PMC33305
PMID: 11331769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 1998 Jun;50(3):289-95.

[Neural differentiation of Wnt-1 overexpression P19 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang J(1), Sun H, Bian W, Jing NH.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai
200031.

Wnt-1 gene plays important roles during the development of the mouse central
neural system. and shown a transient expression during neuronal differentiation
of P19 EC cells. We transfected Wnt-1 gene into P19 cells and found the Wnt-1
transfected cells could differentiate into neurons without the induction of RA.
However, MASH-1, a crucial gene for the early neural differentiation, was
expressed later than P19 cells induced by RA.

PMID: 11324569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cancer Res. 2001 Apr 1;61(7):3200-5.

Notch signaling induces cell cycle arrest in small cell lung cancer cells.

Sriuranpong V(1), Borges MW, Ravi RK, Arnold DR, Nelkin BD, Baylin SB, Ball DW.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

Among the various forms of human lung cancer, small cell lung cancer (SCLC)
exhibits a characteristic neuroendocrine (NE) phenotype. Neural and NE
differentiation in SCLC depend, in part, on the action of the
basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor human achaete-scute
homologue-1 (hASH1). In nervous system development, the Notch signaling pathway
is a critical negative regulator of bHLH factors, including hASH1, controlling
cell fate commitment and differentiation. To characterize Notch pathway function 
in SCLC, we explored the consequences of constitutively active Notch signaling in
cultured SCLC cells. Recombinant adenoviruses were used to overexpress active
forms of Notch1, Notch2, or the Notch effector protein human hairy enhancer of
split-1 (HES1) in DMS53 and NCI-H209 SCLC cells. Notch proteins, but not HES1 or 
control adenoviruses, caused a profound growth arrest, associated with a G1 cell 
cycle block. We found up-regulation of p21(waf1/cip1) and p27kip1 in concert with
the cell cycle changes. Active Notch proteins also led to dramatic reduction in
hASH1 expression, as well as marked activation of phosphorylated extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1 and ERK2, findings that have been shown to be
associated with cell cycle arrest in SCLC cells. These data suggest that the
previously described function of Notch proteins as proto-oncogenes is highly
context-dependent. Notch activation, in the setting of a highly proliferative
hASH1-dependent NE neoplasm, can be associated with growth arrest and apparent
reduction in neoplastic potential.

PMID: 11306509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Neuron. 2001 Mar;29(3):603-14.

A role for the helix-loop-helix protein Id2 in the control of oligodendrocyte
development.

Wang S(1), Sdrulla A, Johnson JE, Yokota Y, Barres BA.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University School of Medicine, Department of Neurobiology, Sherman
Fairchild Science Building D231, 299 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Compared to neurons, the intracellular mechanisms that control glial
differentiation are still poorly understood. We show here that oligodendrocyte
lineage cells express the helix-loop-helix proteins Mash1 and Id2. Although Mash1
has been found to regulate neuronal development, we found that in the absence of 
Mash1 oligodendrocyte differentiation occurs normally. In contrast, we found that
overexpression of Id2 powerfully inhibits oligodendrocyte differentiation, that
Id2 normally translocates out of the nucleus at the onset of differentiation, and
that absence of Id2 induces premature oligodendrocyte differentiation in vitro.
These findings demonstrate that Id2 is a component of the intracellular mechanism
that times oligodendrocyte differentiation and point to the existence of an as
yet unidentified MyoD-like bHLH protein necessary for oligodendrocyte
differentiation.

PMID: 11301021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Microsc Res Tech. 2001 Mar 15;52(6):740-5.

Regulation of oligodendrocyte development.

Kagawa T(1), Wada T, Ikenaka K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Neural Information Laboratory, 
38 Nishigonaka, Mydaiji, Okazaki, 444-8585 Aichi, Japan. kagawa@nips.ac.jp

Oligodendrocytes are myelinating cells in the central nervous system. Recent
studies demonstrated that oligodendrocyte progenitor cells are generated from a
restricted region in the ventricular zone. In the rodent spinal cord, progenitor 
cells appear from narrow and bilateral longitudinal columns in the ventral
ventricular zone, and then migrate dorsally. This ventral-specific appearance of 
oligodendrocyte progenitors may be controlled along the dorso-ventral axis in the
spinal cord by extrinsic signals secreted from both the dorsal and ventral cords.
The combined action of the Notch signaling pathway and a basic helix-loop-helix
class of transcription factors may modulate this early specification of spinal
oligodendrocytes and also be involved in multiple steps of oligodendrocyte
differentiation.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11276126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Mar 27;98(7):4010-5. Epub 2001 Mar 13.

Mammalian Scratch: a neural-specific Snail family transcriptional repressor.

Nakakura EK(1), Watkins DN, Schuebel KE, Sriuranpong V, Borges MW, Nelkin BD,
Ball DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Members of the Snail family of zinc finger transcription factors are known to
play critical roles in neurogenesis in invertebrates, but none of these factors
has been linked to vertebrate neuronal differentiation. We report the isolation
of a gene encoding a mammalian Snail family member that is restricted to the
nervous system. Human and murine Scratch (Scrt) share 81% and 69% identity to
Drosophila Scrt and the Caenorhabditis elegans neuronal antiapoptotic protein,
CES-1, respectively, across the five zinc finger domain. Expression of mammalian 
Scrt is predominantly confined to the brain and spinal cord, appearing in newly
differentiating, postmitotic neurons and persisting into postnatal life.
Additional expression is seen in the retina and, significantly, in neuroendocrine
(NE) cells of the lung. In a parallel fashion, we detect hScrt expression in lung
cancers with NE features, especially small cell lung cancer. hScrt shares the
capacity of other Snail family members to bind to E-box enhancer motifs, which
are targets of basic helix--loop--helix (bHLH) transcription factors. We show
that hScrt directly antagonizes the function of heterodimers of the proneural
bHLH protein achaete-scute homolog-1 and E12, leading to active transcriptional
repression at E-box motifs. Thus, Scrt has the potential to function in newly
differentiating, postmitotic neurons and in cancers with NE features by
modulating the action of bHLH transcription factors critical for neuronal
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC31170
PMID: 11274425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Development. 2001 Apr;128(8):1313-22.

Roles of homeobox and bHLH genes in specification of a retinal cell type.

Hatakeyama J(1), Tomita K, Inoue T, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507,
Japan.

Previous analysis of mutant mice has revealed that the bHLH genes Mash1 and
Math3, and the homeobox gene Chx10 are essential for generation of bipolar cells,
the interneurons present in the inner nuclear layer of the retina. Thus, a
combination of the bHLH and homeobox genes should be important for bipolar cell
genesis, but the exact functions of each gene remain largely unknown. We have
found that in Mash1-Math3 double-mutant retina, which exhibits a complete loss of
bipolar cells, Chx10 expression did not disappear but remained in Müller glial
cells, suggesting that Chx10 expression per se is compatible with gliogenesis. In
agreement with this, misexpression of Chx10 alone with retrovirus in the retinal 
explant cultures induced generation of the inner nuclear layer cells, including
Müller glia, but few of them were mature bipolar cells. Misexpression of Mash1 or
Math3 alone did not promote bipolar cell genesis either, but inhibited Müller
gliogenesis. In contrast, misexpression of Mash1 or Math3 together with Chx10
increased the population of mature bipolar cells and decreased that of Müller
glia. Thus, the homeobox gene provides the inner nuclear layer-specific identity 
while the bHLH genes regulate the neuronal versus glial fate determination, and
these two classes of genes together specify the bipolar cell fate. Moreover,
Mash1 and Math3 promoted the bipolar cell fate, but not the other inner nuclear
layer-specific neuronal subtypes in the presence of Chx10, raising the
possibility that the bHLH genes may be involved in neuronal subtype
specification, in addition to simply making the neuronal versus glial fate
choice.

PMID: 11262232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Neuron. 2001 Feb;29(2):401-13.

Neural bHLH genes control the neuronal versus glial fate decision in cortical
progenitors.

Nieto M(1), Schuurmans C, Britz O, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire, et Cellulaire, CNRS, INSERM,
Université, Louis Pasteur, Boite Postale 163, 67404 Illkirch Cédex, Communauté
Urbaine de, Strasbourg, France

We have addressed the role of the proneural bHLH genes Neurogenin2 (Ngn2) and
Mash1 in the selection of neuronal and glial fates by neural stem cells. We show 
that mice mutant for both genes present severe defects in development of the
cerebral cortex, including a reduction of neurogenesis and a premature and
excessive generation of astrocytic precursors. An analysis of wild-type and
mutant cortical progenitors in culture showed that a large fraction of Ngn2;
Mash1 double-mutant progenitors failed to adopt a neuronal fate, instead
remaining pluripotent or entering an astrocytic differentiation pathway.
Together, these results demonstrate that proneural genes are involved in lineage 
restriction of cortical progenitors, promoting the acquisition of the neuronal
fate and inhibiting the astrocytic fate.

PMID: 11239431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Exp Lung Res. 2000 Dec;26(8):595-615.

Morphometric analysis of CC10-hASH1 transgenic mouse lung: a model for
bronchiolization of alveoli and neuroendocrine carcinoma.

Linnoila RI(1), Sahu A, Miki M, Ball DW, DeMayo FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Cancer Biology Department, Medicine Branch, Division of Clinical
Sciences, National Cancer Institute, National Institute of Health, 9610 Medical
Center Drive, Suite 300, Rockville, MD 20850, USA. il17h@nih.gov

Constitutive expression of human achaete-scute homolog-1 (hASH1) alone or in
combination with Simian virus 40 (SV40) large T antigen (TAg) under the Clara
cell 10-kDa secretory protein (CC10) promoter results in bronchiolization of
alveoli and enhanced tumorigenesis, respectively. A novel morphometric system
composed of series of fixed distance concentric rings originating at the
bronchioloalveolar junction was used to determine spatial growth patterns. hASH1 
mice exhibited progressive airway epithelial hyperplasia near this junction, and 
minimal changes further away in the alveolar compartment. TAg animals shared this
increase, but exhibited variable distance-dependent growth. By 2 months TAg/hASH1
animals showed highly increased growth at all points measured. Remarkably,
TAg/hASH1 animals expressed both CC10 and extensive neuroendocrine
differentiation in airways and tumors. The results suggest that these transgenic 
mice provide a useful model with many similarities to human lung carcinogenesis, 
which originates in airway epithelium, and often reveals neuroendocrine
differentiation.

PMID: 11195458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Neurosci. 2001 Feb 15;21(4):1265-73.

The basic helix-loop-helix gene hesr2 promotes gliogenesis in mouse retina.

Satow T(1), Bae SK, Inoue T, Inoue C, Miyoshi G, Tomita K, Bessho Y, Hashimoto N,
Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, and Department of
Neurosurgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan.

Members of a subclass of hairy/Enhancer of split [E(spl)] homologs, called hesr
genes, are structurally related to another subclass of hairy/E(spl) homologs, Hes
genes, which play an important role in neural development. To characterize the
roles of hesr genes in neural development, we used the retina as a model system. 
In situ hybridization analysis indicated that all hesr genes are expressed in the
developing retina, but only hesr2 expression is associated spatially with
gliogenesis. Each member was then misexpressed with retrovirus in the retinal
explant cultures prepared from mouse embryos or neonates, which well mimic in
vivo retinal development. Interestingly, hesr2 but not hesr1 or hesr3 promoted
gliogenesis while inhibiting rod genesis without affecting cell proliferation or 
death, suggesting that the cells that normally differentiate into rods adopted
the glial fate by misexpression of hesr2. The gliogenic activity of hesr2 was
more profound when it was misexpressed postnatally than prenatally. In addition, 
double mutation of the neuronal determination genes Mash1 and Math3, which
increases Müller glia at the expense of bipolar cells, upregulated hesr2
expression. These results indicate that, among structurally related hesr genes,
only hesr2 promotes glial versus neuronal cell fate specification in the retina
and that antagonistic regulation between hesr2 and Mash1-Math3 may determine the 
ratios of neurons and glia.

PMID: 11160397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mech Dev. 2000 Dec;99(1-2):143-8.

Dynamic expression of basic helix-loop-helix Olig family members: implication of 
Olig2 in neuron and oligodendrocyte differentiation and identification of a new
member, Olig3.

Takebayashi H(1), Yoshida S, Sugimori M, Kosako H, Kominami R, Nakafuku M,
Nabeshima Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Yoshida, Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, 606-8501, Kyoto, Japan.
takebaya@lmls.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors have been shown to be
essential for specification of various cell types. Here, we describe a novel bHLH
family consisting of three members, two of which (Olig1, Olig2) are expressed in 
a nervous tissue-specific manner, whereas the third, Olig3 is found mainly in
non-neural tissues. Olig1 and Olig2, which recently have been implicated in
oligodendrogenesis, are expressed in the region of the ventral ventricular zone
of late embryonic spinal cord where oligodendrocyte progenitors appear. In the
embryonic brain, the Olig2 expression domain is broader than that of Olig1 and
does not overlap with an oligodendrocyte progenitor marker, CNP. Furthermore,
Olig2 is expressed in most cells in the ventral half of the early embryonic
spinal cord, which do not yet express an early neuronal marker TuJ1. These
results indicate that Olig2 expression is not limited to the oligodendrocyte
lineage but includes immature neuronal progenitors and multipotential neuron/glia
progenitors as well as embryonic olfactory neurons.

PMID: 11091082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Dev Biol. 2000 Dec 1;228(1):57-72.

Autonomic neurogenesis and apoptosis are alternative fates of progenitor cell
communities induced by TGFbeta.

Hagedorn L(1), Floris J, Suter U, Sommer L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology,
ETH-Hönggerberg, Zurich, CH-8093, Switzerland.

The question of how appropriate cell types are generated in correct numbers
during development of the peripheral nervous system has become particularly
intriguing with the identification of multipotent progenitor cells in
postmigratory targets of the neural crest. Recently, we have provided evidence
that community effects in response to factors of the TGFbeta family might
represent a mechanism to suppress inappropriate nonneural fates from multipotent 
progenitors in developing peripheral ganglia. In culture, BMP2 and TGFbeta
promote neurogenesis at the expense of a smooth-muscle-like fate in clusters of
neural-crest-derived multipotent progenitor cells. We now show that the neurons
generated by TGFbeta factors belong to the autonomic lineage and that cells
within the developing sympathetic ganglia express TGFbeta-type II receptor. In
addition to its neurogenic activity, TGFbeta but not BMP2 also induces apoptosis 
as an alternative fate in cultured progenitor communities. Interestingly, these
fate decisions are controlled by graded changes in TGFbeta concentrations: lower 
doses of TGFbeta promote neurogenesis while slightly higher doses induce
predominantly apoptosis. These effects of TGFbeta are specific for an early
developmental stage since progenitor cells lose their competence to respond to
the proapoptotic activity of TGFbeta upon neuronal differentiation. In vivo, the 
expression of TGFbeta3 in differentiated neurons suggests that the signal
concentration gradually increases with the number of neurons formed in the
autonomic ganglia. We propose that TGFbeta functions in a biphasic manner during 
autonomic gangliogenesis to control both neurogenesis and subsequently the number
of neurons generated from progenitor cells.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11087626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Development. 2000 Dec;127(24):5343-54.

Hoxb1 controls effectors of sonic hedgehog and Mash1 signaling pathways.

Gaufo GO(1), Flodby P, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

The diverse neuronal subtypes in the adult central nervous system arise from
progenitor cells specified by the combined actions of anteroposterior (AP) and
dorsoventral (DV) signaling molecules in the neural tube. Analyses of the
expression and targeted disruption of the homeobox gene Hoxb1 demonstrate that it
is essential for patterning progenitor cells along the entire DV axis of
rhombomere 4 (r4). Hoxb1 accomplishes this function by acting very early during
hindbrain neurogenesis to specify effectors of the sonic hedgehog and Mash1
signaling pathways. In the absence of Hoxb1 function, multiple neurons normally
specified within r4 are instead programmed for early cell death. The findings
reported here provide evidence for a genetic cascade in which an AP-specified
transcription factor, Hoxb1, controls the commitment and specification of neurons
derived from both alar and basal plates of r4.

PMID: 11076756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Dev Biol. 2000 Nov 1;227(1):1-11.

Postmigratory enteric and sympathetic neural precursors share common,
developmentally regulated, responses to BMP2.

Pisano JM(1), Colón-Hastings F, Birren SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Volen National Center for Complex Systems, Brandeis
University, 415 South Street, Waltham, Massachusetts, 02454, USA.

The development of enteric and sympathetic neurons from neural crest precursor
cells is regulated by signals produced by the embryonic environments to which the
cells migrate. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are present in the developing
embryo and act to induce neuronal differentiation and noradrenergic properties of
neural crest cells. We have investigated the role of BMP2 in regulating the
appearance of distinct populations of autonomic neurons from postmigratory,
HNK-1-positive neural crest precursor cells. BMP2 promotes neuronal
differentiation of sympathetic and enteric precursor cells isolated from E14.5
rat. The effects of BMP2 change over time, resulting in a decrease in neuron
number that can be attributed to apoptotic cell death. BMP2-dependent neuron
death is rescued by gut-derived factors that provide trophic support to maturing 
neurons, indicating that BMP2 regulates the acquisition of trophic dependence of 
developing peripheral neurons. In addition to regulating neuron number, BMP2
promotes both panneuronal maturation and the acquisition of an enteric phenotype,
as measured by lineage-specific changes in the expression of tyrosine hydroxylase
and MASH-1. While BMP2 is sufficient to induce neuronal differentiation and
panneuronal development, these results suggest that additional factors in the
environment must collaborate with BMP2 to promote the final noradrenergic
phenotype of sympathetic neurons.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11076672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Dev Biol. 2000 Nov 15;227(2):343-57.

Midline nasal tissue influences nestin expression in nasal-placode-derived
luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone neurons during development.

Kramer PR(1), Wray S.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Developmental Neurobiology Section, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 20892, USA.

Neurons differentiating into the luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH)
neuroendocrine phenotype are derived from the nasal placode. Cells within the
vomeronasal organ anlage that turn on LHRH gene and peptide expression
subsequently migrate into the forebrain where they influence reproductive
function. The molecular and cellular cues regulating differentiation and
migration of these cells are unknown. Discovery of developmental markers can
indicate proteins directing or associated with differentiation. Analysis of such 
markers after manipulation of external cues can elucidate important extracellular
differentiation signals. Embryonic LHRH neurons were examined in vivo for Mash-1 
and nestin, two factors that delineate precursor populations in PNS and forebrain
CNS cells. Nestin, but not Mash-1, was detected in early expressing LHRH cells in
the vomeronasal organ anlage. These results were duplicated in LHRH neurons
maintained in vitro in nasal explants. Such LHRH cells expressed nestin mRNA but 
not Mash-1 mRNA and were also negative for three other olfactory epithelial
developmental transcription factors, Math4A, Math4C/neurogenin1, and NeuroD mRNA.
Experimental manipulation of nasal explants revealed dual expression of nestin
protein and LHRH in cells proximal to the vomeronasal organ anlage that was
dependent upon midline cartilaginous/mesenchymal tissues. Prolonged nestin
expression in LHRH cells after midline removal is consistent with nasal midline
tissues modulating differentiation of LHRH neurons from the nasal placode.

PMID: 11071759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. EMBO J. 2000 Oct 16;19(20):5460-72.

Mammalian achaete-scute and atonal homologs regulate neuronal versus glial fate
determination in the central nervous system.

Tomita K(1), Moriyoshi K, Nakanishi S, Guillemot F, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Whereas vertebrate achaete-scute complex (as-c) and atonal (ato) homologs are
required for neurogenesis, their neuronal determination activities in the central
nervous system (CNS) are not yet supported by loss-of-function studies, probably 
because of genetic redundancy. Here, to address this problem, we generated mice
double mutant for the as-c homolog Mash1 and the ato homolog Math3. Whereas in
Mash1 or Math3 single mutants neurogenesis is only weakly affected, in the double
mutants tectal neurons, two longitudinal columns of hindbrain neurons and retinal
bipolar cells were missing and, instead, those cells that normally differentiate 
into neurons adopted the glial fate. These results indicated that Mash1 and Math3
direct neuronal versus glial fate determination in the CNS and raised the
possibility that downregulation of these bHLH genes is one of the mechanisms to
initiate gliogenesis.

PMCID: PMC314003
PMID: 11032813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Development. 2000 Sep;127(18):3913-21.

Basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors regulate the neuroendocrine
differentiation of fetal mouse pulmonary epithelium.

Ito T(1), Udaka N, Yazawa T, Okudela K, Hayashi H, Sudo T, Guillemot F, Kageyama 
R, Kitamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yokohama City University School of Medicine,
Yokohama, Japan. takaito@med.yokohama-cu.ac.jp.

To clarify the mechanisms that regulate neuroendocrine differentiation of fetal
lung epithelia, we have studied the expression of the mammalian homologs of
achaete-scute complex (Mash1) (Ascl1 - Mouse Genome Informatics); hairy and
enhancer of split1 (Hes1); and the expression of Notch/Notch-ligand system in the
fetal and adult mouse lungs, and in the lungs of Mash1- or Hes1-deficient mice.
Immunohistochemical studies revealed that Mash1-positive cells seemed to belong
to pulmonary neuroendocrine cells (PNEC) and their precursors. In mice deficient 
for Mash1, no PNEC were detected. Hes1-positive cells belong to
non-neuroendocrine cells. In the mice deficient in Hes1, in which Mash1 mRNA was 
upregulated, PNEC appeared precociously, and the number of PNEC was markedly
increased. NeuroD (Neurod1 - Mouse Genome Informatics) expression in the lung was
detected in the adult, and was enhanced in the fetal lungs of Hes1-null mice.
Expression of Notch1, Notch2, Notch3 and Notch4 mRNAs in the mouse lung increased
with age, and Notch1 mRNA was expressed in a Hes1-dependent manner. Notch1,
Notch2 and Notch3 were immunohistochemically detected in non-neuroendocrine
cells. Moreover, analyses of the lungs from the gene-targeted mice suggested that
expression of Delta-like 1 (Dll1 - Mouse Genome Informatics) mRNA depends on
Mash1. Thus, the neuroendocrine differentiation depends on basic helix-loop-helix
factors, and Notch/Notch-ligand pathways may be involved in determining the cell 
differentiation fate in fetal airway epithelium.

PMID: 10952889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cancer Res. 2000 Aug 1;60(15):4005-9.

Constitutive achaete-scute homologue-1 promotes airway dysplasia and lung
neuroendocrine tumors in transgenic mice.

Linnoila RI(1), Zhao B, DeMayo JL, Nelkin BD, Baylin SB, DeMayo FJ, Ball DW.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Cancer Biology Department, Medicine Branch, Division of Clinical
Sciences, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Rockville, Maryland 20817, USA.

The transcription factor achaete-scute homologue-1 (ASH1) is essential for neural
differentiation during fetal development and is a cardinal feature of
neuroendocrine (NE) tumors such as small cell lung cancer. To explore the
potential of ASH1 to promote NE differentiation and tumorigenesis in the lung, we
constitutively expressed the factor in nonendocrine airway epithelial cells using
transgenic mice. Progressive airway hyperplasia and metaplasia developed
beginning at 3 weeks of life. ASH1 potently enhanced the tumorigenic effect of
SV40 large T antigen in airway epithelium. These doubly transgenic animals
developed massive NE lung tumors, implying that ASH1 may cooperate with defects
in p53, pRb, or related pathways in promoting NE lung carcinogenesis.

PMID: 10945598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Neurosci. 2000 Aug 15;20(16):6095-105.

Unique expression patterns of cell fate molecules delineate sequential stages of 
dentate gyrus development.

Pleasure SJ(1), Collins AE, Lowenstein DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Epilepsy Research Laboratory, University of
California, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

The dentate gyrus of the hippocampus is uniquely organized with a displaced
proliferative zone that continues to generate dentate granule cells throughout
life. We have analyzed the expression of Notch receptors, Notch ligands, and
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) genes during dentate gyrus development to determine
whether the need to maintain a pool of undifferentiated precursors is reflected
in the patterns of expression of these genes. Many of these genes are expressed
diffusely throughout the cortical neuroepithelium at embryonic days 16 and 17 in 
the rat, just preceding the migration of newly born granule cells and dentate
precursor cells into the dentate anlage. However, at this time, Mash1, Math3, and
Id3 expression are all concentrated in the area that specifically gives rise to
granule cells and dentate precursor cells. Two days later, at the time of
migration of the first granule cells and dentate precursor cells, cells
expressing Mash1 are seen in the migratory route from the subventricular zone to 
the developing dentate gyrus. Newly born granule cells expressing NeuroD are also
present in this migratory pathway. In the first postnatal week, precursor cells
expressing Mash1 reside in the dentate hilus, and by the third postnatal week
they have largely taken up their final position in the subgranular zone along the
hilar side of the dentate granule cell layer. After terminal differentiation,
granule cells born in the hilus or the subgranular zone begin to express NeuroD
followed by NeuroD2. This study establishes that the expression patterns of bHLH 
mRNAs evolve during the formation of the dentate gyrus, and the precursor cells
resident in the mature dentate gyrus share features with precursor cells found in
development. Thus, many of the same mechanisms that are known to regulate cell
fate and precursor pool size in other brain regions are likely to be operative in
the dentate gyrus at all stages of development.

PMID: 10934259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Neurosci. 2000 Aug 15;20(16):6063-76.

Origin and molecular specification of striatal interneurons.

Marin O(1), Anderson SA, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, Langley Porter Psychiatric Institute, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0984, USA.

The striatum, the largest component of the basal ganglia, contains projection
neurons and interneurons. Whereas there is considerable agreement that the
lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) is the origin of striatal projection neurons,
less is known about the origin of striatal interneurons. Using focal injections
of retrovirus into the ventral telencephalon in vitro, we demonstrate that most
striatal interneurons tangentially migrate from the medial ganglionic eminence
(MGE) or the adjacent preoptic/anterior entopeduncular areas (POa/AEP) and
express the NKX2.1 homeodomain protein. Although the majority of striatal
interneurons (cholinergic, calretinin(+), and parvalbumin(+)) maintain the
expression of NKX2.1 into adulthood, most of the interneurons expressing
somatostatin (SOM), neuropeptide Y (NPY), and neural nitric oxide synthase (NOS) 
appear to downregulate the expression of NKX2.1 as they exit the neuroepithelium.
Analysis of striatal development in mice lacking Nkx2.1 suggests that this gene
is required for the specification of nearly all striatal interneurons. Similar
analysis of mice lacking the Mash1 basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) or both the Dlx1
and Dlx2 homeodomain transcription factors demonstrates that these genes are
required for the differentiation of striatal interneurons. Mash1 mutants
primarily have a reduction in early-born striatal interneurons, whereas Dlx1/2
mutants primarily have reduced numbers of late-born striatal interneurons. We
also present evidence implicating the Lhx6 and Lhx7 LIM-homeobox genes in the
development of distinct interneuron subtypes. Finally, we hypothesize that,
within the MGE, radially migrating cells generally become projection neurons,
whereas tangentially migrating cells mainly form interneurons of the striatum and
cerebral cortex.

PMID: 10934256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Jul 21;274(1):22-31.

HASH-1 and E2-2 are expressed in human neuroblastoma cells and form a functional 
complex.

Persson P(1), Jögi A, Grynfeld A, Påhlman S, Axelson H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Malmö, University Hospital
MAS, S-205 02, Sweden.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor mammalian achaete-scute
homolog-1 (MASH-1 in mouse and HASH-1 in human) is essential for proper
development of olfactory and most peripheral autonomic neurons, and for the
formation of distinct neuronal circuits within the central nervous system. We
have previously shown that HASH-1 is expressed in neuroblastoma tumors and cell
lines, and in this study we have used the yeast two-hybrid system to isolate
HASH-1 interacting proteins from a human neuroblastoma cDNA library. Two of the
isolated clones contained cDNA from the E2-2 gene (also known as ITF2/SEF2-1). We
show that E2-2 interacts with HASH-1 in both yeast and mammalian cells. The
HASH-1/E2-2 complex binds an E-box (CACCTG) in vitro, and transactivates an E-box
containing reporter construct in vivo. Furthermore, E2-2 seems to be one of the
major HASH-1 interacting proteins in extracts from neuroblastoma cells. In
conclusion, E2-2 forms a functional complex with HASH-1, and might therefore be
involved in the development of specific parts of the central and peripheral
nervous systems.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10903890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2000 Jul;16(1):14-26.

Role of the target in the pathfinding of facial visceral motor axons.

Jacob J(1), Tiveron MC, Brunet JF, Guthrie S.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College, Guy's Campus, 4th
Floor New Hunt's House, London, SE1 9RT, United Kingdom.

Axon navigation depends, in part, on guidance cues emanating from the target. We 
have investigated the possible role of the target in the pathfinding of visceral 
motor axons to cranial parasympathetic ganglia. Mice homozygous for a tau-LacZ
transgene targeted in the Phox2a locus lack the sphenopalatine ganglion, which is
the normal target of visceral motor axons of the facial nerve. We found that in
these mutants, facial visceral motor axon pathfinding was disrupted, and some
axons were misrouted to an alternative parasympathetic ganglion. Moreover, the
absence of correct facial visceral motor pathways was concomitant with defects in
the pathfinding of rostrally-projecting sympathetic axons.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10882479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2000 Jun 30;121(2):219-22.

Expression of neural properties in olfactory cytokeratin-positive basal cell
line.

Satoh M(1), Yoshida T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Fermentation, Osaka (IFO), 2-17-85 Juso-honmachi, Yodogawa-ku,
532-8686, Osaka, Japan. satoh-motonobu@ifo.or.jp

A cytokeratin (CK)(+), horizontal basal cell (HBC)-like cell line from murine
olfactory epithelium, DBC1.2, was characterized. Histochemically, it is CK14(+), 
CK18(-), neuron-specific tubulin (NST)(+) and capable of binding Bandeiraea
simplicifolia lectin I. RT-PCR studies revealed that it expresses mRNAs for EGF
receptor, NST, Pax-6, but not for Mash-1 and neurogenin-1. Retinoic acid reduced 
the expression of CK14 and CKs recognized by polyclonal anti-keratin antibody,
whereas it induced nestin. These results suggest that DBC1.2 shares the
properties of HBCs and neural cells.

PMID: 10876035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Development. 2000 Jul;127(14):3021-30.

Misexpression of basic helix-loop-helix genes in the murine cerebral cortex
affects cell fate choices and neuronal survival.

Cai L(1), Morrow EM, Cepko CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

To investigate the role(s) of basic helix-loop-helix genes (bHLH) genes in the
developing murine cerebral cortex, Mash1, Math2, Math3, Neurogenin1 (Ngn1), Ngn2,
NeuroD, NeuroD2 and Id1 were transduced in vivo into the embryonic and postnatal 
cerebral cortex using retrovirus vectors. The morphology and location of infected
cells were analyzed at postnatal stages. The data indicate that a subset of bHLH 
genes are capable of regulating the choice of neuronal versus glial fate and
that, when misexpressed, they can be deleterious to the survival of
differentiating neurons, but not glia.

PMID: 10862740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Development. 2000 Jul;127(14):2989-98.

Basic helix-loop-helix proteins and the timing of oligodendrocyte
differentiation.

Kondo T(1), Raff M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Developmental Neurobiology Programme, MRC Laboratory 
for Molecular Cell Biology and the Biology Department, University College London,
London, WC1E 6BT, UK. t.kondo@ucl.ac.uk

An intracellular timer in oligodendrocyte precursor cells is thought to help
control the timing of their differentiation. We show here that the expression of 
the Hes5 and Mash1 genes, which encode neural-specific bHLH proteins, decrease
and increase, respectively, in these cells with a time course expected if the
proteins are part of the timer. We show that enforced expression of Hes5 in
purified precursor cells strongly inhibits the normal increase in the thyroid
hormone receptor protein TR(&bgr;)1, which is thought to be part of the timing
mechanism; it also strongly inhibits the differentiation induced by either
mitogen withdrawal or thyroid hormone treatment. Enforced expression of Mash1, by
contrast, somewhat accelerates the increase in TR(beta)1 protein. These findings 
suggest that Hes5 and Mash1 may be part of the cell-intrinsic timer in the
precursor cells.

PMID: 10862737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Development. 2000 Jul;127(13):2933-43.

The bHLH gene Hes6, an inhibitor of Hes1, promotes neuronal differentiation.

Bae S(1), Bessho Y, Hojo M, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

We have isolated the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) gene Hes6, a novel member of
the family of mammalian homologues of Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split.
Hes6 is expressed by both undifferentiated and differentiated cells, unlike Hes1,
which is expressed only by the former cells. Hes6 alone does not bind to the DNA 
but suppresses Hes1 from repressing transcription. In addition, Hes6 suppresses
Hes1 from inhibiting Mash1-E47 heterodimer and thereby enables Mash1 and E47 to
upregulate transcription in the presence of Hes1. Furthermore, misexpression of
Hes6 with retrovirus in the developing retina promotes rod photoreceptor
differentiation, like Mash1, in sharp contrast to Hes1, which inhibits cell
differentiation. These results suggest that Hes6 is an inhibitor of Hes1,
supports Mash1 activity and promotes cell differentiation. Mutation analysis
revealed that Hes1- and Hes6-specific functions are, at least in part,
interchangeable by alteration of the loop region, suggesting that the loop is not
simply a nonfunctional spacer but plays an important role in the specific
functions.

PMID: 10851137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Exp Cell Res. 2000 Jun 15;257(2):320-31.

Negative regulation of selected bHLH proteins by eHAND.

Bounpheng MA(1), Morrish TA, Dodds SG, Christy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health
Science Center, San Antonio, Texas, 78245-3207, USA.

The bHLH protein eHAND plays an important role in the development of
extraembryonic, mesodermal, and cardiac cell lineages, presumably through
heterodimerization with other HLH proteins and DNA binding. In this study, we
have identified a novel transcriptional activity of eHAND. In transient
transfection assays, eHAND is a potent inhibitor of activation by some but not
all bHLH proteins. eHAND can prevent E-box DNA binding by these bHLH proteins.
Interestingly, eHAND can also strongly inhibit transactivation activity by a MyoD
approximately E47 tethered dimer, which suggests a distinct mechanism of action. 
eHAND also inhibits MyoD-dependent skeletal muscle cell differentiation and
expression of the muscle-specific myosin heavy chain protein. In addition, we
show that eHAND can repress activity of the natural p75LNGFR promoter, whose
expression overlaps that of eHAND and dHAND. The inhibitory activity of eHAND may
be attributed to multiple mechanisms, such as the ability to act as a
corepressor, the presence of a repression domain, and its ability to sequester E 
proteins in an inactive complex. Based upon its inhibitory effect on bHLH
proteins and cellular differentiation, we propose that eHAND may function by
several mechanisms to promote placental giant cell proliferation by negatively
regulating the activities of the bHLH protein MASH-2.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10837146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Dev Biol. 2000 Jun 15;222(2):336-46.

Negative autoregulation of Mash1 expression in CNS development.

Meredith A(1), Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Basic Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
at Dallas, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, Texas, 75235-9111, USA.

Mash1, a neural-specific bHLH transcription factor, is essential for the
formation of multiple CNS and PNS neural lineages. Transcription from the Mash1
locus is elevated in mice null for Mash1, suggesting that MASH1 normally acts to 
repress its own transcription. This activity is contrary to the positive
autoregulation of other proneural bHLH proteins. To investigate the mechanisms
involved in this process, sequences flanking the Mash1 gene were tested for the
ability to mediate negative autoregulation. A Mash1/lacZ transgene containing 36 
kb of cis-regulatory sequence exhibits an increase in lacZ expression in the
Mash1 mutant background, which phenocopies the observation of transcriptional
autoregulation at the endogenous Mash1 locus. Using Mash1/lacZ lines with
progressively less cis-acting sequence, autoregulatory responsive elements were
demonstrated to colocalize with a previously characterized 1.2-kb CNS enhancer.
Mutations of E-box sites within this enhancer did not result in an apparent loss 
of autoregulation, suggesting that MASH1 does not directly repress its own
transcription. Interestingly, these mutations did not indicate any underlying
positive auto- or cross-regulation of Mash1. Furthermore, the loss of
autoregulation in the Mash1 mutant background is reminiscent of a loss of lateral
inhibitory signaling. However, mutations in HES consensus sites, the likely
purveyors of Notch-mediated lateral inhibition, do not support a role for these
sites in negative autoregulation. We hypothesize that MASH1 normally inhibits its
own expression indirectly, possibly through a HES-mediated repression of positive
regulators or through novel HES binding sites.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10837123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Development. 2000 Jun;127(11):2323-32.

Hes genes regulate sequential stages of neurogenesis in the olfactory epithelium.

Cau E(1), Gradwohl G, Casarosa S, Kageyama R, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)IGBMC, CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur, BP 163, CU de Strasbourg, France.

We have characterised the functions of the bHLH transcriptional repressors HES1
and HES5 in neurogenesis, using the development of the olfactory placodes in
mouse embryos as a model. Hes1 and Hes5 are expressed with distinct patterns in
the olfactory placodes and are subject to different regulatory mechanisms. Hes1
is expressed in a broad placodal domain, which is maintained in absence of the
neural determination gene Mash1. In contrast, expression of Hes5 is restricted to
clusters of neural progenitor cells and requires Mash1 function. Mutations in
Hes1 and Hes5 also have distinct consequences on olfactory placode neurogenesis. 
Loss of Hes1 function leads both to expression of Mash1 outside of the normal
domain of neurogenesis and to increased density of MASH1-positive progenitors
within this domain, and results in an excess of neurons after a delay. A mutation
in Hes5 does not produce any apparent defect. However, olfactory placodes that
are double mutant for Hes1 and Hes5 upregulate Ngn1, a neural bHLH gene activated
downstream of Mash1, and show a strong and rapid increase in neuronal density.
Together, our results suggest that Hes1 regulates Mash1 transcription in the
olfactory placode in two different contexts, initially as a prepattern gene
defining the placodal domain undergoing neurogenesis and, subsequently, as a
neurogenic gene controlling the density of neural progenitors in this domain.
Hes5 synergizes with Hes1 and regulates neurogenesis at the level of Ngn1
expression. Therefore, the olfactory sensory neuron lineage is regulated at
several steps by negative signals acting through different Hes genes and
targeting the expression of different proneural gene homologs.

PMID: 10804175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. FEBS Lett. 2000 Apr 21;472(1):53-6.

Myocyte enhancer factor 2C upregulates MASH-1 expression and induces neurogenesis
in P19 cells.

Skerjanc IS(1), Wilton S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Building, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ont., Canada. skerjanc@julian.uwo.ca

MEF2C is a transcription factor expressed in neural lineages. After transient
transfection, the MEF2 family of factors can act synergistically with the
neural-specific transcription factor, MASH-1, and activate exogenous
neural-specific promoters. To determine whether MEF2C is capable of modulating
endogenous gene expression, P19 cell lines were analyzed that overexpressed
MEF2C, termed P19[MEF2C] cells. Here we show that P19[MEF2C] cells differentiate 
into neurons when aggregated with ME(2)SO. MEF2C-induced neurons expressed
neurofilament protein, the nuclear antigen NeuN, as well as MASH-1. Our results
indicate that MEF2C can directly or indirectly activate the expression of MASH-1,
leading to neurogenesis.

PMID: 10781804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 May 15;28(10):2122-7.

Thermodynamics of DNA binding of MM17, a 'single chain dimer' of transcription
factor MASH-1.

Sieber M(1), Allemann RK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, 
UK.

MASH-1, a member of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcriptional
regulators, is a central factor for the regulation of the differentiation of
committed neuronal precursor cells of the peripheral nervous system. We have
previously produced MM17, a single chain version of this dimeric protein, by
linking the C-terminal end of the first subunit to the N-terminal residue of the 
second subunit through a flexible peptide linker. We have now determined by
isothermal titration calorimetry the thermodynamic parameters characterising the 
DNA binding reactions of MM17. The DNA binding specificity was relatively low and
comparable to that observed for wild-type MASH bHLH. At 32 degrees C and pH 7,
the concentration of MM17 at which 50% DNA binding occurred was determined as
22.8 and 152 nM for binding to MCK-S and the heterologous SP-1, respectively.
Similarly to MASH bHLH the free energy of the association was only slightly
temperature dependent, while both the entropy and the enthalpy change were strong
functions of temperature. The free energy of DNA binding was independent of the
pH for the pH range between 6 and 8. Dissection of the entropy change of the
association reaction suggested that the two basic domains and the linker region
between the subunits underwent a folding transition from a mainly unfolded to a
predominantly ordered conformation. Therefore, like wild-type MASH bHLH, the DNA 
binding reaction of MM17 follows an induced fit mechanism.

PMCID: PMC105363
PMID: 10773081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2000 Mar;15(3):235-43.

Specification of the central noradrenergic phenotype by the homeobox gene Phox2b.

Pattyn A(1), Goridis C, Brunet JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique et Physiologie du Développement, Developmental
Biology Institute of Marseille, CNRS/INSERM/Université de la Méditerranée/AP de
Marseille, Luminy Case 907, Marseille Cedex 9, 13288, France.

The closely related homeobox genes Phox2a and Phox2b are expressed in all central
and peripheral noradrenergic neurons. Our previous results have shown that Phox2a
controls the differentiation of the main noradrenergic center of the brain, the
locus coeruleus, but leaves unaffected the other noradrenergic centers. Here, we 
report that Phox2b has a wider and overlapping role, in that it is required for
the differentiation of all noradrenergic centers in the brain, including the
locus coeruleus. Together with the previously reported lack of
dopamine-b-hydroxylase and tyrosine hydroxylase expression in the peripheral
nervous system of Phox2b knock-out embryos, our present findings make Phox2b a
master regulator of all central and peripheral noradrenergic differentiation. We 
discuss the nonredundancy of Phox2 genes and their complex partnership with the
bHLH transcription factor Mash1, which is also required for the differentiation
of most noradrenergic cell types.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10736201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Development. 2000 Feb;127(4):693-702.

Generation of neurons by transient expression of neural bHLH proteins in
mammalian cells.

Farah MH(1), Olson JM, Sucic HB, Hume RI, Tapscott SJ, Turner DL.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health Research Institute, Neuroscience Program, and Department of
Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48104-1687, USA.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are known to function during 
mammalian neurogenesis. Here we show that transient transfection of vectors
expressing neuroD2, MASH1, ngn1 or related neural bHLH proteins, with their
putative dimerization partner E12, can convert mouse P19 embryonal carcinoma
cells into differentiated neurons. Transfected cells express numerous
neuron-specific proteins, adopt a neuronal morphology and are electrically
excitable. Thus, the expression of neural bHLH proteins is sufficient to confer a
neuronal fate on uncommitted mammalian cells. Neuronal differentiation of
transfected cells is preceded by elevated expression of the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1) and cell cycle withdrawal. This demonstrates that the 
bHLH proteins can link neuronal differentiation to withdrawal from the cell
cycle, possibly by activating the expression of p27(Kip1). The ability to
generate mammalian neurons by transient expression of neural bHLH proteins should
create new opportunities for studying neurogenesis and devising neural repair
strategies.

PMID: 10648228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Neurosci. 1999 Dec 15;19(24):10877-85.

Graded and areal expression patterns of regulatory genes and cadherins in
embryonic neocortex independent of thalamocortical input.

Nakagawa Y(1), Johnson JE, O'Leary DD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

The differentiation of areas of the mammalian neocortex has been hypothesized to 
be controlled by intrinsic genetic programs and extrinsic influences such as
those mediated by thalamocortical afferents (TCAs). To address the interplay
between these intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms in the process of arealization, 
we have analyzed the requirement of TCAs in establishing or maintaining graded or
areal patterns of gene expression in the developing mouse neocortex. We describe 
the differential expression of Lhx2, SCIP, and Emx1, representatives of three
different classes of transcription factors, and the type II classical cadherins
Cad6, Cad8, and Cad11, which are expressed in graded or areal patterns, as well
as layer-specific patterns, in the cortical plate. The differential expression of
Lhx2, SCIP, Emx1, and Cad8 in the cortical plate is not evident until after TCAs 
reach the cortex, whereas Cad6 and Cad11 show subtle graded patterns of
expression before the arrival of TCAs, which later become stronger. We find that 
these genes exhibit normal-appearing graded or areal expression patterns in
Mash-1 mutant mice that fail to develop a TCA projection. These findings show
that TCAs are not required for the establishment or maintenance of the graded and
areal expression patterns of these genes and strongly suggest that their
regulation is intrinsic to the developing neocortex.

PMID: 10594069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Pediatr Res. 1999 Nov;46(5):535-42.

Ventilatory responses to hypercapnia and hypoxia in Mash-1 heterozygous newborn
and adult mice.

Dauger S(1), Renolleau S, Vardon G, Népote V, Mas C, Simonneau M, Gaultier C,
Gallego J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurologie et Physiologie du Développement, INSERM E9935,
Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France.

Normal control of breathing is characterized by maintenance of CO2 and O2
arterial pressures at constant levels by appropriate ventilatory responses to
changes in CO2 production and O2 consumption. Abnormal development of this
regulatory system during embryogenesis may produce early impairments in
chemosensitivity, as in congenital central hypoventilation syndrome. The present 
study addresses the role of the mammalian achaetescute homologous gene (Mash-1)
in the development of respiratory control. We analyzed ventilatory responses to
hypercapnia (8% CO2, 21% O2, 71% N2) and hypoxia (10% O2, 3% CO2, 87% N2) in
newborn and adult Mash-1 heterozygous mice (Mash-1+/-) and their wild-type
littermates (Mash-1+/+). Ventilation, breath duration, and tidal volume were
measured using whole-body plethysmography. Ventilatory responses to hypercapnia
were significantly weaker in newborn male Mash-1+/- compared with Mash-1+/+ mice 
as a result of a weaker breath-duration response. No differences were observed
between adult Mash-1+/- and Mash-1+/+ mice. Our data suggest that Mash-1 may be
involved in respiratory control development via mechanisms linked to the X
chromosome.

PMID: 10541315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1999 Oct-Nov;14(4-5):355-69.

Correct coordination of neuronal differentiation events in ventral forebrain
requires the bHLH factor MASH1.

Horton S(1), Meredith A, Richardson JA, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Basic Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas 75235, USA.

MASH1 is a bHLH transcription factor specifically expressed in the developing
nervous system that has an essential role in the formation of multiple neuronal
lineages in the peripheral and central nervous systems. Here we demonstrate the
requirement for MASH1 for normal development of ventral forebrain structures.
MASH1 is expressed at high levels in the ventral telencephalon and specific
regions within the ventral diencepharon. In the absence of MASH1, tissue
morphology, proliferation, and gene expression within these forebrain regions is 
disrupted. The decreased incorporation of BrdU in the neuro-epithelium and the
enlargement of the ventricles demonstrate a reduction in cell proliferation. A
loss of anatomically distinct lateral and medial ganglionic eminences, and a
disruption of axons traversing this region, indicate abnormalities in cell-type
specification. The aberrant expression of Tuj-1, a marker of neuronal
differentiation in the neuroepithelium, and Dlx, a marker of regional cell
identity, in the ventricular zone in the MASH1 mutant brains suggest coordination
of differentiation events is disrupted. In addition, the involvement of MASH1 in 
lateral inhibition processes that affect the development of these forebrain
regions is implicated. Taken together, an essential role for MASH1 in the
coordination of events required for correct cell-type specification and timing of
differentiation during neural development in ventral forebrain regions is
demonstrated.

PMID: 10588390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Am J Pathol. 1999 Sep;155(3):711-5.

PGP9.5 as a candidate tumor marker for non-small-cell lung cancer.

Hibi K(1), Westra WH, Borges M, Goodman S, Sidransky D, Jen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Division of Head and Neck Cancer Research,
Departments of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21205-2196, USA.

PGP9.5 is a neurospecific peptide that functions to remove ubiquitin from
ubiquitinated proteins and prevents them from targeted degradation by
proteasomes. Using the serial analysis of gene expression method (SAGE), we
observed that the PGP9.5 transcript was highly expressed in primary lung cancers 
and lung cancer cell lines but was not detectable in the normal lung. Here we
examined the expression of PGP9.5 protein in normal lung epithelium, lung tumor
cell lines, and 98 resected primary non-small-cell lung carcinomas (NSCLCs). We
found PGP9.5 reactivity in normal lung in a pattern compatible with K-cells of
the diffuse neuroendocrine system. However, the PGP9.5 was present in both
small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) and NSCLC cell lines (22/24) independent of
neuronal differentiation. In primary NSCLCs, 54% (53/98) of the cases had
positive PGP9.5 staining, and the expression of protein was strongly associated
with pathological stage of the cancer. It was present in 44% (29/66) of stage I
NSCLCs and in 75% (24/32) of stage II and IIIA NSCLCs (p = 0.0032). These results
suggest that the increased expression of PGP9.5 is specifically associated with
lung cancer development and may serve as a potential marker for the detection of 
lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC1866887
PMID: 10487828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1999 Jul;21(1):1-3.

Neuroendocrine differentiation, neuropeptides, and neprilysin.

Cohen AJ(1), Miller YE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Denver Veterans Medical Center, Division of Pulmonary 
Sciences, Denver, CO 80220, USA.

PMID: 10447344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Nature. 1999 May 27;399(6734):366-70.

The homeobox gene Phox2b is essential for the development of autonomic neural
crest derivatives.

Pattyn A(1), Morin X, Cremer H, Goridis C, Brunet JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique et Physiologie du Développement, Developmental
Biology Institute of Marseille, CNRS/INSERM/Université de la Méditterranée/AP de 
Marseille, France.

The sympathetic, parasympathetic and enteric ganglia are the main components of
the peripheral autonomic nervous system, and are all derived from the neural
crest. The factors needed for these structures to develop include the
transcription factor Mash1, the glial-derived neurotrophic factor GNDF and its
receptor subunits, and the neuregulin signalling system, each of which is
essential for the differentiation and survival of subsets of autonomic neurons.
Here we show that all autonomic ganglia fail to form properly and degenerate in
mice lacking the homeodomain transcription factor Phox2b, as do the three cranial
sensory ganglia that are part of the autonomic reflex circuits. In the anlagen of
the enteric nervous system and the sympathetic ganglia, Phox2b is needed for the 
expression of the GDNF-receptor subunit Ret and for maintaining Mash1 expression.
Mutant ganglionic anlagen also fail to switch on the genes that encode two
enzymes needed for the biosynthesis of the neurotransmitter noradrenaline,
dopamine-beta-hydroxylase and tyrosine hydroxylase, demonstrating that Phox2b
regulates the noradrenergic phenotype in vertebrates.

PMID: 10360575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Neurosci Res. 1999 May 1;56(3):229-40.

Regulation of hippocampal neuronal differentiation by the basic helix-loop-helix 
transcription factors HES-1 and MASH-1.

Castella P(1), Wagner JA, Caudy M.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Genetics Graduate Program, Cornell University Graduate School
of Medical Sciences, New York, New York 10021, USA.

HES-1 is a vertebrate homologue of the Drosophila basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
protein Hairy, a transcriptional repressor that negatively regulates neuronal
differentiation. HES-1 expression in neuronal precursors precedes and represses
the expression of the neuronal commitment gene MASH-1, a bHLH activator
homologous to the proneural Achaete-Scute genes in Drosophila. Down-regulation of
HES-1 expression in developing neuroblasts may be necessary for the induction of 
a regulatory cascade of bHLH activator proteins that controls the commitment and 
progression of neuronal differentiation. Here we show that the differentiation of
embryonic day-17 rat hippocampal neurons in culture was coincident with a decline
in HES-1 expression and DNA binding. Therefore, we examined the effect of forced 
expression of HES-1 and MASH-1 upon nerve growth factor (NGF) -induced
differentiation in TrkA transfected hippocampal neurons. Expression of HES-1
inhibited both the intrinsic and NGF-induced neurite outgrowth, whereas MASH-1
expression increased neurite outgrowth. Strikingly, the increased hippocampal
differentiation observed with MASH-1 expression is completely blocked by
coexpression of HES-1. Furthermore, both wild-type HES-1 and a non-DNA binding
mutant of HES-1 repressed MASH-1-dependent transcription activation. These
results suggest that down-regulation of HES-1 is necessary for autonomous, growth
factor-induced and MASH-1-activated hippocampal differentiation.

PMID: 10336252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Comp Neurol. 1999 May 24;408(1):1-10.

Innervation of the esophagus in mice that lack MASH1.

Sang Q(1), Ciampoli D, Greferath U, Sommer L, Young HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia.

The striated muscle of the esophagus differs from other striated muscle, because 
it develops by the transdifferentiation of smooth muscle, and the motor end
plates receive a dual innervation from vagal (cholinergic) motor neurons and
nitric oxide synthase (NOS)-containing enteric neurons. Mash1-/- mice have no
enteric neurons in their esophagus and die within 48 hours of birth without milk 
in their stomachs (Guillemot et al. [1993] Cell 75:463-476). In this study, the
innervation of the esophagus of newborn Mash1-/-, Mash1+/- and wild type mice was
examined. There was no difference between Mash1-/-, Mash1+/-, and wild type mice 
in the transdifferentiation of the muscle and the development of nicotinic
receptor clusters. However, there were significantly more cholinergic nerve
terminals per motor end plate in Mash1-/- mice than Mash1+/- or wild type mice.
Each of the Mash1-/- mice had fewer than 50 NOS neurons per esophagus, compared
with approximately 3,000 in wild type mice. Newborn Mash1+/- mice also contained 
significantly fewer NOS neurons than wild type mice. In Mash1-/- mice, NOS nerve 
fibers were virtually absent from the external muscle but were present at the
myenteric plexus. Unlike that of newborn wild type mice, the lower esophageal
sphincter of Mash 1-/- mice lacked NOS nerve fibers; this may explain the absence
of milk in the stomach. We conclude that 1) the transdifferentiation of the
esophageal muscle and the development of the extrinsic innervation do not require
enteric neurons or MASH1, 2) extrinsic NOS neurons only innervate the myenteric
plexus.

PMID: 10331576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Nat Neurosci. 1999 Apr;2(4):339-45.

BMPs inhibit neurogenesis by a mechanism involving degradation of a transcription
factor.

Shou J(1), Rim PC, Calof AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology and the Developmental Biology Center,
University of California Irvine, College of Medicine, 92697-1275, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 1999 Apr;2(4):301-3.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), negative regulators of neural determination
in the early embryo, were found to be potent inhibitors of neurogenesis in
olfactory epithelium (OE) cultures. BMPs 2, 4 or 7 decreased the number of
proliferating progenitor cells and blocked production of olfactory receptor
neurons (ORNs). Experiments suggested that this effect was due to an action of
BMPs on an early-stage progenitor in the ORN lineage. Further analysis revealed
that progenitors exposed to BMPs rapidly (< 2 h) lost MASH1, a transcription
factor known to be required for the production of ORNs. This disappearance was
due to proteolysis of existing MASH1 protein, but new gene expression was
required to trigger it. The data suggest a novel mechanism of BMP action, whereby
the induced degradation of an essential transcription factor results in premature
termination of a neuronal lineage.

PMID: 10204540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Nat Neurosci. 1999 Apr;2(4):301-3.

BMPs: time to murder and create?

Fishell G.

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 1999 Apr;2(4):339-45.

PMID: 10204532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Development. 1999 May;126(9):1903-16.

Defects in thalamocortical axon pathfinding correlate with altered cell domains
in Mash-1-deficient mice.

Tuttle R(1), Nakagawa Y, Johnson JE, O'Leary DD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA.

We have analyzed the pathfinding of thalamocortical axons (TCAs) from dorsal
thalamus to neocortex in relation to specific cell domains in the forebrain of
wild-type and Mash-1-deficient mice. In wild-type mice, we identified four cell
domains that constitute the proximal part of the TCA pathway. These domains are
distinguished by patterns of gene expression and by the presence of neurons
retrogradely labeled from dorsal thalamus. Since the cells that form these
domains are generated in forebrain proliferative zones that express high levels
of Mash-1, we studied Mash-1 mutant mice to assess the potential roles of these
domains in TCA pathfinding. In null mutants, each of the domains is altered: the 
two Pax-6 domains, one in ventral thalamus and one in hypothalamus, are expanded 
in size; a complementary RPTP(delta) domain in ventral thalamus is
correspondingly reduced and the normally graded expression of RPTP(delta) in that
domain is no longer apparent. In ventral telencephalon, a domain characterized in
the wild type by Netrin-1 and Nkx-2.1 expression and by retrogradely labeled
neurons is absent in the mutant. Defects in TCA pathfinding are localized to the 
borders of each of these altered domains. Many TCAs fail to enter the expanded,
ventral thalamic Pax-6 domain that constitutes the most proximal part of the TCA 
pathway, and form a dense whorl at the border between dorsal and ventral
thalamus. A proportion of TCAs do extend further distally into ventral thalamus, 
but many of these stall at an aberrant, abrupt border of high RPTP(delta)
expression. A small proportion of TCAs extend around the RPTP(delta) domain and
reach the ventral thalamic-hypothalamic border, but few of these axons turn at
that border to extend into the ventral telencephalon. These findings demonstrate 
that Mash-1 is required for the normal development of cell domains that in turn
are required for normal TCA pathfinding. In addition, these findings support the 
hypothesis that ventral telencephalic neurons and their axons guide TCAs through 
ventral thalamus and into ventral telencephalon.

PMID: 10101124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Mol Neurosci. 1998 Oct;11(2):165-78.

The role of NeuroD as a differentiation factor in the mammalian retina.

Ahmad I(1), Acharya HR, Rogers JA, Shibata A, Smithgall TE, Dooley CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha 68198-6395, USA.

NeuroD, a vertebrate homolog of Drosophila atonal gene, plays an important role
in the differentiation of neuronal precursors (Lee et al., 1995). We have
investigated whether NeuroD subserves a similar function in mammalian retinal
neurogenesis. Expression of NeuroD is detected in successive stages of retinal
neurogenesis and is associated with a differentiating population of retinal
cells. The association of NeuroD predominantly with postmitotic precursors in
early as well as late neurogenesis suggests that NeuroD expression plays an
important role in the terminal differentiation of retinal neurons. The notion is 
supported by observations that overexpression of NeuroD during late neurogenesis 
promotes premature differentiation of late-born neurons, rod photoreceptors, and 
bipolar cells, and that NeuroD can interact specifically with the E-box element
in the proximal promoter of the phenotype-specific gene, opsin.

PMID: 10096043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Mar 24;256(3):557-63.

Human achaete-scute homologue 1 (HASH-1) is downregulated in differentiating
neuroblastoma cells.

Söderholm H(1), Ortoft E, Johansson I, Ljungberg J, Larsson C, Axelson H, Påhlman
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine, Lund
University, University Hospital MAS, Malmö, Sweden.

The mammalian achaete-scute homologue, MASH-1, is crucial for early development
of the sympathetic nervous system and is transiently expressed in sympathetic
neuroblasts during embryogenesis. Here we report that the human homologue
(HASH-1) was expressed in all analyzed cell lines (6/6) derived from the
sympathetic nervous system tumor neuroblastoma. The majority of small-cell lung
carcinoma (4/5) cell lines tested expressed HASH-1, while other
nonneuronal/non-neuroendocrine cell lines were negative. Induced differentiation 
of neuroblastoma cells resulted in HASH-1 downregulation. This occurred
concomitant with induction of neurite outgrowth and expression of the neuronal
marker genes GAP-43 and neuropeptide Y. Constitutive expression of exogenous
HASH-1 did not alter the capacity of the neuroblastoma cells to differentiate in 
response to differentiation-inducing agents. It is concluded that moderate HASH-1
expression does not compromise the capacity of these cells to differentiate.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10080936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. FEBS Lett. 1999 Feb 5;444(1):43-6.

Expression of Mash1 in basal cells of rat circumvallate taste buds is dependent
upon gustatory innervation.

Seta Y(1), Toyono T, Takeda S, Toyoshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy II, Kyushu Dental College, Kitakyushu, Japan.
yujiseta@mail.kyu-dent.ac.jp

Mash1, a mammalian homologue of the Drosophila achaete-scute proneural gene
complex, plays an essential role in differentiation of subsets of peripheral
neurons. In this study, using RT-PCR and in situ RT-PCR, we investigated if Mash1
gene expression occurs in rat taste buds. Further, we examined dynamics of Mash1 
expression in the process of degeneration and regeneration in denervated rat
taste buds. In rat tongue epithelium, Mash1 gene expression is confined to
circumvallate, foliate, and fungiform papilla epithelia that include taste buds. 
In taste buds, Mash1-expressing cells are round cells in the basal compartment.
In contrast, the mature taste bud cells do not express the Mash1 gene.
Denervation and regeneration experiments show that the expression of Mash1
requires gustatory innervation. We conclude that Mash1 is expressed in cells of
the taste bud lineage, and that the expression of Mash1 in rat taste buds is
dependent upon gustatory innervation.

PMID: 10037145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Development. 1999 Feb;126(3):525-34.

Mash1 regulates neurogenesis in the ventral telencephalon.

Casarosa S(1), Fode C, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)IGBMC, CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur, BP 163, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Previous studies have shown that mice mutant for the gene Mash1 display severe
neuronal losses in the olfactory epithelium and ganglia of the autonomic nervous 
system, demonstrating a role for Mash1 in development of neuronal lineages in the
peripheral nervous system. Here, we have begun to analyse Mash1 function in the
central nervous system, focusing our studies on the ventral telencephalon where
it is expressed at high levels during neurogenesis. Mash1 mutant mice present a
severe loss of progenitors, particularly of neuronal precursors in the
subventricular zone of the medial ganglionic eminence. Discrete neuronal
populations of the basal ganglia and cerebral cortex are subsequently missing. An
analysis of candidate effectors of Mash1 function revealed that the Notch ligands
Dll1 and Dll3, and the target of Notch signaling Hes5, fail to be expressed in
Mash1 mutant ventral telencephalon. In the lateral ganglionic eminence, loss of
Notch signaling activity correlates with premature expression of a number of
subventricular zone markers by ventricular zone cells. Therefore, Mash1 is an
important regulator of neurogenesis in the ventral telencephalon, where it is
required both to specify neuronal precursors and to control the timing of their
production.

PMID: 9876181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Development. 1999 Feb;126(3):443-56.

Transcription factors Mash-1 and Prox-1 delineate early steps in differentiation 
of neural stem cells in the developing central nervous system.

Torii Ma(1), Matsuzaki F, Osumi N, Kaibuchi K, Nakamura S, Casarosa S, Guillemot 
F, Nakafuku M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurobiology, The University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033 Japan.

Like other tissues and organs in vertebrates, multipotential stem cells serve as 
the origin of diverse cell types during genesis of the mammalian central nervous 
system (CNS). During early development, stem cells self-renew and increase their 
total cell numbers without overt differentiation. At later stages, the cells
withdraw from this self-renewal mode, and are fated to differentiate into neurons
and glia in a spatially and temporally regulated manner. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying this important step in cell differentiation remain poorly
understood. In this study, we present evidence that the expression and function
of the neural-specific transcription factors Mash-1 and Prox-1 are involved in
this process. In vivo, Mash-1- and Prox-1-expressing cells were defined as a
transient proliferating population that was molecularly distinct from
self-renewing stem cells. By taking advantage of in vitro culture systems, we
showed that induction of Mash-1 and Prox-1 coincided with an initial step of
differentiation of stem cells. Furthermore, forced expression of Mash-1 led to
the down-regulation of nestin, a marker for undifferentiated neuroepithelial
cells, and up-regulation of Prox-1, suggesting that Mash-1 positively regulates
cell differentiation. In support of these observations in vitro, we found
specific defects in cellular differentiation and loss of expression of Prox-1 in 
the developing brain of Mash-1 mutant mice in vivo. Thus, we propose that
induction of Mash-1 and Prox-1 is one of the critical molecular events that
control early development of the CNS.

PMID: 9876174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cell Growth Differ. 1998 Oct;9(10):837-45.

Altered expression of helix-loop-helix transcriptional regulators and cyclin D1
in Wnt-1-transformed PC12 cells.

Issack PS(1), Ziff EB.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Kaplan Cancer 
Center, New York University Medical Center, New York 10016, USA.

Nerve growth factor induces PC12 cells to differentiate from a chromaffin cell to
a sympathetic neuronal phenotype. In contrast, PC12 cells, which stably express
Wnt-1, a secreted signaling factor required for development of mammalian midbrain
and cerebellum, fail to express differentiation-specific genes in response to
nerve growth factor. Analysis of factors binding to E box-containing regulatory
elements of the terminal differentiation gene encoding peripherin suggested a
differentiation-specific control of expression of helix-loop-helix
transcriptional regulators. Specifically, the MASH-1 (mammalian achaete-scute
homologue) helix-loop-helix transcription factor, which plays a positive role in 
neuronal differentiation, is reduced in Wnt-1/PC12 cells, and HES-1, a negative
regulator of MASH-1, is increased. These data suggest that the differentiation
block may result from induction of HES-1. Wnt-1/PC12 cells also proliferate more 
rapidly and express increased levels of cyclin D1. Thus, Wnt-1 may block the
differentiation and enhance the proliferation of PC12 cells by activating HES-1
and cyclin D1 and repressing MASH-1.

PMID: 9790495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Dev Biol. 1998 Jul 15;199(2):216-25.

Mammalian BarH homologue is a potential regulator of neural bHLH genes.

Saito T(1), Sawamoto K, Okano H, Anderson DJ, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, RIKEN, Ibaraki, Japan. tesaito@lab.nig.ac.jp

Vertebrate neurogenesis involves sequential actions of transcription factors.
neurogenins, encoding Atonal-related bHLH transcription factors, function as
neuronal determination genes in Xenopus. neurogenins and antother bHLH factor
gene, Mash1, are expressed in distinct subsets or areas of cells giving rise to
neurons, suggesting that these genes play important roles to generate distinct
populations of neurons. A mammalian homologue of BarH (MBH1) is expressed in a
complementary pattern to Mash1 expression in the developing nervous system like
neurogenins. Forced expression of MBH1 down-regulates expression of Mash1 and
up-regulates neurogenin2/Math4A, a member of neurogenins, in P19 cells during
neuronal differentiation. This suggests that MBH1 is a potential regulator of
mammalian neural bHLH genes, thereby establishing distinct pathways of neuronal
differentiation.

PMID: 9698441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cell Tissue Res. 1998 Jul;293(1):23-9.

Regulated expression of neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors
during differentiation of the immortalized neuronal progenitor cell line HC2S2
into neurons.

Ohtsuka T(1), Asahi M, Matsuura N, Kikuchi H, Hojo M, Kageyama R, Ohkubo H,
Hoshimaru M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 54
Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606, Japan.

Expression of nine neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors
was examined in an immortalized neuronal progenitor cell line HC2S2, which
differentiates into neurons after suppression of the v-myc expression with
tetracycline. Expression of MASH-1, NeuroD, NeuroD-related factor (NDRF) and
HES-1 was demonstrated in HC2S2 cells by Northern blot analysis using total RNA. 
Expression of MASH-1 mRNA was downregulated upon differentiation of HC2S2 cells
into mature neurons. In contrast, NeuroD and NDRF mRNA expression was maintained 
all through the differentiation. The expression of HES-1, a negative regulator of
the neuronal differentiation, was upregulated temporarily in accordance with the 
suppression of the v-myc expression and was downregulated upon the
differentiation of HC2S2 cells into neurons. The reduced expression of HES-1 mRNA
in undifferentiated HC2S2 cells may be explained by the transcriptional
suppression of HES-1 by the myc oncoprotein. The above data imply that both HES-1
and MASH-1 need to be downregulated at the time of accomplishment of the terminal
differentiation into mature neurons and that NeuroD and NDRF participate in the
regulatory process of the terminal differentiation in combination.

PMID: 9634594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Dev Biol. 1998 May 1;197(1):106-16.

Multiple elements regulate Mash1 expression in the developing CNS.

Verma-Kurvari S(1), Savage T, Smith D, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, Texas 75235-9111, USA.

Mash1, a transcription factor of the basic helix-loop-helix class, is expressed
during embryogenesis in restricted regions of the nervous system. An essential
role for Mash1 in neural development was demonstrated previously in mice carrying
a targeted disruption of the Mash1 gene. Regulation of the precise temporal and
spatial expression of Mash1 is thus likely to be important for proper neural
development. In this study, sequences that regulate Mash1 expression in the
central nervous system were characterized by assaying the expression of lacZ
reporter genes in transgenic embryos. A 1158-bp enhancer localized approximately 
7 kb upstream of the Mash1 coding region was identified. Deletions within this
enhancer region reveal the presence of both positive and negative cis-acting
elements. Analysis of multiple sequences within the enhancer demonstrate that
different elements preferentially function in different regions within the
Mash1-specific CNS expression domain. In addition, a role for sequences 3' of the
Mash1 coding region is revealed, providing evidence for posttranscriptional
control of Mash1 expression in multiple CNS domains.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9578622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;29(12):1389-99.

bHLH transcription factors and mammalian neuronal differentiation.

Kageyama R(1), Ishibashi M, Takebayashi K, Tomita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Kyoto University Faculty of Medicine,
Japan.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factor Mash1 is expressed in the developing
nervous system. Null mutation of Mash1 results in loss of olfactory and autonomic
neurons and delays differentiation of retinal neurons, indicating that Mash1
promotes neuronal differentiation. Other bHLH genes, Math/NeuroD/Neurogenin, all 
expressed in the developing nervous system, have also been suggested to promote
neuronal differentiation. In contrast, another bHLH factor, HES1, which is
expressed by neural precursor cells but not by neurons, represses Mash1
expression and antagonizes Mash1 activity in a dominant negative manner. Forced
expression of HES1 in precursor cells blocks neuronal differentiation in the
brain and retina, indicating that HES1 is a negative regulator of neuronal
differentiation. Conversely, null mutation of HES1 up-regulates Mash1 expression,
accelerates neuronal differentiation, and causes severe defects of the brain and 
eyes. Thus, HES1 regulates brain and eye morphogenesis by inhibiting premature
neuronal differentiation, and the down-regulation of HES1 expression at the right
time is required for normal development of the nervous system. Interestingly,
HES1 can repress its own expression by binding to its promoter, suggesting that
negative autoregulation may contribute to down-regulation of HES1 expression
during neural development. Recent studies indicate that HES1 expression is also
controlled by RBP-J, a mammalian homologue of Suppressor of Hairless [Su(H)], and
Notch, a key membrane protein that may regulate lateral specification through
RBP-J during neural development. Thus, the Notch-->RBP-J-->HES1-Mash1 pathway may
play a critical role in neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 9570134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Biochemistry. 1998 Mar 24;37(12):4217-23.

Thermodynamics of the DNA binding reaction of transcription factor MASH-1.

K-unne AG(1), Sieber M, Meierhans D, Allemann RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, ETH-Zurich, Universitätstrasse 16, CH-8092 Zurich,
Switzerland.

MASH-1, a member of the basic helix-loop-helix (BHLH) family of transcription
factors, promotes the differentiation of committed neuronal precursor cells. We
have determined the thermodynamic parameters of the DNA binding reaction of the
BHLH domain of MASH-1 (MASH-BHLH) by isothermal titration calorimetry and found
that the specificity of the binding reaction was rather low. At 27 degrees C, the
association constant for binding was 5.13 (+/-0.51) x 10(8) M-1 for an E-box
containing oligonucleotide, while for a heterologous DNA sequence it was 5.14
(+/-1.93) x 10(7) M-1. The reaction enthalpy and the reaction entropy were
strongly dependent on the temperature, but the reaction free energy was almost
independent of temperature. The association reaction was enthalpically driven
throughout the physiological temperature range and characterized by a large
negative heat capacity change. No change in the protonation state of the protein 
and/or the DNA was observed at pH 6. Within experimental error, the reaction was 
independent of pH between pH 6 and 8. Dissection of the entropy change of the
binding reaction indicated that binding was coupled to local protein folding of
approximately 25 amino acids per protein subunit. The circular dichroism spectra 
of free and DNA-bound MASH-BHLH revealed the formation of additional
alpha-helical structure comprising approximately 25 amino acids upon complex
formation. Therefore, while the basic region was in an alpha-helical conformation
in the DNA complex, in free MASH-BHLH it was substantially unfolded even at
concentrations where the protein is mainly dimeric. The association between
MASH-1 and DNA is therefore an example of "induced fit".

PMID: 9521744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 1998 Mar 12;106(1-2):1-12.

POU domain genes are differentially expressed in the early stages after lineage
commitment of the PNS-derived stem cell line, RT4-AC.

Donahue LM(1), Reinhart AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock 79430, USA. cbblmd@wpoffice.net.ttuhsc.edu

RT4 is a family of cell lines derived from a rat peripheral neurotumor and
consists of a multipotential stem cell which spontaneously gives rise to a glial 
derivative and two neuronal derivatives. To begin to understand the role(s) of
transcription factors in neural differentiation, we examined the expression of
ten transcription factor genes (MASH1, REST/NRSF, Oct-1, Oct-2, Tst-1/SCIP,
Brn-1, Brn-2, Brn-3.0, Brn-4, Brn-5) in the RT4 cell lines. We report here that
all of the RT4 cells express REST/NRSF, Oct-1 and Brn-5, but do not express
MASH1, Brn-3.0 or Brn-4. Furthermore, Brn-2 and Tst-1/SCIP expression was
restricted to the RT4 stem cell line and glial derivative, while Oct-2 was
expressed predominantly by the RT4 stem cell line and neuronal derivatives. We
propose that the lack of expression of MASH1 (which is expressed relatively early
in autonomic neuron differentiation) and Brn-3.0 (which is expressed early in
sensory neuron differentiation), in combination with the presence of REST/NRSF (a
repressor of neuronal gene expression), in all of the RT4 cell lines, establishes
the RT4 system as a unique model for examining very early events in neuronal
versus glial cell fate determination.

PMID: 9554933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Mar 15;26(6):1408-13.

Single chain dimers of MASH-1 bind DNA with enhanced affinity.

Sieber M(1), Allemann RK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Organic Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, ETH-Zürich,
Universitätstrasse 16, CH-8092 Zurich, Switzerland.

By designing recombinant genes containing tandem copies of the coding region of
the BHLH domain of MASH-1 (MASH-BHLH) with intervening DNA sequences encoding
linker sequences of 8 or 17 amino acids, the two subunits of the MASH dimer have 
been connected to form the single chain dimers MM8 and MM17. Despite the long and
flexible linkers which connect the C-terminus of the first BHLH subunit to the
N-terminus of the second, a distance of approximately 55 A, the single chain
dimers could be produced in Escherichia coli at high levels. MM8 and MM17 were
monomeric and no 'cross-folding' of the subunits was observed. CD spectroscopy
revealed that, like wild-type MASH-BHLH, MM8 and MM17 adopt only partly folded
structures in the absence of DNA, but undergo a folding transition to a mainly
alpha-helical conformation on DNA binding. Titrations by electrophoretic mobility
shift assays revealed that the affinity of the single chain dimers for E
box-containing DNA sequences was increased approximately 10-fold when compared
with wild-type MASH-BHLH. On the other hand, the affinity for heterologous DNA
sequences was increased only 5-fold. Therefore, the introduction of the peptide
linker led to a 4-fold increase in DNA binding specificity from -0.14 to -0.57
kcal/mol.

PMCID: PMC147425
PMID: 9490785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Development. 1998 Feb;125(4):609-20.

MASH1 activates expression of the paired homeodomain transcription factor Phox2a,
and couples pan-neuronal and subtype-specific components of autonomic neuronal
identity.

Lo L(1), Tiveron MC, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

We have investigated the genetic circuitry underlying the determination of
neuronal identity, using mammalian peripheral autonomic neurons as a model
system. Previously, we showed that treatment of neural crest stem cells (NCSCs)
with bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) leads to an induction of MASH1
expression and consequent autonomic neuronal differentiation. We now show that
BMP2 also induces expression of the paired homeodomain transcription factor
Phox2a, and the GDNF/NTN signalling receptor tyrosine kinase c-RET. Constitutive 
expression of MASH1 in NCSCs from a retroviral vector, in the absence of
exogenous BMP2, induces expression of both Phox2a and c-RET in a large fraction
of infected colonies, and also promotes morphological neuronal differentiation
and expression of pan-neuronal markers. In vivo, expression of Phox2a in
autonomic ganglia is strongly reduced in Mash1 -/- embryos. These loss- and
gain-of-function data suggest that MASH1 positively regulates expression of
Phox2a, either directly or indirectly. Constitutive expression of Phox2a, by
contrast to MASH1, fails to induce expression of neuronal markers or a neuronal
morphology, but does induce expression of c-RET. These data suggest that MASH1
couples expression of pan-neuronal and subtype-specific components of autonomic
neuronal identity, and support the general idea that identity is established by
combining subprograms involving cascades of transcription factors, which specify 
distinct components of neuronal phenotype.

PMID: 9435282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Development. 1998 Feb;125(4):599-608.

Control of noradrenergic differentiation and Phox2a expression by MASH1 in the
central and peripheral nervous system.

Hirsch MR(1), Tiveron MC, Guillemot F, Brunet JF, Goridis C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique et Physiologie du Développement, Institute de
Biologie du Développement de Marseille, CNRS/INSERM/Université de la
Méditerranée, Campus de Luminy, Marseille, France.

Mash1, a mammalian homologue of the Drosophila proneural genes of the
achaete-scute complex, is transiently expressed throughout the developing
peripheral autonomic nervous system and in subsets of cells in the neural tube.
In the mouse, targeted mutation of Mash1 has revealed a role in the development
of parts of the autonomic nervous system and of olfactory neurons, but no
discernible phenotype in the brain has been reported. Here, we show that the
adrenergic and noradrenergic centres of the brain are missing in Mash1 mutant
embryos, whereas most other brainstem nuclei are preserved. Indeed, the present
data together with the previous results show that, except in cranial sensory
ganglia, Mash1 function is essential for the development of all central and
peripheral neurons that express noradrenergic traits transiently or permanently. 
In particular, we show that, in the absence of MASH1, these neurons fail to
initiate expression of the noradrenaline biosynthetic enzyme dopamine
beta-hydroxylase. We had previously shown that all these neurons normally express
the homeodomain transcription factor Phox2a, a positive regulator of the dopamine
beta-hydroxylase gene and that a subset of them depend on it for their survival. 
We now report that expression of Phox2a is abolished or massively altered in the 
Mash1-/- mutants, both in the noradrenergic centres of the brain and in
peripheral autonomic ganglia. These results suggest that MASH1 controls
noradrenergic differentiation at least in part by controlling expression of
Phox2a and point to fundamental homologies in the genetic circuits that determine
the noradrenergic phenotype in the central and peripheral nervous system.

PMID: 9435281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Dev Biol. 1998 Feb 1;194(1):86-98.

Involvement of Mash1 in EGF-mediated regulation of differentiation in the
vertebrate retina.

Ahmad I(1), Dooley CM, Afiat S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska 68114, USA.

It is believed that signaling through the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor 
plays a critical role in the development of Drosophila eyes. In the present study
we have analyzed the role that EGF-mediated signaling plays in vertebrate retinal
development. We have observed that during late retinal neurogenesis EGF delays
rod photoreceptor differentiation and that this effect of EGF involves the
modulation of expression of a homologue of Drosophila proneural genes, Mash1. EGF
causes a significant decrease in Mash1 expression and an increase in the
proportion of proliferating cells in the retina in vitro. The decrease in Mash1
expression is accompanied by a concomitant decrease in opsin expression, a marker
for overt rod photoreceptor differentiation. Withdrawal of EGF leads to an
increase in both Mash1 and opsin expression; however, the onset of expression of 
Mash1 precedes that of opsin. Our study identifies a proliferative intermediate
precursor, characterized by Mash1 expression, that is the target of EGF-mediated 
suppression of rod photoreceptor differentiation. Based on the evolutionarily
conserved roles of EGF- and Notch-mediated signaling in the delay of
differentiation in proliferating precursors we propose that these distinct
signaling mechanisms act in concert to ensure the fidelity of the strict temporal
and spatial nature of cell fate determination in the retina.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9473334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Neurobiol. 1998 Feb 5;34(2):126-34.

Requirement of the MASH-1 transcription factor for neuroendocrine differentiation
of thyroid C cells.

Lanigan TM(1), DeRaad SK, Russo AF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242, USA.

Thyroid C cells are neural crest-derived neuroendocrine cells that can acquire
features similar to serotonergic neurons. Based on developmental and phenotypic
markers, we have previously proposed that C cells and serotonergic enteric
neurons arise from a common sympathoadrenal progenitor. In this report, we
genetically examined this relationship using mice lacking the mammalian
achaete-scute homologue 1 (MASH-1) transcription factor, since MASH-1 has
recently been shown to be required for differentiation of serotonergic enteric
neurons. We found that MASH-1 knockout mice have a greatly reduced number of C
cells based on the lack of calcitonin and serotonin immunoreactivity. In
contrast, calcitonin and serotonin were still expressed in cultured mature C
cells that no longer express MASH-1, demonstrating that MASH-1 is not directly
required for the expression of these two markers. Hence, MASH-1 is required to
establish the C-cell phenotype and supports the model that C cells lie in the
neuronal differentiation pathway of the sympathoadrenal neural crest.

PMID: 9468384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Genes Dev. 1997 Aug 15;11(16):2052-65.

Overexpression of Stra13, a novel retinoic acid-inducible gene of the basic
helix-loop-helix family, inhibits mesodermal and promotes neuronal
differentiation of P19 cells.

Boudjelal M(1), Taneja R, Matsubara S, Bouillet P, Dolle P, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique-Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale-Université Louis Pasteur, Collège de France, Illkirch.

We report the cDNA cloning of Stra13, a novel retinoic acid (RA)-inducible gene
from P19 embryonal carcinoma cells that encodes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
protein that shows the highest sequence similarities to the Drosophila Hairy and 
Enhancer of split and mouse Hes proteins. Stra13 does not bind to the known
consensus motifs (E-box and N-box) for bHLH proteins, but can repress activated
transcription (through an alpha-helix rich domain) in part by interaction with
general factors of the basal transcription machinery. During mouse embryogenesis,
Stra13 RNA is expressed in the neuroectoderm, and also in a number of mesodermal 
and endodermal derivatives. Remarkably, overexpression of Stra13 in P19 cells
results in neuronal differentiation in monolayer culture, under conditions where 
wild-type P19 cells only undergo mesodermal/endodermal differentiation. This
neuronal differentiation is accompanied by an altered expression of mesodermal
and neuronal markers, indicating that Stra13 could be one of the earliest RA
target genes whose expression is required for repression of mesodermal/endodermal
differentiation and/or induction of neuronal differentiation when P19 cell
aggregates are exposed to RA. Our results raise the possibility that Stra13 could
be involved as a repressor in a number of decision events occurring during
differentiation of various cell lineages.

PMCID: PMC316454
PMID: 9284045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1997 Aug;182(4):327-36.

Gene expression of MASH-1, MATH-1, neuroD and NSCL-2, basic helix-loop-helix
proteins, during neural differentiation in P19 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Itoh F(1), Nakane T, Chiba S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, 
Japan.

We examined the gene expression of MASH-1, MATH-1, neuroD and NSCL-2 during
neural differentiation of P19 embryonal carcinoma cells using reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and high performance liquid
chromatography. These proteins are members of basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor family and their expressions are reported to be transient
and restricted in the nervous system during early neurogenesis. Retinoic acid
(RA-, 1 microM)-treatment and aggregation for 4 days induced and greatly
increased MASH-1, neuroD and NSCL-2 mRNA in P19 cells. The increases peaked at
day 3, 4 and 5, respectively. RA-treatment increased MATH-1 mRNA slightly. mRNA
of MAP2, a neural differentiation marker, were increased by RA-treatment and the 
increases reached to the plateau at day 5. The results indicate that the gene
expression of MASH-1, MATH-1, neuroD and NSCL-2 during neural differentiation in 
P19 cells is transient and the order is similar to that in the mouse embryo
nervous system as previously reported.

PMID: 9352625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Curr Biol. 1997 Jun 1;7(6):440-50.

MASH1 maintains competence for BMP2-induced neuronal differentiation in
post-migratory neural crest cells.

Lo L(1), Sommer L, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 216-76, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, California
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA.

BACKGROUND: The interplay between growth factors and transcription factors in
vertebrate neurogenesis is poorly understood. MASH1 is a basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factor that is essential for autonomic neurogenesis. Bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) 2, and its relative BMP4, have been shown to induce
expression of MASH1 and to promote autonomic neuronal differentiation in neural
crest stem cells. The relationship between expression of MASH1 and the neurogenic
competence of neural crest cells has not been investigated, however.
RESULTS: We have examined the function of MASH1 in neurogenic competence using a 
population of immuno-isolated neural-crest-derived progenitor cells.
Post-migratory neural crest cells isolated from fetal rat gut expressed Mash1,
yet comprised a mixture of committed neuronal precursors and non-neuronal cells. 
The non-neuronal cells remained competent to differentiate to neurons, however,
if challenged with BMP2. Such competence declines with time and is paralleled by 
a decline in Mash1 expression in the cells. Expression of endogenous Mash1 can be
maintained by BMP2; in turn, constitutive expression of Mash1 from a retroviral
vector maintains competence for neuronal differentiation in response to late
addition of BMP2.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that MASH1 promotes competence for neurogenesis, 
in a manner similar to its homologs, the proneural genes achaete-scute in
Drosophila. They also reveal an unexpected feedback interaction between BMP2 and 
MASH1 during neuronal differentiation. MASH1 may play multiple roles at
successive stages of development within a neurogenic lineage, only one of which
is revealed by a loss-of-function mutation.

PMID: 9197246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 Jun;8(6):677-86.

Tissue-specific expression of human achaete-scute homologue-1 in neuroendocrine
tumors: transcriptional regulation by dual inhibitory regions.

Chen H(1), Biel MA, Borges MW, Thiagalingam A, Nelkin BD, Baylin SB, Ball DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Malignancies with neuroendocrine (NE) features such as medullary thyroid cancer
(MTC) and small cell lung cancer (SCLC) are prototypic neoplasms arising from
peripheral endocrine cells. The mechanisms that regulate the NE phenotype in
these tumors and their cellular precursors are not well understood. However, a
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that is homologous to Drosophila
neural fate determination proteins may have a central role. Human achaete-scute
homologue-1 (hASH1), a human homologue of the Drosophila achaete-scute complex,
is highly expressed in MTC, SCLC, and pheochromocytomas. To determine what
mechanisms allow constitutive expression of hASH1 in NE tumors, we cloned human
genomic DNA fragments containing the hASH1 gene and characterized its promoter
region. We show that hASH1 expression is restricted to NE cell lines by a
transcriptionally regulated mechanism. Dual promoters initiate hASH1
transcription, with the predominant site being an evolutionarily conserved
initiator (INR) element. Transient transfection studies provide evidence for a
generalized enhancer region that has high activity in all cell lines tested.
Restriction of hASH1 expression to NE tumor cells depends on two tissue-specific 
repressor regions, present in the proximal and distal (> 13.5 kb) 5'-flanking
region. Understanding the mechanisms of tissue-specific control of hASH1 gene
expression provides a useful model to explore regulatory cascades influencing
both normal nervous system development and the NE phenotype of tumors such as MTC
and SCLC.

PMID: 9186001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Neurosci. 1997 May 15;17(10):3644-52.

Mash1 and neurogenin1 expression patterns define complementary domains of
neuroepithelium in the developing CNS and are correlated with regions expressing 
notch ligands.

Ma Q(1), Sommer L, Cserjesi P, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 216-76, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, California
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA.

Genetic studies in Drosophila and in vertebrates have implicated basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) genes in neuronal fate determination and cell type
specification. We have compared directly the expression of Mash1 and neurogenin1 
(ngn1), two bHLH genes that are expressed specifically at early stages of
neurogenesis. In the PNS these genes are expressed in complementary autonomic and
sensory lineages. In the CNS in situ hybridization to serial sections and
double-labeling experiments indicate that Mash1 and ngn1 are expressed in
adjacent and nonoverlapping regions of the neuroepithelium that correspond to
future functionally distinct areas of the brain. We also showed that in the PNS
several other bHLH genes exhibit similar lineal restriction, as do ngn1 and
Mash1, suggesting that complementary cascades of bHLH factors are involved in PNS
development. Finally, we found that there is a close association between
expression of ngn1 and Mash1 and that of two Notch ligands. These observations
suggest a basic plan for vertebrate neurogenesis whereby regionalization of the
neuroepithelium is followed by activation of a relatively small number of bHLH
genes, which are used repeatedly in complementary domains to promote neural
determination and differentiation.

PMID: 9133387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 May 13;94(10):5355-60.

Conservation of the Drosophila lateral inhibition pathway in human lung cancer: a
hairy-related protein (HES-1) directly represses achaete-scute homolog-1
expression.

Chen H(1), Thiagalingam A, Chopra H, Borges MW, Feder JN, Nelkin BD, Baylin SB,
Ball DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 424 North Bond 
Street, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

The achaete-scute genes encode essential transcription factors in normal
Drosophila and vertebrate nervous system development. Human achaete-scute
homolog-1 (hASH1) is constitutively expressed in a human lung cancer with
neuroendocrine (NE) features, small cell lung cancer (SCLC), and is essential for
development of the normal pulmonary NE cells that most resemble this neoplasm.
Mechanisms regulating achaete-scute homolog expression outside of Drosophila are 
presently unclear, either in the context of the developing nervous system or in
normal or neoplastic cells with NE features. We now provide evidence that the
protein hairy-enhancer-of-split-1 (HES-1) acts in a similar manner as its
Drosophila homolog, hairy, to transcriptionally repress achaete-scute expression.
HES-1 protein is detected at abundant levels in most non-NE human lung cancer
cell lines which lack hASH1 but is virtually absent in hASH1-expressing lung
cancer cells. Moreover, induction of HES-1 in a SCLC cell line down-regulates
endogenous hASH1 gene expression. The repressive effect of HES-1 is directly
mediated by binding of the protein to a class C site in the hASH1 promoter. Thus,
a key part of the process that determines neural fate in Drosophila is conserved 
in human lung cancer cells. Furthermore, modulation of this pathway may underlie 
the constitutive hASH1 expression seen in NE tumors such as SCLC, the most
virulent human lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC24682
PMID: 9144241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Nature. 1997 Apr 24;386(6627):852-5.

An achaete-scute homologue essential for neuroendocrine differentiation in the
lung.

Borges M(1), Linnoila RI, van de Velde HJ, Chen H, Nelkin BD, Mabry M, Baylin SB,
Ball DW.

Author information: 
(1)The Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

In Drosophila and in vertebrates, the achaete-scute family of basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors plays a critical developmental role in
neuronal commitment and differentiation. Relatively little is known, however,
about the transcriptional control of neural features in cells outside a neuronal 
context. A minority of normal bronchial epithelial cells and many lung cancers,
especially small-cell lung cancer, exhibit a neuroendocrine phenotype that may
reflect a common precursor cell population. We show here that human achaete-scute
homologue-1 (hASH1) is selectively expressed in normal fetal pulmonary
neuroendocrine cells, as well as in the diverse range of lung cancers with
neuroendocrine features. Strikingly, newborn mice bearing a disruption of the
ASH1 gene have no detectable pulmonary neuroendocrine cells. Depletion of this
transcription factor from lung cancer cells by antisense oligonucleotides results
in a significant decrease in the expression of neuroendrocrine markers. Thus, a
homologue of Drosophila neural fate determination genes seems to be necessary for
progression of lung epithelial cells through a neuroendocrine differentiation
pathway that is a feature of small-cell lung cancer, the most lethal form of
human lung cancer.

PMID: 9126746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Development. 1997 Apr;124(8):1611-21.

Mash1 activates a cascade of bHLH regulators in olfactory neuron progenitors.

Cau E(1), Gradwohl G, Fode C, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur, Illkirch, CU de Strasbourg, France.

The lineage of olfactory neurons has been relatively well characterized at the
cellular level, but the genes that regulate the proliferation and differentiation
of their progenitors are currently unknown. In this study, we report the
isolation of a novel murine gene, Math4C/neurogenin1, which is distantly related 
to the Drosophila proneural gene atonal. We show that Math4C/neurogenin1 and the 
basic helix-loop-helix gene Mash1 are expressed in the olfactory epithelium by
different dividing progenitor populations, while another basic helix-loop-helix
gene, NeuroD, is expressed at the onset of neuronal differentiation. These
expression patterns suggest that each gene marks a distinct stage of olfactory
neuron progenitor development, in the following sequence:
Mash1>Math4C/neurogenin1>NeuroD. We have previously reported that inactivation of
Mash1 function leads to a severe reduction in the number of olfactory neurons. We
show here that most cells in the olfactory epithelium of Mash1 mutant embryos
fail to express Math4C/neurogenin1 or NeuroD. Strikingly, a subset of progenitor 
cells in a ventrocaudal domain of Mash1 mutant olfactory epithelium still express
Math4C/neurogenin1 and NeuroD and differentiate into neurons. Cells in this
domain also express Math4A/neurogenin2, another member of the Math4/neurogenin
gene family, and not Mash1. Our results demonstrate that Mash1 is required at an 
early stage in the olfactory neuron lineage to initiate a differentiation program
involving Math4C/neurogenin1 and NeuroD. Another gene activates a similar program
in a separate population of olfactory neuron progenitors.

PMID: 9108377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mech Dev. 1997 Mar;62(2):227-37.

Expression of the helix-loop-helix factor, Hes3, during embryo development
suggests a role in early midbrain-hindbrain patterning.

Lobe CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, LSB 425, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON,
Canada. lobe@mcmail.cis.mcmaster.ca

The Hes gene family members are mammalian homologues of the Drosophila hairy and 
Enhancer of split genes. hairy and Enhancer of split function in both
segmentation and in the Notch neurogenic pathway during Drosophila embryo
development. Previous expression data suggested a conserved role for the Hes
genes in the Notch signalling pathway, but not in segmentation. Here, Hes3
expression during mouse embryogenesis is described. During early development of
the central nervous system, Hes3 is expressed specifically in the region of the
midbrain/hindbrain boundary, and in rhombomeres 2, 4, 6 and 7. This pattern
suggests that Hes3 may have a conserved role as a segmentation gene. Later in
development, Hes3 is co-expressed with other neurogenic gene homologues in the
developing central nervous system and epithelial cells undergoing mesenchyme
induction.

PMID: 9152013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Biochemistry. 1997 Feb 4;36(5):1085-91.

Covalently linking BHLH subunits of MASH-1 increases specificity of DNA binding.

Künne AG(1), Allemann RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, ETH-Zürich, Switzerland.

MASH-1, a member of the basic-helix-loop-helix (BHLH) family of transcription
factors, promotes the differentiation of committed neuronal precursor cells. In
vitro, MASH-1 displays only marginal DNA sequence specificity. We have produced a
MASH-1 variant, MASH-GGC, by introducing the tripeptide Gly-Gly-Cys at the
C-terminal end of the BHLH domain. Under reducing conditions the properties of
MASH-GGC and of the BHLH domain of MASH-1 were very similar. Like MASH-1, reduced
MASH-GGC showed little specificity of DNA binding. CD spectroscopy revealed that 
both proteins underwent a conformational change from a largely unfolded to a
mainly alpha-helical conformation upon binding to DNA. When the subunits of
MASH-GGC were linked through a disulfide bond, the folded conformation was stable
over a wide concentration range (2.5 nM to 2 microM) even in the absence of DNA. 
Oxidized MASH-GGC bound to E-box-containing sequences half-maximally at 148 nM,
compared to 458 nM for the reduced form. Therefore, even when the change from a
monomeric to a dimeric species was taken into account, the affinity for
E-box-containing DNA sequences was increased. Surprisingly, the apparent
dissociation constant for the complex with DNA not containing E-box sequences was
increased upon oxidation. Therefore, despite the large distance between the
disulfide bridge and the protein-DNA interface, covalently linking the subunits
of MASH-1 increased the specificity of DNA binding significantly. In vivo, such
an increase of the intrinsic DNA binding specificity might be achieved through
interactions with other proteins of the transcriptional machinery.

PMID: 9033398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1997;62:493-504.

Cell lineage determination and the control of neuronal identity in the neural
crest.

Anderson DJ(1), Groves A, Lo L, Ma Q, Rao M, Shah NM, Sommer L.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Biology, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena 91125, USA.

The molecular mechanisms underlying the determination of neuronal identity in the
vertebrate peripheral nervous system are only just beginning to come into focus. 
Many of these mechanisms, such as the involvement of cascades of bHLH
transcription factors and lateral inhibition via the Notch-Delta system, appear
to have been conserved from Drosophila (Ghysen et al. 1993; Jan and Jan 1993).
The way in which these genetic circuits are controlled by instructive growth
factors, and the manner in which they lead to expression of a particular neuronal
identity, is far from clear. This process is being elucidated by studies of
neurogenesis in the peripheral autonomic lineage, which is arguably the
best-understood neurogenic lineage in vertebrates. Emerging evidence is beginning
to suggest that neuronal diversity within the autonomic and sensory lineages may 
be generated by related, but distinct, mechanisms. All autonomic progenitors
express a common bHLH protein, MASH1, which appears to be induced by members of
the BMP2 subfamily secreted by the tissues to which these progenitors migrate.
Additional signals may then act on these progenitors in different locations to
induce the expression of other transcription factors, which act in conjunction
with MASH1 to specify the final phenotypes of the different autonomic neuron
subtypes (sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric). Although different classes 
of autonomic neurons develop in very different locations within the body,
different classes of sensory neurons are located together in dorsal root ganglia.
The finding that distinct but related subtypes of bHLH proteins, the neurogenins,
are expressed by different classes of sensory neuron precursors early in
development suggests that sensory neuron diversity, in contrast to autonomic
neuron diversity, may be pre-specified at or before the time neural crest cells
begin their emigration from the neural tube.

PMID: 9598383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Dev Biol. 1996 Dec 15;180(2):605-17.

Lineage-specific regulation of the neural differentiation gene MASH1.

Verma-Kurvari S(1), Savage T, Gowan K, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, Texas, 75235-9111, USA.

Mash1 is a transcription factor required during embryogenesis for the development
of multiple neural lineages. It is expressed in restricted domains at specific
stages in the developing central and peripheral nervous systems and in the
developing olfactory epithelium. We have investigated the regulation of Mash1
expression during embryogenesis using transgenic mice containing Mash1/lacZ
reporter constructs. Cis-acting regulatory elements controlling Mash1 expression 
in the central nervous system are located within an 8-kb sequence upstream of the
Mash1 coding region. This 8-kb sequence does not contain elements directing
expression to the peripheral nervous system, olfactory epithelium, or retina.
Sequences outside this 8 kb but within 36 kb of the Mash1 locus contain elements 
responsible for expression in the autonomic division of the peripheral nervous
system. However, transgene expression in embryos containing the 36-kb sequence
was never detected in the olfactory epithelium and retina. Thus, regulatory
elements driving expression in these lineages may be at even greater distances
from the Mash1 coding region. These data provide evidence for complex regulation 
of Mash1 expression in which multiple lineage-specific cis-acting regulatory
regions span greater than 36 kb of the Mash1 locus. Further characterization of
these regions will facilitate the study of factors that regulate the temporal and
spatial expression of Mash1 during development. In addition, the regulatory
sequences identified here can direct expression of heterologous genes to
developing neural lineages that normally express Mash1, thus providing an
important tool for examining the function of candidate regulatory genes in
mammalian nervous system development.

PMID: 8954731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Dev Biol. 1996 Nov 25;180(1):227-41.

Restricted expression of a novel murine atonal-related bHLH protein in
undifferentiated neural precursors.

Gradwohl G(1), Fode C, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur, Illkirch, France.

Tissue-specific bHLH proteins play important roles in the specification and
differentiation of neural cell lineages in invertebrate and vertebrate organisms.
Two groups of bHLH proteins, atonal and achaete-scute, have proneural activities 
in Drosophila, and the mouse achaete-scute homolog MASH1 is required for the
differentiation of several neural lineages. In a screen for proteins interacting 
with MASH1, we have isolated a novel bHLH protein related to atonal, named
MATH4A, which is broadly expressed in neural precursor cells in the mouse
embryonic CNS and PNS. Interaction assays in yeast and in vitro demonstrate that 
MATH4A interacts efficiently with both MASH1 and the ubiquitous bHLH protein E12.
MATH4A-E12 heterodimers, but not MATH4A-MASH1, bind to a consensus E-box
sequence. Math4A expression is restricted to undifferentiated neural precursors
and is complementary to that of Mash1 in most regions of the nervous system. In
particular, Math4A is transcribed at high levels in the cerebral cortex, dorsal
thalamus, and epibranchial placodes, which present little or no Mash1 expression.
However, expression of the two genes shows limited overlap in certain CNS regions
(retina, preoptic area of the hypothalamus, midbrain, hindbrain). Its structure
and expression pattern suggest that MATH4A may regulate an early step of neural
development, either as a partner of ubiquitous bHLH proteins or associated with
other neural-specific bHLH proteins.

PMID: 8948587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Dev Biol. 1996 Nov 25;180(1):143-55.

Identification of novel paired homeodomain protein related to C. elegans unc-4 as
a potential downstream target of MASH1.

Saito T(1), Lo L, Anderson DJ, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, RIKEN, Ibaraki, Japan. tesaito@rtc.riken.go.jp

A novel paired homeodomain protein, PHD1, that is most closely related to C.
elegans unc-4 has been identified by a differential RT-PCR method. PHD1 is
expressed in a narrow layer adjacent to the ventricular zone of the dorsal spinal
cord, immediately following expression of MASH1 but preceding overt neuronal
differentiation. Some cells coexpressing MASH1 and PHD1 can be seen, suggesting
that these two genes are sequentially activated within the same lineage. In the
olfactory sensory epithelium, PHD1 expression not only follows but is dependent
upon MASH1 function, suggesting that PHD1 acts downstream of MASH1. A sequential 
action of bHLH and paired homeodomain proteins is apparent in other neurogenic
lineages and may be a general feature of both vertebrate and invertebate
neurogenesis.

PMID: 8948581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 25;271(43):26659-63.

Cooperative transcriptional activation by the neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix
protein MASH1 and members of the myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2) family.

Black BL(1), Ligon KL, Zhang Y, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Oncology, Hamon Center for Basic Cancer
Research, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75235,
USA.

Establishment of skeletal muscle and neural cell types is controlled by families 
of myogenic and neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins, respectively. 
Myogenic bHLH proteins have been shown to activate skeletal muscle transcription 
in collaboration with members of the myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2) family of
MCM1-agamous-deficiens-serum response factor (MADS)-box transcription factors,
which are expressed in differentiated myocytes and neurons. Here, we show that
the neurogenic bHLH protein MASH1 interacts with members of the MEF2 family and
that this interaction, mediated by the DNA binding and dimerization domains of
these factors, results in synergistic activation of transcription through either 
the MASH1 or the MEF2 DNA binding site. Consistent with their involvement in
activation of neuronal gene expression, members of the MEF2 family are expressed 
in P19 embryonal carcinoma cells that have been induced to form neurons following
treatment with retinoic acid. These results suggest that members of the MEF2
family perform similar roles in synergistic activation of transcription in
myogenic and neurogenic lineages by serving as cofactors for cell type-specific
bHLH proteins.

PMID: 8900141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Sep;7(9):1149-56.

Cell-substratum interactions mediate oncogene-induced phenotype of lung cancer
cells.

Barr LF(1), Campbell SE, Penno MB, Ball DW, Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 
21205, USA.

In vivo and in vitro studies have linked small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells along a differentiation continuum. The
transition of a SCLC toward a NSCLC phenotype is modeled in culture by the
simultaneous overexpression of myc and ras genes in cultured SCLC cells. A major 
phenotypic distinction between SCLC and NSCLC in culture is that SCLC cells
usually grow in floating aggregates, whereas NSCLC cells and myc- plus
ras-expressing SCLC cells grow as adherent spreading monolayers like other
epithelial cells. The present studies examine how myc, ras, cell aggregation, and
attachment to laminin may interact to modulate transitions between the SCLC and
NSCLC phenotypes. We find that myc-expressing SCLC cells, which normally grow as 
anchorage-independent cells in plastic flasks, will adhere to laminin and exhibit
an epithelial morphology. In this setting, the cells express both NSCLC and SCLC 
markers, thus resembling a tumor type previously termed NSCLC with neuroendocrine
features. Anchorage-dependent SCLC cells simultaneously expressing the myc family
and an exogenous ras oncogene move further toward the NSCLC phenotype than the
above myc-expressing cells. However, forced suspension of such cells restores the
expression of neuroendocrine SCLC features. These studies indicate that cell
environment, as much as gene expression events, profoundly affects aspects of the
SCLC cell phenotype.

PMID: 8877096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Genes Cells. 1996 Aug;1(8):765-74.

Mash1 promotes neuronal differentiation in the retina.

Tomita K(1), Nakanishi S, Guillemot F, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Kyoto University Faculty of Medicine,
Sakyo-ku, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mash1, a mammalian homologue of Drosophila achaete-scute proneural
gene complex, plays an essential role in differentiation of subsets of peripheral
neurones. Whereas Mash1 is expressed during retinal development, no apparent
abnormalities were found during embryogenesis as well as at birth in Mash1-null
retina, suggesting that early differentiating cells such as ganglion, amacrine
and cone cells develop normally. Because Mash1-null mice die soon after birth,
their postnatal development cannot be examined in vivo. Thus, it remains to be
determined whether or not Mash1 functions in postnatal development of retina.
RESULTS: Here, Mash1 roles in postnatal development of retina was examined by
using retinal explant that develops like in vivo retina. Without Mash1,
differentiation of late appearing cells such as rod, horizontal, and bipolar
cells was delayed and the final number of bipolar cells was significantly
reduced. In contrast, vimentin-positive cells (probably Muller glial cells) were 
increased in Mash1-null retina.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide evidence that Mash1 promotes neuronal
differentiation during retinal development and is essential for proper ratios of 
retinal cell types.

PMID: 9077445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Surgery. 1996 Aug;120(2):168-72; discussion 173.

Differentiation of medullary thyroid cancer by C-Raf-1 silences expression of the
neural transcription factor human achaete-scute homolog-1.

Chen H(1), Carson-Walter EB, Baylin SB, Nelkin BD, Ball DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Md, USA.

BACKGROUND: Human achaete-scute homolog-1 (hASH1), a fetal neural transcription
factor, is highly expressed in neuroendocrine tumors such as medullary thyroid
cancer (MTC). Although hASH1 probably plays a part in the growth and development 
of these tumors, its precise role and mechanism are unknown.
METHODS: To further elucidate the function and regulation of hASH1 in
neuroendocrine tumor differentiation, we used a model of MTC tumor
differentiation mediated by the ras/raf-1 signaling pathway. The MTC TT cells
alone or transduced with a beta-estradiol activatable raf-1 construct (TT: delta 
Raf-1:ER) were treated with beta-estradiol or carrier. Northern analysis and
nuclear run-off assays were performed to determine the hASH1 messenger RNA (mRNA)
levels and transcription rate, respectively.
RESULTS: The TT: delta Raf-1:ER cells treated with beta-estradiol underwent
marked biochemical and morphologic changes, including cell rounding, increase in 
calcitonin transcription, loss of RET proto-oncogene expression, and cessation of
cell growth. During this differentiation process expression of hASH1 mRNA was
silenced. Nuclear run-off experiments revealed that this decrease in steady-state
hASH1 mRNA by raf-1 activation resulted predominantly from transcriptional
inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: Silencing of hASH1 in parallel with loss of RET is associated with
development of a mature C-cell differentiation pattern. Mechanisms leading to
transcriptional silencing of hASH1 may be crucial in regulating the proliferative
capacity or differentiation status of MTC. Downstream targets of hASH1 could play
a role in C-cell proliferation and progression to MTC.

PMID: 8751579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jun 14;271(24):14371-5.

Functional and physical interactions between mammalian achaete-scute homolog 1
and myocyte enhancer factor 2A.

Mao Z(1), Nadal-Ginard B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA.

The mammalian achaete-scute homolog 1 (MASH1) protein is required for the early
development of the nervous system. However, the molecular and biochemical
mechanism by which MASH1 acts to determine neurogenesis are still unknown. The
myocyte enhancer factor 2A (MEF2A) is a MADS transcription factor that is
essential for the specification and differentiation of the muscle lineage. Here
we show that MEF2A and MASH1 are coordinately induced during the differentiation 
of the teratocarcinoma cell line P19 along a neuronal lineage and that in
transient transfection assays, MEF2A and MASH1 cooperatively activate gene
expression. This cooperativity appears to be due to a specific physical
interaction between MEF2A and MASH1. Taken together, these findings suggest that 
MASH1 via a cooperative interaction with MEF2A may regulate the expression of
specific genes that are critical for neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 8662987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Development. 1996 Jan;122(1):309-20.

Distinct subpopulations of enteric neuronal progenitors defined by time of
development, sympathoadrenal lineage markers and Mash-1-dependence.

Blaugrund E(1), Pham TD, Tennyson VM, Lo L, Sommer L, Anderson DJ, Gershon MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Enteric and sympathetic neurons have previously been proposed to be lineally
related. We present independent lines of evidence that suggest that enteric
neurons arise from at least two lineages, only one of which expresses markers in 
common with sympathoadrenal cells. In the rat, sympathoadrenal markers are
expressed, in the same order as in sympathetic neurons, by a subset of enteric
neuronal precursors, which also transiently express tyrosine hydroxylase. If this
precursor pool is eliminated in vitro by complement-mediated lysis, enteric
neurons continue to develop; however, none of these are serotonergic. In the
mouse, the Mash-1-/- mutation, which eliminates sympathetic neurons, also
prevents the development of enteric serotonergic neurons. Other enteric neuronal 
populations, however, including those that contain calcitonin gene related
peptide are present. Enteric tyrosine hydroxylase-containing cells co-express
Mash-1 and are eliminated by the Mash-1-/- mutation, consistent with the idea
that in the mouse, as in the rat, these precursors generate serotonergic neurons.
Serotonergic neurons are generated early in development, while calcitonin gene
related peptide-containing enteric neurons are generated much later. These data
suggest that enteric neurons are derived from at least two progenitor lineages.
One transiently expresses sympathoadrenal markers, is Mash-1-dependent, and
generates early-born enteric neurons, some of which are serotonergic. The other
is Mash-1-independent, does not express sympathoadrenal markers, and generates
late-born enteric neurons, some of which contain calcitonin gene related peptide.

PMID: 8565843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 1995 Dec 21;90(1-2):184-9.

Mash-1 is expressed during ROD photoreceptor differentiation and binds an E-box, 
E(opsin)-1 in the rat opsin gene.

Ahmad I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy and Ophthalmology, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha 68198, USA.

It has been shown previously that the transcription factor Mash-1 plays a
significant role in mammalian neurogenesis. In the present study we show that
Mash-1 is expressed during rat retinal development and that it interacts
specifically with an E-box identified in the promoter of the opsin gene during
rod photoreceptor differentiation. We propose that opsin may be one of the
downstream neuronal genes regulated by Mash-1 during neurogenesis in the central 
nervous system.

PMID: 8719343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Neuron. 1995 Dec;15(6):1245-58.

The cellular function of MASH1 in autonomic neurogenesis.

Sommer L(1), Shah N, Rao M, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 216-76, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena
91125, USA.

Using primary cultures and immortalized multipotential stem cell lines derived
from wild-type and Mash1 mutant neural crest cells, we have analyzed the cellular
function of MASH1 in autonomic neurogenesis. We present evidence for the
existence of a precursor expressing MASH1 and neuronal markers such as
neurofilament, neuron-specific tubulin, and tetanus toxin receptor. This cell has
a nonneuronal morphology. Differentiation of this precursor to neurons that
express markers such as SCG10, peripherin, and neuron-specific enolase is
dependent upon MASH1 function. These data imply that the differentiation of
autonomic neurons from uncommitted neural crest cells occurs in several
sequential steps. Moreover, they suggest that MASH1 does not commit multipotent
cells to a neural fate, like its Drosophila achaete-scute counterparts, but
rather promotes the differentiation of a committed neuronal precursor.

PMID: 8845150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Genomics. 1995 Nov 1;30(1):81-3.

Localization of the human achaete-scute homolog gene (ASCL1) distal to
phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) and proximal to tumor rejection antigen (TRA1) on
chromosome 12q22-q23.

Renault B(1), Lieman J, Ward D, Krauter K, Kucherlapati R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
New York 10461, USA.

ASCL1, the human achaete-scute homolog, is a helix-loop-helix transcription
factor that was previously assigned to chromosome 12 using a rodent-human somatic
hybrid panel. We now placed this gene on a yeast artificial chromosome contig
encompassing position 119 cM of the Généthon genetic map between the two genes
phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) and tumor rejection antigen 1 (TRA1). We also
localized ASCL1 in the 12q22-q23 cytogenetic interval by using fluorescence in
situ hybridization.

PMID: 8595908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Neurooncol. 1995 Oct;26(1):35-43.

Expression of the human Achaete-scute 1 gene in olfactory neuroblastoma
(esthesioneuroblastoma).

Carney ME(1), O'Reilly RC, Sholevar B, Buiakova OI, Lowry LD, Keane WM, Margolis 
FL, Rothstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Jefferson Medical College,
Jefferson Cancer Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Olfactory neuroblastoma (ONB) is a rare neuronal malignancy of the olfactory
mucosal. Markers used in the diagnosis of ONB do not distinguish ONB from other
neuronal tumors or tumors with neuroendocrine features thus making the diagnosis 
of ONB difficult. Using a modified RT-PCR technique, we show that the human
homologue of the Drosophila achaete-scute gene HASH1 is expressed in 6 primary
and one metastatic ONB specimens, whereas Olfactory Marker Protein (OMP) is not. 
Previous studies have shown that HASH1 is expressed in immature olfactory neurons
and is required for their development. OMP, whose function is unknown, is
expressed exclusively in mature olfactory neurons. Together, these data suggest
that ONB is derived from immature olfactory neurons of neuroectodermal origin.
Analysis of RNA expression in primary tumor specimens and in an established cell 
line make this an ideal system to study olfactory growth and differentiation.
Furthermore, these studies represent the first molecular genetic analysis of this
rare and unusual neuronal tumor.

PMID: 8583243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Biochemistry. 1995 Sep 5;34(35):11026-36.

DNA binding specificity of the basic-helix-loop-helix protein MASH-1.

Meierhan D(1), el-Ariss C, Neuenschwander M, Sieber M, Stackhouse JF, Allemann
RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, ETH-Zurich, Switzerland.

Despite the high degree of sequence similarity in their basic-helix-loop-helix
(BHLH) domains, MASH-1 and MyoD are involved in different biological processes.
In order to define possible differences between the DNA binding specificities of 
these two proteins, we investigated the DNA binding properties of MASH-1 by
circular dichroism spectroscopy and by electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSA). Upon binding to DNA, the BHLH domain of MASH-1 underwent a conformational
change from a mainly unfolded to a largely alpha-helical form, and surprisingly, 
this change was independent of the specific DNA sequence. The same conformational
transition could be induced by the addition of 20% 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol. The
apparent dissociation constants (KD) of the complexes of full-length MASH-1 with 
various oligonucleotides were determined from half-saturation points in EMSAs.
MASH-1 bound as a dimer to DNA sequences containing an E-box with high affinity
KD = 1.4-4.1 x 10(-14) M2). However, the specificity of DNA binding was low. The 
dissociation constant for the complex between MASH-1 and the highest affinity
E-box sequence (KD = 1.4 x 10(-14) M2) was only a factor of 10 smaller than for
completely unrelated DNA sequences (KD = approximately 1 x 10(-13) M2). The DNA
binding specificity of MASH-1 was not significantly increased by the formation of
an heterodimer with the ubiquitous E12 protein. MASH-1 and MyoD displayed similar
binding site preferences, suggesting that their different target gene
specificities cannot be explained solely by differential DNA binding. An
explanation for these findings is provided on the basis of the known crystal
structure of the BHLH domain of MyoD.

PMID: 7669760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Neurosci. 1995 Sep;15(9):6167-78.

Induction of a serotonergic and neuronal phenotype in thyroid C-cells.

Clark MS(1), Lanigan TM, Page NM, Russo AF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242, USA.

We have investigated whether rat thyroid C-cells can acquire a phenotype similar 
to serotonergic neurons. C-cells are neural crest derived endocrine cells with
some intrinsic neuronal and serotonergic properties. A relatively simple
isolation scheme yielded cultures of about 50% initial purity, as measured by
fluorescence activated cell sorting. These enriched C-cells could extend neurites
up to 550 microns on a laminin-containing substratum in the presence of NGF. The 
cultured C-cells expressed neurofilaments and this expression was enhanced by NGF
treatment. The C-cells also expressed two markers of the sympathoadrenal neural
crest lineage, the mammalian achaete scute homolog-1 (MASH-1) transcription
factor, and the B2 cell surface antigen. Interestingly, MASH-1 was not detectable
after the C-cells were placed in culture, which is consistent with neuronal
differentiation, since MASH-1 is only expressed in neuronal progenitors prior to 
differentiation. We then demonstrated that C-cells possess the fundamental
features of serotonergic neurons: synthesis and secretion, uptake, and feedback
control. The enriched C-cells, as well as the CA77 C-cell line, showed 5-HT
immunostaining, expression of tryptophan hydroxylase mRNA, 5-HT1B autoreceptor
mRNA, and 5-HT transporter mRNA and activity. NGF greatly induced 5-HT
transporter activity as determined by sensitivity to sertraline, a selective 5-HT
reuptake inhibitor. Based on these results, we propose that thyroid C-cells are
derived from a vagal sympathoadrenal progenitor, similar to serotonergic enteric 
neurons, and can undergo neuronal transdifferentiation. Hence, these cells should
provide suitable and convenient models for molecular and cellular studies on
serotonergic neurons.

PMID: 7666199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1995 Aug;6(4):363-79.

Dynamics of MASH1 expression in vitro and in vivo suggest a non-stem cell site of
MASH1 action in the olfactory receptor neuron lineage.

Gordon MK(1), Mumm JS, Davis RA, Holcomb JD, Calof AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242, USA.

Disruption of the mouse gene encoding the transcription factor MASH1 leads to
loss of certain classes of neurons, including receptor neurons of the olfactory
epithelium (OE). Here we investigate the nature of the cell type expressing MASH1
in mouse OE by manipulating olfactory receptor neuron (ORN) neurogenesis in vitro
and in vivo to alter the dynamics of neuronal production. The results indicate
that MASH1 is expressed in cells of the ORN lineage, but not in ORNs themselves
nor in their immediate precursors. Data on how changes in the numbers and
proliferative states of MASH+ cells correlate with induced changes in overall
neurogenesis strongly suggest that MASH1-expressing cells give rise to the
immediate precursors of ORNs, but are not the self-renewing stem cells of the OE.
The results imply that multiple progenitor stages are employed in generating ORNs
and suggest that the action of MASH1 occurs predominantly at an intermediate
stage.

PMID: 8846005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Am J Hum Genet. 1995 Jan;56(1):336-7.

Exclusion of the neuronal nitric oxide synthase gene and the human achaete-scute 
homologue I gene as candidate loci for spinal cerebellar ataxia 2.

Twells R, Xu W, Ball D, Allotey R, Williamson R, Chamberlain S.

PMCID: PMC1801330
PMID: 7529963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Neurosci. 1994 Nov;14(11 Pt 1):6370-83.

DLX-2, MASH-1, and MAP-2 expression and bromodeoxyuridine incorporation define
molecularly distinct cell populations in the embryonic mouse forebrain.

Porteus MH(1), Bulfone A, Liu JK, Puelles L, Lo LC, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Department of Psychiatry,
University of California, San Francisco 94143-0984.

Recently, the Dlx family of homeobox genes have been identified as candidates for
regulating patterning and differentiation of the forebrain. We have made a
polyclonal antiserum to the protein product of the Dlx-2 gene. Using this
antiserum, we have characterized the spatial and temporal pattern of DLX-2
protein expression during murine development and in the adult mouse brain. These 
studies demonstrate that, like the mRNA from the Dlx-2 gene, DLX-2 protein is
expressed in mouse embryonic forebrain, limbs, tail, genital tubercle, and
branchial arches. Within the embryonic forebrain, DLX-2 protein is expressed
within specific transverse and longitudinal domains. Analysis of expression
within the wall of the forebrain shows that DLX-2 is expressed in proliferative
regions including the ventricular and subventricular zones. DLX-2 is expressed in
the same cells as MASH-1, a marker of relatively undifferentiated cells, but in a
reciprocal fashion to MAP-2, a marker of terminal neuronal differentiation. A
number of DLX-2-expressing cells, but not all, can be labeled with
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU). Using the patterns of DLX-2, MASH-1, MAP-2 expression, 
and bromodeoxyuridine incorporation, we identify four molecularly distinct
populations of cells that may correspond to different stages of neuronal
differentiation in the mouse basal forebrain, in which DLX-2 is expressed at the 
transition from proliferation to terminal differentiation.

PMID: 7965042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Dev Biol. 1994 Nov;166(1):300-10.

Regulated expression of Wnt family members during neuroectodermal differentiation
of P19 embryonal carcinoma cells: overexpression of Wnt-1 perturbs normal
differentiation-specific properties.

Smolich BD(1), Papkoff J.

Author information: 
(1)SUGEN, Inc., Redwood City, California 94063.

The P19 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cell line represents a useful model system for
analysis of neural development and differentiation processes that are difficult
to study in mammalian embryos. Since many members of the Wnt family of signaling 
molecules are expressed in the developing as well as adult nervous system, we
have examined expression of these genes in P19 cells. Analysis of the mRNA
accumulation profiles for Wnt genes during retinoic acid (RA)-induced neural
differentiation of P19 cells showed that nine Wnt family members were expressed
in a regulated manner during this process. Most were induced by RA treatment, and
some were also expressed in undifferentiated P19 cells. Since Wnt-1 is not
expressed in undifferentiated P19 cells but is induced during neuroectodermal
differentiation we have generated P19 cell lines that overexpress Wnt-1 in the
absence of RA treatment, in order to address the role of Wnt-1 in P19
differentiation. In the presence of ectopic Wnt-1, expression of other endogenous
Wnt genes, which serve as early differentiation markers in this system, were
induced without RA, which is normally required for appearance of these gene
products. Furthermore, ectopic expression of Wnt-1 resulted in a loss of SSEA-1
antigen expression, a marker of undifferentiated P19 cells. Similarly to the
parental cell line, addition of RA to P19 cells overexpressing Wnt-1 induced the 
neuroectodermal pathway, but expression of cell type-specific markers such as
MASH-1, HNK-1, and GAP-43 was diminished and the morphology of neuronal
processes, stained with an antibody to neurofilament, was abnormal. These data
suggest that Wnt-1 itself can induce some aspects of early neuroectodermal
differentiation and, furthermore, that the correct timing of Wnt-1 expression is 
necessary for proper RA-induced expression of the neural phenotype.

PMID: 7958454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Cell. 1994 May 6;77(3):349-60.

Glial growth factor restricts mammalian neural crest stem cells to a glial fate.

Shah NM(1), Marchionni MA, Isaacs I, Stroobant P, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125.

Growth factors and cytokines are thought to influence the development of
uncommitted progenitor cell populations, but the issue of how these factors act
on individual cells remains controversial. Such factors may act simply as
selective mitogens or survival factors for cells that undergo lineage
restrictions stochastically. Alternatively, they may instruct or bias multipotent
cells to choose one lineage at the expense of others. Here we show that glial
growth factor (GGF), previously defined as a Schwann cell mitogen, strongly
suppresses neuronal differentiation of rat neural crest stem cells while
promoting or allowing glial differentiation. Quantitative clonal analysis
suggests that the action of GGF is likely to be instructive rather than
selective. Taken together with the expression pattern of GGF, these data suggest 
a lateral signaling model for the diversification of cell types within developing
peripheral ganglia.

PMID: 7910115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Perspect Dev Neurobiol. 1994;2(2):191-201.

MASH-1: a marker and a mutation for mammalian neural crest development.

Lo L(1), Guillemot F, Joyner AL, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 216-76, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, California
Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125, USA.

The ability to generate mice containing null mutations in any cloned gene
promises new insights into the molecular control of mammalian neural crest
development. This approach has recently been applied to MASH-1, a transcription
factor in the bHLH family that is a mammalian homologue of the Drosophila
proneural genes achaete-scute. In wild-type embryos, this gene is expressed early
in the development of the autonomic nervous system, in apparent precursors of
sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric neurons (as well as in restricted
regions of the central nervous system). A null mutation in the MASH-1 gene
eliminates sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons and enteric neurons of the
foregut (esophagus); however, enteric neurons of the stomach and hindgut are only
partially affected. Analysis with other markers indicates that the mutation acts 
after neural crest cells have localized in the anlagen of the autonomic nervous
system to prevent neuronal differentiation. The differentiation of autonomic glia
appears unaffected. Thus, MASH-1 provides one of the most specific mutations
affecting neural development in mammals, as well as a valuable marker to study
the early segregation of neural crest cell lineages.

PMID: 7728503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Cell. 1993 Nov 5;75(3):463-76.

Mammalian achaete-scute homolog 1 is required for the early development of
olfactory and autonomic neurons.

Guillemot F(1), Lo LC, Johnson JE, Auerbach A, Anderson DJ, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada.

The mouse Mash-1 gene, like its Drosophila homologs of the achaete-scute complex 
(AS-C), encodes a transcription factor expressed in neural precursors. We created
a null allele of this gene by homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells.
Mice homozygous for the mutation die at birth with apparent breathing and feeding
defects. The brain and spinal cord of the mutants appear normal, but their
olfactory epithelium and sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric ganglia are
severely affected. In the olfactory epithelium, neuronal progenitors die at an
early stage, whereas the nonneuronal supporting cells are present. In sympathetic
ganglia, the mutation arrests the development of neuronal precursors, preventing 
the generation of sympathetic neurons, but does not affect glial precursor cells.
These observations suggest that Mash-1, like its Drosophila homologs of the AS-C,
controls a basic operation in development of neuronal progenitors in distinct
neural lineages.

PMID: 8221886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1993 Jan 23;1171(3):323-7.

Cloning, sequencing and expression of the mouse mammalian achaete-scute homolog 1
(MASH1).

Franco del Amo F(1), Gendron-Maguire M, Swiatek PJ, Gridley T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Roche Institute of Molecular
Biology, Nutley, NJ.

We describe the cloning of a full length cDNA encoding the mouse mammalian
achaete-scute homolog 1 (mouse MASH1). Using a ribonuclease protection assay to
examine expression of this gene in cell lines, postimplantation embryos and adult
tissues, expression was detected between days 10.5 and 16.5 of gestation and in
adult brain. No expression was detected in other adult tissues or in most of the 
cell lines examined. However, differentiation of P19 embryonal carcinoma cells
into neuronal cell types by exposure to retinoic acid resulted in the induction
of MASH1 RNA expression.

PMID: 8424959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mech Dev. 1993 Jan;40(1-2):25-36.

XASH1, a Xenopus homolog of achaete-scute: a proneural gene in anterior regions
of the vertebrate CNS.

Ferreiro B(1), Skoglund P, Bailey A, Dorsky R, Harris WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093.

The pro-neural achaete-scute complex (ASC) of Drosophila encodes four homologous 
proteins, each containing a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain, characteristic 
of a large family of transcription factors. We have isolated XASH1, a Xenopus
homolog of achaete-scute. The XASH1 protein is very similar to the ASC proteins
of Drosophila and the rat homolog, MASH1. XASH1 is expressed in the embryonic
anterior central nervous system in a dynamic sequence, first in the midbrain,
then in the forebrain, and then in the eye and hindbrain. In the larva, XASH1
expression correlates with regions of continued neurogenesis in the CNS,
revealing the pattern of rhombomeres in the hindbrain, and other proliferative
zones in the eye and midbrain. As a heterodimer with the bHLH protein E12, XASH1 
binds specifically to an enhancer sequence derived from the promoter of the
proneural achaete gene of Drosophila. This binding is inhibited by the
extramacrochaete protein, a negative regulator of ASC gene function and
neurogenesis in Drosophila. The combined evidence described in this paper
strongly suggests that XASH1 plays a role in Xenopus neurogenesis similar to that
played by the ASC genes in Drosophila.

PMID: 8443105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Apr 15;89(8):3596-600.

DNA binding and transcriptional regulatory activity of mammalian achaete-scute
homologous (MASH) proteins revealed by interaction with a muscle-specific
enhancer.

Johnson JE(1), Birren SJ, Saito T, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena 91125.

The MASH genes are vertebrate homologues of achaete-scute, genes required for
neuronal determination in Drosophila. The sequence of MASH1 and MASH2 contains a 
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) motif that is present in other transcriptional
regulators such as MyoD and E12. In the absence of an authentic target for the
MASH proteins, we examined their DNA binding and transcriptional regulatory
activity by using a binding site (the E box) from the muscle creatine kinase
(MCK) gene, a target of MyoD. Like myogenic bHLH proteins, the MASH proteins form
heterooligomers with E12 that bind the MCK E box with high affinity in vitro.
Unexpectedly, however, MASH1 and MASH2 also activate transcription of both
exogenous and endogenous MCK in transfected C3H/10T1/2 fibroblasts. However, they
do not induce myogenesis. Myogenic activity is not exclusively a property of the 
MyoD basic region, as substitution of this domain fails to confer myogenic
activity on MASH1. These data suggest that different bHLH proteins may activate
overlapping but distinct sets of target genes in the same cell type.

PMCID: PMC48915
PMID: 1314394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Genes Dev. 1991 Sep;5(9):1524-37.

Mammalian achaete-scute homolog 1 is transiently expressed by spatially
restricted subsets of early neuroepithelial and neural crest cells.

Lo LC(1), Johnson JE, Wuenschell CW, Saito T, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 
91125.

Using monoclonal antibodies, we have examined the expression pattern of MASH1, a 
basic helix-loop-helix protein that is a mammalian homolog of the Drosophila
achaete-scute proteins. In Drosophila, achaete-scute genes are required for the
determination of a subset of neurons. In the rat embryo, MASH1 expression is
confined to subpopulations of neural precursor cells. The induction of MASH1
precedes, but is extinguished upon, overt neuronal differentiation. MASH1 is
expressed in the forebrain by spatially restricted domains of neuroepithelium and
in the peripheral nervous system exclusively by precursors of sympathetic and
enteric neurons. The features of early and transient expression, in spatially
restricted subpopulations of neural precursors, are similar to those observed for
achaete-scute. Thus, the amino acid sequence conservation between MASH1 and
achaete-scute is reflected in a parallel conservation of cell type specificity of
expression, similar to the case of mammalian MyoD and Drosophila nautilus. These 
data support the idea that helix-loop-helix proteins may represent an
evolutionarily conserved family of cell-type determination genes, of which MASH1 
is the first neural-specific member identified in vertebrates.

PMID: 1909283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Nature. 1990 Aug 30;346(6287):858-61.

Two rat homologues of Drosophila achaete-scute specifically expressed in neuronal
precursors.

Johnson JE(1), Birren SJ, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 216-76, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena
91125.

In vertebrates, the peripheral nervous system is embryologically derived from the
neural crest. Although the earliest neural crest cells seem to be multipotent,
the molecular mechanisms responsible for the restriction of these cells to
different sublineages are not understood. We therefore searched for developmental
control genes expressed in crest cells or their derivatives. One important class 
of regulatory molecules comprises proteins with common DNA-binding and
dimerization domains, the basic helix-loop-helix (B-HLH) region. Members of this 
family include MyoD, a mammalian myogenic determination molecule, and proteins
encoded by genes of the achaete-scute complex of Drosophila, which have an
important role in neuronal determination. From a sympathetic neuronal precursor
cell line derived from the neural crest we have now isolated two different
mammalian genes that are homologous to genes of the achaete-scute complex. The
sequence of the B-HLH-encoding region of these genes is more similar to that of
the genes of the achaete-scute complex than it is to that of other, mammalian
members of the B-HLH family. At least one of these genes is transiently expressed
in the embryonic rat nervous system, is not detected in non-neuronal tissues or
cell lines, and is induced by nerve growth factor in PC12 cells.

PMID: 2392153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


