
1. Br J Nutr. 2016 Mar 7:1-9. [Epub ahead of print]

Effects of sodium selenite on c-Jun N-terminal kinase signalling pathway induced 
by oxidative stress in human chondrocytes and c-Jun N-terminal kinase expression 
in patients with Kashin-Beck disease, an endemic osteoarthritis.

Dai X(1), Li Y(2), Zhang R(1), Kou Y(2), Mo X(2), Cao J(1), Xiong Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Key Laboratory of Environment and Genes Related to Diseases of Education
Ministry,Health Science Center,Institute of Endemic Diseases,Xi'an Jiaotong
University,No.76 Yanta West Road,Xi'an,Shaanxi 710061,People's Republic of China.
(2)2School of Life Science and Technology,Xi'an Jiaotong University,Xi'an,Shaanxi
710049,People's Republic of China.

The c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK) are members of the mitogen-activated protein
kinase family and are activated by environmental stress. Se plays an important
role in the biological pathways by forming selenoprotein. Selenoproteins have
been shown to exhibit a variety of biological functions including antioxidant
functions and maintaining cellular redox balance, and compromise of such
important proteins would lead to oxidative stress and apoptosis. We examined the 
expression levels of JNK in Kashin-Beck disease (KBD) patients, tested the
potential protective effects of sodium selenite on tert-butyl hydroperoxide
(tBHP)-induced oxidative injury and apoptosis in human chondrocytes as well as
its underlying mechanism in this study. We produced an oxidative damage model
induced by tBHP in C28/I2 human chondrocytes to test the essential anti-apoptosis
effects of Se in vitro. The results indicated that the expression level of
phosphorylated JNK was significantly increased in KBD patients. Cell apoptosis
was increased and molecule expressions of the JNK signalling pathway were
activated in the tBHP-injured chondrocytes. Na2SeO3 protected against
tBHP-induced oxidative stress and apoptosis in cells by increasing cell
viability, reducing reactive oxygen species generation, increasing Glutathione
peroxidase (GPx) activity and down-regulating the JNK pathway. These results
demonstrate that apoptosis induced by tBHP in chondrocytes might be mediated via 
up-regulation of the JNK pathway; Na2SeO3 has an effect of anti-apoptosis by
down-regulating the JNK signalling pathway.

PMID: 26948765  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Tumour Biol. 2016 Mar 2. [Epub ahead of print]

miRNA-204 suppresses human non-small cell lung cancer by targeting ATF2.

Zhang S(1,)(2), Gao L(1,)(2), Thakur A(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Shi P(1,)(2), Liu
F(1,)(2), Feng J(1,)(2), Wang T(1,)(2), Liang Y(1,)(2), Liu JJ(5), Chen M(6,)(7),
Ren H(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, 277 West Yanta Road, Xi'an, 710061,
People's Republic of China. (2)Shaanxi Provincial Research Center for the Project
of Prevention and Treatment of Respiratory Diseases, Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's
Republic of China. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Life Guard Hospital,
Biratnagar, Nepal. (4)S. R. Laboratory and Diagnostic Center, Biratnagar, Nepal. 
(5)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medical Sciences, University of New
South Wales, Sydney, Australia. (6)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care
Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, 277 West
Yanta Road, Xi'an, 710061, People's Republic of China.
chenmingwei@mail.xjtu.edu.cn. (7)Shaanxi Provincial Research Center for the
Project of Prevention and Treatment of Respiratory Diseases, Xi'an, Shaanxi,
People's Republic of China. chenmingwei@mail.xjtu.edu.cn. (8)Department of
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, 277 West Yanta Road, Xi'an, 710061, People's Republic of
China. jessie_renhui@aliyun.com. (9)Shaanxi Provincial Research Center for the
Project of Prevention and Treatment of Respiratory Diseases, Xi'an, Shaanxi,
People's Republic of China. jessie_renhui@aliyun.com.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play a critical role in cancer development and progression.
Deregulated expression of miR-204 has been reported in several cancers, but the
mechanism through which miR-204 modulates human non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) is largely unknown. In this study, we investigate the expression and
functional role of miR-204 in human NSCLC tissues and cell lines. RNA isolation, 
qRT-PCR, MTT, colony formation assay, cell cycle assay, cell apoptosis assay,
cell migration assay, and Western blot were performed. Statistical analysis was
performed using SPSS 18.0 software and statistical significance was accepted at p
value <0.05. miR-204 level was significantly reduced in NSCLC tissues as compared
to that of non-neoplastic tissues. Transient over-expression of miR-204 by
transfecting with miR-204 mimics suppressed NSCLC cell proliferation, migration, 
and induced apoptosis and G1 arrest, whereas inhibition of miR-204 showed the
converse effects. Additionally, activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2), an
important transcription factor, was demonstrated as a potential target gene of
miR-204. Subsequent investigations found a negative correlation between miR-204
level and ATF2 expression in NSCLC tissue samples. Moreover, we observed that
miR-204 expression inversely affected endogenous ATF2 expression at both mRNA and
protein levels in vitro. Taken together, miR-204 may act as a tumor suppressor by
directly targeting ATF2 in NSCLC.

PMID: 26935060  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Phytomedicine. 2016 Feb 15;23(2):174-80. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2015.12.011. Epub 
2016 Jan 4.

Cryptotanshinone deregulates unfolded protein response and eukaryotic initiation 
factor signaling in acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells.

Wu CF(1), Seo EJ(1), Klauck SM(2), Efferth T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, 
Johannes Gutenberg University, Staudinger Weg 5, 55128 Mainz, Germany. (2)Working
Group Cancer Genome Research, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and German
Cancer Consortium (DKTK), National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 460, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Department of Pharmaceutical 
Biology, Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, Johannes Gutenberg University,
Staudinger Weg 5, 55128 Mainz, Germany. Electronic address: efferth@uni-mainz.de.

BACKGROUND: Unfolded protein responses (UPR) determine cell fate and are
recognized as anticancer targets. In a previous research, we reported that
cryptotanshinone (CPT) exerted cytotoxic effects toward acute lymphoblastic
leukemia cells through mitochondria-mediated apoptosis.
PURPOSE: In the present study, we further investigated the role of UPR in
CPT-induced cytotoxicity on acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells by applying tools 
of pharmacogenomics and bioinformatics.
METHODS: Gene expression profiling was performed by mRNA microarray
hybridization. Potential transcription factor binding motifs were identified in
the promoter regions of the deregulated genes by Cistrome software. Molecular
docking on eIF-4A and PI3K was performed to investigate the inhibitory activity
of CPT on translation initiation.
RESULTS: CPT regulated genes related to UPR and eIF2 signaling pathways. The
DNA-Damage-Inducible Transcript 3 (DDIT3) gene, which is activated as consequence
of UPR malfunction during apoptosis, was induced and validated by in vitro
experiments. Transcription factor binding motif analysis of the
microarrary-retrieved deregulated genes in the promoter region emphasized the
relevance of transcription factors, such as ATF2, ATF4 and XBP1, regulating UPR
and cell apoptosis. Molecular docking suggested inhibitory effects of CPT by
binding to eIF-4A and PI3K providing evidence for a role of CPT's in the
disruption of protein synthesis.
CONCLUSION: CPT triggered UPR and inhibited protein synthesis via eIF-mediated
translation initiation, potentially supporting CPT-induced cytotoxic effects
toward acute leukemia cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26926179  [PubMed - in process]


4. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 22;11(2):e0149486. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149486.
eCollection 2016.

SB203580 Modulates p38 MAPK Signaling and Dengue Virus-Induced Liver Injury by
Reducing MAPKAPK2, HSP27, and ATF2 Phosphorylation.

Sreekanth GP(1), Chuncharunee A(1), Sirimontaporn A(1), Panaampon J(1), Noisakran
S(2), Yenchitsomanus PT(3), Limjindaporn T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand. (2)Medical Biotechnology Unit, National Center for
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, National Science and Technology
Development Agency, Bangkok, Thailand. (3)Division of Molecular Medicine,
Department of Research and Development, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Dengue virus (DENV) infection causes organ injuries, and the liver is one of the 
most important sites of DENV infection, where viral replication generates a high 
viral load. The molecular mechanism of DENV-induced liver injury is still under
investigation. The mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPKs), including p38 MAPK,
have roles in the hepatic cell apoptosis induced by DENV. However, the in vivo
role of p38 MAPK in DENV-induced liver injury is not fully understood. In this
study, we investigated the role of SB203580, a p38 MAPK inhibitor, in a mouse
model of DENV infection. Both the hematological parameters, leucopenia and
thrombocytopenia, were improved by SB203580 treatment and liver transaminases and
histopathology were also improved. We used a real-time PCR microarray to profile 
the expression of apoptosis-related genes. Tumor necrosis factor a, caspase 9,
caspase 8, and caspase 3 proteins were significantly lower in the
SB203580-treated DENV-infected mice than that in the infected control mice.
Increased expressions of cytokines including TNF-a, IL-6 and IL-10, and
chemokines including RANTES and IP-10 in DENV infection were reduced by SB203580 
treatment. DENV infection induced the phosphorylation of p38MAPK, and its
downstream signals including MAPKAPK2, HSP27 and ATF-2. SB203580 treatment did
not decrease the phosphorylation of p38 MAPK, but it significantly reduced the
phosphorylation of MAPKAPK2, HSP27, and ATF2. Therefore, SB203580 modulates the
downstream signals to p38 MAPK and reduces DENV-induced liver injury.

PMCID: PMC4764010
PMID: 26901653  [PubMed - in process]


5. Cancer Biol Ther. 2016 Mar 3;17(3):291-9. doi: 10.1080/15384047.2016.1139245.
Epub 2016 Jan 30.

Rapid induction of apoptosis in chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells by the
microtubule disrupting agent BNC105.

Bates D(1,)(2), Feris EJ(3,)(2), Danilov AV(1,)(2), Eastman A(3,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medicine , Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth , Lebanon , 
NH , USA. (2)c Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth , Lebanon , NH , USA. (3)b Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology , 
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth , Lebanon , NH , USA.

Microtubule targeting agents, such as vinblastine, are usually thought to arrest 
cells in mitosis and subsequently induce apoptosis. However, they can also cause 
rapid induction of apoptosis in a cell-cycle phase independent manner. BNC105 is 
a novel vascular and microtubule disrupting drug that also induces apoptosis
rapidly but with markedly increased potency compared to vinca alkaloids and
combretastatin A4. BNC105 binds to the colchicine-binding site on tubulin
resulting in activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), phosphorylation of
ATF2, and induction of ATF3 and Noxa leading to acute apoptosis in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells. Apoptosis induced by BNC105 is dependent upon
both JNK activation and Noxa induction. Normal leukocytes and one CLL sample also
exhibited JNK activation but not Noxa induction and were resistant to BNC105.
This study emphasizes the importance of Noxa and JNK for induction of apoptosis
in CLL cells by microtubule targeting drugs, and highlights the potential of
BNC105 as a potent therapeutic to treat haematopoietic malignancies.

PMID: 26891146  [PubMed - in process]


6. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 17;6:21173. doi: 10.1038/srep21173.

ECM microenvironment unlocks brown adipogenic potential of adult human bone
marrow-derived MSCs.

Lee MH(1,)(2,)(3), Goralczyk AG(1,)(3), Kriszt R(1,)(2,)(3), Ang XM(1,)(2,)(3),
Badowski C(4), Li Y(5), Summers SA(6), Toh SA(7,)(8), Yassin MS(8), Shabbir A(9),
Sheppard A(10), Raghunath M(1,)(3,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, National University of Singapore,
117575, Singapore. (2)NUS Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and
Engineering (NGS), National University of Singapore, 117456, Singapore. (3)NUS
Tissue Engineering Program, Life Science Institute, National University of
Singapore, 117510, Singapore. (4)Institute of Medical Biology, A*STAR, 138648,
Singapore. (5)Program in Cardiovascular and Metabolic Diseases, Duke-NUS Medical 
Graduate School, 169857, Singapore. (6)Translational Metabolic Health Laboratory,
Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne VIC 3004, Australia.
(7)Department of Medicine, National University Health System, 119228, Singapore. 
(8)Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, 117599, Singapore. (9)Department of Surgery, National University
Hospital, 119074, Singapore. (10)Liggins Institute, University of Auckland,
Auckland 1142 New Zealand. (11)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine, National University of Singapore, 117599, Singapore.

Key to realizing the diagnostic and therapeutic potential of human brown/brite
adipocytes is the identification of a renewable, easily accessible and safe
tissue source of progenitor cells, and an efficacious in vitro differentiation
protocol. We show that macromolecular crowding (MMC) facilitates brown adipocyte 
differentiation in adult human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (bmMSCs), as
evidenced by substantially upregulating uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) and uncoupled
respiration. Moreover, MMC also induced 'browning' in bmMSC-derived white
adipocytes. Mechanistically, MMC creates a 3D extracellular matrix architecture
enshrouding maturing adipocytes in a collagen IV cocoon that is engaged by
paxillin-positive focal adhesions also at the apical side of cells, without
contact to the stiff support structure. This leads to an enhanced matrix-cell
signaling, reflected by increased phosphorylation of ATF2, a key transcription
factor in UCP1 regulation. Thus, tuning the dimensionality of the
microenvironment in vitro can unlock a strong brown potential dormant in bone
marrow.

PMCID: PMC4756694
PMID: 26883894  [PubMed - in process]


7. Oncol Lett. 2016 Jan;11(1):760-766. Epub 2015 Nov 16.

Activating transcription factor 2 expression mediates cell proliferation and is
associated with poor prognosis in human non-small cell lung carcinoma.

You Z(1), Zhou Y(2), Guo Y(1), Chen W(1), Chen S(1), Wang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University,
Nanchang, Jiangxi 330006, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pharmacy, Peking
University, Beijing 100083, P.R. China.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) is a member of the cAMP response element
binding protein family that heterodimerizes and activates other transcription
factors involved in stress and DNA damage responses, growth, differentiation and 
apoptosis. ATF2 has been investigated as a potential carcinogenic biomarker in
certain types of cancer, such as melanoma. However, its function and clinical
significance in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has not been well studied.
Therefore, the present study aimed to analyze the association between
ATF2/phosphorylated (p)-ATF2 expression and NSCLC malignant behavior, and discuss
its clinical significance. Reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain
reaction and western blotting were used to detect the expression of ATF2 in NSCLC
cell lines and fresh NSCLC tissue samples. In addition, immunohistochemistry
(IHC) was performed to identify the location and expression of ATF2 and p-ATF2
(threonine 71) in paraffin-embedded sections of NSCLC and adjacent normal tissue.
The results demonstrated that ATF2 was markedly overexpressed in the NSCLC cells 
and significantly overexpressed in the fresh NSCLC tissues compared with the
control cells and samples (86 paraffin-embedded tissue sections), respectively
(P<0.01). Further data demonstrated that ATF2 expression levels were
significantly increased in tumor tissues compared to normal tissues and ATF2 was 
located in the cytoplasm and nucleus. ATF2 expression was closely associated with
adverse clinical characteristics such as TNM stage (P=0.002), tumor size
(P=0.018) and metastasis (P=0.027). In addition, nuclear p-ATF2 staining was
positive in 65/86 samples of NSCLC. Furthermore, the Kaplan-Meier analysis
indicated that patients with high levels of ATF2 and p-ATF2 expression had a
significantly shorter overall survival compared with patients exhibiting a low
expression (P<0.01 and P<0.05, respectively). Subsequent in vitro experiments
revealed that cell growth decreased following knockdown of ATF2 expression using 
RNA interference, indicating that ATF2 may suppress cell proliferation. Taken
together, the results of the present study demonstrated that ATF2 and p-ATF2 were
significantly overexpressed in NSCLC tissues, and ATF2 and p-ATF2 overexpression 
predicted significantly worse outcomes for patients with NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4727085
PMID: 26870280  [PubMed]


8. Microb Cell Fact. 2016 Feb 9;15(1):32. doi: 10.1186/s12934-016-0434-6.

Key role of lipid management in nitrogen and aroma metabolism in an evolved wine 
yeast strain.

Rollero S(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Mouret JR(5,)(6,)(7), Sanchez I(8,)(9,)(10), Camarasa
C(11,)(12,)(13), Ortiz-Julien A(14), Sablayrolles JM(15,)(16,)(17), Dequin
S(18,)(19,)(20).

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR1083, 34060, Montpellier, France. rollero@supagro.inra.fr.
(2)SupAgro, UMR1083, 34060, Montpellier, France. rollero@supagro.inra.fr.
(3)Universite Montpellier, UMR1083, 34060, Montpellier, France.
rollero@supagro.inra.fr. (4)Lallemand SAS, 31700, Blagnac, France.
rollero@supagro.inra.fr. (5)INRA, UMR1083, 34060, Montpellier, France.
mouretj@supagro.inra.fr. (6)SupAgro, UMR1083, 34060, Montpellier, France.
mouretj@supagro.inra.fr. (7)Universite Montpellier, UMR1083, 34060, Montpellier, 
France. mouretj@supagro.inra.fr. (8)INRA, UMR1083, 34060, Montpellier, France.
sanchezi@supagro.inra.fr. (9)SupAgro, UMR1083, 34060, Montpellier, France.
sanchezi@supagro.inra.fr. (10)Universite Montpellier, UMR1083, 34060,
Montpellier, France. sanchezi@supagro.inra.fr. (11)INRA, UMR1083, 34060,
Montpellier, France. camarasa@supagro.inra.fr. (12)SupAgro, UMR1083, 34060,
Montpellier, France. camarasa@supagro.inra.fr. (13)Universite Montpellier,
UMR1083, 34060, Montpellier, France. camarasa@supagro.inra.fr. (14)Lallemand SAS,
31700, Blagnac, France. ajulien@lallemand.com. (15)INRA, UMR1083, 34060,
Montpellier, France. sablayro@supagro.inra.fr. (16)SupAgro, UMR1083, 34060,
Montpellier, France. sablayro@supagro.inra.fr. (17)Universite Montpellier,
UMR1083, 34060, Montpellier, France. sablayro@supagro.inra.fr. (18)INRA, UMR1083,
34060, Montpellier, France. dequin@supagro.inra.fr. (19)SupAgro, UMR1083, 34060, 
Montpellier, France. dequin@supagro.inra.fr. (20)Universite Montpellier, UMR1083,
34060, Montpellier, France. dequin@supagro.inra.fr.

BACKGROUND: Fermentative aromas play a key role in the organoleptic profile of
young wines. Their production depends both on yeast strain and fermentation
conditions. A present-day trend in the wine industry consists in developing new
strains with aromatic properties using adaptive evolution approaches. An evolved 
strain, Affinity ECA5, overproducing esters, was recently obtained. In this
study, dynamics of nitrogen consumption and of the fermentative aroma synthesis
of the evolved and its ancestral strains were compared and coupled with a
transcriptomic analysis approach to better understand the metabolic reshaping of 
Affinity ECA5.
RESULTS: Nitrogen assimilation was different between the two strains,
particularly amino acids transported by carriers regulated by nitrogen catabolite
repression. We also observed differences in the kinetics of fermentative aroma
production, especially in the bioconversion of higher alcohols into acetate
esters. Finally, transcriptomic data showed that the enhanced bioconversion into 
acetate esters by the evolved strain was associated with the repression of genes 
involved in sterol biosynthesis rather than an enhanced expression of ATF1 and
ATF2 (genes coding for the enzymes responsible for the synthesis of acetate
esters from higher alcohols).
CONCLUSIONS: An integrated approach to yeast metabolism-combining transcriptomic 
analyses and online monitoring data-showed differences between the two strains at
different levels. Differences in nitrogen source consumption were observed
suggesting modifications of NCR in the evolved strain. Moreover, the evolved
strain showed a different way of managing the lipid source, which notably
affected the production of acetate esters, likely because of a greater
availability of acetyl-CoA for the evolved strain.

PMCID: PMC4748530
PMID: 26861624  [PubMed - in process]


9. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2016 Jan 7. pii: S0278-2391(16)00012-4. doi:
10.1016/j.joms.2015.12.020. [Epub ahead of print]

Effect of p38 Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase Inhibitor on Temporomandibular
Joint Synovitis Induced by Occlusal Alteration.

Jiang L(1), Lin X(2), Ji P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dental student, Stomatological Hospital of Shandong University and the
Shandong Province Key Laboratory of Oral Tissue Regeneration, Jinan City,
Shandong Province, China. (2)Resident, Stomatological Hospital of Shandong
University and the Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine of Shandong Province, Jinan
City, Shandong Province, China. (3)Professor, Stomatological Hospital of Shandong
University and the Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine of Shandong Province, Jinan
City, Shandong Province, China. Electronic address: jiping@mail.sdu.edu.cn.

PURPOSE: To investigate the alteration in rat temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
synovial membrane induced by increased occlusal vertical dimension (iOVD) and to 
determine whether the p38 mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling
cascade is involved.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-six rats were randomly divided into 3 groups:
control + normal saline (NS; controls), iOVD + NS, and iOVD + SB203580 (a potent 
p38 MAPK inhibitor). Morphologic changes of synovial tissues were observed and
scored. Activation levels of p38 MAPK and activating transcription factor-2
(ATF2) were detected by immunohistochemistry. Expression levels of interleukin-1ß
(IL-1ß) and matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3) were measured by quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Obvious synovitis was found in the iOVD group. P38 and ATF2 were
activated, and mRNA and protein expression levels of IL-1ß and MMP-3 were
upregulated after iOVD. However, decreased synovial tissue inflammation and lower
mRNA and protein levels of IL-1ß and MMP-3 were observed in the iOVD + SB203580
group.
CONCLUSION: iOVD can induce temporomandibular joint synovitis, and the p38 MAPK
signaling cascade might participate in and aggravate the process of articular
inflammation.

Copyright © 2016 American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26850876  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Biotechnol J. 2016 Jan 27. doi: 10.1002/biot.201500406. [Epub ahead of print]

Rapid ester biosynthesis screening reveals a high activity
alcohol-O-acyltransferase (AATase) from tomato fruit.

Lin JL(1), Zhu J(2), Wheeldon I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical and Environmental Engineering, University of California, Riverside,
California, USA. (2)Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside,
California, USA. (3)Chemical and Environmental Engineering, University of
California, Riverside, California, USA. iwheeldon@engr.ucr.edu.

Ethyl and acetate esters are naturally produced in various yeasts, plants, and
bacteria. The biosynthetic pathways that produce these esters share a common
reaction step, the condensation of acetyl/acyl-CoA with an alcohol by
alcohol-O-acetyl/acyltransferase (AATase). Recent metabolic engineering efforts
exploit AATase activity to produce fatty acid ethyl esters as potential diesel
fuel replacements as well as short- and medium-chain volatile esters as fragrance
and flavor compounds. These efforts have been limited by the lack of a rapid
screen to quantify ester biosynthesis. Enzyme engineering efforts have also been 
limited by the lack of a high throughput screen for AATase activity. Here, we
developed a high throughput assay for AATase activity and used this assay to
discover a high activity AATase from tomato fruit, Solanum lycopersicum
(Atf-S.l). Atf1-S.l exhibited broad specificity towards acyl-CoAs with chain
length from C4 to C10 and was specific towards 1-pentanol. The AATase screen also
revealed new acyl-CoA substrate specificities for Atf1, Atf2, Eht1, and Eeb1 from
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and Atf-C.m from melon fruit, Cucumis melo, thus
increasing the pool of characterized AATases that can be used in ester
biosynthesis of ester-based fragrance and flavor compounds as well as fatty acid 
ethyl ester biofuels.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26814045  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Lipids. 2016 Mar;51(3):303-10. doi: 10.1007/s11745-016-4119-z. Epub 2016 Jan 19.

A Low-Protein, High-Carbohydrate Diet Stimulates Thermogenesis in the Brown
Adipose Tissue of Rats via ATF-2.

de França SA(1), Dos Santos MP(1), Przygodda F(2), Garófalo MA(2), Kettelhut
IC(3), Magalhães DA(1), Bezerra KS(4), Colodel EM(4), Flouris AD(5), Andrade
CM(1), Kawashita NH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Biochemistry Laboratory, Federal University of Mato
Grosso, Cuiabá, Mato Grosso, Brazil. (2)Department of Physiology, Ribeirão Preto 
Medical School, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Ribeirão Preto Medical School,
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Department of
Veterinary Science, Federal University of Mato Grosso, Cuiabá, Mato Grosso,
Brazil. (5)FAME Laboratory, Department of Exercise Science, University of
Thessaly, Trikala, Greece. (6)Department of Chemistry, Biochemistry Laboratory,
Federal University of Mato Grosso, Cuiabá, Mato Grosso, Brazil.
nairhonda@terra.com.br.

The aim of this study was to evaluate thermogenesis in the interscapular brown
adipose tissue (IBAT) of rats submitted to low-protein, high-carbohydrate (LPHC) 
diet and the involvement of adrenergic stimulation in this process. Male rats
(~100 g) were submitted to LPHC (6 %-protein; 74 %-carbohydrate) or control (C;
17 %-protein; 63 %-carbohydrate) isocaloric diets for 15 days. The IBAT
temperature was evaluated in the rats before and after the administration of
noradrenaline (NA) (20 µg 100 g b w(-1) min(-1)). The expression levels of
uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) and other proteins involved in the regulation of UCP1
expression were determined by Western blot (Student's t test, P = 0.05). The LPHC
diet promoted a 1.1 °C increase in the basal temperature of IBAT when compared
with the basal temperature in the IBAT of the C group. NA administration promoted
a 0.3 °C increase in basal temperature in the IBAT of the C rats and a 0.5 °C
increase in the IBAT of the LPHC group. The level of UCP1 increased 60 % in the
IBAT of LPHC-fed rats, and among the proteins involved in its expression, such as
ß3-AR and a1-AR, there was a 40 % increase in the levels of p38-MAPK and a 30 %
decrease in CREB when compared to the C rats. The higher sympathetic flux to
IBAT, which is a consequence of the administration of the LPHC diet to rats,
activates thermogenesis and increases the expression of UCP1 in the tissue. Our
results suggest that the increase in UCP1 content may occur via p38 MAPK and
ATF2.

PMID: 26781764  [PubMed - in process]


12. J Toxicol Sci. 2016;41(1):77-89. doi: 10.2131/jts.41.77.

Cigarette smoke extract-induced interleukin-6 expression is regulated by
phospholipase D1 in human bronchial epithelial cells.

Koo JB(1), Han JS.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry & Molecular
Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Korea.

Cigarette smoking is known to be associated with various kinds of diseases,
including atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, cancer, and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Many of the diseases associated with cigarette smoking 
are also associated with changes in interleukin-6 (IL-6) expression. In this
study, we investigated the role of phospholipase D1 (PLD1) in IL-6 expression
induced by cigarette smoke extract (CSE). Treatment with CSE increased PLD1 and
IL-6 expressions in human bronchial epithelial (BEAS-2B) cells. In addition, CSE 
treatment activated PLC, PKC, and MAPK pathway through the Gi protein-coupled
receptor. Pertussis toxin (PTX, Gi protein-coupled receptor inhibitor), PAO (PLC 
inhibitor), Go6976 (PKC inhibitor) and SB203580 (p38MAPK inhibitor) decreased
CSE-induced PLD1 expression. The results show that Gi protein, PLC, PKC, and
p38MAPK act as upstream regulators of PLD1 in CSE-treated BEAS-2B cells.
Moreover, PLD1 siRNA transfection decreased CSE-induced ATF2 phosphorylation and 
IL-6 expression. In addition, inhibitors of Gi protein, PLC, PKC, and p38MAPK,
and ATF2 siRNA transfection decreased CSE-induced IL-6 expression, suggesting
that CSE-induced IL-6 expression is regulated via Gi
protein/PLC/PKC/p38MAPK/PLD1/ATF2 pathway. Taken together, the results suggest
that PLD1 is an important regulator of IL-6 expression induced by CSE in BEAS-2B 
cells.

PMID: 26763395  [PubMed - in process]


13. Blood. 2016 Jan 8. pii: blood-2015-07-655647. [Epub ahead of print]

CARMA1- and MyD88-dependent activation of Jun/ATF-type AP-1 complexes is a
hallmark of ABC diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

Juilland M(1), Gonzalez M(1), Erdmann T(2), Banz Y(3), Jevnikar Z(1), Hailfinger 
S(1), Tzankov A(4), Grau M(5), Lenz G(6), Novak U(7), Thome M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland;
(2)Translational Oncology, Department of Medicine A, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, 
University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany; (3)Institute of Pathology,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; (4)Institute of Pathology, University
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland; (5)Department of Physics, Philipps-University
Marburg, Marburg, Germany; (6)Cluster of Excellence EXC 1003, Cells in Motion,
Muenster, Germany; (7)Department of Medical Oncology, Inselspital, Bern
University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland. (8)Department of Biochemistry, University
of Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland; margot.thomemiazza@unil.ch.

A hallmark of the diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) of the activated B-cell
(ABC) type, a molecular subtype characterized by adverse outcome, is constitutive
activation of the transcription factor NF-<U+03BA>B, which controls expression of genes 
promoting cellular survival and proliferation. Much less, however, is known about
the role of the transcription factor AP-1 in ABC DLBCL. Here we show that AP-1,
like NF-<U+03BA>B, was controlled by constitutive activation of the B-cell receptor
and/or toll-like receptor signaling pathways in ABC DLBCL cell lines. In contrast
to germinal center B-cell (GCB) DLBCL, ABC DLBCL cell lines expressed high levels
of the AP-1 family members c-Jun, JunB and JunD, which formed heterodimeric
complexes with the AP-1 family members ATF2, ATF3 and ATF7. Inhibition of these
complexes by a dominant negative approach led to impaired growth of a majority of
ABC DLBCL cell lines. Individual silencing of c-Jun, ATF2 or ATF3 decreased
cellular survival, and revealed a c-Jun/ATF2-dependent control of ATF3
expression. As a consequence, ATF3 expression was much higher in ABC versus GCB
DLBCL cell lines. Samples derived from DLBCL patients showed a clear trend
towards high and nuclear ATF3 expression in nodal DLBCL of the non-GC, or ABC
subtype. These findings identify the activation of AP-1 complexes of the
Jun/ATF-type as an important element controlling the growth of ABC DLBCL.

Copyright © 2016 American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26747248  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Tumour Biol. 2016 Jan 5. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetic variants in EBV reactivation-related genes and the risk and survival of
breast cancer.

Zhang W(1), Zhang ZZ(1,)(2), Tang LY(3), Lin Y(4), Su FX(5), Xie XM(6), Su XF(7),
Ren ZF(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)The School of Public Health, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China.
(2)Aviation Hygiene Management Division, China Southern Airlines Company Limited,
9/F, Kangda Building, 278 Airport Road, Guangzhou, China. (3)The Third Affiliated
Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510630, China. (4)The First
Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China. (5)The
Second Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510120, China.
(6)The Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, 510080, China. (7)School 
of Public Health and Primary Care, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. xuefensu@cuhk.edu.hk. (8)The School of Public
Health, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China.
renzef@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (9)Department of Statistics and Epidemiology, Guangzhou 
Key Laboratory of Environmental Pollution and Health Risk Assessment, School of
Public Health, Sun Yat-sen University, 74 Zhongshan 2nd Rd, Guangzhou, 510080,
China. renzef@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Tumor susceptibility gene 101 (TSG101) and activating transcription factor 2
(ATF2) have been suggested to involve in the reactivation of EBV which has
implications in the development and progression of breast cancer. Therefore, the 
polymorphisms of TSG101 and ATF2 may associate with breast cancer risk and
prognosis. A case-control study with 1551 breast cancer cases and 1605
age-matched controls were conducted in Guangzhou, China. We have also
successfully followed up 1168 cases until December 31, 2014. The variant allele
of TSG101 rs2292179 was associated with a non-significant reduced risk of breast 
cancer, particularly among women with BMI<U+2009><<U+2009>24 (kg/m(2)) (P for interaction
<0.05). For ATF2 rs3845744, the variant allele was also associated with a
significantly reduced breast cancer risk [odds ratio (OR) (95 % confidence
interval (CI)) 0.86 (0.74~1.00)], and the association occurred among only
postmenopausal women [OR (95 % CI) 0.69 (0.54~0.88)] (P for interaction <0.05).
Breast cancer risk was further reduced with the increasing numbers of the variant
G alleles of the two polymorphisms (P for trend <0.05). We did not find an
overall association of the two loci with breast cancer prognosis, while the
hazard ratios of the two loci (AG/GG vs. AA) were significantly higher among
postmenopausal women than premenopausal women (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.046, 0.016 for TSG101
rs2292179 and ATF2 rs3845744, respectively). In summary, the variant alleles of
TSG101 rs2292179 and ATF2 rs3845744 were associated with a reduced risk of breast
cancer, particularly for subjects with BMI <24 (kg/m(2)) and postmenopausal
women, respectively. The two SNPs and menopausal status may have a significant
interaction on breast cancer progression.

PMID: 26729199  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Biochem Pharmacol. 2016 Feb 15;102:78-96. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2015.12.001. Epub
2015 Dec 7.

Pharmacological inhibition of eicosanoids and platelet-activating factor
signaling impairs zymosan-induced release of IL-23 by dendritic cells.

Rodríguez M(1), Márquez S(1), Montero O(2), Alonso S(3), Frade JG(4), Crespo
MS(5), Fernández N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad de Valladolid, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. (2)Centro para el Desarrollo 
de la Biotecnología, CSIC, Parque Tecnológico de Boecillo, Valladolid, Spain.
(3)Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular, CSIC, 47003 Valladolid, Spain.
(4)Servicio de Hematología, Hospital Universitario Rio-Hortega, 47012 Valladolid,
Spain. (5)Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular, CSIC, 47003 Valladolid,
Spain. Electronic address: mscres@ibgm.uva.es.

The engagement of the receptors for fungal patterns induces the expression of
cytokines, the release of arachidonic acid, and the production of PGE2 in human
dendritic cells (DC), but few data are available about other lipid mediators that
may modulate DC function. The combined antagonism of leukotriene (LT) B4,
cysteinyl-LT, and platelet-activating factor (PAF,
1-O-alkyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine) inhibited IL23A mRNA expression
in response to the fungal surrogate zymosan and to a lower extent TNFA (tumor
necrosis factor-a) and CSF2 (granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor)
mRNA. The combination of lipid mediators and the lipid extract of
zymosan-conditioned medium increased the induction of IL23A by LPS (bacterial
lipopolysaccharide), thus suggesting that unlike LPS, zymosan elicits the
production of mediators at a concentration enough for optimal response. Zymosan
induced the release of LTB4, LTE4, 12-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (12-HETE), and
PAF C16:0. DC showed a high expression and detectable Ser663 phosphorylation of
5-lipoxygenase in response to zymosan, and a high expression and activity of
LPCAT1/2 (lysophosphatidylcholine acyltransferase 1 and 2), the enzymes that
incorporate acetate from acetyl-CoA into choline-containing lysophospholipids to 
produce PAF. Pharmacological modulation of the arachidonic acid cascade and the
PAF receptor inhibited the binding of P-71Thr-ATF2 (activating transcription
factor 2) to the IL23A promoter, thus mirroring their effects on the expression
of IL23A mRNA and IL-23 protein. These results indicate that LTB4, cysteinyl-LT, 
and PAF, acting through their cognate G protein-coupled receptors, contribute to 
the phosphorylation of ATF2 and play a central role in IL23A promoter
trans-activation and the cytokine signature induced by fungal patterns.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26673542  [PubMed - in process]


16. Metab Eng. 2016 Jan;33:86-97. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2015.11.002. Epub 2015 Nov 29.

Metabolic engineering Corynebacterium glutamicum to produce triacylglycerols.

Plassmeier J(1), Li Y(2), Rueckert C(1), Sinskey AJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA. (2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering, East
China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, PR China.
(3)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA; Engineering Systems Division, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

In this study, we metabolically engineered Corynebacterium glutamicum to produce 
triacylglycerols (TAGs) by completing and constraining a de novo TAG biosynthesis
pathway. First, the plasmid pZ8_TAG4 was constructed which allows the
heterologous expression of four genes: three (atf1 and atf2, encoding the
diacylglycerol acyltransferase; pgpB, encoding the phosphatidic acid phosphatase)
to complete the TAG biosynthesis pathway, and one gene (tadA) for lipid body
assembly. Second, we applied four metabolic strategies to increase TAGs
accumulation: (i) boosting precursor supply by heterologous expression of tesA
(encoding thioesterase to form free fatty acid to reduce the feedback inhibition 
by acyl-ACP) and fadD (encoding acyl-CoA synthetase to enhance acyl-CoA supply), 
(ii) reduction of TAG degradation and precursor consumption by deleting four
cellular lipases (cg0109, cg0110, cg1676 and cg1320) and the diacylglycerol
kinase (cg2849), (iii) enhancement of fatty acid biosynthesis by deletion of fasR
(cg2737, TetR-type transcriptional regulator of genes for the fatty acid
biosynthesis), and (iv) elimination of the observed by-product formation of
organic acids by blocking the acetic acid (pqo) and lactic acid production (ldh) 
pathways. The final strain (CgTesRtcEfasEbp/pZ8_TAG4) achieved a 7.5% yield of
total fatty acids (2.38±0.05g/L intracellular fatty acids and 0.64±0.09g/L
extracellular fatty acids) from 4% glucose in shake flasks after process
optimization. This corresponds to maximum intracellular fatty acids content of
17.8±0.5% of the dry cell.

Copyright © 2015 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26645801  [PubMed - in process]


17. Sci Signal. 2015 Dec 8;8(406):ra124. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aac6479.

The transcription factor ATF2 promotes melanoma metastasis by suppressing protein
fucosylation.

Lau E(1), Feng Y(2), Claps G(2), Fukuda MN(2), Perlina A(2), Donn D(2), Jilaveanu
L(3), Kluger H(3), Freeze HH(2), Ronai ZA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Initiation and Maintenance Program, Cancer Center, Sanford Burnham
Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. eric.lau@moffitt.org
zeev@ronailab.net. (2)Tumor Initiation and Maintenance Program, Cancer Center,
Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Medical Oncology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Melanoma is one of the most lethal skin cancers worldwide, primarily because of
its propensity to metastasize. Thus, the elucidation of mechanisms that govern
metastatic propensity is urgently needed. We found that protein kinase Ce
(PKCe)-mediated activation of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) controls
the migratory and invasive behaviors of melanoma cells. PKCe-dependent
phosphorylation of ATF2 promoted its transcriptional repression of the gene
encoding fucokinase (FUK), which mediates the fucose salvage pathway and thus
global cellular protein fucosylation. In primary melanocytes and cell lines
representing early-stage melanoma, the abundance of PKCe-phosphorylated ATF2 was 
low, thereby enabling the expression of FUK and cellular protein fucosylation,
which promoted cellular adhesion and reduced motility. In contrast, increased
expression of the gene encoding PKCe and abundance of phosphorylated,
transcriptionally active ATF2 were observed in advanced-stage melanomas and
correlated with decreased FUK expression, decreased cellular protein
fucosylation, attenuated cell adhesion, and increased cell motility. Restoring
fucosylation in mice either by dietary fucose supplementation or by genetic
manipulation of murine Fuk expression attenuated primary melanoma growth,
increased the number of intratumoral natural killer cells, and decreased distal
metastasis in murine isograft models. Tumor microarray analysis of human melanoma
specimens confirmed reduced fucosylation in metastatic tumors and a better
prognosis for primary melanomas that had high abundance of fucosylation. Thus,
inhibiting PKCe or ATF2 or increasing protein fucosylation in tumor cells may
improve clinical outcome in melanoma patients.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26645581  [PubMed - in process]


18. Neuroscience. 2016 Jan 28;313:184-98. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.11.025.
Epub 2015 Nov 18.

Counter-regulation of the AP-1 monomers pATF2 and Fos: Molecular readjustment of 
brainstem neurons in hearing and deaf adult rats after electrical intracochlear
stimulation.

Rauch AK(1), Rosskothen-Kuhl N(2), Illing RB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiological Research Laboratory, Department of Otorhinolaryngology,
University of Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address:
ann-kathrin.rauch@uniklinik-freiburg.de. (2)Neurobiological Research Laboratory, 
Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Freiburg, Germany. Electronic
address: nicole.rosskothen@uniklinik-freiburg.de. (3)Neurobiological Research
Laboratory, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Freiburg, Germany.
Electronic address: robert.illing@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Expression of the immediate-early gene fos (also known as c-fos) and
phosphorylation of the product of the early response gene atf2 (pATF2) in the
adult auditory brainstem can be modulated by electrical intracochlear
stimulation. The Fos and pATF2 proteins are competitive monomers of the
heterodimeric activator protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factor that triggers the
expression of genes related to neural plasticity. Our previous findings showed
that the stimulation-induced spatio-temporal pattern of Fos expression in the
adult auditory system depends on hearing experience. In this study, we aimed to
identify a possible correlation of pATF2 and Fos expression. Adult normal hearing
and neonatally deafened rats were unilaterally stimulated with a cochlear implant
(CI) for 45min, 73min, or 2h. The numbers of Fos- and pATF2-positive neurons in
the anteroventral cochlear nucleus (AVCN), the lateral superior olive (LSO), and 
the central inferior colliculus (CIC) were evaluated. Following stimulation, an
increased Fos expression was demonstrated in all these regions in hearing and
deaf rats. However, in neonatally deafened rats, significantly more Fos-positive 
neurons emerged that did not obey a tonotopic order. Independent of hearing
experience, Fos expression correlated with a locally matching decrease of pATF2
expression in AVCN and LSO, but not in CIC. We suggest that these changes in gene
expression result in a shift of AP-1 dimer composition from ATF2:Jun to Fos:Jun. 
This change in AP-1 constellation is expected to invoke different transcriptional
cascades leading to distinct modes of tissue reorganization and plasticity
responses in the mature central auditory system under stimulation.

Copyright © 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26601778  [PubMed - in process]


19. BMC Cancer. 2015 Nov 11;15:895. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1899-0.

CIP2A overexpression induces autoimmune response and enhances JNK signaling
pathway in human lung cancer.

Peng B(1), Chai Y(2), Li Y(3), Liu X(4), Zhang J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Border Biomedical Research Center & Department of Biological Sciences, The
University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX, 79968, USA. bpeng2@miners.utep.edu. 
(2)Border Biomedical Research Center & Department of Biological Sciences, The
University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX, 79968, USA. yrchai@live.cn.
(3)Border Biomedical Research Center & Department of Biological Sciences, The
University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX, 79968, USA. yli5@miners.utep.edu.
(4)Border Biomedical Research Center & Department of Biological Sciences, The
University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX, 79968, USA. xliu2@miners.utep.edu.
(5)Border Biomedical Research Center & Department of Biological Sciences, The
University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX, 79968, USA. jzhang@utep.edu.

BACKGROUND: Cancerous inhibitor of PP2A (CIP2A) is a recently characterized
oncoprotein, which promotes cancer cell proliferation. But the role of CIP2A in
lung cancer progression is still not well understood.
METHODS: The expression level of CIP2A in lung cancer tissues was examined by
immunohistochemistry. CIP2A-associated cell proliferation was performed by knock 
down or overexpression of CIP2A in lung cancer cells. Phospho-array was used to
screen kinase candidates related to expression change of CIP2A. Western-blot and 
luciferase reporter assay were used to validate phospho-array results.
RESULTS: Overexpression of CIP2A in lung cancer not only triggers immune response
in lung cancer patients but also promotes lung cancer cell proliferation. By
phospho-array, several kinase candidates were identified, one of which is c-Jun
activated kinases (JNK). The knock down of CIP2A decreased JNK phosphorylation,
and the phosphorylation of downstream transcriptional factors, ATF2 and c-Jun,
whose transcriptional activity were decreased as well. Furthermore, the
expression level of CIP2A also affected the phosphorylation of the upstream
kinase of JNK, MKK4/MKK7. At last, treatment with JNK inhibitor partially
abolished CIP2A-induced cell proliferation.
CONCLUSION: CIP2A is a tumor-associated autoantigen in lung cancer, which promote
lung cancer proliferation partially through MKK4/7-JNK signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4642650
PMID: 26560124  [PubMed - in process]


20. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Feb;1859(2):246-61. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.11.001.
Epub 2015 Nov 5.

Coenzyme Q0 regulates NF<U+03BA>B/AP-1 activation and enhances Nrf2 stabilization in
attenuation of LPS-induced inflammation and redox imbalance: Evidence from in
vitro and in vivo studies.

Yang HL(1), Lin MW(1), Korivi M(1), Wu JJ(1), Liao CH(1), Chang CT(1), Liao
JW(2), Hseu YC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nutrition, College of Biopharmaceutical and Food Sciences, China 
Medical University, Taichung 40402, Taiwan. (2)Graduate Institute of Veterinary
Pathology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung 402, Taiwan. (3)Department
of Cosmeceutics, College of Biopharmaceutical and Food Sciences, China Medical
University, Taichung 40402, Taiwan; Department of Health and Nutrition
Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung 41354, Taiwan. Electronic address:
ychseu@mail.cmu.edu.tw.

Coenzyme Q (CoQ) analogs with variable number of isoprenoid units have been
demonstrated as anti-inflammatory and antioxidant/pro-oxidant molecules. In this 
study we used CoQ0 (2,3-dimethoxy-5-methyl-1,4-benzoquinone, zero isoprenoid
side-chains), a novel quinone derivative, and investigated its molecular actions 
against LPS-induced inflammation and redox imbalance in murine RAW264.7
macrophages and mice. In LPS-stimulated macrophages, non-cytotoxic concentrations
of CoQ0 (2.5-10µM) inhibited iNOS/COX-2 protein expressions with subsequent
reductions of NO, PGE2, TNF-a and IL-1ß secretions. This inhibition was reasoned 
by suppression of NF<U+03BA>B (p65) activation, and inhibition of AP-1 (c-Jun., c-Fos,
ATF2) translocation. Our findings indicated that IKKa-mediated I-<U+03BA>B degradation
and MAPK-signaling are involved in regulation of NF<U+03BA>B/AP-1 activation.
Furthermore, CoQ0 triggered HO-1 and NQO-1 genes through increased Nrf2 nuclear
translocation and Nrf2/ARE-signaling. This phenomenon was confirmed by diminished
CoQ0 protective effects in Nrf2 knockdown cells, where LPS-induced NO, PGE2,
TNF-a and IL-1ß productions remained high. Molecular evidence revealed that CoQ0 
enhanced Nrf2 steady-state level at both transcriptional and translational
levels. CoQ0-induced Nrf2 activation appears to be regulated by ROS-JNK-signaling
cascades, as evidenced by suppressed Nrf2 activation upon treatment with
pharmacological inhibitors of ROS (N-acetylcysteine) and JNK (SP600125). Besides,
oral administration of CoQ0 (5mg/kg) suppressed LPS-induced (1mg/kg) induction of
iNOS/COX-2 and TNF-a/IL-1ß through tight regulation of NF<U+03BA>B/Nrf2 signaling in
mice liver and spleen. Our findings conclude that pharmacological actions of CoQ0
are mediated via inhibition of NF<U+03BA>B/AP-1 activation and induction of
Nrf2/ARE-signaling. Owing to its potent anti-inflammatory and antioxidant
properties, CoQ0 could be a promising candidate to treat inflammatory disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26548719  [PubMed - in process]


21. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015 Nov 4;16:366. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0768-9.

Iterative sub-network component analysis enables reconstruction of large scale
genetic networks.

Jayavelu ND(1), Aasgaard LS(2), Bar N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU), Sem Salandsvei 4, Trondheim, Norway. nareshd@ntnu.no.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU), Sem Salandsvei 4, Trondheim, Norway. lsaas@statoil.com.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU), Sem Salandsvei 4, Trondheim, Norway. nadi.bar@ntnu.no.

BACKGROUND: Network component analysis (NCA) became a popular tool to understand 
complex regulatory networks. The method uses high-throughput gene expression data
and a priori topology to reconstruct transcription factor activity profiles.
Current NCA algorithms are constrained by several conditions posed on the network
topology, to guarantee unique reconstruction (termed compliancy). However, the
restrictions these conditions pose are not necessarily true from biological
perspective and they force network size reduction, pruning potentially important 
components.
RESULTS: To address this, we developed a novel, Iterative Sub-Network Component
Analysis (ISNCA) for reconstructing networks at any size. By dividing the initial
network into smaller, compliant subnetworks, the algorithm first predicts the
reconstruction of each subnetwork using standard NCA algorithms. It then
subtracts from the reconstruction the contribution of the shared components from 
the other subnetwork. We tested the ISNCA on real, large datasets using various
NCA algorithms. The size of the networks we tested and the accuracy of the
reconstruction increased significantly. Importantly, FOXA1, ATF2, ATF3 and many
other known key regulators in breast cancer could not be incorporated by any NCA 
algorithm because of the necessary conditions. However, their temporal activities
could be reconstructed by our algorithm, and therefore their involvement in
breast cancer could be analyzed.
CONCLUSIONS: Our framework enables reconstruction of large gene expression data
networks, without reducing their size or pruning potentially important
components, and at the same time rendering the results more biological plausible.
Our ISNCA method is not only suitable for prediction of key regulators in cancer 
studies, but it can be applied to any high-throughput gene expression data.

PMCID: PMC4634733
PMID: 26537518  [PubMed - in process]


22. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Dec 4-11;468(1-2):228-33. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.125. Epub 2015 Oct 30.

Vaginal LPS changed gene transcriptional regulation response to ischemic
reperfusion and increased vulnerability of fetal brain hemorrhage.

Dong Y(1), Kimura Y(2), Ito T(3), Velayo C(3), Sato T(3), Sugibayashi R(3),
Funamoto K(3), Hitomi K(3), Iida K(3), Endo M(3), Sato N(3), Yaegashi N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Interdisciplinary Biomedical Engineering, Tohoku University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. Electronic address: dongyupeng7@gmail.com.
(2)Advanced Interdisciplinary Biomedical Engineering, Tohoku University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan; Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Tohoku 
University Hospital, Sendai, Japan. (3)Advanced Interdisciplinary Biomedical
Engineering, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(4)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Tohoku University Hospital, Sendai,
Japan.

During pregnancy, both ischemic reperfusion and bacterial agent LPS are known
risk factors for fetal brain damage. However, there is a lack of evidence to
explain whether vaginal LPS affects the fetus response to ischemic reperfusion.
Here we reported that there was more than 2 folds higher vulnerability of fetal
brain hemorrhage response to ischemic reperfusion when mother mouse was treated
with vaginal LPS. As our previously reported, ischemic reperfusion induces
P53-dependent fetal brain damage was based on a molecular mechanism: the
transcriptional pattern was changed from HIF-1alpha-dependent to P53-dependent
immediately. In the present work, only with vaginal LPS precondition,
phosphorylation of activated transcriptional factor (ATF) 2 at Thr71 appeared in 
response to ischemic reperfusion. Moreover, this phosphorylation was completely
blocked by pre-treatment with a P53 inhibitor, pifithrin-a. We concluded that
vaginal LPS precondition trigged the p53-dependent phosphorylation of ATF2 in
response to ischemic reperfusion, which played an important role of increasing
vulnerability to hemorrhage in fetus.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26523514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Exp Neurol. 2016 Mar;277:296-304. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.10.010. Epub 2015
Oct 26.

JNK-mediated activation of ATF2 contributes to dopaminergic neurodegeneration in 
the MPTP mouse model of Parkinson's disease.

Huang Q(1), Du X(1), He X(1), Yu Q(1), Hu K(1), Breitwieser W(2), Shen Q(3), Ma
S(4), Li M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen
University, 74 Zhongshan 2nd Road, Guangzhou 510080, China. (2)Cell Regulation
Department, CRUK Manchester Institute, Wilmslow Road, Manchester M20 4BX, United 
Kingdom. (3)Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Brain Function and Disease,
Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, 74 Zhongshan 2nd Road,
Guangzhou 510080, China; Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, 
Sun Yat-Sen University, Number 107, Yan Jiang Xi Road, Guangzhou 510120, China.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen
University, 74 Zhongshan 2nd Road, Guangzhou 510080, China. Electronic address:
mashsh3@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (5)Department of Pharmacology, Zhongshan School of
Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, 74 Zhongshan 2nd Road, Guangzhou 510080, China;
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Brain Function and Disease, Zhongshan School
of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, 74 Zhongshan 2nd Road, Guangzhou 510080,
China. Electronic address: limt@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

The c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)/c-Jun pathway is a known critical regulator of 
dopaminergic neuronal death in Parkinson's disease (PD) and is considered a
potential target for neuroprotective therapy. However, whether JNK is activated
within dopaminergic neurons remains controversial, and whether JNK acts through
downstream effectors other than c-Jun to promote dopaminergic neuronal death
remains unclear. In this study, we confirm that JNK but not p38 is activated in
dopaminergic neurons after 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine
(MPTP)-intoxication. Furthermore, within the dopaminergic neurons of the
substantia nigra in MPTP-treated mice, JNK2/3 phosphorylates threonine 69 (Thr69)
of Activating transcription factor-2 (ATF2), a transcription factor of the
ATF/CREB family, whereas the phosphorylation of Thr71 is constitutive and remains
unchanged. The increased phosphorylation of ATF2 on Thr69 by JNK in the MPTP
mouse model suggests a functional relationship between the transcriptional
activation of ATF2 and dopaminergic neuron death. By using dopaminergic
neuron-specific conditional ATF2 mutant mice, we found that either partial or
complete deletion of the ATF2 DNA-binding domain in dopaminergic neurons markedly
alleviates the MPTP-induced dopaminergic neurodegeneration, indicating that the
activation of ATF2 plays a detrimental role in neuropathogenesis in PD. Taken
together, our findings demonstrate that JNK-mediated ATF2 activation contributes 
to dopaminergic neuronal death in an MPTP model of PD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26515688  [PubMed - in process]


24. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 Dec 15;289(3):482-94. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2015.10.012. Epub 2015 Oct 20.

Resveratrol alleviates diabetes-induced testicular dysfunction by inhibiting
oxidative stress and c-Jun N-terminal kinase signaling in rats.

Faid I(1), Al-Hussaini H(1), Kilarkaje N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Kuwait.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Kuwait.
Electronic address: knarayana@hsc.edu.kw.

Diabetes adversely affects reproductive functions in humans and animals. The
present study investigated the effects of Resveratrol on diabetes-induced
alterations in oxidative stress, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling and
apoptosis in the testis. Adult male Wistar rats (13-15 weeks; n=6/group) were
segregated into 1) normal control, 2) Resveratrol-treated (5mg/kg; ip; given
during last 3 weeks), 3) Streptozotocin-induced diabetic and, 4)
Resveratrol-treated diabetic groups, and euthanized on day 42 after the
confirmation of diabetes. Resveratrol did not normalize blood glucose levels in
diabetic rats. Resveratrol supplementation recovered diabetes-induced decreases
in reproductive organ weights, sperm count and motility, intra-testicular levels 
of superoxide dismutase, catalase, and glutathione peroxidase and an increase in 
4-hydroxynonenal activities (P<0.05). Resveratrol also recovered diabetes-induced
increases in JNK signaling pathway proteins, namely, ASK1 (apoptosis
signal-regulating kinase 1), JNKs (46 and 54 kDa isoforms) and p-JNK to normal
control levels (P<0.05). Interestingly, the expression of a down-stream target of
ASK1, MKK4 (mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 4) and its phosphorylated
form (p-MKK4) did not change in experimental groups. Resveratrol inhibited
diabetes-induced increases in AP-1 (activator protein-1) components, c-Jun and
ATF2 (activating transcription factor 2), but not their phosphorylated forms, to 
normal control levels (P<0.05). Further, Resveratrol inhibited diabetes-induced
increase in cleaved-caspase-3 to normal control levels. In conclusion,
Resveratrol alleviates diabetes-induced apoptosis in testis by modulating
oxidative stress, JNK signaling pathway and caspase-3 activities, but not by
inhibiting hyperglycemia, in rats. These results suggest that Resveratrol
supplementation may be a useful strategy to treat diabetes-induced testicular
dysfunction.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26499206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Hum Immunol. 2016 Jan;77(1):71-5. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2015.10.007. Epub 2015
Oct 21.

Epigenetic characteristics in inflammatory candidate genes in aggressive
periodontitis.

Schulz S(1), Immel UD(2), Just L(3), Schaller HG(4), Gläser C(5), Reichert S(4).

Author information: 
(1)University School of Dental Medicine, Department of Operative Dentistry and
Periodontology, Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany. Electronic
address: susanne.schulz@medizin.uni-halle.de. (2)Institute of Legal Medicine,
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany. (3)Clinic for Oral and
Maxillofacial Plastic Surgery, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg,
Germany. (4)University School of Dental Medicine, Department of Operative
Dentistry and Periodontology, Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany.
(5)Institute of Human Genetics and Medical Biology, Martin-Luther University
Halle-Wittenberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Periodontitis is a chronic inflammatory disease triggered by the host
immune response. Epigenetic modifications also affect the immune response. We
assessed CpG methylation in 22 inflammatory candidate genes (ATF2, CCL25, CXCL14,
CXCL3, CXCL5, CXCL6, FADD, GATA3, IL10RA, IL12A, IL12B, IL13, IL13RA1, IL15,
IL17C, IL17RA, IL4R, IL6R, IL6ST, IL7, INHA, and TYK2) with respect to the
occurrence of aggressive periodontitis (AgP).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this study 15 AgP patients (53.3% males, 41.4±10.5years)
and 10 controls (40.0% males, 36.9±17.5years) were included. The methylation
patterns of gingival biopsies were quantified using EpiTect® Methyl Signature PCR
Array Human Inflammatory Response.
RESULTS: In gingival biopsies taken from patients with AgP, CpG methylation of
CCL25 (1.73% vs. 2.59%, p=0.015) and IL17C (6.89% vs. 19.27%, p=0.002) was
significantly reduced as compared with periodontally healthy tissues.
DISCUSSION: We showed for the first time a differential methylation pattern for
CCL25 and IL17C in periodontitis. CCL25 plays an important role in T-cell
development, whereas IL17C regulates innate epithelial immune responses. The
decrease in CpG methylation is presumably accompanied by an increase in gene
expression. This could lead to a greater availability of CCL25 and interleukin
17C and support periodontal loss of attachment.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26472015  [PubMed - in process]


26. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Oct 15. pii: ASN.2015010093. [Epub ahead of print]

Antiaging Gene Klotho Regulates Adrenal CYP11B2 Expression and Aldosterone
Synthesis.

Zhou X(1), Chen K(2), Wang Y(2), Schuman M(2), Lei H(3), Sun Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China; and Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, 
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
(2)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. (3)Department of Cardiology, First
Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China; and.
(4)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma Zhongjie-Sun@ouhsc.edu.

Deficiency of the antiaging gene Klotho (KL) induces renal damage and
hypertension through unknown mechanisms. In this study, we assessed whether KL
regulates expression of CYP11B2, a key rate-limiting enzyme in aldosterone
synthesis, in adrenal glands. We found that haplodeficiency of KL(+/-) in mice
increased the plasma level of aldosterone by 16 weeks of age, which coincided
with spontaneous and persistent elevation of BP. Blockade of aldosterone actions 
by eplerenone reversed KL deficiency-induced hypertension and attenuated the
kidney damage. Protein expression of CYP11B2 was upregulated in adrenal cortex of
KL(+/-) mice. KL and CYP11B2 proteins colocalized in adrenal zona glomerulosa
cells. Silencing of KL upregulated and overexpression of KL downregulated CYP11B2
expression in human adrenocortical cells. Notably, silencing of KL decreased
expression of SF-1, a negative transcription factor of CYP11B2, but increased
phosphorylation of ATF2, a positive transcription factor of CYP11B2, which may
contribute to upregulation of CYP11B2 expression. Therefore, these results show
that KL regulates adrenal CYP11B2 expression. KL deficiency-induced spontaneous
hypertension and kidney damage may be partially attributed to the upregulation of
CYP11B2 expression and aldosterone synthesis.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMID: 26471128  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 3;6(34):36338-53. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5537.

Mitochondrial ATF2 translocation contributes to apoptosis induction and BRAF
inhibitor resistance in melanoma through the interaction of Bim with VDAC1.

Gao Z(1,)(2), Shang Q(1,)(2), Liu Z(1), Deng C(1,)(3), Guo C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Surgery, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders,
Chongqing, P. R. China. (2)Department of Pathology, Linyi People's Hospital,
Linyi, Shandong, P. R. China. (3)Department of Neonatology, Children's Hospital
of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND: The mitochondrial accumulation of ATF2 is involved in tumor
suppressor activities via cytochrome c release in melanoma cells. However, the
signaling pathways that connect mitochondrial ATF2 accumulation and cytochrome c 
release are not well documented.
METHODS: Several melanoma cell lines, B16F10, K1735M2, A375 and A375-R1, were
treated with paclitaxel and vemurafenib to test the function of mitochondrial
ATF2 and its connection to Bim and voltage-dependent anion channel 1 (VDAC1).
Immunoprecipitation analysis was performed to investigate the functional
interaction between the involved proteins. VDAC1 oligomerization was evaluated
using an EGS-based crosslinking assay.
RESULTS: The expression and migration of ATF2 to the mitochondria accounted for
paclitaxel stimuli and acquired resistance to BRAF inhibitors. Mitochondrial ATF2
facilitated Bim stabilization through the inhibition of its degradation by the
proteasome, thereby promoting cytochrome c release and inducing apoptosis in
B16F10 and A375 cells. Studies using B16F10 and A375 cells genetically modified
for ATF2 indicated that mitochondrial ATF2 was able to dissociate Bim from the
Mcl-1/Bim complex to trigger VDAC1 oligomerization. Immunoprecipitation analysis 
revealed that Bim interacts with VDAC1, and this interaction was remarkably
enhanced during apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: These results reveal that mitochondrial ATF2 is associated with the
induction of apoptosis and BRAF inhibitor resistance through Bim activation,
which might suggest potential novel therapies for the targeted induction of
apoptosis in melanoma therapy.

PMID: 26462148  [PubMed - in process]


28. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2016 Feb;60(2):256-65. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201500607. Epub 2015 
Oct 28.

Resveratrol stimulates cyclic AMP response element mediated gene transcription.

Thiel G(1), Rössler OG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty,
Saarland University, Homburg, Germany.

SCOPE: Many intracellular effects have been attributed to resveratrol, a
polyphenolic phytoalexin found in grapes and in other plants, including the
direct regulation of transcription. Here, we have analyzed the impact of
resveratrol on gene transcription regulated by the cyclic AMP response element
(CRE).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Transcription of a chromatin-embedded reporter gene with
CREs in its regulatory region was significantly elevated in resveratrol-treated
293 human embryonic kidney cells, hepatoma cells and neural stem cells. The CRE
thus functions as resveratrol-responsive element. The polyphenols quercetin and
naringenin also stimulated CRE-mediated gene transcription, but not in the range 
of resveratrol. The polyphenol curcumin, in contrast, had no effect upon
CRE-regulated transcription. In addition, resveratrol stimulation upregulated the
transcriptional activation potentials of the CRE-binding proteins (CREB) and
activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2).
CONCLUSION: CREB exhibits cytoprotective activity by stimulating CRE-regulated
genes, while ATF2 has been identified as a tumor suppressor. The fact that
resveratrol upregulates CRE-mediated gene transcription and enhances the
transcriptional activation potentials of CREB and ATF2 suggests that
cytoprotective and tumor suppressive activities of resveratrol may rely-at least 
in part-on the stimulation of CREB- and ATF2-controlled target genes.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26446263  [PubMed - in process]


29. J Mol Diagn. 2015 Nov;17(6):669-78. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2015.06.006. Epub 2015 
Sep 30.

Aberrant Levels of miRNAs in Bone Marrow Microenvironment and Peripheral Blood of
Myeloma Patients and Disease Progression.

Wang W(1), Corrigan-Cummins M(1), Barber EA(1), Saleh LM(1), Zingone A(2),
Ghafoor A(1), Costello R(2), Zhang Y(2), Kurlander RJ(1), Korde N(2), Roccaro
AM(3), Ghobrial IM(3), Landgren O(2), Calvo KR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Section, Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Institutes of 
Health Clinical Center, Bethesda, Maryland. (2)Multiple Myeloma Section,
Metabolism Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. (3)Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (4)Hematology Section, 
Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Institutes of Health Clinical Center,
Bethesda, Maryland. Electronic address: calvok@cc.nih.gov.

The bone marrow (BM) microenvironment of multiple myeloma (MM) is reported to
play a role in the biology of disease. In this study, we found that the
extracellular BM microenvironment in MM contains a unique miRNA signature
detectable by miRNA microarray and quantitative real-time PCR, which is partially
represented in the peripheral blood. Eleven miRNAs were significantly decreased
in both BM and serum of MM patients in comparison with controls. Evaluation of
these miRNAs in plasma of a separate cohort of MM patients and controls confirmed
significantly aberrant levels of let-7a, let-7b, let-7i, miR-15b, miR-16, and
miR-20a in both serum and plasma. We then studied the myeloma precursor diseases 
and found that a subset of the MM miRNAs exhibited aberrant expression in
monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance and smoldering myeloma. miRNA 
analysis of enriched CD138(+) plasma cells from MM and monoclonal gammopathy of
undetermined significance found that most of the validated MM BM signature miRNAs
were significantly decreased in MM plasma cells. Gene expression profiling
indicated that multiple targets of the decreased miRNAs found increased
expression in MM plasma cells, including ATF2, HRAS, HDAC4, TGFB1, TGFBR1, and
mitogen-activated protein kinases. The findings suggest that these miRNAs are
detectable in aberrant levels in the peripheral blood of patients with plasma
cell proliferation and may play a role in aberrant plasma cell proliferation and 
disease progression.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the Association
for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4630165 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26433312  [PubMed - in process]


30. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Sep 28;21(36):10336-47. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v21.i36.10336.

Predictive biomarkers of sorafenib efficacy in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma:
Are we getting there?

Shao YY(1), Hsu CH(1), Cheng AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yu-Yun Shao, Chih-Hung Hsu, Ann-Lii Cheng, Graduate Institute of Oncology,
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei 10051, Taiwan.

Sorafenib is the current standard treatment for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), but its efficacy is modest with low response rates and short response
duration. Predictive biomarkers for sorafenib efficacy are necessary. However,
efforts to determine biomarkers for sorafenib have led only to potential
candidates rather than clinically useful predictors. Studies based on patient
cohorts identified the potential of blood levels of angiopoietin-2, hepatocyte
growth factor, insulin-like growth factor-1, and transforming growth factor-ß1
for predicting sorafenib efficacy. Alpha-fetoprotein response, dynamic
contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging, and treatment-related side effects 
may serve as early surrogate markers. Novel approaches based on super-responders 
or experimental mouse models may provide new directions in biomarker research.
These studies identified tumor amplification of FGF3/FGF4 or VEGFA and tumor
expression of phospho-Mapk14 and phospho-Atf2 as possible predictive markers that
await validation. A group effort that considers various prognostic factors and
proper collection of tumor tissues before treatment is imperative for the success
of future biomarker research in advanced HCC.

PMCID: PMC4579880
PMID: 26420960  [PubMed - in process]


31. Chem Biol Interact. 2015 Dec 5;242:107-22. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2015.09.020. Epub
2015 Sep 26.

Novel carbocyclic curcumin analog CUR3d modulates genes involved in multiple
apoptosis pathways in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Bhullar KS(1), Jha A(2), Rupasinghe HP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture, Dalhousie
University, Truro, Nova Scotia, B2N 5E3, Canada; Department of Pharmacology,
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 
2H7, Canada. (2)Department of Chemistry, Acadia University, Wolfville, Nova
Scotia, B4P 2R6, Canada. (3)Department of Environmental Sciences, Faculty of
Agriculture, Dalhousie University, Truro, Nova Scotia, B2N 5E3, Canada;
Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, B3H 4R2, Canada. Electronic address: vrupasinghe@dal.ca.

Anticancer activity of a novel curcumin analog
(E)-2-(4-hydroxy-3-methoxybenzylidene)-5-((E)-3-(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)acrylo
yl)cyclopentanone (CUR3d) was studied using a human hepatocellular carcinoma cell
line (HepG2). The results showed that CUR3d completely inhibits the tumor cell
proliferation in a dose- and time-dependent manner. CUR3d at 100 µmol/L activated
the pro-apoptotic caspase-3 along with downregulation of anti-apoptotic BIRC5 and
Bcl2. CUR3d treatment controlled the cancer cell growth by downregulating the
expression of PI3K/Akt (Akt1, Akt2) pathway along with NF-<U+03BA>B. CUR3d
down-regulated the members of epidermal growth receptor family (EGFR, ERBB3,
ERBB2) and insulin like growth receptors (IGF1, IGF-1R, IGF2). This correlated
with the downregulation of G-protein (RHOA, RHOB) and RAS (ATF2, HRAS, KRAS,
NRAS) pathway signaling. CUR3d also arrested cell cycle via inhibition of CDK2,
CDK4, CDK5, CDK9, MDM2, MDM4 and TERT genes. Cell cycle essential aurora kinases 
(AURKa, AURKß) and polo-like kinases (PLK1, PLK2, PLK3) were also modulated by
CUR3d. Topoisomerases (TOP2a, TOP2ß), important factors in cancer cell
immortality, as well as HIF-1a were downregulated following CUR3d treatment. The 
expression of protein kinase-C family (PRKC-A, PRKC-D, PRKC-E) was also
attenuated by CUR3d. The downregulation of histone deacetylases (Class I, II, IV)
and PARP I further strengthened the anticancer efficacy of CUR3d. Downregulation 
of carcinogenic cathepsins (CTSB, CTSD) and heat shock proteins exhibited CUR3d's
potency as a potential immunological adjuvant. Finally, the non-toxic
manifestation of CUR3d in healthy liver and lung cells along with downregulation 
of drug resistant gene ABCC1 further warrant need for advance investigations.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26409325  [PubMed - in process]


32. Microvasc Res. 2016 Jan;103:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.mvr.2015.09.003. Epub 2015 Sep
25.

Induced peroxidase and cytoprotective enzyme expressions support adaptation of
HUVECs to sustain subsequent H2O2 exposure.

Patel H(1), Chen J(2), Kavdia M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI
48201, United States. Electronic address: hemang@wayne.edu. (2)Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, United States.
Electronic address: ej8568@wayne.edu. (3)Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, United States. Electronic address:
kavdia@wayne.edu.

H2O2 mediates autocrine and paracrine signaling in the vasculature and can
propagate endothelial dysfunction. However, it is not clear how endothelial cells
withstand H2O2 exposure and promote H2O2-induced vascular remodeling. To
understand the innate ability of endothelial cells for sustaining excess H2O2
exposure, we investigated the genotypic and functional regulation of redox
systems in primary HUVECs following an H2O2 treatment. Primary HUVECs were
exposed to transient H2O2 exposure and consistent H2O2 exposure. Following H2O2
treatments for 24, 48 and 72h, we measured O2(-) production, mitochondrial
membrane polarization (MMP), and gene expressions of pro-oxidative enzymes,
peroxidase enzymes, and cytoprotective intermediates. Our results showed that the
24h H2O2 exposure significantly increased O2(-) levels, hyperpolarized MMP, and
downregulated CAT, GPX1, TXNRD1, NFE2L2, ASK1, and ATF2 gene expression in
HUVECs. At 72h, HUVECs in both treatment conditions were shown to adapt to reduce
O2(-) levels and normalize MMP. An upregulation of GPX1, TXNRD1, and HMOX1 gene
expression and a recovery of NFE2L2 and PRDX1 gene expression to control levels
were observed in both consistent and transient treatments at 48 and 72h. The
response of endothelial cells to excess levels of H2O2 involves a complex
interaction amongst O2(-) levels, mitochondrial membrane polarization and anti-
and pro-oxidant gene regulation. As a part of this response, HUVECs induce
cytoprotective mechanisms including the expression of peroxidase and antioxidant 
enzymes along with the downregulation of pro-apoptotic genes. This adaptation
assists HUVECs to withstand subsequent exposures to H2O2.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4688180 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26409120  [PubMed - in process]


33. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 6;467(1):103-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.09.113. Epub 2015 Sep 25.

MicroRNA-761 regulates mitochondrial biogenesis in mouse skeletal muscle in
response to exercise.

Xu Y(1), Zhao C(2), Sun X(2), Liu Z(3), Zhang J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Hospital of Hebei Engineering University, Handan, 056002, Hebei,
China. (2)Medical College of Hebei Engineering University, Handan, 056002, Hebei,
China. (3)Affiliated Hospital of Hebei Engineering University, Handan, 056002,
Hebei, China. Electronic address: liuzhij1207@163.com. (4)National Institute for 
Communicable Disease Control and Prevention (ICDC), Chinese Center for Disease
Control and Prevention (China CDC), Beijing, 102206, China. Electronic address:
zhangjianzhong@icdc.cn.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been suggested to play critical roles in skeletal muscle 
in response to exercise. Previous study has shown that miR-761 was involved in a 
novel model regulating the mitochondrial network. However, its role in
mitochondrial biogenesis remains poorly understood. Therefore, the current study 
was aimed to examine the effect of miR-761 on mitochondrial biogenesis in
skeletal muscle. Real-time quantitative PCR analysis demonstrated that aberrantly
expressed miR-761 is involved in exercise activity and miR-761 is decreased by
exercise training compared with the sedentary control mice. miR-761 suppresses
mitochondrial biogenesis of C2C12 myocytes by targeting the 3'-UTR of peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>) coactivator-1 (PGC-1a).
Overexpression of miR-761 was capable of inhibiting the protein expression levels
of PGC-1a. Moreover, miR-761 overexpression suppressed the p38 MAPK signaling
pathway and down-regulated the expression of phosphorylated MAPK-activated
protein kinase-2 (P-MK2), a downstream kinase of p38 MAPK. The phosphorylation of
activating transcription factors 2 (ATF2) that plays a functional role in linking
the activation of the p38 MAPK pathway to enhanced transcription of the PGC-1a
was also inhibited by the overexpression of miR-761. These findings revealed a
novel regulation mechanism for miR-761 in skeletal myocytes, and contributed to a
better understanding of the modulation of skeletal muscle in response to
exercise.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26408907  [PubMed - in process]


34. J Neurochem. 2015 Dec;135(6):1189-202. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13364. Epub 2015 Oct 14.

microRNA-26a modulates inflammatory response induced by toll-like receptor 4
stimulation in microglia.

Kumar A(1,)(2), Bhatia HS(1), de Oliveira AC(3), Fiebich BL(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Neurochemistry Lab, University of Freiburg Medical
School, Freiburg, Germany. (2)Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany. (3)Department of Pharmacology, Federal University of Minas
Gerais, Avenida Antonio Carlos, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. (4)VivaCell Biotechnology
GmbH, Denzlingen, Germany.

MiRNAs, a family of small non-coding RNAs, have emerged as novel
post-transcriptional regulators of numerous cellular responses. Although the
involvement of miRNAs in the regulation of neuroinflammation in various
neurological diseases has been previously studied, their role in the production
of inflammatory mediators during microglia activation is poorly understood. In
this study, the role of miR-26a has been investigated in the modulation of
inflammatory response in cultured microglia. Using real-time PCR, the expression 
of miR-26a was studied in toll-like receptors 4 stimulated primary mouse
microglia. miR-26a expression was found to be rapidly reduced after the
stimulation of toll-like receptors 4 in microglia. Over-expression of miR-26a
significantly decreased the production of inflammatory cytokines such as tumor
necrosis factor a and IL-6, whereas knockdown of miR-26a increased the expression
of these mediators. Furthermore, using in silico analysis, we identified that the
activating transcription factor (ATF) 2 is directly targeted by miR-26a. This
finding was confirmed by loss and gain of function studies. Similar to the effect
of miR-26a over-expression, knockdown of activating transcription factor 2
inhibited the production of proinflammatory cytokines, particularly IL-6. Taken
together, our results suggest the involvement of miR-26a in the regulation of the
production of proinflammatory cytokines in microglia. We proposed that in
microglia, activation of toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 
down-regulates miR-26a. The down-regulation of this miR increases expression of
activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2). This event, in addition to the
activation of ATF2 by c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), increases interleukin-6
(IL-6) production. On the other hand, miR-26a also increases the production of
tumor necrosis factor a (TNFa) by a mechanism independent of ATF2.

© 2015 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 26376347  [PubMed - in process]


35. J Biol Chem. 2015 Oct 30;290(44):26661-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.691436. Epub
2015 Sep 14.

Two hydrophobic residues can determine the specificity of mitogen-activated
protein kinase docking interactions.

Bardwell AJ(1), Bardwell L(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, Center for Complex
Biological Systems, University of California, Irvine, California 92697. (2)From
the Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, Center for Complex Biological
Systems, University of California, Irvine, California 92697 bardwell@uci.edu.

MAPKs bind to many of their upstream regulators and downstream substrates via a
short docking motif (the D-site) on their binding partner. MAPKs that are in
different families (e.g. ERK, JNK, and p38) can bind selectively to D-sites in
their authentic substrates and regulators while discriminating against D-sites in
other pathways. Here we demonstrate that the short hydrophobic region at the
distal end of the D-site plays a critical role in determining the high
selectivity of JNK MAPKs for docking sites in their cognate MAPK kinases.
Changing just 1 or 2 key hydrophobic residues in this submotif is sufficient to
turn a weak JNK-binding D-site into a strong one, or vice versa. These
specificity-determining differences are also found in the D-sites of the ETS
family transcription factors Elk-1 and Net. Moreover, swapping two hydrophobic
residues between these D-sites switches the relative efficiency of Elk-1 and Net 
as substrates for ERK versus JNK, as predicted. These results provide new
insights into docking specificity and suggest that this specificity can evolve
rapidly by changes to just 1 or 2 amino acids.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4646321 [Available on 2016-10-30]
PMID: 26370088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Biochem J. 2015 Sep 15;470(3):281-91. doi: 10.1042/BJ20150397. Epub 2015 Jul 15.

Down-regulation of EPHX2 gene transcription by Sp1 under high-glucose conditions.

Oguro A(1), Oida S(1), Imaoka S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Environmental Bioscience and Department of Bioscience,
School of Science and Technology, Kwansei Gakuin University, 2-1 Gakuen, Sanda
669-1337, Japan. (2)Research Center for Environmental Bioscience and Department
of Bioscience, School of Science and Technology, Kwansei Gakuin University, 2-1
Gakuen, Sanda 669-1337, Japan imaoka@kwansei.ac.jp.

sEH (soluble epoxide hydrolase), which is encoded by the EPHX2 gene, regulates
the actions of bioactive lipids, EETs (epoxyeicosatrienoic acids). Previously, we
found that high-glucose-induced oxidative stress suppressed sEH levels in a
hepatocarcinoma cell line (Hep3B) and sEH was decreased in streptozotocin-induced
diabetic mice in vivo. In the present study, we investigated the regulatory
mechanisms underlying EPHX2 transcriptional suppression under high-glucose
conditions. The decrease in sEH was prevented by an Sp1 (specificity protein 1)
inhibitor, mithramycin A, and overexpression or knockdown of Sp1 revealed that
Sp1 suppressively regulated sEH expression, in contrast with the general role of 
Sp1 on transcriptional activation. In addition, we found that AP2a (activating
protein 2a) promoted EPHX2 transcription. The nuclear transport of Sp1, but not
that of AP2a, was increased under high glucose concomitantly with the decrease in
sEH. Within the EPHX2 promoter -56/+32, five Sp1-binding sites were identified,
and the mutation of each of these sites showed that the first one (SP1_1) was
important in both suppression by Sp1 and activation by AP2a. Furthermore,
overexpression of Sp1 diminished the binding of AP2a by DNA-affinity
precipitation assay and ChIP, suggesting competition between Sp1 and AP2a on the 
EPHX2 promoter. These findings provide novel insights into the role of Sp1 in
transcriptional suppression, which may be applicable to the transcriptional
regulation of other genes.

© 2015 Authors; published by Portland Press Limited.

PMID: 26341485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Microb Cell Fact. 2015 Sep 4;14:128. doi: 10.1186/s12934-015-0314-5.

Genomic and transcriptomic analysis of aroma synthesis in two hybrids between
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and S. kudriavzevii in winemaking conditions.

Gamero A(1), Belloch C(2), Querol A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biotecnología, Instituto de Agroquímica y Tecnología de los
Alimentos (IATA), CSIC, Avda/Agustín Escardino Benlloch, 7, 46980, Paterna,
Valencia, Spain. amgallu@iata.csic.es. (2)Departamento de Biotecnología,
Instituto de Agroquímica y Tecnología de los Alimentos (IATA), CSIC, Avda/Agustín
Escardino Benlloch, 7, 46980, Paterna, Valencia, Spain. belloch@iata.csic.es.
(3)Departamento de Biotecnología, Instituto de Agroquímica y Tecnología de los
Alimentos (IATA), CSIC, Avda/Agustín Escardino Benlloch, 7, 46980, Paterna,
Valencia, Spain. aquerol@iata.csic.es.

BACKGROUND: Aroma is one of the most important attributes defining wine quality
in which yeasts play a crucial role, synthesizing aromatic compounds or releasing
odourless conjugates. A present-day trend in winemaking consists of lowering
fermentation temperature to achieve higher aroma production and retention. S.
cerevisiae × S. kudriavzevii hybrids seem to have inherited beneficial traits
from their parental species, like fermenting efficiently at low temperature or
producing higher amounts of certain aromatic compounds. In this study, allelic
composition and gene expression of the genes related to aroma synthesis in two
genetically and phenotypically different S. cerevisiae × S. kudriavzevii hybrids,
Lalvin W27 and VIN7, were compared and related to aroma production in
microvinifications at 12 and 28 °C. In addition, the contribution of the allele
coming from each parental to the overall expression was explored by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The results indicated large differences in allele composition, gene
expression and the contribution of each parental to the overall expression at the
fermentation temperatures tested. Results obtained by RT-PCR showed that in ARO1 
and ATF2 genes the S. kudriavzevii allele was more expressed than that of S.
cerevisiae particularly at 12 °C.
CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed high differences regarding allele composition
and gene expression in two S. cerevisiae × S. kudriavzevii hybrids, which may
have led to different aroma profiles in winemaking conditions. The contribution
of the alleles coming from each parental to the overall expression has proved to 
differently influence aroma synthesis. Besides, the quantitative contribution to 
the overall gene expression of the alleles coming from one parental strain or the
other was clearly determined by the fermentation temperature for some genes.

PMCID: PMC4558966
PMID: 26336982  [PubMed - in process]


38. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Nov;35(21):3633-45. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00768-15. Epub 2015 Aug 
17.

Role of the Exocyst Complex Component Sec6/8 in Genomic Stability.

Torres MJ(1), Pandita RK(2), Kulak O(1), Kumar R(3), Formstecher E(4), Horikoshi 
N(5), Mujoo K(5), Hunt CR(5), Zhao Y(6), Lum L(1), Zaman A(1), Yeaman C(7), White
MA(8), Pandita TK(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA The Houston Methodist Research
Institute, Houston, Texas, USA. (3)Department of Radiation Oncology, University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA. (4)Hybrigenics, Inc.,
Paris, France. (5)The Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, Texas, USA. 
(6)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois, USA. (7)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, Iowa, USA. (8)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA Michael.White@UTSouthwestern.edu 
tpandita@houstonmethodist.org. (9)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA The Houston Methodist
Research Institute, Houston, Texas, USA Michael.White@UTSouthwestern.edu
tpandita@houstonmethodist.org.

The exocyst is a heterooctomeric complex well appreciated for its role in the
dynamic assembly of specialized membrane domains. Accumulating evidence indicates
that this macromolecular machine also serves as a physical platform that
coordinates regulatory cascades supporting biological systems such as host
defense signaling, cell fate, and energy homeostasis. The isolation of multiple
components of the DNA damage response (DDR) as exocyst-interacting proteins,
together with the identification of Sec8 as a suppressor of the p53 response,
suggested functional interactions between the exocyst and the DDR. We found that 
exocyst perturbation resulted in resistance to ionizing radiation (IR) and
accelerated resolution of DNA damage. This occurred at the expense of genomic
integrity, as enhanced recombination frequencies correlated with the accumulation
of aberrant chromatid exchanges. Sec8 perturbation resulted in the accumulation
of ATF2 and RNF20 and the promiscuous accumulation of DDR-associated chromatin
marks and Rad51 repairosomes. Thus, the exocyst supports DNA repair fidelity by
limiting the formation of repair chromatin in the absence of DNA damage.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4589602 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26283729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Neurol Sci. 2015 Oct 15;357(1-2):270-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2015.08.004. Epub
2015 Aug 5.

The role of p38MAPK signal pathway in the neuroprotective mechanism of limb
postconditioning against rat cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury.

Li H(1), Zhou S(2), Wu L(3), Liu K(3), Zhang Y(4), Ma G(4), Wang L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China; Department 
of Neurology, Guangdong Neuroscience Institute, Guangdong General Hospital and
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical University,
Guilin, China. (3)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical 
University, Guilin, China. (4)Department of Neurology, Guangdong Neuroscience
Institute, Guangdong General Hospital and Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China. (5)Department of Neurology, Guangdong
Neuroscience Institute, Guangdong General Hospital and Guangdong Academy of
Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China. Electronic address:
wljgd68@163.com.

It has been reported that remote ischemic postconditioning was able to protect
from a harmful ischemia occurring in brain. In the present study, we investigated
the role of p38 MAPK signal pathway in the process of neuroprotection and
anti-apoptosis following remote limb ischemic postconditioning on rat focal
cerebral ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) model. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided 
randomly into four groups: the sham-operated group, I/R group, limb ischemic
postconditioning (LPostC) group, and LPostC+SB203580 (p38 MAPK inhibitor) group. 
Focal ischemia was induced by transient middle cerebral artery occlusion. Limb
ischemic postconditioning was implemented by brief cycles of femoral artery
occlusion. At 24h after modeling, we analyzed the neurological deficit score,
assessed the cerebral tissue morphology by H-E staining, and evaluated neuronal
apoptosis by TUNEL staining. The protein expression levels of p-p38 or p-ATF2
(phospho-activating transcription factor 2) in the penumbra region were detected 
by western blotting or immunohistochemical staining. Our findings revealed that
LPostC relieved cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury by decreasing neurological
score, improving neuronal morphological changes in the ischemic penumbra area,
and reducing neuronal apoptosis. In addition, LPostC or LPostC+SB203580
attenuated the increase in p-p38 and p-ATF2 levels in ischemia/reperfusion brain 
tissue. These results indicate that the protective effects of LPostC against
cerebral I/R injury may be related to the attenuation of neuronal apoptosis and
the suppression of p38 MAPK-ATF2 pathway.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26282496  [PubMed - in process]


40. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 13;10(8):e0135504. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135504.
eCollection 2015.

Xenopus Pkdcc1 and Pkdcc2 Are Two New Tyrosine Kinases Involved in the Regulation
of JNK Dependent Wnt/PCP Signaling Pathway.

Vitorino M(1), Silva AC(2), Inácio JM(3), Ramalho JS(4), Gur M(5), Fainsod A(5), 
Steinbeisser H(6), Belo JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Medicine Program, Departamento de Ciências Biomédicas e Medicina,
Universidade do Algarve, Faro, Portugal; Center for Biomedical Research (CBMR),
Universidade do Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, Faro, Portugal. (2)Center for
Biomedical Research (CBMR), Universidade do Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, Faro,
Portugal. (3)Regenerative Medicine Program, Departamento de Ciências Biomédicas e
Medicina, Universidade do Algarve, Faro, Portugal; Center for Biomedical Research
(CBMR), Universidade do Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, Faro, Portugal; CEDOC, NOVA 
Medical School/Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade Nova de Lisboa,
Lisboa, Portugal. (4)CEDOC, NOVA Medical School/Faculdade de Ciências Médicas,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal. (5)Department of Developmental
Biology and Cancer Research, Institute for Medical Research Israel-Canada,
Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University, P.O. Box 12272, Jerusalem, 91120, Israel.
(6)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Protein Kinase Domain Containing, Cytoplasmic (PKDCC) is a protein kinase which
has been implicated in longitudinal bone growth through regulation of
chondrocytes formation. Nevertheless, the mechanism by which this occurs remains 
unknown. Here, we identified two new members of the PKDCC family, Pkdcc1 and
Pkdcc2 from Xenopus laevis. Interestingly, our knockdown experiments revealed
that these two proteins are both involved on blastopore and neural tube closure
during gastrula and neurula stages, respectively. In vertebrates, tissue polarity
and cell movement observed during gastrulation and neural tube closure are
controlled by Wnt/Planar Cell Polarity (PCP) molecular pathway. Our results
showed that Pkdcc1 and Pkdcc2 promote the recruitment of Dvl to the plasma
membrane. But surprisingly, they revealed different roles in the induction of a
luciferase reporter under the control of Atf2 promoter. While Pkdcc1 induces Atf2
expression, Pkdcc2 does not, and furthermore inhibits its normal induction by
Wnt11 and Wnt5a. Altogether our data show, for the first time, that members of
the PKDCC family are involved in the regulation of JNK dependent Wnt/PCP
signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4536202
PMID: 26270962  [PubMed - in process]


41. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 30;10(7):e0134003. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134003.
eCollection 2015.

All-Trans Retinoic Acid Induces TGF-ß2 in Intestinal Epithelial Cells via RhoA-
and p38a MAPK-Mediated Activation of the Transcription Factor ATF2.

Namachivayam K(1), MohanKumar K(1), Arbach D(2), Jagadeeswaran R(2), Jain SK(3), 
Natarajan V(4), Mehta D(4), Jankov RP(5), Maheshwari A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois, United States of America; Department of Pediatrics, Morsani College of 
Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States of America. 
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois, United States of America. (3)Department of Pediatrics, University of
Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America. (4)Department
of Pharmacology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America. (5)Physiology & Experimental Medicine Program, Hospital for
Sick Children Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of
Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of
Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (6)Department of
Pediatrics, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States
of America; Department of Pediatrics, Morsani College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States of America; Department of
Pharmacology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States
of America; Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine,
University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States of America; Department
of Community and Family Health, College of Public Health, University of South
Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States of America.

OBJECTIVE: We have shown previously that preterm infants are at risk of
necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), an inflammatory bowel necrosis typically seen in
infants born prior to 32 weeks' gestation, because of the developmental
deficiency of transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß2 in the intestine. The present
study was designed to investigate all-trans retinoic acid (atRA) as an inducer of
TGF-ß2 in intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) and to elucidate the involved
signaling mechanisms.
METHODS: AtRA effects on intestinal epithelium were investigated using IEC6
cells. TGF-ß2 expression was measured using reverse transcriptase-quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) and Western blots. Signaling pathways were
investigated using Western blots, transiently-transfected/transduced cells,
kinase arrays, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and selective small molecule
inhibitors.
RESULTS: AtRA-treatment of IEC6 cells selectively increased TGF-ß2 mRNA and
protein expression in a time- and dose-dependent fashion, and increased the
activity of the TGF-ß2 promoter. AtRA effects were mediated via RhoA GTPase,
Rho-associated, coiled-coil-containing protein kinase 1 (ROCK1), p38a MAPK, and
activating transcription factor (ATF)-2. AtRA increased phospho-ATF2 binding to
the TGF-ß2 promoter and increased histone H2B acetylation in the TGF-ß2
nucleosome, which is typically associated with transcriptional activation.
CONCLUSIONS: AtRA induces TGF-ß2 expression in IECs via RhoA- and p38a
MAPK-mediated activation of the transcription factor ATF2. Further studies are
needed to investigate the role of atRA as a protective/therapeutic agent in gut
mucosal inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4520553
PMID: 26225425  [PubMed - in process]


42. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 May 1;8(5):5062-70. eCollection 2015.

High-grade ovarian cancer secreting effective exosomes in tumor angiogenesis.

Yi H(1), Ye J(2), Yang XM(3), Zhang LW(2), Zhang ZG(3), Chen YP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Maternity and Children Health Hospital Fujian Medical University
Teaching Hospital Fuzhou 350005, China. (2)The Fifth People's Hospital of
Shanghai, Fudan University Shanghai 200240, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of
Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine Shanghai, China.

Ovarian cancer, the most lethal gynecological cancer, related closely to tumor
stage. High-grade ovarian cancer always results in a late diagnose and high
recurrence, which reduce survival within five years. Until recently, curable
therapy is still under research and anti-angiogenesis proves a promising way.
Tumor-derived exosomes are essential in tumor migration and metastases such as
angiogenesis is enhanced by exosomes. In our study, we have made comparison
between high-grade and unlikely high-grade serous ovarian cancer cells on
exosomal function of endothelial cells proliferation, migration and tube
formation. Exosomes derived from high-grade ovarian cancer have a profound impact
on angiogenesis with comparison to unlikely high-grade ovarian cancer. Proteomic 
profiles revealed some potential proteins involved in exosomal function of
angiogenesis such as ATF2, MTA1, ROCK1/2 and so on. Therefore, exosomes plays an 
influential role in angiogenesis in ovarian serous cancer and also function more 
effectively in high-grade ovarian cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4503072
PMID: 26191200  [PubMed - in process]


43. Cell Microbiol. 2016 Jan;18(1):66-79. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12483. Epub 2015 Jul 31.

A critical role for ATF2 transcription factor in the regulation of E-selectin
expression in response to non-endotoxin components of Neisseria meningitidis.

Jacobsen MC(1,)(2), Dusart PJ(1,)(3), Kotowicz K(1), Bajaj-Elliott M(1), Hart
SL(4), Klein NJ(1), Dixon GL(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Infection, Inflammation and Rheumatology Section, Institute of Child Health,
University College London, London, UK. (2)Department of Biology, Faculty of
Science, University of Regina, Regina, SK, Canada. (3)Science for Life
Laboratory, Clinical Applied Proteomics, School of Biotechnology, Royal Institute
of Technology (KTH), Solna, Sweden. (4)Experimental and Personalised Medicine
Section, Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, UK.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK.

Vascular injury is a serious complication of sepsis due to the gram-negative
bacterium Neisseria meningitidis. One of the critical early steps in initiating
this injury is via the interaction of leucocytes, particularly neutrophils, with 
adhesion molecules expressed on inflamed endothelium. We have previously
demonstrated that both lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and non-LPS components of
meningococci can induce very high levels of expression of the vascular
endothelial cell adhesion molecule E-selectin, which is critical for early
tethering and capture of neutrophils onto endothelium under flow. Using an
LPS-deficient strain of meningococcus, we showed that very high levels of
expression can be induced in primary endothelial cells, even in the context of
weak activation of the major host signal transduction factor [nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
(NF-<U+03BA>B)]. In this study, we show that the particular propensity for
N.<U+2009>meningitidis to induce high levels of expression is regulated at a
transcriptional level, and demonstrate a significant role for phosphorylation of 
the ATF2 transcription factor, likely via mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinases, on the activity of the E-selectin promoter. Furthermore, inhibition of
E-selectin expression in response to the lpxA- strain by a p38 inhibitor
indicates a significant role of a p38-dependent MAPK signalling pathway in ATF2
activation. Collectively, these data highlight the role that LPS and other
bacterial components have in modulating endothelial function and their
involvement in the pathogenesis of meningococcal sepsis. Better understanding of 
these multiple mechanisms induced by complex stimuli such as bacteria, and the
specific inflammatory pathways they activate, may lead to improved, focused
interventions in both meningococcal and potentially bacterial sepsis more
generally.

© 2015 The Authors. Cellular Microbiology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26153406  [PubMed - in process]


44. Radiat Res. 2015 Jul;184(1):105-19. Epub 2015 Jun 26.

Defining the Biological Effectiveness of Components of High-LET Track Structure.

Sridharan DM(1), Chappell LJ(2), Whalen MK(1), Cucinotta FA(3), Pluth JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)a<U+2009> Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Life Sciences Division, Berkeley,
California 94710; (2)b<U+2009> NASA, Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas
77058; and. (3)c<U+2009> University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Health Physics and Diagnostic 
Sciences, Las Vegas, Nevada 89154.

During space travel, astronauts are exposed to a wide array of high-linear energy
transfer (LET) particles, with differing energies and resulting biological
effects. Risk assessment of these exposures carries a large uncertainty
predominantly due to the unique track structure of the particle's energy
deposition. The complex damage elicited by high charge and energy (HZE) particles
results from both lesions along the track core and from energetic electrons, d
rays, generated as a consequence of particle traversal. To better define how
cells respond to this complex radiation exposure, a normal hTERT immortalized
skin fibroblast cell line was exposed to a defined panel of particles carefully
chosen to tease out track structure effects. Phosphorylation kinetics for several
key double-strand break (DSB) response proteins (<U+03B3>-H2AX, pATF2 and pSMC1) were
defined after exposure to ten different high-LET radiation qualities and one
low-LET radiation (X ray), at two doses (0.5-2 Gy) and time points (2 and 24 h). 
The results reveal that the lower energy particles (Fe 300, Si 93 and Ti 300
MeV/u), with a narrower track width and higher number and intensity of d rays,
cause the highest degree of persistent damage response. The persistent <U+03B3>-H2AX
signal at lower energies suggests that damage from these exposures are more
difficult to resolve, likely due to the greater complexity of the associated DNA 
lesions. However, different kinetics were observed for the solely ATM-mediated
phosphorylations (pATF2 and pSMC1), revealing a shallow induction at early times 
and a higher level of residual phosphorylation compared to <U+03B3>-H2AX. The differing 
phospho-protein profiles exhibited, compared to <U+03B3>-H2AX, suggests additional
functions for these proteins within the cell. The strong correspondence between
the predicted curves for energy deposition per nucleosome for each ion/energy
combination and the persistent levels of <U+03B3>-H2AX indicates that the nature of
energy distribution defines residual levels of <U+03B3>-H2AX, an indicator of unrepaired
DSBs. Our results suggest that decreasing the energy of a particle results in
more complex damage that may increase genomic instability and increase the risk
of carcinogenesis.

PMID: 26114329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Endocr J. 2015;62(9):765-76. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ15-0211. Epub 2015 Jun 20.

Stimulus-selective induction of the orphan nuclear receptor NGFIB underlies
different influences of angiotensin II and potassium on the human adrenal gland
zona glomerulosa-specific 3ß-HSD isoform gene expression in adrenocortical H295R 
cells.

Yarimizu D(1), Doi M, Ota T, Okamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8051, Japan.

In the adrenal, the type I 3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD3B1) is expressed 
exclusively in the zona glomerulosa (ZG), where aldosterone is produced.
Angiotensin II (AngII) and potassium (K(+)) are the major physiological
regulators of aldosterone synthesis. However, their respective roles in
regulation of aldosterone synthesis are not fully defined, particularly in terms 
of transcriptional regulation of steroidogenic enzyme genes. We previously showed
that AngII can stimulate expression of HSD3B1. But, K(+) responsiveness of this
gene has remained unexplored. Here, we report that K(+) stimulation lacks the
ability to induce HSD3B1 expression in human adrenocortical H295R cells. Both
AngII and K(+) were able to enhance transcription of the aldosterone synthase
gene (CYP11B2). Promoter analysis revealed that although both AngII and K(+)
activate transcription from the Ca(2+)/cAMP-responsive element (CRE) located in
the CYP11B2 promoter, the orphan nuclear receptor NGFIB-responsive element (NBRE)
located in the HSD3B1 promoter fails to respond to K(+), being only able to
enhance transcription after AngII treatment. We found that induction of de novo
protein synthesis of NGFIB occurs only after AngII treatment. This sharply
contrasts with the phosphorylation that occurs in response to both AngII and K(+)
on the CREB/ATF family transcription factor ATF2. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay confirmed that the NGFIB protein occupies the HSD3B1 promoter only after
AngII, while ATF2 binds to the CYP11B2 promoter in response to both AngII and
K(+). These data provide evidence that downstream signals from AngII and K(+) can
be uncoupled in the regulation of HSD3B1 in the human adrenocortical H295R cells.

PMID: 26096451  [PubMed - in process]


46. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 Sep 1;287(2):178-90. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2015.06.003. Epub 2015 Jun 3.

Coordinated induction of GST and MRP2 by cAMP in Caco-2 cells: Role of protein
kinase A signaling pathway and toxicological relevance.

Arana MR(1), Tocchetti GN(2), Domizi P(3), Arias A(4), Rigalli JP(5), Ruiz ML(6),
Luquita MG(7), Banchio C(8), Mottino AD(9), Villanueva SS(10).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Experimental (CONICET), Facultad de Ciencias
Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas (UNR), Suipacha 570, 2000 Rosario, Argentina.
Electronic address: arana@ifise-conicet.gov.ar. (2)Instituto de Fisiología
Experimental (CONICET), Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas (UNR),
Suipacha 570, 2000 Rosario, Argentina. Electronic address:
gtocchetti@live.com.ar. (3)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario
(CONICET), Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas (UNR), Suipacha 570, 
2000 Rosario, Argentina. Electronic address: domizi@ibr-conicet.gov.ar.
(4)Instituto de Fisiología Experimental (CONICET), Facultad de Ciencias
Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas (UNR), Suipacha 570, 2000 Rosario, Argentina.
Electronic address: agoarias@yahoo.com.ar. (5)Instituto de Fisiología
Experimental (CONICET), Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas (UNR),
Suipacha 570, 2000 Rosario, Argentina. Electronic address: jprigalli@gmail.com.
(6)Instituto de Fisiología Experimental (CONICET), Facultad de Ciencias
Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas (UNR), Suipacha 570, 2000 Rosario, Argentina.
Electronic address: ruiz@ifise-conicet.gov.ar. (7)Instituto de Fisiología
Experimental (CONICET), Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas (UNR),
Suipacha 570, 2000 Rosario, Argentina. Electronic address:
drmgluquita@yahoo.com.ar. (8)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario
(CONICET), Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas (UNR), Suipacha 570, 
2000 Rosario, Argentina. Electronic address: banchio@ibr-conicet.gov.ar.
(9)Instituto de Fisiología Experimental (CONICET), Facultad de Ciencias
Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas (UNR), Suipacha 570, 2000 Rosario, Argentina.
Electronic address: aldomottino@yahoo.com.ar. (10)Instituto de Fisiología
Experimental (CONICET), Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas (UNR),
Suipacha 570, 2000 Rosario, Argentina. Electronic address: ssmv77@yahoo.com.ar.

The cAMP pathway is a universal signaling pathway regulating many cellular
processes including metabolic routes, growth and differentiation. However, its
effects on xenobiotic biotransformation and transport systems are poorly
characterized. The effect of cAMP on expression and activity of GST and MRP2 was 
evaluated in Caco-2 cells, a model of intestinal epithelium. Cells incubated with
the cAMP permeable analog dibutyryl cyclic AMP (db-cAMP: 1,10,100 µM) for 48 h
exhibited a dose-response increase in GST class a and MRP2 protein expression.
Incubation with forskolin, an activator of adenylyl cyclase, confirmed the
association between intracellular cAMP and upregulation of MRP2. Consistent with 
increased expression of GSTa and MRP2, db-cAMP enhanced their activities, as well
as cytoprotection against the common substrate 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene.
Pretreatment with protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitors totally abolished
upregulation of MRP2 and GSTa induced by db-cAMP. In silico analysis together
with experiments consisting of treatment with db-cAMP of Caco-2 cells transfected
with a reporter construct containing CRE and AP-1 sites evidenced participation
of these sites in MRP2 upregulation. Further studies involving the transcription 
factors CREB and AP-1 (c-JUN, c-FOS and ATF2) demonstrated increased levels of
total c-JUN and phosphorylation of c-JUN and ATF2 by db-cAMP, which were
suppressed by a PKA inhibitor. Co-immunoprecipitation and ChIP assay studies
demonstrated that db-cAMP increased c-JUN/ATF2 interaction, with further
recruitment to the region of the MRP2 promoter containing CRE and AP-1 sites. We 
conclude that cAMP induces GSTa and MRP2 expression and activity in Caco-2 cells 
via the PKA pathway, thus regulating detoxification of specific xenobiotics.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26049102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Epigenetics. 2015;10(7):574-80. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1055441.

Epigenetic landscape of amphetamine and methamphetamine addiction in rodents.

Godino A(1), Jayanthi S, Cadet JL.

Author information: 
(1)a Département de Biologie; École Normale Supérieure de Lyon ; Lyon , France.

Amphetamine and methamphetamine addiction is described by specific behavioral
alterations, suggesting long-lasting changes in gene and protein expression
within specific brain subregions involved in the reward circuitry. Given the
persistence of the addiction phenotype at both behavioral and transcriptional
levels, several studies have been conducted to elucidate the epigenetic landscape
associated with persistent effects of drug use on the mammalian brain. This
review discusses recent advances in our comprehension of epigenetic mechanisms
underlying amphetamine- or methamphetamine-induced behavioral, transcriptional,
and synaptic plasticity. Accumulating evidence demonstrated that drug exposure
induces major epigenetic modifications-histone acetylation and methylation, DNA
methylation-in a very complex manner. In rare instances, however, the regulation 
of a specific target gene can be correlated to both epigenetic alterations and
behavioral abnormalities. Work is now needed to clarify and validate an
epigenetic model of addiction to amphetamines. Investigations that include
genome-wide approaches will accelerate the speed of discovery in the field of
addiction.

PMCID: PMC4622560
PMID: 26023847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2015 Sep;51(8):851-6. doi:
10.1007/s11626-015-9907-x. Epub 2015 May 20.

Deoxycholic acid inhibited proliferation and induced apoptosis and necrosis by
regulating the activity of transcription factors in rat pancreatic acinar cell
line AR42J.

Zhang G(1), Zhang J(2,)(3), Shang D(4), Qi B(5), Chen H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Zhongshan Road 222, Dalian, China, 116011. guixinzhanggxz@163.com.
(2)Department of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Zhongshan Road 222, Dalian, China, 116011. jingwenzhangjwz@163.com.
(3)Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China, 116044. jingwenzhangjwz@163.com.
(4)Department of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Zhongshan Road 222, Dalian, China, 116011. dongshangds@yeah.net.
(5)Department of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Zhongshan Road 222, Dalian, China, 116011. bingqibq@126.com.
(6)Department of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Zhongshan Road 222, Dalian, China, 116011. hailongchenhlc@163.com.

The objective of this study is to investigate the effect of deoxycholic acid
(DCA) on rat pancreatic acinar cell line AR42J and the functional mechanisms of
DCA on AR42J cells. AR42J cells were treated with various concentrations of DCA
for 24 h and also treated with 0.4 mmol/L DCA for multiple times, and then,
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay was
performed to detect the AR42J cell survival rate. Flow cytometric was used to
detect the cell apoptosis and necrosis in AR42J cells treated with 0.4 mmol/L and
0.8 mmol/L DCA. The cells treated with phosphate buffer saline (PBS) were served 
as control. In addition, the DNA-binding activity assays of transcription factors
(TFs) in nuclear proteins of cells treated with DCA were determined using
Panomics Procarta Transcription Factor Assay Kit. The relative survival rates
were markedly decreased (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Compared
with control group, the cell apoptosis and necrosis ratio were both significantly
elevated in 0.4 mmol/L DCA and 0.8 mmol/L DCA groups (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). A significant
increase (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in the activity of transcription factor 2 (ATF2),
interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE), NKX-2.5, androgen receptor (AR),
p53, and hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) was observed, and the activity of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR), activator protein 1 (AP1), and
E2F1 was reduced (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). In conclusion, DCA inhibited proliferation and
induced apoptosis and necrosis in AR42J cells. The expression changes of related 
genes regulated by TFs might be the molecular mechanism of AR42J cell injury.

PMID: 25990271  [PubMed - in process]


49. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2015 Jul;28(4):481-4. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12382. Epub
2015 May 30.

ATF2 alters melanocyte response and macrophage recruitment in UV-irradiated
neonatal mouse skin.

Senft D(1), Sorolla A(2), Dewing A(1), Claps G(1), Lau E(1), Walker GJ(2), Ronai 
ZA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Sanford Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA. 
(2)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Qld, Australia.

PMID: 25963442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. PLoS One. 2015 May 11;10(5):e0126459. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126459.
eCollection 2015.

Shikonin Suppresses Skin Carcinogenesis via Inhibiting Cell Proliferation.

Li W(1), Zhang C(1), Ren A(1), Li T(1), Jin R(2), Li G(2), Gu X(3), Shi R(4),
Zhao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology & Neuroscience, LSU Health Sciences
Center in Shreveport, Shreveport, Louisiana, United States of America.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, LSU Health Sciences Center in Shreveport,
Shreveport, Louisiana, United States of America. (3)Department of Pathology, LSU 
Health Sciences Center in Shreveport, Shreveport, Louisiana, United States of
America. (4)Feist-Weiller Cancer Center, LSU Health Sciences Center in
Shreveport, Shreveport, Louisiana, United States of America.

The M2 isoform of pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) has been shown to be up-regulated in 
human skin cancers. To test whether PKM2 may be a target for chemoprevention,
shikonin, a natural product from the root of Lithospermum erythrorhizon and a
specific inhibitor of PKM2, was used in a chemically-induced mouse skin
carcinogenesis study. The results revealed that shikonin treatment suppressed
skin tumor formation. Morphological examinations and immunohistochemical staining
of the skin epidermal tissues suggested that shikonin inhibited cell
proliferation without inducing apoptosis. Although shikonin alone suppressed PKM2
activity, it did not suppress tumor promoter-induced PKM2 activation in the skin 
epidermal tissues at the end of the skin carcinogenesis study. To reveal the
potential chemopreventive mechanism of shikonin, an antibody microarray analysis 
was performed, and the results showed that the transcription factor ATF2 and its 
downstream target Cdk4 were up-regulated by chemical carcinogen treatment;
whereas these up-regulations were suppressed by shikonin. In a promotable skin
cell model, the nuclear levels of ATF2 were increased during tumor promotion,
whereas this increase was inhibited by shikonin. Furthermore, knockdown of ATF2
decreased the expression levels of Cdk4 and Fra-1 (a key subunit of the activator
protein 1. In summary, these results suggest that shikonin, rather than
inhibiting PKM2 in vivo, suppresses the ATF2 pathway in skin carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4427333
PMID: 25961580  [PubMed - in process]


51. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:492395. doi: 10.1155/2015/492395. Epub 2015 Apr 15.

Transcriptomic Analysis of mRNAs in Human Monocytic Cells Expressing the HIV-1
Nef Protein and Their Exosomes.

Aqil M(1), Mallik S(2), Bandyopadhyay S(2), Maulik U(3), Jameel S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi 110067, India ; Department of Oral Medicine and
Diagnostic Sciences, College of Dentistry, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA. (2)Machine Intelligence Unit, Indian Statistical
Institute, Kolkata 700108, India. (3)Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal 700032, India. (4)Virology
Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi 
110067, India ; The Wellcome Trust/DBT India Alliance, Plot No. 19,
8-2-684/3K/19, Road No. 12, Banjara Hills, Hyderabad 500034, India.

The Nef protein of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) promotes viral replication 
and progression to AIDS. Besides its well-studied effects on intracellular
signaling, Nef also functions through its secretion in exosomes, which are
nanovesicles containing proteins, microRNAs, and mRNAs and are important for
intercellular communication. Nef expression enhances exosome secretion and these 
exosomes can enter uninfected CD4 T cells leading to apoptotic death. We have
recently reported the first miRNome analysis of exosomes secreted from
Nef-expressing U937monocytic cells. Here we show genome-wide transcriptome
analysis of Nef-expressing U937 cells and their exosomes. We identified four key 
mRNAs preferentially retained in Nef-expressing cells; these code for MECP2,
HMOX1, AARSD1, and ATF2 and are important for chromatin modification and gene
expression. Interestingly, their target miRNAs are exported out in exosomes. We
also identified three key mRNAs selectively secreted in exosomes from
Nef-expressing U937 cells and their corresponding miRNAs being preferentially
retained in cells. These are AATK, SLC27A1, and CDKAL and are important in
apoptosis and fatty acid transport. Thus, our study identifies selectively
expressed mRNAs in Nef-expressing U937 cells and their exosomes and supports a
new mode on intercellular regulation by the HIV-1 Nef protein.

PMCID: PMC4413250
PMID: 25961023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Front Oncol. 2015 Apr 14;5:90. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00090. eCollection 2015.

Neuroendocrine differentiation in prostate cancer: a mechanism of radioresistance
and treatment failure.

Hu CD(1), Choo R(2), Huang J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue
University Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University , West Lafayette, IN ,
USA. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Mayo Clinic , Rochester, MN , USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA , Los
Angeles, CA , USA.

Neuroendocrine differentiation (NED) in prostate cancer is a well-recognized
phenotypic change by which prostate cancer cells transdifferentiate into
neuroendocrine-like (NE-like) cells. NE-like cells lack the expression of
androgen receptor and prostate specific antigen, and are resistant to treatments.
In addition, NE-like cells secrete peptide hormones and growth factors to support
the growth of surrounding tumor cells in a paracrine manner. Accumulated evidence
has suggested that NED is associated with disease progression and poor prognosis.
The importance of NED in prostate cancer progression and therapeutic response is 
further supported by the fact that therapeutic agents, including
androgen-deprivation therapy, chemotherapeutic agents, and radiotherapy, also
induce NED. We will review the work supporting the overall hypothesis that
therapy-induced NED is a mechanism of resistance to treatments, as well as
discuss the relationship between therapy-induced NED and therapy-induced
senescence, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and cancer stem cells.
Furthermore, we will use radiation-induced NED as a model to explore several
NED-based targeting strategies for development of novel therapeutics. Finally, we
propose future studies that will specifically address therapy-induced NED in the 
hope that a better treatment regimen for prostate cancer can be developed.

PMCID: PMC4396194
PMID: 25927031  [PubMed]


53. Biochem J. 2015 Jun 15;468(3):363-72. doi: 10.1042/BJ20141523. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Suppression of interferon ß gene transcription by inhibitors of bromodomain and
extra-terminal (BET) family members.

Malik N(1), Vollmer S(1), Nanda SK(1), Lopez-Pelaez M(1), Prescott A(2), Gray
N(3), Cohen P(4).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, College of Life Sciences,
Dow Street, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, U.K. (2)Division of
Cell Signalling and Immunology, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee,
Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, U.K. (3)Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, U.S.A. (4)MRC Protein Phosphorylation and
Ubiquitylation Unit, College of Life Sciences, Dow Street, University of Dundee, 
Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, U.K. p.cohen@dundee.ac.uk.

PLK (Polo-like kinase) inhibitors, such as BI-2536, have been reported to
suppress IFNB (encoding IFNß, interferon ß) gene transcription induced by ligands
that activate TLR3 (Toll-like receptor 3) and TLR4. In the present study, we
found that BI-2536 is likely to exert this effect by preventing the interaction
of the transcription factors IRF3 (interferon-regulatory factor 3) and c-Jun with
the IFNB promoter, but without affecting the TBK1 {TANK [TRAF
(tumour-necrosis-factor-receptor-associated factor)-associated nuclear factor <U+03BA>B 
activator]-binding kinase 1}-catalysed phosphorylation of IRF3 at Ser³<U+2079>6, the
dimerization and nuclear translocation of IRF3 or the phosphorylation of c-Jun
and ATF2 (activating transcription factor 2). Although BI-2536 inhibits few other
kinases tested, it interacts with BET (bromodomain and extra-terminal) family
members and displaces them from acetylated lysine residues on histones. We found 
that BET inhibitors that do not inhibit PLKs phenocopied the effect of BI-2536 on
IFNB gene transcription. Similarly, BET inhibitors blocked the interaction of
IRF5 with the IFNB promoter and the secretion of IFNß induced by TLR7 or TLR9
ligands in the human plasmacytoid dendritic cell line GEN2.2, but without
affecting the nuclear translocation of IRF5. We found that the BET family member 
BRD4 (bromodomain-containing protein 4) was associated with the IFNB promoter and
that this interaction was enhanced by TLR3- or TLR4-ligation and prevented by
BI-2536 and other BET inhibitors. Our results establish that BET family members
are essential for TLR-stimulated IFNB gene transcription by permitting
transcription factors to interact with the IFNB promoter. They also show that the
interaction of the IFNB promoter with BRD4 is regulated by TLR ligation and that 
BI-2536 is likely to suppress IFNB gene transcription by targeting BET family
members.

© 2015 The Author(s).

PMCID: PMC4613535
PMID: 25891802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Microb Cell Fact. 2015 Mar 17;14:35. doi: 10.1186/s12934-015-0221-9.

Microbial host selection affects intracellular localization and activity of
alcohol-O-acetyltransferase.

Zhu J(1), Lin JL(2), Palomec L(3), Wheeldon I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside, USA, 92521.
jzhu008@ucr.edu. (2)Department of Chemical and Environmental Engineering,
University of California, Riverside, USA, 92521. jlin034@ucr.edu. (3)Department
of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, University of California, Riverside,
USA, 92521. pliracema@yahoo.com. (4)Department of Chemical and Environmental
Engineering, University of California, Riverside, USA, 92521.
iwheeldon@engr.ucr.edu.

BACKGROUND: A key pathway for ester biosynthesis in yeast is the condensation of 
an alcohol with acetyl-CoA by alcohol-O-acetyltransferase (AATase). This pathway 
is also prevalent in fruit, producing short and medium chain volatile esters
during ripening. In this work, a series of six AATases from Saccharomyces and
non-Saccharomyces yeasts as well as tomato fruit were evaluated with respect to
their activity, intracellular localization, and expression in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae and Escherichia coli cell hosts. The series of AATases includes Atf1
and Atf2 from S. cerevisiae, as well as AATases from S. pastorianus,
Kluyveromyces lactis, Pichia anomala, and Solanum lycopersicum (tomato).
RESULTS: When expressed in S. cerevisiae, Atf1, Atf2, and an AATase from S.
pastorianus localized to lipid droplets, while AATases from non-Saccharomyces
yeasts and tomato fruit did not localize to intracellular membranes and were
localized to the cytoplasm. All AATases studied here formed intracellular
aggregates when expressed in E. coli, and western blot analysis revealed that
expression levels in E. coli were upwards of 100-fold higher than in S.
cerevisiae. Fermentation and whole cell lysate activity assays of the two most
active AATases, Atf1 from S. cerevisiae and an AATase from tomato fruit,
demonstrated that the aggregates were enzymatically active, but with highly
reduced specific activity in comparison to activity in S. cerevisiae. Activity
was partially recovered at lower expression levels, coinciding with smaller
intracellular aggregates. In vivo and in vitro activity assays from
heterologously expressed Atf1 from S. cerevisiae, which localizes to lipid
droplets under homologous expression, demonstrates that its activity is not
membrane dependent.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of these studies provide important information on the
biochemistry of AATases under homologous and heterologous expression with two
common microbial hosts for biochemical processes, S. cerevisiae and E. coli. All 
studied AATases formed aggregates with low enzymatic activity when expressed in
E. coli and any membrane localization observed in S. cerevisiae was lost in E.
coli. In addition, AATases that were found to localize to lipid droplet membranes
in S. cerevisiae were found to not be membrane dependent with respect to
activity.

PMCID: PMC4367896
PMID: 25880435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cancer Cell Int. 2015 Mar 30;15:34. doi: 10.1186/s12935-015-0188-y. eCollection
2015.

Bim and VDAC1 are hierarchically essential for mitochondrial ATF2 mediated cell
death.

Liu Z(1), Luo Q(1), Guo C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Surgery, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
136 Zhongshan 2nd Rd, Chongqing, 400014 P. R. China. (2)Laboratory of Surgery,
Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 136 Zhongshan 2nd Rd,
Chongqing, 400014 P. R. China ; Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child
Development and Disorders, Chongqing, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND: ATF2 mediated cytochrome c release is the formation of a channel with
some unknown factors larger than that of the individual proteins. BHS-only
proteins (BH3s), such as Bim, could induce BAX and VDAC, forming a new channel.
According to this facts, we can speculated that there is possible signal
relationship with BH3s and ATF2, which is associated with mitochondrial-based
death programs.
METHODS: The growth inhibitory effects of mitochondrial ATF2 were tested in
cancer cell lines B16F10, A549, EG7, and LL2. Apoptosis was measured by flow
cytometry. The effects of ATF2 and levels of apoptosis regulatory proteins were
measured by Western blotting. The interaction of proteins were evaluated by
immunoprecipitation analysis. The in vivo antitumor activity of mitochondrial
ATF2 were tested in xenograft B16F10 models.
RESULTS: Genotoxic stress enabled mitochondrial ATF2 accumulation, perturbing the
HK1-VDAC1 complex, increasing mitochondrial permeability, and promoting
apoptosis. ATF2 inhibition strongly reduced the conformational activation of Bim,
suggesting that Bim acts downstream of ATF2. Although Bim downregulation had no
effect on ATF2 activation, Bim knockdown abolished VDAC1 activation; the failure 
of VDAC1 activation in Bim-depleted cells could be reversed by the BH3-only
protein mimic ABT-737. We also demonstrate that silencing of ATF2 in B16F10 cells
increases both the incidence and prevalence of tumor xenografts in vivo, whereas 
stably mitochondrial ATF2 transfection inhibited B16F10 tumor xenografts growth.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, these results show that ATF2 is a component of the
apoptosis machinery that involves a hierarchical contribution of ATF2, Bim, and
VDAC1. Our data offer new insight into the mechanism of mitochondrial ATF2 in
mitochondrial apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC4387661
PMID: 25852302  [PubMed]


56. Biochem Pharmacol. 2015 May 1;95(1):16-27. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2015.03.004. Epub
2015 Mar 17.

A new water soluble MAPK activator exerts antitumor activity in melanoma cells
resistant to the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib.

Graziani G(1), Artuso S(2), De Luca A(3), Muzi A(1), Rotili D(4), Scimeca M(5),
Atzori MG(1), Ceci C(1), Mai A(6), Leonetti C(2), Levati L(7), Bonanno E(5),
Tentori L(1), Caccuri AM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Medicine, University of "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.
(2)Experimental Chemotherapy Laboratory, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, 
Rome, Italy. (3)The NAST Centre for Nanoscience & Nanotechnology & Innovative
Instrumentation, University of "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy. (4)Department of Drug 
Chemistry and Technologies, "Sapienza" University, Rome, Italy. (5)Department of 
Biomedicine and Prevention, University of "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy; TMALab
s.r.l., Spin-off of University of "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy. (6)Department of
Drug Chemistry and Technologies, "Sapienza" University, Rome, Italy; Pasteur
Institute, Cenci-Bolognetti Foundation, "Sapienza" University, Rome, Italy.
(7)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, "Istituto Dermopatico dell'Immacolata" -
IRCCS, Rome, Italy. (8)The NAST Centre for Nanoscience & Nanotechnology &
Innovative Instrumentation, University of "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy; Department 
of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, University of "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.
Electronic address: caccuri@uniroma2.it.

Recovery of mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) or activation of alternative 
pathways, such as the PI3K/AKT/mTOR, are involved in acquired resistance to BRAF 
inhibitors which represent the first-line treatment of BRAF-mutated metastatic
melanoma. We recently demonstrated that
6-((7-nitrobenzo[c][1,2,5]oxadiazol-4-yl)thio)hexan-1-ol (NBDHEX) and its water
soluble analog
2-(2-(2-((7-nitrobenzo[c][1,2,5]oxadiazol-4-yl)thio)ethoxy)ethoxy)ethanol
(MC3181) trigger apoptosis in BRAF V600E mutated melanoma cells through
activation of the MAPK c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). Herein, we investigated
whether NBDHEX and MC3181 might exert antitumor activity against BRAF V600E
mutated human melanoma cells rendered resistant to the BRAF inhibitor
vemurafenib. To this aim we generated a subline of A375 melanoma resistant in
vitro and in vivo to vemurafenib (A375-VR8) and characterized by NRAS G13R
mutation, high basal levels of CRAF protein and phospho-activation of AKT. In
these cells ERK phosphorylation was not significantly down-modulated by
vemurafenib concentrations capable of abrogating ERK phosphorylation in sensitive
A375 cells. Both NBDHEX and MC3181 induced marked antiproliferative and apoptotic
effects in A375-VR8 cells and, at equitoxic concentrations, caused a strong
phosphorylation of JNK, p38, and of the downstream mediators of apoptosis ATF2
and p53. Drug treatment further increased ERK phosphorylation, which was required
for the cellular response to the NBD derivatives, as apoptosis was antagonized by
the ERK inhibitor FR180204. Finally, in vivo administration of MC3181 provoked
JNK activation at the tumor site and markedly reduced A375-VR8 growth. These
evidences strongly suggest that the activation of multiple pro-apoptotic MAPK
pathways by MC3181 might represent a new strategy for the treatment of melanoma
resistant to BRAF inhibitors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25795251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Stem Cells. 2015 Jun;33(6):1863-77. doi: 10.1002/stem.2005. Epub 2015 Apr 21.

Icariin promotes angiogenic differentiation and prevents oxidative stress-induced
autophagy in endothelial progenitor cells.

Tang Y(1,)(2), Jacobi A(1), Vater C(1), Zou L(3), Zou X(4), Stiehler M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Centre for Translational Bone, Joint and Soft
Tissue Research, Medical Faculty and University Centre for Orthopaedics and
Trauma Surgery, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus at Technische Universität
Dresden, Dresden, Germany. (2)Department of Pharmacy, the First Affiliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. (3)Department of Burn
surgery and Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang, China. (4)Department of Spinal Surgery, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Reduced tissue levels of endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) and functional
impairment of endothelium are frequently observed in patients with diabetes and
cardiovascular disease. The vascular endothelium is specifically sensitive to
oxidative stress, and this is one of the mechanisms that causes widespread
endothelial dysfunction in most cardiovascular diseases and disorders. Hence
attention has increasingly been paid to enhance mobilization and differentiation 
of EPCs for therapeutic purposes. The aim of this study was to investigate
whether Icariin, a natural bioactive component known from traditional Chinese
Medicine, can induce angiogenic differentiation and inhibit oxidative
stress-induced cell dysfunction in bone marrow-derived EPCs (BM-EPCs), and, if
so, through what mechanisms. We observed that treatment of BM-EPCs with Icariin
significantly promoted cell migration and capillary tube formation, substantially
abrogated hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 )-induced apoptotic and autophagic programmed 
cell death that was linked to the reduced intracellular reactive oxygen species
levels and restored mitochondrial membrane potential. Icariin downregulated
endothelial nitric oxide synthase 3, as well as nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide
phosphate-oxidase expression upon H2 O2 induction. These antiapoptotic and
antiautophagic effects of Icariin are possibly mediated by restoring the loss of 
mammalian target of rapamycin /p70S6K/4EBP1 phosphorylation as well as
attenuation of ATF2 and ERK1/2 protein levels after H2 O2 treatment. In summary, 
favorable modulation of the angiogenesis and redox states in BM-EPCs make Icariin
a promising proangiogenic agent both enhancing vasculogenesis and protecting
against endothelial dysfunction.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25787271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Gene. 2015 May 25;563(1):45-51. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.03.010. Epub 2015 Mar 6.

Interleukin 18 augments growth ability via NF-<U+03BA>B and p38/ATF2 pathways by
targeting cyclin B1, cyclin B2, cyclin A2, and Bcl-2 in BRL-3A rat liver cells.

Zhang J(1), Pan C(1), Xu T(1), Niu Z(1), Ma C(1), Xu C(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang 453007, China; Key 
Laboratory for Cell Differentiation Regulation, Xinxiang 453007, China.
(2)College of Life Science, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang 453007, China; Key 
Laboratory for Cell Differentiation Regulation, Xinxiang 453007, China.
Electronic address: cellkeylab@126.com.

Interleukin 18 (IL-18) is a pleiotropic cytokine and capable of stimulating
proliferation of certain cell types. Nonetheless, its effect on normal liver
cells cultured remains unclear. In the present study, we discovered that IL-18
expression level was remarkably elevated at 3.3 and 8.6h after synchronized
BRL-3A rat liver cells (G0 phase) re-entering the cell cycle. In addition,
recombinant rat IL-18 (rrIL-18) at dosages 5-10 ng/ml increased the cell
viability compared to untreated cells (with medium only) at 24 and 48 h (P<0.05).
At the same time, the percentage of BrdU-labeling cells was also significantly
increased (P<0.01). On the other hand, knockdown of IL-18 expression with short
interference RNA (siRNA), the cell viability began to decline at 24h and
significantly decreased compared to negative control (NC) at 48 and 72 h after
transfection (P<0.05). Meanwhile, the number of cells in division phase (G2/M)
was reduced in parallel. Further, after treatment with rrIL-18 (5 ng/ml), IL-18
and its receptor subunit IL-18Ra increased both at mRNA and protein levels.
Moreover, the expression levels of adaptor molecule MyD88, transcription factor
NF-<U+03BA>B and its downstream targets cyclin B1 and cyclin B2 were remarkably enhanced
in BRL-3A cells stimulated by rrIL-18. Furthermore, transcription factor ATF2 and
its targeted genes cyclin A2, Bcl-2 were also markedly increased after treatment 
with rrIL-18. These results demonstrated that IL-18 can augment cell
proliferation via NF-<U+03BA>B and p38/ATF2 pathway by targeting cyclin B1, cyclin B2,
cyclin A2 and Bcl-2 in BRL-3A rat liver cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25752290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Med Oncol. 2015 Apr;32(4):100. doi: 10.1007/s12032-015-0538-6. Epub 2015 Mar 4.

Combined treatment of carfilzomib and z-VAD-fmk inhibits skeletal proteolysis and
apoptosis and ameliorates cancer cachexia.

Wang Q(1), Li C, Peng X, Kang Q, Deng D, Zhang L, Zheng Y, Wang C, Qiao Z, Guo D,
You S, Tang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University, YouYi Road, Yuzhong District, Chongqing, 400016, China.

The purpose of the study was to evaluate the therapeutic benefit of treatments
with carfilzomib (CFZ) and z-VAD-fmk in a mouse model of cancer-induced cachexia.
The model of cancer-associated cachexia was generated by injecting murine C26
adenocarcinoma cells into BALB/C mice. CFZ and z-VAD-fmk were administered
individually or in combination at 5 and 12 days after inoculation. Changes in
body weight, gastrocnemius muscle mass, tumor burden, spontaneous activity,
survival, and metabolic profiles were noted. Also evaluated were the circulatory 
levels of renin and angiotensin II, and levels of apoptotic, proteolytic, and
renin-angiotensin system-associated markers and transcription factor 2 (ATF2) in 
gastrocnemius muscle. The CFZ and z-VAD-fmk treatments were associated with less 
muscle wasting, reduced tumor burden, modulated metabolism, higher levels of
glucose, albumin, and total proteins, and lower levels of triglyceride fatty
acids, more spontaneous physical activity, and longer survival in C26-inoculated 
mice compared with PBS-treated cachectic mice. CFZ and z-VAD-fmk treatments
resulted in higher levels of caspase-3 and BAX and lower level of BCL-XL in
gastrocnemius muscles and altered the level of proteins in the renin-angiotensin 
system. The combined treatment administered 5 days after C26 inoculation was more
effective than other regimens. Combined treatment with CFZ and z-VAD-fmk early in
the development of cachexia was associated with signs of less proteolysis and
apoptosis and less severe cachexia in a mouse model of cancer-induced cachexia.

PMID: 25737433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 12;34(46):5739-48. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.22. Epub 2015 Mar 2.

Transcriptional repression of IFNß1 by ATF2 confers melanoma resistance to
therapy.

Lau E(1), Sedy J(1), Sander C(2), Shaw MA(3), Feng Y(1), Scortegagna M(1), Claps 
G(1), Robinson S(4), Cheng P(5), Srivas R(6), Soonthornvacharin S(1), Ideker
T(7), Bosenberg M(8), Gonzalez R(4), Robinson W(4), Chanda SK(1), Ware C(1),
Dummer R(5), Hoon D(3), Kirkwood JM(2), Ronai ZA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA. 
(2)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (3)John Wayne
Cancer Institute, Santa Monica, CA, USA. (4)Division of Medical Oncology,
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA. (5)Department of
Dermatology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (6)Department of
Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA,
USA. (8)Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.

The resistance of melanoma to current treatment modalities represents a major
obstacle for durable therapeutic response, and thus the elucidation of mechanisms
of resistance is urgently needed. The crucial functions of activating
transcription factor-2 (ATF2) in the development and therapeutic resistance of
melanoma have been previously reported, although the precise underlying
mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we report a protein kinase C-<U+025B> (PKC<U+025B>)- and
ATF2-mediated mechanism that facilitates resistance by transcriptionally
repressing the expression of interferon-ß1 (IFNß1) and downstream type-I IFN
signaling that is otherwise induced upon exposure to chemotherapy. Treatment of
early-stage melanomas expressing low levels of PKC<U+025B> with chemotherapies relieves 
ATF2-mediated transcriptional repression of IFNß1, resulting in impaired S-phase 
progression, a senescence-like phenotype and increased cell death. This response 
is lost in late-stage metastatic melanomas expressing high levels of PKC<U+025B>.
Notably, nuclear ATF2 and low expression of IFNß1 in melanoma tumor samples
correlates with poor patient responsiveness to biochemotherapy or neoadjuvant
IFN-a2a. Conversely, cytosolic ATF2 and induction of IFNß1 coincides with
therapeutic responsiveness. Collectively, we identify an IFNß1-dependent,
cell-autonomous mechanism that contributes to the therapeutic resistance of
melanoma via the PKC<U+025B>-ATF2 regulatory axis.

PMCID: PMC4558399 [Available on 2016-05-12]
PMID: 25728676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Vet Med Sci. 2014 Dec;76(12):1609-15. doi: 10.1292/jvms.14-0343. Epub 2014 Sep 
26.

AP-1-mediated expression of brain-specific class IVa ß-tubulin in P19 embryonal
carcinoma cells.

Maruyama Y(1), Arahara K, Kinoshita E, Arai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tissue Physiology, Tokyo University of Agriculture and
Technology, Fuchu, Tokyo 183-8509, Japan.

Expression of brain-specific phenotypes increased in all trans retinoic acid
(ATRA)-induced neural differentiation of mouse P19 embryonal carcinoma cells.
Among these phenotypes, expression of class IVa ß-tubulin isotype (TUBB4a) was
particularly enhanced in neural differentiation. Transient transfection assays
employing a reporter construct found that ATRA-mediated regulatory region of the 
TUBB4a gene lay in the region from -83 nt to +137 nt relative to the +1
transcription start site. Site-directed mutagenesis in the AP-1 binding site at
-29/-17 suggested that the AP-1 binding site was a critical region for
ATRA-mediated TUBB4a expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments
suggested participation of JunD and activating transcription factor-2 (ATF2) in
TUBB4a expression. Additionally, exogenous induction of the dominant-negative
(dn) type of JunD canceled ATRA-induced upregulation of TUBB4a, and the dn type
of ATF2 suppressed even the basal activity. Further immunoblot study revealed an 
ATRA-mediated increase in JunD protein, while a significant amount of ATF2
protein was constantly produced. These results suggest that
differentiation-mediated activation of JunD results in enhanced TUBB4a
expression.

PMCID: PMC4300376
PMID: 25649943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Epigenetics. 2015;10(3):191-9. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1009764.

Interferon regulatory factor 1 and histone H4 acetylation in systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Leung YT(1), Shi L, Maurer K, Song L, Zhang Z, Petri M, Sullivan KE.

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Rheumatology ; University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine ; Philadelphia , PA USA.

Erratum in
    Epigenetics. 2015;10(9):891.

Histone acetylation modulates gene expression and has been described as increased
in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). We investigated interferon regulatory
factor 1 (IRF1) interactions that influence H4 acetylation (H4ac) in SLE.
Intracellular flow cytometry for H4 acetylated lysine (K) 5, K8, K12, and K16 was
performed. Histone acetylation was defined in monocytes and T cells from controls
and SLE patients. RNA-Seq studies were performed on monocytes to look for an
imbalance in histone acetyltransferases and histone deacetylase enzyme
expression. Expression levels were validated using real-time quantitative RT-PCR.
IRF1 induction of H4ac was evaluated using D54MG cells overexpressing IRF1. IRF1 
protein interactions were studied using co-immunoprecipitation assays.
IRF1-dependent recruitment of histone acetyltransferases to target genes was
examined by ChIP assays using p300 antibody. Flow cytometry data showed
significantly increased H4K5, H4K8, H4K12, and H4K16 acetylation in SLE
monocytes. HDAC3 and HDAC11 gene expression were decreased in SLE monocytes. PCAF
showed significantly higher gene expression in SLE than controls.
IRF1-overexpressing D54MG cells were associated with significantly increased
H4K5, H4K8, and H4K12 acetylation compared to vector-control D54MG cells both
globally and at specific target genes. Co-immunoprecipitation studies using D54MG
cells revealed IRF1 protein-protein interactions with PCAF, P300, CBP, GCN5,
ATF2, and HDAC3. ChIP experiments demonstrated increased p300 recruitment to
known IRF1 targets in D54MG cells overexpressing IRF1. In contrast, p300 binding 
to IRF1 targets decreased in D54MG cells with IRF1 knockdown. SLE appears to be
associated with an imbalance in histone acetyltransferases and histone
deacetylase enzymes favoring pathologic H4 acetylation. Furthermore, IRF1
directly interacts with chromatin modifying enzymes, supporting a model where
recruitment to specific target genes is mediated in part by IRF1.

PMCID: PMC4622916
PMID: 25611806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Mar;36(3):327-37. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv005. Epub 2015 Jan 
18.

Twist1 and AP-1 cooperatively upregulate integrin a5 expression to induce
invasion and the epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Nam EH(1), Lee Y(2), Moon B(3), Lee JW(4), Kim S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Immunotherapy Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Daejon, Korea. (2)Immunotherapy Research Center, Korea Research
Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejon, Korea, Department of
Chemistry, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejon, Korea.
(3)Immunotherapy Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Daejon, Korea, Department of Functional Genomics, Korea University
of Science and Technology, Daejon, Korea and. (4)Department of Pharmacy, College 
of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. (5)Immunotherapy Research
Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejon, Korea, 
Department of Chemistry, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology,
Daejon, Korea, Department of Functional Genomics, Korea University of Science and
Technology, Daejon, Korea and semikim@kribb.re.kr.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important process implicated in
tumor invasion and metastasis. Twist1 is a transcription factor that induces EMT,
including E-cadherin suppression and cancer cell migration and invasion; hence it
promotes cancer metastasis. Twist1 directly or indirectly regulates the
expression of various genes and cellular functions involved in cancer
progression. However, the underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown. In this
study, we investigated the molecular basis for Twist1-mediated invasion and EMT. 
In human cancer cells, Twist1 was found to directly upregulate transcription of
the mesenchymal gene integrin a5 in an E-box-independent, but activating
protein-1 (AP-1) element-dependent, manner. Twist1 activated the integrin a5
promoter by interacting with and activating the transcription factor AP-1,
composed of c-Jun and activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2); it also enhanced
the nuclear presence of ATF-2. AP-1 was critical for Twist1-induced cancer cell
invasion, primarily through the induction of integrin a5, which activated c-Jun
N-terminal kinase and focal adhesion kinase-signaling activities. Using data from
The Cancer Genome Atlas, we found that Twist1 expression positively correlates
with integrin a5 expression in human colorectal cancers. These findings suggest
that cooperation between Twist1 and AP-1 represents a novel mechanism for EMT and
tumor invasiveness. This study supports further investigation into the molecular 
basis underlying the diverse Twist1-mediated functions that occur during tumor
progression.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25600770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Jan 15;6:e1598. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.562.

Glutathione transferases P1/P2 regulate the timing of signaling pathway
activations and cell cycle progression during mouse liver regeneration.

Pajaud J(1), Ribault C(1), Ben Mosbah I(1), Rauch C(1), Henderson C(2), Bellaud
P(3), Aninat C(1), Loyer P(1), Morel F(1), Corlu A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Inserm, UMR 991, Liver, Metabolisms and Cancer, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes,
France [2] Université de Rennes 1, Faculté de Médecine, Rennes, France.
(2)Medical Research Institute, University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital and
Medical School, Dundee, UK. (3)1] Université de Rennes 1, Faculté de Médecine,
Rennes, France [2] Plateforme Histopathologie H2P2, Biosit, Biogenouest,
Université de Rennes 1, Rennes, France.

Glutathione transferases (GST) are phase II enzymes catalyzing the detoxification
of endogenous noxious compounds and xenobiotics. They also regulate
phosphorylation activities of MAPKinases in a catalytic-independent manner.
Previous studies have demonstrated the regulation of JNK-dependent pathway by
GSTP1/2. Considering the crucial role of JNK in the early steps of the hepatocyte
cell cycle, we sought to determine whether GSTP1/2 were essential for hepatocyte 
proliferation following partial hepatectomy (PH). Using a conventional double
knockout mouse model for the Gstp1 and Gstp2 genes, we found that the lack of
GSTP1/P2 reduced the rate of DNA replication and mitotic index during the first
wave of hepatocyte proliferation. The lowered proliferation was associated with
the decrease in TNFalpha and IL-6 plasma concentrations, reduced hepatic HGF
expression and delayed and/or altered activation of STAT3, JNK and ERK1/2
signaling pathways. In addition, the expression and/or activation of cell cycle
regulators such as Cyclin D1, CDK4, E2F1 and MCM7 was postponed demonstrating
that the absence of GSTP1/2 delayed the entry into and progression through the G1
phase of the cell cycle and impaired the synchrony of proliferation in
hepatocytes following PH. Furthermore, while JNK and its downstream targets c-Jun
and ATF2 were activated during the early steps of the liver regeneration in
wild-type animals, the constitutively active JNK found in the quiescent liver of 
Gstp1/2 knockout mice underwent a decrease in its activity after PH. Transient
induction of antioxidant enzymes and nitric oxide synthase were also delayed or
repressed during the regenerative response. Altogether our results demonstrate
that GSTP1/2 are a critical regulators of hepatocyte proliferation in the initial
phases of liver regeneration.

PMCID: PMC4669760
PMID: 25590808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Mol Cell. 2015 Jan 22;57(2):235-46. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.12.005. Epub 2015 
Jan 8.

Cold-inducible Zfp516 activates UCP1 transcription to promote browning of white
fat and development of brown fat.

Dempersmier J(1), Sambeat A(2), Gulyaeva O(3), Paul SM(2), Hudak CS(2), Raposo
HF(2), Kwan HY(2), Kang C(4), Wong RH(1), Sul HS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Science & Toxicology, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA; Comparative Biochemistry Program, University
of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. (2)Department of Nutritional
Science & Toxicology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720,
USA. (3)Department of Nutritional Science & Toxicology, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA; Endocrinology Program, University of
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. (4)Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(5)Department of Nutritional Science & Toxicology, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA; Comparative Biochemistry Program, University
of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA; Endocrinology Program,
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. Electronic address: 
hsul@berkeley.edu.

Uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) mediates nonshivering thermogenesis and, upon cold
exposure, is induced in brown adipose tissue (BAT) and subcutaneous white adipose
tissue (iWAT). Here, by high-throughput screening using the UCP1 promoter, we
identify Zfp516 as a transcriptional activator of UCP1 as well as PGC1a, thereby 
promoting a BAT program. Zfp516 itself is induced by cold and sympathetic
stimulation through the cAMP-CREB/ATF2 pathway. Zfp516 directly binds to the
proximal region of the UCP1 promoter, not to the enhancer region where other
transcription factors bind, and interacts with PRDM16 to activate the UCP1
promoter. Although ablation of Zfp516 causes embryonic lethality, knockout
embryos still show drastically reduced BAT mass. Overexpression of Zfp516 in
adipose tissue promotes browning of iWAT even at room temperature, increasing
body temperature and energy expenditure and preventing diet-induced obesity.
Zfp516 may represent a future target for obesity therapeutics.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4304950
PMID: 25578880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Pharmacol. 2015 Apr;87(4):617-28. doi: 10.1124/mol.114.095695. Epub 2015 Jan 
9.

Transient receptor potential melastatin-3 (TRPM3)-induced activation of AP-1
requires Ca2+ ions and the transcription factors c-Jun, ATF2, and ternary complex
factor.

Lesch A(1), Hui X(1), Lipp P(1), Thiel G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (A.L., G.T.) and
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Saarland Medical Faculty,
Homburg, Germany (X.H., P.L.). (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology (A.L., G.T.) and Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
University of Saarland Medical Faculty, Homburg, Germany (X.H., P.L.)
gerald.thiel@uks.eu.

The steroid pregnenolone sulfate activates the transcription factor activator
protein-1 (AP-1) via stimulation of transient receptor potential melastatin-3
(TRPM3) channels. Here, we show that the signaling pathway requires an influx of 
Ca(2+) ions into the cells and a rise in the intracellular Ca(2+) levels. The
upregulation of AP-1 was attenuated in cells that overexpressed mitogen activated
protein kinase phosphatase-1, indicating that Ca(2+) ions prolong the signaling
cascade via activation of mitogen activated protein kinases. On the
transcriptional level, expression of a dominant-negative mutant of the basic
region leucine zipper protein c-Jun, a major constituent of the AP-1
transcription factor complex, or expression of a c-Jun-specific short hairpin RNA
attenuated pregnenolone sulfate-induced AP-1 activation. In addition, stimulation
of TRPM3 channels increased the transcriptional activation potential of the basic
region leucine zipper protein ATF2. Inhibition of ATF2 target gene expression via
expression of a dominant-negative mutant of ATF2 or expression of an
ATF2-specific short hairpin RNA interfered with TRPM3-mediated stimulation of
AP-1. Moreover, we show that a dominant-negative mutant of the ternary complex
factor (TCF) Elk-1 attenuated the upregulation of AP-1 following stimulation of
TRPM3 channels. Thus, c-Jun, ATF2, and TCFs are required to connect the
intracellular signaling cascade elicited by activation of TRPM3 channels with
enhanced transcription of AP-1-regulated genes. We conclude that pregnenolone
sulfate-induced TRPM3 channel activation changes the gene expression pattern of
the cells by activating transcription of c-Jun-, ATF2-, and TCF-controlled genes.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 25576487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Exp Ther Med. 2015 Feb;9(2):319-326. Epub 2014 Nov 27.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress response in spontaneously hypertensive rats is
affected by myocardial ischemia reperfusion injury.

Guo XF(1), Yang XJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, P.R. China ; Department of Emergency and ICU, Suzhou
Municipal Hospital (East Area), Suzhou, Jiangsu 215001, P.R. China. (2)Department
of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu
215006, P.R. China.

Cell apoptosis induced by endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress appears to be one of 
the main causes of myocardial necrosis following myocardial ischemia/reperfusion 
(MI/R). The C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) pathway is the main pathway through
which apoptosis is induced during ER stress. Glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78)
is an important protein involved in the CHOP pathway. The present study
investigated the hypothesis that MI/R activates the CHOP pathway through
signaling via a pathway involving PKR-like ER kinase (PERK), a-subunit of
eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2a) and activating transcription factor 2
(ATF2). Immunohistochemical staining of the heart tissues from spontaneously
hypersensitive rats indicated that MI/R injury increases CHOP and GPR78 protein
expression levels. To further analyze the mechanism by which MI/R injury induces 
apoptosis by ER stress, the expression levels of five marker proteins involved in
the hypothetical PERK-eIF2a-ATF2 pathway were detected, namely PERK,
phosphorylated PERK (P-PERK), eIF2a, phosphorylated eIF2a (P-eIF2a) and ATF2. An 
increase in the collective expression levels of these proteins would indicate
that apoptosis was induced by this signaling pathway. In addition, the study also
explored whether hypertension affects the signaling pathway of MI/R-induced
myocardial apoptosis by treating spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs) with
captopril (an effective drug used to treat hypertension). Rats treated with
captopril experienced a reduction in blood pressure to normal levels, but no
marked differences in the expression levels of the tested proteins or in MI/R
injury severity compared with those in untreated rats. These results suggest that
MI/R activates the CHOP pathway during ER stress by activating the
PERK-eIF2a-ATF2 pathway and that hypertension does not affect this signaling
pathway.

PMCID: PMC4280955
PMID: 25574192  [PubMed]


68. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 29;9(12):e116048. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116048.
eCollection 2014.

Cdk1-mediated phosphorylation of human ATF7 at Thr-51 and Thr-53 promotes
cell-cycle progression into M phase.

Hasegawa H(1), Ishibashi K(1), Kubota S(1), Yamaguchi C(1), Yuki R(1), Nakajo
H(1), Eckner R(2), Yamaguchi N(1), Yokoyama KK(3), Yamaguchi N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey, United States of America.
(3)Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) and its homolog ATF7 are phosphorylated 
at Thr-69/Thr-71 and at Thr-51/Thr-53, respectively, by stress-activated MAPKs
regulating their transcriptional functions in G1 and S phases. However, little is
known about the role of ATF2 and ATF7 in G2/M phase. Here, we show that
Cdk1-cyclin B1 phosphorylates ATF2 at Thr-69/Thr-71 and ATF7 at Thr-51/Thr-53
from early prophase to anaphase in the absence of any stress stimulation.
Knockdown of ATF2 or ATF7 decreases the rate of cell proliferation and the number
of cells in M-phase. In particular, the knockdown of ATF7 severely inhibits cell 
proliferation and G2/M progression. The inducible expression of a mitotically
nonphosphorylatable version of ATF7 inhibits G2/M progression despite the
presence of endogenous ATF7. We also show that mitotic phosphorylation of ATF7
promotes the activation of Aurora kinases, which are key enzymes for early
mitotic events. These results suggest that the Cdk1-mediated phosphorylation of
ATF7 facilitates G2/M progression, at least in part, by enabling Aurora
signaling.

PMCID: PMC4278844
PMID: 25545367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Ginseng Res. 2015 Jan;39(1):61-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jgr.2014.06.002. Epub 2014 Jun
19.

Molecular mechanism of protopanaxadiol saponin fraction-mediated
anti-inflammatory actions.

Yang Y(1), Lee J(2), Rhee MH(3), Yu T(1), Baek KS(1), Sung NY(1), Kim Y(1), Yoon 
K(1), Kim JH(1), Kwak YS(4), Hong S(1), Kim JH(5), Cho JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea.
(2)Department of Dermatological Health Management, Eulji University, Seongnam,
Korea. (3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu,
Korea. (4)Ginseng Corporation Central Research Institute, Daejeon, Korea.
(5)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Biosafety
Research Institute, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Korean Red Ginseng (KRG) is a representative traditional herbal
medicine with many different pharmacological properties including anticancer,
anti-atherosclerosis, anti-diabetes, and anti-inflammatory activities. Only a few
studies have explored the molecular mechanism of KRG-mediated anti-inflammatory
activity.
METHODS: We investigated the anti-inflammatory mechanisms of the protopanaxadiol 
saponin fraction (PPD-SF) of KRG using in vitro and in vivo inflammatory models.
RESULTS: PPD-SF dose-dependently diminished the release of inflammatory mediators
[nitric oxide (NO), tumor necrosis factor-a, and prostaglandin E2], and
downregulated the mRNA expression of their corresponding genes (inducible NO
synthase, tumor necrosis factor-a, and cyclooxygenase-2), without altering cell
viability. The PPD-SF-mediated suppression of these events appeared to be
regulated by a blockade of p38, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and TANK (TRAF
family member-associated NF-kappa-B activator)-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), which are
linked to the activation of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) and
interferon regulatory transcription factor 3 (IRF3). Moreover, this fraction also
ameliorated HCl/ethanol/-induced gastritis via suppression of phospho-JNK2
levels.
CONCLUSION: These results strongly suggest that the anti-inflammatory action of
PPD-SF could be mediated by a reduction in the activation of p38-, JNK2-, and
TANK-binding-kinase-1-linked pathways and their corresponding transcription
factors (ATF2 and IRF3).

PMCID: PMC4268567
PMID: 25535478  [PubMed]


70. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;34(5):1711-22. doi: 10.1159/000366372. Epub 2014 Nov
12.

WWOX suppresses cell growth and induces cell apoptosis via inhibition of P38
nuclear translocation in cholangiocarcinoma.

Wang M(1), Li Y, Wu M, Wang W, Gong B, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (EHCC) is the second most common
primary hepatic malignancy, and is associated with high morbidity and mortality. 
We previously reported the decreased expression of WWOX in EHCC samples, but the 
underlying mechanism remained unclear.
METHODS: Immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence were performed to examine the
interaction of WWOX and P38 MAPK. Western blot was carried out to detect the
expression of ATF2 and eIF-4E. MTT, colony formation, and Annexin V-FITC assays
were performed to detect the cell proliferation and apoptosis. IHC was performed 
to detect the protein expression in clinical samples.
RESULTS: WWOX interacted with P38 and modulated its sub-cellular localization,
leading to the cytoplasmic retention of P38. WWOX over-expression inhibited the
phosphorylation of ATF2 and eIF-4E, while exogenous P38 reversed this reduction
in phosphorylation. Ectopic expression of WWOX in EHCC cells led to inhibited
proliferation and stimulated apoptosis in a P38 MAPK-dependent manner. In
addition, we found a negative association of WWOX with nuclear localization of
P38 and expression of phosphorylated ATF2 in EHCC samples.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrated the role of WWOX in EHCC progression, revealing
the potential of WWOX/p-ATF2 as a novel diagnostic and prognostic marker, and
therapeutic target for EHCC.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25502636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Nov 27;13(4):9735-46. doi: 10.4238/2014.November.27.1.

Acetate ester production by Chinese yellow rice wine yeast overexpressing the
alcohol acetyltransferase-encoding gene ATF2.

Zhang J(1), Zhang C(1), Qi Y(1), Dai L(1), Ma H(1), Guo X(1), Xiao D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Fermentation Microbiology, Ministry of Education,
Tianjin Industrial Microbiology Key Laboratory, College of Biotechnology, Tianjin
University of Science and Technology, Tianjin, China.

Acetate ester, which are produced by fermenting yeast cells in an
enzyme-catalyzed intracellular reaction, are responsible for the fruity character
of fermented alcoholic beverages such as Chinese yellow rice wine. Alcohol
acetyltransferase (AATase) is currently believed to be the key enzyme responsible
for the production of acetate ester. In order to determine the precise role of
the ATF2 gene in acetate ester production, an ATF2 gene encoding a type of AATase
was overexpressed and the ability of the mutant to form acetate esters (including
ethyl acetate, isoamyl acetate, and isobutyl acetate) was investigated. The
results showed that after 5 days of fermentation, the concentrations of ethyl
acetate, isoamyl acetate, and isobutyl acetate in yellow rice wines fermented
with EY2 (pUC-PIA2K) increased to 137.79 mg/L (an approximate 4.9-fold increase
relative to the parent cell RY1), 26.68 mg/L, and 7.60 mg/L, respectively. This
study confirms that the ATF2 gene plays an important role in the production of
acetate ester production during Chinese yellow rice wine fermentation, thereby
offering prospects for the development of yellow rice wine yeast starter strains 
with optimized ester-producing capabilities.

PMID: 25501183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cell Adh Migr. 2015;9(3):227-32. doi: 10.4161/19336918.2014.972775. Epub 2014 Oct
23.

Rsu1 contributes to cell adhesion and spreading in MCF10A cells via effects on
P38 map kinase signaling.

Kim YC(1), Gonzalez-Nieves R, Cutler ML.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pathology; F. Edward Hebert School of Medicine ; Uniformed
Services University of the Health Sciences ; Bethesda , MD USA.

The ILK, PINCH, Parvin (IPP) complex regulates adhesion and migration via binding
of ILK to ß1 integrin and a-parvin thus linking focal adhesions to actin
cytoskeleton. ILK also binds the adaptor protein PINCH which connects signaling
proteins including Rsu1 to the complex. A recent study of Rsu1 and PINCH1 in
non-transformed MCF10A human mammary epithelial cells revealed that the
siRNA-mediated depletion of either Rsu1 or PINCH1 decreased the number of focal
adhesions (FAs) and altered the distribution and localization of FA proteins.
This correlated with reduced adhesion, failure to spread or migrate in response
to EGF and a loss of actin stress fibers and caveolae. The depletion of Rsu1
caused significant reduction in PINCH1 implying that Rsu1 may function in part by
regulating levels of PINCH1. However, Rsu1, but not PINCH1, was required for
EGF-induced activation of p38 Map kinase and ATF2 phosphorylation, suggesting a
Rsu1 function independent from the IPP complex. Reconstitution of Rsu1-depleted
cells with a Rsu1 mutant (N92D) that does not bind to PINCH1 failed to restore
FAs or migration but did promote IPP-independent spreading and constitutive as
well as EGF-induced p38 activation. In this commentary we discuss p38 activity in
adhesion and how Rsu1 expression may be linked to Map kinase kinase (MKK)
activation and detachment-induced stress kinase signaling.

PMCID: PMC4594256
PMID: 25482629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Jan 15;400:21-31. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.11.010. Epub 
2014 Nov 25.

Attenuation of mitochondrial and nuclear p38a signaling: a novel mechanism of
estrogen neuroprotection in cerebral ischemia.

Han D(1), Scott EL(2), Dong Y(2), Raz L(2), Wang R(3), Zhang Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Anesthesiology, Xuzhou Medical College, Jiangsu
221004, China. (2)Department of Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Medical
College of Georgia at Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Medical College of
Georgia at Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA; Neurobiology
Institute of Medical Research Centre, Hebei United University, Tangshan, Hebei
06300, China. (4)Department of Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Medical
College of Georgia at Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.
Electronic address: qzhang@gru.edu.

P38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) is a pro-apoptotic and
pro-inflammatory protein that is activated in response to cellular stress. While 
p38 is known to be activated in response to cerebral ischemia, the precise role
of p38 and its isoforms in ischemia-induced neuronal apoptosis remains unclear.
In the current study, we examined the differential activation and functional
roles of p38a and p38ß MAPK isoforms in short-term ovariectomized female rats
treated with either the neuroprotective ovarian hormone 17beta-estradiol (E2) or 
placebo in a model of global cerebral ischemia (GCI). GCI induced biphasic
activation of total p38 in the hippocampal CA1, with peaks at 30<U+2009>min and 1 day
after 10-min ischemia-reperfusion. Further study demonstrated that activated
p38a, but not p38ß, translocated to the nucleus 30<U+2009>min and 3<U+2009>h post reperfusion, 
and that this event coincided with increased phosphorylation of activating
transcription factor 2 (ATF2), a p38 target protein. Intriguingly, activated p38a
was also enhanced in mitochondrial fractions of CA1 neurons 1 day after GCI, and 
there was loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, as well as enhanced
cytochrome c release and caspase-3 cleavage at 2 days post GCI. Importantly, E2
prevented the biphasic activation of p38, as well as both nuclear and
mitochondrial translocation of p38a after GCI, and these findings correlated with
attenuation of mitochondrial dysfunction and delayed neuronal cell death in the
hippocampal CA1. Furthermore, administration of a p38 inhibitor was able to mimic
the neuroprotective effects of E2 in the hippocampal CA1 region by preventing
nuclear and mitochondrial translocation of p38a, loss of mitochondrial membrane
potential, and neuronal apoptosis. As a whole, this study suggests that changes
in subcellular localization of the activated p38a isoform are required for
neuronal apoptosis following GCI, and that E2 exerts robust neuroprotection, in
part, through dual inhibition of activation and subcellular trafficking of p38a.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 25462588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cell Rep. 2014 Nov 20;9(4):1361-74. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.10.043. Epub 2014 
Nov 13.

JNK suppresses tumor formation via a gene-expression program mediated by ATF2.

Gozdecka M(1), Lyons S(2), Kondo S(3), Taylor J(4), Li Y(5), Walczynski J(2),
Thiel G(6), Breitwieser W(2), Jones N(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Regulation, CRUK Manchester Institute, Paterson Building,
University of Manchester, Manchester M20 4BX, UK; Haematological Cancer Genetics,
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge
CB10 1SA, UK. (2)Department of Cell Regulation, CRUK Manchester Institute,
Paterson Building, University of Manchester, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.
(3)Department of Cell Regulation, CRUK Manchester Institute, Paterson Building,
University of Manchester, Manchester M20 4BX, UK; Laboratory of Molecular
Genetics, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, 
Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. (4)Central Manchester NHS Trust and University 
of Manchester, the Nowgen Centre, 29 Grafton Street, Manchester M13 9WU, UK;
Applied Computational Biology and Bioinformatics Group, CRUK Manchester
Institute, Paterson Building, University of Manchester, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.
(5)Applied Computational Biology and Bioinformatics Group, CRUK Manchester
Institute, Paterson Building, University of Manchester, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.
(6)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, Building 44, 66421 Homburg, Germany. (7)Department of
Cell Regulation, CRUK Manchester Institute, Paterson Building, University of
Manchester, Manchester M20 4BX, UK. Electronic address:
nic.jones@cruk.manchester.ac.uk.

JNK and p38 phosphorylate a diverse set of substrates and, consequently, can act 
in a context-dependent manner to either promote or inhibit tumor growth.
Elucidating the functions of specific substrates of JNK and p38 is therefore
critical for our understanding of these kinases in cancer. ATF2 is a
phosphorylation-dependent transcription factor and substrate of both JNK and p38.
Here, we show ATF2 suppresses tumor formation in an orthotopic model of liver
cancer and cellular transformation in vitro. Furthermore, we find that
suppression of tumorigenesis by JNK requires ATF2. We identify a transcriptional 
program activated by JNK via ATF2 and provide examples of JNK- and ATF2-dependent
genes that block cellular transformation. Significantly, we also show that
ATF2-dependent gene expression is frequently downregulated in human cancers,
indicating that amelioration of JNK-ATF2-mediated suppression may be a common
event during tumor development.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25456131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2015 Apr;148:132-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2014.11.016.
Epub 2014 Nov 20.

1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 induces monocytic differentiation of human myeloid
leukemia cells by regulating C/EBPß expression through MEF2C.

Zheng R(1), Wang X(2), Studzinski GP(3).

Author information: 
(1)UH Cancer Center, Rutgers, New Jersey Medical School, 205 South Orange Ave.,
Newark, NJ 07103, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Rutgers, New Jersey Medical School, 185 South Orange Ave., Newark, NJ 07103, USA.
(3)UH Cancer Center, Rutgers, New Jersey Medical School, 205 South Orange Ave.,
Newark, NJ 07103, USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Rutgers, 
New Jersey Medical School, 185 South Orange Ave., Newark, NJ 07103, USA.
Electronic address: studzins@njms.rutgers.edu.

Myogenic enhancer factor2 (Mef2) consists of a family of transcription factors
involved in morphogenesis of skeletal, cardiac and smooth muscle cells. Among the
four isoforms (Mef2A, 2B, 2C, and 2D), Mef2C was also found to play important
roles in hematopoiesis. At myeloid progenitor level, Mef2C expression favors
monocytic differentiation. Previous studies from our laboratory demonstrated that
ERK5 was activated in 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D)-induced monocytic
differentiation in AML cells and ERK5 activation was accompanied by increased
Mef2C phosphorylation. We therefore examined the role of Mef2C in 1,25D-induced
monocytic differentiation in AML cell lines (HL60, U937 and THP1) and found that 
knockdown of Mef2C with small interfering RNA (siRNA) significantly decreases the
expression of the monocytic marker, CD14, without affecting the expression of the
general myeloid marker, CD11b. CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) ß, which
can bind to CD14 promoter and increase its transcription, has been shown to be
the downstream effector of 1,25D-induced monocytic differentiation in AML cells. 
When Mef2C was knocked down, expression of C/EBPß was reduced at both mRNA and
protein levels. The protein expression levels of cell cycle regulators, p27(Kip1)
and cyclin D1, were not affected by Mef2C knockdown, nor the monopoiesis related 
transcription factor, ATF2 (activating transcription factor 2). Thus, we conclude
that 1,25D-induced monocytic differentiation, and CD14 expression in particular, 
are mediated through activation of ERK5-Mef2C-C/EBPß signaling pathway, and that 
Mef2C does not seem to modulate cell cycle progression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4361347
PMID: 25448741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 2;111(48):17330-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1411932111. Epub 2014 Nov 17.

Noise decomposition of intracellular biochemical signaling networks using
nonequivalent reporters.

Rhee A(1), Cheong R(1), Levchenko A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 
21218; and. (2)Yale Systems Biology Institute and Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520 andre.levchenko@yale.edu.

Experimental measurements of biochemical noise have primarily focused on sources 
of noise at the gene expression level due to limitations of existing noise
decomposition techniques. Here, we introduce a mathematical framework that
extends classical extrinsic-intrinsic noise analysis and enables mapping of noise
within upstream signaling networks free of such restrictions. The framework
applies to systems for which the responses of interest are linearly correlated on
average, although the framework can be easily generalized to the nonlinear case. 
Interestingly, despite the high degree of complexity and nonlinearity of most
mammalian signaling networks, three distinct tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
signaling network branches displayed linearly correlated responses, in both
wild-type and perturbed versions of the network, across multiple orders of
magnitude of ligand concentration. Using the noise mapping analysis, we find that
the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway generates higher noise than the NF-<U+03BA>B
pathway, whereas the activation of c-Jun adds a greater amount of noise than the 
activation of ATF-2. In addition, we find that the A20 protein can suppress noise
in the activation of ATF-2 by separately inhibiting the TNF receptor complex and 
JNK pathway through a negative feedback mechanism. These results, easily scalable
to larger and more complex networks, pave the way toward assessing how noise
propagates through cellular signaling pathways and create a foundation on which
we can further investigate the relationship between signaling system architecture
and biological noise.

PMCID: PMC4260601
PMID: 25404303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Dec;92(6):555-63. doi: 10.1139/bcb-2014-0074. Epub 2014
Sep 18.

Discovery of novel membrane binding structures and functions.

Kufareva I(1), Lenoir M, Dancea F, Sridhar P, Raush E, Bissig C, Gruenberg J,
Abagyan R, Overduin M.

Author information: 
(1)a Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

The function of a protein is determined by its intrinsic activity in the context 
of its subcellular distribution. Membranes localize proteins within cellular
compartments and govern their specific activities. Discovering such
membrane-protein interactions is important for understanding biological
mechanisms and could uncover novel sites for therapeutic intervention. We present
a method for detecting membrane interactive proteins and their exposed residues
that insert into lipid bilayers. Although the development process involved
analysis of how C1b, C2, ENTH, FYVE, Gla, pleckstrin homology (PH), and PX
domains bind membranes, the resulting membrane optimal docking area (MODA) method
yields predictions for a given protein of known three-dimensional structures
without referring to canonical membrane-targeting modules. This approach was
tested on the Arf1 GTPase, ATF2 acetyltransferase, von Willebrand factor A3
domain, and Neisseria gonorrhoeae MsrB protein and further refined with membrane 
interactive and non-interactive FAPP1 and PKD1 pleckstrin homology domains,
respectively. Furthermore we demonstrate how this tool can be used to discover
unprecedented membrane binding functions as illustrated by the Bro1 domain of
Alix, which was revealed to recognize lysobisphosphatidic acid (LBPA). Validation
of novel membrane-protein interactions relies on other techniques such as nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), which was used here to map the sites of
micelle interaction. Together this indicates that genome-wide identification of
known and novel membrane interactive proteins and sites is now feasible and
provides a new tool for functional annotation of the proteome.

PMCID: PMC4267288
PMID: 25394204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 19;289(51):35326-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.611962. Epub
2014 Nov 3.

Human macrophage SCN5A activates an innate immune signaling pathway for antiviral
host defense.

Jones A(1), Kainz D(1), Khan F(1), Lee C(1), Carrithers MD(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Neurology and Program in Cellular and Molecular
Pathology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706 and. (2)From the Department of Neurology and Program in Cellular 
and Molecular Pathology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53706 and the William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans
Hospital, Madison, Wisconsin 53705 carrithers@neurology.wisc.edu.

Pattern recognition receptors contain a binding domain for pathogen-associated
molecular patterns coupled to a signaling domain that regulates transcription of 
host immune response genes. Here, a novel mechanism that links pathogen
recognition to channel activation and downstream signaling is proposed. We
demonstrate that an intracellular sodium channel variant, human macrophage SCN5A,
initiates signaling and transcription through a calcium-dependent isoform of
adenylate cyclase, ADCY8, and the transcription factor, ATF2. Pharmacological
stimulation with a channel agonist or treatment with cytoplasmic poly(I:C), a
mimic of viral dsRNA, activates this pathway to regulate expression of
SP100-related genes and interferon ß. Electrophysiological analysis reveals that 
the SCN5A variant mediates nonselective outward currents and a small, but
detectable, inward current. Intracellular poly(I:C) markedly augments an inward
voltage-sensitive sodium current and inhibits the outward nonselective current.
These results suggest human macrophage SCN5A initiates signaling in an innate
immune pathway relevant to antiviral host defense. It is postulated that SCN5A is
a novel pathogen sensor and that this pathway represents a channel
activation-dependent mechanism of transcriptional regulation.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4271219
PMID: 25368329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Int J Cancer. 2015 Jun 1;136(11):2598-609. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29302. Epub 2014 Nov 
12.

ATF2 contributes to cisplatin resistance in non-small cell lung cancer and
celastrol induces cisplatin resensitization through inhibition of JNK/ATF2
pathway.

Lo Iacono M(1), Monica V, Vavalà T, Gisabella M, Saviozzi S, Bracco E, Novello S,
Papotti M, Scagliotti GV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Turin, S. Luigi Hospital, Regione
Gonzole 10, Orbassano, Turin, Italy.

ATF2 is a transcription factor involved in stress and DNA damage. A correlation
between ATF2 JNK-mediated activation and resistance to damaging agents has
already been reported. The purpose of the present study was to investigate
whether ATF2 may have a role in acquired resistance to cisplatin in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). mRNA and protein analysis on matched cancer and
corresponding normal tissues from surgically resected NSCLC have been performed. 
Furthermore, in NSCLC cell lines, ATF2 expression levels were evaluated and
correlated to platinum (CDDP) resistance. Celastrol-mediated ATF2/cJUN activity
was measured. High expression levels of both ATF2 transcript and proteins were
observed in lung cancer specimens (p << 0.01, Log2 (FC)<U+2009>=<U+2009>+4.7). CDDP-resistant
NSCLC cell lines expressed high levels of ATF2 protein. By contrast,
Celastrol-mediated ATF2/cJUN functional inhibition restored the response to CDDP.
Moreover, ATF2 protein activation correlates with worse outcome in advanced
CDDP-treated patients. For the first time, it has been shown NSCLC ATF2
upregulation at both mRNA/protein levels in NSCLC. In addition, we reported that 
in NSCLC cell lines a correlation between ATF2 protein expression and CDDP
resistance occurs. Altogether, our results indicate a potential increase in CDDP 
sensitivity, on Celastrol-mediated ATF2/cJUN inhibition. These data suggest a
possible involvement of ATF2 in NSCLC CDDP-resistance.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 25359574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Dec 15;92(4):530-43. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.09.026. Epub
2014 Oct 12.

Simvastatin induces NF<U+03BA>B/p65 down-regulation and JNK1/c-Jun/ATF-2 activation,
leading to matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) but not MMP-2 down-regulation in
human leukemia cells.

Chen YJ(1), Chang LS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung
804, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen
University, Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan; Department of Biotechnology, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan. Electronic address: lschang@mail.nsysu.edu.tw.

The aim of the present study was to explore the signaling pathways associated
with the effect of simvastatin on matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2)/MMP-9
expression in human leukemia K562 cells. In sharp contrast to its insignificant
effect on MMP-2, simvastatin down-regulated MMP-9 protein expression and mRNA
levels in K562 cells. Simvastatin-induced Pin1 down-regulation evoked NF<U+03BA>B/p65
degradation. Meanwhile, simvastatin induced JNK-mediated c-Jun and ATF-2
activation. Over-expression of Pin1 suppressed simvastatin-induced MMP-9
down-regulation. Treatment with SP600125 (a JNK inhibitor) or knock-down of JNK1 
reduced MMP-2 expression in simvastatin-treated cells. Simvastatin enhanced the
binding of c-Jun/ATF-2 with the MMP-2 promoter. Down-regulation of c-Jun or ATF-2
by siRNA revealed that c-Jun/ATF-2 activation was crucial for MMP-2 expression.
Suppression of p65 activation or knock-down of Pin1 by shRNA reduced MMP-2 and
MMP-9 expression in K562 cells. Over-expression of constitutively active JNK1
rescued MMP-2 expression in Pin1 shRNA-transfected cells. Simvastatin treatment
also suppressed MMP-9 but not MMP-2 expression in human leukemia U937 and KU812
cells. Taken together, our data indicate that simvastatin-induced p65 instability
leads to MMP-9 down-regulation in leukemia cells, while simvastatin-induced
JNK1/c-Jun/ATF-2 activation maintains the MMP-2 expression underlying p65
down-regulation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25316568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Yeast. 2015 Jan;32(1):67-76. doi: 10.1002/yea.3047. Epub 2014 Nov 12.

Influence of carbon and nitrogen source on production of volatile fragrance and
flavour metabolites by the yeast Kluyveromyces marxianus.

Gethins L(1), Guneser O, Demirkol A, Rea MC, Stanton C, Ross RP, Yuceer Y,
Morrissey JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Microbiology, University College Cork, Ireland; Teagasc Research
Centre, Moorepark, Fermoy, County Cork, Ireland.

The yeast Kluyveromyces marxianus produces a range of volatile molecules with
applications as fragrances or flavours. The purpose of this study was to
establish how nutritional conditions influence the production of these
metabolites. Four strains were grown on synthetic media, using a variety of
carbon and nitrogen sources and volatile metabolites analysed using gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). The nitrogen source had pronounced
effects on metabolite production: levels of the fusel alcohols 2-phenylethanol
and isoamyl alcohol were highest when yeast extract was the nitrogen source, and 
ammonium had a strong repressing effect on production of 2-phenylethyl acetate.
In contrast, the nitrogen source did not affect production of isoamyl acetate or 
ethyl acetate, indicating that more than one alcohol acetyl transferase activity 
is present in K. marxianus. Production of all acetate esters was low when cells
were growing on lactose (as opposed to glucose or fructose), with a lower
intracellular pool of acetyl CoA being one explanation for this observation.
Bioinformatic and phylogenetic analysis of the known yeast alcohol acetyl
transferases ATF1 and ATF2 suggests that the ancestral protein Atf2p may not be
involved in synthesis of volatile acetate esters in K. marxianus, and raises
interesting questions as to what other genes encode this activity in
non-Saccharomyces yeasts. Identification of all the genes involved in ester
synthesis will be important for development of the K. marxianus platform for
flavour and fragrance production.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25308412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Neurooncol. 2015 Jan;121(1):63-72. doi: 10.1007/s11060-014-1607-y. Epub 2014
Sep 26.

MiR-622 suppresses proliferation, invasion and migration by directly targeting
activating transcription factor 2 in glioma cells.

Zhang R(1), Luo H, Wang S, Chen Z, Hua L, Wang HW, Chen W, Yuan Y, Zhou X, Li D, 
Shen S, Jiang T, You Y, Liu N, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Guangzhou Road 300#, Nanjing, 210029, China.

Malignant gliomas are the most common and devastating primary brain tumors in
adults. The rapid invasion of tumor cells into the adjacent normal brain tissues 
is a major cause of treatment failure, yet the mechanisms that regulate this
process remain poorly understood. MicroRNAs have recently emerged as regulators
of invasion and metastasis by acting on multiple signaling pathways. In this
study, we found that miR-622 is significantly downregulated in glioma tissues and
cell lines. Functional experiments showed that increased miR-622 expression
reduced glioma cell invasion and migration, whereas decreased miR-622 expression 
enhanced cell invasion and migration. Moreover, activating transcription factor 2
(ATF2), an important transcription factor that regulate tumor invasion, was
identified as a direct target of miR-622. Knockdown of ATF2 using small
interefering RNA recapitulated the anti-invasive function of miR-622, whereas
restoring the ATF2 expression attenuated the function of miR-622 in glioma cells.
Furthermore, clinical data indicated that miR-622 and ATF2 were inversely
expressed in glioma specimens. Our findings provide insight into the specific
biological behavior of miR-622 in tumor invasion and migration. Targeting
miR-622/ATF2 axis is a novel therapeutic approach for blocking glioma invasion.

PMID: 25258251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Nat Med. 2014 Oct;20(10):1138-46. doi: 10.1038/nm.3679. Epub 2014 Sep 14.

In vivo RNAi screening identifies a mechanism of sorafenib resistance in liver
cancer.

Rudalska R(1), Dauch D(1), Longerich T(2), McJunkin K(3), Wuestefeld T(4), Kang
TW(5), Hohmeyer A(5), Pesic M(4), Leibold J(4), von Thun A(6), Schirmacher P(2), 
Zuber J(7), Weiss KH(8), Powers S(9), Malek NP(10), Eilers M(6), Sipos B(11),
Lowe SW(12), Geffers R(13), Laufer S(14), Zender L(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Translational Gastrointestinal Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine I, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. [2]. (2)Institute of
Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (3)The Watson
School of Biological Sciences, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor,
New York, USA. (4)Division of Translational Gastrointestinal Oncology, Department
of Internal Medicine I, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. (5)1]
Division of Translational Gastrointestinal Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine I, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. [2] Translational
Gastrointestinal Oncology Group within the German Consortium for Translational
Cancer Research (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany. (6)1] Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken, University of Wuerzburg, 
Wuerzburg, Germany. [2] Theodor Boveri Institute, Biocenter, University of
Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany. (7)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology,
Vienna, Austria. (8)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (9)Cancer Genome Center, Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York, USA. (10)Department of Internal
Medicine I, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. (11)Institute of
Pathology, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. (12)1] Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. [2] Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, New York, New York, USA. (13)Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 
Braunschweig, Germany. (14)Department of Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, 
University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014 Nov;11(11):622.
    Hepatology. 2015 May;61(5):1755-7.

In solid tumors, resistance to therapy inevitably develops upon treatment with
cytotoxic drugs or molecularly targeted therapies. Here, we describe a system
that enables pooled shRNA screening directly in mouse hepatocellular carcinomas
(HCC) in vivo to identify genes likely to be involved in therapy resistance.
Using a focused shRNA library targeting genes located within focal genomic
amplifications of human HCC, we screened for genes whose inhibition increased the
therapeutic efficacy of the multikinase inhibitor sorafenib. Both shRNA-mediated 
and pharmacological silencing of Mapk14 (p38a) were found to sensitize mouse HCC 
to sorafenib therapy and prolong survival by abrogating Mapk14-dependent
activation of Mek-Erk and Atf2 signaling. Elevated Mapk14-Atf2 signaling
predicted poor response to sorafenib therapy in human HCC, and sorafenib
resistance of p-Mapk14-expressing HCC cells could be reverted by silencing
Mapk14. Our results suggest that a combination of sorafenib and Mapk14 blockade
is a promising approach to overcoming therapy resistance of human HCC.

PMCID: PMC4587571
PMID: 25216638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2015 Mar;99(5):2191-207. doi:
10.1007/s00253-014-6002-2. Epub 2014 Sep 12.

Overexpression of a phosphatidic acid phosphatase type 2 leads to an increase in 
triacylglycerol production in oleaginous Rhodococcus strains.

Hernández MA(1), Comba S, Arabolaza A, Gramajo H, Alvarez HM.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Regional de Investigación y Desarrollo Científico Tecnológico, Facultad
de Ciencias Naturales, Universidad Nacional de la Patagonia San Juan Bosco, Ruta 
Provincial N° 1, Km 4-Ciudad Universitaria, 9000, Comodoro Rivadavia, Chubut,
Argentina.

Oleaginous Rhodococcus strains are able to accumulate large amounts of
triacylglycerol (TAG). Phosphatidic acid phosphatase (PAP) enzyme catalyzes the
dephosphorylation of phosphatidic acid (PA) to yield diacylglycerol (DAG), a key 
precursor for TAG biosynthesis. Studies to establish its role in lipid metabolism
have been mainly focused in eukaryotes but not in bacteria. In this work, we
identified and characterized a putative PAP type 2 (PAP2) encoded by the ro00075 
gene in Rhodococcus jostii RHA1. Heterologous expression of ro00075 in
Escherichia coli resulted in a fourfold increase in PAP activity and twofold in
DAG content. The conditional deletion of ro00075 in RHA1 led to a decrease in the
content of DAG and TAG, whereas its overexpression in both RHA1 and Rhodococcus
opacus PD630 promoted an increase up to 10 to 15 % by cellular dry weight in TAG 
content. On the other hand, expression of ro00075 in the non-oleaginous strain
Rhodococcus fascians F7 promoted an increase in total fatty acid content up to
7 % at the expense of free fatty acid (FFA), DAG, and TAG fractions. Moreover,
co-expression of ro00075/atf2 genes resulted in a fourfold increase in total
fatty acid content by a further increase of the FFA and TAG fractions. The
results of this study suggest that ro00075 encodes for a PAP2 enzyme actively
involved in TAG biosynthesis. Overexpression of this gene, as single one or with 
an atf gene, provides an alternative approach to increase the biosynthesis and
accumulation of bacterial oils as a potential source of raw material for biofuel 
production.

PMID: 25213912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. ACS Synth Biol. 2015 May 15;4(5):585-94. doi: 10.1021/sb500255k. Epub 2014 Sep
19.

Homology-integrated CRISPR-Cas (HI-CRISPR) system for one-step multigene
disruption in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Bao Z(1), Xiao H(1), Liang J(1), Zhang L(1), Xiong X(1), Sun N(1), Si T(1), Zhao 
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering, §Departments of Chemistry, and Bioengineering, Institute for Genomic
Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801,
United States.

One-step multiple gene disruption in the model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
is a highly useful tool for both basic and applied research, but it remains a
challenge. Here, we report a rapid, efficient, and potentially scalable strategy 
based on the type II Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats
(CRISPR)-CRISPR associated proteins (Cas) system to generate multiple gene
disruptions simultaneously in S. cerevisiae. A 100 bp dsDNA mutagenizing
homologous recombination donor is inserted between two direct repeats for each
target gene in a CRISPR array consisting of multiple donor and guide sequence
pairs. An ultrahigh copy number plasmid carrying iCas9, a variant of wild-type
Cas9, trans-encoded RNA (tracrRNA), and a homology-integrated crRNA cassette is
designed to greatly increase the gene disruption efficiency. As proof of concept,
three genes, CAN1, ADE2, and LYP1, were simultaneously disrupted in 4 days with
an efficiency ranging from 27 to 87%. Another three genes involved in an
artificial hydrocortisone biosynthetic pathway, ATF2, GCY1, and YPR1, were
simultaneously disrupted in 6 days with 100% efficiency. This homology-integrated
CRISPR (HI-CRISPR) strategy represents a powerful tool for creating yeast strains
with multiple gene knockouts.

PMID: 25207793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Oncogene. 2015 Jul;34(27):3568-81. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.287. Epub 2014 Sep 8.

p57Kip2 is an unrecognized DNA damage response effector molecule that functions
in tumor suppression and chemoresistance.

Jia H(1), Cong Q(1), Chua JF(2), Liu H(1), Xia X(1), Zhang X(1), Lin J(1), Habib 
SL(3), Ao J(4), Zuo Q(5), Fu C(5), Li B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China. (2)The Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore,
Singapore. (3)South Texas Veterans Health Care System and Department of Cellular 
and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio,
San Antonio, TX, USA. (4)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes,
Shanghai Cancer Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School 
of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (5)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Changhai
Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

The DNA damage response (DDR) helps to maintain genome integrity, suppress
tumorigenesis and mediate the radiotherapeutic and chemotherapeutic effects on
cancer. Here we report that p57Kip2, a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor
implicated in the development of tumor-prone Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, is an
effector molecule of the DNA-damage response. Genotoxic stress induces p57Kip2
expression via the bone morphogenetic protein-Smad1 and Atm-p38MAPK-Atf2 pathways
in p53-proficient or -deficient cells and requires the Smad1-Atf2 complex that
facilitates their recruitment to the p57Kip2 promoter. Elevated p57Kip2 induces
G1/S phase cell cycle arrest but inhibits cell death in response to DNA damage
and acts in parallel with p53 to suppress cell transformation and tumor
formation. p57Kip2 is also upregulated in stage I and II clinical rectal tumor
samples, likely due to genome instability of precancerous and/or early cancer
cells. Targeting p57Kip2 in primary rectal cancer cells and tumor models resulted
in increased sensitivity to doxorubicin, suggesting that p57Kip2 has a role in
chemoresistance, which is consistent with its pro-survival function. These
findings place p57Kip2 in DDR and uncover molecular mechanisms by which p57Kip2
suppresses tumorigenesis and causes chemoresistance.

PMID: 25195859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Jan;116(1):149-57. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24954.

Zfat-deficient CD4<U+207A> CD8<U+207A> double-positive thymocytes are susceptible to apoptosis 
with deregulated activation of p38 and JNK.

Ishikura S(1), Ogawa M, Doi K, Matsuzaki H, Iwaihara Y, Tanaka Y, Tsunoda T,
Hideshima H, Okamura T, Shirasawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, 
Japan; Central Research Institute for Advanced Molecular Medicine, Fukuoka
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Zfat, which is a nuclear protein harboring an AT-hook domain and 18-repeats of
C2H2 zinc-finger motif, is highly expressed in immune-related tissues, including 
the thymus and spleen. T cell specific deletion of the Zfat gene by crossing
Zfat(f/f) mice with LckCre mice yields a significant reduction in the number of
CD4(+) CD8(+) double-positive (DP) thymocytes. However, physiological role for
Zfat in T cell development in the thymus remains unknown. Here, we found that
Zfat-deficient DP thymocytes in Zfat(f/f)-LckCre mice were susceptible to
apoptosis both at an unstimulated state and in response to T cell receptor
(TCR)-stimulation. The phosphorylation levels of p38 and JNK were elevated in
Zfat-deficient thymocytes at an unstimulated state with an enhanced
phosphorylation of ATF2 and with an over-expression of Gadd45a· On the other
hand, the activation of JNK in the Zfat-deficient thymocytes, but not p38, was
strengthened and prolonged in response to TCR-stimulation. All these results
demonstrate that Zfat critically participates in the development of DP thymocytes
through regulating the activities of p38 and JNK.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25169027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Aug;52(1):303-17. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8838-y. Epub 2014
Aug 27.

IL-1ß Induces MMP-9-Dependent Brain Astrocytic Migration via Transactivation of
PDGF Receptor/NADPH Oxidase 2-Derived Reactive Oxygen Species Signals.

Yang CM(1), Hsieh HL, Yu PH, Lin CC, Liu SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology and Health Aging Research Center,
College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st Road, Kwei-San,
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, chuenmao@mail.cgu.edu.tw.

Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) plays a crucial role in pathological processes
of brain inflammation, injury, and neurodegeneration. Moreover, cytokines such as
interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) induce expression of several inflammatory mediators in
brain astrocytes, which may be important for brain inflammatory disorders. Recent
studies have implicated that increased oxidative stress may contribute to the
brain injury and inflammation. However, whether IL-1ß-induced MMP-9 expression
mediated through oxidative stress remains unclear. Therefore, we investigated the
role of redox signals in IL-1ß-induced MMP-9 expression in rat brain astrocytes
(RBA-1 cells). Herein, we first demonstrated that reactive oxygen species (ROS)
play a crucial role in ILß-induced MMP-9 expression by zymography, real-time PCR,
and ROS staining in cultured RBA-1 cells. Next, IL-1ß-induced MMP-9 expression is
mediated through a c-Src-mediated transactivation of PDGFR/PI3K/Akt cascade
linking to p47(phox)/NADPH oxidase 2 (Nox2)/ROS signaling pathway. Nox2-dependent
ROS generation led to activation of MAPKs and the downstream transcription
factors NF-<U+03BA>B and AP-1 (i.e., ATF2), which enhanced MMP-9 promoter activity, and 
thereby turned on transcription of MMP-9 gene. Functionally, IL-1ß-induced MMP-9 
expression promoted astrocytic migration. These results demonstrated that in
RBA-1 cells, activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and AP-1 (ATF2) by the
c-Src/PDGFR/PI3K/Akt-mediated Nox2/ROS/MAPKs signals is required for upregulation
of MMP-9 and cell migration enhanced by IL-1ß.

PMID: 25159478  [PubMed - in process]


89. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Sep;147(2):295-309. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-3098-0.
Epub 2014 Aug 22.

Phosphorylation of activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) within the
activation domain is a key determinant of sensitivity to tamoxifen in breast
cancer.

Rudraraju B(1), Droog M, Abdel-Fatah TM, Zwart W, Giannoudis A, Malki MI, Moore
D, Patel H, Shaw J, Ellis IO, Chan S, Brooke GN, Nevedomskaya E, Lo Nigro C,
Carroll J, Coombes RC, Bevan C, Ali S, Palmieri C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Clinical Cancer Medicine, Institute of
Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, The Duncan Building, Daulby
Street, Liverpool, L69 3GA, UK.

Activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) has been implicated as a tumour
suppressor in breast cancer (BC). c-JUN N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 MAPK
phosphorylate ATF-2 within the activation domain (AD), which is required for its 
transcriptional activity. To date, the role of ATF-2 in determining response to
endocrine therapy has not been explored. Effects of ATF-2 loss in the oestrogen
receptor (ER)-positive luminal BC cell line MCF7 were explored, as well as its
role in response to tamoxifen treatment. Genome-wide chromatin binding patterns
of ATF-2 when phosphorylated within the AD in MCF-7 cells were determined using
ChIP-seq. The expression of ATF-2 and phosphorylated ATF-2 (pATF-2-Thr71) was
determined in a series of 1,650 BC patients and correlated with
clinico-pathological features and clinical outcome. Loss of ATF-2 diminished the 
growth-inhibitory effects of tamoxifen, while tamoxifen treatment induced ATF-2
phosphorylation within the AD, to regulate the expression of a set of 227 genes
for proximal phospho-ATF-2 binding, involved in cell development, assembly and
survival. Low expression of both ATF-2 and pATF-2-Thr71 was significantly
associated with aggressive pathological features. Furthermore, pATF-2 was
associated with both p-p38 and pJNK1/2 (< 0.0001). While expression of ATF-2 is
not associated with outcome, pATF-2 is associated with longer disease-free
(p = 0.002) and BC-specific survival in patients exposed to tamoxifen (p = 0.01).
Furthermore, multivariate analysis confirmed pATF-2-Thr71 as an independent
prognostic factor. ATF-2 is important for modulating the effect of tamoxifen and 
phosphorylation of ATF-2 within the AD at Thr71 predicts for improved outcome for
ER-positive BC receiving tamoxifen.

PMID: 25141981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2014 Aug;157(4):473-5. doi: 10.1007/s10517-014-2594-x. Epub
2014 Aug 12.

Effect of 3-(3'-tert-butyl-4'-hydroxyphenyl)propyl thiosulfonate sodium on
expression of GSTP1 and NQO1 genes and protein transcription factors in BALB/c
mouse liver.

Shintyapina AB(1), Safronova OG, Vavilin VA, Kandalintseva NV, Prosenko AE,
Lyakhovich VV.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Siberian Division of
the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia,
shintyapina@yandex.ru.

The study examined dynamics of the effect of novel phenol antioxidant preparation
3-(3'-tertbutyl- 4'-hydroxyphenyl)propyl thiosulfonate sodium (TS-13) on
expression of antioxidant protection enzymes genes GSTP1 and NQO1 and on the
content of protein transcription factors NF-<U+03BA>B and ATF-2 in mouse liver.
Expression of GSTP1 gene decreased significantly on days 4 and 7 after per os
administration of TS-13 (100 mg/kg), but increased on post-administration day 14.
On days 7 and 14 post-administration, expression of NQO1 gene was significantly
increased. On day 7, the hepatic content of the phosphorylated form of ATF-2 and 
two subunits of nuclear factor NF-<U+03BA>B (p50, p65) decreased significantly.

PMID: 25110086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Stem Cells. 2014 Dec;32(12):3196-208. doi: 10.1002/stem.1807.

A switch from canonical to noncanonical Wnt signaling mediates early
differentiation of human neural stem cells.

Bengoa-Vergniory N(1), Gorroño-Etxebarria I, González-Salazar I, Kypta RM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Stem Cells Unit, CIC bioGUNE, Derio, Spain.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is essential for neurogenesis but less is known about
ß-catenin-independent Wnt signals. We show here that Wnt/activator protein-1
(AP-1) signaling drives differentiation of human embryonic stem cell and induced 
pluripotent stem cell-derived neural progenitor cells. Neuronal differentiation
was accompanied by a reduction in ß-catenin/Tcf-dependent transcription and
target gene expression, increased levels and/or phosphorylation of activating
transcription factor 2 (ATF2), cyclic AMP response element-binding protein, and
c-Jun, and increased AP-1-dependent transcription. Inhibition of Wnt secretion
using the porcupine inhibitors IWP-2 and Wnt-C59 blocked neuronal
differentiation, while activation or inhibition of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling had no
effect. Neuronal differentiation increased expression of several Wnt genes,
including WNT3A, silencing of which reduced differentiation. Addition of
recombinant Wnt-3a to cells treated with IWP-2 or Wnt-C59 increased AP-1 levels
and restored neuronal differentiation. The effects of Wnt-3a could not be blocked
by addition of Dkk-1 or IWR-1, suggesting the involvement of noncanonical
signaling. Consistent with this, restoration of neuronal differentiation by
Wnt-3a was reduced by inhibition of Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and by gene
silencing of ATF2. Together, these observations suggest that
ß-catenin-independent Wnt signals promote neural stem/progenitor cell
differentiation in a signaling pathway involving Wnt-3a, JNK, and ATF2.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25100239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 5;9(8):e104141. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104141. eCollection
2014.

Dual N- and C-terminal helices are required for endoplasmic reticulum and lipid
droplet association of alcohol acetyltransferases in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Lin JL(1), Wheeldon I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, University of California
Riverside, Riverside, California, United States of America.

In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae two alcohol acetyltransferases (AATases),
Atf1 and Atf2, condense short chain alcohols with acetyl-CoA to produce volatile 
acetate esters. Such esters are, in large part, responsible for the distinctive
flavors and aromas of fermented beverages including beer, wine, and sake. Atf1
and Atf2 localize to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Atf1 is known to localize
to lipid droplets (LDs). The mechanism and function of these localizations are
unknown. Here, we investigate potential mechanisms of Atf1 and Atf2 membrane
association. Segments of the N- and C-terminal domains of Atf1 (residues 24-41
and 508-525, respectively) are predicted to be amphipathic helices. Truncations
of these helices revealed that the terminal domains are essential for ER and LD
association. Moreover, mutations of the basic or hydrophobic residues in the
N-terminal helix and hydrophobic residues in the C-terminal helix disrupted ER
association and subsequent sorting from the ER to LDs. Similar amphipathic
helices are found at both ends of Atf2, enabling ER and LD association. As was
the case with Atf1, mutations to the N- and C-terminal helices of Atf2 prevented 
membrane association. Sequence comparison of the AATases from Saccharomyces,
non-Saccharomyces yeast (K. lactis and P. anomala) and fruits species (C. melo
and S. lycopersicum) showed that only AATases from Saccharomyces evolved terminal
amphipathic helices. Heterologous expression of these orthologs in S. cerevisiae 
revealed that the absence of terminal amphipathic helices eliminates LD
association. Combined, the results of this study suggest a common mechanism of
membrane association for AATases via dual N- and C-terminal amphipathic helices.

PMCID: PMC4122449
PMID: 25093817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Biochem J. 2014 Oct 15;463(2):191-9. doi: 10.1042/BJ20140403.

FGF21 expression and release in muscle cells: involvement of MyoD and regulation 
by mitochondria-driven signalling.

Ribas F, Villarroya J, Hondares E, Giralt M, Villarroya F.

Although the liver is generally considered the main site of production of FGF21
(fibroblast growth factor-21), high FGF21 levels have been found to be associated
with neuromuscular mitochondrial genetic diseases, and there are indications that
the muscle may be a relevant site of FGF21 production under conditions of
muscular mitochondrial stress. In the present study, we found that expression and
release of FGF21 was associated with myogenic differentiation, and we identified 
MyoD as a major controller of FGF21 gene transcription. Mimicking mitochondrial
dysfunction using respiratory chain/oxidative phosphorylation inhibitors resulted
in enhanced expression and release of FGF21 by muscle cells. The increased
production of reactive oxygen species, subsequent induction of p38 MAPK
(mitogen-activated protein kinase) and activation of an ATF2 (activating
transcription factor 2)-binding site at the proximal promoter region of the FGF21
gene was found to be a major mechanism linking mitochondrial dysfunction with
enhanced FGF21 gene transcription in myogenic cells. The myogenic factor MyoD was
required for the induction of FGF21 gene transcription by mitochondrial
dysfunction, thus explaining the preferential response of muscle cells to
mitochondrial dysfunction-induced FGF21 expression and secretion. FGF21 release
by muscle cells in response to mitochondrial alterations may represent a
physiological mechanism by which the sensing of internal energetic status by
muscles results in the release of FGF21 to favour systemic metabolic adaptations.

PMID: 25055037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:950472. doi: 10.1155/2014/950472. Epub 2014 Jun 23.

The regulatory role of activating transcription factor 2 in inflammation.

Yu T(1), Li YJ(2), Bian AH(3), Zuo HB(2), Zhu TW(2), Ji SX(2), Kong F(2), Yin de 
Q(2), Wang CB(2), Wang ZF(2), Wang HQ(2), Yang Y(4), Yoo BC(5), Cho JY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Linyi Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Linyi 276000, China ;
Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746,
Republic of Korea. (2)Linyi Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Linyi
276000, China. (3)Laiwu Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Laiwu 271100, 
China. (4)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon
440-746, Republic of Korea. (5)Research Institute and Hospital, National Cancer
Center, Goyang 410-769, Republic of Korea.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) is a member of the leucine zipper family
of DNA-binding proteins and is widely distributed in tissues including the liver,
lung, spleen, and kidney. Like c-Jun and c-Fos, ATF2 responds to stress-related
stimuli and may thereby influence cell proliferation, inflammation, apoptosis,
oncogenesis, neurological development and function, and skeletal remodeling.
Recent studies clarify the regulatory role of ATF2 in inflammation and describe
potential inhibitors of this protein. In this paper, we summarize the properties 
and functions of ATF2 and explore potential applications of ATF2 inhibitors as
tools for research and for the development of immunosuppressive and
anti-inflammatory drugs.

PMCID: PMC4090481
PMID: 25049453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Cell Signal. 2014 Nov;26(11):2424-35. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.07.021. Epub
2014 Jul 17.

Differential roles of ATF-2 in survival and DNA repair contributing to
radioresistance induced by autocrine soluble factors in A549 lung cancer cells.

Desai S(1), Kumar A(1), Laskar S(2), Pandey BN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Signalling and Cancer Biology Section, Radiation Biology and Health 
Sciences Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 400 085, India.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Dr Ernest Borges
Marg, Parel, Mumbai 400 012, India. (3)Radiation Signalling and Cancer Biology
Section, Radiation Biology and Health Sciences Division, Bhabha Atomic Research
Centre, Mumbai 400 085, India. Electronic address: badrinarain@yahoo.co.in.

Radioresistance is one of the obstacles to the effective radiotherapy for
non-small cell lung cancer. Soluble factors in the tumour microenvironment are
often implicated in radioresistance but the underpinning mechanism(s) remain
largely elusive. We herein studied the wholesome effect of autocrine cytokines
and growth factors in the form of self-conditioned medium (CM) on the
radiosensitivity of A549 cells. A549 cells grown in CM exhibited radioresistance 
which was associated with increased survival and DNA repair. CM induced
pro-survival pathways through increased intracellular cAMP and phosphorylation of
JNK and p38. Downstream to JNK/p38 signalling, ATF-2 phosphorylated at Thr69/71
was accompanied with its increased transcriptional activity in CM treated cells. 
Pre-treatment with cAMP inhibitor and silencing of ATF-2 abrogated the CM-induced
survival. Interestingly, in cells treated with CM followed by radiation, ATF-2
was found to be switched over from transcription factor to DNA damage response
protein. In CM treated cells, after <U+03B3>-radiation p-ATF-2(Thr69/71) and
subsequently the transcriptional activity of ATF-2 were declined with
simultaneous rise in p-ATF-2(Ser490/498). Immunoprecipitation/immunoblotting and 
inhibitor studies showed that phosphorylation of ATF-2 at Ser490/498 was mediated
by ATM. Moreover, p-ATF-2(Ser490/498) was found to be co-localised with <U+03B3>-H2AX in
DNA repair foci in CM-treated cells. The DNA repair activity of ATF-2 was
assisted with higher activity MRN complex in cells grown in CM. Our study
revealed that, autocrine soluble factors regulate dual but differential role of
ATF-2 as a transcription factor or DNA repair protein, which collectively
culminate in radioresistance of A549 cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25041846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 29;289(35):24153-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.522003. Epub
2014 Jul 9.

Avian facial morphogenesis is regulated by c-Jun N-terminal kinase/planar cell
polarity (JNK/PCP) wingless-related (WNT) signaling.

Geetha-Loganathan P(1), Nimmagadda S(1), Fu K(1), Richman JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Oral Health Sciences, Life Sciences Institute, Faculty 
of Dentistry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T
1Z3, Canada. (2)From the Department of Oral Health Sciences, Life Sciences
Institute, Faculty of Dentistry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6T 1Z3, Canada richman@dentistry.ubc.ca.

Wingless-related proteins (WNTs) regulate extension of the central axis of the
vertebrate embryo (convergent extension) as well as morphogenesis of organs such 
as limbs and kidneys. Here, we asked whether WNT signaling directs facial
morphogenesis using a targeted approach in chicken embryos. WNT11 is thought to
mainly act via ß-catenin-independent pathways, and little is known about its role
in craniofacial development. RCAS::WNT11 retrovirus was injected into the
maxillary prominence, and the majority of embryos developed notches in the upper 
beak or the equivalent of cleft lip. Three-dimensional morphometric analysis
revealed that WNT11 prevented lengthening of the maxillary prominence, which was 
due in part to decreased proliferation. We next determined, using a series of
luciferase reporters, that WNT11 strongly induced JNK/planar cell polarity
signaling while repressing the ß-catenin-mediated pathway. The activation of the 
JNK-ATF2 reporter was mediated by the DEP domain of Dishevelled. The impacts of
altered signaling on the mesenchyme were assessed by implanted Wnt11- or
Wnt3a-expressing cells (activates ß-catenin pathway) into the maxillary
prominence or by knocking down endogenous WNT11 with RNAi. Host cells were
attracted to Wnt11 donor cells. In contrast, cells exposed to Wnt3a or the
control cells did not migrate. Cells in which endogenous WNT11 was knocked down
were more oriented and shorter than those exposed to exogenous WNT11. The data
suggest that JNK/planar cell polarity WNT signaling operates in the face to
regulate several morphogenetic events leading to lip fusion.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4148847
PMID: 25008326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 15;289(33):22942-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.522656. Epub
2014 Jun 30.

The unfolded protein response and the phosphorylations of activating
transcription factor 2 in the trans-activation of il23a promoter produced by
ß-glucans.

Rodríguez M(1), Domingo E(2), Alonso S(2), Frade JG(3), Eiros J(4), Crespo MS(5),
Fernández N(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de Valladolid, 47005-Valladolid. (2)the Instituto de
Biología y Genética Molecular, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas,
47003-Valladolid. (3)the Division of Hematology, Hospital Universitario Rio
Hortega, 47012-Valladolid, and. (4)the Division of Microbiology, Hospital
Universitario Rio Hortega, 47012-Valladolid, Spain. (5)the Instituto de Biología 
y Genética Molecular, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas,
47003-Valladolid, mscres@ibgm.uva.es.

Current views on the control of IL-23 production focus on the regulation of
il23a, the gene encoding IL-23 p19, by NF-<U+03BA>B in combination with other
transcription factors. C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), X2-Box-binding protein 1 
(XBP1), activator protein 1 (AP1), SMAD, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBPß),
and cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) have been involved in response
to LPS, but no data are available regarding the mechanism triggered by the fungal
mimic and ß-glucan-containing stimulus zymosan, which produces IL-23 and to a low
extent the related cytokine IL-12 p70. Zymosan induced the mobilization of CHOP
from the nuclear fractions to phagocytic vesicles. Hypha-forming Candida also
induced the nuclear disappearance of CHOP. Assay of transcription factor binding 
to the il23a promoter showed an increase of Thr(P)-71-Thr(P)-69-activating
transcription factor 2 (ATF2) binding in response to zymosan. PKC and
PKA/mitogen- and stress-activated kinase inhibitors down-regulated Thr(P)-71-ATF2
binding to the il23a promoter and il23a mRNA expression. Consistent with the
current concept of complementary phosphorylations on N-terminal Thr-71 and Thr-69
of ATF2 by ERK and p38 MAPK, MEK, and p38 MAPK inhibitors blunted Thr(P)-69-ATF2 
binding. Knockdown of atf2 mRNA with siRNA correlated with inhibition of il23a
mRNA, but it did not affect the expression of il12/23b and il10 mRNA. These data 
indicate the following: (i) zymosan decreases nuclear proapoptotic CHOP, most
likely by promoting its accumulation in phagocytic vesicles; (ii) zymosan-induced
il23a mRNA expression is best explained through coordinated <U+03BA>B- and
ATF2-dependent transcription; and (iii) il23a expression relies on complementary 
phosphorylation of ATF2 on Thr-69 and Thr-71 dependent on PKC and MAPK
activities.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4132795
PMID: 24982422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Oncol Rep. 2014 Sep;32(3):1021-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3296. Epub 2014 Jun 27.

MicroRNA-451 regulates activating transcription factor 2 expression and inhibits 
liver cancer cell migration.

Lv G(1), Hu Z(1), Tie Y(1), Du J(2), Fu H(1), Gao X(3), Zheng X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Pathology, General Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100853, P.R. China. 
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Harbin Medical University,
Harbin, Heilongjiang 150086, P.R. China.

Accumulating evidence suggests that microRNAs (miRNAs) can function as oncogenes 
or as tumor suppressor genes depending on the tissue type or target. Therefore,
clarification of the specific roles of miRNAs is vital for the diagnosis and
treatment of cancer. In the present study, miR-451 was found to be downregulated 
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues when compared to that in adjacent
tissues. Functional analysis showed that, in vitro, miR-451 inhibited the
migration of hepatoma cell lines HepG2 and SK-Hep-1. Further investigation of the
molecular mechanisms identified activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) as a
target of miR-451. miR-451 inhibited ATF2 expression by binding to the 3'UTR. An 
in vivo assay revealed a significant negative correlation between miR-451 and
ATF2 in liver cancer tissues. According to previous findings reported in the
literature, the opposing functions of ATF2 are related to its subcellular
localization. In the nucleus, ATF2 displays oncogenic activities in melanoma. In 
the present study, ATF2 exhibited a higher expression level in the nucleus in
tumoral tissues of HCC as detected by immunohistochemistry. In conclusion, in
this study, we identified a potential target of miR-451, ATF2, and revealed a
novel role of miR-451 in the inhibition of the migratory ability of hepatoma cell
lines.

PMID: 24968707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Aug 15;25(16):2509-21. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E14-05-0962. Epub
2014 Jun 25.

VEGF-A isoforms differentially regulate ATF-2-dependent VCAM-1 gene expression
and endothelial-leukocyte interactions.

Fearnley GW(1), Odell AF(1), Latham AM(1), Mughal NA(2), Bruns AF(3), Burgoyne
NJ(4), Homer-Vanniasinkam S(5), Zachary IC(6), Hollstein MC(7), Wheatcroft SB(3),
Ponnambalam S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Endothelial Cell Biology Unit, School of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom. (2)Endothelial Cell Biology
Unit, School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2
9JT, United KingdomLeeds Vascular Institute, Leeds General Infirmary, Leeds LS1
3EX, United Kingdom. (3)Division of Cardiovascular and Diabetes Research, Faculty
of Medicine and Health, LIGHT Laboratories, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT,
United Kingdom. (4)Fios Genomics, Edinburgh EH16 4UX, United Kingdom. (5)Leeds
Vascular Institute, Leeds General Infirmary, Leeds LS1 3EX, United Kingdom.
(6)Division of Cardiovascular Biology and Medicine, Rayne Institute, University
College London, London, United Kingdom. (7)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (8)Endothelial Cell Biology Unit, School of Molecular 
and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom
s.ponnambalam@leeds.ac.uk.

Vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) regulates many aspects of vascular 
physiology. VEGF-A stimulates signal transduction pathways that modulate
endothelial outputs such as cell migration, proliferation, tubulogenesis, and
cell-cell interactions. Multiple VEGF-A isoforms exist, but the biological
significance of this is unclear. Here we analyzed VEGF-A isoform-specific
stimulation of VCAM-1 gene expression, which controls endothelial-leukocyte
interactions, and show that this is dependent on both ERK1/2 and activating
transcription factor-2 (ATF-2). VEGF-A isoforms showed differential ERK1/2 and
p38 MAPK phosphorylation kinetics. A key feature of VEGF-A isoform-specific
ERK1/2 activation and nuclear translocation was increased phosphorylation of
ATF-2 on threonine residue 71 (T71). Using reverse genetics, we showed ATF-2 to
be functionally required for VEGF-A-stimulated endothelial VCAM-1 gene
expression. ATF-2 knockdown blocked VEGF-A-stimulated VCAM-1 expression and
endothelial-leukocyte interactions. ATF-2 was also required for other endothelial
cell outputs, such as cell migration and tubulogenesis. In contrast, VCAM-1 was
essential only for promoting endothelial-leukocyte interactions. This work
presents a new paradigm for understanding how soluble growth factor isoforms
program complex cellular outputs and responses by modulating signal transduction 
pathways.

© 2014 Fearnley et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for
Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4142621
PMID: 24966171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Aug 17;229(1):25-32. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.06.013. Epub
2014 Jun 6.

Nanomolar levels of PAHs in extracts from urban air induce MAPK signaling in
HepG2 cells.

Jarvis IW(1), Bergvall C(2), Morales DA(3), Kummrow F(4), Umbuzeiro GA(3),
Westerholm R(2), Stenius U(1), Dreij K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Box 210, SE-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Stockholm University,
Svante Arrhenius väg 16, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Faculty of Technology,
State University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Limeira, São Paulo 13484-332, Brazil.
(4)Institute of Environmental, Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Federal
University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), Diadema, São Paulo 09972-270, Brazil.
(5)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Box 210, SE-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: Kristian.Dreij@ki.se.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are common environmental pollutants that 
occur naturally in complex mixtures. Many of the adverse health effects of PAHs
including cancer are linked to the activation of intracellular stress response
signaling. This study has investigated intracellular MAPK signaling in response
to PAHs in extracts from urban air collected in Stockholm, Sweden and Limeira,
Brazil, in comparison to BP in HepG2 cells. Nanomolar concentrations of PAHs in
the extracts induced activation of MEK4 signaling with down-stream increased gene
expression of several important stress response mediators. Involvement of the
MEK4/JNK pathway was confirmed using siRNA and an inhibitor of JNK signaling
resulting in significantly reduced MAPK signaling transactivated by the AP-1
transcription factors ATF2 and c-Jun. ATF2 was also identified as a sensitive
stress responsive protein with activation observed at extract concentrations
equivalent to 0.1 nM BP. We show that exposure to low levels of environmental PAH
mixtures more strongly activates these signaling pathways compared to BP alone
suggesting effects due to interactions. Taken together, this is the first study
showing the involvement of MEK4/JNK/AP-1 pathway in regulating the intracellular 
stress response after exposure to nanomolar levels of PAHs in environmental
mixtures.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24910982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Jul 1;90(1):34-49. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.04.008. Epub
2014 Apr 26.

Salvianolic acid B protects human endothelial progenitor cells against oxidative 
stress-mediated dysfunction by modulating Akt/mTOR/4EBP1, p38 MAPK/ATF2, and
ERK1/2 signaling pathways.

Tang Y(1), Jacobi A(2), Vater C(3), Zou X(4), Stiehler M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Translational Bone, Joint and Soft Tissue Research, Medical Faculty
and University Centre for Orthopaedics and Trauma Surgery, University Hospital
Carl Gustav Carus at Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany; Department
of Pharmacy, the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, 510080
Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: yubo.tang@uniklinikum-dresden.de. (2)Centre
for Translational Bone, Joint and Soft Tissue Research, Medical Faculty and
University Centre for Orthopaedics and Trauma Surgery, University Hospital Carl
Gustav Carus at Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany. Electronic
address: angela.jacobi@uniklinikum-dresden.de. (3)Centre for Translational Bone, 
Joint and Soft Tissue Research, Medical Faculty and University Centre for
Orthopaedics and Trauma Surgery, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus at
Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany. Electronic address:
corina.vater@uniklinikum-dresden.de. (4)Department of Spinal Surgery, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, 510080 Guangzhou, China.
Electronic address: zxnong@hotmail.com. (5)Centre for Translational Bone, Joint
and Soft Tissue Research, Medical Faculty and University Centre for Orthopaedics 
and Trauma Surgery, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus at Technische
Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany. Electronic address:
maik.stiehler@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

The vascular endothelium is specifically sensitive to oxidative stress, and this 
is one of the mechanisms that causes widespread endothelial dysfunction in most
cardiovascular diseases and disorders. Protection against reactive oxygen species
(ROS)-mediated oxidative damage via antioxidant mechanisms is essential for
tissue maintenance and shows therapeutic potential for patients suffering from
cardiovascular and metabolic disorders. Salvianolic acid B (SalB), a natural
bioactive component known from Traditional Chinese Medicine, has been reported to
exert cellular protection in various types of cells. However, the underlying
mechanisms involved are not fully understood. Here, we showed that SalB
significantly promoted the migratory and tube formation abilities of human bone
marrow derived-endothelial progenitor cells (BM-EPCs) in vitro, and substantially
abrogated hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)-induced cell damage. SalB down-regulated Nox4 
and eNOS, as well as nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)-oxidase 
expression upon H2O2 induction that in turn prevents oxidative-induced
endothelial dysfunction. Moreover, SalB suppressed the Bax/Bcl-xL ratio and
caspase-3 activation after H2O2 induction. Furthermore, our results provide
mechanistic evidence that activation of the mTOR/p70S6K/4EBP1 pathways is
required for both SalB-mediated angiogenic and protective effects against
oxidative stress-induced cell injury in BM-EPCs. Suppression of MKK3/6-p38
MAPK-ATF2 and ERK1/2 signaling pathways by SalB significantly protected BM-EPCs
against cell injury caused by oxidative stress via reduction of intracellular ROS
levels and apoptosis. Taken together, by providing a mechanistic insight into the
modulation of redox states in BM-EPCs by SalB, we suggest that SalB has a strong 
potential of being a new proangiogenic and cytoprotective therapeutic agent with 
applications in the field of endothelial injury-mediated vascular diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24780446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Development. 2014 May;141(10):2064-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.107938. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

The Wnt/JNK signaling target gene alcam is required for embryonic kidney
development.

Cizelsky W(1), Tata A, Kühl M, Kühl SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Ulm University,
Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, Ulm 89081, Germany.

Proper development of nephrons is essential for kidney function.
ß-Catenin-independent Wnt signaling through Fzd8, Inversin, Daam1, RhoA and
Myosin is required for nephric tubule morphogenesis. Here, we provide a novel
mechanism through which non-canonical Wnt signaling contributes to tubular
development. Using Xenopus laevis as a model system, we found that the
cell-adhesion molecule Alcam is required for proper nephrogenesis and functions
downstream of Fzd3 during embryonic kidney development. We found alcam expression
to be independent of Fzd8 or Inversin, but to be transcriptionally regulated by
the ß-Catenin-independent Wnt/JNK pathway involving ATF2 and Pax2 in a direct
manner. These novel findings indicate that several branches of Wnt signaling are 
independently required for proximal tubule development. Moreover, our data
indicate that regulation of morphogenesis by non-canonical Wnt ligands also
involves direct transcriptional responses in addition to the effects on a
post-translational level.

PMID: 24764076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 22;9(4):e93567. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093567. eCollection
2014.

GPBAR1/TGR5 mediates bile acid-induced cytokine expression in murine Kupffer
cells.

Lou G(1), Ma X(2), Fu X(3), Meng Z(2), Zhang W(3), Wang YD(3), Van Ness C(3), Yu 
D(3), Xu R(4), Huang W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China; Division of Molecular Diabetes Research, Department
of Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases Research, Beckman Research Institute, City of 
Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, California, United States of America.
(2)Division of Molecular Diabetes Research, Department of Diabetes and Metabolic 
Diseases Research, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope National Medical
Center, Duarte, California, United States of America; Irell & Manella Graduate
School of Biological Sciences, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope National 
Medical Center, Duarte, California, United States of America. (3)Division of
Molecular Diabetes Research, Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases
Research, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope National Medical Center,
Duarte, California, United States of America. (4)Department of Hematology and
Cancer Institute, Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China.

GPBAR1/TGR5 is a novel plasma membrane-bound G protein-coupled bile acid (BA)
receptor. BAs are known to induce the expression of inflammatory cytokines in the
liver with unknown mechanism. Here we show that without other external stimuli,
TGR5 activation alone induced the expression of interleukin 1ß (IL-1ß) and tumor 
necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) in murine macrophage cell line RAW264.7 or murine
Kupffer cells. The TGR5-mediated increase of pro-inflammatory cytokine expression
was suppressed by JNK inhibition. Moreover, the induced pro-inflammatory cytokine
expression in mouse liver by 1% cholic acid (CA) diet was blunted in JNK-/- mice.
TGR5 activation by its ligands enhanced the phosphorylation levels, DNA-binding
and trans-activities of c-Jun and ATF2 transcription factors. Finally, the
induced pro-inflammatory cytokine expression in Kupffer cells by TGR5 activation 
correlated with the suppression of Cholesterol 7a-hydroxylase (Cyp7a1) expression
in murine hepatocytes. These results suggest that TGR5 mediates the BA-induced
pro-inflammatory cytokine production in murine Kupffer cells through
JNK-dependent pathway. This novel role of TGR5 may correlate to the suppression
of Cyp7a1 expression in hepatocytes and contribute to the delicate BA feedback
regulation.

PMCID: PMC3995640
PMID: 24755711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Oncotarget. 2014 Apr 30;5(8):2176-86.

Novel mechanism of JNK pathway activation by adenoviral E1A.

Romanov VS(1), Brichkina AI, Morrison H, Pospelova TV, Pospelov VA, Herrlich P.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute for Age Research - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI),
Beutenbergstr. 11, D-07745 Jena, Germany.

The adenoviral oncoprotein E1A influences cellular regulation by interacting with
a number of cellular proteins. In collaboration with complementary oncogenes, E1A
fully transforms primary cells. As part of this action, E1A inhibits
transcription of c-Jun:Fos target genes while promoting that of
c-Jun:ATF2-dependent genes including jun. Both c-Jun and ATF2 are
hyperphosphorylated in response to E1A. In the current study, E1A was fused with 
the ligand binding domain of the estrogen receptor (E1A-ER) to monitor the
immediate effect of E1A activation. With this approach we now show that E1A
activates c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), the upstream kinases MKK4 and MKK7, as
well as the small GTPase Rac1. Activation of the JNK pathway requires the
N-terminal domain of E1A, and, importantly, is independent of transcription. In
addition, it requires the presence of ERM proteins. Downregulation of signaling
components upstream of JNK inhibits E1A-dependent JNK/c-Jun activation. Taking
these findings together, we show that E1A activates the JNK/c-Jun signaling
pathway upstream of Rac1 in a transcription-independent manner, demonstrating a
novel mechanism of E1A action.

PMCID: PMC4039154
PMID: 24742962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Elife. 2014 Apr 15;3:e01694. doi: 10.7554/eLife.01694.

Nuclear receptor LRH-1/NR5A2 is required and targetable for liver endoplasmic
reticulum stress resolution.

Mamrosh JL(1), Lee JM, Wagner M, Stambrook PJ, Whitby RJ, Sifers RN, Wu SP, Tsai 
MJ, Demayo FJ, Moore DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, United States.

Erratum in
    Elife. 2015;4:e10084.

Chronic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress results in toxicity that contributes to
multiple human disorders. We report a stress resolution pathway initiated by the 
nuclear receptor LRH-1 that is independent of known unfolded protein response
(UPR) pathways. Like mice lacking primary UPR components, hepatic Lrh-1-null mice
cannot resolve ER stress, despite a functional UPR. In response to ER stress,
LRH-1 induces expression of the kinase Plk3, which phosphorylates and activates
the transcription factor ATF2. Plk3-null mice also cannot resolve ER stress, and 
restoring Plk3 expression in Lrh-1-null cells rescues ER stress resolution.
Reduced or heightened ATF2 activity also sensitizes or desensitizes cells to ER
stress, respectively. LRH-1 agonist treatment increases ER stress resistance and 
decreases cell death. We conclude that LRH-1 initiates a novel pathway of ER
stress resolution that is independent of the UPR, yet equivalently required.
Targeting LRH-1 may be beneficial in human disorders associated with chronic ER
stress. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01694.001.

PMCID: PMC3987120
PMID: 24737860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Ethnopharmacol. 2014 May 28;154(1):218-28. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.04.008. Epub
2014 Apr 13.

ATF-2/CREB/IRF-3-targeted anti-inflammatory activity of Korean red ginseng water 
extract.

Yang Y(1), Yang WS(1), Yu T(1), Sung GH(2), Park KW(3), Yoon K(1), Son YJ(4),
Hwang H(1), Kwak YS(5), Lee CM(6), Rhee MH(7), Kim JH(8), Cho JY(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746,
Republic of Korea. (2)Mushroom Research Division, National Institute of
Horticultural and Herbal Science, Rural Development Administration, Eumseong
369-873, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Pharmacy, Sunchon National University, Suncheon 540-742, Republic of Korea.
(5)Ginseng Corporation Central Research Institute, Daejeon 305-805, Republic of
Korea. (6)Metabolic Engineering Division, National Academy of Agricultural
Science, Rural Development Administration, Suwon 441-707, Republic of Korea.
(7)College of Veterinary Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, 
Republic of Korea. (8)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Biosafety Research Institute, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju
561-756, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jhkim1@chonbuk.ac.kr.
(9)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jaecho@skku.edu.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Korean Red Ginseng (KRG) is one of the
representative traditional herbal medicines prepared from Panax ginseng Meyer
(Araliaceae) in Korea. It has been reported that KRG exhibits a lot of different 
biological actions such as anti-aging, anti-fatigue, anti-stress,
anti-atherosclerosis, anti-diabetic, anti-cancer, and anti-inflammatory
activities. Although systematic studies have investigated how KRG is able to
ameliorate various inflammatory diseases, its molecular inhibitory mechanisms had
not been carried out prior to this study.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In order to investigate these mechanisms, we evaluated the
effects of a water extract of Korean Red Ginseng (KRG-WE) on the in vitro
inflammatory responses of activated RAW264.7 cells, and on in vivo gastritis and 
peritonitis models by analyzing the activation events of inflammation-inducing
transcription factors and their upstream kinases.
RESULTS: KRG-WE reduced the production of nitric oxide (NO), protected cells
against NO-induced apoptosis, suppressed mRNA levels of inducible NO synthase
(iNOS), cyclooxygenase (COX)-2, and interferon (IFN)-ß, ameliorated
EtOH/HCl-induced gastritis, and downregulated peritoneal exudate-derived NO
production from lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-injected mice. The inhibition of these
inflammatory responses by KRG-WE was regulated through the suppression of p38,
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and by subsequent
inhibition of activating transcription factor (ATF)-2, cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB), and IRF-3 activation. Of ginsensides included in 
this extract, interestingly, G-Rc showed the highest inhibitory potency on
IRF-3-mediated luciferase activity.
CONCLUSION: These results strongly suggest that the anti-inflammatory activities 
of KRG-WE could be due to its inhibition of the p38/JNK/TBK1 activation pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24735861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:231012. doi: 10.1155/2014/231012. Epub 2014 Feb 23.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor impairs plasminogen activator inhibitor-1
expression via inhibiting TNF-a-activated MAPK/AP-1 signaling cascade.

Chen WL(1), Sheu JR(1), Hsiao CJ(2), Hsiao SH(3), Chung CL(4), Hsiao G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences and Department of Pharmacology, College
of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, 250 Wu-Hsing Street, Taipei 110-31,
Taiwan. (2)School of Respiratory Therapy, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei 110-31, Taiwan. (3)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department 
of Internal Medicine, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei 110-31, Taiwan. 
(4)School of Respiratory Therapy, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei 110-31, Taiwan ; Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei 110-31, Taiwan.

Tumor necrosis factor-(TNF-)-a upregulates plasminogen activator inhibitor-(PAI-)
1 expression in pleural mesothelial cells (PMCs), contributing to fibrin
deposition and pleural fibrosis. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been found
implicated in fibrogenesis. However, the roles of TNF-a or HDAC in the regulation
of PAI-1 expression have not been well investigated. We aimed to examine the
effects and mechanisms of HDAC inhibition on TNF-a-induced PAI-1 expression in
human PMCs. MeT-5A human PMCs were treated with TNF-a in the presence or absence 
of the m-carboxycinnamic acid bishydroxamide (CBHA), an HDAC class II inhibitor, 
and the HDAC activity, PAI-1 protein expression, mRNA, and activated signalings
were analyzed. CBHA abrogated TNF-a-induced HDAC activity, PAI-1 protein and,
mRNA expression in MeT-5A cells. Moreover, CBHA significantly enhanced
mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-(MKP-) 5/MKP-1 expression and
inhibited p38/JNK activations, ATF2/c-Jun translocation, and PAI-1 promoter
activity. Altogether, our data suggest that HDAC inhibition may abrogate
TNF-a-activated MAPK/AP-1 signaling and PAI-1 expression in human PMCs. Given the
antifibrotic effect through PAI-1 abrogation, CBHA may be utilized as a novel
agent in the treatment of fibrotic diseases.

PMCID: PMC3953480
PMID: 24707477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Apr 25;447(1):77-82. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.03.100. Epub 2014 Mar 29.

Sensitization of mesothelioma cells to platinum-based chemotherapy by GSTp
knockdown.

Chen J(1), Solomides C(2), Simpkins H(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, NS-LIJ Health System, 350
Community Drive, Manhasset, NY 11030, USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine at Staten Island University Hospital, 475 Seaview Avenue, Staten Island,
NY 10305, USA. Electronic address: jianli_chen@siuh.edu. (2)Department of
Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Jefferson
Medical College, 132 S. 10th Street, 260E Main, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.
Electronic address: charalambos.solomides@jefferson.edu. (3)The Feinstein
Institute for Medical Research, NS-LIJ Health System, 350 Community Drive,
Manhasset, NY 11030, USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine at
Staten Island University Hospital, 475 Seaview Avenue, Staten Island, NY 10305,
USA. Electronic address: hsimpkins@siuh.edu.

It is predicted that the incidence of mesothelioma will increase and thus it is
important to find new ways to treat this chemoresistant tumor.
Glutathione-S-Transferase p (GSTp) is found at significant levels in
mesotheliomas and thus attenuating its intracellular levels may provide a means
of sensitizing mesothelioma cells to chemotherapy. GSTp knockdowns were therefore
prepared with shRNA (less off-target effects) employing two cell lines (211H,
H2452) that were typed by immunohistochemistry to be of mesothelial origin. The
knockdowns exhibited a decrease in both total GST enzyme activity and GSTp
protein levels as well as an increase in both glutathione levels and sensitivity 
to cis and oxaliplatin. Cisplatin treatment of the knockdowns increased ROS
levels significantly (as compared to the parental cells) and produced activation 
of the JNK/p38 pathways and activating transcription factor (ATF2). The degree of
activation and increase in ROS appeared to correlate with the cell line's
sensitivity to cisplatin. Treatment with N-Acetyl Cysteine decreased ROS
production and JNK/p38 phosphorylation but had minimal affect on ATF2 suggesting 
a direct interaction of GTPp with this transcription factor. Oxaliplatin
treatment produced only minimal changes in ROS levels and activation of the
JNK/p38 pathway. Recently, new methods of siRNA delivery (nanoparticles) have
been shown to be effective in decreasing the levels of target proteins in humans 
including candidate genes involved in drug resistance - thus this approach may
have promise in sensitizing cisplatin-resistant tumors to chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24690178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Bone Miner Res. 2014 Aug;29(8):1823-32. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2229.

Identification of novel transcription factors in osteoclast differentiation using
genome-wide analysis of open chromatin determined by DNase-seq.

Inoue K(1), Imai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrative Pathophysiology, Proteo-Science Center, Graduate
School of Medicine, Ehime University, Ehime, Japan; Department of Biological
Resources, Integrated Center for Sciences, Ehime University, Ehime, Japan.

Clarification of the mechanisms underlying osteoclast differentiation enables us 
to understand the physiology of bone metabolism as well as the pathophysiology of
bone diseases such as osteoporosis. Recently, it has been reported that
epigenetics can determine cell fate and regulate cell type-specific gene
expression. However, little is known about epigenetics during osteoclastogenesis.
To reveal a part of epigenetics, especially focused on chromatin dynamics, during
early osteoclastogenesis and to identify novel transcription factors involved in 
osteoclastogenesis, we performed a genome-wide analysis of open chromatin during 
receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL)-induced osteoclastogenesis using DNase
I hypersensitive sites sequencing (DNase-seq). DNase-seq was performed using the 
extracted nuclei from RAW264 cells treated with or without RANKL for 24 hours,
followed by several bioinformatic analyses. DNase I hypersensitive sites (DHSs)
were dynamically changed during RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis and they
accumulated in promoter regions. The distributions of DHSs among cis-regulatory
DNA regions were identical regardless of RANKL stimulation. Motif discovery
analysis successfully identified well-known osteoclastogenic transcription
factors including Jun, CREB1, FOS, ATF2, and ATF4, but also novel transcription
factors for osteoclastogenesis such as Zscan10, Atf1, Nrf1, and Srebf2. siRNA
knockdown of these identified novel transcription factors impaired
osteoclastogenesis. Taken together, DNase-seq is a useful tool for comprehension 
of epigenetics, especially chromatin dynamics during osteoclastogenesis and for
identification of novel transcription factors involved in osteoclastogenesis.
This study may reveal underlying mechanisms that determine cell type-specific
differentiation of bone cells and may lead to investigation of novel therapeutic 
targets for osteoporosis.

© 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 24677342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cell Commun Signal. 2014 Mar 28;12:22. doi: 10.1186/1478-811X-12-22.

Divergent signaling pathways cooperatively regulate TGFß induction of
cysteine-rich protein 2 in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Wu ML, Chen CH, Lin YT, Jheng YJ, Ho YC, Yang LT, Chen L, Layne MD, Yet SF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and System Medicine, National Health Research
Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan. syet@nhri.org.tw.

BACKGROUND: Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) of the arterial wall play a
critical role in the development of occlusive vascular diseases. Cysteine-rich
protein 2 (CRP2) is a VSMC-expressed LIM-only protein, which functionally limits 
VSMC migration and protects against pathological vascular remodeling. The
multifunctional cytokine TGFß has been implicated to play a role in the
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis through numerous downstream signaling pathways.
We showed previously that TGFß upregulates CRP2 expression; however, the detailed
signaling mechanisms remain unclear.
RESULTS: TGFß treatment of VSMCs activated both Smad2/3 and ATF2 phosphorylation.
Individually knocking down Smad2/3 or ATF2 pathways with siRNA impaired the TGFß 
induction of CRP2, indicating that both contribute to CRP2 expression. Inhibiting
TßRI kinase activity by SB431542 or TßRI knockdown abolished Smad2/3
phosphorylation but did not alter ATF2 phosphorylation, indicating while Smad2/3 
phosphorylation was TßRI-dependent ATF2 phosphorylation was independent of TßRI. 
Inhibiting Src kinase activity by SU6656 suppressed TGFß-induced RhoA and ATF2
activation but not Smad2 phosphorylation. Blocking ROCK activity, the major
downstream target of RhoA, abolished ATF2 phosphorylation and CRP2 induction but 
not Smad2 phosphorylation. Furthermore, JNK inhibition with SP600125 reduced
TGFß-induced ATF2 (but not Smad2) phosphorylation and CRP2 protein expression
while ROCK inhibition blocked JNK activation. These results indicate that
downstream of TßRII, Src family kinase-RhoA-ROCK-JNK signaling pathway mediates
TßRI-independent ATF2 activation. Promoter analysis revealed that the TGFß
induction of CRP2 was mediated through the CRE and SBE promoter elements that
were located in close proximity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that two signaling pathways downstream of
TGFß converge on the CRE and SBE sites of the Csrp2 promoter to cooperatively
control CRP2 induction in VSMCs, which represents a previously unrecognized
mechanism of VSMC gene induction by TGFß.

PMCID: PMC3973006
PMID: 24674138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 5;9(3):e90698. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090698. eCollection 
2014.

MCAF1 and Rta-activated BZLF1 transcription in Epstein-Barr virus.

Lin TY(1), Chu YY(1), Yang YC(1), Hsu SW(2), Liu ST(2), Chang LK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Science and Technology, College of Life Science,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Molecular Genetics Laboratory,
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Chang-Gung University, Taoyuan,
Taiwan.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) expresses two transcription factors, Rta and Zta, which 
are involved in the transcriptional activation of EBV lytic genes. This study
sought to elucidate the mechanism by which Rta activates transcription of the
Zta-encoding gene, BZLF1, through the ZII element in the gene promoter. In a DNA 
affinity precipitation assay, ATF2 was found to associate with an Rta-interacting
protein, MCAF1, at the ZII element. The interaction between Rta, MCAF1, and ATF2 
at the same site in the ZII region was further verified in vivo by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. The complex appears to be crucial for the activation
of BZLF1 transcription, as the overexpression of two ATF2-dominant negative
mutants, or the introduction of MCAF1 siRNA into 293T cells, were both found to
substantially reduce Rta-mediated transcription levels of BZLF1. Moreover, this
study also found that the Rta-MCAF1-ATF2 complex binds to a typical AP-1 binding 
sequence on the promoter of BMRF2, a key viral gene for EBV infection. Mutation
of this sequence decreased Rta-mediated promoter activity significantly. Taken
together, these results indicate a critical role for MCAF1 in AP-1-dependent Rta 
activation of BZLF1 transcription.

PMCID: PMC3944714
PMID: 24598729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Vaccine. 2014 May 19;32(24):2770-81. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.02.016. Epub
2014 Feb 25.

High cell density cultivations by alternating tangential flow (ATF) perfusion for
influenza A virus production using suspension cells.

Genzel Y(1), Vogel T(2), Buck J(2), Behrendt I(3), Ramirez DV(3), Schiedner G(4),
Jordan I(5), Reichl U(6).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems, Magdeburg
Sandtorstr. 1, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany. Electronic address:
genzel@mpi-magdeburg.mpg.de. (2)Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex
Technical Systems, Magdeburg Sandtorstr. 1, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany; University 
of Applied Sciences Esslingen, Kanalstrasse 33, 73728 Esslingen, Germany. (3)Max 
Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems, Magdeburg Sandtorstr.
1, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany. (4)CEVEC Pharmaceuticals GmbH, Gottfried-Hagen-Str. 
62, 51105 Cologne, Germany. (5)ProBioGen AG, Goethestr. 54, 13086 Berlin,
Germany. (6)Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems,
Magdeburg Sandtorstr. 1, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany; Chair for Bioprocess
Engineering, Otto-von-Guericke-University Magdeburg, Universitätsplatz 2, 39106
Magdeburg, Germany.

High cell densities in animal cell culture can be obtained by continuous
perfusion of fresh culture medium across hollow fiber membranes that retain the
cells. Careful selection of the membrane type and cut-off allows to control
accumulation of target molecules and removal of low molecular weight compounds.
In this report, perfusion with the scalable ATF (alternating tangential
filtration, Refine Technology) system was evaluated for two suspension cell
lines, the avian cell line AGE1.CR and the human cell line CAP. Both were
cultivated in chemically defined media optimized for batch cell growth in a 1L
stirred tank bioreactor connected to the smallest ATF unit (ATF2) and infected
with cell line-adapted human influenza A virus (A/PR/8/34 (H1N1), typical
diameter: 80-100 nm). At concentrations of about 25 million cells/mL three
different membrane cut-offs (50 kDa, 0.2 µm and 0.5 µm) were tested and compared 
to batch cultivations performed at 5 million cells/mL. For medium and large
cut-offs no cell-density effect could be observed with cell-specific virus yields
of 1428-1708 virions/AGE1.CR cell (infected with moi 0.001) and 1883-4086
virions/CAP cell (moi of 0.025) compared to 1292 virions/AGE1.CR cell and 3883
virions/CAP cell in batch cultures. Even at a concentration of 48 million AGE1.CR
cells/mL (cut-off: 0.2 µm) a cell-specific yield of 1266 virions/cell was
reached. Only for the small cut-off (50 kDa) used with AGE1.CR cells a decrease
in cell-specific yield was measured with 518 virions/cell. Surprisingly, the
ratio of infectious to total virions seemed to be increased in ATF compared to
batch cultures. AGE1.CR cell-derived virus particles were present in the permeate
(0.2 and 0.5 µm cut-off), whereas CAP cell-derived virions were not, suggesting
possible differences in morphology, aggregation or membrane properties of the
virions released by the two cell lines. To our knowledge, this is the first study
that illustrates the potential of ATF-based perfusion of chemically defined media
across cell-retaining membranes for production of an influenza A vaccine.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24583003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Int J Sports Med. 2014 Sep;35(10):863-70. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1367045. Epub 2014 
Feb 27.

Futsal and continuous exercise induce similar changes in specific skeletal muscle
signalling proteins.

Serpiello FR(1), McKenna MJ(1), Coratella G(2), Markworth JF(3), Tarperi C(2),
Bishop D(1), Stepto NK(1), Cameron-Smith D(3), Schena F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Sport, Exercise and Active Living (ISEAL), College of Sport and
Exercise Science, Victoria University, Melbourne, Australia. (2)Department of
Neurological, Neuropsychological, Morphological and -Movement Sciences, Faculty
of Sport Sciences, University of Verona, Italy. (3)The University of Auckland,
Liggins Institute, Auckland, New Zealand.

Exercise elicits skeletal-muscle adaptations which are important for improved
health outcomes. We compared the effects of a futsal game (FUT) and
moderate-intensity continuous exercise (MOD), on the skeletal-muscle protein
signalling responses in young, healthy individuals. 16 men undertook an
incremental exercise test and a resting muscle biopsy performed >48<U+2009>h apart. They
were then randomly allocated to either FUT (n=12) consisting of 2<U+2009>x<U+2009>20<U+2009>min
halves, or MOD (n=8) consisting of a work-matched running bout performed at an
intensity corresponding to the individual ventilatory threshold 1. Work matching 
was achieved by means of triaxial accelerometers. Immediately after FUT and MOD, 
participants underwent a second biopsy to assess exercise-induced changes in
protein signalling. Total and phosphorylated protein abundance was assessed via
western blotting. Both FUT and MOD altered signalling responses in skeletal
muscle. FUT increased total ATF2 protein abundance (p=0.048) and phosphorylation 
(p=0.029), while no changes occurred with MOD. Both exercise regimes increased
ACC phosphorylation (p=0.01) and returned a trend for increased p38MAPK
phosphorylation. Futsal may be employed as an alternative to continuous exercise 
to elicit muscle adaptations which may be associated with improved health
outcomes. As only FUT increased ATF2 activation, this protein might be a target
of future investigation on exercise-induced signalling.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 24577854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Phys Rev Lett. 2014 Jan 24;112(3):034802. Epub 2014 Jan 24.

Experimental validation of a novel compact focusing scheme for future
energy-frontier linear lepton colliders.

White GR(1), Ainsworth R(2), Akagi T(3), Alabau-Gonzalvo J(4), Angal-Kalinin
D(5), Araki S(6), Aryshev A(6), Bai S(7), Bambade P(8), Bett DR(9), Blair G(10), 
Blanch C(11), Blanco O(12), Blaskovic-Kraljevic N(9), Bolzon B(13), Boogert S(2),
Burrows PN(9), Christian G(9), Corner L(9), Davis MR(9), Faus-Golfe A(11), Fukuda
M(6), Gao J(7), García-Morales H(14), Geffroy N(15), Hayano H(6), Heo AY(16),
Hildreth M(17), Honda Y(6), Huang JY(18), Hwang WH(18), Iwashita Y(19), Jang
S(16), Jeremie A(15), Kamiya Y(20), Karataev P(2), Kim ES(16), Kim HS(16), Kim
SH(18), Kim YI(9), Komamiya S(20), Kubo K(6), Kume T(6), Kuroda S(6), Lam B(1),
Lekomtsev K(6), Liu S(8), Lyapin A(2), Marin E(1), Masuzawa M(6), McCormick D(1),
Naito T(6), Nelson J(1), Nevay LJ(21), Okugi T(6), Omori T(6), Oroku M(20), Park 
H(16), Park YJ(18), Perry C(9), Pfingstner J(4), Phinney N(1), Rawankar A(6),
Renier Y(4), Resta-López J(11), Ross M(1), Sanuki T(22), Schulte D(4), Seryi
A(9), Shevelev M(6), Shimizu H(6), Snuverink J(2), Spencer C(1), Suehara T(20),
Sugahara R(6), Takahashi T(3), Tanaka R(3), Tauchi T(6), Terunuma N(6), Tomás
R(4), Urakawa J(6), Wang D(7), Warden M(9), Wendt M(4), Wolski A(23), Woodley
M(1), Yamaguchi Y(20), Yamanaka T(20), Yan J(20), Yokoya K(6), Zimmermann F(4);
ATF2 Collaboration.

Author information: 
(1)SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, 2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park,
California 94025-7090, USA. (2)John Adams Institute for Accelerator Science at
Royal Holloway University of London, Egham Hill, Egham, Surrey TW20 0EX, United
Kingdom. (3)Department of Physics, Hiroshima University, 1-3-1 Kagamiyama,
Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8526, Japan. (4)European Organization for Nuclear Research 
(CERN), CH-1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland. (5)CLRC: Daresbury Laboratory, Daresbury,
Warrington, Cheshire WA4 4AD, United Kingdom. (6)High Energy Accelerator Research
Organization (KEK), 1-1 Oho, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0801, Japan. (7)Institute of
High Energy Physics (IHEP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China.
(8)LAL, Universite Paris-Sud, CNRS/IN2P3, Orsay, France. (9)John Adams Institute 
for Accelerator Science at University of Oxford, Denys Wilkinson Building, Keble 
Road, Oxford OX1 3RH, United Kingdom. (10)John Adams Institute for Accelerator
Science at Royal Holloway University of London, Egham Hill, Egham, Surrey TW20
0EX, United Kingdom and Science and Technology Facilities Council, Polaris House,
North Star Avenue, Swindon SN2 1SZ, United Kingdom. (11)Universidad de Valencia -
Instituto de Física Corpuscular (IFC), Edificio Institutos de Investigación, c/
Catedrático José Beltrán, 2, E-46980 Paterna, Spain. (12)European Organization
for Nuclear Research (CERN), CH-1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland and LAL, Universite
Paris-Sud, CNRS/IN2P3, Orsay, France. (13)European Organization for Nuclear
Research (CERN), CH-1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland and CLRC: Daresbury Laboratory,
Daresbury, Warrington, Cheshire WA4 4AD, United Kingdom and Department of
Physics, Oliver Lodge Laboratory, University of Liverpool, Oxford St., Liverpool 
L69 3BX, United Kingdom. (14)European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN),
CH-1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland and Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya,
BarcelonaTech, C. Jordi Girona, 31. 08034 Barcelona, Spain. (15)LAPP-Universite
de Savoie-CNRS/IN2P3, Annecy-le-Vieux, France. (16)Department of Physics,
Kyungpook National University, 1370 San Kyuk-dong, Puk ku, Taegu 635, South
Korea. (17)University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana 46556, USA. (18)Pohang
Accelerator Laboratory, POSTECH (Pohang University of Science and Technology),
San-31 Hyoja-dong, Pohang 790-784, South Korea. (19)Institute for Chemical
Research (ICR), Nuclear Science Research Facility, Kyoto University, Gokasho,
Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan. (20)Department of Physics, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113, Japan. (21)John Adams Institute for Accelerator
Science at University of Oxford, Denys Wilkinson Building, Keble Road, Oxford OX1
3RH, United Kingdom and John Adams Institute for Accelerator Science at Royal
Holloway University of London, Egham Hill, Egham, Surrey TW20 0EX, United
Kingdom. (22)Tohoku University, 28 Kawauchi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8576 Japan.
(23)Department of Physics, Oliver Lodge Laboratory, University of Liverpool,
Oxford St., Liverpool L69 3BX, United Kingdom.

A novel scheme for the focusing of high-energy leptons in future linear colliders
was proposed in 2001 [P. Raimondi and A. Seryi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3779
(2001)]. This scheme has many advantageous properties over previously studied
focusing schemes, including being significantly shorter for a given energy and
having a significantly better energy bandwidth. Experimental results from the
ATF2 accelerator at KEK are presented that validate the operating principle of
such a scheme by demonstrating the demagnification of a 1.3 GeV electron beam
down to below 65 nm in height using an energy-scaled version of the compact
focusing optics designed for the ILC collider.

PMID: 24484144  [PubMed]


115. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 8;9(1):e83541. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083541. eCollection 
2014.

PknE, a serine/threonine protein kinase of Mycobacterium tuberculosis initiates
survival crosstalk that also impacts HIV coinfection.

Parandhaman DK(1), Hanna LE(2), Narayanan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, National Institute for Research in Tuberculosis,
Chennai, TamilNadu, India. (2)Department of Clinic Research, HIV division,
National Institute for Research in Tuberculosis, Chennai, TamilNadu, India.

Serine threonine protein kinases (STPK) play a major role in the pathogenesis of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Here, we examined the role of STPK pknE, using a
deletion mutant <U+0394>pknE in the modulation of intracellular signaling events that
favor M. tuberculosis survival. Phosphorylation kinetics of MAPK (p38MAPK, Erk½
and SAPK/JNK) was defective in <U+0394>pknE compared to wild-type infected macrophages. 
This defective signaling dramatically delayed and reduced the phosphorylation
kinetics of transcription factors ATF-2 and c-JUN in <U+0394>pknE infected macrophages. 
MAPK inhibitors instead of reducing the phosphorylation in <U+0394>pknE infected
macrophages, revealed crosstalks with Erk½ signaling influenced by SAPK/JNK and
p38 pathways independently. Modulations in intra cellular signaling altered the
expression of coreceptors CCR5 and CXCR4 in <U+0394>pknE infected macrophages. In
conclusion, pknE plays a role in MAPK crosstalks that enables intracellular
survival of M. tuberculosis. This survival strategy also impacts HIV/TB
coinfection.

PMCID: PMC3885422
PMID: 24421891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Blood Cancer J. 2014 Jan 10;4:e171. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2013.69.

Synergistic cytotoxicity of gemcitabine, clofarabine and edelfosine in lymphoma
cell lines.

Valdez BC(1), Zander AR(2), Song G(1), Murray D(3), Nieto Y(1), Li Y(1), Champlin
RE(1), Andersson BS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Transplantation and Cellular Therapy, University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Stem Cell
Transplantation, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Experimental Oncology, Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada.

Treatments for lymphomas include gemcitabine (Gem) and clofarabine (Clo) which
inhibit DNA synthesis. To improve their cytotoxicity, we studied their synergism 
with the alkyl phospholipid edelfosine (Ed). Exposure of the J45.01 and SUP-T1
(T-cell) and the OCI-LY10 (B-cell) lymphoma cell lines to IC10-IC20 levels of the
drugs resulted in strong synergistic cytotoxicity for the 3-drug combination
based on various assays of cell proliferation and apoptosis. Cell death
correlated with increased phosphorylation of histone 2AX and KAP1, decreased
mitochondrial transmembrane potential, increased production of reactive oxygen
species and release of pro-apoptotic factors. Caspase 8-negative I9.2 cells were 
considerably more resistant to [Gem+Clo+Ed] than caspase 8-positive cells. In all
three cell lines [Gem+Clo+Ed] decreased the level of phosphorylation of the
pro-survival protein AKT and activated the stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase (SAPK/JNK) stress signaling pathway, which in J45.01 cells
resulted in the phosphorylation and heterodimerization of the transcription
factors ATF2 and c-Jun. The observed rational mechanism-based efficacy of
[Gem+Clo+Ed] based on the synergistic convergence of several pro-death and
anti-apoptotic signaling pathways in three very different cell backgrounds
provides a powerful foundation for undertaking clinical trials of this drug
combination for the treatment of lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC3913938
PMID: 24413065  [PubMed]


117. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Mar;33(3):703-10. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1615. Epub 2014 Jan 
7.

Helicobacter pylori enhances CIP2A expression and cell proliferation via
JNK2/ATF2 signaling in human gastric cancer cells.

Zhao Y(1), Li Y(2), Han J(3), Liu T(2), Guan Q(4), Zhao P(4), Guo L(5), Liu K(1),
He D(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Second Clinical Medical School of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, Gansu
730030, P.R. China. (2)Department of General Surgery, The Second Hospital of
Lanzhou University, Key Laboratory of Digestive System Tumors of Gansu Province, 
Lanzhou, Gansu 730030, P.R. China. (3)Institute of Pathogenic Biology, School of 
Basic Medical Science, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Surgical Oncology, The First Hospital of Lanzhou University,
Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, P.R. China. (5)Department of General Surgery, The Second
Hospital of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730030, P.R. China.

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection plays an important role in the
development of gastric carcinomas. Cancerous inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A 
(CIP2A) is a novel human oncoprotein that functions as an important regulator of 
cell growth and malignant transformation. In the present study, we aimed to
investigate the potential mechanisms by which H. pylori upregulates the
expression of CIP2A and the functional impact of H. pylori-induced CIP2A in
gastric cancer cells. We demonstrated that infection of MKN-45 cells with H.
pylori led to a marked increase in the expression of CIP2A at the mRNA and
protein levels. H. pylori-induced CIP2A was associated with increased cell
proliferation. In addition, H. pylori was found to activate the JNK2 pathway.
Importantly, both H. pylori-induced CIP2A production and cell proliferation were 
partially reversed by inhibition of JNK2 signaling. Similarly, the blockade of H.
pylori-induced CIP2A expression by siRNA against CIP2A also inhibited cell
proliferation. Thus, H. pylori appears to stimulate the expression of CIP2A and
proliferation of gastric cancer cells via JNK2 signaling. These findings suggest 
that H. pylori-induced upregulation of CIP2A contributes to the development and
progression of gastric cancer. Further in vivo studies are warranted to explore
the biological role of CIP2A and its interaction with JNK2 signaling in gastric
cancer.

PMID: 24398514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Feb 5;136(5):1698-701. doi: 10.1021/ja4095318. Epub 2014 Jan 
27.

Synthetic phosphorylation of p38a recapitulates protein kinase activity.

Chooi KP(1), Galan SR, Raj R, McCullagh J, Mohammed S, Jones LH, Davis BG.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Research Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford ,
Mansfield Road, Oxford OX1 3TA, U.K.

Through a "tag-and-modify" protein chemical modification strategy, we
site-selectively phosphorylated the activation loop of protein kinase p38a.
Phosphorylation at natural (180) and unnatural (172) sites created two pure
phospho-forms. p38a bearing only a single phosphocysteine (pCys) as a mimic of
pThr at 180 was sufficient to switch the kinase to an active state, capable of
processing natural protein substrate ATF2; 172 site phosphorylation did not. In
this way, we chemically recapitulated triggering of a relevant segment of the
MAPK-signaling pathway in vitro. This allowed detailed kinetic analysis of global
and stoichiometric phosphorylation events catalyzed by p38a and revealed that
site 180 is a sufficient activator alone and engenders dominant
mono-phosphorylation activity. Moreover, a survey of kinase inhibition using
inhibitors with different (Type I/II) modes (including therapeutically relevant) 
revealed unambiguously that Type II inhibitors inhibit phosphorylated p38a and
allowed discovery of a predictive kinetic analysis based on cooperativity to
distinguish Type I vs II.

PMCID: PMC4235370
PMID: 24393126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Ethnopharmacol. 2014 Feb 12;151(3):1165-74. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.12.033.
Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Myrsine seguinii ethanolic extract and its active component quercetin inhibit
macrophage activation and peritonitis induced by LPS by targeting to
Syk/Src/IRAK-1.

Yang WS(1), Jeong D(1), Yi YS(1), Lee BH(2), Kim TW(3), Htwe KM(4), Kim YD(5),
Yoon KD(6), Hong S(1), Lee WS(7), Cho JY(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746,
Republic of Korea. (2)Division of Biological Resources Coordination, National
Institute of Biological Resources, Incheon 404-708, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon 200-701,
Republic of Korea. (4)Popa Mountain Park, Forest Department, Kyaukpadaung
Township, Mandalay Division, Myanmar. (5)Department of Life Science, Hallym
University, Chuncheon 200-702, Republic of Korea. (6)College of Pharmacy, The
Catholic University of Korea, Bucheon 420-743, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: kdyoon@catholic.ac.kr. (7)Department of Forest Sciences, Seoul National 
University, Seoul 151-921, Republic of Korea. (8)Department of Genetic
Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: jaecho@skku.edu.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Myrsine seguinii H. LÉVEILLÉ (syn. Rapanea
neriifolia) (Myrsinaceae) is a medicinal plants traditionally used in Myanmar to 
treat infectious and inflammatory diseases. Since none of reports have
systematically demonstrated the anti-inflammatory activity of this plant, we
aimed to mechanistically understand the regulatory roles of the plant in
inflammatory responses using the ethanolic extract of Myrsine seguinii (Ms-EE).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Activated macrophages and peritonitis symptoms induced by 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) were employed. HPLC analysis was used to identify active
components. To characterize direct target enzymes, kinase assay was established.
RESULTS: Ms-EE inhibited the production of nitric oxide (NO) and prostaglandin
(PG)E2 in RAW264.7 cells and peritoneal macrophages stimulated by LPS. This
extract suppressed the mRNA expression of the inducible NO synthase (iNOS) and
cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 genes by down-regulating the activation of nuclear factor 
(NF)-<U+03BA>B and activator protein (AP-1). Interestingly, it was found that Ms-EE can 
directly suppress the enzyme activities of Syk, Src, and interleukin-1
receptor-associated kinase-1 (IRAK-1). Similarly, orally administered Ms-EE
inhibited the phosphorylation of Src and Syk in peritoneal exudate-derived cells 
prepared from peritonitis. Finally, HPLC analysis clearly demonstrated that
quercetin is a major active component with suppressing activity on the release of
inflammatory mediators (NO and PGE2), and the enzyme activities of Src, Syk, and 
IRAK-1.
CONCLUSION: Ms-EE containing quercetin negatively modulates macrophage-mediated
in vitro inflammatory responses and LPS-induced peritonitis by blocking the
Src/Syk/NF-<U+03BA>B and IRAK-1/AP-1 pathways, which contributes to its major
ethnopharmacological use as an anti-inflammatory herbal medicine.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24378351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Anim Sci Technol. 2014 Nov 6;56:23. doi: 10.1186/2055-0391-56-23. eCollection
2014.

A whole genomic scan to detect selection signatures between Berkshire and Korean 
native pig breeds.

Edea Z(1), Kim KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, 361-763 
Korea.

BACKGROUND: Scanning of the genome for selection signatures between breeds may
play important role in understanding the underlie causes for observable
phenotypic variations. The discovery of high density single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) provide a useful starting point to perform genome-wide scan 
in pig populations in order to identify loci/candidate genes underlie phenotypic 
variation in pig breeds and facilitate genetic improvement programs. However,
prior to this study genomic region under selection in commercially selected
Berkshire and Korean native pig breeds has never been detected using high density
SNP markers. To this end, we have genotyped 45 animals using Porcine SNP60 chip
to detect selection signatures in the genome of the two breeds by using the F ST 
approach.
RESULTS: In the comparison of Berkshire and KNP breeds using the FDIST approach, 
a total of 1108 outlier loci (3.48%) were significantly different from zero at
99% confidence level with 870 of the outlier SNPs displaying high level of
genetic differentiation (F ST =0.490). The identified candidate genes were
involved in a wide array of biological processes and molecular functions. Results
revealed that 19 candidate genes were enriched in phosphate metabolism (GO:
0006796; ADCK1, ACYP1, CAMK2D, CDK13, CDK13, ERN1, GALK2, INPP1; MAK, MAP2K5,
MAP3K1, MAPK14, P14KB, PIK3C3, PRKC1, PTPRK, RNASEL, THBS1, BRAF, VRK1). We have 
identified a set of candidate genes under selection and have known to be involved
in growth, size and pork quality (CART, AGL, CF7L2, MAP2K5, DLK1, GLI3, CA3 and
MC3R), ear morphology and size (HMGA2 and SOX5) stress response (ATF2, MSRB3,
TMTC3 and SCAF8) and immune response ( HCST and RYR1).
CONCLUSIONS: Some of the genes may be used to facilitate genetic improvement
programs. Our results also provide insights for better understanding of the
process and influence of breed development on the pattern of genetic variations.

PMCID: PMC4540274
PMID: 26290712  [PubMed]


121. J Gastroenterol. 2014 Dec;49(12):1557-66. doi: 10.1007/s00535-013-0927-6. Epub
2013 Dec 22.

Proliferation of mouse liver stem/progenitor cells induced by plasma from
patients with acute liver failure is modulated by P2Y2 receptor-mediated JNK
activation.

Wang T(1), Takikawa Y, Watanabe A, Kakisaka K, Oikawa K, Miyamoto Y, Suzuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Iwate Medical
University, Morioka, Iwate, Japan, tingwang@iwate-med.ac.jp.

Erratum in
    J Gastroenterol. 2014 Dec;49(12):1588. Oigawa, Kanta [corrected to Oikawa,
Kanta].

BACKGROUND: We recently reported that acute liver failure plasma (ALF-P) promotes
the proliferation of mouse liver oval cells (OCs) through c-jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK) activation. The aim of this study was to investigate the mechanism by which
ALF-P induces JNK activation and OC proliferation.
METHODS: OCs and primary hepatocytes were exposed to ALF-P or normal control
plasma (NC-P). Cell proliferation and activation of JNK and other JNK signaling
molecules were detected subsequently. Next, we determined the effects of
extracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and ATP receptors on ALF-P-stimulated 
cell growth. Finally, the relationship between the tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNFa) and ATP receptor pathways was investigated.
RESULTS: Cell proliferation accompanied by JNK activation was only observed in
ALF-P-stimulated OCs. ALF-P stimulated the activation of SEK1/MKK4 and ATF2, but 
not c-Jun. Both PPADS (pyridoxalphosphate-6-azophenyl-2',4'-disulfonic acid)
treatment and P2Y2 (G-protein-coupled) small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection
blocked the effects of ALF-P on cell proliferation and JNK activation. However,
ATP levels in ALF-P were significantly lower than that in NC-P, and ATP did not
stimulate the proliferation of OCs. On the other hand, TNFa stimulated JNK
activation and proliferation of OCs. TNFa receptor antagonist partly inhibited
the ALF-P-stimulated proliferation of OCs. Moreover, PPADS significantly
inhibited TNFa-stimulated cell proliferation, induced apoptosis, and inhibited
the activation of JNK. However, our data showed no significant difference in
plasma TNFa levels between the NC-P and ALF-P samples.
CONCLUSIONS: JNK activation induced by P2Y2 receptor crosstalk with the TNFa
signaling pathway is important in mediating the effects of ALF-P on the
proliferation and survival of OCs.

PMID: 24362969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Bone. 2014 Mar;60:186-97. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.12.014. Epub 2013 Dec 18.

c-Src-dependent transactivation of PDGFR contributes to TNF-a-induced MMP-9
expression and functional impairment in osteoblasts.

Tsai CL(1), Chen WC(2), Lee IT(3), Chi PL(2), Cheng SE(2), Yang CM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology and Health Ageing Research Center,
College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan; Department of
Nursing, Division of Basic Medical Sciences, Chang Gung University of Science and
Technology, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. (2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology and
Health Ageing Research Center, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University,
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. (3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology and Health Ageing 
Research Center, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan;
Department of Anesthetics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Lin-Kou and College of
Medicine, Chang Gung University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. (4)Department of
Physiology and Pharmacology and Health Ageing Research Center, College of
Medicine, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. Electronic address:
chuenmao@mail.cgu.edu.tw.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), MMP-9 especially, have been shown to be induced
by cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and may contribute to
bone inflammatory diseases and postnatal bone modeling and remodeling. However,
the mechanisms underlying MMP-9 expression induced by TNF-a in osteoblasts remain
unclear. Here, we showed that in MC3T3-E1 cells, TNF-a induced MMP-9 gene
expression determined by real-time PCR, zymography, and promoter assay.
TNF-a-mediated responses were attenuated by pretreatment with the inhibitor of
protein tyrosine kinase (PTK; genistein), c-Src (PP1), PDGFR (AG1296), PI3K
(LY294002), Akt (SH-5), MEK1/2 (U0126), p38 MAPK (SB202190), JNK1/2 (SP600125),
or AP-1 (Tanshinone IIA) and transfection with siRNA of c-Src, PDGFR, p85, Akt,
c-Jun, or ATF2. Moreover, TNF-a also time-dependently stimulated phosphorylation 
of c-Src and PDGFR and c-Src/PDGFR complex formation, which were reduced by
pretreatment with PP1 or AG1296. TNF-a-stimulated Akt phosphorylation was
inhibited by genistein, PP1, AG1296, LY294002, or SH5. We further demonstrated
that TNF-a stimulated ERK1/2, p38 MAPK, and JNK1/2 phosphorylation via a
c-Src-dependent PDGFR/PI3K/Akt pathway. TNF-a stimulated AP-1 activation,
including c-Jun and ATF2 phosphorylation and AP-1 transcription activity via
MAPK-dependent pathways. In addition, TNF-a-induced MMP-9 promoter activity was
mediated through an AP-1 binding domain of the MMP-9 promoter region. Finally, we
found that up-regulation of MMP-9 contributes to MMP-mediated type I collagen
degradation and osteoblasts detachment. These results suggested that
TNF-a-induced MMP-9 expression is mediated through a c-Src-dependent PDGFR
transactivation and PI3K/Akt cascade linking to MAPK-mediated activation of AP-1 
(c-Jun/ATF2) and leading to functional impairment in osteoblasts.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24361597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Dec 19;4:e973. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.475.

The ROS/JNK/ATF2 pathway mediates selenite-induced leukemia NB4 cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis in vitro and in vivo.

An JJ(1), Shi KJ(1), Wei W(1), Hua FY(1), Ci YL(1), Jiang Q(1), Li F(1), Wu P(1),
Hui KY(1), Yang Y(1), Xu CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and School of Basic
Medicine, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing, China.

It has previously been shown that selenite can act as an antitumor agent and
inhibit cancer cell growth, although the mechanism responsible for this effect is
not well understood. In this study, we have shown that selenite can induce cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis in NB4 cells. Selenite treatment of these cells also
inhibited the JNK/ATF2 axis. Further experiments demonstrated that
selenite-induced production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) worked as an
upstream of the JNK/ATF2 axis, cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Inactivation of
ATF2 resulted in decreased affinity of this transcription factor for the
promoters of cyclin A, cyclin D3 and CDK4, which led to the arrest of the NB4
cells in the G0/G1 phase. Finally, in vivo experiments confirmed the antitumor
activity of selenite and the mechanisms that were described in vitro. Taken
together, our results indicate that selenite-induced ROS arrest NB4 cells at
G0/G1 phase through inhibiting the JNK/ATF2 axis in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3877548
PMID: 24357804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Feb;13(2):364-74. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0513. Epub 
2013 Dec 19.

Characterization of LY2228820 dimesylate, a potent and selective inhibitor of p38
MAPK with antitumor activity.

Campbell RM(1), Anderson BD, Brooks NA, Brooks HB, Chan EM, De Dios A, Gilmour R,
Graff JR, Jambrina E, Mader M, McCann D, Na S, Parsons SH, Pratt SE, Shih C,
Stancato LF, Starling JJ, Tate C, Velasco JA, Wang Y, Ye XS.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Robert M. Campbell, Eli Lilly and Company, Lilly
Corporate Center, dc0424, Indianapolis, IN 46285.
campbell_robert_morris@lilly.com.

p38a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) is activated in cancer cells in
response to environmental factors, oncogenic stress, radiation, and chemotherapy.
p38a MAPK phosphorylates a number of substrates, including MAPKAP-K2 (MK2), and
regulates the production of cytokines in the tumor microenvironment, such as
TNF-a, interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß), IL-6, and CXCL8 (IL-8). p38a MAPK is highly
expressed in human cancers and may play a role in tumor growth, invasion,
metastasis, and drug resistance. LY2228820 dimesylate (hereafter LY2228820), a
trisubstituted imidazole derivative, is a potent and selective, ATP-competitive
inhibitor of the a- and ß-isoforms of p38 MAPK in vitro (IC(50) = 5.3 and 3.2
nmol/L, respectively). In cell-based assays, LY2228820 potently and selectively
inhibited phosphorylation of MK2 (Thr334) in anisomycin-stimulated HeLa cells (at
9.8 nmol/L by Western blot analysis) and anisomycin-induced mouse RAW264.7
macrophages (IC(50) = 35.3 nmol/L) with no changes in phosphorylation of p38a
MAPK, JNK, ERK1/2, c-Jun, ATF2, or c-Myc = 10 µmol/L. LY2228820 also reduced
TNF-a secretion by lipopolysaccharide/IFN-<U+03B3>-stimulated macrophages (IC(50) = 6.3 
nmol/L). In mice transplanted with B16-F10 melanoma, tumor phospho-MK2 (p-MK2)
was inhibited by LY2228820 in a dose-dependent manner [threshold effective dose
(TED)(70) = 11.2 mg/kg]. Significant target inhibition (>40% reduction in p-MK2) 
was maintained for 4 to 8 hours following a single 10 mg/kg oral dose. LY2228820 
produced significant tumor growth delay in multiple in vivo cancer models
(melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer, ovarian, glioma, myeloma, breast). In
summary, LY2228820 is a p38 MAPK inhibitor, which has been optimized for potency,
selectivity, drug-like properties (such as oral bioavailability), and efficacy in
animal models of human cancer.

PMID: 24356814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Feb;41(2):627-37. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2901-z. Epub 2013
Dec 19.

SOCS2 inhibited mitochondria biogenesis via inhibiting p38 MAPK/ATF2 pathway in
C2C12 cells.

Gan L(1), Liu Z, Zhang Z, Yang X, Liu J, Sun C.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
712100, Shaanxi, China.

In order to investigate the mechanism of suppressor of cytokine signaling 2
(SOCS2) on mitochondrial biogenesis, RNA interference and over-expression plasmid
vectors of SOCS2 were used to transfect murine skeletal muscle C2C12 cells.
Results demonstrated that over-expression of SOCS2 inhibited the differentiation 
of C2C12 cells, and reduced the expression of MyHC, MyoD and MyoG while elevated 
the protein expression of MSTN. Meanwhile the expression of PGC-1a, MDH, CPT-1
were significantly elevated in the RNA interference of SOCS2 group which were
decreased in SOCS2 overexpression group. However, there was no change on the
expression of UCP1 in both two groups. JC-1 dyeing showed overexpression of SOCS2
decreased the mitochondrial membrane potential and results of immunofluorescence,
real-time PCR and western blotting indicated the increase expression of Cyt c,
while interference SOCS2 had the opposite effects in C2C12 cells. Moreover,
interference of SOCS2 elevated the p38 phosphorylation level then further
increased the phosphorylation of ATF2, whereas overexpression of SOCS2 alleviated
this phenomenon. Taken together, our observations indicated that SOCS2 could
suppress myotube formation, act as an anti-regulator of mitochondria biogenesis
via inhibiting p38 MAPK signal pathway.

PMID: 24352701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 7;111(1):421-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1321704111. 
Epub 2013 Dec 16.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 3C binds to BATF/IRF4 or SPI1/IRF4 composite
sites and recruits Sin3A to repress CDKN2A.

Jiang S(1), Willox B, Zhou H, Holthaus AM, Wang A, Shi TT, Maruo S, Kharchenko
PV, Johannsen EC, Kieff E, Zhao B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Program in Virology,
Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, and Center for Biomedical
Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA3C) repression of CDKN2A p14(ARF) and 
p16(INK4A) is essential for immortal human B-lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL)
growth. EBNA3C ChIP-sequencing identified >13,000 EBNA3C sites in LCL DNA. Most
EBNA3C sites were associated with active transcription; 64% were strong H3K4me1- 
and H3K27ac-marked enhancers and 16% were active promoters marked by H3K4me3 and 
H3K9ac. Using ENCODE LCL transcription factor ChIP-sequencing data, EBNA3C sites 
coincided (±250 bp) with RUNX3 (64%), BATF (55%), ATF2 (51%), IRF4 (41%), MEF2A
(35%), PAX5 (34%), SPI1 (29%), BCL11a (28%), SP1 (26%), TCF12 (23%), NF-<U+03BA>B (23%),
POU2F2 (23%), and RBPJ (16%). EBNA3C sites separated into five distinct clusters:
(i) Sin3A, (ii) EBNA2/RBPJ, (iii) SPI1, and (iv) strong or (v) weak BATF/IRF4.
EBNA3C signals were positively affected by RUNX3, BATF/IRF4 (AICE) and SPI1/IRF4 
(EICE) cooccupancy. Gene set enrichment analyses correlated EBNA3C/Sin3A promoter
sites with transcription down-regulation (P < 1.6 × 10(-4)). EBNA3C signals were 
strongest at BATF/IRF4 and SPI1/IRF4 composite sites. EBNA3C bound strongly to
the p14(ARF) promoter through SPI1/IRF4/BATF/RUNX3, establishing RBPJ-, Sin3A-,
and REST-mediated repression. EBNA3C immune precipitated with Sin3A and
conditional EBNA3C inactivation significantly decreased Sin3A binding at the
p14(ARF) promoter (P < 0.05). These data support a model in which EBNA3C binds
strongly to BATF/IRF4/SPI1/RUNX3 sites to enhance transcription and recruits
RBPJ/Sin3A- and REST/NRSF-repressive complexes to repress p14(ARF) and p16(INK4A)
expression.

PMCID: PMC3890834
PMID: 24344258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Genet Mol Res. 2013 Nov 26;12(4):5992-6005. doi: 10.4238/2013.November.26.9.

Critical evaluation of transcription factor Atf2 as a candidate modulator of
alcohol preference in mouse and human populations.

Wang LS(1), Jiao Y, Huang Y, Liu XY, Gibson G, Bennett B, Hamre KM, Li DW, Zhao
HY, Gelernter J, Kranzler HR, Farrer LA, Lu L, Wang YJ, Gu WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and BioMedical Engineering, Campbell Clinic,
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA.

In prior work, congenic strains carrying the DBA/2Igb (D2) region of chromosome 2
(Chr2) for alcohol preference were bred onto a C57BL/6Ibg (B6) background and as 
predicted were found to reduce voluntary consumption. Subsequently,
interval-specific congenic recombinant strains (ISCRS) were generated and also
tested. These ISCRS strains reduced the quantitative trait loci (QTL) interval to
a comparatively small 3.4 Mb region. Here, we have exploited an integrative
approach using both murine and human populations to critically evaluate candidate
genes within this region. First, we used bioinformatics tools to search for genes
relevant to alcohol preference within the QTL region. Second, we searched for
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within exons of every gene in this region.
Third, we conducted follow-up microarray analyses to identify differentially
expressed genes between the B6 and ISCRS strains in mice from each group. Fourth,
we analyzed correlations between the expression level of candidate genes and
phenotypes of alcohol preference in a large family of BXD recombinant inbred
strains derived from B6 and D2. Finally, we evaluated SNP segregation in both BXD
mouse strains and in humans who were heavy alcohol drinkers or non-drinkers.
Among several potential candidate genes in this region, we identified activating 
transcription factor 2 (Atf2) as the most plausible gene that would influence
alcohol preference. However, the candidacy of Atf2 was only weakly supported when
we used a genetic network approach and by focused reanalysis of genome-wide
association study data from European-American and African-American populations.
Thus, we cannot conclude that Atf2 plays a role in the regulation of the QTL of
mouse Chr2.

PMCID: PMC4108070
PMID: 24338393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 2;8(12):e80997. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080997. eCollection
2013.

Inhibitory effect of baicalin on iNOS and NO expression in intestinal mucosa of
rats with acute endotoxemia.

Feng A(1), Zhou G, Yuan X, Huang X, Zhang Z, Zhang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Huai'an First People's Hospital,
Nanjing Medical, University, Huai'an, P. R. China.

The mechanism by which baicalin modulated the expression of inducible nitric
oxide synthase (iNOS) and nitric oxide (NO) in the mucosa of distal ileum was
investigated in a rat model of acute endo-toxemia induced by intraperitoneal
injection of bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The experiment demonstrated that
LPS upregulated iNOS mRNA and protein expression as well as NO produc-tion
(measured as the stable degradation production, nitrites). LPS not only increased
toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 
(PPAR<U+03B3>) content, but also activated p38 and activating transcription factor 2
(ATF2) and inactivated PPAR<U+03B3> via phosphorylation. Inhibition of p38 signalling
pathway by chemical inhibitor SB202190 and small interfering RNA (siRNA)
ameliorated LPS-induced iNOS generation, while suppression of PPAR<U+03B3> pathway by
SR-202 boosted LPS-elicited iNOS expression. Baicalin treatment (I) attenuated
LPS-induced iNOS mRNA and protein as well as nitrites generation, and (II)
ameliorated LPS-elicited TLR4 and PPAR<U+03B3> production, and (III) inhibited p38/ATF2 
phosphorylation leading to suppression of p38 signalling, and (IV) prevented
PPAR<U+03B3> from phosphorylation contributing to maintainence of PPAR<U+03B3> bioactivity.
However, SR-202 co-treatment (I) partially abrogated the inhibitory effect of
baicalin on iNOS mRNA expression, and (II) partially reversed baicalin-inhibited 
p38 phosphorylation. In summary, baicalin could ameliorate LPS-induced iNOS and
NO overproduction in mucosa of rat terminal ileum via inhibition of p38
signalling cascade and activation of PPAR<U+03B3> pathway. There existed a interplay
between the two signalling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3846647
PMID: 24312512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Hum Pathol. 2014 Feb;45(2):276-84. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.09.003. Epub 2013 
Nov 27.

Activating transcription factor 2 in mesenchymal tumors.

Endo M(1), Su L(2), Nielsen TO(3).

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Pathology Evaluation Centre, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada;
Department of Anatomic Pathology, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan; Department
of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (2)Biomedical Research
Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Genetic Pathology Evaluation Centre, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
Electronic address: torsten@mail.ubc.ca.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) is a member of activator protein 1
superfamily, which can heterodimerize with other transcription factors regulating
cell differentiation and survival. ATF2 assembles into a complex with the
synovial sarcoma translocation, chromosome 18 (SS18)-synovial sarcoma, X
breakpoint (SSX) fusion oncoprotein, and the transducin-like enhancer of split 1 
(TLE1) corepressor, driving oncogenesis in synovial sarcoma. The fusion
oncoproteins in many other translocation-associated sarcomas incorporate
transcription factors from the ATF/cAMP response element binding or E26 families,
which potentially form heterodimers with ATF2 to regulate transcription. ATF2 may
therefore play an important role in the oncogenesis of many mesenchymal tumors,
but as yet, little is known about its protein expression in patient specimens.
Herein we perform immunohistochemical analyses using a validated specific
antibody for ATF2 expression and intracellular localization on a cohort of 594
malignant and 207 benign mesenchymal tumors representing 47 diagnostic entities. 
Melanoma served as a positive control for nuclear and cytoplasmic staining. High 
nuclear ATF2 expression was mainly observed in translocation-associated and/or
spindle cell sarcomas including synovial sarcoma, desmoplastic small round cell
tumor, endometrial stromal sarcoma, gastrointestinal stromal tumor, malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor, and solitary fibrous tumor. Cytoplasmic ATF2
expression was less frequently seen than nuclear expression in malignant
mesenchymal tumors. Benign mesenchymal tumors mostly showed much lower nuclear
and cytoplasmic ATF2 expression.

© 2014.

PMID: 24289970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Neurobiol. 2014 Jun;49(3):1256-69. doi: 10.1007/s12035-013-8597-1. Epub 2013 
Nov 28.

Upregulation of COX-2/PGE2 by ET-1 mediated through Ca2+-dependent signals in
mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells.

Lin CC(1), Hsieh HL, Chi PL, Yang CC, Hsiao LD, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthetics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkuo, and College
of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

Endothelin-1 (ET-1), a proinflammatory mediator, is elevated in the regions of
several brain inflammatory disorders, implying that ET-1 may contribute to
inflammatory responses. The deleterious effects of ET-1 on brain endothelial
cells may aggravate brain inflammation mediated through the upregulation of
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)/prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) system. However, the signaling
mechanisms underlying ET-1-induced COX-2 expression in mouse brain microvascular 
endothelial cells (bEnd.3 cells) remain unclear. Herein, we investigated the
effects of Ca2+-dependent protein kinases on ET-1-induced COX-2 expression and
PGE2 release in bEnd.3 cells. The data obtained with Western blotting, reverse
transcription PCR, and intracellular Ca2+ analyses showed that ET-1-induced COX-2
expression was mediated through phosphatidylinositol-phospholipase C (PI-PLC) and
phosphatidylcholine-phospholipase C (PC-PLC)/Ca2+-dependent activation of protein
kinase C-alpha (PKC-a) and calmodulin kinase II (CaMKII) cascades. Next, we
demonstrated that ET-1 stimulated intracellular Ca2+ increase, phoshorylation of 
PKC-a, CaMKII, and mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) (ERK1/2, p38 MAPK,
and JNK1/2) and then activated the activating transcription factor 2
(ATF2)/activator protein 1 (AP-1) via Gq/i protein-coupled ETB receptors.
Moreover, the data of chromatin immunoprecipitation and promoter reporter assay
demonstrated that the activated ATF2/AP-1 and p300 bound to its corresponding
binding sites within COX-2 promoter, thereby turning on COX-2 gene transcription.
Finally, upregulation of COX-2 by ET-1 promoted PGE2 biosynthesis and release in 
these cells. Taken together, these results demonstrate that in bEnd.3 cells,
Ca2+-dependent PKC-a and CaMKII linking to MAPKs, ATF2/AP-1, and p300 cascade is 
essential for ET-1-induced COX-2 upregulation. Understanding the mechanisms of
COX-2/PGE2 system upregulated by ET-1 on brain microvascular endothelial cells
may provide rational therapeutic interventions for brain injury and inflammatory 
diseases.

PMID: 24287977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mol Hum Reprod. 2014 Feb;20(2):127-38. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gat080. Epub 2013 Nov 
13.

Discovery, identification and sequence analysis of RNAs selected for very short
or long poly A tail in immature bovine oocytes.

Gohin M(1), Fournier E, Dufort I, Sirard MA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de
L'Agriculture et de L'Alimentation, Département des Sciences Animales, 2440 Bl.
Hochelaga, Pavillon INAF, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada G1V 0A6.

A major challenge in applying genomics to oocyte physiology is that many RNAs are
present but will not be translated into proteins, making it difficult to draw
conclusions from RNAseq and array data. Oocyte maturation and early embryo
development rely on maternal storage of specific RNAs with a short poly(A) tail, 
which must be elongated for translation. To resolve the role of key genes during 
that period, we aimed to characterize both extremes of mRNA: deadenylated RNA and
long polyA tails mRNA population in immature bovine oocytes. Using magnetic beads
coupled to oligodT, we isolated deadenylated (A-, 20-50 adenosines) from
polyadenylated (A+, up to 200 adenosines) RNAs. After transcriptomic analysis, we
observed that A+ candidates are associated with short-term processes required for
immediate cell survival (translation or protein transport) or meiotic resumption,
while several A- candidates are involved in processes (chromatin modification,
gene transcription and post-transcriptional modifications) that will be extremely
important in the development of the early embryo. In addition to a list of
candidates probably translated early or late, sequence analysis revealed that
cytoplasmic polyadenylation element (CPE) and U(3)GU(3) were enriched in A-
sequences. Moreover, a motif associated with polyadenylation signals (MAPS,
U(5)CU(2)) appeared to be enriched in 3'untranslated regions (UTR) with CPE or
U(3)GU(3) sequences in bovine but also in zebrafish and Xenopus tropicalis. To
further validate our methodology, we measured specific tail length of known
candidates (AURKA, PTTG1, H2A1) but also determined the poly(A) tail length of
other candidate RNAs (H3F3A, H1FOO, DAZAP2, ATF1, ATF2, KAT5, DAZL, ELAVL2). In
conclusion, we have reported a methodology to isolate deadenylated from
polyadenylated RNAs in samples with small total RNA quantities such as mammals.
Moreover, we identified deadenylated RNAs in bovine oocytes that may be stored
for the long-term process of early embryo development and described a conserved
motif enriched in the 3'UTR of deadenylated RNAs.

PMID: 24233545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 5;8(11):e77773. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077773. eCollection
2013.

Intestinal DMBT1 expression is modulated by Crohn's disease-associated IL23R
variants and by a DMBT1 variant which influences binding of the transcription
factors CREB1 and ATF-2.

Diegelmann J(1), Czamara D, Le Bras E, Zimmermann E, Olszak T, Bedynek A, Göke B,
Franke A, Glas J, Brand S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II - Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU), 
Munich, Germany ; Department of Preventive Dentistry and Periodontology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU), Munich, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: DMBT is an antibacterial pattern recognition and scavenger receptor. 
In this study, we analyzed the role of DMBT1 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) regarding inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) susceptibility and examined
their functional impact on transcription factor binding and downstream gene
expression.
METHODS: Seven SNPs in the DMBT1 gene region were analyzed in 2073 individuals
including 818 Crohn's disease (CD) patients and 972 healthy controls in two
independent case-control panels. Comprehensive epistasis analyses for the known
CD susceptibility genes NOD2, IL23R and IL27 were performed. The influence of
IL23R variants on DMBT1 expression was analyzed. Functional analysis included
siRNA transfection, quantitative PCR, western blot, electrophoretic mobility
shift and luciferase assays.
RESULTS: IL-22 induces DMBT1 protein expression in intestinal epithelial cells
dependent on STAT3, ATF-2 and CREB1. IL-22 expression-modulating, CD
risk-associated IL23R variants influence DMBT1 expression in CD patients and
DMBT1 levels are increased in the inflamed intestinal mucosa of CD patients.
Several DMBT1 SNPs were associated with CD susceptibility. SNP rs2981804 was most
strongly associated with CD in the combined panel (p = 3.0 × 10(-7), OR 1.42; 95%
CI 1.24-1.63). All haplotype groups tested showed highly significant associations
with CD (including omnibus P-values as low as 6.1 × 10(-18)). The most strongly
CD risk-associated, non-coding DMBT1 SNP rs2981804 modifies the DNA binding sites
for the transcription factors CREB1 and ATF-2 and the respective genomic region
comprising rs2981804 is able to act as a transcriptional regulator in vitro.
Intestinal DMBT1 expression is decreased in CD patients carrying the rs2981804 CD
risk allele.
CONCLUSION: We identified novel associations of DMBT1 variants with CD
susceptibility and discovered a novel functional role of rs2981804 in regulating 
DMBT1 expression. Our data suggest an important role of DMBT1 in CD pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3818382
PMID: 24223725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 6;8(11):e78253. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078253. eCollection
2013.

Regulation of G<U+03B3>-globin gene by ATF2 and its associated proteins through the
cAMP-response element.

Liu L(1), Karmakar S, Dhar R, Mahajan M, Choudhury A, Weissman S, Pace BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, The University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, Texas, United States of America.

The upstream G<U+03B3>-globin cAMP-response element (G-CRE) plays an important role in
regulating G<U+03B3>-globin expression through binding of ATF2 and its DNA-binding
partners defined in this study. ATF2 knockdown resulted in a significant
reduction of <U+03B3>-globin expression accompanied by decreased ATF2 binding to the
G-CRE. By contrast, stable ATF2 expression in K562 cells increased <U+03B3>-globin
transcription which was reduced by ATF2 knockdown. Moreover, a similar effect of 
ATF2 on <U+03B3>-globin expression was observed in primary erythroid progenitors. To
understand the role of ATF2 in <U+03B3>-globin expression, chromatographically purified 
G-CRE/ATF2-interacting proteins were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis;
major binding partners included CREB1, cJun, Brg1, and histone deacetylases among
others. Immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated interaction of these proteins
with ATF2 and in vivo GCRE binding in CD34(+) cells undergoing erythroid
differentiation which was correlated with <U+03B3>-globin expression during development.
These results suggest synergism between developmental stage-specific recruitments
of the ATF2 protein complex and expression of <U+03B3>-globin during erythropoiesis.
Microarray studies in K562 cells support ATF2 plays diverse roles in
hematopoiesis and chromatin remodeling.

PMCID: PMC3819381
PMID: 24223142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Dec;40(12):7017-25. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2821-y. Epub 2013 
Nov 1.

Adiponectin decreases lipids deposition by p38 MAPK/ATF2 signaling pathway in
muscle of broilers.

Yan J(1), Gan L, Qi R, Sun C.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science & Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling,
712100, Shaanxi, China.

Adiponectin is an adipokine hormone that influences glucose utilization, insulin 
sensitivity and energy homeostasis. To investigate the effect of adiponectin on
lipids deposition in broilers, rosiglitazone and dexamethasone were used to treat
broilers. A total of 120 twenty-three-day-old male Cobb broilers were randomly
divided into 3 groups for 3 weeks of drug treatment. Serum adiponectin level and 
fatty acid composition in muscles were measured. Adiponectin, adiponectin
receptors (adipoR1, adipoR2) and lipid metabolism-related genes expression levels
in muscles were measured using real-time PCR. Western blot was used to measure
the expression levels of lipid metabolism-related proteins and the
phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK)/activating
transcription factor 2 (ATF2) pathway marker proteins. Rosiglitazone increased
serum adiponectin concentration and the expression levels of adiponectin and
adipoR1 (P < 0.05), while dexamethasone had the opposite effect. Intramuscular
fat content, total fatty acid, saturated fatty acid and monounsaturated fatty
acid reduced in the rosiglitazone treatment group (P < 0.05). In the
rosiglitazone treatment group, the expression levels of lipogenic genes and
proteins decreased in the muscles, whereas the expression levels of lipolysis
genes increased. Meanwhile, the phosphorylation levels of p38MAPK and ATF2
increased with supplementation of rosiglitazone and decreased in the
dexamethasone treatment group (P < 0.01). These results indicated that
rosiglitazone and dexamethasone could regulate adiponectin expression in muscle
of broilers and adiponectin had an anti-lipogenic effect by p38 MAPK/ATF2
signaling pathway.

PMID: 24178343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 15;441(2):507-13. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.10.096. Epub 2013 Oct 26.

ICAM-3 endows anticancer drug resistance against microtubule-damaging agents via 
activation of the ICAM-3-AKT/ERK-CREB-2 pathway and blockage of apoptosis.

Ahn KC(1), Choi JY, Kim JS, Hwang SG, Kim WJ, Park JK, Um HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Cancer Research, Korea Institute of Radiological and
Medical Sciences, 215-4 Gongneung-Dong, Nowon-Gu, Seoul 139-706, Republic of
Korea.

In a previous study, we showed that induction of ICAM-3 endows radioresistance in
cervical cancer [1]. To ascertain whether ICAM-3 also promotes anticancer drug
resistance, mock control (H1299/pcDNA3) or ICAM-3-expressing stable transfectants
(H1299/ICAM-3) of the non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell line, NCI-H1299,
were generated and treated with the microtubule-damaging agents, paclitaxel (TXL)
and vincristine (VCS). TXL-/VCS-treated H1299/ICAM-3 cells showed significantly
lower levels of apoptosis, activation of caspases-3, 8 or 9, and decrease in
anti-apoptotic protein levels, compared to H1299/pcDNA3 cells. Our data clearly
indicate that ICAM-3 promotes drug resistance via inhibition of apoptosis. We
additionally showed that Akt, ERK, and CREB-2 are located downstream of ICAM-3,
and activation of the ICAM-3-Akt/ERK-CREB-2 pathway induces resistance against
TXL and VCS. ICAM-3-expressing stable NCI-H460/ICAM-3 transfectant cells and
radioresistant SiHa cells endogenously overexpressing ICAM-3 additionally showed 
drug resistance against TXL and VCS via activation of the ICAM-3-Akt/ERK-CREB-2
pathway. The finding that ICAM-3 endows drug resistance as well as
radioresistance supports its potential utility as a major therapeutic target
against cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24177012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Cell Sci. 2013 Dec 15;126(Pt 24):5704-13. doi: 10.1242/jcs.135483. Epub 2013
Oct 21.

TAK1 regulates SOX9 expression in chondrocytes and is essential for postnatal
development of the growth plate and articular cartilages.

Gao L(1), Sheu TJ, Dong Y, Hoak DM, Zuscik MJ, Schwarz EM, Hilton MJ, O'Keefe RJ,
Jonason JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Center for Musculoskeletal
Research, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA.

TAK1 is a MAP3K that mediates non-canonical TGF-ß and BMP signaling. During the
embryonic period, TAK1 is essential for cartilage and joint development as
deletion of Tak1 in chondro-osteo progenitor cells leads to severe
chondrodysplasia with defects in both chondrocyte proliferation and maturation.
We have investigated the role of TAK1 in committed chondrocytes during early
postnatal development. Using the Col2a1-CreER(T2); Tak1(f/f) mouse model, we
induced deletion of Tak1 at postnatal day 7 and characterized the skeletal
phenotypes of these mice at 1 and 3 months of age. Mice with chondrocyte-specific
Tak1 deletion exhibited severe growth retardation and reduced proteoglycan and
type II collagen content in the extracellular matrix of the articular cartilage. 
We found reduced Col2a1 and Acan expression, but increased Mmp13 and Adamts5
expression, in Tak1-deficient chondrocytes along with reduced expression of the
SOX trio of transcription factors, SOX9, SOX5 and SOX6. In vitro, BMP2 stimulated
Sox9 gene expression and Sox9 promoter activity. These effects were reduced;
however, following Tak1 deletion or treatment with a TAK1 kinase inhibitor. TAK1 
affects both canonical and non-canonical BMP signal transduction and we found
that both of these pathways contribute to BMP2-mediated Sox9 promoter activation.
Additionally, we found that ATF2 directly binds the Sox9 promoter in response to 
BMP signaling and that this effect is dependent upon TAK1 kinase activity. These 
novel findings establish that TAK1 contributes to BMP2-mediated Sox9 gene
expression and is essential for the postnatal development of normal growth plate 
and articular cartilages.

PMCID: PMC3860312
PMID: 24144697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 22;288(47):33966-77. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.492702. Epub
2013 Oct 14.

Rapamycin induces mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase phosphatase-1 (MKP-1)
expression through activation of protein kinase B and mitogen-activated protein
kinase kinase pathways.

Rastogi R(1), Jiang Z, Ahmad N, Rosati R, Liu Y, Beuret L, Monks R, Charron J,
Birnbaum MJ, Samavati L.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and
Sleep Medicine, Wayne State University School of Medicine and Detroit Medical
Center, Detroit, Michigan 48201.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-1 (MKP-1), also known as dual
specificity phosphatase-1 (DUSP-1), plays a crucial role in the deactivation of
MAPKs. Several drugs with immune-suppressive properties modulate MKP-1 expression
as part of their mechanism of action. We investigated the effect of mTOR
inhibition through rapamycin and a dual mTOR inhibitor (AZD2014) on MKP-1
expression. Low dose rapamycin led to a rapid activation of both AKT and ERK
pathways with a subsequent increase in MKP-1 expression. Rapamycin treatment led 
to phosphorylation of CREB, transcription factor 1 (ATF1), and ATF2, three
transcription factors that bind to the cyclic AMP-responsive elements on the
Mkp-1 promoter. Inhibition of either the MEK/ERK or the AKT pathway attenuated
rapamycin-mediated MKP-1 induction. AZD2014 did not activate AKT but activated
the ERK pathway, leading to a moderate MKP-1 induction. Using bone marrow-derived
macrophages (BMDMs) derived from wild-type (WT) mice or mice deficient in AKT1
and AKT2 isoforms or BMDM from targeted deficiency in MEK1 and MEK2, we show that
rapamycin treatment led to an increased MKP1 expression in BMDM from WT but
failed to do so in BMDMs lacking the AKT1 isoform or MEK1 and MEK2. Importantly, 
rapamycin pretreatment inhibited LPS-mediated p38 activation and decreased nitric
oxide and IL-6 production. Our work provides a conceptual framework for the
observed immune modulatory effect of mTOR inhibition.

PMCID: PMC3837136
PMID: 24126911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2013 Dec;72(6):1315-24.

A novel antitumor piperazine alkyl compound causes apoptosis by inducing RhoB
expression via ROS-mediated c-Abl/p38 MAPK signaling.

Chung KS, Han G, Kim BK, Kim HM, Yang JS, Ahn J, Lee K, Song KB, Won M.

PURPOSE: We investigated the action mechanism of a novel anticancer compound,
KR28 (1-allyl-4-dodecanoyl-1-ethyl-piperazin-1-ium; bromide), to induce apoptosis
of human prostate carcinoma PC-3 cells.
METHODS: To explore an apoptotic signaling of KR28, we used ROS assay, SRB assay,
flow cytometry analysis, reporter assay, xenograft assay, Western blotting, and
RT-PCR analysis.
RESULTS: The growth inhibitory action of KR28 is cell line specific, impeding the
growth of prostate carcinoma PC-3 and stomach carcinoma NUGC-3 cells. KR28 showed
strong antitumor activity in PC-3 mouse xenograft model. KR28 increased ROS
production, leading to nuclear c-Abl expression, which in turn activated p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) to enhance the expression of RhoB, an
apoptosis inducer. The KR28-induced apoptosis was abrogated by the ROS scavenger 
N-acetylcysteine and by knockdown of c-Abl, p38 MAPK, or ATF2. Moreover, the p300
binding site and two CCAAT boxes in the RhoB promoter appear to be involved in
ROS-mediated RhoB expression in the presence of KR28.
CONCLUSION: The antitumor agent KR28 induces apoptosis of PC-3 cells by
ROS-mediated RhoB expression via c-Abl upregulation and activation of p38
MAPK/ATF-2.

PMID: 24121479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Cell Mol Med. 2013 Dec;17(12):1619-31. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12150. Epub 2013 Oct
9.

Repeated H2 O2 exposure drives cell cycle progression in an in vitro model of
ulcerative colitis.

Poehlmann A(1), Reissig K, Schönfeld P, Walluscheck D, Schinlauer A, Hartig R,
Lessel W, Guenther T, Silver A, Roessner A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany.

The production of hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ) drives tumourigenesis in ulcerative 
colitis (UC). Recently, we showed that H2 O2 activates DNA damage checkpoints in 
human colonic epithelial cells (HCEC) through c-Jun N-terminal Kinases (JNK) that
induces p21(WAF1) . Moreover, caspases circumvented the G1/S and intra-S
checkpoints, and cells accumulated in G2/M. The latter observation raised the
question of whether repeated H2 O2 exposures alter JNK activation, thereby
promoting a direct passage of cells from G2/M arrest to driven cell cycle
progression. Here, we report that increased proliferation of repeatedly H2 O2
-exposed HCEC cells (C-cell cultures) was associated with (i) increased
phospho-p46 JNK, (ii) decreased total JNK and phospho-p54 JNK and (iii) p21(WAF1)
down-regulation. Altered JNK activation and p21(WAF1) down-regulation were
accompanied by defects in maintaining G2/M and mitotic spindle checkpoints
through adaptation, as well as by apoptosis resistance following H2 O2 exposure. 
This may cause increased proliferation of C-cell cultures, a defining initiating 
feature in the inflammation-carcinoma pathway in UC. We further suggest that
dysregulated JNK activation is attributed to a non-apoptotic function of
caspases, causing checkpoint adaptation in C-cell cultures. Additionally, loss of
cell-contact inhibition and the overcoming of senescence, hallmarks of cancer,
contributed to increased proliferation. Furthermore, there was evidence that p54 
JNK inactivation is responsible for loss of cell-contact inhibition. We present a
cellular model of UC and suggest a sinusoidal pattern of proliferation, which is 
triggered by H2 O2 -induced reactive oxygen species generation, involving an
interplay between JNK activation/inactivation, p21(WAF1) , c-Fos,
c-Jun/phospho-c-Jun, ATF2/phospho-ATF2, ß-catenin/TCF4-signalling, c-Myc, CDK6
and Cyclin D2, leading to driven cell cycle progression.

© 2013 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC3914643
PMID: 24118792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Proteome Res. 2013 Dec 6;12(12):5535-47. doi: 10.1021/pr400445v. Epub 2013 Nov 
1.

Conductometric monitoring of protein-protein interactions.

Spera R(1), Festa F, Bragazzi NL, Pechkova E, LaBaer J, Nicolini C.

Author information: 
(1)Nanoworld Institute, Fondazione EL.B.A. Nicolini , Largo Redaelli 7, 24020,
Pradalunga, Bergamo, Italy.

Conductometric monitoring of protein-protein and protein-sterol interactions is
here proved feasible by coupling quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation
monitoring (QCM_D) to nucleic acid programmable protein arrays (NAPPA). The
conductance curves measured in NAPPA microarrays printed on quartz surface
allowed the identification of binding events between the immobilized proteins and
the query. NAPPA allows the immobilization on the quartz surface of a wide range 
of proteins and can be easily adapted to generate innumerous types of biosensors.
Indeed multiple proteins on the same quartz crystal have been tested and
envisaged proving the possibility of analyzing the same array for several
distinct interactions. Two examples of NAPPA-based conductometer applications
with clinical relevance are presented herein, the interaction between the
transcription factors Jun and ATF2 and the interaction between Cytochrome P540scc
and cholesterol.

PMID: 24106799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 19;8(9):e72783. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072783. eCollection
2013.

TNF-a induces cytosolic phospholipase A2 expression in human lung epithelial
cells via JNK1/2- and p38 MAPK-dependent AP-1 activation.

Lee IT(1), Lin CC, Cheng SE, Hsiao LD, Hsiao YC, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthetics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Lin-Kou and College
of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan ; Department of
Physiology and Pharmacology and Health Aging Research Center, College of
Medicine, Chang Gung University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(12).
doi:10.1371/annotation/f56711b9-78f1-49ed-9116-872913e98867.

BACKGROUND: Cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) plays a pivotal role in mediating 
agonist-induced arachidonic acid (AA) release for prostaglandin (PG) synthesis
during inflammation triggered by tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a). However, the
mechanisms underlying TNF-a-induced cPLA2 expression in human lung epithelial
cells (HPAEpiCs) were not completely understood.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We demonstrated that TNF-a induced cPLA2 mRNA and protein
expression, promoter activity, and PGE2 secretion in HPAEpiCs. These responses
induced by TNF-a were inhibited by pretreatment with the inhibitor of MEK1/2
(PD98059), p38 MAPK (SB202190), JNK1/2 (SP600125), or AP-1 (Tanshinone IIA) and
transfection with siRNA of TNFR1, p42, p38, JNK2, c-Jun, c-Fos, or ATF2. We
showed that TNF-a markedly stimulated p42/p44 MAPK, p38 MAPK, and JNK1/2
phosphorylation which were attenuated by their respective inhibitors. In
addition, TNF-a also stimulated c-Jun and ATF2 phosphorylation which were
inhibited by pretreatment with SP600125 and SB202190, respectively, but not
PD98059. Furthermore, TNF-a-induced cPLA2 promoter activity was abrogated by
transfection with the point-mutated AP-1 cPLA2 construct. Finally, we showed that
TNF-a time-dependently induced p300/c-Fos/c-Jun/ATF2 complex formation in
HPAEpiCs. On the other hand, TNF-a induced in vivo binding of c-Jun, c-Fos, ATF2,
and p300 to the cPLA2 promoter in these cells. In an in vivo study, we found that
TNF-a induced leukocyte count in BAL fluid of mice and cPLA2 mRNA levels in lung 
tissues via MAPKs and AP-1.
SIGNIFICANCE: Taken together, these results demonstrated that TNF-a-induced cPLA2
expression was mediated through p38 MAPK- and JNK1/2-dependent
p300/c-Fos/c-Jun/ATF2 complex formation in HPAEpiCs.

PMCID: PMC3777958
PMID: 24069158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mol Cell Biochem. 2014 Jan;385(1-2):199-205. doi: 10.1007/s11010-013-1828-y. Epub
2013 Sep 25.

Insulin-like growth factor 1 opposes the effects of C-reactive protein on
endothelial cell activation.

Liu SJ(1), Zhong Y, You XY, Liu WH, Li AQ, Liu SM.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Second Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical University, 250 Changgang East Road, Guangzhou, 510260,
People's Republic of China.

Emerging evidence demonstrates that high plasma C-reactive protein (CRP) levels
or low plasma insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) concentrations may be
separately associated with the increased risk of coronary artery disease or
myocardial infarction. Interestingly, animal model studies and epidemiological
investigations indicate that circulating IGF-1 and CRP levels have an inverse
correlation. The present study aims to evaluate if IGF-1 can directly oppose the 
effects of CRP on endothelial cell (EC) activation. We found that IGF-1 rescues
endothelial nitric oxide synthase activity and decreases the release of
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 from ECs.
We also showed that IGF-1 antagonizes the effects of CRP by activating the
PI3K/Akt pathway and suppressing the JNK/c-Jun and MAPK p38/ATF2 signaling
pathways, rather than inhibiting ERK1/2 activity. These findings provide evidence
of the physiopathological mechanisms of endothelial activation and novel insights
into the protective properties of IGF-1.

PMID: 24065393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Immunity. 2013 Sep 19;39(3):521-36. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.08.035.

The intracellular sensor NOD2 induces microRNA-29 expression in human dendritic
cells to limit IL-23 release.

Brain O(1), Owens BM, Pichulik T, Allan P, Khatamzas E, Leslie A, Steevels T,
Sharma S, Mayer A, Catuneanu AM, Morton V, Sun MY, Jewell D, Coccia M, Harrison
O, Maloy K, Schönefeldt S, Bornschein S, Liston A, Simmons A.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK; Human Immunology Unit, Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

NOD2 is an intracellular sensor that contributes to immune defense and
inflammation. Here we investigated whether NOD2 mediates its effects through
control of microRNAs (miRNAs). miR-29 expression was upregulated in human
dendritic cells (DCs) in response to NOD2 signals, and miR-29 regulated the
expression of multiple immune mediators. In particular, miR-29 downregulated
interleukin-23 (IL-23) by targeting IL-12p40 directly and IL-23p19 indirectly,
likely via reduction of ATF2. DSS-induced colitis was worse in miR-29-deficient
mice and was associated with elevated IL-23 and T helper 17 signature cytokines
in the intestinal mucosa. Crohn's disease (CD) patient DCs expressing
NOD2 polymorphisms failed to induce miR-29 upon pattern recognition receptor
stimulation and showed enhanced release of IL-12p40 on exposure to adherent
invasive E. coli. Therefore, we suggest that loss of miR-29-mediated
immunoregulation in CD DCs might contribute to elevated IL-23 in this disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24054330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Neurobiol. 2014 Apr;49(2):658-72. doi: 10.1007/s12035-013-8547-y. Epub 2013
Sep 10.

C-Src/Jak2/PDGFR/PKCd-dependent MMP-9 induction is required for
thrombin-stimulated rat brain astrocytes migration.

Lin CC(1), Lee IT, Chi PL, Hsieh HL, Cheng SE, Hsiao LD, Liu CJ, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthetics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Lin-Kou and College
of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

Among matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), MMP-9 has been observed in patients with 
brain inflammatory diseases and may contribute to the pathology of brain
diseases. Thrombin has been known as a regulator of MMP-9 expression and cells
migration. However, the mechanisms underlying thrombin-induced MMP-9 expression
in rat brain astrocytes (RBA-1 cells) were not completely understood. Here, we
demonstrated that thrombin induced the expression of pro-form MMP-9 in RBA-1
cells and cells migration which were attenuated by pretreatment with the
inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinase (Genistein), c-Src (PP1), Jak2 (AG490),
PDGFR (AG1296), PI3K (LY294002), Akt (SH-5), PKCs (Ro318220), PKCd (Rottlerin),
or NF-<U+03BA>B (Bay11-7082) and transfection with siRNA of c-Src, PDGFR, Akt, PKCd,
ATF2, p65, IKKa, or IKKß. In addition, thrombin-stimulated c-Src, Jak2, or PDGFR 
phosphorylation was inhibited by a thrombin inhibitor (PPACK), PP1, AG490, or
AG1296. Thrombin further stimulated c-Src and PDGFR complex formation in RBA-1
cells. Thrombin also stimulated Akt and PKCd phosphorylation and PKCd
translocation which were reduced by PPACK, PP1, AG490, AG1296, or LY294002. We
further observed that thrombin markedly stimulated ATF2 or I<U+03BA>Ba phosphorylation
and NF-<U+03BA>B p65 translocation which were inhibited by Rottlerin or LY294002.
Finally, thrombin stimulated in vivo binding of p65 to the MMP-9 promoter, which 
was reduced by pretreatment with Rottlerin or LY294002. These results concluded
that in RBA-1 cells, thrombin activated a c-Src/Jak2/PDGFR/PI3K/Akt/PKCd pathway,
which in turn triggered ATF2 and NF-<U+03BA>B activation and ultimately induced MMP-9
expression associated with cell migration.

PMID: 24018979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Cell Signal. 2013 Dec;25(12):2518-29. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.08.004. Epub
2013 Aug 24.

Combining docking site and phosphosite predictions to find new substrates:
identification of smoothelin-like-2 (SMTNL2) as a c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)
substrate.

Gordon EA(1), Whisenant TC, Zeller M, Kaake RM, Gordon WM, Krotee P, Patel V,
Huang L, Baldi P, Bardwell L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California Irvine,
United States; Center for Complex Biological Systems, University of California
Irvine, United States.

Specific docking interactions between mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), 
their regulators, and their downstream substrates, are crucial for efficient and 
accurate signal transmission. To identify novel substrates of the c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK) family of MAPKs, we searched the human genome for
proteins that contained (1), a predicted JNK-docking site (D-site); and (2), a
cluster of putative JNK target phosphosites located close to the D-site. Here we 
describe a novel JNK substrate that emerged from this analysis, the functionally 
uncharacterized protein smoothelin-like 2 (SMTNL2). SMTNL2 protein bound with
high-affinity to multiple MAPKs including JNK1-3 and ERK2; furthermore, the
identity of conserved amino acids in the predicted docking site (residues
180-193) was necessary for this high-affinity binding. In addition, purified
full-length SMTNL2 protein was phosphorylated by JNK1-3 in vitro, and this
required the integrity of the D-site. Using mass spectrometry and mutagenesis, we
identified four D-site-dependent phosphoacceptor sites in close proximity to the 
docking site, at S217, S241, T236 and T239. A short peptide comprised of the
SMTNL2 D-site inhibited JNK-mediated phosphorylation of the ATF2 transcription
factor, showing that SMTNL2 can compete with other substrates for JNK binding.
Moreover, when transfected into HEK293 cells, SMTNL2 was phosphorylated by
endogenous JNK in a D-site dependent manner, on the same residues identified in
vitro. SMTNL2 protein was expressed in many mammalian tissues, with a notably
high expression in skeletal muscle. Consistent with the hypothesis that SMTNL2
has a function in skeletal muscle, SMTNL2 protein expression was strongly induced
during the transition from myoblasts to myotubes in differentiating C2C12 cells.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC4132694
PMID: 23981301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(8):e1003745. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003745. Epub 2013 Aug 
15.

Past visits present: TCF/LEFs partner with ATFs for ß-catenin-independent
activity.

Sprowl S(1), Waterman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of America.

Comment on
    PLoS Genet. 2013;9(8):e1003603.

PMCID: PMC3744446
PMID: 23966883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(8):e1003603. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003603. Epub 2013 Aug 
15.

ß-Catenin-independent activation of TCF1/LEF1 in human hematopoietic tumor cells 
through interaction with ATF2 transcription factors.

Grumolato L(1), Liu G, Haremaki T, Mungamuri SK, Mong P, Akiri G, Lopez-Bergami
P, Arita A, Anouar Y, Mlodzik M, Ronai ZA, Brody J, Weinstein DC, Aaronson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, New York, United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2013;9(8):e1003745.

The role of Wnt signaling in embryonic development and stem cell maintenance is
well established and aberrations leading to the constitutive up-regulation of
this pathway are frequent in several types of human cancers. Upon ligand-mediated
activation, Wnt receptors promote the stabilization of ß-catenin, which
translocates to the nucleus and binds to the T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer
factor (TCF/LEF) family of transcription factors to regulate the expression of
Wnt target genes. When not bound to ß-catenin, the TCF/LEF proteins are believed 
to act as transcriptional repressors. Using a specific lentiviral reporter, we
identified hematopoietic tumor cells displaying constitutive TCF/LEF
transcriptional activation in the absence of ß-catenin stabilization. Suppression
of TCF/LEF activity in these cells mediated by an inducible dominant-negative
TCF4 (DN-TCF4) inhibited both cell growth and the expression of Wnt target genes.
Further, expression of TCF1 and LEF1, but not TCF4, stimulated TCF/LEF reporter
activity in certain human cell lines independently of ß-catenin. By a
complementary approach in vivo, TCF1 mutants, which lacked the ability to bind to
ß-catenin, induced Xenopus embryo axis duplication, a hallmark of Wnt activation,
and the expression of the Wnt target gene Xnr3. Through generation of different
TCF1-TCF4 fusion proteins, we identified three distinct TCF1 domains that
participate in the ß-catenin-independent activity of this transcription factor.
TCF1 and LEF1 physically interacted and functionally synergized with members of
the activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) family of transcription factors.
Moreover, knockdown of ATF2 expression in lymphoma cells phenocopied the
inhibitory effects of DN-TCF4 on the expression of target genes associated with
the Wnt pathway and on cell growth. Together, our findings indicate that, through
interaction with ATF2 factors, TCF1/LEF1 promote the growth of hematopoietic
malignancies in the absence of ß-catenin stabilization, thus establishing a new
mechanism for TCF1/LEF1 transcriptional activity distinct from that associated
with canonical Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC3744423
PMID: 23966864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cancer Res. 2013 Oct 1;73(19):5869-79. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0344. Epub
2013 Aug 15.

Cetuximab attenuates its cytotoxic and radiosensitizing potential by inducing
fibronectin biosynthesis.

Eke I(1), Storch K, Krause M, Cordes N.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: OncoRay-National Center for Radiation Research in
Oncology; Department of Radiation Oncology, Medical Faculty Carl Gustav Carus,
Technische Universität Dresden; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK); German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ); and Institute of Radiooncology, Helmholtz Center
Dresden-Rossendorf, Dresden, Germany.

Inherent and acquired resistance to targeted therapeutics continues to emerge as 
a major clinical obstacle. For example, resistance to EGF receptor targeting
occurs commonly, more so than was expected, on the basis of preclinical work.
Given emerging evidence that cancer cell-substrate interactions are important
determinants of therapeutic sensitivity, we examined the impact of
cell-fibronectin interactions on the efficacy of the EGF receptor antibody
cetuximab, which is used widely for lung cancer treatment. Our results revealed
the potential for cell-fibronectin interactions to induce radioresistance of
human non-small cell lung cancer cells. Cell adhesion to fibronectin enhanced
tumor cell radioresistance and attenuated the cytotoxic and radiosensitizing
effects of cetuximab. Both in vitro and in vivo, we found that cetuximab
treatment led to a remarkable induction of fibronectin biosynthesis. Mechanistic 
analyses revealed the induction was mediated by a p38-MAPK-ATF2 signaling pathway
and that RNAi-mediated inhibition of fibronectin could elevate the cytotoxic and 
radiosensitizing potential of cetuximab. Taken together, our findings show how
cell adhesion blunts cetuximab, which, by inducing fibronectin, generates a
self-attenuating mechanism of drug resistance.

PMID: 23950208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Proteomics. 2013 Oct 8;91:344-57. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2013.07.019. Epub 2013
Aug 7.

Quantitative profiling of tyrosine phosphorylation revealed changes in the
activity of the T cell receptor signaling pathway upon cisplatin-induced
apoptosis.

Størvold GL(1), Landskron J, Strozynski M, Arntzen MØ, Koehler CJ, Kalland ME,
Taskén K, Thiede B.

Author information: 
(1)The Biotechnology Centre of Oslo, University of Oslo, Gaustadalleen 21, 0349
Oslo, Norway.

In order to better understand the cellular responses to the chemotherapeutic drug
cisplatin and the mechanisms leading to apoptosis and potential side effects, we 
performed a SILAC-based quantitative phosphotyrosine analysis of Jurkat T cells
exposed to cisplatin. Signaling molecules in the T cell receptor (TCR) pathway
were enriched among proteins displaying reduced phosphorylation levels. The
results were verified by immunoblotting and/or phospho-flow cytometry for a
selected set of proteins, including the tyrosine kinases Lck and Zap70, and
downstream targets Itk, Plc<U+03B3>1 and Erk. In contrast to the effects on the T cell
signaling pathways, the dually phosphorylated form of p38a MAPK was increased in 
treated cells, and activation of this signaling pathway was verified by
immunoblot analysis of phosphorylation levels of p38a MAPK and the downstream
targets Atf2 and MAPKAPK2. Activation of the p38a MAPK signaling pathway has been
suggested to be one of the main mechanisms by which cisplatin induces apoptosis. 
Our results indicate that cisplatin may reduce the activity of proteins involved 
in the TCR signaling pathway, which has an important role in regulating
proliferation of T cells, and may contribute to explain previous observations
where cisplatin has been reported to inhibit proliferation of T cells.BIOLOGICAL 
SIGNIFICANCE: In this study, a quantitative phosphotyrosine analysis was
performed to identify changes of the phosphoproteome during exposure of Jurkat T 
cells by cisplatin. The results of the phosphoproteome analysis were complemented
with immunoblotting and temporal phospho-flow analysis. An initial activation of 
the p38a MAPK signaling pathway was detected at early time points of cisplatin
treatment, a response previously suggested to be part of the mechanism by which
cisplatin induces apoptosis. Furthermore, reduced phosphorylation levels of
proteins involved in signaling downstream of the TCR during apoptosis were found 
by the phosphotyrosine proteome analysis. Our study can support to elucidate the 
mechanism behind the previously observed immunosuppressive effect of cisplatin.

© 2013.

PMID: 23933134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:421051. doi: 10.1155/2013/421051.
Epub 2013 Jun 25.

Timosaponin AIII Suppresses Hepatocyte Growth Factor-Induced Invasive Activity
through Sustained ERK Activation in Breast Cancer MDA-MB-231 Cells.

Tsai CH(1), Yang CW, Wang JY, Tsai YF, Tseng LM, King KL, Chen WS, Chiu JH, Shyr 
YM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Traditional Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming
University, No. 155, Section 2, Linong Street, Beitou, Taipei 112, Taiwan ;
Division of General Surgery, Department of Surgery, Mackay Memorial Hospital, No.
92, Section 2, Zhongshan N. Road, Taipei 10449, Taiwan.

Background. The aim of this study was to investigate the mechanisms by which
Timosaponin AIII (TAIII) is able to inhibit HGF-induced invasion activity in the 
triple negative breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231. Methods. After pretreatment
with different concentrations (10(-6)~10(-8)<U+2009>M) of TAIII, the cells were treated 
with hepatocyte growth factor (HGF, 15<U+2009>ng/mL). At different time intervals after 
coincubation, various parameters, including the expression of c-Met, ERK, COX2,
and MMP-9, which were assessed by Western blotting or by real-time PCR, were
analyzed. In addition, invasive activity was also monitored. Results. HGF was
found to induce c-MET activation and ERK activation, together with increased COX2
protein expression; these changes were followed by a subsequent increase in
invasive activity. TAIII was found to suppress HGF-induced invasive activity and 
COX2 gene expression in a concentration-dependent manner (10(-6)~10(-8)<U+2009>M) in
parallel with increases in the phosphoforms of c-Met and ERK after TAIII
treatment. The mechanisms by which TAIII suppresses HGF-induced invasive activity
were demonstrated to include sustained cytoplasmic and nuclear ERK activation;
these led to a suppression of nuclear ATF2 activation, which was followed by
downregulation of COX2 and MMP-9 transcription. Conclusion. TAIII suppresses
HGF-induced invasive activity in MDA-MB-231 cells via sustained ERK activation.

PMCID: PMC3708436
PMID: 23878598  [PubMed]


151. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2013 Jul 16;14:209. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-14-209.

The expression of p-ATF2 involved in the chondeocytes apoptosis of an endemic
osteoarthritis, Kashin-Beck disease.

Han J, Guo X, Tan W, Zhang F, Liu J, Wang W, Xu P, Lammi MJ.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of the study was to understand the function and
expression of ATF2 by JNK and p38 signal pathways in the chondrocytes apoptosis
of articular cartilage of the Kashin-Beck disease (KBD).
METHODS: The changes of ATF2, JNK and p38 mRNAs and proteins were investigated
between cartilage and chondrocyte as well as KBD and normal. JNK and p38
inhibitors were used as treatments to prevent apoptosis in chondrocytes from KBD 
patients.
RESULTS: It was found that the protein levels of p-p38, p-JNK, ATF2 and p-ATF2
increased in KBD human cartilage which is in line with the higher mRNA levels of 
p38, JNK and ATF2 as compared both with normal cartilage and KBD chondrocytes. In
addition, p-ATF2 was only detected in KBD cartilage. Furthermore, JNK inhibitor
was more effective than p38 inhibitor in preventing chondrocyte apoptosis at
equal concentrations of 10 µM.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicated the expression of p-ATF2 by JNK and p38
signal pathways involved in the chondrocyte apoptosis in cartilage with KBD.

PMCID: PMC3726291
PMID: 23866832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Neurobiol Dis. 2013 Nov;59:26-37. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.07.001. Epub 2013 Jul
13.

Proximal inhibition of p38 MAPK stress signaling prevents distal axonopathy.

Dapper JD(1), Crish SD, Pang IH, Calkins DJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Vanderbilt Eye Institute, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
TN 37232, USA. Electronic address: jasondapper@hotmail.com.

The p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) isoforms are phosphorylated by a 
variety of stress stimuli in neurodegenerative disease and act as upstream
activators of myriad pathogenic processes. Thus, p38 MAPK inhibitors are of
growing interest as possible therapeutic interventions. Axonal dysfunction is an 
early component of most neurodegenerative disorders, including the most prevalent
optic neuropathy, glaucoma. Sensitivity to intraocular pressure at an early stage
disrupts anterograde transport along retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons to
projection targets in the brain with subsequent degeneration of the axons
themselves; RGC body loss is much later. Here we show that elevated ocular
pressure in rats increases p38 MAPK activation in retina, especially in RGC
bodies. Topical eye-drop application of a potent and selective inhibitor of the
p38 MAPK catalytic domain (Ro3206145) prevented both the degradation of
anterograde transport to the brain and degeneration of axons in the optic nerve. 
Ro3206145 reduced in the retina phosphorylation of tau and heat-shock protein 27,
both down-stream targets of p38 MAPK activation implicated in glaucoma, as well
as expression of two inflammatory responses. We also observed increased p38 MAPK 
activation in mouse models. Thus, inhibition of p38 MAPK signaling in the retina 
may represent a therapeutic target for preventing early pathogenesis in optic
neuropathies.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC3775981
PMID: 23859799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Environ Toxicol. 2015 Feb;30(2):205-11. doi: 10.1002/tox.21886. Epub 2013 Jul 8.

Activation of MAPK pathways and downstream transcription factors in
2-aminobiphenyl-induced apoptosis.

Chen LC(1), Chueh TC, Tuan YF, Chen CC, Chien CC, Lee HY, Chen SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung City, 84001, Taiwan.

2-Aminobiphenyls (2-ABP) induces oxidative DNA damage and leads to apoptosis. The
precise signaling pathways of inducing apoptosis in vitro are still unknown. This
study provides insight into the relationship between 2-ABP-induced apoptosis and 
the activation of MAPK and downstream transcription factors using pharmacological
inhibitors of ERK, p38, and JNK pathways. Results showed that 2-ABP induced the
activation of ERK and JNK but not p38. The ERK/JNK pathways downstream
transcription factors, c-Jun and ATF-2, were also activated by 2-ABP. The
inhibitory effects of ERK inhibitor, U0126, on 2-ABP-induced caspase-3 activity
were not detected. However, JNK inhibitor, SP600125, significantly attenuated the
caspase-3 activity induced by 2-ABP. The expression of the transcription factors 
c-Jun and ATF-2 were decreased in 2-ABP treated cells in the presence of ERK/JNK 
inhibitors, suggesting that the expression of ERK/JNK pathways leads to the
downstream activation of c-Jun and ATF-2. N-acetylcysteine, an ROS scavenger,
inhibited 2-ABP-induced activation of ERK and JNK, the cell death and caspase-3
activity, which suggested that oxidative stress plays a crucial role in apoptosis
through activation of caspase-3 in a ROS/JNK-dependent signaling cascade.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23836369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Anim Genet. 2013 Dec;44(6):648-60. doi: 10.1111/age.12066. Epub 2013 Jul 5.

Transcriptional analysis of intramuscular fatty acid composition in the
longissimus thoracis muscle of Iberian × Landrace back-crossed pigs.

Pena RN(1), Noguera JL, Casellas J, Díaz I, Fernández AI, Folch JM,
Ibáñez-Escriche N.

Author information: 
(1)Genètica i Millora Animal, IRTA, 191 Av. Rovira Roure, 25198, Lleida, Spain;
Departament de Producció Animal, ETSEA, Universitat de Lleida, 191 Av. Rovira
Roure, 25198, Lleida, Spain.

This study aimed at identifying differential gene expression conditional on the
fatty acid profile of the longissimus thoracis (Lt) muscle, a prime cut of
economic relevance for fresh and cured pork production. A population of 110
Iberian (25%) × Landrace (75%) back-crossed pigs was used, because these two
breeds exhibit extreme profiles of intramuscular saturated fatty acid,
monounsaturated fatty acid (MUFA) and polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) contents.
Total RNA from Lt muscle was individually hybridized to GeneChip Porcine Genome
arrays (Affymetrix). A principal component analysis was performed with data from 
the 110 animals to select 40 extreme animals based on the total fatty acid
profile and the MUFA composition (MAP). Comparison of global transcription levels
between extreme fatty acid profile pigs (n = 40) resulted in 219 differentially
expressed probes (false discovery rate <0.10). Gene ontology, pathway and network
analysis indicated that animals with higher percentages of PUFA exhibit a shift
toward a more oxidative muscular metabolism state, with a raise in mitochondria
function (PPARGC1A, ATF2), fatty acid uptake and oxidation (FABP5, MGLL). On the 
other hand, 87 probes were differentially expressed between MUFA composition
groups (n = 40; false discovery rate <0.10). In particular, muscles rich in n-7
MUFA expressed higher levels of genes involved in lipid metabolism (GLUL, CRAT,
PLA2G15) and lower levels of fatty acid elongation genes (ELOVL5). Moreover, the 
chromosomal position of FABP5, PAQR3, MGLL, PPARGC1A, GLUL and ELOVL5
co-localized with very relevant QTL for fat deposition and composition described 
in the same resource population. This study represents a complementary approach
to identifying genes underlying these QTL effects.

© 2013 The Authors, Animal Genetics © 2013 Stichting International Foundation for
Animal Genetics.

PMID: 23826865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Int J Oral Sci. 2013 Jun;5(2):75-84. doi: 10.1038/ijos.2013.41. Epub 2013 Jun 28.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 gene controls tooth root development in coordination
with formation of the periodontium.

Rakian A(1), Yang WC, Gluhak-Heinrich J, Cui Y, Harris MA, Villarreal D, Feng JQ,
Macdougall M, Harris SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, TX, USA.

Formation of the periodontium begins following onset of tooth-root formation in a
coordinated manner after birth. Dental follicle progenitor cells are thought to
form the cementum, alveolar bone and Sharpey's fibers of the periodontal ligament
(PDL). However, little is known about the regulatory morphogens that control
differentiation and function of these progenitor cells, as well as the progenitor
cells involved in crown and root formation. We investigated the role of bone
morphogenetic protein-2 (Bmp2) in these processes by the conditional removal of
the Bmp2 gene using the Sp7-Cre-EGFP mouse model. Sp7-Cre-EGFP first becomes
active at E18 in the first molar, with robust Cre activity at postnatal day 0
(P0), followed by Cre activity in the second molar, which occurs after P0. There 
is robust Cre activity in the periodontium and third molars by 2 weeks of age.
When the Bmp2 gene is removed from Sp7(+) (Osterix(+)) cells, major defects are
noted in root, cellular cementum and periodontium formation. First, there are
major cell autonomous defects in root-odontoblast terminal differentiation.
Second, there are major alterations in formation of the PDLs and cellular
cementum, correlated with decreased nuclear factor IC (Nfic), periostin and
a-SMA(+) cells. Third, there is a failure to produce vascular endothelial growth 
factor A (VEGF-A) in the periodontium and the pulp leading to decreased formation
of the microvascular and associated candidate stem cells in the
Bmp2-cKO(Sp7-Cre-EGFP). Fourth, ameloblast function and enamel formation are
indirectly altered in the Bmp2-cKO(Sp7-Cre-EGFP). These data demonstrate that the
Bmp2 gene has complex roles in postnatal tooth development and periodontium
formation.

PMCID: PMC3707077
PMID: 23807640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Jun 27;14(7):13511-24. doi: 10.3390/ijms140713511.

p38ß, A novel regulatory target of Pokemon in hepatic cells.

Chen Z(1), Liu F, Zhang N, Cao D, Liu M, Tan Y, Jiang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
liu.feng@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn.

Pokemon is an important proto-oncogene involved in various biological processes
and cancer development, such as cell differentiation, tumorigenesis and
metastasis. Pokemon is recognized as a transcription factor localized upstream of
several oncogenes, regulating their expression. p38MAPKs act as key regulatory
factors in cellular signaling pathways associated with inflammatory responses,
cell proliferation, differentiation and survival. p38ß, a member of p38MAPK
family, is closely correlated with tumorigenesis, but the mechanism of activation
remains unclear. In this study, we found overexpression of Pokemon promoted the
growth, migration and invasion of HepG2 cells. However, a p38 inhibitor SB202190 
efficiently attenuated the promoting effect of Pokemon in the HepG2 cells.
Targeted expression or silencing of Pokemon changed cellular p38ß protein level
and phosphorylation of downstream ATF2 in the p38 signaling pathway. Both dual
luciferase report assay and ChIP assay suggested that p38ß is a novel regulatory 
target of the transcription factor Pokemon and positively regulated by Pokemon in
hepatic cells.

PMCID: PMC3742200
PMID: 23807508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Cell Mol Med. 2013 Aug;17(8):976-88. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12071. Epub 2013 Jun 25.

ATF2 knockdown reinforces oxidative stress-induced apoptosis in TE7 cancer cells.

Walluscheck D(1), Poehlmann A, Hartig R, Lendeckel U, Schönfeld P,
Hotz-Wagenblatt A, Reissig K, Bajbouj K, Roessner A, Schneider-Stock R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany.

Cancer cells showing low apoptotic effects following oxidative stress-induced DNA
damage are mainly affected by growth arrest. Thus, recent studies focus on
improving anti-cancer therapies by increasing apoptosis sensitivity. We aimed at 
identifying a universal molecule as potential target to enhance oxidative
stress-based anti-cancer therapy through a switch from cell cycle arrest to
apoptosis. A cDNA microarray was performed with hydrogen peroxide-treated
oesophageal squamous epithelial cancer cells TE7. This cell line showed
checkpoint activation via p21(WAF1) , but low apoptotic response following DNA
damage. The potential target molecule was chosen depended on the following
demands: it should regulate DNA damage response, cell cycle and apoptosis. As the
transcription factor ATF2 is implicated in all these processes, we focused on
this protein. We investigated checkpoint activation via ATF2. Indeed, ATF2
knockdown revealed ATF2-triggered p21(WAF1) protein expression, suggesting
p21(WAF1) transactivation through ATF2. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP), we identified a hitherto unknown ATF2-binding sequence in the p21(WAF1)
promoter. p-ATF2 was found to interact with p-c-Jun, creating the AP-1 complex.
Moreover, ATF2 knockdown led to c-Jun downregulation. This suggests ATF2-driven
induction of c-Jun expression, thereby enhancing ATF2 transcriptional activity
via c-Jun-ATF2 heterodimerization. Notably, downregulation of ATF2 caused a
switch from cell cycle arrest to reinforced apoptosis, presumably via p21(WAF1)
downregulation, confirming the importance of ATF2 in the establishment of cell
cycle arrest. 1-Chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene also led to ATF2-dependent G2/M arrest,
suggesting that this is a general feature induced by oxidative stress. As ATF2
knockdown also increased apoptosis, we propose ATF2 as a target for combined
oxidative stress-based anti-cancer therapies.

© 2013 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine Published by
Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3780530
PMID: 23800081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;45(8):1939-50. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.06.006. Epub 2013 Jun 19.

A novel retro-inverso peptide is a preferential JNK substrate-competitive
inhibitor.

Ngoei KR(1), Catimel B, Milech N, Watt PM, Bogoyevitch MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia.

A novel 18 amino acid peptide PYC98 was demonstrated to inhibit JNK1 activity
toward c-Jun. We observed a 5-fold increase in the potency of the retro-inverso
form, D-PYC98 (a D-amino acid peptide in the reversed sequence) when compared
with the inhibition achieved by L-PYC98, prompting our further evaluation of the 
D-PYC98 inhibitory mechanism. In vitro assays revealed that, in addition to the
inhibition of c-Jun phosphorylation, D-PYC98 inhibited the JNK1-mediated
phosphorylation of an EGFR-derived peptide, the ATF2 transcription factor, and
the microtubule-regulatory protein DCX. JNK2 and JNK3 activities toward c-Jun
were also inhibited, and surface plasmon resonance analysis confirmed the direct 
interaction of D-PYC98 and JNK1. Further kinetics analyses revealed the non-ATP
competitive mechanism of action of D-PYC98 as a JNK1 inhibitor. The targeting of 
the JNK1 common docking site by D-PYC98 was confirmed by the competition of
binding by TIJIP. However, as mutations of JNK1 R127 and E329 within the common
docking domain did not impact on the affinity of the interaction with D-PYC98
measured by surface plasmon resonance analysis, other residues in the common
docking site appear to contribute to the JNK1 interaction with D-PYC98.
Furthermore, we found that D-PYC98 inhibited the related kinase p38 MAPK,
suggesting a broader interest in developing D-PYC98 for possible therapeutic
applications. Lastly, in evaluating the efficacy of this peptide to act as a
substrate competitive inhibitor in cells, we confirmed that the cell-permeable
D-PYC98-TAT inhibited c-Jun Ser63 phosphorylation during hyperosmotic stress.
Thus, D-PYC98-TAT is a novel cell-permeable JNK inhibitor.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23792175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Cell Commun Signal. 2013 Dec;7(4):279-93. doi: 10.1007/s12079-013-0207-5. Epub 
2013 Jun 14.

Rsu1 contributes to regulation of cell adhesion and spreading by PINCH1-dependent
and - independent mechanisms.

Gonzalez-Nieves R(1), Desantis AI, Cutler ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, F. Edward Hebert School of Medicine, Uniformed
Services University of the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD,
20814, USA.

Cell adhesion and migration are complex processes that require integrin
activation, the formation and dissolution of focal adhesion (FAs), and linkage of
actin cytoskeleton to the FAs. The IPP (ILK, PINCH, Parvin) complex regulates FA 
formation via binding of the adaptor protein ILK to ß1 integrin, PINCH and
parvin. The signaling protein Rsu1 is linked to the complex via binding PINCH1.
The role of Rsu1 and PINCH1 in adhesion and migration was examined in
non-transformed mammary epithelial cells. Confocal microscopy revealed that the
depletion of either Rsu1 or PINCH1 by siRNA in MCF10A cells decreased the number 
of focal adhesions and altered the distribution and localization of ß1 integrin, 
vinculin, talin and paxillin without affecting the levels of FA protein
expression. This correlated with reduced adhesion, failure to spread or migrate
in response to EGF and a loss of actin stress fibers and caveolae. In addition,
constitutive phosphorylation of actin regulatory proteins occurred in the absence
of PINCH1. The depletion of Rsu1 caused significant reduction in PINCH1 implying 
that Rsu1 may function by regulating levels of PINCH1. However, while both Rsu1- 
or PINCH1-depleted cells retained the ability to activate adhesion signaling in
response to EGF stimulation, only Rsu1 was required for EGF-induced p38 Map
Kinase phosphorylation and ATF2 activation, suggesting an Rsu1 function
independent from the IPP complex. Reconstitution of Rsu1-depleted cells with an
Rsu1 mutant that does not bind to PINCH1 failed to restore FAs or migration but
did promote spreading and constitutive p38 activation. These data show that
Rsu1-PINCH1 association with ILK and the IPP complex is required for regulation
of adhesion and migration but that Rsu1 has a critical role in linking
integrin-induced adhesion to activation of p38 Map kinase signaling and cell
spreading. Moreover, it suggests that Rsu1 may regulate p38 signaling from the
IPP complex affecting other functions including survival.

PMCID: PMC3889256
PMID: 23765260  [PubMed]


160. Exp Mol Med. 2013 Jun 14;45:e27. doi: 10.1038/emm.2013.48.

Wnt5a stimulates chemotactic migration and chemokine production in human
neutrophils.

Jung YS(1), Lee HY, Kim SD, Park JS, Kim JK, Suh PG, Bae YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, South Korea 
[2] Mitochondria Hub Regulation Center, Dong-A University, Busan, South Korea.

Wnt5a is a ligand that activates the noncanonical Wnt signaling pathways
(ß-catenin-independent pathways). Human neutrophils expressed several Wnt5a
receptors, such as Frizzled 2, 5 and 8. Stimulation of human neutrophils with
Wnt5a caused chemotactic migration and the production of two important
chemokines, CXCL8 and CCL2. CCL2 production by Wnt5a was mediated by a pertussis 
toxin-sensitive G-protein-dependent pathway. Wnt5a also stimulated the
phosphorylation of three mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs: ERK, p38 MAPK 
and JNK) and Akt. Inhibition of ERK, p38 MAPK or JNK by specific inhibitors
induced a dramatic reduction in Wnt5a-induced CCL2 production. Supernatant
collected from lipopolysaccharide-stimulated macrophages induced neutrophil
chemotaxis, which was significantly inhibited by anti-Wnt5a antibody. Our results
suggested that Wnt5a may contribute to neutrophil recruitment, mediating the
inflammation response.

PMCID: PMC3701286
PMID: 23764954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 9;288(32):23322-30. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.462101. Epub 2013
Jun 6.

Precisely ordered phosphorylation reactions in the p38 mitogen-activated protein 
(MAP) kinase cascade.

Humphreys JM(1), Piala AT, Akella R, He H, Goldsmith EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

The MAP kinase cascades, composed of a MAP3K, a MAP2K, and a MAPK, control switch
responses to extracellular stimuli and stress in eukaryotes. The most important
feature of these modules is thought to be the two double phosphorylation
reactions catalyzed by MAP3Ks and MAP2Ks. We addressed whether the reactions are 
sequential or random in the p38 MAP kinase module. Mass spectrometry was used to 
track the phosphorylation of the MAP2K MEK6 by two MAP3Ks, TAO2 and ASK1, and the
subsequent phosphorylation of p38a by MEK6/S*T* (where S (Ser) and T (Thr) are
the two phosphorylation sites and * denotes phosphorylation). Both double
phosphorylation reactions are precisely ordered. MEK6 is phosphorylated first on 
Thr-211 and then on Ser-207 by both MAP3Ks. This is the first demonstration of a 
precise reaction order for a MAP2K. p38a is phosphorylated first on Tyr-182 and
then on Thr-180, the same reaction order observed previously in ERK2. Thus,
intermediates were MEK6/ST* and p38a/TY*. Similarly, the phosphorylation of the
p38a transcription factor substrate ATF2 occurs in a precise sequence. Progress
curves for the appearance of intermediates were fit to kinetic models. The models
confirmed the reaction order, revealed processivity in the phosphorylation of
MEK6 by ASK1, and suggested that the order of phosphorylation is dictated by both
binding and catalysis rates.

PMCID: PMC3743502
PMID: 23744074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;33(15):3026-35. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00349-13. Epub 2013 Jun 
3.

A stress-activated, p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase-ATF/CREB pathway
regulates posttranscriptional, sequence-dependent decay of target RNAs.

Gao J(1), Wagnon JL, Protacio RM, Glazko GV, Beggs M, Raj V, Davidson MK, Wahls
WP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

Broadly conserved, mitogen-activated/stress-activated protein kinases (MAPK/SAPK)
of the p38 family regulate multiple cellular processes. They transduce signals
via dimeric, basic leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors of the ATF/CREB
family (such as Atf2, Fos, and Jun) to regulate the transcription of target
genes. We report additional mechanisms for gene regulation by such pathways
exerted through RNA stability controls. The Spc1 (Sty1/Phh1) kinase-regulated
Atf1-Pcr1 (Mts1-Mts2) heterodimer of the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
controls the stress-induced, posttranscriptional stability and decay of sets of
target RNAs. Whole transcriptome RNA sequencing data revealed that decay is
associated nonrandomly with transcripts that contain an M26 sequence motif.
Moreover, the ablation of an M26 sequence motif in a target mRNA is sufficient to
block its stress-induced loss. Conversely, engineered M26 motifs can render a
stable mRNA into one that is targeted for decay. This stress-activated RNA decay 
(SARD) provides a mechanism for reducing the expression of target genes without
shutting off transcription itself. Thus, a single p38-ATF/CREB signal
transduction pathway can coordinately induce (promote transcription and RNA
stability) and repress (promote RNA decay) transcript levels for distinct sets of
genes, as is required for developmental decisions in response to stress and other
stimuli.

PMCID: PMC3719685
PMID: 23732911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cell Signal. 2013 Sep;25(9):1780-91. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.05.025. Epub
2013 May 25.

Autocrine IL-8 and VEGF mediate epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
invasiveness via p38/JNK-ATF-2 signalling in A549 lung cancer cells.

Desai S(1), Laskar S, Pandey BN.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Biology and Health Sciences Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre,
Mumbai 400085, India.

Soluble factors in tumour microenvironment play a major role in modulating the
metastatic potential of cancer cells. Herein, we investigated the effect of
autocrine cytokines and growth factors in the form of self-conditioned medium
(CM) on A549 lung carcinoma cells. We demonstrated that CM induced morphological 
and molecular changes associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition viz
change in shape from cuboidal to spindle, actin cytoskeleton remodelling,
upregulation of vimentin and downregulation of E-cadherin etc. These changes were
accompanied with enhanced motility, invasion, anchorage-independent growth and
anoikis-resistance. Amongst the different factors of CM, IL-8 and VEGF were found
to play a major role in the CM-induced motility and invasion. In the
intracellular signalling cascade, CM triggered phosphorylation of JNK and p38
which was associated with the CM-enhanced invasiveness. In CM-treated cells,
activated p38 and JNK further activated ATF-2 (Activating Transcription Factor-2)
and knock-down of ATF-2 abrogated the CM-induced invasiveness, suggesting the
signal transduction along the p38/JNK-ATF-2 axis. Furthermore, neutralising IL-8 
and VEGF in CM, significantly abrogated CM-induced phosphorylation of ATF-2.
Conversely, exogenous addition of these individual cytokines in plain medium,
increased the activation of ATF-2 and invasiveness marginally. However, when
added in combination these cytokines (IL-8 and VEGF) resulted in drastic increase
in ATF-2 phosphorylation and subsequent invasiveness suggesting their synergetic 
interplay in the observed phenomenon. Taken together, our results identify
IL-8/VEGF induced JNK/p38-ATF-2 as a novel pro-invasive pathway, which may be
explored as potential therapeutic target to circumvent the invasiveness of lung
malignancies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23714383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013 Apr;21(4):731-6. doi: 10.1002/oby.20274.

Expression of activating transcription factor 2 in inflammatory macrophages in
obese adipose tissue.

Miyata Y(1), Fukuhara A, Otsuki M, Shimomura I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: White adipose tissue (WAT) of obesity is in the state of inflammation 
with progressive infiltration by macrophages and overproduction of reactive
oxygen species (ROS), which can induce WAT dysfunction, including insulin
resistance and adipocytokine dysregulation. Activating transcription factor 2
(ATF2) is a member of the ATF/cAMP response element binding family of
transcription factors and known to be activated by cellular stressors, such as
inflammatory cytokines, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and ROS. DESIGN AND METHODS,
RESULTS: Here, we show that ATF2 protein was significantly more induced in WAT of
ob/ob mice compared with C57BL/6J mice. Total and phosphorylated ATF2 were highly
expressed in infiltrated macrophages. Furthermore, flow cytometry analysis
demonstrated that ATF2 expression was high in CD11c-positive/CD301-negative M1
macrophages. Phosphorylation of ATF2 was induced by treatment with either H2 O2
or LPS in RAW264.7 macrophage cells, and suppression of ATF2 expression by
small-interfering RNA induced mRNA levels of ATF3, an anti-inflammatory molecule 
in macrophages in WAT.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that ATF2 is an important transcriptional
factor relating to inflammation through the suppression of ATF3 in M1 macrophages
of WAT.

Copyright © 2012 The Obesity Society.

PMID: 23712976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cell Signal. 2013 Sep;25(9):1804-12. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.05.014. Epub
2013 May 21.

Inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) is a novel regulator of RIG-I mediated
IFN-ß production.

Johnsen IB(1), Bergstroem B, Stiberg KA, Thommesen L, Anthonsen MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Children's and Women's Health, Faculty of
Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
Ingvild.johnsen@ntnu.no

Antiviral responses can be triggered by the cytoplasmic RNA helicase RIG-I that
binds to viral RNA. RIG-I-mediated signaling stimulates the transcription factors
IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B and their activation mechanisms have been intensively studied.
Here we examined Sendai virus (SV)-mediated activation of the transcription
factor CREB and the role of its feedback repressor ICER in production of
endogenous antiviral proteins. We show that SV infection and the mitochondrial
adapter protein MAVS promote CREB phosphorylation that is dependent upon p38 MAPK
and MK2. ICER is induced by CREB and acts as a feedback repressor of
CRE-dependent transcription. We found that SV infection stimulated induction of
ICER mRNA and protein expression. Surprisingly, ectopic expression and
siRNA-mediated knockdown of ICER revealed that ICER is a positive regulator of
the production of antiviral IFN-ß and IP10 during SV infection. In contrast, ICER
did not affect SV-elicited phosphorylation of IRF3, NF-<U+03BA>B or ATF2/c-Jun,
transcription factors governing IFN-ß and IP10 synthesis. However, expression of 
ICER increased total IRF3 protein levels during SV infection. These results point
to a novel role of ICER in antiviral immune signaling acting to increase levels
of antiviral effectors.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23707530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Gastroenterology. 2013 Aug;145(2):396-406.e1-10. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2013.04.056. Epub 2013 May 7.

Short-chain fatty acids activate GPR41 and GPR43 on intestinal epithelial cells
to promote inflammatory responses in mice.

Kim MH(1), Kang SG, Park JH, Yanagisawa M, Kim CH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology and Hematopoiesis, Department of Comparative
Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
Indiana 47907, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), the most abundant microbial
metabolites in the intestine, activate cells via G-protein-coupled receptors
(GPRs), such as GPR41 and GPR43. We studied regulation of the immune response by 
SCFAs and their receptors in the intestines of mice.
METHODS: Inflammatory responses were induced in GPR41(-/-), GPR43(-/-), and
C57BL6 (control) mice by administration of ethanol; 2, 4, 6-trinitrobenzene
sulfonic-acid (TNBS); or infection with Citrobacter rodentium. We examined the
effects of C rodentium infection on control mice fed SCFAs and/or given
injections of antibodies that delay the immune response. We also studied the
kinetics of cytokine and chemokine production, leukocyte recruitment, intestinal 
permeability, and T-cell responses. Primary colon epithelial cells were isolated 
from GPR41(-/-), GPR43(-/-), and control mice; signaling pathways regulated by
SCFAs were identified using immunohistochemical, enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay, and flow cytometry analyses.
RESULTS: GPR41(-/-) and GPR43(-/-) mice had reduced inflammatory responses after 
administration of ethanol or TNBS compared with control mice, and had a slower
immune response against C rodentium infection, clearing the bacteria more slowly.
SCFAs activated intestinal epithelial cells to produce chemokines and cytokines
in culture and mice after administration of ethanol, TNBS, or C rodentium. These 
processes required GPR41 and GPR43 and were required to recruit leukocytes and
activate effector T cells in the intestine. GPR41 and GPR43 activated
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling pathways in epithelial cells to induce production of chemokines 
and cytokines during immune responses.
CONCLUSIONS: SCFAs activate GPR41 and GPR43 on intestinal epithelial cells,
leading to mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling and rapid production of
chemokines and cytokines. These pathways mediate protective immunity and tissue
inflammation in mice.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23665276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Immunol. 2013 Jun 15;190(12):6596-606. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201876. Epub 2013
May 8.

Mechanism of IL-1ß modulation of intestinal epithelial barrier involves p38
kinase and activating transcription factor-2 activation.

Al-Sadi R(1), Guo S, Ye D, Dokladny K, Alhmoud T, Ereifej L, Said HM, Ma TY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, 
Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.

The defective intestinal epithelial tight junction (TJ) barrier has been
postulated to be an important pathogenic factor contributing to intestinal
inflammation. It has been shown that the proinflammatory cytokine IL-1ß causes an
increase in intestinal permeability; however, the signaling pathways and the
molecular mechanisms involved remain unclear. The major purpose of this study was
to investigate the role of the p38 kinase pathway and the molecular processes
involved. In these studies, the in vitro intestinal epithelial model system
(Caco-2 monolayers) was used to delineate the cellular and molecular mechanisms, 
and a complementary in vivo mouse model system (intestinal perfusion) was used to
assess the in vivo relevance of the in vitro findings. Our data indicated that
the IL-1ß increase in Caco-2 TJ permeability correlated with an activation of p38
kinase. The activation of p38 kinase caused phosphorylation and activation of p38
kinase substrate, activating transcription factor (ATF)-2. The activated ATF-2
translocated to the nucleus where it attached to its binding motif on the myosin 
L chain kinase (MLCK) promoter region, leading to the activation of MLCK promoter
activity and gene transcription. Small interfering RNA induced silencing of
ATF-2, or mutation of the ATF-2 binding motif prevented the activation of MLCK
promoter and MLCK mRNA transcription. Additionally, in vivo intestinal perfusion 
studies also indicated that the IL-1ß increase in mouse intestinal permeability
required p38 kinase-dependent activation of ATF-2. In conclusion, these studies
show that the IL-1ß-induced increase in intestinal TJ permeability in vitro and
in vivo was regulated by p38 kinase activation of ATF-2 and by ATF-2 regulation
of MLCK gene activity.

PMCID: PMC3677168
PMID: 23656735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mutat Res. 2013 Aug 30;756(1-2):108-14. doi: 10.1016/j.mrgentox.2013.04.011. Epub
2013 Apr 30.

Smad7 foci are present in micronuclei induced by heavy particle radiation.

Wang M(1), Saha J, Cucinotta FA.

Author information: 
(1)Universities Space Research Association, Division of Space Life Sciences, 3600
Bay Area Boulevard, Houston, TX, USA.

DNA damage and reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated by ionizing radiation (IR)
activate DNA damage response (DDR) and cytokine signaling pathways, including
double strand break (DSB) repair and TGFß/Smad signaling pathway. Proteins
assembled at IR-induced DSB sites can be visualized as foci, including <U+03B3>H2AX,
53BP1, ATM and ATF2. Unrepaired DSBs are thought to be one origin of micronuclei 
(MN), an indicator of genotoxic stress and chromosomal instability. Studies have 
detected <U+03B3>H2AX in IR-induced MN, indicating the presence of DSB in MN. Previously
we reported that TGFß downstream proteins Smad7 and phospho-Smad2 (pSmad2)
co-localized with DDR proteins following radiation. Here we studied the status of
Smad7 and pSmad2 in MN post high linear energy transfer (LET) radiation in human 
normal and cancerous cells. We observed <U+03B3>H2AX foci in IR-induced MN, whereas
53BP1 and ATF2 were absent. Interestingly, Smad7 foci, but not pSmad2, were
detectable in both spontaneous and IR-induced MN. We compared the effect of
particle track structures on the yield of MN using 5.6MeV/u boron (B) and
600MeV/u iron (Fe) particles with similar LET (200 and 180keV/µm, respectively)
in human fibroblasts. The frequency of MN induced by B was lower than that by Fe 
particles, albeit the proportion of Smad7-positive to Smad7-negative MN remained 
constant. An increased frequency of spontaneous MN, with slightly higher ratio of
Smad7 or <U+03B3>H2AX positive, was found in human prostate cancer cells (PC3) compared 
to normal cells. 24h after 1Gy of Fe particles exposure, the yield of MN
increased, and the majority (~70%) carried <U+03B3>H2AX and Smad7. Phospho-ATM (Ser1981)
foci were found in both spontaneous and IR-induced MN in PC3 cells, displaying a 
much lower frequency compared to <U+03B3>H2AX and Smad7. Our data suggest a unique role 
of Smad7 in IR-induced MN formation, which may associate with DNA repair,
apoptosis and genomic instability.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 23643526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Mol Med (Berl). 2013 Aug;91(8):977-87. doi: 10.1007/s00109-013-1035-z. Epub
2013 Apr 26.

Mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase 1 activates osteoclastogenesis in
vitro and affects bone destruction in vivo.

Ha J(1), Kim HJ, Huang H, Lee ZH, Kim HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, BK21 and DRI, Seoul National
University, Seoul 110-749, Republic of Korea.

Mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase (MSK) 1 is an important regulator of
immune response and mitogenic signaling. In this study, we report for the first
time that MSK1 was activated by the osteoclast differentiation factor receptor
activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL) in osteoclast precursor cells.
Inhibition of upstream kinases ERK1/2 and p38, but not JNK, suppressed MSK
activation upon RANKL stimulation. An MSK1 inhibitor efficiently prevented the
induction of c-Fos and NFATc1 and CREB phosphorylation by RANKL. Inhibition of
MSK1 also successfully blocked RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis. MSK knockdown
with small interfering RNA significantly inhibited osteoclast differentiation and
bone resorption. MSK1 did not affect osteoclast survival. The induction of c-Fos 
and NFATc1 and the phosphorylation of CREB and ATF2 were also inhibited by MSK1
knockdown. Moreover, knockdown of MSK1 significantly blocked recruitment of c-Fos
to the NFATc1 promoter upon RANKL stimulation. Therefore, NFATc1-inducible
osteoclast-specific genes were downregulated by MSK1 blockade. NFATc1 retrovirus 
transduction almost completely rescued the differentiation defect of
MSK1-silenced cells. In vivo knockdown of MSK1 reduced RANKL-induced bone
resorption as well as osteoclast formation. Thus, our results suggested that MSK1
is an important novel molecule involved in RANKL signaling and osteoclast
differentiation.

PMID: 23619911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2013 Sep;20(9):6468-81. doi:
10.1007/s11356-013-1695-9. Epub 2013 Apr 17.

Signal transduction disturbance related to hepatocarcinogenesis in mouse by
prolonged exposure to Nanjing drinking water.

Zhang R(1), Sun J, Zhang Y, Cheng S, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control & Resource Reuse, School of the
Environment, Nanjing University, 163 Xianlin Road, Nanjing, 210046, People's
Republic of China.

Toxicogenomic approaches were used to investigate the potential
hepatocarcinogenic effects on mice by oral exposure to Nanjing drinking water
(NJDW). Changes in the hepatic transcriptome of 3 weeks male mice (Mus musculus) 
were monitored and dissected after oral exposure to NJDW for 90 days. No
preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions were observed in the hepatic tissue by the
end of NJDW exposure. However, total of 746 genes were changed transcriptionally.
Thirty-one percent of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were associated with 
the functional categories of cell cycle regulation, adhesion, growth, apoptosis, 
and signal transduction, which are closely implicated in tumorigenesis and
progression. Interrogation of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes revealed
that 43 DEGs were mapped to several crucial signaling pathways implicated in the 
pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In signal transduction network
constructed via Genes2Networks software, Egfr, Akt1, Atf2, Ctnnb1, Hras, Mapk1,
Smad2, and Ccnd1 were hubs. Direct gene-disease relationships obtained from
Comparative Toxicogenomics Database and scientific literatures revealed that the 
hubs have direct mechanism or biomarker relationships with hepatocellular
preneoplastic lesions or hepatocarcinogenesis. Therefore, prolonged intake of
NJDW without employing any indoor water treatment strategy might predispose mouse
to HCC. Furthermore, Egfr, Akt1, Ctnnb1, Hras, Mapk1, Smad2, and Ccnd1 were
identified as promising biomarkers of the potential combined
hepatocarcinogenicity.

PMID: 23591932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Arch Toxicol. 2013 Jun;87(6):981-9. doi: 10.1007/s00204-013-1058-9. Epub 2013 Apr
17.

Oxidative stress and MAPK involved into ATF2 expression in immortalized human
urothelial cells treated by arsenic.

Liu S(1), Wang F, Yan L, Zhang L, Song Y, Xi S, Jia J, Sun G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Liaoning Provincial Key
Laboratory of Arsenic Biological Effect and Poisoning, School of Public Health,
China Medical University, District of Heping, North Er Road, No. 92, Shenyang
City 110001, China.

ATF2 is a subfamily member of AP-1 and has an important role in cellular stress
responses. ATF2 has been implicated in a transcriptional response leading to cell
migration and malignant tumor progression. However, little is known about the
effect of arsenic on expression of ATF2 and regulatory pathways in human
urothelial cells. In this study, ATF2 expression was measured in NaAsO(2)-treated
human uroepithelial cell line (SV-HUC-1) with 1, 2, 4, 8 and 10 µM concentrations
in order to provide some basis data for the study on mechanism of bladder cancer 
induced by arsenic. We found that ATF2 expression levels at 2, 4, 8 and 10 µM
arsenic-treated cells were significantly higher than those of control cells, and 
the strongest expression occurred in 4 µM NaAsO(2)-treated cells. Antioxidants
(melatonin) and JNK or p38 inhibitors decreased significantly arsenic-induced
ATF2 expression. Taken together, these data indicated that the increasing of ATF2
expression is mediated via oxidative stress induced by arsenic in SV-HUC-1 cells,
and JNK or p38 rather than ERK is responsible for arsenic-induced ATF2
expression. ROS were also involved in arsenic induced the activation of JNK and
p38 MAPK signaling pathway.

PMID: 23591579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 May 15;19(10):2710-22. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2689. 
Epub 2013 Apr 15.

Inhibition of melanoma growth by small molecules that promote the mitochondrial
localization of ATF2.

Varsano T(1), Lau E, Feng Y, Garrido M, Milan L, Heynen-Genel S, Hassig CA, Ronai
ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

PURPOSE: Effective therapy for malignant melanoma, the leading cause of death
from skin cancer, remains an area of significant unmet need in oncology. The
elevated expression of PKCe in advanced metastatic melanoma results in the
increased phosphorylation of the transcription factor ATF2 on threonine 52, which
causes its nuclear localization and confers its oncogenic activities. The
nuclear-to-mitochondrial translocation of ATF2 following genotoxic stress
promotes apoptosis, a function that is largely lost in melanoma cells, due to its
confined nuclear localization. Therefore, promoting the nuclear export of ATF2,
which sensitizes melanoma cells to apoptosis, represents a novel therapeutic
modality.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We conducted a pilot high-throughput screen of 3,800
compounds to identify small molecules that promote melanoma cell death by
inducing the cytoplasmic localization of ATF2. The imaging-based ATF2
translocation assay was conducted using UACC903 melanoma cells that stably
express doxycycline-inducible GFP-ATF2.
RESULTS: We identified two compounds (SBI-0089410 and SBI-0087702) that promoted 
the cytoplasmic localization of ATF2, reduced cell viability, inhibited colony
formation, cell motility, and anchorage-free growth, and increased mitochondrial 
membrane permeability. SBI-0089410 inhibited the
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-l3-acetate (TPA)-induced membrane translocation of
protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms, whereas both compounds decreased ATF2
phosphorylation by PKCe and ATF2 transcriptional activity. Overexpression of
either constitutively active PKCe or phosphomimic mutant ATF2(T52E) attenuated
the cellular effects of the compounds.
CONCLUSION: The imaging-based high-throughput screen provides a proof-of-concept 
for the identification of small molecules that block the oncogenic addiction to
PKCe signaling by promoting ATF2 nuclear export, resulting in mitochondrial
membrane leakage and melanoma cell death.

©2013 AACR

PMCID: PMC3690798
PMID: 23589174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Biomed Pharmacother. 2013 May;67(4):337-45. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2013.02.006.
Epub 2013 Feb 27.

Enhanced tumorigenesis and lymphatic metastasis of CD133+ hepatocarcinoma ascites
syngeneic cell lines mediated by JNK signaling pathway in vitro and in vivo.

Jin Y(1), Mao J, Wang H, Hou Z, Ma W, Zhang J, Wang B, Huang Y, Zang S, Tang J,
Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dalian Medical University, 9 West Lvshun Southern
Road, Dalian 116044, PR China.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs), stem-like cells, or tumor-initiating cells (TICs) may
initiate tumorigenesis and metastasis, but neither the basic cell biology of CSCs
nor the mechanisms of CSC-mediated tumor growth and lymphoid node metastasis are 
understood. Evidence suggests that CSC phenotype is maintained, at least in part,
by altered JNK signaling. In this study, factors influencing the growth and
metastatic potential of CSCs were examined by comparing CD133 surface antigen
expression, proliferation, clonogenicity, invasive capacity, tumorigenicity, and 
expression of JNK-associated signaling molecules between the highly metastatic
mouse hepatocarcinoma ascites syngeneic cell line Hca-F and the low metastasis
potential line Hca-P. The Hca-F line exhibited higher clonogenic, proliferative, 
and invasive capacities than Hca-P cells, and a greater proportion of Hca-F cells
were CD133 positive. In both cell lines, the CD133+ subpopulation showed
significantly enhanced tumorigenicity and metastatic potential. An in vivo
tumorigenicity assay in nude mice indicated that Hca-F cells possessed
significantly higher tumorigenicity than Hca-P cells as indicated by larger
tumors after inoculation. Expression levels of E-cadherin (CDH1), annexin VII,
and JNK1 proteins were inversely correlated with CD133 expression in both Hca-F
and Hca-P cells. These results demonstrate that CD133+ subpopulations of both
Hca-F and Hca-P lines show CSC-like properties. However, Hca-F cells showed
greater tumorigenicity and invasiveness, consistent with greater lymphatic
metastasis capacity. We propose that tumorigenesis and lymphatic metastasis are
regulated by JNK/P53/annexin VII and JNK/ATF-2/CDH1/annexin VII signal
transduction pathways.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23582787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Cell. 2013 Apr 11;153(2):389-401. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.026.

A Direct in vivo RNAi screen identifies MKK4 as a key regulator of liver
regeneration.

Wuestefeld T(1), Pesic M, Rudalska R, Dauch D, Longerich T, Kang TW, Yevsa T,
Heinzmann F, Hoenicke L, Hohmeyer A, Potapova A, Rittelmeier I, Jarek M, Geffers 
R, Scharfe M, Klawonn F, Schirmacher P, Malek NP, Ott M, Nordheim A, Vogel A,
Manns MP, Zender L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Endocrinology, Medical School
Hannover, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2014 Mar;59(3):1201-3.
    Cell. 2013 Apr 11;153(2):283-4.

The liver harbors a distinct capacity for endogenous regeneration; however, liver
regeneration is often impaired in disease and therefore insufficient to
compensate for the loss of hepatocytes and organ function. Here we describe a
functional genetic approach for the identification of gene targets that can be
exploited to increase the regenerative capacity of hepatocytes. Pools of small
hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) were directly and stably delivered into mouse livers to
screen for genes modulating liver regeneration. Our studies identify the
dual-specific kinase MKK4 as a master regulator of liver regeneration. MKK4
silencing robustly increased the regenerative capacity of hepatocytes in mouse
models of liver regeneration and acute and chronic liver failure.
Mechanistically, induction of MKK7 and a JNK1-dependent activation of the AP1
transcription factor ATF2 and the Ets factor ELK1 are crucial for increased
regeneration of hepatocytes with MKK4 silencing.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23582328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Apr 26;434(1):8-14. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.03.082. Epub 2013 Apr 6.

Gas6 induces cancer cell migration and epithelial-mesenchymal transition through 
upregulation of MAPK and Slug.

Lee Y(1), Lee M, Kim S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology,
Daejeon, South Korea.

Binding of Gas6 to Axl (Gas6/Axl axis) alters cellular functions, including
migration, invasion, proliferation, and survival. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying Gas6-mediated cell migration remain poorly understood. In
this study, we found that Gas6 induced the activation of JNK and ERK1/2 signaling
in cancer cells expressing Axl, resulting in the phosphorylation of activator
protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factors c-Jun and ATF-2, and induction of Slug.
Depletion of c-Jun or ATF-2 by siRNA attenuated the Gas6-induced expression of
Slug. Slug expression was required for cell migration and E-cadherin
reduction/vimentin induction induced by Gas6. These results suggest that Gas6
induced cell migration via Slug upregulation in JNK- and ERK1/2-dependent
mechanisms. These data provide an important insight into the molecular mechanisms
mediating Gas6-induced cell migration.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23567973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e57185. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057185. Epub 2013 Mar 11.

GADD45a induction by nickel negatively regulates JNKs/p38 activation via
promoting PP2Ca expression.

Yu Y(1), Li J, Wan Y, Lu J, Gao J, Huang C.

Author information: 
(1)Nelson Institute of Environmental Medicine, New York University School of
Medicine, Tuxedo, New York, United States of America.

Growth arrest and DNA damage (GADD) 45a is a member of GADD inducible gene
family, and is inducible in cell response to oxidative stress. GADD45a
upregulation induces MKK4/JNK activation in some published experimental systems. 
However, we found here that the depletion of GADD45a (GADD45a-/-) in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) resulted in an increase in the phosphorylation of
MKK4/7, MKK3/6 and consequently specific up-regulated the activation of JNK/p38
and their downstream transcription factors, such as c-Jun and ATF2, in comparison
to those in GADD45a+/+ MEFs cell following nickel exposure. This up-regulation of
MKK-JNK/p38 pathway in GADD45a-/- cell could be rescued by the reconstitutional
expression of HA-GADD45a in GADD45a-/- MEFs, GADD45a-/-(HA-GADD45a). Subsequent
studies indicated that GADD45a deletion repressed expression of PP2Ca, the
phosphotase of MKK3/6 and MKK4/7, whereas ectopic expression of HA-PP2Ca in
GADD45a-/- cells attenuated activation of MKK3/6-p38 and MKK4/7-JNK pathways.
Collectively, our results demonstrate a novel function and mechanism responsible 
for GADD45a regulation of MKK/MAPK pathway, further provides insight into
understanding the big picture of GADD45a in the regulation of cellular responses 
to oxidative stress and environmental carcinogens.

PMCID: PMC3594291
PMID: 23536762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mol Pain. 2013 Mar 22;9:13. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-9-13.

Intervention of electroacupuncture on spinal p38 MAPK/ATF-2/VR-1 pathway in
treating inflammatory pain induced by CFA in rats.

Fang JQ(1), Du JY, Liang Y, Fang JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Acupuncture Research, The Third Clinical
Medical College, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, 548 Binwen Road, Binjiang
District, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province 310053, China. fangjianqiao7532@163.com

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have demonstrated that p38 MAPK signal transduction 
pathway plays an important role in the development and maintenance of
inflammatory pain. Electroacupuncture (EA) can suppress the inflammatory pain.
However, the relationship between EA effect and p38 MAPK signal transduction
pathway in inflammatory pain remains poorly understood. It is our hypothesis that
p38 MAPK/ATF-2/VR-1 and/or p38 MAPK/ATF-2/COX-2 signal transduction pathway
should be activated by inflammatory pain in CFA-injected model. Meanwhile, EA may
inhibit the activation of p38 MAPK signal transduction pathway. The present study
aims to investigate that anti-inflammatory and analgesic effect of EA and its
intervention on the p38 MAPK signal transduction pathway in a rat model of
inflammatory pain.
RESULTS: EA had a pronounced anti-inflammatory and analgesic effect on
CFA-induced chronic inflammatory pain in rats. EA could quickly raise CFA-rat's
paw withdrawal thresholds (PWTs) and maintain good and long analgesic effect,
while it subdued the ankle swelling of CFA rats only at postinjection day 14. EA 
could down-regulate the protein expressions of p-p38 MAPK and p-ATF-2, reduced
the numbers of p-p38 MAPK-IR cells and p-ATF-2-IR cells in spinal dorsal horn in 
CFA rats, inhibited the expressions of both protein and mRNA of VR-1, but had no 
effect on the COX-2 mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study indicates that inhibiting the activation of spinal
p38 MAPK/ATF-2/VR-1 pathway may be one of the main mechanisms via central signal 
transduction pathway in the process of anti-inflammatory pain by EA in CFA rats.

PMCID: PMC3608238
PMID: 23517865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Apr 15;304(8):E844-52. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00581.2012. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

ß-Adrenergic stimulation does not activate p38 MAP kinase or induce PGC-1a in
skeletal muscle.

Kim SH(1), Asaka M, Higashida K, Takahashi Y, Holloszy JO, Han DH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Geriatrics and Nutritional Sciences, Department of Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

There are reports that the ß-adrenergic agonist clenbuterol induces a large
increase in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator-1a (PGC-1a) 
in skeletal muscle. This has led to the hypothesis that the increases in PGC-1a
and mitochondrial biogenesis induced in muscle by endurance exercise are mediated
by catecholamines. In the present study, we evaluated this possibility and found 
that injecting rats with clenbuterol or norepinephrine induced large increases in
PGC-1a and mitochondrial proteins in brown adipose tissue but had no effect on
PGC-1a expression or mitochondrial biogenesis in skeletal muscle. In brown
adipocytes, the increase in PGC-1a expression induced by ß-adrenergic stimulation
is mediated by activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK),
which phosphorylates and activates the cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB) family member activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2), which binds to a
cyclic AMP response element (CRE) in the PGC-1a promoter and mediates the
increase in PGC-1a transcription. Phospho-CREB does not have this effect. Our
results show that the reason for the lack of effect of ß-adrenergic stimulation
on PGC-1a expression in muscle is that catecholamines do not activate p38 or
increase ATF2 phosphorylation in muscle.

PMCID: PMC3625780
PMID: 23443926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Chem Commun (Camb). 2013 Apr 7;49(27):2795-7. doi: 10.1039/c3cc38467e.

A universal and multiplex kinase assay using <U+03B3>-[(18)O(4)]-ATP.

Fu C(1), Zheng X, Jiang Y, Liu Y, Xu P, Zeng Z, Liu R, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen
University, Xiamen, 361005, PR China.

We have synthesized <U+03B3>-[(18)O4]-ATP and used it to develop a non-radioactive and
multiplex method. Significantly, this novel approach can be applied to any
kinases without using a purified enzyme or a fluorescent substrate. Using this
approach, the effectiveness and specificity of inhibitors on several kinases
could be readily determined.

PMID: 23439932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Insect Sci. 2012;12:107. doi: 10.1673/031.012.10701.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase p38b interaction with delta class glutathione
transferases from the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster.

Wongtrakul J(1), Sukittikul S, Saisawang C, Ketterman AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Health Sciences, Chiang Mai University, POBOX 80 CMU,
Chiang Mai, Thailand 50200. jwongtrakul@yahoo.com

Glutathione transferases (GSTs) are a family of multifunctional enzymes involved 
in xenobiotic biotransformation, drug metabolism, and protection against
oxidative damage. The p38b mitogen-activated protein kinase is involved in
cellular stress response. This study screened interactions between Drosophila
melanogaster Meigen (Diptera: Drosophilidae) Delta class glutathione transferases
(DmGSTs) and the D. melanogaster p38b MAPK. Therefore, 12 DmGSTs and p38b kinase 
were obtained as recombinant proteins. The study showed that DmGSTD8 and
DmGSTD11b significantly increased p38b activity toward ATF2 and jun, which are
transcription factor substrates. DmGSTD3 and DmGSTD5 moderately increased p38b
activity for jun. In addition, GST activity in the presence of p38b was also
measured. It was found that p38b affected substrate specificity toward CDNB
(1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene) and DCNB (1,2-dichloro-4-nitrobenzene) of several
GST isoforms, i.e., DmGSTD2, DmGSTD5, DmGSTD8, and DmGSTD11b. The interaction of 
a GST and p38b can affect the substrate specificity of either enzyme, which
suggests induced conformational changes affecting catalysis. Similar interactions
do not occur for all the Delta enzymes and p38b, which suggests that these
interactions could be specific.

PMCID: PMC3605031
PMID: 23438069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Oncogene. 2014 Feb 20;33(8):1027-36. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.28. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Sensitisation of c-MYC-induced B-lymphoma cells to apoptosis by ATF2.

Walczynski J(1), Lyons S(1), Jones N(1), Breitwieser W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Regulation, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Transcription factors ATF2 (activating transcription factor 2) and ATF7
(activating transcription factor 7) are highly homologous members of the
activator protein 1 (AP-1) family. Their activities are growth factor and stress 
stimulated and they strictly require phosphorylation by mitogen-activated protein
(MAP) kinases for their transcriptional functions. In samples of human B-cell
lymphomas as well as Eµ-Myc-driven mouse B-cell lymphomas, we find that ATF2 as
well as MAP kinase c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) are significantly up-regulated
compared with normal human B-cell lines and mouse B cells, respectively. The B
cell-specific deletion of ATF2 and ATF7 in mice results in significantly
accelerated onset of Eµ-Myc-induced lymphoma. In addition, loss of ATF2/7
desensitises Eµ-Myc lymphoma cells to spontaneous as well as stress-induced
apoptosis. Our results therefore suggest that c-MYC induces stress-mediated
activation of ATF2 and ATF7 and that these transcription factors regulate
apoptosis in response to oncogenic transformation of B cells.

PMID: 23416976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 26;110(9):E798-807. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1215236110. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

BMP4-mediated brown fat-like changes in white adipose tissue alter glucose and
energy homeostasis.

Qian SW(1), Tang Y, Li X, Liu Y, Zhang YY, Huang HY, Xue RD, Yu HY, Guo L, Gao
HD, Liu Y, Sun X, Li YM, Jia WP, Tang QQ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, the Ministry of Education, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University Shanghai Medical College,
Shanghai 200032, People's Republic of China.

Expression of bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) in adipocytes of white adipose 
tissue (WAT) produces "white adipocytes" with characteristics of brown fat and
leads to a reduction of adiposity and its metabolic complications. Although BMP4 
is known to induce commitment of pluripotent stem cells to the adipocyte lineage 
by producing cells that possess the characteristics of preadipocytes, its effects
on the mature white adipocyte phenotype and function were unknown. Forced
expression of a BMP4 transgene in white adipocytes of mice gives rise to reduced 
WAT mass and white adipocyte size along with an increased number of a white
adipocyte cell types with brown adipocyte characteristics comparable to those of 
beige or brite adipocytes. These changes correlate closely with increased energy 
expenditure, improved insulin sensitivity, and protection against diet-induced
obesity and diabetes. Conversely, BMP4-deficient mice exhibit enlarged white
adipocyte morphology and impaired insulin sensitivity. We identify peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-a (PGC1a) as the target of
BMP signaling required for these brown fat-like changes in WAT. This effect of
BMP4 on WAT appears to extend to human adipose tissue, because the level of
expression of BMP4 in WAT correlates inversely with body mass index. These
findings provide a genetic and metabolic basis for BMP4's role in altering
insulin sensitivity by affecting WAT development.

PMCID: PMC3587258
PMID: 23388637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54633. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054633. Epub 2013 Jan 28.

Disease progression and phasic changes in gene expression in a mouse model of
osteoarthritis.

Loeser RF(1), Olex AL, McNulty MA, Carlson CS, Callahan M, Ferguson C, Fetrow JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Molecular Medicine, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.
rloeser@wakehealth.edu

Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common form of arthritis and has multiple risk
factors including joint injury. The purpose of this study was to characterize the
histologic development of OA in a mouse model where OA is induced by
destabilization of the medial meniscus (DMM model) and to identify genes
regulated during different stages of the disease, using RNA isolated from the
joint "organ" and analyzed using microarrays. Histologic changes seen in OA,
including articular cartilage lesions and osteophytes, were present in the medial
tibial plateaus of the DMM knees beginning at the earliest (2 week) time point
and became progressively more severe by 16 weeks. 427 probe sets (371 genes) from
the microarrays passed consistency and significance filters. There was an initial
up-regulation at 2 and 4 weeks of genes involved in morphogenesis,
differentiation, and development, including growth factor and matrix genes, as
well as transcription factors including Atf2, Creb3l1, and Erg. Most genes were
off or down-regulated at 8 weeks with the most highly down-regulated genes
involved in cell division and the cytoskeleton. Gene expression increased at 16
weeks, in particular extracellular matrix genes including Prelp, Col3a1 and
fibromodulin. Immunostaining revealed the presence of these three proteins in
cartilage and soft tissues including ligaments as well as in the fibrocartilage
covering osteophytes. The results support a phasic development of OA with early
matrix remodeling and transcriptional activity followed by a more quiescent
period that is not maintained. This implies that the response to an OA
intervention will depend on the timing of the intervention. The quiescent period 
at 8 weeks may be due to the maturation of the osteophytes which are thought to
temporarily stabilize the joint.

PMCID: PMC3557277
PMID: 23382930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Mar 1;41(5):2894-906. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1478. Epub 2013
Jan 15.

An autonomous chromatin/DNA-PK mechanism for localized DNA damage signaling in
mammalian cells.

Muñoz DP(1), Kawahara M, Yannone SM.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Mail Stop
84-171, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Rapid phosphorylation of histone variant H2AX proximal to DNA breaks is an
initiating event and a hallmark of eukaryotic DNA damage responses. Three
mammalian kinases are known to phosphorylate H2AX in response to DNA damage.
However, the mechanism(s) for damage-localized phosphorylation remains
incompletely understood. The DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) is the most
abundant H2AX-modifying kinases and uniquely activated by binding DNA termini.
Here, we have developed a novel approach to examine enzyme activity and substrate
properties by executing biochemical assays on intact cellular structures. We
apply this approach to examine the mechanisms of localized protein modification
in chromatin within fixed cells. DNA-PK retains substrate specificity and
independently generates break-localized <U+03B3>H2AX foci in chromatin. In situ DNA-PK
activity recapitulates localization and intensity of in vivo H2AX phosphorylation
and requires no active cellular processes. Nuclease treatments or addition of
exogenous DNA resulted in genome-wide H2AX phosphorylation, showing that DNA
termini dictated the locality of H2AX phosphorylation in situ. DNA-PK also
reconstituted focal phosphorylation of structural maintenance of chromatin
protein 1, but not activating transcription factor 2. Allosteric regulation of
DNA-PK by DNA termini protruding from chromatin constitutes an autonomous
mechanism for break-localized protein phosphorylation that generates sub-nuclear 
foci. We discuss generalized implications of this mechanism in localizing
mammalian DNA damage responses.

PMCID: PMC3597672
PMID: 23325849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Oct;97(19):8537-46. doi:
10.1007/s00253-012-4670-3. Epub 2013 Jan 15.

Production of tetraacetyl phytosphingosine (TAPS) in Wickerhamomyces ciferrii is 
catalyzed by acetyltransferases Sli1p and Atf2p.

Ter Veld F(1), Wolff D, Schorsch C, Köhler T, Boles E, Poetsch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biochemistry, Ruhr University Bochum, Bldg. ND, Fl. 3, Rm.
130, Universitätsstraße 150, 44801, Bochum, Germany, Frank.terVeld@rub.de.

Wickerhamomyces ciferrii secretes tetraacetyl phytosphingosine (TAPS), and in
this study, the catalyzing acetyltransferases were identified using mass
spectrometry-based proteomics. The proteome of wild-type strain NRRL Y-1031
served as control and was compared to the tetraacetyl phytosphingosine defective 
mating type NRRL Y-1031-27. Acetylation of phytosphingosine in W. ciferrii is
catalyzed by acetyltransferases Sli1p and Atf2p, encoded by genes similar to
Saccharomyces cerevisiae YGR212W and YGR177C, respectively. Ablation of SLI1
resulted in an almost complete loss of tri- and tetraacetyl phytosphingosines,
whereas the loss ATF2 resulted in an 15-fold increase in triacetyl
phytosphingosine. Most likely, it is the concerted action of these two
acetyltransferases that yields tetraacetyl phytosphingosine, in which Sli1p
catalyzes initial O- and N-acetylation, producing triacetyl phytosphingosine.
Finally, Atf2p catalyzes final O-acetylation to yield tetraacetyl
phytosphingosine. The current study demonstrates that mass spectrometry-based
proteomics can be employed to identify key steps in ill-explored metabolite
biosynthesis pathways of nonconventional microorganisms. Furthermore, the
identification of phytosphingosine as substrate for alcohol acetyltransferase
Atf2p broadens the known substrate range of this enzyme. This interesting
property of Atf2p may be exploited to enhance the secretion of heterologous
compounds.

PMID: 23318835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 8;288(6):3831-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.405654. Epub 2012
Dec 21.

S-nitrosoglutathione induces ciliary neurotrophic factor expression in
astrocytes, which has implications to protect the central nervous system under
pathological conditions.

Paintlia MK(1), Paintlia AS, Singh AK, Singh I.

Author information: 
(1)Darby Children's Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 19;288(16):11507.

Accumulating evidence suggests that reactive astrogliosis has beneficial and
detrimental outcomes in various CNS disorders, but the mechanism behind this
dichotomy is unclear. Recent advances in this direction suggested that NO
signaling is critical to regulate the outcomes of reactive astrogliosis in vivo. 
Using biochemical and genetic approaches, we here investigated the effect of
S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO; a physiological NO donor) in astrocytes in vitro
settings. GSNO enhanced the expressions of glial fibrillary acidic protein and
neurotrophic factors including ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) in astrocytes
in a dose-dependent manner. The enhanced CNTF expression in GSNO-treated
astrocytes was ascribed to NO-mediated sGC/cGMP/PKG signaling. It was associated 
with p38 MAPK-dependent increased peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>
transactivation. In addition, the chromatin accessibility of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> accompanied with ATF2 and CREB (cAMP-response
element-binding protein) was enhanced across the CNTF gene promoter in GSNO
treated astrocytes. Interestingly, secreted CNTF was responsible for increased
expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein in GSNO-treated astrocytes in an
autocrine manner via a JAK2- and STAT3-dependent mechanism. In addition, CNTF
secreted by GSNO-treated astrocytes enhanced the differentiation of immature
oligodendrocytes in vitro. These effects of GSNO were consistent with an
endogenously produced NO in astrocytes stimulated with proinflammatory cytokines 
in vitro. We conclude that NO signaling induces CNTF expression in astrocytes
that favors the beneficial outcomes of reactive astrogliosis in vivo. Our data
suggest that the endogenously produced NO or its exogenous source has potential
to modulate the outcomes of reactive astrogliosis to protect CNS under
pathological conditions.

PMCID: PMC3567638
PMID: 23264628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Clin Invest. 2013 Jan;123(1):469-78. doi: 10.1172/JCI64209. Epub 2012 Dec 21.

p62 links ß-adrenergic input to mitochondrial function and thermogenesis.

Müller TD(1), Lee SJ, Jastroch M, Kabra D, Stemmer K, Aichler M, Abplanalp B,
Ananthakrishnan G, Bhardwaj N, Collins S, Divanovic S, Endele M, Finan B, Gao Y, 
Habegger KM, Hembree J, Heppner KM, Hofmann S, Holland J, Küchler D, Kutschke M, 
Krishna R, Lehti M, Oelkrug R, Ottaway N, Perez-Tilve D, Raver C, Walch AK,
Schriever SC, Speakman J, Tseng YH, Diaz-Meco M, Pfluger PT, Moscat J, Tschöp MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Diabetes and Obesity, Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen and Department 
of Medicine, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.

The scaffold protein p62 (sequestosome 1; SQSTM1) is an emerging key molecular
link among the metabolic, immune, and proliferative processes of the cell. Here, 
we report that adipocyte-specific, but not CNS-, liver-, muscle-, or
myeloid-specific p62-deficient mice are obese and exhibit a decreased metabolic
rate caused by impaired nonshivering thermogenesis. Our results show that p62
regulates energy metabolism via control of mitochondrial function in brown
adipose tissue (BAT). Accordingly, adipocyte-specific p62 deficiency led to
impaired mitochondrial function, causing BAT to become unresponsive to
ß-adrenergic stimuli. Ablation of p62 leads to decreased activation of p38
targets, affecting signaling molecules that control mitochondrial function, such 
as ATF2, CREB, PGC1a, DIO2, NRF1, CYTC, COX2, ATP5ß, and UCP1. p62 ablation in
HIB1B and BAT primary cells demonstrated that p62 controls thermogenesis in a
cell-autonomous manner, independently of brown adipocyte development or
differentiation. Together, our data identify p62 as a novel regulator of
mitochondrial function and brown fat thermogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3533288
PMID: 23257354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Med Food. 2013 Jan;16(1):56-65. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2012.2374. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

HangAmDan-B, an ethnomedicinal herbal mixture, suppresses inflammatory responses 
by inhibiting Syk/NF-<U+03BA>B and JNK/ATF-2 pathways.

Yu T(1), Moh SH, Kim SB, Yang Y, Kim E, Lee YW, Cho CK, Kim KH, Yoo BC, Cho JY,
Yoo HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea.

HangAmDan-B (HAD-B) is a powdered mixture of eight ethnopharmacologically
characterized folk medicines that is prescribed for solid masses and cancers in
Korea. In view of the finding that macrophage-mediated inflammation is a
pathophysiologically important phenomenon, we investigated whether HAD-B
modulates inflammatory responses and explored the associated molecular
mechanisms. The immunomodulatory activity of HAD-B in toll-like
receptor-activated macrophages induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was assessed
by measuring nitric oxide (NO) and prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) levels. To
identify the specific transcription factors (such as nuclear factor [NF]-<U+03BA>B and
signaling enzymes) targeted by HAD-B, biochemical approaches, including kinase
assays and immunoblot analysis, were additionally employed. HAD-B suppressed the 
production of PGE(2) and NO in LPS-activated macrophages in a dose-dependent
manner. Furthermore, the extract ameliorated HCl/EtOH-induced gastritis symptoms.
Moreover, HAD-B significantly inhibited LPS-induced mRNA expression of inducible 
NO synthase and cyclooxygenase (COX)-2. Interestingly, marked inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B
and activating transcription factor was observed in the presence of HAD-B. Data
from direct kinase assays and immunoblot analysis showed that HAD-B suppresses
activation of the upstream signaling cascade involving spleen tyrosine kinase,
Src, p38, c-Jun N-terminal kinase, and transforming growth factor ß-activated
kinase 1. Finally, kaempferol, but not quercetin or resveratrol was identified as
a bioactive compound in HAD-B. Therefore, our results suggest that HAD-B
possesses anti-inflammatory activity that contributes to its anticancer property.

PMCID: PMC3545317
PMID: 23256447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51400. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051400. Epub 2012 Dec 10.

Adeno-associated virus vector mediated expression of an oncogenic retroviral
envelope protein induces lung adenocarcinomas in immunocompetent mice.

Linnerth-Petrik NM(1), Santry LA, Yu DL, Wootton SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, Ontario, Canada.

Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer-related death worldwide. A poor
overall survival rate of 16% necessitates the need for novel treatment
strategies. Mouse models of lung cancer are important tools for analyzing the
significance of somatic mutations in the initiation and progression of lung
cancer. Of additional importance, however, are animal models of virally induced
cancers. JSRV is a simple betaretrovirus that causes contagious lung cancer in
sheep known as ovine pulmonary adenocarcinoma and closely resembles human lung
adenocarcinoma. Previously we showed that expression of the JSRV envelope (Env)
from an AAV vector induced lung tumors in immunodeficient mice, but not in
immunocompetent mice. Because of the importance of studying lung cancer in the
context of an intact immune system we sought to improve our mouse model. In this 
report, we employed the use of a strong JSRV enhancer-promoter combination to
express Env at high levels and demonstrate for the first time, lung tumor
induction in immunocompetent mice. This occurred despite a robust Env-specific
antibody-mediated immune response. The PI3K/Akt and MAPK pathways were activated 
in both immunocompetent and immunodeficient mice, however, differential
activation of PTEN, GSKa, p70S6K, p38MAPK, ATF2 and STAT5 was observed. A JSRV
Env lung tumor-derived cell line was shown to have a similar signal transduction 
activation profile as Env-induced lung tumors in C57BL/6 mice. Given the
similarities between our model and pulmonary adenocarcinomas in humans, and the
ease with which tumors can be induced in any transgenic mouse, this system can be
used to uncover novel mechanisms involved lung tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3519541
PMID: 23251519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Food Microbiol. 2013 Apr;33(2):228-34. doi: 10.1016/j.fm.2012.09.021. Epub 2012
Oct 11.

Genetic analysis of geraniol metabolism during fermentation.

Steyer D(1), Erny C, Claudel P, Riveill G, Karst F, Legras JL.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR1131, F-68021 Colmar, France.

Geraniol produced by grape is the main precursor of terpenols which play a key
role in the floral aroma of white wines. We investigated the fate of geraniol
during wine fermentation by Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The volatile compounds
produced during fermentation of a medium enriched with geraniol were extracted by
Stir-bar sorptive extraction and analysed by GC-MS. We were able to detect and
quantify geranyl acetate but also citronellyl- and neryl-acetate. The presence of
these compounds partly explains the disparition of geraniol. The amounts of
terpenyl esters are strain dependant. We demonstrated both by gene overexpression
and gene-deletion the involvement of ATF1 enzyme but not ATF2 in the acetylation 
of terpenols. The affinity of ATF1 enzyme for several terpenols and for isoamyl
alcohol was compared. We also demonstrated that OYE2 is the enzyme involved in
geraniol to citronellol reduction. Fermenting strain deleted from OYE2 gene
produces far less citronellol than wild type strain. Moreover lab strain
over-expressing OYE2 allows 87% geraniol to citronellol reduction in
bioconversion experiment compared to about 50% conversion with control strain.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23200656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Jan 30;365(2):316-26. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.11.012.
Epub 2012 Nov 20.

Phosphorylation of ATF2 and interaction with NFY induces c-Jun in the
gonadotrope.

Lindaman LL(1), Yeh DM, Xie C, Breen KM, Coss D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, Center for Reproductive Science and
Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0674, USA.
llindaman@ucsd.edu

Induction of c-Jun and c-Fos, partners that comprise the AP1 transcription
factor, is critical for GnRH regulation of FSHß gene expression. The signaling
pathways that are necessary for regulation of AP1 in the gonadotrope cell are not
known. Here, we investigate the mechanism of c-Jun induction by GnRH, the sole
regulator of c-Jun in the gonadotrope. We identify that GnRH phosphorylates ATF2 
via p38 and JNK, the same pathways responsible for GnRH induction of c-Jun. Upon 
phosphorylation, ATF2 binds the CRE element within the c-Jun proximal promoter
and interacts with NFY. Functional ATF2 is necessary for both GnRH induction of
c-Jun and FSHß. Taken together, these studies elucidate the specificity of c-Jun 
induction by GnRH in the gonadotrope by demonstrating GnRH activation of the p38 
and JNK signaling pathways that lead to phosphorylation of ATF2, providing
critical insight into GnRH regulation of its target gene, the gonadotropin
subunit FSHß.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3529762
PMID: 23178797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Cell Commun Signal. 2012 Nov 15;10(1):33. doi: 10.1186/1478-811X-10-33.

Role of TLR4/NADPH oxidase/ROS-activated p38 MAPK in VCAM-1 expression induced by
lipopolysaccharide in human renal mesangial cells.

Lee IT(1), Shih RH, Lin CC, Chen JT, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology and Health Aging Research Center,
College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st Road, Kwei-San,
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. chuenmao@mail.cgu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: In bacteria-induced glomerulonephritis, Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)
activation by lipopolysaccharide (LPS, a key component of the outer membranes of 
Gram-negative bacteria) can increase oxidative stress and the expression of
vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), which recruits leukocytes to the
glomerular mesangium. However, the mechanisms underlying VCAM-1 expression
induced by LPS are still unclear in human renal mesangial cells (HRMCs).
RESULTS: We demonstrated that LPS induced VCAM-1 mRNA and protein levels
associated with an increase in the promoter activity of VCAM-1, determined by
Western blot, RT-PCR, and promoter assay. LPS-induced responses were inhibited by
transfection with siRNAs of TLR4, myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88),
Nox2, Nox4, p47phox, c-Src, p38 MAPK, activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2),
and p300 or pretreatment with the inhibitors of reactive oxygen species (ROS,
edaravone), NADPH oxidase [apocynin (APO) or diphenyleneiodonium chloride (DPI)],
c-Src (PP1), p38 MAPK (SB202190), and p300 (GR343). LPS induced NADPH oxidase
activation, ROS production, and p47phox translocation from the cytosol to the
membrane, which were reduced by PP1 or c-Src siRNA. We observed that LPS induced 
TLR4, MyD88, c-Src, and p47phox complex formation determined by
co-immunoprecipitation and Western blot. We further demonstrated that LPS
stimulated ATF2 and p300 phosphorylation and complex formation via a c-Src/NADPH 
oxidase/ROS/p38 MAPK pathway. Up-regulation of VCAM-1 led to enhancing monocyte
adhesion to HRMCs challenged with LPS, which was inhibited by siRNAs of c-Src,
p47phox, p38 MAPK, ATF2, and p300 or pretreatment with an anti-VCAM-1
neutralizing antibody.
CONCLUSIONS: In HRMCs, LPS-induced VCAM-1 expression was, at least in part,
mediated through a TLR4/MyD88/ c-Src/NADPH oxidase/ROS/p38 MAPK-dependent p300
and ATF2 pathway associated with recruitment of monocyte adhesion to kidney.
Blockade of these pathways may reduce monocyte adhesion via VCAM-1 suppression
and attenuation of the inflammatory responses in renal diseases.

PMCID: PMC3509033
PMID: 23153039  [PubMed]


193. Protein Expr Purif. 2013 Feb;87(2):87-99. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2012.10.010. Epub
2012 Nov 10.

High yield purification of JNK1ß1 and activation by in vitro reconstitution of
the MEKK1<U+2192>MKK4<U+2192>JNK MAPK phosphorylation cascade.

Owen GR(1), Achilonu I, Dirr HW.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Structure-Function Research Unit, School of Molecular and Cell
Biology, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 2050, South Africa.

The c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway forms part of the mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways comprising a sequential three-tiered
kinase cascade. Here, an upstream MAP3K (MEKK1) phosphorylates and activates a
MAP2K (MKK4 and MKK7), which in turn phosphorylates and activates the MAPK, JNK. 
The C-terminal kinase domain of MEKK1 (MEKK-C) is constitutively active, while
MKK4/7 and JNK are both activated by dual phosphorylation of S/Y, and T/Y
residues within their activation loops, respectively. While improvements in the
purification of large quantities of active JNKs have recently been made,
inadequacies in their yield, purity, and the efficiency of their phosphorylation 
still exist. We describe a novel and robust method that further improves upon the
purification of large yields of highly pure, phosphorylated JNK1ß1, which is most
suitable for biochemical and biophysical characterization. Codon harmonization of
the JNK1ß1 gene was used as a precautionary measure toward increasing the soluble
overexpression of the kinase. While JNK1ß1 and its substrate ATF2 were both
purified to >99% purity as GST fusion proteins using GSH-agarose affinity
chromatography and each cleaved from GST using thrombin, constitutively-active
MEKK-C and inactive MKK4 were separately expressed in E. coli as
thioredoxin-His(6)-tagged proteins and purified using urea refolding and
Ni(2+)-IMAC, respectively. Activation of JNK1ß1 was then achieved by successfully
reconstituting the JNK MAPK activation cascade in vitro; MEKK-C was used to
activate MKK4, which in turn was used to efficiently phosphorylate and activate
large quantities of JNK1ß1. Activated JNK1ß1 was thereafter able to phosphorylate
ATF2 with high catalytic efficiency.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23147205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Structure. 2012 Dec 5;20(12):2174-84. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.09.021. Epub 2012
Nov 8.

Structural mechanisms of allostery and autoinhibition in JNK family kinases.

Laughlin JD(1), Nwachukwu JC, Figuera-Losada M, Cherry L, Nettles KW, LoGrasso
PV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, The Scripps Research Institute, 130
Scripps Way, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA.

c-Jun N-terminal (JNK) family kinases have a common peptide-docking site used by 
upstream activating kinases, substrates, scaffold proteins, and phosphatases,
where the ensemble of bound proteins determines signaling output. Although there 
are many JNK structures, little is known about mechanisms of allosteric
regulation between the catalytic and peptide-binding sites, and the activation
loop, whose phosphorylation is required for catalytic activity. Here, we compare 
three structures of unliganded JNK3 bound to different peptides. These were
compared as a class to structures that differ in binding of peptide, small
molecule ligand, or conformation of the kinase activation loop. Peptide binding
induced an inhibitory interlobe conformer that was reversed by alterations in the
activation loop. Structure class analysis revealed the subtle structural
mechanisms for allosteric signaling between the peptide-binding site and
activation loop. Biochemical data from isothermal calorimetry, fluorescence
energy transfer, and enzyme inhibition demonstrated affinity differences among
the three peptides that were consistent with structural observations.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3589125
PMID: 23142346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47566. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047566. Epub 2012 Oct 15.

Potent and specific antitumor effect for colorectal cancer by CEA and Rb double
regulated oncolytic adenovirus harboring ST13 gene.

Zhou X(1), Xie G, Wang S, Wang Y, Zhang K, Zheng S, Chu L, Xiao L, Yu Y, Zhang Y,
Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Xinyuan Institute of Medicine and Biotechnology, College of Life Science,
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, China.

Cancer Targeting Gene-Viro-Therapy (CTGVT) is constructed by inserting an
antitumor gene into an oncolytic virus (OV). It is actually an OV-gene therapy,
which has much better antitumor effect than either gene therapy alone or
virotherapy alone in our previously published papers. This study is a
modification of CTGVT by inserting a colorectal cancer (CRC) specific suppressor 
gene, ST13, into a CRC specific oncolytic virus, the Ad·CEA·E1A(<U+0394>24), to
construct the Ad·(ST13)·CEA·E1A(<U+0394>24) for increasing the targeting tropism to
colorectal cancer and it was briefly named as CTGVT-CRC. Although many studies on
CEA promoter and ST13 gene were reported but no construct has been performed to
combine both of them as a new strategy for colorectal cancer (CRC) specific
therapy. In addition to the CRC specificity, the antitumor effect of
Ad·(ST13)·CEA·E1A(<U+0394>24) was also excellent and got nearly complete inhibition (not
eradication) of CRC xenograft since ST13 was an effective antitumor gene with
less toxicity, and a Chinese patent (No. 201110319434.4) was available for this
study. Ad·(ST13)·CEA·E1A(<U+0394>24) caused cell apoptosis through P38 MAPK (i.e. P38)
which upregulated CHOP and ATF2 expression. The mitochondrial medicated apoptosis
pathway was activated by the increase of caspase 9 and caspase 3 expression.

PMCID: PMC3471845
PMID: 23077639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Dec;32(12):e149-60. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.300497. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Soluble ST2 is regulated by p75 neurotrophin receptor and predicts mortality in
diabetic patients with critical limb ischemia.

Caporali A(1), Meloni M, Miller AM, Vierlinger K, Cardinali A, Spinetti G, Nailor
A, Faglia E, Losa S, Gotti A, Fortunato O, Mitic T, Hofner M, Noehammer C,
Madeddu P, Emanueli C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Vascular Pathology and Regeneration, School of Clinical
Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, England, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: The p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75(NTR)) contributes to diabetes
mellitus-induced defective postischemic neovascularization. The interleukin-33
receptor ST2 is expressed as transmembrane (ST2L) and soluble (sST2) isoforms.
Here, we studied the following: (1) the impact of p75(NTR) in the healing of
ischemic and diabetic calf wounds; (2) the link between p75(NTR) and ST2; and (3)
circulating sST2 levels in critical limb ischemia (CLI) patients.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Diabetes mellitus was induced in p75(NTR) knockout (p75KO)
mice and wild-type (WT) littermates by streptozotocin. Diabetic and nondiabetic
p75KO and WT mice received left limb ischemia induction and a full-thickness
wound on the ipsilateral calf. Diabetes mellitus impaired wound closure and
angiogenesis and increased ST2 expression in WT, but not in p75KO wounds. In
cultured endothelial cells, p75(NTR) promoted ST2 (both isoforms) expression
through p38(MAPK)/activating transcription factor 2 pathway activation. Next,
sST2 was measured in the serum of patients with CLI undergoing either
revascularization or limb amputation and in the 2 nondiabetic groups (with CLI or
nonischemic individuals). Serum sST2 increased in diabetic patients with CLI and 
was directly associated with higher mortality at 1 year from revascularization.
CONCLUSIONS: p75(NTR) inhibits the healing of ischemic lower limb wounds in
diabetes mellitus and promotes ST2 expression. Circulating sST2 predicts
mortality in diabetic CLI patients.

PMCID: PMC3616363
PMID: 23065828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Open Rheumatol J. 2012;6:220-31. doi: 10.2174/1874312901206010220. Epub 2012 Sep 
7.

c-Jun N-Terminal Kinase in Inflammation and Rheumatic Diseases.

Guma M(1), Firestein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, UC San Diego School of
Medicine, La Jolla, CA, USA.

The c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) are members of the mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) family and are activated by environmental stress. JNK is also
activated by proinflammatory cytokines, such as TNF and IL-1, and Toll-like
receptor ligands. This pathway, therefore, can act as a critical convergence
point in immune system signaling for both adaptive and innate responses. Like
other MAPKs, the JNKs are activated via the sequential activation of protein
kinases that includes two dual-specificity MAP kinase kinases (MKK4 and MKK7) and
multiple MAP kinase kinase kinases. MAPKs, including JNKs, can be deactivated by 
a specialized group of phosphatases, called MAP kinase phosphatases. JNK
phosphorylates and regulates the activity of transcription factors other than
c-Jun, including ATF2, Elk-1, p53 and c-Myc and non-transcription factors, such
as members of the Bcl-2 family. The pathway plays a critical role in cell
proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis and migration. In this review, an overview
of the functions that are related to rheumatic diseases is presented. In
addition, some diseases in which JNK participates will be highlighted.

PMCID: PMC3460413
PMID: 23028407  [PubMed]


198. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Sep;28(9):985-7.

[Construction and identification of small interfering RNA expression vector
targeting ATF-2 gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Mao WW(1), Xiong P, Han F, Hu ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Clinical Medicine, Jiujiang,
China.

AIM: To construct an eukaryotic expression vector for RNA interference targeting 
activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) gene, and explore its effect on
proliferation and apoptosis of HepG2 cells.
METHODS: Two complementary oligonucleotides were synthesized based on ATF-2 mRNA 
sequence. The annealed fragment was inserted into the vector PBA-siU6. The
recombinant plasmid PBA-siATF-2 was confirmed by DNA sequencing and transfected
into HepG2 cells mediated by liposome. After transfection, ATF-2 protein was
detected by Western blotting. The cellular growth activity and apoptosis rate
were measured by MTT assay and flow cytometry, respectively.
RESULTS: Recombinant plasmid expressing siRNA targeting ATF-2 gene was confirmed 
by DNA sequencing. Plasmid transfection down-regulated the level of ATF-2 protein
in HepG2 cells, which blocked cellular growth and induced cell apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: The eukaryotic expression vector for RNA interference targeting ATF-2
gene was constructed successfully, which inhibits HepG2 cell proliferation and
induces cell apoptosis.

PMID: 22980665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Cancer Res. 2012 Nov 1;72(21):5516-28. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0775. Epub
2012 Sep 12.

RhoJ regulates melanoma chemoresistance by suppressing pathways that sense DNA
damage.

Ho H(1), Aruri J, Kapadia R, Mehr H, White MA, Ganesan AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California at Irvine, Irvine,
California 92697, USA.

Melanomas resist conventional chemotherapeutics, in part, through intrinsic
disrespect of apoptotic checkpoint activation. In this study, using an unbiased
genome-wide RNA interference screen, we identified RhoJ and its effector PAK1, as
key modulators of melanoma cell sensitivity to DNA damage. We find that RhoJ
activates PAK1 in response to drug-induced DNA damage, which then uncouples ATR
from its downstream effectors, ultimately resulting in a blunted DNA damage
response (DDR). In addition, ATR suppression leads to the decreased
phosphorylation of ATF2 and consequent increased expression of the melanocyte
survival gene Sox10 resulting in a higher DDR threshold required to engage
melanoma cell death. In the setting of normal melanocyte behavior, this
regulatory relationship may facilitate appropriate epidermal melanization in
response to UV-induced DNA damage. However, pathologic pathway activation during 
oncogenic transformation produces a tumor that is intrinsically resistant to
chemotherapy and has the propensity to accumulate additional mutations. These
findings identify DNA damage agents and pharmacologic inhibitors of RhoJ/PAK1 as 
novel synergistic agents that can be used to treat melanomas that are resistant
to conventional chemotherapies.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3548429
PMID: 22971344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Mar;97(5):2119-30. doi:
10.1007/s00253-012-4360-1. Epub 2012 Aug 29.

The atf2 gene is involved in triacylglycerol biosynthesis and accumulation in the
oleaginous Rhodococcus opacus PD630.

Hernández MA(1), Arabolaza A, Rodríguez E, Gramajo H, Alvarez HM.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Regional de Investigación y Desarrollo Científico Tecnológico, Facultad
de Ciencias Naturales, Universidad Nacional de la Patagonia, San Juan Bosco Km
4-Ciudad Universitaria 9000, Comodoro Rivadavia (Chubut), Argentina.

Rhodococcus opacus PD630 is an oleaginous bacterium able to accumulate large
amounts of triacylglycerols (TAG) in different carbon sources. The last reaction 
for TAG biosynthesis is catalyzed by the bifunctional wax ester
synthase/acyl-CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase (WS/DGAT) enzymes encoded by atf
genes. R. opacus PD630 possesses at least 17 putative atf homologous genes in its
genome, but only atf1 and atf2 exhibited a significant DGAT activity when
expressed in E. coli, as revealed in a previous study. The contribution of atf1
gene to TAG accumulation by strain PD630 has been demonstrated previously,
although additional Atfs may also contribute to lipid accumulation, since the
atf1-disrupted mutant is still able to produce significant amounts of TAG
(Alvarez et al., Microbiology 154:2327-2335, 2008). In this study, we
investigated the in vivo role of atf2 gene in TAG accumulation by R. opacus PD630
by using different genetic strategies. The atf2-disrupted mutant exhibited a
decrease in TAG accumulation (up to 25-30 %, w/w) and an approximately tenfold
increase in glycogen formation in comparison with the wild-type strain.
Surprisingly, in contrast to single mutants, a double mutant generated by the
disruption of atf1 and atf2 genes only showed a very low effect in TAG and in
glycogen accumulation under lipid storage conditions. Overexpression of atf1 and 
atf2 genes in strain PD630 promoted an increase of approximately 10 % (w/w) in
TAG accumulation, while heterologous expression of atf2 gene in Mycobacterium
smegmatis caused an increase in TAG accumulation during cultivation in
nitrogen-rich media. This study demonstrated that, in addition to atf1 gene, atf2
is actively involved in TAG accumulation by the oleaginous R. opacus PD630.

PMID: 22926642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2012;2012:390385. doi: 10.1155/2012/390385. Epub 2012 Aug
7.

Coffee polyphenols change the expression of STAT5B and ATF-2 modifying cyclin D1 
levels in cancer cells.

Oleaga C(1), Ciudad CJ, Noé V, Izquierdo-Pulido M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Epidemiological studies suggest that coffee consumption reduces the
risk of cancer, but the molecular mechanisms of its chemopreventive effects
remain unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To identify differentially expressed genes upon incubation of HT29
colon cancer cells with instant caffeinated coffee (ICC) or caffeic acid (CA)
using whole-genome microarrays.
RESULTS: ICC incubation of HT29 cells caused the overexpression of 57 genes and
the underexpression of 161, while CA incubation induced the overexpression of 12 
genes and the underexpression of 32. Using Venn-Diagrams, we built a list of five
overexpressed genes and twelve underexpressed genes in common between the two
experimental conditions. This list was used to generate a biological association 
network in which STAT5B and ATF-2 appeared as highly interconnected nodes. STAT5B
overexpression was confirmed at the mRNA and protein levels. For ATF-2, the
changes in mRNA levels were confirmed for both ICC and CA, whereas the decrease
in protein levels was only observed in CA-treated cells. The levels of cyclin D1,
a target gene for both STAT5B and ATF-2, were downregulated by CA in colon cancer
cells and by ICC and CA in breast cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Coffee polyphenols are able to affect cyclin D1 expression in cancer
cells through the modulation of STAT5B and ATF-2.

PMCID: PMC3424007
PMID: 22919439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. BMC Cancer. 2012 Aug 1;12:331. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-331.

A systems biology approach to the global analysis of transcription factors in
colorectal cancer.

Pradhan MP(1), Prasad NK, Palakal MJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Informatics, Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

BACKGROUND: Biological entities do not perform in isolation, and often, it is the
nature and degree of interactions among numerous biological entities which
ultimately determines any final outcome. Hence, experimental data on any single
biological entity can be of limited value when considered only in isolation. To
address this, we propose that augmenting individual entity data with the
literature will not only better define the entity's own significance but also
uncover relationships with novel biological entities.To test this notion, we
developed a comprehensive text mining and computational methodology that focused 
on discovering new targets of one class of molecular entities, transcription
factors (TF), within one particular disease, colorectal cancer (CRC).
METHODS: We used 39 molecular entities known to be associated with CRC along with
six colorectal cancer terms as the bait list, or list of search terms, for mining
the biomedical literature to identify CRC-specific genes and proteins. Using the 
literature-mined data, we constructed a global TF interaction network for CRC. We
then developed a multi-level, multi-parametric methodology to identify TFs to
CRC.
RESULTS: The small bait list, when augmented with literature-mined data,
identified a large number of biological entities associated with CRC. The
relative importance of these TF and their associated modules was identified using
functional and topological features. Additional validation of these highly-ranked
TF using the literature strengthened our findings. Some of the novel TF that we
identified were: SLUG, RUNX1, IRF1, HIF1A, ATF-2, ABL1, ELK-1 and GATA-1. Some of
these TFs are associated with functional modules in known pathways of CRC,
including the Beta-catenin/development, immune response, transcription, and DNA
damage pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: Our methodology of using text mining data and a multi-level,
multi-parameter scoring technique was able to identify both known and novel TF
that have roles in CRC. Starting with just one TF (SMAD3) in the bait list, the
literature mining process identified an additional 116 CRC-associated TFs. Our
network-based analysis showed that these TFs all belonged to any of 13 major
functional groups that are known to play important roles in CRC. Among these
identified TFs, we obtained a novel six-node module consisting of
ATF2-P53-JNK1-ELK1-EPHB2-HIF1A, from which the novel JNK1-ELK1 association could 
potentially be a significant marker for CRC.

PMCID: PMC3539921
PMID: 22852817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 14;287(38):31833-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.374462. Epub
2012 Jul 27.

Opposite orientations of a transcription factor heterodimer bind DNA
cooperatively with interaction partners but have different effects on
interferon-ß gene transcription.

Burns V(1), Kerppola TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

ATF2-Jun, IRF3, and HMGI recognize a composite regulatory element within the
interferon-ß enhancer (IFNb). Cooperative ATF2-Jun-IRF3 complex formation at IFNb
has been proposed to require a fixed orientation of ATF2-Jun binding. Our results
show that ATF2-Jun heterodimers bound IFNb in both orientations alone and in
association with IRF3 and HMGI. Two sets of symmetrically located amino acid
residues in ATF2 and Jun facilitated the interactions between heterodimers bound 
in opposite orientations and IRF3 at IFNb. IRF3 and HMGI bound IFNb in
association with both orientations of ATF2-Jun heterodimers with the same
cooperativity. ATF2-Jun heterodimers that bound IFNb in opposite orientations in 
vitro had different effects on interferon-ß gene transcription when they were
co-expressed with IRF3 in cultured cells. These heterodimers had different
transcriptional activities at different endogenous genes. Different regions of
ATF2 and Jun mediated their orientation-dependent transcriptional activities at
different genes. These studies revealed that cooperative DNA binding does not
require a unique nucleoprotein complex configuration, and that transcription
factor complexes that bind the same enhancer in different configurations can have
different transcriptional activities.

PMCID: PMC3442517
PMID: 22843696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Nutr Biochem. 2013 Jan;24(1):124-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2012.03.009. Epub
2012 Jul 21.

Protective effects of (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate against TNF-a-induced lung
inflammation via ROS-dependent ICAM-1 inhibition.

Lee IT(1), Lin CC, Lee CY, Hsieh PW, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Chang Gung University, Kwei-San,
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

Oxidative stresses are considered to play an important role in the induction of
cell adhesion molecules and proinflammatory cytokines implicated in inflammatory 
processes. Heme oxygenase (HO)-1 and suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS)-3
exert several biological functions, including antiapoptotic and anti-inflammatory
effects. Here, we report that HO-1 and SOCS-3 were induced in A549 cells and
human pulmonary alveolar epithelial cells (HPAEpiCs) treated with
(-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG). EGCG protected against tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-a-mediated lung inflammation by down-regulation of oxidative stress 
and intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 expression in A549 cells or HPAEpiCs
and the lungs of mice. EGCG inhibited TNF-a-induced ICAM-1 expression, THP-1
cells adherence, pulmonary hematoma and leukocyte (eosinophils and neutrophils)
count in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in mice. In addition, EGCG also attenuated 
TNF-a-induced oxidative stress, p47(phox) translocation, MAPKs activation, and
STAT-3 and activating transcription factor (ATF)2 phosphorylation. EGCG also
reduced the formation of a TNFR1/TRAF2/Rac1/p47(phox) complex. Moreover, in this 
study, the observed suppression of TNF-a-stimulated ICAM-1 expression and
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation by EGCG was abrogated by transfection
with siRNA of SOCS-3 or HO-1. These results suggested that HO-1 or SOCS-3
functions as a suppressor of TNF-a signaling, not only by inhibiting adhesion
molecules expression but also by diminishing intracellular ROS production and
STAT-3 and ATF2 activation in A549 cells or HPAEpiCs and the lungs of mice.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22819551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Oncogene. 2013 May 2;32(18):2365-71, 2375.e1-5. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.247. Epub
2012 Jul 16.

SS18-SSX2 and the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway in mouse and human synovial
sarcomas.

Jones KB(1), Su L, Jin H, Lenz C, Randall RL, Underhill TM, Nielsen TO, Sharma S,
Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112-5331,
USA.

Synovial sarcoma is a deadly malignancy with limited sensitivity to traditional
cytotoxic chemotherapy. SS18-SSX fusion oncogene expression characterizes human
synovial sarcomas and drives oncogenesis in a mouse model. Elevated expression of
BCL2 is considered a consistent feature of the synovial sarcoma expression
profile. Our objective was to evaluate the expression of apoptotic pathway
members in synovial sarcomas and interrogate the impact of modulating SS18-SSX
expression on this pathway. We show in human and murine synovial sarcoma cells
that SS18-SSX increases BCL2 expression, but represses other anti-apoptotic
genes, including MCL1 and BCL2A1. This repression is achieved by directly
suppressing expression via binding through activating transcription factor 2
(ATF2) to the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP) response element (CRE) in the 
promoters of these genes and recruiting TLE1/Groucho. The suppression of these
two anti-apoptotic pathways silences the typical routes by which other tumors
evade BH3-domain peptidomimetic pharmacotherapy. We show that mouse and human
synovial sarcoma cells are sensitive in vitro to ABT-263, a BH3-peptidomimetic,
much more than the other tested cancer cell lines. ABT-263 also enhances the
sensitivity of these cells to doxorubicin, a traditional cytotoxic chemotherapy
used for synovial sarcoma. We also demonstrate the capacity of ABT-263 to stunt
synovial sarcomagenesis in vivo in a genetic mouse model. These data recommend
pursuit of BH3-peptidomimetic pharmacotherapy in human synovial sarcomas.

PMCID: PMC3756901
PMID: 22797074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Neurol Res. 2012 Sep;34(7):714-20. doi: 10.1179/1743132812Y.0000000070. Epub 2012
Jul 5.

Inhibition of p38 MAPK reduces loss of primary sensory neurons after nerve
transection.

Agthong S(1), Kaewsema A, Chentanez V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University Bangkok, 
Thailand. sagthong@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: p38 member of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family has been 
shown to participate in neuropathic pain and axonal regeneration after nerve
injury. However, its role in axotomy-induced neuronal apoptosis remains unclear. 
This study was aimed to examine p38 phosphorylation in the dorsal root ganglia
(DRG) and its role in DRG neuronal loss after axotomy.
METHODS: Left sciatic nerve transection was performed in all rats. For the
temporal study of p38 phosphorylation, the rats were sacrificed at 1 day, 2
weeks, and 2 months after injury. In the second experiment, the rats were divided
into control and inhibitor groups receiving vehicle and p38 inhibitor (SB203580, 
200 µg/kg/day intraperitoneally once daily), respectively, for 2 weeks.
RESULTS: The p38 phosphorylation was increased in L4/5 DRG at 2 weeks after
transection. Immunoreactivity of phospho-p38 was mainly observed in the cytoplasm
of small neurons with additional nuclear localization in the axotomized neurons
at 2 weeks. SB203580 could reduce the phosphorylation of p38 and its substrate,
ATF2, including the upregulation of total caspase-3 expression in the DRG.
Moreover, count of L4/5 DRG neurons revealed significantly decreased cell loss in
the inhibitor than control groups (17·4% versus 32·5%).
CONCLUSION: These data suggest the role of p38 in sensory neuronal loss after
nerve transection. Future studies should be done to confirm the apoptotic role of
p38 in this condition.

PMID: 22776617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Immunol. 2012 Jul 15;189(2):1014-23. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200857. Epub 2012
Jun 15.

Molecular mechanisms responsible for the selective and low-grade induction of
proinflammatory mediators in murine macrophages by lipopolysaccharide.

Maitra U(1), Deng H, Glaros T, Baker B, Capelluto DG, Li Z, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.

Low-dose endotoxemia is prevalent in humans with adverse health conditions, and
it correlates with the pathogenesis of chronic inflammatory diseases such as
atherosclerosis, diabetes, and neurologic inflammation. However, the underlying
molecular mechanisms are poorly understood. In this study, we demonstrate that
subclinical low-dose LPS skews macrophages into a mild proinflammatory state,
through cell surface TLR4, IL-1R-associated kinase-1, and the Toll-interacting
protein. Unlike high-dose LPS, low-dose LPS does not induce robust activation of 
NF-<U+03BA>B, MAPKs, PI3K, or anti-inflammatory mediators. Instead, low-dose LPS induces
activating transcription factor 2 through Toll-interacting protein-mediated
generation of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, allowing mild induction of
proinflammatory mediators. Low-dose LPS also suppresses PI3K and related negative
regulators of inflammatory genes. Our data reveal novel mechanisms responsible
for skewed and persistent low-grade inflammation, a cardinal feature of chronic
inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC3392521
PMID: 22706082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Epigenetics. 2012 Aug;7(8):858-67. doi: 10.4161/epi.20837. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

DNA methylation analyses of urothelial carcinoma reveal distinct epigenetic
subtypes and an association between gene copy number and methylation status.

Lauss M(1), Aine M, Sjödahl G, Veerla S, Patschan O, Gudjonsson S, Chebil G,
Lövgren K, Fernö M, Månsson W, Liedberg F, Ringnér M, Lindgren D, Höglund M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Skåne University Hospital, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden.

We assessed DNA methylation and copy number status of 27,000 CpGs in 149
urothelial carcinomas and integrated the findings with gene expression and
mutation data. Methylation was associated with gene expression for 1,332 CpGs, of
which 26% showed positive correlation with expression, i.e., high methylation and
high gene expression levels. These positively correlated CpGs were part of
specific transcription factor binding sites, such as sites for MYC and CREBP1, or
located in gene bodies. Furthermore, we found genes with copy number gains, low
expression and high methylation levels, revealing an association between
methylation and copy number levels. This phenomenon was typically observed for
developmental genes, such as HOX genes, and tumor suppressor genes. In contrast, 
we also identified genes with copy number gains, high expression and low
methylation levels. This was for instance observed for some keratin genes. Tumor 
cases could be grouped into four subgroups, termed epitypes, by their DNA
methylation profiles. One epitype was influenced by the presence of infiltrating 
immune cells, two epitypes were mainly composed of non-muscle invasive tumors,
and the remaining epitype of muscle invasive tumors. The polycomb complex protein
EZH2 that blocks differentiation in embryonic stem cells showed increased
expression both at the mRNA and protein levels in the muscle invasive epitype,
together with methylation of polycomb target genes and HOX genes. Our data
highlights HOX gene silencing and EZH2 expression as mechanisms to promote a more
undifferentiated and aggressive state in UC.

PMCID: PMC3427281
PMID: 22705924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Chem Biol Interact. 2012 Aug 30;199(2):112-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2012.06.003.
Epub 2012 Jun 13.

Pimaric acid from Aralia cordata has an inhibitory effect on TNF-a-induced MMP-9 
production and HASMC migration via down-regulated NF-<U+03BA>B and AP-1.

Suh SJ(1), Kwak CH, Chung TW, Park SJ, Cheeeei M, Park SS, Seo CS, Son JK, Chang 
YC, Park YG, Lee YC, Chang HW, Kim CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746,
Republic of Korea.

Many studies have indicated that activation of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9
and smooth muscle cell (SMC) migration are involved in neointimal formation and
atherosclerosis. In this study, we revealed that pimaric acid (PiMA) purified
from Aralia cordata had an inhibitory effect on MMP-9 production and migration of
human aortic smooth muscle cells (HASMCs) induced by tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-a. Down-regulated MMP-9 mRNA transcription was detected in PiMA-treated
cells using RT-PCR and the luciferase-tagged MMP-9 promoter assay. Results of an 
electrophoretic mobility shift assay indicated that PiMA-treated HASMCs showed
decreased binding activity of nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B and activator protein-1
transcription factors. A Western-blot analysis using nuclear extract demonstrated
that PiMA reduced the levels of NF-<U+03BA>B p65, c-Fos, p-c-Jun, Jun-D, and p-ATF2
proteins in the nucleus. In addition, TNF-a stimulated mitogen activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) containing extracellular signal regulated kinase 1 and 2, p38, and 
c-Jun N-terminal kinase was inhibited by PiMA. Using the Transwell system, we
found that PiMA inhibited TNF-a stimulated HASMC migration/invasion in a
dose-dependent manner. To confirm whether MAPK mediated MMP-9 expression, we used
MAPK inhibitors including U0126, SB253580, and SP600125 and found that those
inhibitors reduced MMP-9 expression and HASMC migration/invasion. These results
suggest that PiMA has potent anti-atherosclerotic activity with inhibitory action
on MMP-9 production and cell migration in TNF-a-induced HASMCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22705379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Xenotransplantation. 2012 May-Jun;19(3):177-85. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-3089.2012.00701.x.

Binding of transcription factor activating protein 2 <U+03B3> on the 5'-proximal
promoter region of human porcine endogenous retrovirus subgroup A receptor
2/GPR172B.

Nakaya Y(1), Shimode S, Kobayashi T, Imakawa K, Miyazawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Signal Transduction, Department of Cell Biology, Institute for
Virus Research, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Xenotransplantation is one of the solutions for the shortage of organ
donors, and pigs have been considered to be the most suitable animal donors.
Specific pathogen-free pigs are utilized in the xenotransplantation; however,
pigs have infectious gammaretroviruses, named porcine endogenous retroviruses
(PERVs) in their genome. Of them, PERV-A and PERV-B can infect human cells in
vitro and potentially induce diseases like other gammaretroviruses. The human
cellular receptors for PERV-A were identified and named human PERV-A receptor
(HuPAR)-1 and HuPAR-2 (also called as GPR172A and GPR172B, respectively). We have
recently reported that HuPAR-2 expression was regulated by epigenetic
modification and preferentially expressed in placenta. However, the detailed
mechanisms of HuPAR-2 expression have not been fully characterized. In this
study, we analyzed molecular mechanisms associated with HuPAR-2 transcription
through the identification of transcription factors that bind to the promoter
region of HuPAR-2.
METHODS: In situ hybridization was performed to identify the cells expressing
HuPAR-2 in placental tissues. Transcriptional activities were measured by
dual-luciferase reporter assay using serial deletion mutants of HuPAR-2
5'-flanking region. To identify the transcription factors bound to the promoter
region, in silico analysis, electrophoresis mobility shift assay, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay were conducted. The effect of the transcription factor 
transcription factor activator protein (TFAP)-2<U+03B3> on the promoter activities was
investigated by overexpression of the factor.
RESULTS: We identified that HuPAR-2 was specifically expressed in villous
trophoblast cells. We also identified that a region spanning from -126 to -32 had
proximal promoter activities and TFAP-2<U+03B3> bound to a region spanning from -58 to
-35 in vitro and in vivo. The overexpression of TFAP-2<U+03B3> also augmented the
proximal promoter activity.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated that TFAP-2<U+03B3> is one of the transcription factors
involved in the HuPAR-2 expression in human villous trophoblast cells. By
studying transcriptional factors involved in the expression of HuPAR-2, we may
find a clue to control the potential risks caused by PERV-A infection in
xenotransplantation.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22702469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Cell Sci. 2012 Jun 15;125(Pt 12):2815-24. doi: 10.1242/jcs.095000. Epub 2012
Jun 8.

ATF2 - at the crossroad of nuclear and cytosolic functions.

Lau E(1), Ronai ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 10901
N. Torrey Pines Rd, La Jolla, CA 92130, USA. elau@sbmri.org

An increasing number of transcription factors have been shown to elicit oncogenic
and tumor suppressor activities, depending on the tissue and cell context.
Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2; also known as cAMP-dependent
transcription factor ATF-2) has oncogenic activities in melanoma and tumor
suppressor activities in non-malignant skin tumors and breast cancer. Recent work
has shown that the opposing functions of ATF2 are associated with its subcellular
localization. In the nucleus, ATF2 contributes to global transcription and the
DNA damage response, in addition to specific transcriptional activities that are 
related to cell development, proliferation and death. ATF2 can also translocate
to the cytosol, primarily following exposure to severe genotoxic stress, where it
impairs mitochondrial membrane potential and promotes mitochondrial-based cell
death. Notably, phosphorylation of ATF2 by the epsilon isoform of protein kinase 
C (PKCe) is the master switch that controls its subcellular localization and
function. Here, we summarize our current understanding of the regulation and
function of ATF2 in both subcellular compartments. This mechanism of control of a
non-genetically modified transcription factor represents a novel paradigm for
'oncogene addiction'.

PMCID: PMC3434827
PMID: 22685333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Neuroinflammation. 2012 Jul 6;9:110. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-9-110.

NADPH oxidase-mediated redox signal contributes to lipoteichoic acid-induced
MMP-9 upregulation in brain astrocytes.

Hsieh HL(1), Lin CC, Shih RH, Hsiao LD, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Division of Basic Medical Sciences, Chang Gung
University of Science and Technology, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Lipoteichoic acid (LTA) is a component of gram-positive bacterial
cell walls and may be elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients suffering
from meningitis. Among matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), MMP-9 has been observed 
in patients with brain inflammatory diseases and may contribute to the pathology 
of brain diseases. Moreover, several studies have suggested that increased
oxidative stress is implicated in the pathogenesis of brain inflammation and
injury. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying LTA-induced redox signal and
MMP-9 expression in brain astrocytes remain unclear.
OBJECTIVE: Herein we explored whether LTA-induced MMP-9 expression was mediated
through redox signals in rat brain astrocytes (RBA-1 cells).
METHODS: Upregulation of MMP-9 by LTA was evaluated by zymographic and RT-PCR
analyses. Next, the MMP-9 regulatory pathways were investigated by pretreatment
with pharmacological inhibitors or transfection with small interfering RNAs
(siRNAs), Western blotting, and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-PCR and
promoter activity reporter assays. Moreover, we determined the cell functional
changes by migration assay.
RESULTS: These results showed that LTA induced MMP-9 expression via a
PKC(a)-dependent pathway. We further demonstrated that PKCa stimulated
p47phox/NADPH oxidase 2 (Nox2)-dependent reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation
and then activated the ATF2/AP-1 signals. The activated-ATF2 bound to the
AP-1-binding site of MMP-9 promoter, and thereby turned on MMP-9 gene
transcription. Additionally, the co-activator p300 also contributed to these
responses. Functionally, LTA-induced MMP-9 expression enhanced astrocytic
migration.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrated that in RBA-1 cells, activation of
ATF2/AP-1 by the PKC(a)-mediated Nox(2)/ROS signals is essential for upregulation
of MMP-9 and cell migration enhanced by LTA.

PMCID: PMC3391180
PMID: 22643046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biol Chem. 2012 Jan;393(1-2):93-100. doi: 10.1515/BC-2011-157.

Identification of ATF2 as a transcriptional regulator of renin gene.

Desch M(1), Hackmayer G, Todorov VT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Regensburg, D93040 Regensburg, Germany.

The cAMP response element (enhCRE) in the distal enhancer regulatory region of
renin gene is believed to play a major role in the control of renin
transcription. enhCRE binds the CRE-binding protein (CREB), which is the main
transcription factor target of cAMP signaling. Using the mouse renin-producing
cell line As4.1 we found that activating transcription factor-2 (ATF2) also binds
to enhCRE. N-terminal phosphorylation of ATF2, which controls its
transactivation, is associated with downregulation of renin gene expression by
the cytokine tumor necrosis factor-a (TNFa). The ubiquitin proteasome inhibitor
MG132 also phosphorylates ATF2 and inhibits renin expression. Knockdown of ATF2
attenuated the suppression of renin gene expression by MG132, thus demonstrating 
that ATF2 mediates the inhibitory effect of MG132. In addition, MG132 increased
the DNA-binding of ATF2 as well as the ratio of bound ATF2 to CREB. Using ATF2-
and CREB-Gal4 fusion protein constructs coupled with luciferase reporter system
we showed that ATF2 has a weaker transactivating capacity than CREB. These data
suggest that ATF2 represses renin expression by drifting the transcriptional
control of renin gene away from CREB. Accordingly, TNFa completely abrogated the 
cAMP-dependent stimulation of renin gene expression.

PMID: 22628303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Int J Cancer. 2012 Sep 15;131(6):E884-96. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27629. Epub 2012 May
30.

Targeting of syndecan-1 by microRNA miR-10b promotes breast cancer cell motility 
and invasiveness via a Rho-GTPase- and E-cadherin-dependent mechanism.

Ibrahim SA(1), Yip GW, Stock C, Pan JW, Neubauer C, Poeter M, Pupjalis D, Koo CY,
Kelsch R, Schüle R, Rescher U, Kiesel L, Götte M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Münster University Hospital, Münster,
Germany.

microRNAs are small endogenous noncoding RNAs, which post-transcriptionally
regulate gene expression. In breast cancer, overexpression of the transmembrane
heparan sulfate proteoglycan syndecan-1, a predicted target of the oncomiR
miR-10b, correlates with poor clinical outcome. To investigate the potential
functional relationship of miR-10b and syndecan-1, MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 breast
cancer cells were transiently transfected with pre-miR-10b, syndecan-1 siRNA or
control reagents, respectively. Altered cell behavior was monitored by
proliferation, migration and invasion chamber assays, and time-lapse video
microscopy. miR-10b overexpression induced post-transcriptional downregulation of
syndecan-1, as demonstrated by quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR), flow cytometry,
and 3'UTR luciferase assays, resulting in increased cancer cell migration and
matrigel invasiveness. Syndecan-1 silencing generated a copy of this phenotype.
Adhesion to fibronectin and laminin and basal cell proliferation was increased.
Syndecan-1 coimmunoprecipitated with focal adhesion kinase, which showed
increased activation upon syndecan-1 depletion. Affymetrix screening and
confirmatory qPCR and Western blotting analysis of syndecan-1-deficient cells
revealed upregulation of ATF-2, COX-2, cadherin-11, vinculin, actin <U+03B3> 2, MYL9,
transgelin-1, RhoA/C, matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2) and heparanase, and
downregulation of AML1/RUNX1, E-cadherin, CLDN1, p21WAF/CIP, cyclin-dependent
kinase 6, TLR-4, PAI1/2, Collagen1alpha1, JHDM1D, Mpp4, MMP9, matrilin-2 and
ANXA3/A10. Video microscopy demonstrated massively increased Rho kinase-dependent
motility of syndecan-1-depleted cells, which displayed increased filopodia
formation. We conclude that syndecan-1 is a novel target of the oncomiR miR-10b. 
Rho-GTPase-dependent modulation of cytoskeletal function and downregulation of
E-cadherin expression are identified as relevant effectors of the
miR-10b-syndecan-1 axis, which emerges as a promising target for the development 
of new therapeutic approaches for breast cancer.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 22573479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 May 18;421(4):696-700. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.064. Epub 2012 Apr 21.

Negative regulation of Odd-skipped related 2 by TGF-beta achieves the induction
of cellular migration and the arrest of cell cycle.

Kawai S(1), Amano A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Frontier Oral Science, Osaka University Graduate School of
Dentistry, Suita-Osaka 565-0871, Japan. skawai@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp

The transcription factor Odd-skipped related 2 (Osr2) functions in craniofacial
and limb developments in mammals. We previously found that Osr2 gene expression
is regulated by intracellular transcription factors such as Runx2, and C/EBP,
whereas it remains unclear if extracellular factors would functionally regulate
the Osr2 expression. In this study, we showed that TGF-ß down-regulated the Osr2 
expression, which is involved in regulation of cellular migration and cell cycle.
Furthermore, the down-regulation was found to be mediated by Smad3/Smad4 and
p38/ATF2 signaling molecules. The Osr2 promoter was shown to possess Smad3/4
binding element and ATF2 binding element between -647 and -64 of promoter. TGF-ß 
induced cellular migration in C3H10T1/2 cells and arrested cell cycle at G1 phase
in NMuMG-Fucci cells. In contrast, the Osr2 reduced the migration and also
stimulated the cell-cycle progression. These results suggest that Osr2 is
involved in TGF-ß regulating cell migration and cell cycle via a Smad3-ATF2
transcriptional complex mediating pathway.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22542937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Mediators Inflamm. 2012;2012:732860. doi: 10.1155/2012/732860. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Molecular mechanism of macrophage activation by red ginseng acidic polysaccharide
from Korean red ginseng.

Byeon SE(1), Lee J, Kim JH, Yang WS, Kwak YS, Kim SY, Choung ES, Rhee MH, Cho JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746,
Republic of Korea.

Red ginseng acidic polysaccharide (RGAP), isolated from Korean red ginseng,
displays immunostimulatory and antitumor activities. Even though numerous studies
have been reported, the mechanism as to how RGAP is able to stimulate the immune 
response is not clear. In this study, we aimed to explore the mechanism of
molecular activation of RGAP in macrophages. RGAP treatment strongly induced NO
production in RAW264.7 cells without altering morphological changes, although the
activity was not strong compared to LPS-induced dendritic-like morphology in
RAW264.7 cells. RGAP-induced NO production was accompanied with enhanced mRNA
levels of iNOS and increases in nuclear transcription factors such as NF-<U+03BA>B,
AP-1, STAT-1, ATF-2, and CREB. According to pharmacological evaluation with
specific enzyme inhibitors, Western blot analysis of intracellular signaling
proteins and inhibitory pattern using blocking antibodies, ERK, and JNK were
found to be the most important signaling enzymes compared to LPS signaling
cascade. Further, TLR2 seems to be a target surface receptor of RGAP. Lastly,
macrophages isolated from RGS2 knockout mice or wortmannin exposure strongly
upregulated RGAP-treated NO production. Therefore, our results suggest that RGAP 
can activate macrophage function through activation of transcription factors such
as NF-<U+03BA>B and AP-1 and their upstream signaling enzymes such as ERK and JNK.

PMCID: PMC3306998
PMID: 22474399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34236. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034236. Epub 2012 Mar 28.

Methamphetamine causes differential alterations in gene expression and patterns
of histone acetylation/hypoacetylation in the rat nucleus accumbens.

Martin TA(1), Jayanthi S, McCoy MT, Brannock C, Ladenheim B, Garrett T, Lehrmann 
E, Becker KG, Cadet JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, NIH/NIDA Intramural Research
Program, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Methamphetamine (METH) addiction is associated with several neuropsychiatric
symptoms. Little is known about the effects of METH on gene expression and
epigenetic modifications in the rat nucleus accumbens (NAC). Our study
investigated the effects of a non-toxic METH injection (20 mg/kg) on gene
expression, histone acetylation, and the expression of the histone
acetyltransferase (HAT), ATF2, and of the histone deacetylases (HDACs), HDAC1 and
HDAC2, in that structure. Microarray analyses done at 1, 8, 16 and 24 hrs after
the METH injection identified METH-induced changes in the expression of genes
previously implicated in the acute and longterm effects of psychostimulants,
including immediate early genes and corticotropin-releasing factor (Crf). In
contrast, the METH injection caused time-dependent decreases in the expression of
other genes including Npas4 and cholecystokinin (Cck). Pathway analyses showed
that genes with altered expression participated in behavioral performance,
cell-to-cell signaling, and regulation of gene expression. PCR analyses confirmed
the changes in the expression of c-fos, fosB, Crf, Cck, and Npas4 transcripts. To
determine if the METH injection caused post-translational changes in histone
markers, we used western blot analyses and identified METH-mediated decreases in 
histone H3 acetylated at lysine 9 (H3K9ac) and lysine 18 (H3K18ac) in nuclear
sub-fractions. In contrast, the METH injection caused time-dependent increases in
acetylated H4K5 and H4K8. The changes in histone acetylation were accompanied by 
decreased expression of HDAC1 but increased expression of HDAC2 protein levels.
The histone acetyltransferase, ATF2, showed significant METH-induced increased in
protein expression. These results suggest that METH-induced alterations in global
gene expression seen in rat NAC might be related, in part, to METH-induced
changes in histone acetylation secondary to changes in HAT and HDAC expression.
The causal role that HATs and HDACs might play in METH-induced gene expression
needs to be investigated further.

PMCID: PMC3314616
PMID: 22470541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2012 Jun 15;302(12):F1569-75. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00560.2011. Epub 2012 Mar 21.

JNK-dependent AP-1 activation is required for aristolochic acid-induced TGF-ß1
synthesis in human renal proximal epithelial cells.

Rui HL(1), Wang YY, Cheng H, Chen YP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing, China.

Chronic aristolochic acid nephropathy (CAAN) is a chronic and progressive
tubulointerstitial nephropathy characterized by extensive interstitial fibrosis. 
Aristolochic acid (AA) could induce overexpression of transforming growth
factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) in a human renal proximal tubule epithelial cells line (HKC), 
which has been implicated in the pathogenesis of CAAN. The present studies in HKC
cells showed 1) AA could activate JNK in time- and dose-dependent manners and JNK
inhibitor SP600125 could inhibit AA-induced TGF-ß1 promoter activity and TGF-ß1
synthesis; 2) AA-induced JNK activation and TGF-ß1 synthesis were significantly
inhibited by kinase-inactive mutants of MEKK4, MKK4, or MKK7; 3) AA could
upregulate luciferase activity derived by a wild-type TGF-ß1 promoter, but not by
an AP-1 binding-deficient TGF-ß1 promoter; and 4) AA could upregulate expression 
of c-Fos, phospho-c-Jun, and phospho-ATF2. The above data suggest AA-induced
TGF-ß1 overexpression in HKC cells may be mainly mediated by the JNK signaling
pathway. Both the upstream kinases of JNK including MEKK4, MKK4, and MKK7, and
the downstream transcription factor of JNK, AP-1, may also participate in this
process.

PMID: 22442213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Cancer Cell. 2012 Mar 20;21(3):333-47. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.01.010.

Deconstruction of the SS18-SSX fusion oncoprotein complex: insights into disease 
etiology and therapeutics.

Su L(1), Sampaio AV, Jones KB, Pacheco M, Goytain A, Lin S, Poulin N, Yi L, Rossi
FM, Kast J, Capecchi MR, Underhill TM, Nielsen TO.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia V6T 1Z3, Canada.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2012 Mar 20;21(3):323-4.

Synovial sarcoma is a translocation-associated sarcoma where the underlying
chromosomal event generates SS18-SSX fusion transcripts. In vitro and in vivo
studies have shown that the SS18-SSX fusion oncoprotein is both necessary and
sufficient to support tumorigenesis; however, its mechanism of action remains
poorly defined. We have purified a core SS18-SSX complex and discovered that
SS18-SSX serves as a bridge between activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) and 
transducin-like enhancer of split 1 (TLE1), resulting in repression of ATF2
target genes. Disruption of these components by siRNA knockdown or treatment with
HDAC inhibitors rescues target gene expression, leading to growth suppression and
apoptosis. Together, these studies define a fundamental role for aberrant ATF2
transcriptional dysregulation in the etiology of synovial sarcoma.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3734954
PMID: 22439931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2012 May 1;302(9):H1806-17. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00929.2011. Epub 2012 Feb 24.

Regulation of phosphatase and tensin homolog on chromosome 10 in response to
hypoxia.

Qian J(1), Ling S, Castillo AC, Long B, Birnbaum Y, Ye Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555, USA.

Phosphatase and tensin homolog on chromosome 10 (PTEN) is downregulated during
hypertrophic and cancerous cell growth, leading to activation of the prosurvival 
Akt pathway. However, PTEN regulation in cardiac myocytes upon exposure to
hypoxia remains unclear. We explored the role of PTEN in response to
hypoxia/ischemia in the myocardium. We validated that PTEN is a transcriptional
target of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) and is positively regulated
via a p38/ATF-2 signaling pathway. Accordingly, hypoxia-induced upregulation of
phosphorylation of ATF-2 and PTEN were reversed by a dominant negative mutant
p38. Inhibition of PTEN in cardiomyocytes attenuated hypoxia-induced cell death
and apoptosis. Cardiac-specific knockout of PTEN resulted in increased
phosphorylation of Akt and forkhead box O 1 (forkhead transcription factors),
limited infarct size in animals exposed to ischemia-reperfusion injury, and
ameliorated deterioration of left ventricular function and remodeling following
permanent coronary artery occlusion. In addition, the activation of Bim, FASL,
and caspase was coupled with PTEN activation, all of which were attenuated by
PTEN inhibition. In conclusion, cardiomyocyte-specific conditional PTEN deletion 
limited myocardial infarct size in an in vivo model of ischemia-reperfusion
injury and attenuated adverse remodeling in a model of chronic permanent coronary
artery ligation.

PMID: 22367504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 13;287(16):13291-302. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.323766. Epub
2012 Feb 17.

Enzyme kinetics and interaction studies for human JNK1ß1 and substrates
activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (c-Jun).

Figuera-Losada M(1), LoGrasso PV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter,
Florida 33458, USA.

c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) is a stress signal transducer linked to cell death,
and survival. JNK1 has been implicated in obesity, glucose intolerance, and
insulin resistance. In this study we report the kinetic mechanism for JNK1ß1 with
transcription factors ATF2 and c-Jun along with interaction kinetics for these
substrates. JNK1ß1 followed a random sequential mechanism forming a ternary
complex between JNK-substrate-ATP. K(m) for ATF2 and c-Jun was 1.1 and 2.8 µM,
respectively. Inhibition studies using adenosine 5'-(ß,<U+03B3>-methylenetriphosphate)
and a peptide derived from JNK interacting protein 1 (JIP1) supported the
proposed kinetic mechanism. Biolayer interferometry studies showed that
unphosphorylated JNK1ß1 bound to ATF2 with similar affinity as it did to c-Jun
(K(D) = 2.60 ± 0.34 versus 1.00 ± 0.35 µM, respectively). The presence of ATP
increased the affinity of unphosphorylated JNK1ß1 for ATF2 and c-Jun, to 0.80 ±
0.04 versus 0.65 ± 0.07 µM, respectively. Phosphorylation of JNK1ß1 decreased the
affinity of the kinase for ATF2 to 11.0 ± 1.1 µM and for c-Jun to 17.0 ± 7.5 µM
in the absence of ATP. The presence of ATP caused a shift in the K(D) of the
active kinase for ATF2 to 1.70 ± 0.25 µM and for c-Jun of 3.50 ± 0.95 µM. These
results are the first kinetic and biochemical characterization of JNK1ß1 and
uncover some of the differences in the enzymatic activity of JNK1ß1 compared with
other variants and suggest that ATP binding or JNK phosphorylation could induce
changes in the interactions with substrates, activators, and regulatory proteins.

PMCID: PMC3339953
PMID: 22351776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Cancer Res. 2012 Apr 1;72(7):1784-94. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3878. Epub
2012 Feb 16.

Tumor cell-derived angiopoietin-like protein ANGPTL2 is a critical driver of
metastasis.

Endo M(1), Nakano M, Kadomatsu T, Fukuhara S, Kuroda H, Mikami S, Hato T, Aoi J, 
Horiguchi H, Miyata K, Odagiri H, Masuda T, Harada M, Horio H, Hishima T, Nomori 
H, Ito T, Yamamoto Y, Minami T, Okada S, Takahashi T, Mochizuki N, Iwase H, Oike 
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

Strategies to inhibit metastasis have been mainly unsuccessful in part due to
insufficient mechanistic understanding. Here, we report evidence of critical role
for the angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2) in metastatic progression. In mice,
Angptl2 has been implicated in inflammatory carcinogenesis but it has not been
studied in human tumors. In patients with lung cancer, elevated levels of ANGPTL2
expression in tumor cells within the primary tumor were associated with a
reduction in the period of disease-free survival after surgical resection.
Transcription factors NFATc, ATF2, and c-Jun upregulated in aggressive tumor
cells promoted increased Angptl2 expression. Most notably, tumor cell-derived
ANGPTL2 increased in vitro motility and invasion in an autocrine/paracrine
manner, conferring an aggressive metastatic tumor phenotype. In xenograft mouse
models, tumor cell-derived ANGPTL2 accelerated metastasis and shortened survival 
whereas attenuating ANGPTL2 expression in tumor cells-blunted metastasis and
extended survival. Overall, our findings showed that tumor cell-derived ANGPTL2
drives metastasis and provided an initial proof of concept for blockade of its
action as a strategy to antagonize the metastatic process.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22345152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Cell. 2012 Feb 3;148(3):543-55. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.01.016.

PKCe promotes oncogenic functions of ATF2 in the nucleus while blocking its
apoptotic function at mitochondria.

Lau E(1), Kluger H, Varsano T, Lee K, Scheffler I, Rimm DL, Ideker T, Ronai ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The transcription factor ATF2 elicits oncogenic activities in melanoma and tumor 
suppressor activities in nonmalignant skin cancer. Here, we identify that ATF2
tumor suppressor function is determined by its ability to localize at the
mitochondria, where it alters membrane permeability following genotoxic stress.
The ability of ATF2 to reach the mitochondria is determined by PKCe, which
directs ATF2 nuclear localization. Genotoxic stress attenuates PKCe effect on
ATF2; enables ATF2 nuclear export and localization at the mitochondria, where it 
perturbs the HK1-VDAC1 complex; increases mitochondrial permeability; and
promotes apoptosis. Significantly, high levels of PKCe, as seen in melanoma
cells, block ATF2 nuclear export and function at the mitochondria, thereby
attenuating apoptosis following exposure to genotoxic stress. In melanoma tumor
samples, high PKCe levels associate with poor prognosis. Overall, our findings
provide the framework for understanding how subcellular localization enables ATF2
oncogenic or tumor suppressor functions.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3615433
PMID: 22304920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Virol. 2012 Apr;86(7):3787-94. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06307-11. Epub 2012 Jan 25.

Adenosine deaminase acting on RNA 1 (ADAR1) suppresses the induction of
interferon by measles virus.

Li Z(1), Okonski KM, Samuel CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Santa Barbara, California, USA.

ADAR1, the interferon (IFN)-inducible adenosine deaminase acting on RNA,
catalyzes the C-6 deamination of adenosine (A) to produce inosine (I) in RNA
substrates with a double-stranded character. Because double-stranded RNA is a
known inducer of IFN, we tested the role of ADAR1 in IFN induction following
virus infection. HeLa cells made stably deficient in ADAR1 (ADAR1(kd)) were
compared to vector control (CON(kd)) and protein kinase PKR-deficient (PKR(kd))
cells for IFN-ß induction following infection with either parental (wild-type
[WT]) recombinant Moraten vaccine strain measles virus (MV) or isogenic knockout 
mutants deficient for either V (V(ko)) or C (C(ko)) protein expression. We
observed potent IFN-ß transcript induction in ADAR1(kd) cells by all three
viruses; in contrast, in ADAR1-sufficient CON(kd) cells, only the C(ko) mutant
virus was an effective inducer and the IFN-ß RNA induction was amplified by PKR. 
The enhanced IFN-ß transcript-inducing capacity of the WT and V(ko) viruses seen 
in ADAR1-deficient cells correlated with the enhanced activation of PKR, IFN
regulatory factor IRF3, and activator of transcription ATF2, reaching levels
similar to those seen in C(ko) virus-infected cells. However, the level of IFN-ß 
protein produced was not proportional to the level of IFN-ß RNA but rather
correlated inversely with the level of activated PKR. These results suggest that 
ADAR1 functions as an important suppressor of MV-mediated responses, including
the activation of PKR and IRF3 and the induction of IFN-ß RNA. Our findings
further implicate a balanced interplay between PKR and ADAR1 in modulating IFN-ß 
protein production following virus infection.

PMCID: PMC3302501
PMID: 22278222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 9;287(11):8621-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.294272. Epub 2012 
Jan 24.

Critical role of N-terminal end-localized nuclear export signal in regulation of 
activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) subcellular localization and
transcriptional activity.

Hsu CC(1), Hu CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology and the Purdue
University Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana
47907, USA.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) belongs to the basic leucine zipper
family of transcription factors. ATF2 regulates target gene expression by binding
to the cyclic AMP-response element as a homodimer or a heterodimer with c-Jun.
Cytoplasmic localization of ATF2 was observed in melanoma, brain tissue from
patients with Alzheimer disease, prostate cancer specimens, and ionizing
radiation-treated prostate cancer cells, suggesting that alteration of ATF2
subcellular localization may be involved in the pathogenesis of these diseases.
We previously demonstrated that ATF2 is a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein,
and it contains two nuclear localization signals in the basic region and one
nuclear export signal (NES) in the leucine zipper domain (named LZ-NES). In the
present study, we demonstrate that a hydrophobic stretch in the N terminus,
(1)MKFKLHV(7), also functions as an NES (termed N-NES) in a chromosome region
maintenance 1 (CRM1)-dependent manner. Mutation of both N-NES and LZ-NES results 
in a predominant nuclear localization, whereas mutation of each individual NES
only partially increases the nuclear localization. These results suggest that
cytoplasmic localization of ATF2 requires function of at least one of the NESs.
Further, mutation of N-NES enhances the transcriptional activity of ATF2,
suggesting that the novel NES negatively regulates the transcriptional potential 
of ATF2. Thus, ATF2 subcellular localization is probably modulated by multiple
mechanisms, and further understanding of the regulation of ATF2 subcellular
localization under various pathological conditions will provide insight into the 
pathophysiological role of ATF2 in human diseases.

PMCID: PMC3318682
PMID: 22275354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Biochem Soc Trans. 2012 Feb;40(1):230-4. doi: 10.1042/BST20110630.

The roles of ATF2 (activating transcription factor 2) in tumorigenesis.

Gozdecka M(1), Breitwieser W.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Regulation Department, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, University
of Manchester, Wilmslow Road, Withington, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.

MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) pathways are among the most frequently
deregulated signalling events in cancer. Among the critical targets of MAPK
activities are members of the AP-1 (activator protein 1) transcription factor, a 
dimeric complex consisting of Jun, Fos, Maf and ATF (activating transcription
factor) family DNA-binding proteins. Depending on the cellular context, the
composition of the dimeric complexes determines the regulation of growth,
survival or apoptosis. JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase), p38 and a number of Jun and
Fos family proteins have been analysed for their involvement in oncogenic
transformation and tumour formation. These data are also emerging for the ATF
components of the AP-1 factor. The aim of the present review is to provide an
overview of the functions of two ATF family proteins, ATF2 and ATF7, in mammalian
development and their potential functions in tumour formation.

PMID: 22260696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Med. 2012 May 9;18:433-44. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2011.00193.

Effect of prostaglandin I2 analogs on cytokine expression in human myeloid
dendritic cells via epigenetic regulation.

Kuo CH(1), Lin CH, Yang SN, Huang MY, Chen HL, Kuo PL, Hsu YL, Huang SK, Jong YJ,
Wei WJ, Chen YP, Hung CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Prostaglandin I(2) (PGI(2)) analog is regarded as a potential candidate for
treating asthma. Human myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs) play a critical role in the
pathogenesis of asthma. However, the effects of PGI(2) analog on human mDCs are
unknown. In the present study, circulating mDCs were isolated from six healthy
subjects. The effects of PGI(2) analogs iloprost and treprostinil on cytokine
production, maturation and T-cell stimulatory function of human mDCs were
investigated. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a and interleukin (IL)-10 were measured
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The expression of costimulatory molecules
was investigated by flow cytometry. T-cell stimulatory function was investigated 
by measuring interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>, IL-13 and IL-10 production by T cells cocultured
with iloprost-treated mDCs. Intracellular signaling was investigated by Western
blot and chromatin immunoprecipitation. We found that iloprost and treprostinil
induced IL-10, but suppressed TNF-a production in polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid
(poly I:C)-stimulated mDCs. This effect was reversed by the I-prostanoid (IP),
E-prostanoid (EP) receptor antagonists or intracellular free calcium (Ca(2+))
chelator. Forskolin, an adenyl cyclase activator, conferred a similar effect.
Iloprost and treprostinil increased intracellular adenosine 3',5'-cyclic
monophosphate (cAMP) levels, and iloprost also increased intracellular Ca(2+).
Iloprost suppressed poly I:C-induced mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
phospho-p38 and phospho-activating transcription factor (ATF)2 expression.
Iloprost downregulated poly I:C-induced histone H3K4 trimethylation in the TNFA
gene promoter region via suppressing translocation of histone 3 lysine 4
(H3K4)-specific methyltransferases MLL (mixed lineage leukemia) and WDR5 (WD
repeat domain 5). Iloprost-treated mDCs inhibited IL-13, IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-10
production by T cells. In conclusion, PGI(2) analogs enhance IL-10 and suppress
TNF-a expression through the IP/EP2/EP4 receptors-cAMP and EP1 receptor-Ca(2+)
pathway. Iloprost suppressed TNF-a expression via the MAPK-p38-ATF2 pathway and
epigenetic regulation by downregulation of histone H3K4 trimethylation.

PMCID: PMC3356435
PMID: 22231731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Stem Cells Regen Med. 2012 Nov 26;8(3):190-7. eCollection 2012.

Localization and Molecular Characterization of human Breast Cancer Initiating
Cells from heterogeneous population of Breast Cancer Mesenchymal Stem cells by
Immunofluorescence Microscopy.

Potdar P(1), Monteiro F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Biology, Jaslok Hospital and Research
Centre , 15, Dr. G. Deshmukh Road, Mumbai- 400026, Maharashtra, India.

Breast Cancer (BC) is a heterogeneous disease and arises from breast cancer
initiating stem cell population in the tumor and these cells are resistant to
cancer therapies. Thus identifying this cell type within the tumor clone is an
important area of research to understand the mechanism of breast cancer
development. Recently, our laboratory has isolated and characterized Human breast
cancer mesenchymal stem cells (hBCMSCs) from human breast cancer and showed the
heterogeneity of these cells existing in the tumor. Therefore, our present
objective is to use this model system to identify, localize and define specific
breast cancer initiating cells (BCICs) from the heterogeneous population of
hBCMSCs cell line developed in our laboratory. Localization of specific cell
types can be done by using specific cancer marker antibodies using
Immunofluorescence microscopy. In this study we have used FITC labeled specific
cancer antibodies i.e. p53, Rb1, Hras, Ki67, EGFR, GST, ETS1 and ATF2 to localize
BCICs in this population of cells. Our results have demonstrated that few cells
among many of the BC cells gave fluorescence with specific cancer antibody
indicating that these cell types are BCICs that may be responsible for supporting
the growth of other cell type to form tumors. The Phase Contrast Microscopy
clearly showed giant cells with enlarged nucleus and scanty cytoplasm associated 
with many cytoplasmic granules. It also indicates that these cells are mainly
responsible for supporting proliferation of surrounding cells that form a part of
the BC tumor. We have further hypothesized that molecular profiling of these
tumor cells will open a new avenue of molecular targeted therapies for Breast
Cancer patients even at an advanced stage of disease.

PMCID: PMC3908297
PMID: 24693197  [PubMed]


229. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 Apr;363(1-2):269-80. doi: 10.1007/s11010-011-1179-5. Epub 
2011 Dec 24.

Apoptotic signaling in endothelial cells with neutrophil activation.

Koshio O(1), Nagao T, Mabuchi A, Ono Y, Suzuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioactive Molecules, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, 
1-23-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8640, Japan. koshio@med.teikyo-u.ac.jp

As is the case for tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß),
degranulated substances (DS) released from polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) and
H(2)O(2) cause endothelial cell apoptosis through the phosphorylation of members 
of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family. Stimulation of human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) with IL-1ß or TNF-a/cycloheximide (CHX) 
was found to enhance the phosphorylation of p38 and Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK)
in a time-dependent fashion, but did not affect the time-dependent
phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase. In addition, IL-1ß and 
TNF-a/CHX induced the phosphorylation of activating transcription factor-2
(ATF-2), but not c-Jun. Moreover, the p38 in HUVEC was phosphorylated by DS
released from PMN and also by H(2)O(2), but not by O(2) (-) induced by
myeloperoxidase (MPO) of PMN. On the other hand, caspase 8 in HUVEC was activated
by DS, but not by H(2)O(2) and/or O(2) (-). In addition, caspases 3 and 7 were
cleaved by the treatment of DS and turned into active forms. DS was concentrated,
analyzed by electrophoresis, and revealed to contain precursor and subunits of
MPO (90, 60, and 14 kDa) and another peptide with a molecular weight of about 28 
kDa. Because SB203580 that was an inhibitor of p38 MAPK did not repress
phosphorylation of ATF-2 in HUVEC, it was suggested that JNK was more important
than p38 in a series of signaling courses. These results suggest the possibility 
that not only TNF-a/CHX and IL-1ß but also DS released from PMN and the
cell-permeable reactive oxygen species H(2)O(2) induce blood vessel injury
through endothelial apoptosis.

PMID: 22198289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Genomics. 2012 Mar;99(3):152-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2011.11.004. Epub 2011 Dec
7.

MiRNA expression signatures induced by Marek's disease virus infection in
chickens.

Tian F(1), Luo J, Zhang H, Chang S, Song J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal & Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD 20742, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression at
the post-transcriptional level. Emerging evidence suggests that differential
miRNA expression is associated with viral infection and cancer. Marek's disease
virus infection induces lymphoma in chickens. However, the host defense response 
against Marek's disease (MD) progression remains poorly understood. Here, we
utilized microarrays to screen miRNAs that were sensitive to Marek's disease
virus (MDV) infection. QRT-PCR analysis confirmed the microarray data and
revealed expression patterns of some miRNAs in tumor samples. Chicken miRNA
gga-miR-15b, which was reduced in infected susceptible chickens and splenic
tumors, controlled the expression of ATF2 (activating transcription factor 2).
ATF2 was significantly increased in the same group. Our results indicated that
differential expression of miRNA in resistant and susceptible chickens was caused
by MDV infection, which effectively influenced protein expression of ATF2. This
latter result might be related to Marek's disease resistance/susceptibility.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22178800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28946. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028946. Epub 2011 Dec 13.

Involvement of dopamine receptors in binge methamphetamine-induced activation of 
endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrial stress pathways.

Beauvais G(1), Atwell K, Jayanthi S, Ladenheim B, Cadet JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, National Institute on Drug Abuse,
Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Single large doses of methamphetamine (METH) cause endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress and mitochondrial dysfunctions in rodent striata. The dopamine D(1)
receptor appears to be involved in these METH-mediated stresses. The purpose of
this study was to investigate if dopamine D(1) and D(2) receptors are involved in
ER and mitochondrial stresses caused by single-day METH binges in the rat
striatum. Male Sprague-Dawley rats received 4 injections of 10 mg/kg of METH
alone or in combination with a putative D(1) or D(2) receptor antagonist,
SCH23390 or raclopride, respectively, given 30 min prior to each METH injection. 
Rats were euthanized at various timepoints afterwards. Striatal tissues were used
in quantitative RT-PCR and western blot analyses. We found that binge METH
injections caused increased expression of the pro-survival genes, BiP/GRP-78 and 
P58(IPK), in a SCH23390-sensitive manner. METH also caused up-regulation of
ER-stress genes, Atf2, Atf3, Atf4, CHOP/Gadd153 and Gadd34. The expression of
heat shock proteins (HSPs) was increased after METH injections. SCH23390
completely blocked induction in all analyzed ER stress-related proteins that
included ATF3, ATF4, CHOP/Gadd153, HSPs and caspase-12. The dopamine D(2)-like
antagonist, raclopride, exerted small to moderate inhibitory influence on some
METH-induced changes in ER stress proteins. Importantly, METH caused decreases in
the mitochondrial anti-apoptotic protein, Bcl-2, but increases in the
pro-apoptotic proteins, Bax, Bad and cytochrome c, in a SCH23390-sensitive
fashion. In contrast, raclopride provided only small inhibition of METH-induced
changes in mitochondrial proteins. These findings indicate that METH-induced
activation of striatal ER and mitochondrial stress pathways might be more related
to activation of SCH23390-sensitive receptors.

PMCID: PMC3236770
PMID: 22174933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Int Immunopharmacol. 2012 Jan;12(1):182-8. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2011.11.009.
Epub 2011 Dec 9.

Berberine ameliorates COX-2 expression in rat small intestinal mucosa partially
through PPAR<U+03B3> pathway during acute endotoxemia.

Feng AW(1), Gao W, Zhou GR, Yu R, Li N, Huang XL, Li QR, Li JS.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of General Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University
School of Medicine, 305 East Zhongshan Road, Nanjing 210002, China.

Berberine hydrochloride (BBR), a plant alkaloid, has been used to treat
intestinal inflammation or infection for years. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is
pro-inflammatory mediator and involved in the induction of gut inflammation. The 
expression of COX-2 in small bowel mucosa was determined and the mechanism by
which BBR modulated COX-2 expression was explored in a rat model of endotoxemia
induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The results showed that without LPS
stimulation COX-2 was constitutively expressed at low levels in control rats. LPS
challenge rapidly induced COX-2 gene transcription resulting in high levels of
inducible COX-2 expression in endotoxemic rats. BBR pre- and post-treatment had
no marked effect on constitutive COX-2 expression but inhibited inducible COX-2
overexpression. LPS challenge increased the expression and phosphorylation of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>), p38 and activating
transcription factor 2 and 3 (ATF2, ATF3), but the effects of LPS were inhibited 
by BBR treatment. GW9662 did not influence constitutive COX-2 expression but
enhanced inducible COX-2 overproduction. Besides, GW9662 abolished the inhibitory
effect of BBR on inducible COX-2, p38, ATF2, 3 expression and phosphorylation.
Collectively, these results indicated that BBR gavage could attenuate the
overexpression of inducible COX-2, not constitutive COX-2, in ileal mucosa during
acute endotoxemia in part via activation of PPAR<U+03B3> pathway, which negatively
interfered with p38/ATFs cascade.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22155099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2012 Feb;56(2):325-35. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201100453. Epub 2011 
Dec 7.

Multi-parametric approach to identify coffee components that regulate mechanisms 
of gastric acid secretion.

Rubach M(1), Lang R, Seebach E, Somoza MM, Hofmann T, Somoza V.

Author information: 
(1)German Research Center for Food Chemistry, Freising, Germany.

SCOPE: Chlorogenic acid (CA), caffeine (CAFF), pyrogallol (PYR), catechol (CAT), 
(ß)N-alkanoyl-hydroxytryptamides (C5HT) and N-methylpyridinium (N-MP) were
evaluated for their influence on mechanisms of gastric acid secretion as single
compounds and in biomimetic mixtures.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Compounds were tested in coffee representative
concentrations. Human gastric cancer cells (HGT-1) were used to study the proton 
secretory activity by Ussing chamber experiments and FACS analysis. For
activation of EGFr, Akt1, ERK1/2, ATF-2 and cAMP levels, we performed pathway
screening assays. Time-dependent expression of related genes were determined by
real-time PCR. Part of the data was used for neural network modeling to identify 
the most relevant compounds. N-MP increased the expression of the anti-secretory 
somatostatin receptor by 114%, whereas C5HT decreased its expression by 52%. N-MP
down-regulated the pro-secretory CHRM3 receptor by 36% and the H<U+207A>,K<U+207A>-ATPase by
36%. CAFF stimulated the secretory activity in the functional assays, whereas
N-MP and CA decreased proton secretion. After applying a pathway analysis, we
were able to discriminate between CAFF, CA, CAT, C5HT, PYR and
histamine-activating EGFr signaling and N-MP-associated ERK1/2 signaling.
CONCLUSION: By applying a multi-parametric approach, N-MP was shown to
effectively down-regulate mechanisms of gastric acid secretion in human parietal 
gastric cells.

© 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22147653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 20;287(4):2632-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.323709. Epub 2011 
Dec 2.

p38a mediates cell survival in response to oxidative stress via induction of
antioxidant genes: effect on the p70S6K pathway.

Gutiérrez-Uzquiza Á(1), Arechederra M, Bragado P, Aguirre-Ghiso JA, Porras A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular II Facultad de Farmacia,
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del
Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Ciudad Universitaria, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

We reveal a novel pro-survival role for mammalian p38a in response to H(2)O(2),
which involves an up-regulation of antioxidant defenses. The presence of p38a
increases basal and H(2)O(2)-induced expression of the antioxidant enzymes:
superoxide-dismutase 1 (SOD-1), SOD-2, and catalase through different mechanisms,
which protects from reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation and prevents cell 
death. p38a was found to regulate (i) H(2)O(2)-induced SOD-2 expression through a
direct regulation of transcription mediated by activating transcription factor 2 
(ATF-2) and (ii) H(2)O(2)-induced catalase expression through regulation of
protein stability and mRNA expression and/or stabilization. As a consequence, SOD
and catalase activities are higher in WT MEFs. We also found that this
p38a-dependent antioxidant response allows WT cells to maintain an efficient
activation of the mTOR/p70S6K pathway. Accordingly, the loss of p38a leads to ROS
accumulation in response to H(2)O(2), which causes cell death and inactivation of
mTOR/p70S6K signaling. This can be rescued by either p38a re-expression or
treatment with the antioxidants, N-acetyl cysteine, or exogenously added
catalase. Therefore, our results reveal a novel homeostatic role for p38a in
response to oxidative stress, where ROS removal is favored by antioxidant enzymes
up-regulation, allowing cell survival and mTOR/p70S6K activation.

PMCID: PMC3268422
PMID: 22139847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Prostate Cancer. 2011;2011:893208. doi: 10.1155/2011/893208. Epub 2011 Oct 23.

Role of heparan sulfate 2-o-sulfotransferase in prostate cancer cell
proliferation, invasion, and growth factor signaling.

Ferguson BW(1), Datta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Biophysics, Texas A&M University, MS 2128, College 
Station, TX 77845, USA.

Heparan-sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) are required for maximal growth factor
signaling in prostate cancer progression. The degree of sulfate modification on
the covalently attached heparan sulfate (HS) chains is one of the determining
factors of growth factor-HSPG interactions. Sulfate groups are transferred to HS 
chains via a series of O-sulfotransferases. In the present study, we demonstrate 
that Heparan sulfate 2-O-sulfotransferase (2OST) is essential for maximal
proliferation and invasion of prostate cancer cells in the LNCaP-C4-2B model. We 
also show that a decrease in invasion due to 2OST siRNA is associated with an
increase in actin and E-cadherin accumulation at the cell surface. 2OST
expression correlates with increasing metastatic potential in this model. We
demonstrate that 2OST expression is upregulated by the stress-inducible
transcription factors HIF1a, ATF2, and NF<U+03BA>B. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis suggests that HIF1a and ATF2 act directly on the 2OST promoter, while
NF<U+03BA>B acts indirectly.

PMCID: PMC3202141
PMID: 22135748  [PubMed]


236. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 20;287(4):2787-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.281915. Epub 2011 
Nov 30.

Distinct signaling properties of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases 4
(MKK4) and 7 (MKK7) in embryonic stem cell (ESC) differentiation.

Wang J(1), Chen L, Ko CI, Zhang L, Puga A, Xia Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, College of Medicine, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45367-0056, USA.

Signal transduction pathways are integral components of the developmental
regulatory network that guides progressive cell fate determination. MKK4 and MKK7
are upstream kinases of the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs),
responsible for channeling physiological and environmental signals to their
cellular responses. Both kinases are essential for survival of mouse embryos, but
because of embryonic lethality, their precise developmental roles remain largely 
unknown. Using gene knock-out mouse ESCs, we studied the roles of MKK4 and MKK7
in differentiation in vitro. While MKK4 and MKK7 were dispensable for ESC
self-renewal and pluripotency maintenance, they exhibited unique signaling and
functional properties in differentiation. MKK4 and MKK7 complemented each other
in activation of the JNK-c-Jun cascades and loss of both led to senescence upon
cell differentiation. On the other hand, MKK4 and MKK7 had opposite effects on
activation of the p38 cascades during differentiation. Specifically, MKK7 reduced
p38 activation, while Mkk7(-/-) ESCs had elevated phosphorylation of MKK4, p38,
and ATF2, and increased MEF2C expression. Consequently, Mkk7(-/-) ESCs had higher
expression of MHC and MLC and enhanced formation of contractile cardiomyocytes.
In contrast, MKK4 was required for p38 activation and Mkk4(-/-) ESCs exhibited
diminished p-ATF2 and MEF2C expression, resulting in impaired MHC induction and
defective cardiomyocyte differentiation. Exogenous MKK4 expression partially
restored the ability of Mkk4(-/-) ESCs to differentiate into cardiomyocytes. Our 
results uncover complementary and interdependent roles of MKK4 and MKK7 in
development, and identify the essential requirement for MKK4 in p38 activation
and cardiomyocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3268436
PMID: 22130668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 6;287(2):1588-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.315127. Epub 2011
Nov 28.

Dissection of Wnt5a-Ror2 signaling leading to matrix metalloproteinase (MMP-13)
expression.

Yamagata K(1), Li X, Ikegaki S, Oneyama C, Okada M, Nishita M, Minami Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe
University, 7-5-1, Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

It has been shown that constitutively active Wnt5a-Ror2 signaling in osteosarcoma
cell lines plays crucial roles in induced expression of matrix
metalloproteinase-13 (MMP-13), required for their invasiveness; however, it
remains largely unclear about the molecular basis of MMP-13 gene induction by
Wnt5a-Ror2 signaling. Here we show by reporter assay that the activator protein 1
(AP1) (binding site in the promoter region of MMP-13 gene is primarily
responsible for its transcriptional activation by Wnt5a-Ror2 signaling in
osteosarcoma cell lines SaOS-2 and U2OS. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
revealed that c-Jun and ATF2 are crucial transcription factors recruited to the
AP1-binding site in the MMP-13 gene promoter during Wnt5a-Ror2 signaling in
SaOS-2 cells. Using siRNA-mediated suppression or specific inhibitors, we also
show that Dishevelled2 (Dvl2) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase are required for MMP-13
gene induction presumably via phosphorylation of c-Jun and ATF2 during Wnt5a-Ror2
signaling in SaOS-2 cells. Interestingly, Dvl2 and Rac1, but not Dvl3, are
required for MMP-13 expression in SaOS-2 cells, whereas Dvl3, but not Dvl2 and
Rac1, is required for its expression in U2OS cells, indicating the presence of
distinct intracellular signaling machineries leading to expression of the same
gene, in this case MMP-13 gene in different osteosarcoma cell lines. Moreover, we
provide evidence suggesting that Wnt5a-Ror2 signaling might also be required for 
expression of MMP-13 gene during the development of the cartilaginous tissue.

PMCID: PMC3256912
PMID: 22128168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Pathol Oncol Res. 2012 Jul;18(3):571-7. doi: 10.1007/s12253-011-9476-6. Epub 2011
Nov 23.

The effect of JDP2 and ATF2 on the epithelial-mesenchymal transition of human
pancreatic cancer cell lines.

Xu Y(1), Liu Z, Guo K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pancreatic Gastroenterologic Surgery, First Hospital of China
Medical University, No 92, Nanjing Rd, Shenyang 110001, China. xuyhsy@yeah.net

Pancreatic cancer is a common malignancy with a bleak outcome due to the early
occurrence of micro-metastases and poor prognosis. The epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) is considered to be related to the invasion and metastasis of a 
variety of malignant tumors. Currently, there is no research regarding the
relationship of pancreatic cancer EMT with Jun dimerization protein 2 (JDP2), an 
inhibitor of the activator protein-1 (AP-1) family, and activating transcription 
factor-2 (ATF2), an AP-1-family member. In this study, we used western blot
analysis and immunofluorescence to detect the protein expression of the
epithelial marker E-cadherin and the mesenchymal marker vimentin in the
pancreatic cancer cell line BxPC3, which was transfected with JDP2 and induced by
Collagen I. Compared with the negative control, the E-cadherin and vimentin
expression levels did not change significantly, whereas E-cadherin expression
decreased and vimentin expression increased in the control group transfected with
empty plasmid, suggesting that JDP2 inhibits the EMT induced by Collagen I.
Additionally, we verified that compared with the negative control, the morphology
of the Capan2 cell line induced by TGF-ß1 after transfection with ATF2 was
significantly changed, as was the mRNA expression of E-cadherin, whereas the mRNA
expression of vimentin, Snail, and ATF2 was significantly increased. Cell
invasiveness was also significantly increased (P < 0.01), suggesting that ATF2,
together with TGF-ß1, induced EMT in the Capan2 cell line. The members of the
AP-1 family are closely related to EMT and that JDP2, as an AP-1-family
inhibitor, inhibits EMT, which could lead to a new direction in
molecular-targeted therapy for pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 22109562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Biochem J. 2012 Feb 15;442(1):127-37. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111269.

Induction of group IVC phospholipase A2 in allergic asthma: transcriptional
regulation by TNFa in bronchoepithelial cells.

Bickford JS(1), Newsom KJ, Herlihy JD, Mueller C, Keeler B, Qiu X, Walters JN, Su
N, Wallet SM, Flotte TR, Nick HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Airway inflammation in allergen-induced asthma is associated with eicosanoid
release. These bioactive lipids exhibit anti- and pro-inflammatory activities
with relevance to pulmonary pathophysiology. We hypothesized that
sensitization/challenge using an extract from the ubiquitous fungus Aspergillus
fumigatus in a mouse model of allergic asthma would result in altered
phospholipase gene expression, thus modulating the downstream eicosanoid pathway.
We observed the most significant induction in the group IVC PLA2 (phospholipase
A2) [also known as cPLA2<U+03B3> (cytosolic PLA2<U+03B3>) or PLA2G4C]. Our results infer that
A. fumigatus extract can induce cPLA2<U+03B3> levels directly in eosinophils, whereas
induction in lung epithelial cells is most likely to be a consequence of TNFa
(tumour necrosis factor a) secretion by A. fumigatus-activated macrophages. The
mechanism of TNFa-dependent induction of cPLA2<U+03B3> gene expression was elucidated
through a combination of promoter deletions, ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation)
and overexpression studies in human bronchoepithelial cells, leading to the
identification of functionally relevant CRE (cAMP-response element), NF-<U+03BA>B
(nuclear factor <U+03BA>B) and E-box promoter elements. ChIP analysis demonstrated that 
RNA polymerase II, ATF-2 (activating transcription factor 2)-c-Jun, p65-p65 and
USF (upstream stimulating factor) 1-USF2 complexes are recruited to the cPLA2<U+03B3>
enhancer/promoter in response to TNFa, with overexpression and dominant-negative 
studies implying a strong level of co-operation and interplay between these
factors. Overall, our results link cytokine-mediated alterations in cPLA2<U+03B3> gene
expression with allergic asthma and outline a complex regulatory mechanism.

PMID: 22082005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2011 Summer;41(3):244-50.

Inhibition of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway attenuates 
cerebral vasospasm following experimental subarachnoid hemorrhage in rabbits.

Zhang X(1), Zhao XD, Shi JX, Yin HX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Jinling Hospital; 305 East Zhongshan Road, Nanjing
210002, P.R. China.

The p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) plays an important role in
apoptosis and is also involved in the development of cerebral vasospasm after
subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). Here, we sought to examine whether inhibition of
p38 MAPK could attenuate cerebral vasospasm and investigate the underlying
mechanisms in a rabbit SAH model. SAH was established in rabbits (n=12/group)
using the double-hemorrhage method. We observed apparent vasospasm in the basilar
arteries of rabbits with SAH, which was significantly attenuated by SB203580, a
selective p38MAPK inhibitor. Immunoblotting assays showed enhanced
phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and ATF2 and increased caspase-3 cleavage following
SAH, which were, however, markedly suppressed by SB203580. TUNEL staining further
revealed significant apoptosis in the basilar arteries of rabbits with SAH, which
was scantly present in rabbits treated with SB203580. Our results demonstrated
that p38 MAPK was activated in cerebral vasospasm and associated with increased
apoptosis in the basilar arteries and p38 MAPK inhibition suppressed apoptosis,
suggesting that p38 MAPK could be a novel therapeutic target for cerebral
vasospasm.

PMID: 22075507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Biochemistry. 2011 Dec 6;50(48):10520-9. doi: 10.1021/bi201506g. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

Nonvisual arrestins function as simple scaffolds assembling the MKK4-JNK3a2
signaling complex.

Zhan X(1), Kaoud TS, Dalby KN, Gurevich VV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232,
United States.

Arrestins make up a small family of proteins with four mammalian members that
play key roles in the regulation of multiple G protein-coupled receptor-dependent
and -independent signaling pathways. Although arrestins were reported to serve as
scaffolds for MAP kinase cascades, promoting the activation of JNK3, ERK1/2, and 
p38, the molecular mechanisms involved were not elucidated, and even the direct
binding of arrestins with MAP kinases was never demonstrated. Here, using
purified proteins, we show that both nonvisual arrestins directly bind JNK3a2 and
its upstream activator MKK4, and that the affinity of arrestin-3 for these
kinases is higher than that of arrestin-2. Reconstitution of the MKK4-JNK3a2
signaling module from pure proteins in the presence of different arrestin-3
concentrations showed that arrestin-3 acts as a "true" scaffold, facilitating
JNK3a2 phosphorylation by bringing the two kinases together. Both the level of
JNK3a2 phosphorylation by MKK4 and JNK3a2 activity toward its substrate ATF2
increase at low and then decrease at high arrestin-3 levels, yielding a
bell-shaped concentration dependence expected with true scaffolds that do not
activate the upstream kinase or its substrate. Thus, direct binding of both
kinases and true scaffolding is the molecular mechanism of action of arrestin-3
on the MKK4-JNK3a2 signaling module.

PMCID: PMC3227541
PMID: 22047447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jan;32(1):76-87. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05661-11. Epub 2011 Oct 28.

Ku regulates signaling to DNA damage response pathways through the Ku70 von
Willebrand A domain.

Fell VL(1), Schild-Poulter C.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of 
Medicine & Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

The Ku heterodimer (Ku70/Ku80) is a main component of the nonhomologous
end-joining (NHEJ) pathway that repairs DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Ku binds
the broken DNA end and recruits other proteins to facilitate the processing and
ligation of the broken end. While Ku interacts with many proteins involved in DNA
damage/repair-related functions, few interactions have been mapped to the
N-terminal von Willebrand A (vWA) domain, a predicted protein interaction domain.
The mutagenesis of Ku70 vWA domain S155/D156 unexpectedly increased cell survival
following ionizing radiation (IR) treatment. DNA repair appeared unaffected, but 
defects in the activation of apoptosis and alterations in the DNA damage
signaling response were identified. In particular, Ku70 S155A/D156A affected the 
IR-induced transcriptional response of several activating transcription factor 2 
(ATF2)-regulated genes involved in apoptosis regulation. ATF2 phosphorylation and
recruitment to DNA damage-induced foci was increased in Ku70-deficient cells,
suggesting that Ku represses ATF2 activation. Ku70 S155A/D156A substitutions
further enhanced this repression. S155A substitution alone was sufficient to
confer enhanced survival, whereas alteration to a phosphomimetic residue (S155D) 
reversed this effect, suggesting that S155 is a phosphorylation site. Thus, these
findings infer that Ku links signals from the DNA repair machinery to DNA damage 
signaling regulators that control apoptotic pathways.

PMCID: PMC3255697
PMID: 22037767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Am J Cancer Res. 2011;1(7):834-44. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

Ionizing radiation induces neuroendocrine differentiation of prostate cancer
cells in vitro, in vivo and in prostate cancer patients.

Deng X, Elzey BD, Poulson JM, Morrison WB, Ko SC, Hahn NM, Ratliff TL, Hu CD.

Prostate cancer remains the most common noncutaneous cancer among American men.
Although most patients can be cured by surgery and radiotherapy, 32,050 patients 
still died of the disease in 2010. Many patients receive radiotherapy either as a
primary therapy, salvage therapy, or in combination with surgery or hormonal
therapy. Despite initial treatment, several studies suggest that approximately
10% of low-risk prostate cancer patients and up to 30-60% with more advanced
cancer patients experience biochemical recurrence within five years after
radiotherapy. Thus, elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying
radioresistance and tumor recurrence has the potential to significantly reduce
prostate cancer mortality. We previously demonstrated that fractionated ionizing 
radiation (IR) can induce the prostate cancer cell line LNCaP to undergo
neuroendocrine differentiation (NED) by activation of cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB) and cytoplasmic sequestration of ATF2, two CRE-binding
transcription factors that oppose each other to regulate NED. Importantly,
IR-induced NED is reversible and de-differentiated cells are cross-resistant to
IR, androgen depletion and docetaxel treatments. These findings suggest that
radiation-induced NED may allow prostate cancer cells to survive treatment and
contribute to tumor recurrence. In the present study, we further demonstrated
that IR also induces NED in a subset of DU-145 and PC-3 cells. In addition, we
confirmed that IR induces NED in LNCaP xenograft tumors in nude mice, and
observed that the plasma chro-mogranin A (CgA) level, a biomarker for NED, is
increased by 2- to 5-fold in tumor-bearing mice after fractionated radiation
doses of 20 and 40 Gy, respectively. Consistent with these in vivo findings, a
pilot study in prostate cancer patients showed that the serum CgA level is
elevated in 4 out of 9 patients after radiotherapy. Taken together, these
findings provide evidence that radiation-induced NED is a general therapeutic
response in a subset of prostate cancer patients. Thus, a large scale analysis of
radiotherapy-induced NED in prostate cancer patients and its correlation to
clinical outcomes will likely provide new insight into the role of NED in
prostate cancer radiotherapy and prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3196282
PMID: 22016831  [PubMed]


244. Neurosci Lett. 2011 Nov 14;505(2):76-81. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.09.060. Epub 
2011 Oct 1.

Caspase-3 is a target gene of c-Jun:ATF2 heterodimers during apoptosis induced by
activity deprivation in cerebellar granule neurons.

Song B(1), Xie B, Wang C, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen
University, 74 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou 510080, China.

Caspase-3, a key executor of neuronal apoptosis, is up-regulated and activated
during apoptosis induced by activity deprivation in cerebellar granule neurons
(CGNs). However, the transcriptional mechanism regulating caspase-3 during CGN
apoptosis remains unknown. Here, we show that the caspase-3 gene is
transactivated and its induction is preceded by c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase
(JNK)/c-Jun:ATF2 pathway activation following activity deprivation in CGNs. We
observed that caspase-3 induction is abolished by pharmacological inhibition of
the JNK/c-Jun:ATF2 pathway. Destroying c-Jun:ATF2 heterodimers with dominant
negative mutants of c-Jun and ATF2 or knockdown by small RNA interference reduced
caspase-3 promoter activity and mRNA level. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation showed increased binding of c-Jun:ATF2 heterodimers to the
caspase-3 promoter in response to activity deprivation in vivo. Site-directed
mutagenesis of the caspase-3 promoter revealed that caspase-3 transcriptional
activation depends primarily on an ATF site -233 to -225 nucleotides upstream of 
the start site. Taken together, these data demonstrate that caspase-3 is a target
gene of c-Jun:ATF2 heterodimers during apoptosis induced by activity deprivation 
in CGNs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21996423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Head Neck. 2011 Nov;33(11):1586-99. doi: 10.1002/hed.21648. Epub 2010 Dec 28.

Activating transcription factor-2 in survival mechanisms in head and neck
carcinoma cells.

Duffey D(1), Dolgilevich S, Razzouk S, Li L, Green R, Gorti GK.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine Section of Otolaryngology, 333 Cedar St,
Box 208041, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA. Dianne.duffey@yale.edu

BACKGROUND: Activating transcription factor-2 (ATF2) is associated with tumor
progression but is not well studied in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC). Its effects in stress and its importance in other survival mechanisms
were studied.
METHODS: ATF2 expression and nuclear activation were confirmed in HNSCC. After
modulation of ATF2, in vitro effects on proliferation and chemosensitivity were
studied. Effects on in vivo tumor growth and interleukin 8 (IL-8) expression were
determined. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) treatment was used to further
evaluate cytokine production and chemosensitivity.
RESULTS: Reductions of ATF2 resulted in significant nuclear p-ATF2 activation,
cisplatin resistance, and augmented IL-8 expression without affecting in vivo
tumor growth. In this setting, TNF increases p-p38 phosphorylation and
chemosensitivity while further enhancing IL-8 production.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest regulatory roles for ATF2 in TNF-related mechanisms 
of HNSCC. Its perturbation and nuclear activation are associated with significant
effects on survival and cytokine production.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3117940
PMID: 21990224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25354. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025354. Epub 2011 Sep 30.

Transcriptional networks in epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Venkov C(1), Plieth D, Ni T, Karmaker A, Bian A, George AL Jr, Neilson EG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) changes polarized epithelial 
cells into migratory phenotypes associated with loss of cell-cell adhesion
molecules and cytoskeletal rearrangements. This form of plasticity is seen in
mesodermal development, fibroblast formation, and cancer metastasis.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Here we identify prominent transcriptional networks active 
during three time points of this transitional process, as epithelial cells become
fibroblasts. DNA microarray in cultured epithelia undergoing EMT, validated in
vivo, were used to detect various patterns of gene expression. In particular, the
promoter sequences of differentially expressed genes and their transcription
factors were analyzed to identify potential binding sites and partners. The four 
most frequent cis-regulatory elements (CREs) in up-regulated genes were SRY,
FTS-1, Evi-1, and GC-Box, and RNA inhibition of the four transcription factors,
Atf2, Klf10, Sox11, and SP1, most frequently binding these CREs, establish their 
importance in the initiation and propagation of EMT. Oligonucleotides that block 
the most frequent CREs restrain EMT at early and intermediate stages through
apoptosis of the cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results identify new transcriptional interactions with high
frequency CREs that modulate the stability of cellular plasticity, and may serve 
as targets for modulating these transitional states in fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC3184133
PMID: 21980432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Phytother Res. 2012 Apr;26(4):568-78. doi: 10.1002/ptr.3586. Epub 2011 Sep 26.

Berberine inhibits pulmonary metastasis through down-regulation of MMP in
metastatic B16F-10 melanoma cells.

Hamsa TP(1), Kuttan G.

Author information: 
(1)Amala Cancer Research Centre, Amala Nagar, Thrissur, Kerala, India.

The present study demonstrated the potential antimetastatic and antiinvasive
effect of berberine using both in vivo mouse lung metastasis and in vitro models.
Administration of berberine resulted in significant suppression of B16F-10
melanoma induced tumor nodule formation and enhanced the survival of
tumor-bearing mice. Berberine treatment also decreased various biochemical
parameters associated with lung metastasis. These inhibitory actions may be due
to the significant suppression of several signaling molecules such as ERK1/2,
NF-<U+03BA>B, ATF-2 and CREB involved in the transcription signaling pathways for MMP
gene expression. It could also inhibit the migration and invasion of highly
metastatic murine melanoma cells in a dose-dependent manner in vitro. The results
clearly show that berberine could significantly inhibit experimental lung
metastasis produced by intravenous injection of B16F-10 melanoma cells and this
effect could be linked to the down-regulation of metastasis-related signaling
molecules.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21953764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2011 Nov;515(1-2):99-106. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2011.09.002.
Epub 2011 Sep 10.

Nanosecond pulsed electric fields activate MAPK pathways in human cells.

Morotomi-Yano K(1), Akiyama H, Yano K.

Author information: 
(1)Bioelectrics Research Center, Kumamoto University, Kurokami, Kumamoto, Japan.

Application of nanosecond pulsed electric fields (nsPEFs) has attracted attention
as a unique tool in life sciences, especially for cancer therapy, but the
molecular mechanism of its action on living organisms is yet to be fully
elucidated. Here, we report a transient activation of signaling pathways
involving mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) by nsPEFs. Application of
nsPEFs to HeLa S3 cells induced phosphorylation of MAPKs, including p38, JNK and 
ERK, and their upstream kinases. The application of nsPEFs also elicited elevated
phosphorylation of downstream factors including MSK1, Hsp27, ATF2, p90RSK, and
c-Jun. In addition, the application of nsPEFs led to the transcriptional
activation of immediate early genes in the MAPK pathways. Treatment with
inhibitors of the MAPK pathways suppressed nsPEF-induced protein phosphorylation 
and gene expression downstream of MAPKs, confirming the functional connection
between the nsPEF-activated MAPKs and the observed induction of the downstream
events. Taken together, these results provide important clues to the action of
nsPEFs on human cells and demonstrate a new possibility for the utilization of
nsPEFs in the control of various biological phenomena involving activation of the
MAPK pathways.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21933660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2012 Feb;101(2):379-92. doi: 10.1007/s10482-011-9643-5. 
Epub 2011 Sep 20.

Strategies to select yeast starters cultures for production of flavor compounds
in cachaça fermentations.

de Souza AP(1), Vicente Mde A, Klein RC, Fietto LG, Coutrim MX, de Cássia Franco 
Afonso RJ, Araújo LD, da Silva PH, Bouillet LE, Castro IM, Brandão RL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Celular e Molecular, Núcleo de Pesquisas em Ciências
Biológicas, ICEB II, Departamento de Farmácia, Escola de Farmácia, Universidade
Federal de Ouro Preto, Campus do Morro do Cruzeiro. CEP 35, Ouro Preto, MG,
400-000, Brazil.

In this work, we have used classical genetics techniques to find improved starter
strains to produce cachaça with superior sensorial quality. Our strategy included
the selection of yeast strains resistant to 5,5',5<U+2033>-trifluor-D: ,L: -leucine
(TLF) and cerulenin, since these strains produce higher levels of higher alcohols
and esters than parental strains. However, no clear relationship was observed
when levels of flavoring compounds were compared with the levels expression of
the genes (BAT1, BAT2, ATF2, EEB1 genes) involved with the biosynthesis of
flavoring compounds. Furthermore, we determined the stability of phenotypes
considered as the best indicators of the quality of the cachaça for a parental
strain and its segregants. By applying the principal component analysis, a
cluster of segregants, showing a high number of characteristics similar to the
parental strain, was recognized. One segregant, that was resistant to TLF and
cerulenin, also showed growth stability after six consecutive replications on
plates containing high concentrations of sugar and ethanol. "Cachaça" produced at
laboratory scale using a parental strain and this segregant showed a higher level
of flavoring compounds. Both strains predominated in an open fermentative process
through seven cycles, as was shown by mitochondrial restriction fragment length
polymorphisms analysis. Based on the physical chemical composition of the
obtained products, the results demonstrate the usefulness of the developed
strategies for the selection of yeast strains to be used as starters in "cachaça"
production.

PMID: 21932076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Oct 17;52(11):8208-15. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-8017.

Crosstalk between TGF-beta and MAPK signaling during corneal wound healing.

Terai K(1), Call MK, Liu H, Saika S, Liu CY, Hayashi Y, Chikama T, Zhang J, Terai
N, Kao CW, Kao WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio
45267-0838, USA.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to elucidate the mechanisms governing
epithelial cell migration and proliferation during wound healing.
METHODS: The authors used wound healing of mouse corneal epithelium to examine
the role TGF-ß signaling plays during the healing process. To achieve this goal, 
they used transgenic mice in which the TGF-ß receptor type II (Tbr2) was
conditionally ablated from the corneal epithelium. Epithelium debridement wounds 
were made, followed by the assessment of cell migration, proliferation, and
immunostaining of various signaling pathway components.
RESULTS: The authors showed that in the absence of TGF-ß signaling corneal
epithelial wound healing is delayed by 48 hours; this corresponds to a delay in
p38MAPK activation. Despite the delayed p38MAPK activation, ATF2, a substrate of 
p38MAPK, is still phosphorylated, leading to the suppression of cell
proliferation at the leading edge of the wound. These data provide evidence that 
in the absence of TGF-ß signaling, the suppression of cell proliferation during
the early stages of wound healing is maintained through the JNK activation of
ATF2. CONCLUSIONS; Together the data presented here demonstrate the importance of
the TGF-ß and MAPK signaling pathways in corneal epithelial wound healing.

PMCID: PMC3208026
PMID: 21917935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23802. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023802. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Coordinated regulation of ATF2 by miR-26b in <U+03B3>-irradiated lung cancer cells.

Arora H(1), Qureshi R, Park AK, Park WY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

MicroRNA regulates cellular responses to ionizing radiation (IR) through
translational control of target genes. We analyzed time-series changes in
microRNA expression following <U+03B3>-irradiation in H1299 lung cancer cells using
microarray analysis. Significantly changed IR-responsive microRNAs were selected 
based on analysis of variance analysis, and predicted target mRNAs were enriched 
in mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling. Concurrent analysis of
time-series mRNA and microRNA profiles uncovered that expression of miR-26b was
down regulated, and its target activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) mRNA was 
up regulated in <U+03B3>-irradiated H1299 cells. IR in miR-26b overexpressed H1299 cells
could not induce expression of ATF2. When c-Jun N-terminal kinase activity was
inhibited using SP600125, expression of miR-26b was induced following
<U+03B3>-irradiation in H1299 cells. From these results, we concluded that IR-induced
up-regulation of ATF2 was coordinately enhanced by suppression of miR-26b in lung
cancer cells, which may enhance the effect of IR in the MAPK signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3161999
PMID: 21901137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Chromatogr A. 2011 Sep 28;1218(39):7003-15. doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2011.08.023. 
Epub 2011 Aug 16.

Transcription factor proteomics: identification by a novel gel mobility
shift-three-dimensional electrophoresis method coupled with southwestern blot and
high-performance liquid chromatography-electrospray-mass spectrometry analysis.

Jiang D(1), Jia Y, Jarrett HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, One UTSA Circle, University of Texas San Antonio, San
Antonio, TX 28249, USA.

Transcription factor (TF) purification and identification is an important step in
elucidating gene regulatory mechanisms. In this study, we present two new
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)-based multi-dimensional
electrophoresis approaches to isolate and characterize TFs, using detection with 
either southwestern or western blotting and HPLC-nanoESI-MS/MS analysis for
identification. These new techniques involve several major steps. First, EMSA is 
performed with agents that diminish non-specific DNA-binding and the DNA-protein 
complex is separated by native PAGE gel. The gel is then electrotransferred to
PVDF membrane and visualized by autoradiography. Next, the DNA-protein complex,
which has been transferred onto the blot, is extracted using a
detergent-containing elution buffer. Following detergent removal, concentrated
extract is separated by SDS-PAGE (EMSA-2DE), followed by in-gel trypsin digestion
and HPLC-nanoESI-MS/MS analysis, or the concentrated extract is separated by
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (EMSA-3DE), followed by southwestern or
western blot analysis to localize DNA binding proteins on blot which are further 
identified by on-blot trypsin digestion and HPLC-nanoESI-MS/MS analysis. Finally,
the identified DNA binding proteins are further validated by EMSA-immunoblotting 
or EMSA antibody supershift assay. This approach is used to purify and identify
GFP-C/EBP fusion protein from bacterial crude extract, as well as purifying AP1
and CEBP DNA binding proteins from a human embryonic kidney cell line (HEK293)
nuclear extract. AP1 components, c-Jun, Jun-D, c-Fos, CREB, ATF1 and ATF2 were
successfully identified from 1.5 mg of nuclear extract (equivalent to 3×10(7)
HEK293 cells) with AP1 binding activity of 750 fmol. In conclusion, this new
strategy of combining EMSA with additional dimensions of electrophoresis and
using southwestern blotting for detection proves to be a valuable approach in the
identification of transcriptional complexes by proteomic methods.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3174475
PMID: 21880322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 21;286(42):36864-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.276790. Epub
2011 Aug 30.

Interleukin-1beta induces increased transcriptional activation of the
transforming growth factor-beta-activating integrin subunit beta8 through
altering chromatin architecture.

Markovics JA(1), Araya J, Cambier S, Somanath S, Gline S, Jablons D, Hill A,
Wolters PJ, Nishimura SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department Pathology, School of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, California 94110, USA.

The integrin avß8 is a cell surface receptor for the latent domain (LAP) of the
multifunctional cytokine TGF-ß. Through its association with LAP, TGF-ß is
maintained in a latent form that must be activated to function. Binding to the
integrin avß8 with subsequent metalloproteolytic cleavage of LAP represents a
major mechanism of TGF-ß activation in vivo. Altered expression of the integrin
ß8 subunit (ITGB8) is found in human chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
cancers, and brain vascular malformations. We have previously shown that the
proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) increases ITGB8 expression on
lung fibroblasts, which increases avß8-mediated TGF-ß activation in fibrosis and 
pathologic inflammation. Here we report the mechanism of increased ITGB8
expression by IL-1ß. Our data support a model where the chromatin architecture of
the ITGB8 core promoter is altered by nucleosomal repositioning that enhances the
interaction of an AP1 complex (containing c-Jun and ATF2). This repositioning is 
caused by the dissociation of HDAC2 with the ITGB8 core promoter, leading to
increased histone H4 acetylation and a loosening of nucleosomal-DNA interactions 
allowing "opening" of the chromatin structure and increased association of c-Jun 
and ATF-2. These changes are mediated through NF<U+03BA>B- and p38-dependent pathways.
Ultimately, these events culminate in increasing ITGB8 transcription, avß8
surface expression, and avß8-mediated TGFß activation.

PMCID: PMC3196125
PMID: 21878622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2011 Jul;31(7):926-31.

[Jianpi jiedu recipe inhibited Helicobacter pylori-induced the expression of
cyclooxygenase-2 via p38MAPK/ATF-2 signal transduction pathway in human gastric
cancer cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu NN(1), Wang Y, Wu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Putuo Hospital, Shanghai University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 200062.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of Jianpi Jiedu Recipe (JJR) on the expression of 
cyclooxygenase (COX-2) in Helicobacter pylori (Hp) infected gastric cancer cell
line MKN 45, and its regulatory mechanism of p38MAPK signal transduction.
METHODS: The expressions of COX-2 mRNA and protein in human gastric cancer cell
line MKN 45 infected by Hp type strain NCTC 11637 and the regulatory effect of
JJR containing serum were detected using Real-time fluorescent quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (RFQ-PCR) and Western blot. The effects of Hp on COX-2 
mRNA and protein expressions in human gastric cancer cell line MKN 45 were
observed using blocking p38MAPK signal transduction pathway by p38MAPK specific
inhibitor SB203580. The effects of JJR on Hp-infection activated p38MAPK signal
transduction pathway and its downstream activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2)
were observed.
RESULTS: COX-2 mRNA and protein expressions were obviously higher after human
gastric cancer cell line MKN 45 were infected by Hp (P<0.01). After blocking
p38MAPK signal transduction pathway, COX-2 mRNA and protein expressions in
Hp-induced MKN 45 cell line were obviously down-regulated (P<0.01). JJR
containing serum down-regulated Hp-induced COX-2 mRNA and protein expressions in 
MKN 45 cell line in a dose dependent manner. Besides, it could inhibit the
activation of Hp-induced p38MAPK signal pathway. It also showed obvious
inhibition on the activity of its downstream transcription factor ATF-2.
CONCLUSIONS: Hp infection induced COX-2 expressions of gastric cancer cells via
p38MAPK signal transduction pathway. JJR inhibited Hp-induced the expression of
COX-2 through regulating p38MAPK/ATF-2 signal transduction pathway, which may be 
one of its mechanisms in prevention and treatment of Hp-induced gastric cancer.

PMID: 21866663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 21;286(42):36724-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.277673. Epub
2011 Aug 23.

Auto-activation of c-JUN gene by amino acid deprivation of hepatocellular
carcinoma cells reveals a novel c-JUN-mediated signaling pathway.

Fu L(1), Balasubramanian M, Shan J, Dudenhausen EE, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shands Cancer Center,
University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

Mammalian cells respond to protein or amino acid (AA) limitation by activating a 
number of signaling pathways, collectively referred to as the AA response (AAR), 
that modulate a range of cellular functions, including transcriptional induction 
of target genes. This study demonstrates that in hepatocellular carcinoma cells, 
expression of c-JUN, JUN-B, c-FOS, and FOS-B was induced by the AAR, whereas
JUN-D, FRA-1, and FRA-2 were not. Of the four activated FOS/JUN members, c-JUN
made the largest contribution to the induction of several known AAR target genes.
For several human liver, prostate, and ovarian cell lines, the AAR-induced
increase in c-JUN expression was greater in transformed cells compared with
nontransformed counterparts, an effect independent of cell growth rate. Thus far,
the best characterized AA-responsive genes are all transcriptionally activated by
ATF4, but the AAR-dependent induction of c-JUN transcription was
ATF4-independent. The increased expression of c-JUN was dependent on ATF2 and on 
activation of the MEK-ERK and JNK arms of the MAPK signaling pathways. Formation 
of c-JUN-ATF2-activated heterodimers was increased after AA limitation, and c-JUN
or ATF2 knockdown suppressed the induction of c-JUN and other AAR target genes.
AA deprivation triggers a feed-forward process that involves phosphorylation of
existing c-JUN protein by JNK and subsequent auto-activation of the c-JUN gene by
recruitment of c-JUN and ATF2 to two AP-1 sites within the proximal promoter. The
results document the novel observation that AP-1 sequences within the c-JUN gene 
can function as transcriptional amino acid-response elements.

PMCID: PMC3196148
PMID: 21862593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23351. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023351. Epub 2011 Aug 16.

A cytoplasmic negative regulator isoform of ATF7 impairs ATF7 and ATF2
phosphorylation and transcriptional activity.

Diring J(1), Camuzeaux B, Donzeau M, Vigneron M, Rosa-Calatrava M, Kedinger C,
Chatton B.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Strasbourg, UMR7242 Biotechnologie et Signalisation Cellulaire, 
Ecole Supérieure de Biotechnologie de Strasbourg, BP10413, Illkirch, France.

Alternative splicing and post-translational modifications are processes that give
rise to the complexity of the proteome. The nuclear ATF7 and ATF2 (activating
transcription factor) are structurally homologous leucine zipper transcription
factors encoded by distinct genes. Stress and growth factors activate ATF2 and
ATF7 mainly via sequential phosphorylation of two conserved threonine residues in
their activation domain. Distinct protein kinases, among which mitogen-activated 
protein kinases (MAPK), phosphorylate ATF2 and ATF7 first on Thr71/Thr53 and next
on Thr69/Thr51 residues respectively, resulting in transcriptional activation.
Here, we identify and characterize a cytoplasmic alternatively spliced isoform of
ATF7. This variant, named ATF7-4, inhibits both ATF2 and ATF7 transcriptional
activities by impairing the first phosphorylation event on Thr71/Thr53 residues. 
ATF7-4 indeed sequesters the Thr53-phosphorylating kinase in the cytoplasm. Upon 
stimulus-induced phosphorylation, ATF7-4 is poly-ubiquitinated and degraded,
enabling the release of the kinase and ATF7/ATF2 activation. Our data therefore
conclusively establish that ATF7-4 is an important cytoplasmic negative regulator
of ATF7 and ATF2 transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3156760
PMID: 21858082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Nanobiotechnology. 2011 Jul 29;9:29. doi: 10.1186/1477-3155-9-29.

Activation of stress-related signalling pathway in human cells upon SiO2
nanoparticles exposure as an early indicator of cytotoxicity.

Mohamed BM(1), Verma NK, Prina-Mello A, Williams Y, Davies AM, Bakos G, Tormey L,
Edwards C, Hanrahan J, Salvati A, Lynch I, Dawson K, Kelleher D, Volkov Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of clinical medicine, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Trinity
College Dublin, Dublin 8, Ireland. bashmohamed@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Nanomaterials such as SiO2 nanoparticles (SiO2NP) are finding
increasing applications in the biomedical and biotechnological fields such as
disease diagnostics, imaging, drug delivery, food, cosmetics and biosensors
development. Thus, a mechanistic and systematic evaluation of the potential
biological and toxic effects of SiO2NP becomes crucial in order to assess their
complete safe applicability limits.
RESULTS: In this study, human monocytic leukemia cell line THP-1 and human
alveolar epithelial cell line A549 were exposed to a range of amorphous SiO2NP of
various sizes and concentrations (0.01, 0.1 and 0.5 mg/ml). Key biological
indicators of cellular functions including cell population density, cellular
morphology, membrane permeability, lysosomal mass/pH and activation of
transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) were evaluated utilizing quantitative high content
screening (HCS) approach and biochemical techniques. Despite the use of extremely
high nanoparticle concentrations, our findings showed a low degree of
cytotoxicity within the panel of SiO2NP investigated. However, at these
concentrations, we observed the onset of stress-related cellular response induced
by SiO2NP. Interestingly, cells exposed to alumina-coated SiO2NP showed low
level, and in some cases complete absence, of stress response and this was
consistent up to the highest dose of 0.5 mg/ml.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrates and highlights the importance of
subtle biological changes downstream of primary membrane and
endocytosis-associated phenomena resulting from high dose SiO2NP exposure.
Increased activation of transcription factors, such as ATF-2, was quantitatively 
assessed as a function of i) human cell line specific stress-response, ii) SiO2NP
size and iii) concentration. Despite the low level of cytotoxicity detected for
the amorphous SiO2NP investigated, these findings prompt an in-depth focus for
future SiO2NP-cell/tissue investigations based on the combined analysis of more
subtle signalling pathways associated with accumulation mechanisms, which is
essential for establishing the bio-safety of existing and new nanomaterials.

PMCID: PMC3164618
PMID: 21801388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Small GTPases. 2011 Mar;2(2):89-94.

Characterization of ATF2 in Rel/NF<U+03BA>B oncogenesis reveals its role in the
regulation of Ras signaling.

Liss AS(1), Bose HR.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and the Institute of Cellular
and Molecular Biology; University of Texas at Austin; Austin, TX USA.

The v-Rel oncoprotein is the acutely transforming member of the Rel/NF<U+03BA>B family
of transcription factors. v-Rel transforms cells through the inappropriate
activation and suppression of genes normally regulated by cellular Rel/NF<U+03BA>B
family members. We have recently demonstrated that activation of Ha-Ras by v-Rel 
contributes to transformation. Characterization of AP-1 family members in
v-Rel-mediated transformation revealed ectopic expression of ATF2 inhibited
transformation by blocking Ha-Ras activity. This lack of Ha-Ras activity
prevented downstream activation of the Raf-MEK-ERK pathway, a critical pathway
for v-Rel-mediated transformation. Microarray analysis of cells treated with an
inhibitor to the ERK pathway revealed a relatively small number of genes that are
specifically regulated by ERK activity in cells expressing v-Rel. These studies
suggest the main contribution of ERK activity is to temper the expression of
genes in v-Rel transformed cells. The mechanism by which ATF2 regulates
Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK signaling appears to be a context dependent event. The ectopic
expression of ATF2 in cells that are not expressing v-Rel results in the
activation of Ha-Ras. However, activation of downstream Raf-MEK-ERK signaling
pathway is blocked, likely through the recruitment of inhibitory 14-3-3 proteins 
to c-Raf. These results suggest a diverse role for ATF2 in the regulation of the 
Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK pathway.

PMCID: PMC3136910
PMID: 21776408  [PubMed]


259. Oncogene. 2012 Jan 19;31(3):390-401. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.230. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Identification of a c-Jun N-terminal kinase-2-dependent signal amplification
cascade that regulates c-Myc levels in ras transformation.

Mathiasen DP(1), Egebjerg C, Andersen SH, Rafn B, Puustinen P, Khanna A, Daugaard
M, Valo E, Tuomela S, Bøttzauw T, Nielsen CF, Willumsen BM, Hautaniemi S,
Lahesmaa R, Westermarck J, Jäättelä M, Kallunki T.

Author information: 
(1)Apoptosis Department and Centre for Genotoxic Stress Research, Institute of
Cancer Biology, Danish Cancer Society, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Ras is one of the most frequently activated oncogenes in cancer. Two
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are important for ras transformation:
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase 2 (JNK2).
Here we present a downstream signal amplification cascade that is critical for
ras transformation in murine embryonic fibroblasts. This cascade is coordinated
by ERK and JNK2 MAPKs, whose Ras-mediated activation leads to the enhanced levels
of three oncogenic transcription factors, namely, c-Myc, activating transcription
factor 2 (ATF2) and ATF3, all of which are essential for ras transformation.
Previous studies show that ERK-mediated serine 62 phosphorylation protects c-Myc 
from proteasomal degradation. ERK is, however, not alone sufficient to stabilize 
c-Myc but requires the cooperation of cancerous inhibitor of protein phosphatase 
2A (CIP2A), an oncogene that counteracts protein phosphatase 2A-mediated
dephosphorylation of c-Myc. Here we show that JNK2 regulates Cip2a transcription 
via ATF2. ATF2 and c-Myc cooperate to activate the transcription of ATF3.
Remarkably, not only ectopic JNK2, but also ectopic ATF2, CIP2A, c-Myc and ATF3
are sufficient to rescue the defective ras transformation of JNK2-deficient
cells. Thus, these data identify the key signal converging point of JNK2 and ERK 
pathways and underline the central role of CIP2A in ras transformation.

PMID: 21706057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. BMB Rep. 2011 Jun;44(6):405-9. doi: 10.5483/BMBRep.2011.44.6.405.

Transcriptional activation of human GM3 synthase (hST3Gal V) gene by valproic
acid in ARPE-19 human retinal pigment epithelial cells.

Song N(1), Kim SJ, Kwon HY, Son SW, Kim KS, Ahn HB, Lee YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Brain Korea 21 Center for Silver-Bio
Industrialization, Dong-A University, Busan 604-714, Korea.

The present study demonstrated that valproic acid (VPA) transcriptionally
regulates human GM3 synthase (hST3Gal V), which catalyzes ganglioside GM3
biosynthesis in ARPE-19 human retinal pigment epithelial cells. For this, we
characterized the promoter region of the hST3Gal V gene. Functional analysis of
the 5'-flanking region of the hST3Gal V gene revealed that the -177 to -83 region
functions as the VPA-inducible promoter and that the CREB/ATF binding site at
-143 is crucial for VPA-induced expression of hST3Gal V in ARPE-19 cells. In
addition, the transcriptional activity of hST3Gal V induced by VPA in ARPE-19
cells was inhibited by SP600125, a c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitor. In
summary, our results identified the core promoter region in the hST3Gal V
promoter and for the first time demonstrated that ATF2 binding to the CREB/ATF
binding site at -143 is essential for transcriptional activation of hST3Gal V in 
VPA-induced ARPE-19 cells.

PMID: 21699754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Sep;43(9):1373-82. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2011.06.001. Epub 2011 Jun 12.

Reactive oxygen species participate in the p38-mediated apoptosis induced by
potassium deprivation and staurosporine in cerebellar granule neurons.

Ramiro-Cortés Y(1), Guemez-Gamboa A, Morán J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Institute of Cell Physiology, National University of
Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico.

Apoptosis induced by low potassium (K5) or staurosporine in cerebellar granule
neurons triggers an increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels. ROS
inhibition by antioxidants or inhibitors of the NADPH oxidase (NOX) activity
reduces the apoptosis induced by both stimuli. It has been reported that JNK
mediates the apoptosis induced by K5 but not by staurosporine. No information is 
available about the role of other signaling pathways such as p38 in
staurosporine-induced apoptosis, and whether p38 activation could be related to
ROS levels induced by both K5 and staurosporine. Here, we explored this
possibility and found that K5 activates p38 and ATF2 and that the inhibition of
p38 activity prevents the apoptosis induced by this treatment. We also found that
p38 is downstream of ROS generation induced by K5. On the other hand,
staurosporine promotes a sustained activation of p38. We found that p38
inhibition markedly decreases ROS generation, NOX activity and apoptosis induced 
by staurosporine. Furthermore, antioxidants inhibit p38 activation induced by
staurosporine. These data indicate that apoptosis induced by both K5 and
staurosporine is dependent on p38 activation, which is mediated by ROS. In
addition, p38 activation by staurosporine induces a further production of ROS
through NOX activation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21683152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol. 2012 Feb;34(1):143-51. doi:
10.3109/08923973.2011.588233. Epub 2011 Jun 20.

Andrographolide induces apoptosis in B16F-10 melanoma cells by inhibiting
NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated bcl-2 activation and modulating p53-induced caspase-3 gene
expression.

Pratheeshkumar P(1), Sheeja K, Kuttan G.

Author information: 
(1)Amala Cancer Research Centre, Amala Nagar, Thrissur, Kerala, India.

Cancer is a disorder characterized by uncontrolled proliferation and reduced
apoptosis. Inducing apoptosis is an efficient method of treating cancers. In this
study, we investigated the effect of andrographolide on the induction of
apoptosis as well as its regulatory effect on the activation of transcription
factors in B16F-10 melanoma cells. Treatment of B16F-10 cells with nontoxic
concentration of andrographolide showed the presence of apoptotic bodies and
induced DNA fragmentation in a dose-dependent manner. Cell cycle analysis and
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) assays also 
confirmed the observation. The proapoptotic genes p53, Bax, caspase-9, and
caspase-3 were found upregulated in andrographolide-treated cells, whereas the
antiapoptotic gene bcl-2 was downregulated. This study also reveals that
andrographolide treatment could alter the production and expression of
proinflammatory cytokines and could inhibit the activation and nuclear
translocation of p65, p50, and c-Rel subunits of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B), and
other transcription factors such as c-fos, activated transcription factor-2, and 
cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding protein in B16F-10
melanoma cells. These results suggest that andrographolide induces apoptosis via 
inhibiting NF-<U+03BA>B-induced bcl-2-mediated survival signaling and modulating
p53-induced caspase-3-mediated proapoptotic signaling.

PMID: 21682651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Integr Cancer Ther. 2012 Mar;11(1):48-60. doi: 10.1177/1534735411403307. Epub
2011 Jun 10.

Nomilin inhibits metastasis via induction of apoptosis and regulates the
activation of transcription factors and the cytokine profile in B16F-10 cells.

Pratheeshkumar P(1), Raphael TJ, Kuttan G.

Author information: 
(1)Amala Cancer Research Centre, Amala Nagar, Thrissur-680555, Kerala State,
India.

Nomilin is a triterpenoid present in common edible citrus fruits with putative
anticancer properties. In this study, the authors investigated the antimetastatic
potential of nomilin and its possible mechanism of action. Metastasis was induced
in C57BL/6 mice through the lateral tail vein using highly metastatic B16F-10
melanoma cells. Administration of nomilin inhibited tumor nodule formation in the
lungs (68%) and markedly increased the survival rate of the metastatic
tumor-bearing animals. These results correlated with the biochemical parameters
and histopathological analysis. Nomilin showed an inhibition of tumor cell
invasion and activation of matrix metalloproteinases. Treatment with nomilin
induced apoptotic response, characterized by an increase in the sub-G1 fraction
of cells with chromatin condensation and membrane blebbing, a typical ladder of
DNA fragmentation, and detection of apoptotic cells by TUNEL assay. Nomilin
treatment also exhibited a downregulated Bcl-2 and cyclin-D1 expression and
upregulated p53, Bax, caspase-9, caspase-3, p21, and p27 gene expression in
B16F-10 cells. Proinflammatory cytokine production and gene expression were found
to be downregulated in nomilin-treated cells. The study also reveals that nomilin
could inhibit the activation and nuclear translocation of antiapoptotic
transcription factors such as nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B, CREB, and ATF-2 in B16F-10 
cells.

PMID: 21665879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Fitoterapia. 2011 Oct;82(7):976-82. doi: 10.1016/j.fitote.2011.05.013. Epub 2011 
May 27.

Berberine hydrochloride attenuates cyclooxygenase-2 expression in rat small
intestinal mucosa during acute endotoxemia.

Feng AW(1), Yu C, Mao Q, Li N, Li QR, Li JS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210093, China.

The effect of berberine hydrochloride (BBR) on inducible cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
in small intestinal mucosa and related mechanisms was investigated in a rat model
of acute endotoxemia. The results showed that lipopolysaccharide (LPS) increased 
COX-2 expression, whereas SB202190 and BBR curtailed it. LPS increased
phosphorylation of mucosal p38 MAPK and ATF2 as well as production of ATF2,
whereas BBR attenuated these effects. LPS upregulated mucosal peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>), but BBR reduced this receptor.
GW9662 aggravated LPS-induced and reversed BBR-attenuated COX-2 expression. The
findings showed that BBR ameliorated COX-2 overexpression partially via
modulation of p38 and PPAR<U+03B3> pathways during acute endotoxemia.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21641970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Environ Toxicol. 2013 Jul;28(7):390-400. doi: 10.1002/tox.20730. Epub 2011 May
27.

Inhibition of PP2A and the consequent activation of JNK/c-Jun are involved in
tributyltin-induced apoptosis in human amnionic cells.

Zhang Y(1), Liang J, Sun L, Guo Z, Xu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, School of medicine, Zhejiang
University, 388 Yu Hang Tang Road, 310058, Hangzhou, China.

Tributyltin (TBT), a highly toxic environmental contaminant, has been shown to
induce mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis in several mammalian cells. However, the
upstream signal transduction pathways involved in TBT-induced apoptosis are still
not fully elucidated. In this study, the protein phosphatase (PP) 2A, microtubule
organization, and mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), including JNK, p38
and their downstream transcription factors, c-Jun and ATF-2, respectively, were
investigated in human amnionic cells treated by TBT. Furthermore, the activation 
of procaspase-3 after blocking either one of these MAPK pathways was also
observed. The results showed that TBT effectively induced apoptosis characterized
by caspase-3 activation. In apoptotic cells, the inhibition of PP2A activity and 
microtubule depolymerization was detected. Additionally, JNK and p38, as well as 
their downstream targets, c-Jun and ATF-2, were activated. Moreover, a JNK
inhibitor, but not p38 inhibitor, significantly reduced caspase-3 activation. It 
can be concluded that the inhibition of PP2A may (1) play as a role in the
activation of JNK and c-Jun and the concomitant promotion of microtubule
depolymerization and (2) lead to the activation of caspase-3 in TBT-induced
apoptotic cells. The results of this study suggest a critical role of PP2A in the
TBT toxicity mechanism.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21626652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Sci Signal. 2011 May 24;4(174):ra34. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2001684.

p38a Signaling Induces Anoikis and Lumen Formation During Mammary Morphogenesis.

Wen HC(1), Avivar-Valderas A, Sosa MS, Girnius N, Farias EF, Davis RJ,
Aguirre-Ghiso JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Tisch Cancer Institute at Mount Sinai, Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, New York, USA.

The stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK) p38 can induce apoptosis, and its
inhibition facilitates mammary tumorigenesis. We found that during mammary acinar
morphogenesis in MCF-10A cells grown in three-dimensional culture, detachment of 
luminal cells from the basement membrane stimulated mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) kinases 3 and 6 (MKK3/6) and p38a signaling to promote anoikis.
p38a signaling increased transcription of the death-promoting protein BimEL by
phosphorylating the activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) and increasing
c-Jun protein abundance, leading to cell death by anoikis and acinar lumen
formation. Inhibition of p38a or ATF-2 caused luminal filling reminiscent of that
observed in ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). The mammary glands of MKK3/6
knockout mice (MKK3(-/-)/MKK6(+/- )) showed accelerated branching morphogenesis
relative to those of wild-type mice, as well as ductal lumen occlusion due to
reduced anoikis. This phenotype was recapitulated by systemic pharmacological
inhibition of p38a and ß (p38a/ß) in wild-type mice. Moreover, the development of
DCIS-like lesions showing marked ductal occlusion was accelerated in MMTV-Neu
transgenic mice treated with inhibitors of p38a and p38ß. We conclude that p38a
is crucial for the development of hollow ducts during mammary gland development, 
a function that may be crucial to its ability to suppress breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3229273
PMID: 21610252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Physiol. 2011 Jul 15;589(Pt 14):3623-40. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2011.207175.
Epub 2011 May 23.

Dihydrotestosterone stimulates amino acid uptake and the expression of LAT2 in
mouse skeletal muscle fibres through an ERK1/2-dependent mechanism.

Hamdi MM(1), Mutungi G.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical and Clinical Sciences Research Institute, School of Medicine,
Health Policy and Practice, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK.

Dihydrotestosterone (DHT) has acute/non-genomic actions in adult mammalian
skeletal muscles whose physiological functions are still poorly understood.
Therefore, the primary aim of this study was to investigate the acute/non-genomic
effects of DHT on amino acid uptake as well as the cellular signal transduction
events underlying these actions in mouse fast- and slow-twitch skeletal muscle
fibre bundles. 14C-Labelled amino acids were used to investigate the effects of
DHT and testosterone (T) on amino acid uptake and pharmacological interventions
were used to determine the cellular signal transduction events mediating these
actions. While T had no effect on the uptake of isoleucine (Ile) and
a-methylaminoisobutyric acid (MeAIB) in both fibre types, DHT increased their
uptake in the fast-twitch fibre bundles. This effect was reversed by inhibitors
of protein translation, the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), system A,
system L, mTOR and MEK. However, it was relatively insensitive to inhibitors of
transcription, androgen receptors and PI3K/Akt. Additionally, DHT treatment
increased the expression of LAT2 and the phosphorylation of the EGFR in the
fast-twitch fibre bundles and that of ERK1/2, RSK1/2 and ATF2 in both fibre
types. Also, it decreased the phosphorylation of eEF2 and increased the
incorporation of Ile into proteins in both fibre types. Most of these effects
were reversed by EGFR and MEK inhibitors. From these findings we suggest that
another physiological function of the acute/non-genomic actions of DHT in
isolated mammalian skeletal muscle fibres is to stimulate amino acid uptake. This
effect is mediated through the EGFR and involves the activation of the MAPK
pathway and an increase in LAT2 expression.

PMCID: PMC3167122
PMID: 21606113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Food Chem Toxicol. 2011 Aug;49(8):1800-5. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2011.04.031. Epub
2011 May 5.

Kaempferol protects MC3T3-E1 cells through antioxidant effect and regulation of
mitochondrial function.

Choi EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, Education Graduate School, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul 130-701, South Korea. cheunmi@hanmail.net

Kaempferol, a natural flavonoid present in fruits, vegetables, and teas, provides
beneficial effects for human health. In this study, we investigated the
protective effects of kaempferol on antimycin A (AMA)-induced toxicity in
osteoblast-like MC3T3-E1 cells. Exposure of MC3T3-E1 cells to AMA caused
significant cell viability loss, as well as mitochondrial membrane potential
dissipation, complex IV inactivation, intracellular calcium ([Ca²<U+207A>](i))
elevation, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Pretreatment with
kaempferol prior to AMA exposure significantly reduced AMA-induced cell damage by
preventing mitochondrial membrane potential dissipation, complex IV inactivation,
[Ca²<U+207A>](i) elevation, and ROS production. Kaempferol also induced the activation
of PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase), Akt (protein kinase B), and CREB
(cAMP-response element-binding protein) inhibited by AMA, which result
demonstrates that kaempferol utilizes the PI3K/Akt/CREB pathway to augment
metabolic activity inhibited by AMA. All these data indicate that kaempferol may 
reduce or prevent osteoblasts degeneration in osteoporosis or other degenerative 
disorders.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21565246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jun 3;409(2):211-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.121. Epub 2011 May 3.

The activation of p38 MAPK primarily contributes to UV-induced RhoB expression by
recruiting the c-Jun and p300 to the distal CCAAT box of the RhoB promoter.

Ahn J(1), Choi JH, Won M, Kang CM, Gyun MR, Park HM, Kim CH, Chung KS.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Research Center, KRIBB, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea.

The Ras-related small GTP-binding protein RhoB is rapidly induced in response to 
genotoxic stresses caused by ionizing radiation. It is known that UV-induced RhoB
expression results from the binding of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2)
via NF-Y to the inverted CCAAT box (-23) of the RhoB promoter. Here, we show that
the association of c-Jun with the distal CCAAT box (-72) is primarily involved in
UV-induced RhoB expression and p38 MAPK regulated RhoB induction through the
distal CCAAT box. UV-induced RhoB expression and apoptosis were markedly
attenuated by pretreatment with the p38 MAPK inhibitor. siRNA knockdown of RhoB, 
ATF2 and c-Jun resulted in decreased RhoB expression and eventually restored the 
growth of UV-irradiated Jurkat cells. In the reporter assay using luciferase
under the RhoB promoter, inhibition of RhoB promoter activity by the p38
inhibitor and knockdown of c-Jun using siRNA occurred through the distal CCAAT
box. Immunoprecipitation and DNA affinity protein binding assays revealed the
association of c-Jun and p300 via NF-YA and the dissociation of histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) via c-Jun recruitment to the CCAAT boxes of the RhoB
promoter. These results suggest that the activation of p38 MAPK primarily
contributes to UV-induced RhoB expression by recruiting the c-Jun and p300
proteins to the distal CCAAT box of the RhoB promoter in Jurkat cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21565167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Lipid Res. 2011 Jul;52(7):1392-9. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M014266. Epub 2011 May 5.

Glucosylceramide synthase in the fat body controls energy metabolism in
Drosophila.

Kohyama-Koganeya A(1), Nabetani T, Miura M, Hirabayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Membrane Neuroscience, Brain Science Institute, RIKEN, Wako-shi,
Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Glucosylceramide synthase (GlcT-1) catalyzes the synthesis of glucosylceramide
(GlcCer), the core structure of major glycosphingolipids (GSLs). Obesity is a
metabolic disorder caused by an imbalance between energy uptake and expenditure, 
resulting in excess stored body fat. Recent studies have shown that GSL levels
are increased in obese rodents and that pharmacologically reducing GSL levels by 
inhibiting GlcCer synthesis improves adipocyte function. However, the molecular
mechanism underlying these processes is still not clearly understood. Using
Drosophila as a model animal, we report that GlcT-1 expression in the fat body,
which is equivalent to mammalian adipose tissue, regulates energy metabolism.
Overexpression of GlcT-1 increases stored nutrition (triacylglycerol and
carbohydrate) levels. Conversely, reduced expression of GlcT-1 in the fat body
causes a reduction of fat storage. This regulation occurs, at least in part,
through the activation of p38-ATF2 signaling. Furthermore, we found that GlcCer
is the sole GSL of the fat body, indicating that regulation of GlcCer synthesis
by GlcT-1 in the fat body is responsible for regulating energy homeostasis. Both 
GlcT-1 and p38-ATF2 signaling are evolutionarily conserved, leading us to propose
an evolutionary perspective in which GlcT-1 appears to be one of the key factors 
that control fat metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3122912
PMID: 21550991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 21;6(4):e19090. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019090.

Loss of ATF2 function leads to cranial motoneuron degeneration during embryonic
mouse development.

Ackermann J(1), Ashton G, Lyons S, James D, Hornung JP, Jones N, Breitwieser W.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Regulation Department, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, University
of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

The AP-1 family transcription factor ATF2 is essential for development and tissue
maintenance in mammals. In particular, ATF2 is highly expressed and activated in 
the brain and previous studies using mouse knockouts have confirmed its
requirement in the cerebellum as well as in vestibular sense organs. Here we
present the analysis of the requirement for ATF2 in CNS development in mouse
embryos, specifically in the brainstem. We discovered that neuron-specific
inactivation of ATF2 leads to significant loss of motoneurons of the hypoglossal,
abducens and facial nuclei. While the generation of ATF2 mutant motoneurons
appears normal during early development, they undergo caspase-dependent and
independent cell death during later embryonic and foetal stages. The loss of
these motoneurons correlates with increased levels of stress activated MAP
kinases, JNK and p38, as well as aberrant accumulation of phosphorylated
neurofilament proteins, NF-H and NF-M, known substrates for these kinases. This, 
together with other neuropathological phenotypes, including aberrant
vacuolisation and lipid accumulation, indicates that deficiency in ATF2 leads to 
neurodegeneration of subsets of somatic and visceral motoneurons of the
brainstem. It also confirms that ATF2 has a critical role in limiting the
activities of stress kinases JNK and p38 which are potent inducers of cell death 
in the CNS.

PMCID: PMC3080913
PMID: 21533046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2011;74(11):737-45. doi:
10.1080/15287394.2011.539123.

Cytotoxic effects produced by arecoline correlated to epigenetic regulation in
human K-562 cells.

Lin PC(1), Chang WH, Chen YH, Lee CC, Lin YH, Chang JG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung
Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Epigenetic effects are considered heritable but may also be modified by
environmental factors. Arecoline (ARC), a major component of areca nut alkaloids,
is an important environmental risk factor for oral cancer and hepatocellular
carcinomain Taiwan. The aim of this study was to determine the influence of ARC
on the epigenome. The mRNA expression of histone methyltransferases,
acetyltransferases, and demethylases were assessed in K-562 cells following
exposure to ARC. Results demonstrated that ARC produced changes in the
expressions of several genes catalyzing histone methylation (Mll, Setdb1, and
Suv39h2), acetylation (Atf2), and demethylation (JMJD6). Since H3K9 methylation
is involved in maintaining the stability of heterochromatin structures and
inactivating euchromatic gene expressions, data suggest that the ARC-induced
epigenetic changes play a role in the mechanisms underlying chemical-mediated
cytotoxicity and genotoxicity.

PMID: 21480048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 May;31(10):2079-89. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01439-10. Epub 2011 Mar 
14.

Alk5-mediated transforming growth factor ß signaling acts upstream of fibroblast 
growth factor 10 to regulate the proliferation and maintenance of dental
epithelial stem cells.

Zhao H(1), Li S, Han D, Kaartinen V, Chai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, School of Dentistry, University of 
Southern California, 2250 Alcazar Street, CSA 103, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Mouse incisors grow continuously throughout life. This growth is supported by the
division of dental epithelial stem cells that reside in the cervical loop region.
Little is known about the maintenance and regulatory mechanisms of dental
epithelial stem cells. In the present study, we investigated how transforming
growth factor ß (TGF-ß) signaling-mediated mesenchymal-epithelial cell
interactions control dental epithelial stem cells. We designed two approaches
using incisor organ culture and bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) pulse-chase experiments 
to identify and evaluate stem cell functions. We show that the loss of the TGF-ß 
type I receptor (Alk5) in the cranial neural crest-derived dental mesenchyme
severely affects the proliferation of TA (transit-amplifying) cells and the
maintenance of dental epithelial stem cells. Incisors of Wnt1-Cre; Alk5(fl/fl)
mice lost their ability to continue to grow in vitro. The number of BrdU
label-retaining cells (LRCs) was dramatically reduced in Alk5 mutant mice. Fgf10,
Fgf3, and Fgf9 signals in the dental mesenchyme were downregulated in Wnt1-Cre;
Alk5(fl/fl) incisors. Strikingly, the addition of exogenous fibroblast growth
factor 10 (FGF10) into cultured incisors rescued dental epithelial stem cells in 
Wnt1-Cre; Alk5(fl/fl) mice. Therefore, we propose that Alk5 functions upstream of
Fgf10 to regulate TA cell proliferation and stem cell maintenance and that this
signaling mechanism is crucial for stem cell-mediated tooth regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3133354
PMID: 21402782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Protein Sci. 2011 May;20(5):834-48. doi: 10.1002/pro.609. Epub 2011 Mar 23.

GST pi modulates JNK activity through a direct interaction with JNK substrate,
ATF2.

Thévenin AF(1), Zony CL, Bahnson BJ, Colman RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark,
Delaware 19716, USA.

Human GSTpi, an important detoxification enzyme, has been shown to modulate the
activity of JNKs by inhibiting apoptosis and by causing cell proliferation and
tumor growth. In this work, we describe a detailed analysis of the interaction in
vitro between GSTpi and JNK isoforms (both in their inactive and active,
phosphorylated forms). The ability of active JNK1 or JNK2 to phosphorylate their 
substrate, ATF2, is inhibited by two naturally occurring GSTpi haplotypes
(Ile105/Ala114, WT or haplotype A, and Val105/Val114, haplotype C). Haplotype C
of GSTpi is a more potent inhibitor of JNK activity than haplotype A, yielding
75-80% and 25-45% inhibition, respectively. We show that GSTpi is not a substrate
of JNK, as was earlier suggested by others. Through binding studies, we
demonstrate that the interaction between GSTpi and phosphorylated, active JNKs is
isoform specific, with JNK1 being the preferred isoform. In contrast, GSTpi does 
not interact with unphosphorylated, inactive JNKs unless a JNK substrate, ATF2,
is present. We also demonstrate, for the first time, a direct interaction:
between GSTpi and ATF2. GSTpi binds with similar affinity to active JNK + ATF2
and to ATF2 alone. Direct binding experiments between ATF2 and GSTpi, either
alone or in the presence of glutathione analogs or phosphorylated ATF2, indicate 
that the xenobiotic portion of the GSTpi active site and the JNK binding domain
of ATF2 are involved in this interaction. Competition between GSTpi and active
JNK for the substrate ATF2 may be responsible for the inhibition of JNK catalysis
by GSTpi.

Copyright © 2011 The Protein Society.

PMCID: PMC3125868
PMID: 21384452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Circ Res. 2011 Apr 15;108(8):950-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.233841. Epub 2011
Feb 24.

Disturbed blood flow induces RelA expression via c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1: a
novel mode of NF-<U+03BA>B regulation that promotes arterial inflammation.

Cuhlmann S(1), Van der Heiden K, Saliba D, Tremoleda JL, Khalil M, Zakkar M,
Chaudhury H, Luong le A, Mason JC, Udalova I, Gsell W, Jones H, Haskard DO, Krams
R, Evans PC.

Author information: 
(1)British Heart Foundation Cardiovascular Sciences Unit, National Heart and Lung
Institute, Imperial College London, United Kingdom.

RATIONALE: The nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B pathway is involved in arterial
inflammation. Although the signaling pathways that regulate transcriptional
activation of NF-<U+03BA>B are defined, the mechanisms that regulate the expression
levels of NF-<U+03BA>B transcription factors are uncertain.
OBJECTIVE: We studied the signaling mechanisms that regulate RelA NF-<U+03BA>B subunit
expression in endothelial cells (ECs) and their role in arterial inflammation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Gene silencing and chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed
that RelA expression was positively regulated by c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)
and the downstream transcription factor ATF2 in ECs. We concluded that this
pathway promotes focal arterial inflammation as genetic deletion of JNK1 reduced 
NF-<U+03BA>B expression and macrophage accumulation at an atherosusceptible site. We
hypothesized that JNK signaling to NF-<U+03BA>B may be controlled by mechanical forces
because atherosusceptibility is associated with exposure to disturbed blood flow.
This was assessed by positron emission tomography imaging of carotid arteries
modified with a constrictive cuff, a method that was developed to study the
effects of disturbed flow on vascular physiology in vivo. This approach coupled
to en face staining revealed that disturbed flow elevates NF-<U+03BA>B expression and
inflammation in murine carotid arteries via JNK1.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that disturbed blood flow promotes arterial
inflammation by inducing NF-<U+03BA>B expression in endothelial cells via JNK-ATF2
signaling. Thus, our findings illuminate a novel form of JNK-NF-<U+03BA>B crosstalk that
may determine the focal nature of arterial inflammation and atherosclerosis.

PMID: 21350211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 May;1813(5):695-703. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.02.004. Epub 2011 Feb 17.

Role of JNK/ATF-2 pathway in inhibition of thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) expression
and apoptosis mediated by doxorubicin and camptothecin in FTC-133 cells.

El Btaouri H(1), Morjani H, Greffe Y, Charpentier E, Martiny L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire SiRMa (Signalisation Cellulaire et Récepteurs Matriciels),
UMR-CNRS 6237, UFR Sciences, Reims, France. Hassan.elbtaouri@univ-reims.fr

Our previous studies have shown that camptothecin and doxorubicin triggered
ceramide accumulation via de novo synthesis pathway. De novo ceramide generation 
was responsible for the drug-induced apoptosis through a caspase-3-dependent
pathway and a decrease of thrombospondin-1 expression in human thyroid carcinoma 
FTC-133 cells. Here, we demonstrate that Jun N-terminal kinases play a critical
role in camptothecin- and doxorubicin-induced down-regulation of thrombospondin-1
expression: i) de novo ceramide synthesis pathway activates Jun N-terminal kinase
1/2 resulting in activating transcription factor 2 phosphorylation; ii) cell
treatment by SP600125, a Jun N-terminal kinase specific inhibitor, strongly
reduced activating transcription factor 2 phosphorylation and completely
abolished camptothecin and doxorubicin effects; and iii) activating transcription
factor 2 expression silencing greatly attenuated camptothecin- and
doxorubicin-induced down-regulation of thrombospondin-1 expression and apoptosis.
The set of our data established that camptothecin- and doxorubicin-induced
activation of Jun N-terminal kinase/activating transcription factor 2 pathway via
de novo ceramide synthesis down-regulates thrombospondin-1 expression and
apoptosis in human thyroid carcinoma FTC-133 cells. This article is part of a
Special Issue entitled: 11th European Symposium on Calcium.

2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21333695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 15;286(15):12983-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.215889. Epub
2011 Feb 13.

Thermogenic activation induces FGF21 expression and release in brown adipose
tissue.

Hondares E(1), Iglesias R, Giralt A, Gonzalez FJ, Giralt M, Mampel T, Villarroya 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Barcelona, and CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición,
08028 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. hondareselayne@ub.edu

FGF21 is a novel metabolic regulator involved in the control of glucose
homeostasis, insulin sensitivity, and ketogenesis. The liver has been considered 
the main site of production and release of FGF21 into the blood. Here, we show
that, after thermogenic activation, brown adipose tissue becomes a source of
systemic FGF21. This is due to a powerful cAMP-mediated pathway of regulation of 
FGF21 gene transcription. Norepinephrine, acting via ß-adrenergic, cAMP-mediated,
mechanisms and subsequent activation of protein kinase A and p38 MAPK, induces
FGF21 gene transcription and also FGF21 release in brown adipocytes. ATF2 binding
to the FGF21 gene promoter mediates cAMP-dependent induction of FGF21 gene
transcription. FGF21 release by brown fat in vivo was assessed directly by
analyzing arteriovenous differences in FGF21 concentration across interscapular
brown fat, in combination with blood flow to brown adipose tissue and assessment 
of FGF21 half-life. This analysis demonstrates that exposure of rats to cold
induced a marked release of FGF21 by brown fat in vivo, in association with a
reduction in systemic FGF21 half-life. The present findings lead to the
recognition of a novel pathway of regulation the FGF21 gene and an endocrine role
of brown fat, as a source of FGF21 that may be especially relevant in conditions 
of activation of thermogenic activity.

PMCID: PMC3075644
PMID: 21317437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Stem Cells. 2011 Apr;29(4):700-12. doi: 10.1002/stem.614.

Conditional activation of Bmi1 expression regulates self-renewal, apoptosis, and 
differentiation of neural stem/progenitor cells in vitro and in vivo.

Yadirgi G(1), Leinster V, Acquati S, Bhagat H, Shakhova O, Marino S.

Author information: 
(1)Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and the London School
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, United
Kingdom.

The Polycomb group protein Bmi1 is a key regulator of self-renewal of embryonic
and adult central nervous system stem cells, and its overexpression has been
shown to occur in several types of brain tumors. In a Cre/LoxP-based conditional 
transgenic mouse model, we show that fine-tuning of Bmi1 expression in embryonic 
neural stem cell (NSC) is sufficient to increase their proliferation and
self-renewal potential both in vitro and in vivo. This is linked to
downregulation of both the ink4a/ARF and the p21/Foxg1 axes. However, increased
and ectopic proliferation induced by overexpression of Bmi1 in progenitors
committed toward a neuronal lineage during embryonic cortical development,
triggers apoptosis through a survivin-mediated mechanism and leads to reduced
brain size. Postnatally, however, increased self-renewal capacity of neural
stem/progenitor cells (NSPC) is independent of Foxg1 and resistance to apoptosis 
is observed in neural progenitors derived from NSC-overexpressing Bmi1.
Neoplastic transformation is absent in mice-overexpressing Bmi1 aged up to 20
months. These studies provide strong evidence that fine tuning of Bmi1 expression
is a viable tool to increase self-renewal capacity of NSCs both in vitro and in
vivo without eliciting neoplastic transformation of these cells.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21305672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Neuroscience. 2011 Apr 28;180:64-74. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.01.059.
Epub 2011 Feb 18.

Early c-Jun N-terminal kinase-dependent phosphorylation of activating
transcription factor-2 is associated with degeneration of retinal ganglion cells.

Ribas VT(1), Arruda-Carvalho M, Linden R, Chiarini LB.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho, UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.

Neuron death due to deprivation of target-derived neurotrophic factors depends on
protein synthesis regulated by transcription factor activity. We investigated the
content and phosphorylation of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) in
axon-damaged retinal ganglion cells of neonatal rats. In the retina of neonatal
rats, the ATF-2 protein is predominantly located in the nucleus of the ganglion
cells. A gradual loss of the immunoreactivity for ATF-2 occurred after
explantation. ATF-2 is phosphorylated early after explantation, with a peak
within 3 hours, preceding the peak of cell death that occurs at 18 hours. Both
the phosphorylation of ATF-2 and ganglion cell death were blocked by treatment
with an inhibitor of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), whereas an inhibitor of p38
reduced only slightly the rate of ganglion cell death with no effect upon
phosphorylation of ATF-2. Inhibitors of phosphatidyl inositol 3 kinase (PI-3K),
protein kinase C (PKC) or extracellular regulated kinase (ERK) had no effect.
Finally, the inhibitor of JNK blocked the upregulation of both c-Jun and Hrk in
the GCL after retinal explantation. The data show that phosphorylation of ATF-2
by JNK is associated with retinal ganglion cell death after axon damage.

Copyright © 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21300140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 25;286(12):10449-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.209510. Epub
2011 Jan 28.

ATF2 interacts with beta-cell-enriched transcription factors, MafA, Pdx1, and
beta2, and activates insulin gene transcription.

Han SI(1), Yasuda K, Kataoka K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of
Biological Science, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Ikoma 630-0192,
Japan.

Pancreatic ß-cell-restricted expression of insulin is established through several
critical cis-regulatory elements located in the insulin gene promoter region. The
principal cis elements are A-boxes, E1, and C1/RIPE3b. The ß-cell-enriched
transcription factors Pdx1 and Beta2 bind to the A-boxes and E1 element,
respectively. A ß-cell-specific trans-acting factor binding to C1/RIPE3b (termed 
RIPE3b1 activator) was detected by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and has
been identified as MafA, a member of the Maf family of basic leucine zipper
(bZip) proteins. Here, ATF2, a member of the ATF/CREB family of basic leucine
zipper proteins, was identified as a component of the RIPE3b1 activator. ATF2
alone was unable to bind to the C1/RIPE3b element but acquired binding capacity
upon complex formation with MafA. ATF2 also interacted with Pdx1 and Beta2, and
co-expression of ATF2, MafA, Pdx1, and Beta2 resulted in a synergistic activation
of the insulin promoter. Immunohistochemical analysis of mouse pancreas tissue
sections showed that ATF2 is enriched in islet endocrine cells, including
ß-cells. RNAi-mediated knockdown of MafA or ATF2 in the MIN6 ß-cell line resulted
in a significant decrease in endogenous levels of insulin mRNA. These data
indicate that ATF2 is an essential component of the positive regulators of the
insulin gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3060498
PMID: 21278380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Cutan Ocul Toxicol. 2011 Sep;30(3):187-97. doi: 10.3109/15569527.2010.546003.
Epub 2011 Jan 14.

Temporal effects in porcine skin following bromine vapor exposure.

Price JA(1), Rogers JV, Wendling MQ, Plahovinsak JL, Perry MR, Reid FM, Kiser RC,
Graham JS.

Author information: 
(1)Battelle Biomedical Research Center, Columbus, Ohio 43201, USA.
priceja@battelle.org

Bromine is an industrial chemical that causes severe cutaneous burns. When
selecting or developing effective treatments for bromine burns, it is important
to understand the molecular mechanisms of tissue damage and wound healing. This
study investigated the effect of cutaneous bromine vapor exposure on gene
expression using a weanling swine burn model by microarray analysis. Ventral
abdominal sites were exposed to a mean calculated bromine vapor concentration of 
0.51<U+2009>g/L for 7 or 17<U+2009>min. At 6<U+2009>h, 48<U+2009>h, and 7 days post-exposure, total RNA from 
skin samples was isolated, processed, and analyzed with Affymetrix GeneChip®
Porcine Genome Arrays (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>3 per experimental group). Differences in gene
expression were observed with respect to exposure duration and sampling time.
Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA) revealed four common biological functions
(cancer, cellular movement, cell-to-cell signaling and interaction, and tissue
development) among the top ten functions of each experimental group, while
canonical pathway analysis revealed 9 genes (ARG2, CCR1, HMOX1, ATF2, IL-8,
TIMP1, ESR1, HSPAIL, and SELE) that were commonly shared among four significantly
altered signaling pathways. Among these, the transcripts encoding HMOX1 and ESR1 
were identified using IPA as common potential therapeutic targets for Phase
II/III clinical trial or FDA-approved drugs. The present study describes the
transcriptional responses to cutaneous bromine vapor exposure identifying
molecular networks and genes that could serve as targets for developing
therapeutics for bromine-induced skin injury.

PMID: 21231885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 21;5(12):e15716. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015716.

Amino acid availability controls TRB3 transcription in liver through the
GCN2/eIF2a/ATF4 pathway.

Carraro V(1), Maurin AC, Lambert-Langlais S, Averous J, Chaveroux C, Parry L,
Jousse C, Ord D, Ord T, Fafournoux P, Bruhat A.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR 1019 Nutrition Humaine, Saint Genès Champanelle, France.

In mammals, plasma amino acid concentrations are markedly affected by dietary or 
pathological conditions. It has been well established that amino acids are
involved in the control of gene expression. Up to now, all the information
concerning the molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of gene
transcription by amino acid availability has been obtained in cultured cell
lines. The present study aims to investigate the mechanisms involved in
transcriptional activation of the TRB3 gene following amino acid limitation in
mice liver. The results show that TRB3 is up-regulated in the liver of mice fed a
leucine-deficient diet and that this induction is quickly reversible. Using
transient transfection and chromatin immunoprecipitation approaches in hepatoma
cells, we report the characterization of a functional Amino Acid Response Element
(AARE) in the TRB3 promoter and the binding of ATF4, ATF2 and C/EBPß to this AARE
sequence. We also provide evidence that only the binding of ATF4 to the AARE
plays a crucial role in the amino acid-regulated transcription of TRB3. In mouse 
liver, we demonstrate that the GCN2/eIF2a/ATF4 pathway is essential for the
induction of the TRB3 gene transcription in response to a leucine-deficient diet.
Therefore, this work establishes for the first time that the molecular mechanisms
involved in the regulation of gene transcription by amino acid availability are
functional in mouse liver.

PMCID: PMC3006201
PMID: 21203563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. PLoS Genet. 2010 Dec 23;6(12):e1001258. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001258.

A role for ATF2 in regulating MITF and melanoma development.

Shah M(1), Bhoumik A, Goel V, Dewing A, Breitwieser W, Kluger H, Krajewski S,
Krajewska M, Dehart J, Lau E, Kallenberg DM, Jeong H, Eroshkin A, Bennett DC,
Chin L, Bosenberg M, Jones N, Ronai ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, California, United
States of America.

The transcription factor ATF2 has been shown to attenuate melanoma susceptibility
to apoptosis and to promote its ability to form tumors in xenograft models. To
directly assess ATF2's role in melanoma development, we crossed a mouse melanoma 
model (Nras(Q61K)::Ink4a<U+207B>/<U+207B>) with mice expressing a transcriptionally inactive
form of ATF2 in melanocytes. In contrast to 7/21 of the Nras(Q61K)::Ink4a<U+207B>/<U+207B>
mice, only 1/21 mice expressing mutant ATF2 in melanocytes developed melanoma.
Gene expression profiling identified higher MITF expression in primary
melanocytes expressing transcriptionally inactive ATF2. MITF downregulation by
ATF2 was confirmed in the skin of Atf2<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice, in primary human melanocytes, and
in 50% of human melanoma cell lines. Inhibition of MITF transcription by MITF was
shown to be mediated by ATF2-JunB-dependent suppression of SOX10 transcription.
Remarkably, oncogenic BRAF (V600E)-dependent focus formation of melanocytes on
soft agar was inhibited by ATF2 knockdown and partially rescued upon shMITF
co-expression. On melanoma tissue microarrays, a high nuclear ATF2 to MITF ratio 
in primary specimens was associated with metastatic disease and poor prognosis.
Our findings establish the importance of transcriptionally active ATF2 in
melanoma development through fine-tuning of MITF expression.

PMCID: PMC3009656
PMID: 21203491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Biochem J. 2011 Mar 15;434(3):399-413. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101244.

Characterization of a novel JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) inhibitory peptide.

Ngoei KR(1), Catimel B, Church N, Lio DS, Dogovski C, Perugini MA, Watt PM, Cheng
HC, Ng DC, Bogoyevitch MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia.

An improved understanding of the roles of protein kinases in intracellular
signalling and disease progression has driven significant advances in protein
kinase inhibitor discovery. Peptide inhibitors that target the kinase protein
substrate-binding site have continued to attract attention. In the present paper,
we describe a novel JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) inhibitory peptide PYC71N,
which inhibits JNK activity in vitro towards a range of recombinant protein
substrates including the transcription factors c-Jun, ATF2 (activating
trancription factor 2) and Elk1, and the microtubule regulatory protein DCX
(doublecortin). Analysis of cell culture studies confirmed the actions of a
cell-permeable version of PYC71 to inhibit c-Jun phosphorylation during acute
hyperosmotic stress. The analysis of the in vitro data for the kinetics of this
inhibition indicated a substrate-inhibitor complex-mediated inhibition of JNK by 
PYC71N. Alanine-scanning replacement studies revealed the importance of two
residues (PYC71N Phe9 or Phe11 within an FXF motif) for JNK inhibition. The
importance of these residues was confirmed through interaction studies showing
that each change decreased interaction of the peptide with c-Jun. Furthermore,
PYC71N interacted with both non-phosphorylated (inactive) JNK1 and the substrate 
c-Jun, but did not recognize active JNK1. In contrast, a previously characterized
JNK-inhibitory peptide TIJIP [truncated inhibitory region of JIP (JNK-interacting
protein)], showed stronger interaction with active JNK1. Competition binding
analysis confirmed that PYC71N inhibited the interaction of c-Jun with JNK1.
Taken together, the results of the present study define novel properties of the
PYC71N peptide as well as differences from the characterized TIJIP, and highlight
the value of these peptides to probe the biochemistry of JNK-mediated substrate
interactions and phosphorylation.

PMID: 21162712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 1;5(12):e14176. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014176.

A transcription factor map as revealed by a genome-wide gene expression analysis 
of whole-blood mRNA transcriptome in multiple sclerosis.

Riveros C(1), Mellor D, Gandhi KS, McKay FC, Cox MB, Berretta R, Vaezpour SY,
Inostroza-Ponta M, Broadley SA, Heard RN, Vucic S, Stewart GJ, Williams DW, Scott
RJ, Lechner-Scott J, Booth DR, Moscato P; ANZgene Multiple Sclerosis Genetics
Consortium.

Collaborators: Bahlo M, Booth DR, Broadley SA, Brown MA, Browning BL, Browning
SR, Butzkueven H, Carroll WM, Danoy P, Field J, Foote SJ, Griffiths LR, Heard RN,
Kermode AG, Kilpatrick TJ, Lechner-Scott J, Mason D, Moscato P, Perreau VM, Scott
RJ, Slee M, Stankovich J, Stewart GJ, Taylor BV, Wiley J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Bioinformatics, Biomarker Discovery & Information-Based Medicine,
University of Newcastle, and Hunter Medical Research Institute, Newcastle,
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Several lines of evidence suggest that transcription factors are
involved in the pathogenesis of Multiple Sclerosis (MS) but complete mapping of
the whole network has been elusive. One of the reasons is that there are several 
clinical subtypes of MS and transcription factors that may be involved in one
subtype may not be in others. We investigate the possibility that this network
could be mapped using microarray technologies and contemporary bioinformatics
methods on a dataset derived from whole blood in 99 untreated MS patients (36
Relapse Remitting MS, 43 Primary Progressive MS, and 20 Secondary Progressive MS)
and 45 age-matched healthy controls.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have used two different analytical
methodologies: a non-standard differential expression analysis and a differential
co-expression analysis, which have converged on a significant number of
regulatory motifs that are statistically overrepresented in genes that are either
differentially expressed (or differentially co-expressed) in cases and controls
(e.g., V$KROX_Q6, p-value <3.31E-6; V$CREBP1_Q2, p-value <9.93E-6, V$YY1_02,
p-value <1.65E-5).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our analysis uncovered a network of transcription
factors that potentially dysregulate several genes in MS or one or more of its
disease subtypes. The most significant transcription factor motifs were for the
Early Growth Response EGR/KROX family, ATF2, YY1 (Yin and Yang 1), E2F-1/DP-1 and
E2F-4/DP-2 heterodimers, SOX5, and CREB and ATF families. These transcription
factors are involved in early T-lymphocyte specification and commitment as well
as in oligodendrocyte dedifferentiation and development, both pathways that have 
significant biological plausibility in MS causation.

PMCID: PMC2995726
PMID: 21152067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011 Feb 25;653(1-3):8-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.11.026.
Epub 2010 Dec 11.

Biochanin-A, an isoflavon, showed anti-proliferative and anti-inflammatory
activities through the inhibition of iNOS expression, p38-MAPK and ATF-2
phosphorylation and blocking NF<U+03BA>B nuclear translocation.

Kole L(1), Giri B, Manna SK, Pal B, Ghosh S.

Author information: 
(1)Syngene International Ltd., Biocon Park, Plot #2&3, Bommasandra IV Phase,
Jigani Link Road, Bangalore, India. lkole25@gmail.com

Biochanin-A, an isoflavone, existing in red clover, cabbage and alfalfa, has an
inhibitory and apoptogenic effect on certain cancer cells. However, the actual
mechanism by which this compound inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis in 
cancer cells and the mechanism of its anti-inflammatory activities have not been 
well characterized. In this study, we have investigated the anti-inflammatory and
anti-proliferative activity of Biochanin-A. The effects of Biochanin-A on RAW
264.7, HT-29 cell lines and mouse peritoneal macrophages have been investigated
in vitro. Cell proliferation and anti-inflammatory effects were analyzed by
3-(4-5-dimethylthiozol-2-yl)2-5-diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay,
(3)H-thymidine incorporation assay, Western blot, cytokines estimation,
Luciferase assay, Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and Kinase assay.
Present investigation demonstrated that, Biochanin-A inhibited lipopolysacharide 
(LPS)-induced nitric oxide(NO) production in macrophage and showed dose dependent
inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) expression. The induction of
NF-<U+03BA>B binding activity by LPS was inhibited markedly by co-incubation with
different doses of Biochanin-A. Biochanin-A inhibited the LPS-induced IkB kinase 
(IKK) activity and nuclear factor kappa beta (NF-<U+03BA>B) activation associated with
the inhibition of iNOS expression. LPS-induced phosphorylation of I<U+03BA>Ba and p38
MAPK was blocked by Biochanin-A and it inhibited IL-6, IL-1ß and TNF-a production
in RAW264.7 cells indicating its anti-inflammatory activity in association with
anti-proliferation. Biochanin-A is important for the prevention of
phosphorylation and degradation of I<U+03BA>Ba, thereby blocking NF-<U+03BA>B activation, which
in turn leads to decreased expression of the iNOS, thus preventing proliferation 
and inflammation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21147093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Radiat Res. 2010 Dec;174(6):691-702. doi: 10.1667/RR2204.1. Epub 2010 Sep 28.

Analysis of flow cytometry DNA damage response protein activation kinetics after 
exposure to x rays and high-energy iron nuclei.

Chappell LJ(1), Whalen MK, Gurai S, Ponomarev A, Cucinotta FA, Pluth JM.

Author information: 
(1)U.S.R.A., Division of Space Life Science Division, Houston, Texas 77058, USA.

We developed a mathematical method to analyze flow cytometry data to describe the
kinetics of <U+03B3>-H2AX and pATF2 phosphorylation in normal human fibroblast cells
after exposure to various qualities of low-dose radiation. Previously reported
flow cytometry kinetics for these DSB repair phospho-proteins revealed that
distributions of intensity were highly skewed, severely limiting the detection of
differences in the very low-dose range. Distributional analysis revealed
significant differences between control and low-dose samples when distributions
were compared using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Differences in radiation quality
were found in the distribution shapes and when a nonlinear model was used to
relate dose and time to the decay of the mean ratio of phospho-protein
intensities of irradiated samples to controls. We analyzed cell cycle phase- and 
radiation quality-dependent characteristic repair times and residual
phospho-protein levels with these methods. Characteristic repair times for <U+03B3>-H2AX
were higher after exposure to iron nuclei compared to X rays in G(1) cells and in
S/G(2) cells. The RBE in G(1) cells for iron nuclei relative to X rays for <U+03B3>-H2AX
was 2.1 ± 0.6 and 5.0 ± 3.5 at 2 and 24 h after irradiation, respectively. For
pATF2, a saturation effect was observed with reduced expression at high doses,
especially for iron nuclei, with much slower characteristic repair times (>7 h)
compared to X rays. RBEs for pATF2 were 0.7 ± 0.1 and 1.7 ± 0.5 at 2 and 24 h,
respectively. Significant differences in <U+03B3>-H2AX and pATF2 levels when irradiated 
samples were compared to controls were noted even at the lowest dose analyzed
(0.05 Gy). These results show that mathematical models can be applied to flow
cytometry data to identify important and subtle differences after exposure to
various qualities of low-dose radiation.

PMID: 21128792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Dev Dyn. 2011 Jan;240(1):188-94. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22500.

An ATF2-based luciferase reporter to monitor non-canonical Wnt signaling in
Xenopus embryos.

Ohkawara B(1), Niehrs C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Embryology, DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany.

Non-canonical/planar cell polarity (PCP) Wnt signaling plays important roles in
embryonic development and tissue homeostasis, and is implicated in human disease.
Monitoring Wnt/PCP signaling relies mostly on semi-quantitative bioassays or
biochemical analysis. Here we describe a luciferase reporter assay based on an
ATF2 response element, which faithfully monitors non-canonical Wnt signaling in
Xenopus embryos. The assay is simple, quantitative, and robust. It can be used to
detect non-canonical Wnt signaling changes following gain and loss of function of
pathway components, including Wnt, Frizzled, Ror2, Disheveled, Rac1, MKK7, and
JNK. Wnt/PCP signaling has recently been implicated in left-right asymmetry and
our reporter assay suggests that in gastrula embryos there is a right-ward bias
in Wnt/PCP signaling. We also mapped Wnt/PCP signaling in the early Xenopus
embryo and find that it peaks in the dorso-vegetal region, paralleling
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21128306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cancer Biol Ther. 2011 Feb 1;11(3):317-29. Epub 2011 Feb 1.

The Nrf2 transcription factor is a positive regulator of myeloid differentiation 
of acute myeloid leukemia cells.

Bobilev I(1), Novik V, Levi I, Shpilberg O, Levy J, Sharoni Y, Studzinski GP,
Danilenko M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Petakh Tikva, Israel.

1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D) is a powerful differentiation agent, which has 
potential for treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), but induces severe
hypercalcemia at pharmacologically active doses. We have previously shown that
carnosic acid (CA), the polyphenolic antioxidant from rosemary plant, markedly
potentiates differentiation induced by low concentrations of 1,25D in human AML
cell lines. Here, we demonstrated similar enhanced differentiation responses to
the 1,25D/CA combination in primary leukemic cells derived from patients with
AML, and determined the role of the Nrf2/antioxidant response element (Nrf2/ARE) 
pathway in these effects using U937 human monoblastic leukemia cells as the
model. CA strongly transactivated the ARE-luciferase reporter gene, induced the
ARE-responsive genes, NADP(H)-quinone oxidoreductase and the <U+03B3>-glutamylcysteine
synthetase heavy subunit, and elevated cellular glutathione levels.
Interestingly, 1,25D potentiated the effects of CA on these activities. Stable
transfection of wild-type (wt) Nrf2 resulted in the enhancement, while
transfection of dominant-negative (dn) Nrf2 produced suppression of
differentiation induced by the 1,25D/CA combination and, surprisingly, by 1,25D
alone. These opposite effects were associated with a corresponding increase or
decrease in vitamin D receptor and retinoid X receptor-a protein levels, and in
vitamin D responsive element transactivation. Cells transfected with wtNrf2 and
dnNrf2 also displayed opposing changes in the levels of the AP-1 family proteins 
(c-Jun and ATF2) and AP-1 transcriptional activity. Pretreatment with AP-1 decoy 
oligodeoxynucleotide markedly attenuated the differentiation in
wtNrf2-transfected cells, suggesting that the pro-differentiation action of Nrf2 
is mediated by functional AP-1. Our findings suggest that the Nrf2/ARE pathway
plays an important part in the cooperative induction of myeloid leukemia cell
differentiation by 1,25D and a plant polyphenol.

PMCID: PMC3047086
PMID: 21099366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 21;286(3):1951-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.166009. Epub 2010
Nov 22.

Hyperosmotic stress-induced ATF-2 activation through Polo-like kinase 3 in human 
corneal epithelial cells.

Wang L(1), Payton R, Dai W, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California Los Angeles, Torrance, California 90502, USA.

Elevated extracellular solute concentration (hyperosmotic stress) perturbs cell
function and stimulates cell responses by evoking MAPK cascades and activating
AP-1 transcription complex resulting in alterations of gene expression, cell
cycle arrest, and apoptosis. The results presented here demonstrate that
hyperosmotic stress elicited increases in ATF-2 phosphorylation through a novel
Polo-like kinase 3 (Plk3) pathway in human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells. We
found in hyperosmotic stress-induced HCE cells that Plk3 transferred to the
nuclear compartment and was colocalized with ATF-2 in nuclei. Kinase activity of 
Plk3 was significantly activated by hyperosmotic stimulation. Further downstream,
active Plk3 phosphorylated ATF-2 at the Thr-71 site in vivo and in vitro.
Overexpression of Plk3 and its mutants enhanced hyperosmotic stress-induced ATF-2
phosphorylation. In contrast, suppression of Plk3 by knocking down Plk3 mRNA
effectively diminished the effect of hyperosmotic stress-induced ATF-2
phosphorylation. The effect of hyperosmotic stress-induced activation of Plk3 on 
ATF-2 transcription factor function was also examined in CRE
reporter-overexpressed HCE cells. Our results for the first time reveal that
hyperosmotic stress can activate the Plk3 signaling pathway that subsequently
regulates the AP-1 complex by directly phosphorylating ATF-2 independent from the
effects of JNK and p38 activation.

PMCID: PMC3023491
PMID: 21098032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Mol Med (Berl). 2011 Jan;89(1):29-41. doi: 10.1007/s00109-010-0694-2. Epub 2010
Nov 18.

Effects of PGI2 analogues on Th1- and Th2-related chemokines in monocytes via
epigenetic regulation.

Kuo CH(1), Ko YC, Yang SN, Chu YT, Wang WL, Huang SK, Chen HN, Wei WJ, Jong YJ,
Hung CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan, Republic of China.

Comment in
    J Mol Med (Berl). 2011 Jan;89(1):1-3.

Chemokines play important roles in asthma. Prostaglandin I(2) (PGI(2)) analogue
is recently suggested as a candidate for treating asthma. However, the effects of
PGI(2) analogues on the expression of Th1- and Th2-related chemokines are
unknown. To this end, we investigated the in vitro effects of PGI(2) analogues on
the expression of Th1-related chemokine interferon-<U+03B3>-inducible protein-10
(IP-10/CXCL10) and Th2-related chemokine macrophage-derived chemokine (MDC/CCL22)
in human monocytes. The human monocytes were pretreated with iloprost and
treprostinil before lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation. IP-10 and MDC were
measured by ELISA. Intracellular signaling was investigated by cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) assay, western blot and chromatin immunoprecipitation.
PGI(2) analogues enhanced MDC, but suppressed IP-10 expression in LPS-stimulated 
monocytes. These effects were reversed by the I prostanoid (IP) receptor
antagonist (CAY10449), peroxisomal proliferators-activated receptor (PPAR)-a
antagonist (GW6741) and PPAR-<U+03B3> antagonist (GW9662). PGI(2) analogues increased
intracellular cAMP levels. Forskolin, an adenyl cyclase activator, conferred
similar effects. PGI(2) analogue-enhanced MDC expression was reduced by nuclear
factor (NF) <U+03BA>B inhibitor (BAY 117085) and mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK)-p38 inhibitor (SB203580). PGI(2) analogues up-regulated phospho-p65 and
phospho-p38 but down-regulated phospho-ERK expression. Iloprost enhanced H3
acetylation in MDC promoter area and suppressed H3 acetylation, H3K4, and H3K36
trimethylation in IP-10 promoter area. PGI(2) analogues enhanced MDC expression
via the I prostanoid-receptor-cAMP, PPAR-a and PPAR-<U+03B3>, NF<U+03BA>B-p65, MAPK-p38-ATF2
pathways and increasing histone acetylation, and suppressed IP-10 expression via 
the IP-receptor-cAMP, PPAR-<U+03B3>, MAPK-ERK-ELK1 pathways and inhibiting histone
acetylation and trimethylation in LPS-stimulated monocytes. PGI(2) analogues may 
therefore increase Th2 recruitment and inflammation.

PMID: 21085923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Nov;12(11):891-6.

[Effects of antenatal administration of dexamethasone and betamethasone on signal
transduction of bone morphogenetic protein in the fetal lungs of rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen XQ(1), Wu SH, Zhou XY.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Medical Centre, Nanjing Children's Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210008, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the role of antenatal glucocorticoid (dexamethasone and
betamethasone) on bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signal transduction of the rat
fetal lungs.
METHODS: Fifteen pregnant rats were randomly divided into five groups: the rats
treated with dexamethasone for 1 day (1D-DEX) or 3 days (3D-DEX), with
betamethasone for 1 day (1D-BEX) or 3 days (3D-BEX) or with normal saline
(control group), followed cesarean section on the 19th day of gestation. The mRNA
levels of BMP4, BMPR-II, Smad1 and ATF-2 of fetal rat lungs were ascertained by
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The expression of BMP4,
BMPR-II, Smad1 and ATF-2 antigen expression in fetal lungs was assessed by immune
histochemical staining. The expression of BMP4 and BMPR-II was determined by
Western blot.
RESULTS: The levels of BMP4, BMPR-II and Smad1 mRNA expression were up-regulated 
in the 1D-BEX, 3D-BEX and 3D-DEX groups compared with those in the control group 
(P<0.05). The immune histochemiscal analysis showed that the expression of BMP4, 
BMPR-II, Phospho-Smad1 (pSmad1) and ATF-2 in the 1D-BEX, 3D-BEX and 3D-DEX groups
was significantly higher than that in the control group (P<0.01). The results of 
Western blot demonstrated that the expression of BMP4 and BMPR-II protein
increased significantly in the 1D-BEX, 3D-BEX and 3D-DEX groups when compared
with the control group (P<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Betamethasone and dexamethasone may play important roles in the
regulation of BMP signal transduction in the rat fetal lungs. Up-regulation of
BMP4, BMPR-II and Smad1 might be one of crucial factors for the
glucocorticoid-induced maturity of fetal lungs.

PMID: 21083986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 3;5(11):e13805. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013805.

Reverse-phase phosphoproteome analysis of signaling pathways induced by Rift
valley fever virus in human small airway epithelial cells.

Popova TG(1), Turell MJ, Espina V, Kehn-Hall K, Kidd J, Narayanan A, Liotta L,
Petricoin EF 3rd, Kashanchi F, Bailey C, Popov SG.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biodefense and Infectious Diseases, George Mason
University, Manassas, Virginia, United States of America.

Rift valley fever virus (RVFV) infection is an emerging zoonotic disease endemic 
in many countries of sub-Saharan Africa and in Egypt. In this study we show that 
human small airway epithelial cells are highly susceptible to RVFV virulent
strain ZH-501 and the attenuated strain MP-12. We used the reverse-phase protein 
arrays technology to identify phosphoprotein signaling pathways modulated during 
infection of cultured airway epithelium. ZH-501 infection induced activation of
MAP kinases (p38, JNK and ERK) and downstream transcriptional factors [STAT1
(Y701), ATF2 (T69/71), MSK1 (S360) and CREB (S133)]. NF-<U+03BA>B phosphorylation was
also increased. Activation of p53 (S15, S46) correlated with the increased levels
of cleaved effector caspase-3, -6 and -7, indicating activation of the extrinsic 
apoptotic pathway. RVFV infection downregulated phosphorylation of a major
anti-apoptotic regulator of survival pathways, AKT (S473), along with
phosphorylation of FOX 01/03 (T24/31) which controls cell cycle arrest downstream
from AKT. Consistent with this, the level of apoptosis inhibitor XIAP was
decreased. However, the intrinsic apoptotic pathway marker, caspase-9,
demonstrated only a marginal activation accompanied by an increased level of the 
inhibitor of apoptosome formation, HSP27. Concentration of the autophagy marker, 
LC3B, which often accompanies the pro-survival signaling, was decreased.
Cumulatively, our analysis of RVFV infection in lung epithelium indicated a viral
strategy directed toward the control of cell apoptosis through a number of
transcriptional factors. Analyses of MP-12 titers in challenged cells in the
presence of MAPK inhibitors indicated that activation of p38 represents a
protective cell response while ERK activation controls viral replication.

PMCID: PMC2972203
PMID: 21072193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 14;286(2):1025-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.158675. Epub 2010 
Nov 8.

Calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated T cells and MAPK signaling induce
TNF-{alpha} gene expression in pancreatic islet endocrine cells.

Lawrence MC(1), Naziruddin B, Levy MF, Jackson A, McGlynn K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA. Michael.Lawrence@UTSouthwestern.edu

Comment in
    J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 21;286(3):le1; author reply le2.

Cytokines contribute to pancreatic islet inflammation, leading to impaired
glucose homeostasis and diabetic diseases. A plethora of data shows that
proinflammatory cytokines are produced in pancreatic islets by infiltrating
mononuclear immune cells. Here, we show that pancreatic islet a cells and ß cells
express tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and other cytokines capable of promoting 
islet inflammation when exposed to interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß). Cytokine expression by
ß cells was dependent on calcineurin (CN)/nuclear factor of activated T cells
(NFAT) and MAPK signaling. NFAT associated with the TNF-a promoter in response to
stimuli and synergistically activated promoter activity with ATF2 and c-Jun. In
contrast, the ß-cell-specific transcriptional activator MafA could repress
NFAT-mediated TNF-a gene expression whenever C/EBP-ß was bound to the promoter.
NFAT differentially regulated the TNF-a gene depending upon the expression and
MAPK-dependent activation of interacting basic leucine zipper partners in ß
cells. Both p38 and JNK were required for induction of TNF-a mRNA and protein
expression. Collectively, the data show that glucose and IL-1ß can activate
signaling pathways, which control induction and repression of cytokines in
pancreatic endocrine cells. Thus, by these mechanisms, pancreatic ß cells
themselves may contribute to islet inflammation and their own immunological
destruction in the pathogenesis of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3020709
PMID: 21059644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Mol Biosyst. 2010 Dec;6(12):2521-8. doi: 10.1039/c005220e. Epub 2010 Oct 11.

Microarray proteomic analysis discriminates tumorigenic mouse ovarian surface
epithelial cells of divergent aggressive potential.

Urzúa U(1), Best L, Munroe DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Genómica Aplicada, ICBM-Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de
Chile, Independencia 1027, Santiago, Chile. uurzua@med.uchile.cl

Cancer is an intrinsically heterogeneous disease. Tumors classified under the
same etiology and histological type may display divergent growth and invasion
properties, resulting in different progression rates and clinical outcomes. Here,
we approached this subject in a syngeneic mouse model of ovarian cancer. Antibody
microarrays were applied to obtain the proteomic profiles of IF5 and IG10, two
spontaneously transformed mouse ovarian surface epithelial (MOSE) cell lines of
cognate clonal origin but different tumorigenic behavior in vivo. Repeated
dye-swap allowed filter out about 40% of inconsistent signals from a total of 224
arrayed antibodies. Two-class comparison tests resulted in 31 differentially
expressed proteins (adjusted p < 0.05). Proteins of the ErbB and focal adhesion
signaling pathways showed higher levels in IG10, the most aggressive cell. In
contrast, the less aggressive IF5 cell was enriched in proteins related to
nuclear chromatin organization and cell-cycle. Additionally, comparison between
protein levels and mRNA levels of MOSE cells resulted in a positive rank
correlation for 50-60% of protein-mRNA pairs (p < 1.7 × 10(-5)). Importantly, the
protein profile of IG10 is linked to invasion and chemotherapy response in human 
ovarian tumors while the IF5 profile is associated to growth control. The minimal
IG10 network contained the proteins Jun, Smad4, Myc, Atf2, and Pak1 as major
nodes while Chek2, Mdm2 and Ccna2 were the predominant nodes of the IF5 network. 
The molecular basis accounting for a high aggressive potential not necessarily
related to an increased tumor growth capacity is discussed on a pathway-network
basis.

PMID: 20938528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Nephrol. 2011 May-Jun;24(3):376-80. doi: 10.5301/JN.2010.5784.

Ionic contrast media induced more apoptosis in diabetic kidney than nonionic
contrast media.

Lee HC(1), Chang JG, Yen HW, Liu IH, Lai WT, Sheu SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital, Kaohsiung - Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Contrast-induced nephropathy is a major cause of hospital-acquired
acute renal failure, and its risk is significantly increased in patients with
diabetes mellitus. This study aimed to examine both the role of apoptosis in
low-osmolar contrast media-induced kidney injury in normal and diabetic rats and 
the difference in the induced kidney injury between ionic and nonionic contrast
media.
METHODS: Normal and streptozotocin-induced diabetic Wistar rats were administered
with ionic low-osmolar ioxaglate, nonionic low-osmolar iopromide or normal saline
injection. Apoptosis in kidney tubular cells was determined by the presence of
positive terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP in situ nick
end-labeling (TUNEL) stain.
RESULTS: At 24 hours after administration, both ioxaglate and iopromide
injections induced more apoptosis in diabetic (49.7% vs. 25.3% for ioxaglate;
37.7% vs. 25.3% for iopromide; both p<0.001) and normal (36.2% vs. 27.4%,
p=0.002, for ioxaglate; 33.6% vs. 27.4%, p=0.029, for iopromide) kidney tubular
cells than normal saline injections. Additionally, ioxaglate induced more
apoptotic tubular cells in diabetic kidneys than in normal kidneys (p<0.001).
Moreover, ioxaglate significantly induced more apoptotic cells than iopromide in 
diabetic kidneys, but not in normal kidneys (p<0.001, for diabetic rats; p=0.345,
for normal rats).
CONCLUSION: Ionic low-osmolar contrast media induced more apoptosis in tubular
cells in diabetic kidneys than in normal kidneys. Notably, ionic contrast media
induced more apoptosis than nonionic contrast media in diabetic kidneys.

PMID: 20890877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2010 Jul-Sep;24(3):273-85.

Specific inhibition of protein kinase Cbeta expression by antisense RNA affects
the activation of Jurkat T lymphoma cells.

Cervino MC(1), Lopez-Lago MA, Vinuela JE, Barja P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquimica y Biologia Molecular, Universidad de Santiago de
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Antisense RNA technology was employed to specifically inhibit the expression of
the protein kinase Cbeta (PKCbeta) isoform in Jurkat cells, to explore its
influence on the expression of surface antigens (CD69) and the cytokines
interleukin-8 (IL-8), tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and beta, and to
characterise its controversial involvement in the expression of IL-2 and its
receptor (IL-2R). Transfection of cells with an antisense PKCbeta construct
(as-PKCbeta-pREP3) significantly increased IL-2R/CD25 expression in phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)-stimulated as-PKCbeta-pREP3 transfectants, in
contrast to Jurkat cells transfected with a control as-PKCalpha-pREP3 plasmid.
IL-2 production, in contrast, was strongly inhibited in both transfectant
populations stimulated by PMA plus the calcium ionophore ionomycin. Three clones 
(asb1/asb2/asb3), selected from as-PKCbeta-pREP3 transfectants, showed decreased 
PKCbeta protein levels (40 percent, 50 percent and 60 percent, respectively, as
determined by western blotting) and mRNA levels. The specific inhibition was
confirmed in immunoblots for other PKC (alpha, delta, epsilon, gamma, theta, and 
lambda lambda/tau) isoforms and in immunoprecipitates from representative
(c2/asb2) clones. Stimulation of PKCbeta-depleted clones significantly increased 
CD25 expression but decreased IL-2 production (similarly to as-PKCbeta-pREP3
transfectants) and IL-2 message levels. CD69 expression and IL-8 secretion were
significantly decreased, but TNFbeta message levels were highly increased in
asb2/asb3 clones, without affecting TNFalpha secretion. Analysis of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP Kinase) signalling pathway showed unaltered
extracellular signal regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and p38 phosphorylation but
increased activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK1) and its substrate, the
transcription factor ATF-2 (activated transcription factor-2), which are involved
in IL-2 gene expression. Our results revealed new PKCbeta functions, affecting
CD69 expression and IL-8 production, and support the requirement for PKCbeta in
IL-2 secretion/transcription and IL-2R regulation.

PMID: 20846475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Genes Cancer. 2010 Apr 1;1(4):316-330.

Radiation Sensitivity and Tumor Susceptibility in ATM Phospho-Mutant ATF2 Mice.

Li S(1), Ezhevsky S, Dewing A, Cato MH, Scortegagna M, Bhoumik A, Breitwieser W, 
Braddock D, Eroshkin A, Qi J, Chen M, Kim JY, Jones S, Jones N, Rickert R, Ronai 
ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Program, Sanford-Burnham Institute for Medical Research,
La Jolla, CA, USA.

The transcription factor ATF2 was previously shown to be an ATM substrate. Upon
phosphorylation by ATM, ATF2 exhibits a transcription-independent function in the
DNA damage response through localization to DNA repair foci and control of cell
cycle arrest. To assess the physiological significance of this phosphorylation,
we generated ATF2 mutant mice in which the ATM phosphoacceptor sites (S472/S480) 
were mutated (ATF2(KI)). ATF2(KI) mice are more sensitive to ionizing radiation
(IR) than wild-type (ATF2 (WT)) mice: following IR, ATF2(KI) mice exhibited
higher levels of apoptosis in the intestinal crypt cells and impaired hepatic
steatosis. Molecular analysis identified impaired activation of the cell cycle
regulatory protein p21(Cip/Waf1) in cells and tissues of IR-treated ATF2(KI)
mice, which was p53 independent. Analysis of tumor development in p53(KO) crossed
with ATF2(KI) mice indicated a marked decrease in amount of time required for
tumor development. Further, when subjected to two-stage skin carcinogenesis
process, ATF2(KI) mice developed skin tumors faster and with higher incidence,
which also progressed to the more malignant carcinomas, compared with the control
mice. Using 3 mouse models, we establish the importance of ATF2 phosphorylation
by ATM in the acute cellular response to DNA damage and maintenance of genomic
stability.

PMCID: PMC2926982
PMID: 20740050  [PubMed]


299. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2010 Sep;31(9):1223-40. doi: 10.1038/aps.2010.147. Epub 2010 
Aug 23.

Regulation of Nrf2- and AP-1-mediated gene expression by
epigallocatechin-3-gallate and sulforaphane in prostate of Nrf2-knockout or
C57BL/6J mice and PC-3 AP-1 human prostate cancer cells.

Nair S(1), Barve A, Khor TO, Shen GX, Lin W, Chan JY, Cai L, Kong AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, The State University of New Jersey,
Piscataway,08854, USA.

AIM: To examine the regulatory crosstalk between the transcription factors Nrf2
and AP-1 in prostate cancer (PCa) by dietary cancer chemopreventive compounds
(-)epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) from green tea and sulforaphane (SFN) from
cruciferous vegetables.
METHODS: We performed (i) in vitro studies including luciferase reporter gene
assays, MTS cell viability assays, and quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) in
PC-3 AP-1 human PCa cells, (ii) in vivo temporal (3 h and 12 h) microarray
studies in the prostate of Nrf2-deficient mice that was validated by qRT-PCR, and
(iii) in silico bioinformatic analyses to delineate conserved Transcription
Factor Binding Sites (TFBS) in the promoter regions of Nrf2 and AP-1, as well as 
coregulated genes including ATF-2 and ELK-1.
RESULTS: Our study shows that AP-1 activation was attenuated by the combinations 
of SFN (25 micromol/L) and EGCG (20 or 100 micromol/L) in PC-3 cells. Several key
Nrf2-dependent genes were down-regulated (3-fold to 35-fold) after in vivo
administration of the combination of EGCG (100 mg/kg) and SFN (45 mg/kg).
Conserved TFBS signatures were identified in the promoter regions of Nrf2, AP-1, 
ATF2, and ELK-1 suggesting a potential regulatory mechanism of crosstalk between 
them.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our present study of transcriptome profiling the gene
expression changes induced by dietary phytochemicals SFN and EGCG in
Nrf2-deficient mice and in PC-3 cells in vitro demonstrates that the effects of
SFN+EGCG could be mediated via concerted modulation of Nrf2 and AP-1 pathways in 
the prostate.

PMCID: PMC4002318
PMID: 20729872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. OMICS. 2011 Jan-Feb;15(1-2):49-60. doi: 10.1089/omi.2010.0055. Epub 2010 Aug 20.

Stage-associated dynamic activity profile of transcription factors in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma progression based on protein/DNA array analysis.

Su B(1), Tang HL, Deng M, Liao QJ, Zeng X, Zhang WL, Xiang B, Wang L, Li XL, Li
XY, Wu MH, Li GY.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, People's
Republic of China.

Transcription factors (TFs) are crucial modulators of gene regulation during the 
development and progression of tumors. We previously reported the activation of
TFs in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cell lines. In this study, we explored the 
activity profiles of TFs in Protein/DNA array data of a 12-tissue independent set
and a 13-tissue pooled set of NPC that included different clinical stages. TFs
associated with tumor progression were revealed using a generalized linear
model-based regression analysis. Immunohistochemical analysis of clinical NPC
samples was used to validate the results of array analysis. We identified 26 TFs 
that showed increased activities. Of these 26 TFs, 16 were correlated with
clinical stages. Activity changes of AP2 and ATF/CREB were confirmed by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), and increased expression of AP2a, ß,
<U+03B3>, ATF2, and ATF1 in nuclei of tumor cells was associated with clinical stages.
In addition, the expressions of AP2a, ATF2, and ATF1 were correlated with those
of their target genes (epithelia growth factor receptor (EGFR) and matrix
metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2), respectively). This study provides data and valuable
clues that can be used to further investigate the laws of gene transcription
regulation in NPC and to identify suitable targets for the development of
TF-targeted antitumor agents.

PMID: 20726781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Protein Expr Purif. 2011 Feb;75(2):138-46. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2010.08.002. Epub
2010 Aug 13.

Activation by phosphorylation and purification of human c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK) isoforms in milligram amounts.

Thévenin AF(1), Zony CL, Bahnson BJ, Colman RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark, DE
19716, USA.

c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) are part of the mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK) signaling cascade. They are activated through dual phosphorylation of two 
residues in the activation loop, a threonine and a tyrosine, by MAP2 kinases
(MKK4 and 7) in response to various extracellular stresses such as UV or osmotic 
shock, as well as by cytokines and growth factors. Only small amounts of
phosphorylated, active JNKs have previously been produced because of difficulties
in expressing these phosphorylated kinases in Escherichia coli, which lack the
appropriate upstream kinases. We have now established a novel activation and
purification method that allows for reproducible production of milligram amounts 
of active, phosphorylated JNKs suitable for a variety of enzymatic, biophysical
and structural characterizations. We utilize N-terminally His-tagged MKK4 that is
coexpressed in E. coli with a constitutively active form of MEKK1. This
phosphorylated, active His-MKK4 is purified by Ni-NTA chromatography and used to 
phosphorylate milligram amounts of three different isoforms of human JNKs
(JNK1a1, JNK1a2 and JNK2a2) that had separately been expressed and purified from 
E. coli in their inactive forms. These in vitro activated JNKs are phosphorylated
on both residues (T183, Y185) in their activation loops and are active towards
their substrate, ATF2.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2991412
PMID: 20709173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Neurosci. 2010 Aug 11;30(32):10820-32. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2824-10.2010.

Mkp1 is a c-Jun target gene that antagonizes JNK-dependent apoptosis in
sympathetic neurons.

Kristiansen M(1), Hughes R, Patel P, Jacques TS, Clark AR, Ham J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Haematology and Cancer Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health,
University College London, and Department of Histopathology, Great Ormond Street 
Hospital, London WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.

Developing sympathetic neurons depend on NGF for survival. When sympathetic
neurons are deprived of NGF in vitro, a well documented series of events,
including c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway activation, release of cytochrome
c from the mitochondria, and caspase activation, culminates in the death of the
neuron by apoptosis within 24-48 h. This process requires de novo gene
expression, suggesting that increased expression of specific genes activates the 
cell death program. Using rat gene microarrays, we found that NGF withdrawal
induces the expression of many genes, including mkp1, which encodes a MAPK
phosphatase that can dephosphorylate JNKs. The increase in mkp1 mRNA level
requires the MLK-JNK-c-Jun pathway, and we show that Mkp1 is an important
regulator of JNK-dependent apoptosis in sympathetic neurons. In microinjection
experiments, Mkp1 overexpression can inhibit JNK-mediated phosphorylation of
c-Jun and protect sympathetic neurons from apoptosis, while Mkp1 knockdown
accelerates NGF withdrawal-induced death. Accordingly, the number of superior
cervical ganglion (SCG) neurons is reduced in mkp1-/- mice at P1 during the
period of developmental sympathetic neuron death. We also show that c-Jun and
ATF2 bind to two conserved ATF binding sites in the mkp1 promoter in vitro and in
chromatin. Both of these ATF sites contribute to basal promoter activity and are 
required for mkp1 promoter induction after NGF withdrawal. These results
demonstrate that Mkp1 is part of a negative feedback loop induced by the
MLK-JNK-c-Jun signaling pathway that modulates JNK activity and the rate of
neuronal death in rat sympathetic neurons following NGF withdrawal.

PMCID: PMC3044878
PMID: 20702711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Folia Histochem Cytobiol. 2010 Jan;48(2):197-201. doi: 10.2478/v10042-008-0110-8.

Immunoreactivity of ATF-2 and Fra-2 in human dental follicle.

Bolat I(1), Keklikoglu N.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Histology and Embryology, Istanbul
University, Istanbul, Turkey. nkeklik@istanbul.edu.tr

It is asserted that epithelial rests in dental follicle (DF) existing around the 
impacted teeth in adults are effective in cyst formation. In this study, it is
intended for determining and comparing the immunoreactivity (IR) ratio of ATF-2
and Fra-2 proteins, the members of Activator Protein-1 (AP-1) family which
regulates important cellular activities such as growth, proliferation and
differentiation, in DF epithelial cells (EC) and connective tissue cells (CC). In
this study, ATF-2 and Fra-2 immunoreactivity (ATF-2-IR and Fra-2-IR) in EC and CC
in DF tissues obtained from 30 patients were analyzed by using
immunohistochemical method. Ratios of ATF-2-IR positive cells were found
17.36+/-9.55% in EC, 27.27+/-14.86% in CC and ratios of Fra-2-IR positive cells
were found 20.04+/-11.47% in EC, 16.71+/-9.05% in CC. In the statistically
comparison performed; significant differences were found between EC and CC in
terms of both ATF-2-IR (p<0.001) and Fra-2-IR (p<0.05). In EC, no significant
difference was found between ATF-2-IR and Fra-2-IR (p>0.05), whereas significant 
difference was found between ATF-2-IR and Fra-2-IR in CC (p<0.001). According to 
these data, it can be suggested that Fra-2 protein may be more effective than
ATF-2 protein in cyst formation originated from EC of DF. Besides, finding that
ATF-2-IR and Fra-2-IR are different in CC although similar in EC shows that AP-1 
members can be expressed at different ratios in same tissues.

PMID: 20675274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2010 Aug;62(8):1069-76. doi: 10.1111/j.2042-7158.2010.01126.x.

Suppression of tumour necrosis factor-alpha by Schizonepeta tenuifolia water
extract via inhibition of IkappaBalpha degradation and Jun N-terminal
kinase/stress-activated protein kinase activation.

Kang H(1), Han SW, Hong JW, Sohn NW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of East-West Medical Science, Graduate School of East-West Medical 
Science, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do, South Korea.
shehee@khu.ac.kr

OBJECTIVES: The anti-inflammatory effects of an aqueous extract of Schizonepeta
tenuifolia on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced tumour necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in vivo and in vitro have been investigated.
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were orally administered phosphate-buffered saline
(control) or S. tenuifolia water extract (50, 200, 500 or 1000 mg/kg) for 10 days
before intraperitoneal administration of LPS (1.3 mg/kg). Blood samples were
obtained 1 h after LPS challenge, followed by determination of TNF-alpha and IL-6
levels. Peritoneal macrophages from thioglycollate-injected mice were obtained
and stimulated with LPS and S. tenuifolia water extract for viability assay,
cytokine analysis, real-time RT PCR and Western blotting.
KEY FINDINGS: Oral administration of S. tenuifolia water extract to mice
significantly reduced LPS-induced serum levels of TNF-alpha, but not IL-6. When
peritoneal macrophages were treated in vitro with S. tenuifolia water extract,
the inhibition of LPS-induced TNF-alpha was more pronounced than that of IL-6 at 
the level of secreted protein and mRNA. S. tenuifolia water extract reduced the
degradation of IkappaBalpha and the nuclear relocation of p65 NF-kappaB, but the 
phosphorylation of IkappaBalpha was not affected. Inhibition of c-Jun N-terminal 
kinase/stress-activated protein kinase (JNK/SAPK) by S. tenuifolia water extract 
led secondarily to the inhibition of phospho-c-Jun and phospho-ATF-2.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicated that the downregulation of TNF-alpha by S.
tenuifolia water extract may have involved the inhibition of both IkappaBalpha
degradation and activation of c-Jun and ATF-2 involving suppression of JNK/SAPK.

PMID: 20663042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Biol Reprod. 2010 Nov;83(5):774-82. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.085175. Epub 2010
Jul 14.

Insulin-like 3 exposure of the fetal rat gubernaculum modulates expression of
genes involved in neural pathways.

Johnson KJ(1), Robbins AK, Wang Y, McCahan SM, Chacko JK, Barthold JS.

Author information: 
(1)Nemours Biomedical Research, Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children,
Wilmington, Delaware 19803, USA. johnson@medsci.udel.edu

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2010 Nov;83(5):687-9.

Insulin-like 3 (INSL3) signaling directs fetal gubernacular development and
testis descent, but the actions of INSL3 in the gubernaculum are poorly
understood. Using microarray gene expression profiling of fetal male rat
gubernaculum explants exposed to 10 or 100 nM INSL3, significant changes in
expression were identified for approximately 900 genes. Several of the genes
showing the largest inductions regulate neuronal development or activity,
including Pnoc (34-fold), Nptx2 (9-fold), Nfasc (4-fold), Gfra3 (3-fold), Unc5d
(3-fold), and Crlf1 (3-fold). Bioinformatics analysis revealed BMP and WNT
signaling pathways and several gene ontologies related to neurogenesis were
altered by INSL3. Promoter response elements significantly enriched in the
INSL3-regulated gene list included consensus sequences for MYB, REL, ATF2, and
TEF transcription factors. Comparing in vivo gene expression profiles of male and
female rat fetal gubernaculum showed expression of the Bmp, Wnt, and
neurodevelopmental genes induced by INSL3 was higher in males. Using quantitative
RT-PCR, the microarray data were confirmed, and the induction of Bmp3, Chrdl2,
Crlf1, Nptx2, Pnoc, Wnt4, and Wnt5a mRNA levels were examined over a range of
INSL3 concentrations (0.1-100 nM) in male and female gubernaculum. In both sexes,
an increasing gene expression response was observed between 0.1 and 10 nM INSL3. 
These data suggest that INSL3 signaling in the fetal gubernaculum induces
morphogenetic programs, including BMP and WNT signaling, and support other rodent
data suggesting a role for these pathways in development of the gubernaculum.

PMCID: PMC2959107
PMID: 20631401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 7;5(7):e11464. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011464.

A53T-alpha-synuclein overexpression impairs dopamine signaling and striatal
synaptic plasticity in old mice.

Kurz A(1), Double KL, Lastres-Becker I, Tozzi A, Tantucci M, Bockhart V, Bonin M,
García-Arencibia M, Nuber S, Schlaudraff F, Liss B, Fernández-Ruiz J, Gerlach M, 
Wüllner U, Lüddens H, Calabresi P, Auburger G, Gispert S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Goethe University Medical School, Frankfurt, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD), the second most frequent neurodegenerative 
disorder at old age, can be caused by elevated expression or the A53T missense
mutation of the presynaptic protein alpha-synuclein (SNCA). PD is characterized
pathologically by the preferential vulnerability of the dopaminergic
nigrostriatal projection neurons.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we used two mouse lines overexpressing
human A53T-SNCA and studied striatal dysfunction in the absence of
neurodegeneration to understand early disease mechanisms. To characterize the
progression, we employed young adult as well as old mice. Analysis of striatal
neurotransmitter content demonstrated that dopamine (DA) levels correlated
directly with the level of expression of SNCA, an observation also made in
SNCA-deficient (knockout, KO) mice. However, the elevated DA levels in the
striatum of old A53T-SNCA overexpressing mice may not be transmitted
appropriately, in view of three observations. First, a transcriptional
downregulation of the extraneural DA degradation enzyme
catechol-ortho-methytransferase (COMT) was found. Second, an upregulation of DA
receptors was detected by immunoblots and autoradiography. Third, extensive
transcriptome studies via microarrays and quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qPCR) of
altered transcript levels of the DA-inducible genes Atf2, Cb1, Freq, Homer1 and
Pde7b indicated a progressive and genotype-dependent reduction in the
postsynaptic DA response. As a functional consequence, long term depression (LTD)
was absent in corticostriatal slices from old transgenic mice.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Taken together, the dysfunctional neurotransmission and
impaired synaptic plasticity seen in the A53T-SNCA overexpressing mice reflect
early changes within the basal ganglia prior to frank neurodegeneration. As a
model of preclinical stages of PD, such insights may help to develop
neuroprotective therapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC2898885
PMID: 20628651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Oncogene. 2010 Sep 16;29(37):5182-92. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.251. Epub 2010 Jun
28.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) controls tolfenamic acid-induced ATF3
expression via MAP kinase pathways.

Lee SH(1), Bahn JH, Whitlock NC, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Laboratory of Environmental Carcinogenesis,
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA.

Tolfenamic acid (TA) is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug associated with
anti-tumorigenic and pro-apoptotic properties in animal and in vitro models of
cancer. However, the underlying cellular mechanisms by which TA exerts its
effects are only partially understood. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3)
is a member of the ATF/CREB subfamily of the basic region-leucine zipper family
and has been known as a tumor suppressor in human colorectal cancer cells. The
present study was performed to observe whether ATF3 mediates TA-induced apoptosis
and to elucidate the molecular mechanism of ATF3 transcription induced by TA. TA 
treatment and ectopic expression of ATF3 increased apoptosis, whereas knockdown
of ATF3 resulted in significant repression of TA-activated apoptosis. The TA
treatment also induced ATF3 promoter activity. Internal deletion and point
mutation of the predicted ATF/C/EBP binding site in ATF3 promoter abolished
luciferase activation by TA. Overexpression of ATF2 resulted in significant
increase in ATF3 promoter activity, and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
identified this region as a core sequence to which ATF2 binds. TA treatment
resulted in an increase in ATF2 phosphorylation, which was followed by a
subsequent increase in ATF3 transcription. Knock down of ATF2 abolished
TA-induced ATF3 expression. We further provide evidence that TA leads to
increases in phospho-p38 MAPK, JNK and ERK levels. Inhibition of these pathways
using selective inhibitors and dominant negative constructs ameliorated
TA-induced ATF3 expression and promoter activities. The current study shows that 
TA stimulates ATF3 expression and subsequently induces apoptosis. These pathways 
are mediated through phosphorylation of ATF2, which is mediated by p38 MAPK-,
JNK- and ERK-dependent pathways.

PMCID: PMC2940954
PMID: 20581861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Mol Pharmacol. 2010 Sep;78(3):503-10. doi: 10.1124/mol.110.063404. Epub 2010 Jun 
22.

Regulation of mouse brain-selective sulfotransferase sult4a1 by cAMP response
element-binding protein and activating transcription factor-2.

Butcher NJ(1), Mitchell DJ, Burow R, Minchin RF.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD 4072, 
Australia. n.butcher@uq.edu.au

Sulfotransferase 4A1 (SULT4A1) is a novel cytosolic sulfotransferase that is
primarily expressed in the brain. To date, no significant enzyme activity or
biological function for the protein has been identified, although it is highly
conserved between species. Mutations in the SULT4A1 gene have been linked to
schizophrenia susceptibility, and recently, its stability was shown to be
regulated by Pin1, a peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase implicated in several
neurodegenerative diseases. In this study, we investigated the transcriptional
regulation of mouse Sult4a1. Using a series of promoter deletion constructs, we
identified three cAMP-responsive elements (CREs) that were required for maximal
promoter activity. The CREs are located within 100 base pairs of the major
transcription start site and are also present in the same region of the human
SULT4A1 promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) identified two
specific complexes that formed on each of the CREs. One complex contained cAMP
response element-binding protein (CREB), and the other contained activating
transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) and c-Jun. Overexpression of CREB or ATF-2
increased not only reporter promoter activity but also endogenous Sult4a1 mRNA
levels in Neuro2a cells. Moreover, [d-Ala(2),N-MePhe(4),Gly-ol(5)]enkephalin
(DAMGO) treatment increased both reporter promoter activity and Sult4a1 levels in
mu-opioid receptor expressing Neuro2a/mu-opioid receptor cells, and EMSAs showed 
this to be due to increased binding of CREB and ATF-2 to the Sult4a1 promoter. We
also show that DAMGO treatment increases Sult4a1 mRNA and protein levels in
primary mouse neurons. These results suggest that Sult4a1 is a target gene for
the mu-opioid receptor signaling pathway and other pathways involving activation 
of CREB and ATF-2.

PMID: 20571078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Oncogene. 2010 Sep 2;29(35):4925-37. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.239. Epub 2010 Jun 21.

Cell transformation by v-Rel reveals distinct roles of AP-1 family members in
Rel/NF-kappaB oncogenesis.

Liss AS(1), Tiwari R, Kralova J, Bose HR Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Institute of Cellular and
Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712-1095, USA.

Cell transformation by the v-rel oncogene is mediated by the aberrant expression 
of genes that are normally tightly regulated by other Rel/NF-kappaB family
members. Although a number of genes inappropriately activated or suppressed by
v-Rel have been identified, their contributions to the v-Rel transformation
process have been poorly characterized. Here, we examine the role of individual
AP-1 proteins in v-Rel-mediated transformation. v-Rel-transformed cells exhibit
elevated RNA and protein expression of c-Fos, c-Jun and ATF2 and sustained
repression of Fra-2. c-Fos and c-Jun are essential in both the initiation and
maintenance of v-Rel-mediated transformation, whereas Fra-2 is dispensable. By
employing a c-Jun dimerization mutant, we further identified Fos/Jun heterodimers
as major contributors to the v-Rel transformation process. The inability of c-Rel
to induce the expression of c-Fos and c-Jun contributes to its weaker oncogenic
potential relative to v-Rel. Our studies also demonstrate that v-Rel may induce
AP-1 members by directly upregulating gene expression (c-fos and ATF2) and by
activating pathways that stimulate AP-1 activity. Although elevated expression of
ATF2 is also required for v-Rel-mediated transformation, its ectopic
overexpression is inhibitory. Investigating the mode of ATF2 regulation revealed 
a positive feedback mechanism whereby ATF2 induces p38 MAPK phosphorylation to
further induce its own activity. In addition, these studies identified Ha-Ras as 
an effector of v-Rel-mediated transformation and reveal a novel role for ATF2 in 
the inhibition of the Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK signaling pathway. Overall, these studies
reveal distinct and complex roles of AP-1 proteins in Rel/NF-kappaB oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2932816
PMID: 20562914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Haematologica. 2010 Oct;95(10):1697-704. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.021428. Epub 
2010 May 29.

Disturbed expression of the T-cell receptor/CD3 complex and associated signaling 
molecules in CD30+ T-cell lymphoproliferations.

Geissinger E(1), Sadler P, Roth S, Grieb T, Puppe B, Müller N, Reimer P,
Vetter-Kauczok CS, Wenzel J, Bonzheim I, Rüdiger T, Müller-Hermelink HK,
Rosenwald A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Wuerzburg, Josef Schneider-Strasse 2,
Wuerzburg, Germany. geissinger@mail.uniwuerzburg.de

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2010 Oct;95(10):1627-30.

BACKGROUND: CD30(+) T-cell lymphoproliferations comprise a spectrum of clinically
heterogeneous entities, including systemic anaplastic large cell lymphomas
(ALK(-) and ALK(+)) and primary cutaneous CD30(+) T-cell lymphoproliferative
disorders. While all these entities are characterized by proliferation of highly 
atypical, anaplastic CD30(+) T cells, the expression of T-cell specific antigens 
in the tumor cells is not consistently detectable.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We evaluated biopsies from 19 patients with primary cutaneous
CD30(+) lymphoproliferative disorders, 38 with ALK(-) and 33 with ALK(+) systemic
anaplastic large cell lymphoma. The biopsies were examined for the expression of 
T-cell receptoraß/CD3 complex (CD3<U+03B3>, d, e, <U+03B6>), transcription factors regulating
T-cell receptor expression (ATF1, ATF2, TCF-1, TCF-1a/LEF-1, Ets1), and molecules
of T-cell receptor-associated signaling cascades (Lck, ZAP-70, LAT, bcl-10,
Carma1, NFATc1, c-Jun, c-Fos, Syk) using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In comparison to the pattern in 20 peripheral T-cell lymphomas, not
otherwise specified, we detected a highly disturbed expression of the T-cell
receptor/CD3 complex, TCF-1, TCF-1a/LEF-1, Lck, ZAP-70, LAT, NFATc1, c-Jun, c-Fos
and Syk in most of the systemic anaplastic large cell lymphomas. In addition,
primary cutaneous CD30(+) lymphoproliferative disorders showed such a similar
expression pattern to that of systemic anaplastic large cell lymphomas, that none
of the markers we investigated can reliably distinguish between these CD30(+)
T-cell lymphoproliferations.
CONCLUSIONS: Severely altered expression of the T-cell receptor/CD3 complex,
T-cell receptor-associated transcription factors and signal transduction
molecules is a common characteristic of systemic and cutaneous CD30(+)
lymphoproliferations, although the clinical behavior of these entities is very
different. Since peripheral T-cell lymphomas, not otherwise specified retain the 
full expression program required for functioning T-cell receptor signaling, the
differential expression of a subset of these markers might be of diagnostic
utility in distinguishing peripheral T-cell lymphomas, not otherwise specified
from the entire group of CD30(+) lymphoproliferations.

PMCID: PMC2948095
PMID: 20511667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2010 Sep;9(9):1982-90. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M110.000943. Epub
2010 May 28.

In situ proximity ligation detection of c-Jun/AP-1 dimers reveals increased
levels of c-Jun/Fra1 complexes in aggressive breast cancer cell lines in vitro
and in vivo.

Baan B(1), Pardali E, ten Dijke P, van Dam H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands.

Genetic and biochemical studies have shown that selective interactions between
the Jun, Fos, and activating transcription factor (ATF) components of
transcription factor activating protein 1 (AP-1) exhibit specific and critical
functions in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, and survival.
For instance, the ratio between c-Jun/c-Fos and c-Jun/ATF2 dimers in the cell can
be a determining factor in the cellular response to oncogenic or apoptotic
stimuli. Until recently, no methods were available to detect endogenous AP-1
complexes in cells and tissues in situ. Here, we validated the proximity ligation
assay (PLA) for its ability to specifically visualize and quantify changes in
endogenous c-Jun/c-Fos, c-Jun/ATF2, and c-Jun/Fra1 complexes by using, among
others, partner-selective c-Jun mutants. Furthermore, we examined the levels of
c-Jun/AP-1 dimers in cell lines representing different types of human breast
cancer and found that aggressive basal-like breast cancer cells can be
discriminated from much less invasive luminal-like cells by PLA detection of
c-Jun/Fra1 rather than of c-Jun/ATF2 and c-Jun/c-Fos. Also in tumor tissue
derived from highly metastatic basal-like MDA-MB231 cells, high levels of
c-Jun/Fra1 complexes were detected. Together, these results demonstrate that in
situ PLA is a powerful diagnostic tool to analyze and quantify the amounts of
biologically critical AP-1 dimers in fixed cells and tissue material.

PMCID: PMC2938117
PMID: 20511396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 23;285(30):23096-104. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.087221. Epub
2010 May 27.

Growth factor stimulation induces cell survival by c-Jun. ATF2-dependent
activation of Bcl-XL.

Salameh A(1), Galvagni F, Anselmi F, De Clemente C, Orlandini M, Oliviero S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Molecolare, Universita' di Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy.

Growth factor stimulation induces c-Jun-dependent survival of primary endothelial
cells. However, the mechanism of c-Jun anti-apoptotic activity has not been
identified. We here demonstrate that in response to growth factor treatment,
primary human endothelial cells as well as mouse fibroblasts respond with an
increased expression of c-Jun that forms a complex with ATF2. This complex
activates the expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-X(L). By site-directed
mutagenesis experiments, we identified two AP-1-binding sites located within the 
proximal promoter of the Bcl-X gene. Site-directed mutagenesis demonstrated that 
these AP-1 sites are required for the transcriptional activation of the promoter.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments show that in response to growth factor 
treatment, the heterodimer c-Jun.ATF2 binds to these functional AP-1 sites.
Silencing of either c-Jun or ATF2 demonstrated that both nuclear factors are
required for the activation of the proximal Bcl-X promoter. Taken together, our
experiments provide evidence that growth factor-independent signaling pathways
converge in the formation of an active c-Jun.AFT2 dimer, which induces the
expression of the anti-apoptotic factor Bcl-X(L) that mediates a pro-survival
response.

PMCID: PMC2906303
PMID: 20507983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Neurochem Res. 2010 Aug;35(8):1239-47. doi: 10.1007/s11064-010-0180-9. Epub 2010 
May 11.

Assessment of protein expression levels after transient global cerebral ischemia 
using an antibody microarray analysis.

Ayuso MI(1), García-Bonilla L, Martín ME, Salinas M.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Bioquímica-Investigación, Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Irycis, Madrid, 
Spain.

An antibody microarray was used to analyze potential modifications in brain
protein levels induced by ischemic reperfusion. Total brain extracts from rats
subjected to 15 min of transient global ischemia followed by 3 days of
reperfusion and sham control animals were compared within the same array.
Separate arrays were run to analyze resistant (cortex) and vulnerable (CA1)
regions to ischemia. Candidate components distinguishing the two cellular
populations were selected under stringent criteria. IR significantly decreased
the expression of Bcl-x, caspase 11, GADD153, Cdk4, E2F1, Retinoblastoma-P,
SMAD4, AP-1/c-jun, ATF2, PCAF, MAP1b and cofilin within both regions. NGF and
NMDA 2A receptors and IkappaB were specifically down-regulated in CA1, while
Pyk2-P, b-NOS, and tyrosine hydroxylase were slightly up-regulated in the same
region. Some of the array results were validated by western blot. Both the array 
and western blot results suggested a relevant IR induced activation of calpain
specifically at CA1.

PMID: 20458535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010 Aug 1;246(3):128-40. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2010.04.016. Epub 2010 Apr 25.

Disruption of Smad-dependent signaling for growth of GST-P-positive lesions from 
the early stage in a rat two-stage hepatocarcinogenesis model.

Ichimura R(1), Mizukami S(1), Takahashi M(2), Taniai E(1), Kemmochi S(3),
Mitsumori K(1), Shibutani M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Tokyo University of Agriculture and
Technology, 3-5-8 Saiwai-cho, Fuchu-shi, Tokyo 183-8509, Japan. (2)Division of
Pathology, National Institute of Health Sciences, 1-18-1 Kamiyoga, Setagaya-ku,
Tokyo 158-8501, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Tokyo University of
Agriculture and Technology, 3-5-8 Saiwai-cho, Fuchu-shi, Tokyo 183-8509, Japan;
Pathogenetic Veterinary Science, United Graduate School of Veterinary Sciences,
Gifu University, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu-shi, Gifu 501-1193, Japan.

To clarify the involvement of signaling of transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß
during the hepatocarcinogenesis, the immunohistochemical distribution of related 
molecules was analyzed in relation with liver cell lesions expressing glutathione
S-transferase placental form (GST-P) during liver tumor promotion by
fenbendazole, phenobarbital, piperonyl butoxide, or thioacetamide, using rats.
Our study focused on early-stage promotion (6weeks after starting promotion) and 
late-stage promotion (57weeks after starting promotion). With regard to
Smad-dependent signaling, cytoplasmic accumulation of phosphorylated Smad
(phospho-Smad)-2/3 - identified as Smad3 by later immunoblot analysis - increased
in the subpopulation of GST-P(+) foci, while Smad4, a nuclear transporter of
Smad2/3, decreased during early-stage promotion. By late-stage promotion,
GST-P(+) lesions lacking phospho-Smad2/3 had increased in accordance with lesion 
development from foci to carcinomas, while Smad4 largely disappeared in most
proliferative lesions. With regard to Smad-independent mitogen-activated protein 
kinases, GST-P(+) foci that co-expressed phospho-p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase increased during early-stage promotion; however, p38-downstream
phospho-activating transcriptional factor (ATF)-2, ATF3, and phospho-c-Myc, were 
inversely downregulated without relation to promotion. By late-stage promotion,
proliferative lesions downregulated phospho-ATF2 and phospho-c-Myc along with
lesion development, as with downregulation of phospho-p38 in all lesions. These
results suggest that from the early stages, carcinogenic processes were
facilitated by disruption of tumor suppressor functions of Smad-dependent
signaling, while Smad-independent activation of p38 was an early-stage
phenomenon. GST-P(-) foci induced by promotion with agonists of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-a did not change Smad expression, suggesting an
aberration in the Smad-dependent signaling prerequisites for induction of
GST-P(+) proliferative lesions.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20423715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. PLoS Genet. 2010 Apr 1;6(4):e1000892. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000892.

Phosphorylation of the conserved transcription factor ATF-7 by PMK-1 p38 MAPK
regulates innate immunity in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Shivers RP(1), Pagano DJ, Kooistra T, Richardson CE, Reddy KC, Whitney JK,
Kamanzi O, Matsumoto K, Hisamoto N, Kim DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Innate immunity in Caenorhabditis elegans requires a conserved PMK-1 p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway that regulates the basal and
pathogen-induced expression of immune effectors. The mechanisms by which PMK-1
p38 MAPK regulates the transcriptional activation of the C. elegans immune
response have not been identified. Furthermore, in mammalian systems the genetic 
analysis of physiological targets of p38 MAPK in immunity has been limited. Here,
we show that C. elegans ATF-7, a member of the conserved cyclic AMP-responsive
element binding (CREB)/activating transcription factor (ATF) family of
basic-region leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors and an ortholog of
mammalian ATF2/ATF7, has a pivotal role in the regulation of PMK-1-mediated
innate immunity. Genetic analysis of loss-of-function alleles and a
gain-of-function allele of atf-7, combined with expression analysis of
PMK-1-regulated genes and biochemical characterization of the interaction between
ATF-7 and PMK-1, suggest that ATF-7 functions as a repressor of PMK-1-regulated
genes that undergoes a switch to an activator upon phosphorylation by PMK-1.
Whereas loss-of-function mutations in atf-7 can restore basal expression of
PMK-1-regulated genes observed in the pmk-1 null mutant, the induction of
PMK-1-regulated genes by pathogenic Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14 is abrogated. The
switching modes of ATF-7 activity, from repressor to activator in response to
activated PMK-1 p38 MAPK, are reminiscent of the mechanism of regulation mediated
by the corresponding ancestral Sko1p and Hog1p proteins in the yeast response to 
osmotic stress. Our data point to the regulation of the ATF2/ATF7/CREB5 family of
transcriptional regulators by p38 MAPK as an ancient conserved mechanism for the 
control of innate immunity in metazoans, and suggest that ATF2/ATF7 may function 
in a similar manner in the regulation of mammalian innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC2848548
PMID: 20369020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Physiol. 2010 May 15;588(Pt 10):1779-90. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2010.188011.
Epub 2010 Mar 22.

Exercise intensity-dependent regulation of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor coactivator-1 mRNA abundance is associated with differential activation 
of upstream signalling kinases in human skeletal muscle.

Egan B(1), Carson BP, Garcia-Roves PM, Chibalin AV, Sarsfield FM, Barron N,
McCaffrey N, Moyna NM, Zierath JR, O'Gorman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health and Human Performance, Dublin City University, Dublin 9,
Ireland.

Comment in
    J Physiol. 2010 Nov 1;588(Pt 21):4073-4.

Skeletal muscle contraction increases intracellular ATP turnover, calcium flux,
and mechanical stress, initiating signal transduction pathways that modulate
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha
(PGC-1alpha)-dependent transcriptional programmes. The purpose of this study was 
to determine if the intensity of exercise regulates PGC-1alpha expression in
human skeletal muscle, coincident with activation of signalling cascades known to
regulate PGC-1alpha transcription. Eight sedentary males expended 400 kcal (1674 
kj) during a single bout of cycle ergometer exercise on two separate occasions at
either 40% (LO) or 80% (HI) of . Skeletal muscle biopsies from the m. vastus
lateralis were taken at rest and at +0, +3 and +19 h after exercise. Energy
expenditure during exercise was similar between trials, but the high intensity
bout was shorter in duration (LO, 69.9 +/- 4.0 min; HI, 36.0 +/- 2.2 min, P <
0.05) and had a higher rate of glycogen utilization (P < 0.05). PGC-1alpha mRNA
abundance increased in an intensity-dependent manner +3 h after exercise (LO,
3.8-fold; HI, 10.2-fold, P < 0.05). AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)
(2.8-fold, P < 0.05) and calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) 
phosphorylation (84%, P < 0.05) increased immediately after HI but not LO. p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation increased after both
trials (2.0-fold, P < 0.05), but phosphorylation of the downstream transcription 
factor, activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2), increased only after HI
(2.4-fold, P < 0.05). Cyclic-AMP response element binding protein (CREB)
phosphorylation was elevated at +3 h after both trials (80%, P < 0.05) and class 
IIa histone deacetylase (HDAC) phosphorylation increased only after HI (2.0-fold,
P < 0.05). In conclusion, exercise intensity regulates PGC-1alpha mRNA abundance 
in human skeletal muscle in response to a single bout of exercise. This effect is
mediated by differential activation of multiple signalling pathways, with ATF-2
and HDAC phosphorylation proposed as key intensity-dependent mediators.

PMCID: PMC2887994
PMID: 20308248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 Mar 15;4:23. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-23.

Two additive mechanisms impair the differentiation of 'substrate-selective' p38
inhibitors from classical p38 inhibitors in vitro.

Hendriks BS(1), Seidl KM, Chabot JR.

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology, Pfizer Research Technology Center, 620 Memorial Drive,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. bhendriks@merrimackpharma.com

BACKGROUND: The success of anti-TNF biologics for the treatment of rheumatoid
arthritis has highlighted the importance of understanding the intracellular
pathways that regulate TNF production in the quest for an orally-available small 
molecule inhibitor. p38 is known to strongly regulate TNF production via MK2. The
failure of several p38 inhibitors in the clinic suggests the importance of other 
downstream pathways in normal cell function. Recent work has described a
'substrate-selective' p38 inhibitor that is able to preferentially block the
activity of p38 against one substrate (MK2) versus another (ATF2). Using a
combined experimental and computational approach, we have examined this mechanism
in greater detail for two p38 substrates, MK2 and ATF2.
RESULTS: We found that in a dual (MK2 and ATF2) substrate assay, MK2-p38
interaction reduced the activity of p38 against ATF2. We further constructed a
detailed kinetic mechanistic model of p38 phosphorylation in the presence of
multiple substrates and successfully predicted the performance of classical and
so-called 'substrate-selective' p38 inhibitors in the dual substrate assay.
Importantly, it was found that excess MK2 results in a stoichiometric effect in
which the formation of p38-MK2-inhibitor complex prevents the phosphorylation of 
ATF2, despite the preference of the compound for the p38-MK2 complex over the
p38-ATF2 complex. MK2 and p38 protein expression levels were quantified in U937, 
Thp-1 and PBMCs and found that [MK2] > [p38].
CONCLUSION: Our integrated mechanistic modeling and experimental validation
provides an example of how systems biology approaches can be applied to drug
discovery and provide a basis for decision-making with limited chemical matter.
We find that, given our current understanding, it is unlikely that
'substrate-selective' inhibitors of p38 will work as originally intended when
placed in the context of more complex cellular environments, largely due to a
stoichiometric excess of MK2 relative to p38.

PMCID: PMC2850882
PMID: 20230629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. FASEB J. 2010 Jul;24(7):2417-26. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-150615. Epub 2010 Mar 9.

Negative regulation of Wnt signaling mediated by CK1-phosphorylated Dishevelled
via Ror2.

Witte F(1), Bernatik O, Kirchner K, Masek J, Mahl A, Krejci P, Mundlos S,
Schambony A, Bryja V, Stricker S.

Author information: 
(1)Development and Disease Group, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics,
Ihnestr. 73, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Dishevelled (Dvl) is a multifunctional effector of different Wnt cascades. Both
canonical Wnt3a and noncanonical Wnt5a stimulate casein-kinase-1 (CK1) -mediated 
phosphorylation of Dvl, visualized as electrophoretic mobility shift
[phosphorylated and shifted Dvl (ps-Dvl)]. However, the role of this
phosphorylation remains obscure. Here we report the functional interaction of
ps-Dvl with the receptor tyrosine kinase Ror2, which is an alternative Wnt
receptor and is able to inhibit canonical Wnt signaling. We demonstrate
interaction between Ror2 and ps-Dvl at the cell membrane after Wnt3a or Wnt5a
stimulus dependent on CK1. Ps-Dvl interacts with the C-terminal
proline-serine-threonine-rich domain of Ror2, which is required for efficient
inhibition of canonical Wnt signaling. We further show that the Dvl C terminus,
which seems to be exposed in ps-Dvl and efficiently binds Ror2, is an intrinsic
negative regulator of the canonical Wnt pathway downstream of beta-catenin. The
Dvl C terminus is necessary and sufficient to inhibit canonical Wnt/beta-catenin 
signaling, which is dependent on the presence of Ror2. Furthermore, both the Dvl 
C terminus and CK1epsilon can inhibit the Wnt5a/Ror2/ATF2 pathway in mammalian
cells and Xenopus explant cultures. This suggests that phosphorylation of Dvl
triggers negative feedback regulation for different branches of Wnt signaling in 
a Ror2-dependent manner.

PMID: 20215527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010 May;298(5):C1226-34. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00021.2010. Epub 2010 Feb 24.

Induced ATF-2 represses CDK4 transcription through dimerization with JunD
inhibiting intestinal epithelial cell growth after polyamine depletion.

Xiao L(1), Rao JN, Zou T, Liu L, Yu TX, Zhu XY, Donahue JM, Wang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD, USA.

Intestinal epithelium is a rapidly self-renewing tissue in the body, and its
homeostasis is tightly regulated by numerous factors including polyamines.
Decreased levels of cellular polyamines increase activating transcription factor 
(ATF)-2, but the exact role and mechanism of induced ATF-2 in the regulation of
intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) growth remain elusive. Cyclin-dependent kinase
(CDK) 4 is necessary for the G1-to-S phase transition during the cell cycle, and 
its expression is predominantly controlled at the transcription level. Here, we
reported that induced ATF-2 following polyamine depletion repressed CDK4 gene
transcription in IECs by increasing formation of the ATF-2/JunD heterodimers.
ATF-2 formed complexes with JunD as measured by immunoprecipitation using the
ATF-2 and JunD antibodies and by glutathione S-transferase (GST) pull-down assays
using GST-ATF-2 fusion proteins. Studies using various mutants of GST-ATF-2
revealed that formation of the ATF-2/JunD dimers depended on the COOH-terminal
basic region-leucine zipper domain of ATF-2. Polyamine depletion increased
ATF-2/JunD complex and inhibited CDK4 transcription as indicated by a decrease in
the levels of CDK4-promoter activity and its mRNA. ATF-2 silencing not only
prevented inhibition of CDK4 transcription in polyamine-deficient cells but also 
abolished repression of CDK4 expression induced by ectopic JunD overexpression.
ATF-2 silencing also promoted IEC growth in polyamine-depleted cells. These
results indicate that induced ATF-2/JunD association following polyamine
depletion represses CDK4 transcription, thus contributing to the inhibition of
IEC growth.

PMCID: PMC2867388
PMID: 20181929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 7;285(19):14791-805. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.116905. Epub
2010 Feb 23.

cAMP/CREB-mediated transcriptional regulation of ectonucleoside triphosphate
diphosphohydrolase 1 (CD39) expression.

Liao H(1), Hyman MC, Baek AE, Fukase K, Pinsky DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

CD39 is a transmembrane enzyme that inhibits platelet reactivity and inflammation
by phosphohydrolyzing ATP and ADP to AMP. Cyclic AMP (cAMP), an essential second 
messenger, is particularly important in regulating genes controlling vascular
homeostasis. These experiments test the hypothesis that cAMP might positively
regulate the expression of CD39 and thereby modulate important vascular
homeostatic properties. Cd39 mRNA was induced by 13.8- fold in RAW cells treated 
with a membrane-permeant cAMP analogue (8-bromo-cyclic AMP; 8-Br-cAMP),
stimulation of adenylate cyclase, or prostanoids known to drive cAMP response.
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting, immunofluorescence, and TLC assays
demonstrated that both CD39 protein expression and enzymatic activity were
increased in cells treated with 8-Br-cAMP but not in cells transfected with short
hairpin RNA against CD39. This analogue drove a significant increase in
transcriptional activity at the Cd39 promoter although not when the promoter's
cAMP-response element sites were mutated. Pretreatment with cAMP-dependent
protein kinase (PKA), phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), or ERK inhibitors nearly 
obliterated the cAMP-driven increase in Cd39 mRNA, protein expression, and
promoter activity. 8-Br-cAMP greatly increased the phosphorylation of CREB1
(Ser(133)) and ATF2 (Thr(71)) in a PKA-, PI3K-, and ERK-dependent fashion.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that binding of phosphorylated 
CREB1 and ATF2 to cAMP-response element-like sites was significantly increased
with 8-Br-cAMP treatment and that binding was reduced with PKA, PI3K, and ERK
inhibition, whereas transfection of Creb1 and Atf2 overexpression constructs
enhanced cAMP-driven Cd39 mRNA expression. Transfection of RAW cells with mutated
Creb1 (S133A) reduced cAMP-driven Cd39 mRNA expression. Furthermore, the
cAMP-mediated induction of Cd39 mRNA, protein, and phosphohydrolytic activity was
replicated in primary peritoneal macrophages. These data identify cAMP as a
crucial regulator of macrophage CD39 expression and demonstrate that cAMP acts
through the PKA/CREB, PKA/PI3K/ATF2, and PKA/ERK/ATF2 pathways to control a key
vascular homeostatic mediator.

PMCID: PMC2863166
PMID: 20178980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Cytotechnology. 2009 Dec;61(3):125-34. doi: 10.1007/s10616-010-9253-5. Epub 2010 
Feb 17.

Inhibitory effect of luteolin on osteoclast differentiation and function.

Lee JW(1), Ahn JY, Hasegawa S, Cha BY, Yonezawa T, Nagai K, Seo HJ, Jeon WB, Woo 
JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Chubu University, 1200 Matsumoto, Kasugai,
Aichi, 487-8501, Japan.

Osteoclasts are multinucleated cells that play a crucial role in bone resorption,
and are formed by the fusion of mononuclear osteoclasts derived from osteoclast
precursors of the macrophage lineage. Compounds that specifically target
functional osteoclasts would be ideal candidates for anti-resorptive agents for
clinical applications. In the present study, we investigated the effects of
luteolin, a flavonoid, on the regulation of receptor activator of nuclear
factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL)-induced osteoclastogenesis, functions and signaling 
pathway. Addition of luteolin to a coculture system of mouse bone marrow cells
and ST2 cells in the presence of 10(-8) M 1alpha,25(OH)(2)D(3) caused significant
inhibition of osteoclastogenesis. Luteolin had no effects on the
1alpha,25(OH)(2)D(3)-induced expressions of RANKL, osteoprotegerin and macrophage
colony-stimulating factor mRNAs. Next, we examined the direct effects of luteolin
on osteoclast precursors using bone marrow macrophages and RAW264.7 cells.
Luteolin completely inhibited RANKL-induced osteoclast formation. Moreover,
luteolin inhibited the bone resorption by mature osteoclasts accompanied by the
disruption of their actin rings, and these effects were reversely induced by the 
disruption of the actin rings in mature osteoclasts. Finally, we found that
luteolin inhibited RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis through the suppression of
ATF2, downstream of p38 MAPK and nuclear factor of activated T-cells,
cytoplasmic, calcineurin-dependent 1 (NFATc1) expression, respectively. Taken
together, the present results indicate that naturally occurring luteolin has
inhibitory activities toward both osteoclast differentiation and functions
through inhibition of RANKL-induced signaling pathway as well as actin ring
disruption, respectively.

PMCID: PMC2825295
PMID: 20162352  [PubMed]


322. Aging (Albany NY). 2009 Jul 31;1(9):784-802.

Dermal fibroblasts from long-lived Ames dwarf mice maintain their in vivo
resistance to mitochondrial generated reactive oxygen species (ROS).

Hsieh CC(1), Papaconstantinou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555, USA.

Activation of p38 MAPK by ROS involves dissociation of an inactive, reduced
thioredoxin-ASK1 complex [(SH)(2)Trx-ASK1]. Release of ASK1 activates its kinase 
activity thus stimulating the p38 MAPK pathway. The level of p38 MAPK activity
is, therefore, regulated by the balance of free vs. bound ASK1. Longevity of Ames
dwarf mice is attributed to their resistance to oxidative stress. The levels of
(SH)(2) Trx-ASK1 are more abundant in young and old dwarf mice compared to their 
age-matched controls suggesting that the levels of this complex may play a role
in their resistance to oxidative stress. In these studies we demonstrate that
dermal fibroblasts from these long-lived mice exhibit (a) higher levels of
(SH)(2)Trx-ASK1 that correlate with their resistance to ROS generated by
inhibitors of electron transport chain complexes CI (rotenone), CII
(3-nitropropionic acid), CIII, (antimycin A), and H(2)O(2)-mediated activation of
p38 MAPK, and (b) maintain their in vivo resistance to ROS generated by 3NPA. We 
propose that elevated levels of (SH)(2)Trx-ASK1 play a role in conferring
resistance to mitochondrial generated oxidative stress and decreased endogenous
ROS which are characteristics of longevity determination.

PMCID: PMC2815737
PMID: 20157567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Theor Appl Genet. 2010 May;120(8):1611-9. doi: 10.1007/s00122-010-1280-2. Epub
2010 Feb 9.

SRAP polymorphisms associated with superior freezing tolerance in alfalfa
(Medicago sativa spp. sativa).

Castonguay Y(1), Cloutier J, Bertrand A, Michaud R, Laberge S.

Author information: 
(1)Crops and Soils Research and Development Center, Agriculture and Agri-Food
Canada, 2560 Hochelaga Blvd, Quebec, QC, G1V 2J3, Canada.
yves.castonguay@agr.gc.ca

Sequence-related amplified polymorphism (SRAP) analysis was used to uncover
genetic polymorphisms among alfalfa populations recurrently selected for superior
tolerance to freezing (TF populations). Bulk DNA samples (45 plants/bulk) from
each of the cultivar Apica (ATF0), and populations ATF2, ATF4, ATF5, and ATF6
were evaluated with 42 different SRAP primer pairs. Several polymorphisms that
progressively intensified or decreased with the number of recurrent cycles were
identified. Four positive polymorphisms (F10-R14, Me4-R8, F10-R8 and F11-R9)
that, respectively, yielded 540-, 359-, 213-, and 180-bp fragments were selected 
for further analysis. SRAP amplifications with genotypes within ATF populations
confirmed that the polymorphisms identified with bulk DNA samples were reflecting
changes in the frequency of their occurrence in response to selection. In
addition, the number of genotypes cumulating multiple polymorphisms markedly
increased in response to recurrent selection. Independent segregation of the four
SRAP polymorphisms suggests location at unlinked loci. Homology search gave
matches with BAC clones from syntenic Medicago truncatula for the four SRAP
fragments. Analysis of the relationship with low temperature tolerance showed
that multiple SRAP polymorphisms are more frequent in genotypes that maintain
superior regrowth after freezing. These results show that SRAP analysis of bulk
DNA samples from recurrent selections is an effective approach for the
identification of genetic polymorphisms associated with quantitative traits in
allogamous species. These polymorphisms could be useful tools for indirect
selection of freezing tolerance in alfalfa.

PMID: 20143042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 4;5(2):e9057. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009057.

Staphylococcal PknB as the first prokaryotic representative of the
proline-directed kinases.

Miller M(1), Donat S, Rakette S, Stehle T, Kouwen TR, Diks SH, Dreisbach A,
Reilman E, Gronau K, Becher D, Peppelenbosch MP, van Dijl JM, Ohlsen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Groningen and
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

In eukaryotic cell types, virtually all cellular processes are under control of
proline-directed kinases and especially MAP kinases. Serine/threonine kinases in 
general were originally considered as a eukaryote-specific enzyme family.
However, recent studies have revealed that orthologues of eukaryotic
serine/threonine kinases exist in bacteria. Moreover, various pathogenic species,
such as Yersinia and Mycobacterium, require serine/threonine kinases for
successful invasion of human host cells. The substrates targeted by bacterial
serine/threonine kinases have remained largely unknown. Here we report that the
serine/threonine kinase PknB from the important pathogen Staphylococcus aureus is
released into the external milieu, which opens up the possibility that PknB does 
not only phosphorylate bacterial proteins but also proteins of the human host. To
identify possible human targets of purified PknB, we studied in vitro
phosphorylation of peptide microarrays and detected 68 possible human targets for
phosphorylation. These results show that PknB is a proline-directed kinase with
MAP kinase-like enzymatic activity. As the potential cellular targets for PknB
are involved in apoptosis, immune responses, transport, and metabolism, PknB
secretion may help the bacterium to evade intracellular killing and facilitate
its growth. In apparent agreement with this notion, phosphorylation of the
host-cell response coordinating transcription factor ATF-2 by PknB was confirmed 
by mass spectrometry. Taken together, our results identify PknB as the first
prokaryotic representative of the proline-directed kinase/MAP kinase family of
enzymes.

PMCID: PMC2816222
PMID: 20140229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Biochemistry. 2010 Mar 9;49(9):1985-97. doi: 10.1021/bi902065k.

Identification of bZIP interaction partners of viral proteins HBZ, MEQ, BZLF1,
and K-bZIP using coiled-coil arrays.

Reinke AW(1), Grigoryan G, Keating AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Basic-region leucine-zipper transcription factors (bZIPs) contain a segment rich 
in basic amino acids that can bind DNA, followed by a leucine zipper that can
interact with other leucine zippers to form coiled-coil homo- or heterodimers.
Several viruses encode proteins containing bZIP domains, including four that
encode bZIPs lacking significant homology to any human protein. We investigated
the interaction specificity of these four viral bZIPs by using coiled-coil arrays
to assess self-associations as well as heterointeractions with 33 representative 
human bZIPs. The arrays recapitulated reported viral-human interactions and also 
uncovered new associations. MEQ and HBZ interacted with multiple human partners
and had unique interaction profiles compared to any human bZIPs, whereas K-bZIP
and BZLF1 displayed homospecificity. New interactions detected included HBZ with 
MAFB, MAFG, ATF2, CEBPG, and CREBZF and MEQ with NFIL3. These were confirmed in
solution using circular dichroism. HBZ can heteroassociate with MAFB and MAFG in 
the presence of MARE-site DNA, and this interaction is dependent on the basic
region of HBZ. NFIL3 and MEQ have different yet overlapping DNA-binding
specificities and can form a heterocomplex with DNA. Computational design
considering both affinity for MEQ and specificity with respect to other undesired
bZIP-type interactions was used to generate a MEQ dimerization inhibitor. This
peptide, anti-MEQ, bound MEQ both stably and specifically, as assayed using
coiled-coil arrays and circular dichroism in solution. Anti-MEQ also inhibited
MEQ binding to DNA. These studies can guide further investigation of the function
of viral and human bZIP complexes.

PMCID: PMC2841013
PMID: 20102225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Endocrinology. 2010 Mar;151(3):1060-70. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0977. Epub 2010 Jan 
22.

Regulation of aldosterone synthase by activator transcription factor/cAMP
response element-binding protein family members.

Nogueira EF(1), Rainey WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Medical College of Georgia, 1120 15th Street,
Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

Aldosterone synthesis is regulated by angiotensin II (Ang II) and K(+) acting in 
the adrenal zona glomerulosa, in part through the regulation of aldosterone
synthase (CYP11B2). Here, we analyzed the role of cAMP response element
(CRE)-binding proteins (CREBs) in the regulation of CYP11B2. Expression analysis 
of activator transcription factor (ATF)/CREB family members, namely the ATF1 and 
ATF2, the CREB, and the CRE modulator, in H295R cells and normal human adrenal
tissue was performed using quantitative real-time PCR. Ang II-induced
phosphorylation of ATF/CREB members was analyzed by Western blot analysis, and
their subsequent binding to the CYP11B2 promoter using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. Aldosterone production and CYP11B2 expression were
measured in small interfering RNA-transfected cells to knockdown the expression
of ATF/CREB members. CYP11B2 promoter activity was measured in H295R cells
cotransfected with NURR1 (NR4A2) alone or with constitutively active vectors for 
ATF/CREB members. Ang II induced phosphorylation of ATF1, ATF2, and CRE modulator
in a time-dependent manner. Based on chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis,
there was an increased association of these proteins with the CYP11B2 promoter
after Ang II and K(+) treatment. Phosphorylated ATF/CREB members also bound the
CYP11B2 promoter. Knockdown of ATF/CREB members reduced Ang II and K(+) induction
of adrenal cell CYP11B2 mRNA expression and aldosterone production. The
constitutively active ATF/CREB vectors increased the promoter activity of CYP11B2
and had a synergistic effect with NURR1. In summary, these results suggest that
ATF/CREB and NGFI-B family members play a crucial role in the transcriptional
regulation of CYP11B2 and adrenal cell capacity to produce aldosterone.

PMCID: PMC2840695
PMID: 20097716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Cell Microbiol. 2010 Jun;12(6):831-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01436.x.
Epub 2010 Jan 29.

CRK adaptor protein expression is required for efficient replication of avian
influenza A viruses and controls JNK-mediated apoptotic responses.

Hrincius ER(1), Wixler V, Wolff T, Wagner R, Ludwig S, Ehrhardt C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Virology, ZMBE, Muenster, Germany.

The non-structural protein 1 (A/NS1) of influenza A viruses (IAV) harbours
several src-homology domain (SH) binding motifs that are required for interaction
with cellular proteins. The SH3 binding motif at aa212-217 [PPLPPK] of A/NS1 was 
shown to be essential for binding to the cellular adaptor proteins CRK and CRKL. 
Both regulate diverse cellular effector pathways, including activation of the
MAP-kinase JNK that in turn mediates antiviral responses to IAV infection. By
studying functional consequences of A/NS1-CRK interaction we show here that A/NS1
binding to CRK contributes to suppression of the antiviral-acting JNK-ATF2
pathway. However, only IAV that encode an A/NS1-protein harbouring the CRK/CRKL
SH3 binding motif PPLPPK were attenuated upon downregulation of CRKI/II and CRKL,
but not of CRKII alone. The PPLPPK site-harbouring candidate strains could be
discriminated from other strains by a pronounced viral activation of the JNK-ATF2
signalling module that was even further boosted upon knock-down of CRKI/II.
Interestingly, this enhanced JNK activation did not alter type-I IFN-expression, 
but rather resulted in increased levels of virus-induced cell death. Our results 
imply that binding capacity of A/NS1 to CRK/CRKL has evolved in virus strains
that over-induce the antiviral acting JNK-ATF2 signalling module and helps to
suppress the detrimental apoptosis promoting action of this pathway.

PMID: 20088952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2010 Jul;136(7):1089-99. doi: 10.1007/s00432-009-0756-4.
Epub 2010 Jan 20.

Differential sensitivity of human endometrial carcinoma cells with different PTEN
expression to mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling inhibits and
implications for therapy.

Xiao L(1), Yang YB, Li XM, Xu CF, Li T, Wang XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun
Yat-sen University, 600 TianHe Road, 510630 Guangzhou, People's Republic of
China.

PURPOSE: Prior studies in different tumor models have shown that, under
conditions of PTEN deficiency, the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signaling pathway appear to play a major role in the tumor cell's proliferative
and survival pathway, and that pharmacological inhibition of this pathway results
in tumor growth inhibition. This study aimed to explore whether sensitivity to
p38MAPK inhibitors are specifically due to status of PTEN in endometrial cancer
cells.
METHODS: We developed a series of endometrial cancer cell lines with different
PTEN expressions (Ishikawa, RL-952, HEC-1B and HEC-1A cells) or introduced the
wild-type PTEN and PTEN-siRNA in four endometrial cancer cells to change its PTEN
expression with a p38MAPK inhibitor, SB203580 for 2 days. Cell proliferation,
cell apoptosis, and cell cycle distribution were studied, and activation of AKT, 
ATF-2, and p38MAPK was examined by Western blotting.
RESULTS: In cultivated PTEN-deficient endometrial cancer cells, in addition to an
activation of AKT, a phosphorylation of p38MAPK and ATF-2 was evident, while
PTEN-positive endometrial cancer cells lacked AKT activation but revealed a
reduced expression of p-p38MAPK and p-ATF-2. These PTEN-deficient endometrial
cancer cells demonstrated an increased sensitivity to the anti-proliferative
effects induced by SB203580 compared with the PTEN-positive endometrial cancer
cells, which corresponded to alterations in cell cycle response and cell
apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: PTEN-deficient endometrial cancer cells exhibit higher p38MAPK
activity, and genetic studies demonstrate that p38MAPK functions dependently of
AKT. Furthermore, PTEN loss sensitizes cells to p38MAPK inhibition in endometrial
carcinoma cells. These findings indicate that inhibitors of p38MAPK have the
potential to be effective in the treatment of endometrial cancer patients with
PTEN-deficient tumors and should be evaluated in this setting.

PMID: 20087603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 23;285(17):12629-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.073320. Epub
2010 Jan 12.

Exogenous Nef is an inhibitor of Mycobacterium tuberculosis-induced tumor
necrosis factor-alpha production and macrophage apoptosis.

Kumawat K(1), Pathak SK, Spetz AL, Kundu M, Basu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Bose Institute, 93/1 APC Road, Kolkata 700009, India.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 8;291(2):665-6.

Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) impairs tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha)-mediated macrophage apoptosis induced by Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(Mtb). HIV Nef protein plays an important role in the pathogenesis of AIDS. We
have tested the hypothesis that exogenous Nef is a factor that inhibits TNF-alpha
production/apoptosis in macrophages infected with Mtb. We demonstrate that Mtb
and Nef individually trigger TNF-alpha production in macrophages. However,
TNF-alpha production is dampened when the two are present simultaneously,
probably through cross-regulation of the individual signaling pathways leading to
activation of the TNF-alpha promoter. Mtb-induced TNF-alpha production is
abrogated upon mutation of the Ets, Egr, Sp1, CRE, or AP1 binding sites on the
TNF-alpha promoter, whereas Nef-mediated promoter activation depends only on the 
CRE and AP1 binding sites, pointing to differences in the mechanisms of
activation of the promoter. Mtb-dependent promoter activation depends on the
mitogen-activated kinase (MAPK) kinase kinase ASK1 and on MEK/ERK signaling. Nef 
inhibits ASK1/p38 MAPK-dependent Mtb-induced TNF-alpha production probably by
inhibiting binding of ATF2 to the TNF-alpha promoter. It also inhibits
MEK/ERK-dependent Mtb-induced binding of FosB to the promoter. Nef-driven
TNF-alpha production occurs in an ASK1-independent, Rac1/PAK1/p38 MAPK-dependent,
and MEK/ERK-independent manner. The signaling pathways used by Mtb and Nef to
trigger TNF-alpha production are therefore distinctly different. In addition to
attenuating Mtb-dependent TNF-alpha promoter activation, Nef also reduces
Mtb-dependent TNF-alpha mRNA stability probably through its ability to inhibit
ASK1/p38 MAPK signaling. These results provide new insight into how HIV Nef
probably exacerbates tuberculosis infection by virtue of its ability to dampen
Mtb-induced TNF-alpha production.

PMCID: PMC2857058
PMID: 20068037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Neurochem. 2010 May;113(4):807-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06574.x. Epub 
2010 Jan 8.

ATF2 maintains a subset of neural progenitors through CBF1/Notch independent
Hes-1 expression and synergistically activates the expression of Hes-1 in
Notch-dependent neural progenitors.

Sanalkumar R(1), Indulekha CL, Divya TS, Divya MS, Anto RJ, Vinod B, Vidyanand S,
Jagatha B, Venugopal S, James J.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology Division, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Trivandrum,
Kerala, India.

Hes-1 and Hes-5 are downstream effectors of Notch signaling that are known to be 
involved in different aspects of neural stem cell proliferation and
differentiation. Evidence has emerged that Hes-1 expression can be regulated by
alternate signaling pathways independent of canonical Notch/CBF1 interaction.
This context-dependent differential regulation of Hes-1 expression in neural
progenitor gains a lot of importance as it would help in its exponential
expansion without the requirement of interaction from neighboring cells during
development. Here, we have clearly demonstrated the existence of a population of 
neural progenitors with Notch/CBF1-independent Hes-1 expression in vitro. Further
analysis demonstrated the role of FGF2 in activating Hes-1 expression through the
direct binding of ATF2, a JNK downstream target, on Hes-1 promoter. This raises
the possibility for the existence of two distinct populations of neural
progenitors - one maintained by Hes-1 expression exclusively through
Notch-independent mechanism and the other mediating Hes-1 expression through both
canonical Notch and FGF2-ATF2 pathway. This alternative pathway will insure a
constant expression of Hes-1 even in the absence of canonical Notch intracellular
domain-mediated signaling, thereby maintaining a pool of proliferating neural
progenitors required during development.

PMID: 20067572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Biochem. 2010 May;147(5):671-8. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvp208. Epub 2010 Jan 4.

Lysophosphatidylinositol induces rapid phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase and activating transcription factor 2 in HEK293 cells expressing
GPR55 and IM-9 lymphoblastoid cells.

Oka S(1), Kimura S, Toshida T, Ota R, Yamashita A, Sugiura T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Teikyo University, Sagamihara, Kanagawa
229-0195, Japan.

Lysophosphatidylinositol (LPI) is an endogenous ligand for GPR55, a putative
novel type of cannabinoid receptor. In this study, we first examined the effects 
of LPI on p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in HEK293 cells expressing GPR55. 
LPI induced the rapid phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in 
GPR55-expressing cells. No apparent effect was observed in the vector-transfected
cells. The exposure of GPR55-expressing cells to LPI also triggered the
phosphorylation of activating transcription factor 2 downstream of the p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase. Treatment of the cells with Y-27632 [a
Rho-associated kinase (ROCK) inhibitor] blocked the LPI-induced phosphorylation
of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and activating transcription factor 2,
suggesting that the Rho-ROCK pathway is involved in these cellular responses.
Notably, GPR55 was found to be abundantly expressed in lymphoid organs such as
the spleen and thymus. We obtained evidence that rapid phosphorylation of p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase and activating transcription factor 2 also takes
place in IM-9 lymphoblastoid cells, which naturally express GPR55, after
stimulation with LPI. These results suggest that GPR55 and its endogenous ligand 
LPI play essential roles in the homoeostatic responses to stress signals in
several mammalian tissues and cells including certain types of immune cells.

PMID: 20051382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Exp Biol. 2010 Jan 15;213(2):347-57. doi: 10.1242/jeb.036277.

Hyperthermia-induced Hsp70 and MT20 transcriptional upregulation are mediated by 
p38-MAPK and JNKs in Mytilus galloprovincialis (Lamarck); a pro-survival
response.

Gourgou E(1), Aggeli IK, Beis I, Gaitanaki C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Human Physiology, School of Biology, University of
Athens, Panepistimioupolis, Athens, 157 84, Greece.

In the present study we investigated the signal transduction cascades triggered
by acute thermal stress in Mytilus galloprovincialis gills. This particular
species has been reported to exhibit a significant tolerance to high
temperatures; thus, it was intriguing to examine the molecular mechanisms
responsible for this extraordinary trait. In particular, exposure to 30 degrees C
was found to cause a significant and sustained stimulation of p38-MAPK
phosphorylation while the activation profile of JNKs was transient and relatively
moderate. We also observed that hyperthermia induced apoptosis as a delayed
response, with both MAPK subfamilies rapidly translocating to the nucleus. The
phosphorylation of cJun, ATF2 and NFkappaB was detected next. Using selective
inhibitors, phosphorylation of these transcription factors was established to be 
dependent on p38-MAPK or JNKs. Subsequently, potential changes in gene expression
were assessed. In this context, hyperthermia resulted in the transcriptional
upregulation of Hsp70 and MT20 genes with a widely known salutary effect,
preserving mussel fitness and performance under adverse environmental conditions.
Interestingly, p38-MAPK and JNKs were found to mediate the hyperthermia-induced
Hsp70 and MT20 upregulation as well as the delayed induction of apoptosis under
the interventions studied. Overall this is, to our knowledge, the first time that
an insight into the compensatory survival ;programme' initiated in Mytilus
galloprovincialis gills, contributing to this organism's exceptional tolerance to
thermal stress, has been gained. In particular, we provide evidence demonstrating
the principal role of p38-MAPK and JNKs in transducing the stress signal via
mobilization of specific transcription factors and the transcriptional
upregulation of cytoprotective genes.

PMID: 20038670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Blood. 2010 Mar 25;115(12):2533-42. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-228726. Epub 2009 
Dec 23.

KLF2-induced actin shear fibers control both alignment to flow and JNK signaling 
in vascular endothelium.

Boon RA(1), Leyen TA, Fontijn RD, Fledderus JO, Baggen JM, Volger OL, van Nieuw
Amerongen GP, Horrevoets AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology, VU University Medical
Center, 1081 BT Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The shear stress-induced transcription factor Krüppel-like factor 2 (KLF2)
confers antiinflammatory properties to endothelial cells through the inhibition
of activator protein 1, presumably by interfering with mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) cascades. To gain insight into the regulation of these cascades by 
KLF2, we used antibody arrays in combination with time-course mRNA microarray
analysis. No gross changes in MAPKs were detected; rather, phosphorylation of
actin cytoskeleton-associated proteins, including focal adhesion kinase, was
markedly repressed by KLF2. Furthermore, we demonstrate that KLF2-mediated
inhibition of Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) and its downstream targets
ATF2/c-Jun is dependent on the cytoskeleton. Specifically, KLF2 directs the
formation of typical short basal actin filaments, termed shear fibers by us,
which are distinct from thrombin- or tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced stress
fibers. KLF2 is shown to be essential for shear stress-induced cell alignment,
concomitant shear fiber assembly, and inhibition of JNK signaling. These findings
link the specific effects of shear-induced KLF2 on endothelial morphology to the 
suppression of JNK MAPK signaling in vascular homeostasis via novel actin shear
fibers.

PMID: 20032497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Jan;10(1):65-76. doi: 10.1038/nrc2681.

Emerging roles of ATF2 and the dynamic AP1 network in cancer.

Lopez-Bergami P(1), Lau E, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biologia y Medicina Experimental, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
pablo.bergami@gmail.com

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 May;10(5):379.

Cooperation among transcription factors is central for their ability to execute
specific transcriptional programmes. The AP1 complex exemplifies a network of
transcription factors that function in unison under normal circumstances and
during the course of tumour development and progression. This Perspective
summarizes our current understanding of the changes in members of the AP1 complex
and the role of ATF2 as part of this complex in tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2874064
PMID: 20029425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 5;285(6):3525-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.066787. Epub 2009
Dec 14.

The neuropeptide calcitonin gene-related peptide causes repression of tumor
necrosis factor-alpha transcription and suppression of ATF-2 promoter recruitment
in Toll-like receptor-stimulated dendritic cells.

Altmayr F(1), Jusek G, Holzmann B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Technical University Munich, 81675 Munich, Germany.

Sensory nerves may dampen inflammatory processes through the release of the
neuropeptide calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). CGRP mediates
immunosuppressive activities through up-regulation of interleukin-10 or,
alternatively, through an interleukin-10-independent pathway that is associated
with rapid induction of the transcriptional inducible cAMP early repressor
(ICER). In this work, we further investigated the molecular mechanisms of immune 
modulation by CGRP. Using TLR2-stimulated dendritic cells, we show that
inhibition of tumor necrosis factor-alpha production by CGRP is dependent on
up-regulation of endogenous ICER. Dendritic cell expression of ICER was
selectively induced by CGRP and elevation of cellular cAMP levels but not by
numerous pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines. Treatment of dendritic cells with 
CGRP did not interfere with the induction of Tnfa gene expression but caused
premature repression of TLR2-induced transcriptional activity. ATF-2 was rapidly 
phosphorylated and recruited to the Tnfa promoter following ligation of TLR2.
Concomitant administration of CGRP completely prevented binding of ATF-2 to the
Tnfa promoter, whereas recruitment of ICER was markedly elevated. In contrast,
CGRP did not influence TLR2-stimulated binding of NF-kappaB p65. Together, these 
results are consistent with a model suggesting that CGRP causes rapid
up-regulation of ICER, which in turn competes with ATF-2 for binding to the Tnfa 
promoter, leading to repression of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2823491
PMID: 20018859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Immunol. 2010 Jan 15;184(2):564-72. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902931. Epub 2009
Dec 11.

Glycogen synthase kinase 3beta activation is a prerequisite signal for cytokine
production and chemotaxis in human mast cells.

Rådinger M(1), Kuehn HS, Kim MS, Metcalfe DD, Gilfillan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1881, USA.

In addition to regulating mast cell homeostasis, the activation of KIT following 
ligation by stem cell factor promotes a diversity of mast cell responses,
including cytokine production and chemotaxis. Although we have previously defined
a role for the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 in these responses, it is 
clear that other signals are also required for maximal KIT-dependent cytokine
production and chemotaxis. In this study, we provide evidence to support a role
for glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) in such regulation in human mast
cells (HuMCs). GSK3beta was observed to be constitutively activated in HuMCs.
This activity was inhibited by knockdown of GSK3beta protein following
transduction of these cells with GSK3beta-targeted shRNA. This resulted in a
marked attenuation in the ability of KIT to promote chemotaxis and, in synergy
with FcepsilonRI-mediated signaling, cytokine production. GSK3beta regulated
KIT-dependent mast cell responses independently of mammalian target of rapamycin.
However, evidence from the knockdown studies suggested that GSK3beta was required
for activation of the MAPKs, p38, and JNK and downstream phosphorylation of the
transcription factors, Jun and activating transcription factor 2, in addition to 
activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB. These studies provide evidence 
for a novel prerequisite priming mechanism for KIT-dependent responses regulated 
by GSK3beta in HuMCs.

PMCID: PMC2957662
PMID: 20008284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. BMC Genomics. 2009 Dec 10;10:595. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-595.

Deciphering the transcriptional circuitry of microRNA genes expressed during
human monocytic differentiation.

Schmeier S(1), MacPherson CR, Essack M, Kaur M, Schaefer U, Suzuki H, Hayashizaki
Y, Bajic VB.

Author information: 
(1)South African National Bioinformatics Institute, University of the Western
Cape, Modderdam Road, Bellville, South Africa. sebastian.schmeier@kaust.edu.sa

BACKGROUND: Macrophages are immune cells involved in various biological processes
including host defence, homeostasis, differentiation, and organogenesis.
Disruption of macrophage biology has been linked to increased pathogen infection,
inflammation and malignant diseases. Differential gene expression observed in
monocytic differentiation is primarily regulated by interacting transcription
factors (TFs). Current research suggests that microRNAs (miRNAs) degrade and
repress translation of mRNA, but also may target genes involved in
differentiation. We focus on getting insights into the transcriptional circuitry 
regulating miRNA genes expressed during monocytic differentiation.
RESULTS: We computationally analysed the transcriptional circuitry of miRNA genes
during monocytic differentiation using in vitro time-course expression data for
TFs and miRNAs. A set of TF-->miRNA associations was derived from predicted TF
binding sites in promoter regions of miRNA genes. Time-lagged expression
correlation analysis was utilised to evaluate the TF-->miRNA associations. Our
analysis identified 12 TFs that potentially play a central role in regulating
miRNAs throughout the differentiation process. Six of these 12 TFs (ATF2, E2F3,
HOXA4, NFE2L1, SP3, and YY1) have not previously been described to be important
for monocytic differentiation. The remaining six TFs are CEBPB, CREB1, ELK1,
NFE2L2, RUNX1, and USF2. For several miRNAs (miR-21, miR-155, miR-424, and
miR-17-92), we show how their inferred transcriptional regulation impacts
monocytic differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: The study demonstrates that miRNAs and their transcriptional
regulatory control are integral molecular mechanisms during differentiation.
Furthermore, it is the first study to decipher on a large-scale, how miRNAs are
controlled by TFs during human monocytic differentiation. Subsequently, we have
identified 12 candidate key controllers of miRNAs during this differentiation
process.

PMCID: PMC2797535
PMID: 20003307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Infect Immun. 2010 Feb;78(2):830-7. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00914-09. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

Morphine disrupts interleukin-23 (IL-23)/IL-17-mediated pulmonary mucosal host
defense against Streptococcus pneumoniae infection.

Ma J(1), Wang J, Wan J, Charboneau R, Chang Y, Barke RA, Roy S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic and Translational Research, Department of Surgery,
University of Minnesota, MMC 195, 420 Delaware Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, 
USA.

Streptococcus pneumoniae is a pathogen that causes serious respiratory disease
and meningitis in the immunocompromised drug abuse population. However, the
precise mechanisms by which drug abuse compromises the host immune defense to
pulmonary S. pneumoniae infection is not fully understood. Using a
well-established murine model of opiate abuse and S. pneumoniae lung infection,
we explored the influence of morphine treatment on the interleukin-23
(IL-23)/IL-17 axis and related innate immunity. Impairment of early IL-23/IL-17
production caused by morphine treatment was associated with delayed neutrophil
migration and decreased pneumococcal clearance. Furthermore, morphine treatment
impaired MyD88-dependent IL-23 production in alveolar macrophages and dendritic
cells in response to in vitro S. pneumoniae cell infection. Moreover, morphine
treatment significantly inhibited the S. pneumoniae-induced phosphorylation of
interferon response factor 3 (IRF3), ATF2, and NF-kappaBp65. T-cell receptor
delta (TCRdelta)-deficient mice showed a decrease in IL-17 production and a
severely weakened capacity to clear lung S. pneumoniae infection. Finally,
morphine treatment resulted in diminished secretion of antimicrobial proteins
S100A9 and S100A8/A9 during early stages of S. pneumoniae infection. In
conclusion, morphine treatment causes a dysfunction in IL-23-producing dendritic 
cells and macrophages and IL-17-producing gammadeltaT lymphocytes in response to 
S. pneumoniae lung infection. This leads to diminished release of antimicrobial
S100A8/A9 proteins, compromised neutrophil recruitment, and more-severe
infection.

PMCID: PMC2812200
PMID: 19995896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Feb;30(3):613-25. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00685-09. Epub 2009 Nov
30.

The role of ATF-2 family transcription factors in adipocyte differentiation:
antiobesity effects of p38 inhibitors.

Maekawa T(1), Jin W, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.
maekawa@rtc.riken.jp

ATF-2 is a member of the ATF/CREB family of transcription factors and is
activated by stress-activated protein kinases, such as p38. To analyze the
physiological role of ATF-2 family transcription factors, we have generated mice 
with mutations in Atf-2 and Cre-bpa, an Atf-2-related gene. The
trans-heterozygotes of both mutants were lean and had reduced white adipose
tissue (WAT). ATF-2 and CRE-BPa were required for bone morphogenetic protein 2
(BMP-2)-and p38-dependent induction of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma2 (PPARgamma2), a key transcription factor mediating adipocyte
differentiation. Since stored fat supplies have been recognized as a possible
target for antiobesity treatments, we tested whether inhibition of the p38-ATF-2 
pathway suppresses adipocyte differentiation and leads to reduced WAT by treating
mice with a p38 inhibitor for long periods of time. High-fat diet (HFD)-induced
obesity was significantly reduced in mice fed the p38 inhibitor. Furthermore, the
p38 inhibitor alleviated HFD-induced insulin resistance. In p38 inhibitor-treated
mice, macrophage infiltration into WAT was reduced and the tumor necrosis factor 
alpha (TNF-alpha) levels were lower than control mice. Thus, p38 inhibitors may
provide a novel antiobesity treatment.

PMCID: PMC2812240
PMID: 19948881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Mol Biol. 2010 Feb 19;396(2):431-40. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.11.050. Epub 2009 
Nov 26.

Stability and DNA-binding ability of the bZIP dimers formed by the ATF-2 and
c-Jun transcription factors.

Carrillo RJ(1), Dragan AI, Privalov PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218-2685,
USA.

The dimer formed by the ATF-2 and c-Jun transcription factors is one of the main 
components of the human interferon-beta enhanceosome. Although these two
transcription factors are able to form two homodimers and one heterodimer, it is 
mainly the heterodimer that participates in the formation of this enhanceosome,
binding specifically to the positive regulatory domain IV (PRDIV) site of the
enhancer DNA. To understand this surprising advantage of the heterodimer, we
investigated the association of these transcription factors using fragments
containing the basic DNA-recognition segment and the basic leucine zipper domain 
(bZIP). It was found that the probability of forming the hetero-bZIP
significantly exceeds the probability of forming homo-bZIPs, and that the
hetero-bZIP interacts more strongly with the PRDIV site of the interferon-beta
enhancer, especially in the orientation that places the folded ATF-2 basic
segment in the upstream half of this asymmetric site. The effect of salt on the
formation of the ATF-2/c-Jun dimer and on its ability to bind the target PRDIV
site showed that electrostatic interactions between the charged groups of these
proteins and with DNA play an essential role in the formation of the asymmetric
ATF-2/c-Jun/PRDIV complex.

2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19944700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Toxicon. 2010 Apr 1;55(4):754-61. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2009.11.008. Epub 2009
Nov 24.

Notexin upregulates Fas and FasL protein expression of human neuroblastoma
SK-N-SH cells through p38 MAPK/ATF-2 and JNK/c-Jun pathways.

Chen KC(1), Chang LS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen University-Kaohsiung
Medical University Joint Research Center, National Sun Yat-Sen University,
Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan.

Notechis scutatus scutatus notexin induced an increase in Fas and FasL protein
expression of human neuroblastoma SK-N-SH cells in a dose- and time-dependent
manner. Moreover, notexin treatment upregulated transcription of Fas/FasL mRNA.
Downregulation of FADD blocked notexin-induced procaspase-8 degradation and
cleavage of Bid and rescued viability of notexin-treated cells. Upon exposure to 
notexin, activation of JNK and p38 MAPK was observed in SK-N-SH cells.
Notexin-induced upregulation of Fas and FasL was suppressed by SB202190 (p38 MAPK
inhibitor) and S600125 (JNK inhibitor). Downregulation of p38alpha MAPK and JNK1 
by siRNA proved that upregulation of Fas/FasL was related to p38alpha MAPK and
JNK1 activation. Notexin treatment evoked p38alpha MAPK-mediated ATF-2
phosphorylation and JNK1-mediated c-Jun phosphorylation. Knockdown of c-Jun and
ATF-2 by siRNA or overexpression of dominant-negative c-Jun and ATF-2 revealed
that both c-Jun and ATF-2 were crucial for Fas/FasL upregulation. Taken together,
our data indicate that notexin-induced upregulation of Fas and FasL is triggered 
by p38 MAPK/ATF-2 and JNK/c-Jun signaling pathways in SK-N-SH cells.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19944115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Am J Nephrol. 2010;31(2):125-33. doi: 10.1159/000259899. Epub 2009 Nov 17.

JNK/ATF2 pathway is involved in iodinated contrast media-induced apoptosis.

Lee HC(1), Sheu SH, Yen HW, Lai WT, Chang JG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital, No. 100 Tz-You 1st Road, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Notably, activating transcriptional factor 2 (ATF2), a
histone-modification gene, is involved in oxidative stress-induced apoptosis. The
aim of this study was to clarify the role of ATF2 in contrast media-induced
nephropathy.
METHODS: Human embryonic kidney 293T cells were treated with four different
contrast media:ionic high-osmolar diatrizoate; ionic low-osmolar iothalamate;
non-ionic low-osmolar iohexol, and non-ionic iso-osmolar iodixanol. The mRNA
expression of ATF2 was determined by real-time PCR. Short interfering RNA was
used to knock down ATF2 mRNA expression. Phosphorylation of ATF2 was measured by 
Western blotting. Wistar rats were administered either diatrizoate or a normal
saline injection. Apoptosis in kidney tubular cells was determined by the
presence of positive TUNEL stain.
RESULTS: Diatrizoate, iodixanol and iothalamate, but not iohexol, induced the
expression of ATF2 mRNA and phosphorylation of ATF2 in 293T cells in a
time-dependent manner. More apoptotic cells were in diatrizoate-treated kidney
cells than in the saline injection group (p < 0.00001). Cell death was
significantly increased by knockdown ATF2 expression in the presence of
diatrizoate, indicating a protective role of ATF2 in contrast media-induced
apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Differential activation of ATF2 by different contrast media provides
a new insight into the mechanism and prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy.

Copyright (c) 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19923798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2009 Sep-Oct;27(5):751-7.

Autoantibody against activating transcription factor-2 in patients with systemic 
sclerosis.

Akiyama Y(1), Ogawa F, Iwata Y, Komura K, Hara T, Muroi E, Bae SJ, Takenaka M,
Shimizu K, Hasegawa M, Fujimoto M, Sato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the prevalence and clinical correlation of autoantibody 
to activating transcription factor (ATF)-2, a transcription factor of ATF/CREB
family, in patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc).
METHODS: Anti-ATF-2 Ab was examined by ELISA and immunoblotting using human
recombinant ATF-2. ATF-2 activity to bind target DNA was evaluated by ELISA using
a plate coated with oligonucleotide containing the consensus binding site for
ATF-2.
RESULTS: IgG anti-ATF-2 Ab levels in SSc patients (n=69) were significantly
higher than those in normal controls (n=26). SSc patients positive for IgG
anti-ATF-2 Ab had significantly longer disease duration, more frequent presence
of decreased %VC and %DLco, and elevated levels of serum IgG, serum IgA, and
erythrocyte sedimentation rates than those negative. More-over, IgG anti-ATF-2 Ab
levels correlated inversely with %VC or %DLco. The presence of anti-ATF-2 Ab in
SSc patients was confirmed by immunoblotting analysis. IgG isolated from serum
samples of SSc patients positive for IgG anti-ATF-2 Ab by ELISA slightly but
significantly inhibited ATF-2 activity compared with normal controls.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that anti-ATF-2 Ab is a new autoantibody in
SSc and that it serves as a novel serological marker for inflammation and lung
involvement in SSc.

PMID: 19917156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Neurol Res. 2010 Mar;32(2):215-20. doi: 10.1179/174313209X382304. Epub 2009 Nov
11.

Neurodegenerative, with expression ATF-2 by p38 in cortical neurons.

Hosseini M(1), Ostad N, Parivar K, Ghahremani MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Science, Islamshahr Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran,
Iran.

DNA damage, as an important initiator of neuronal cell death, has been implicated
in numerous neurodegenerative conditions. We previously delineated several
pathways that control embryonic cortical neuronal cell death evoked by the
DNA-damaging agent, camptothecin. The topisomerase-1 inhibitor, camptothecin, has
been shown to induce cortical neuronal cell death in a reproducible and
synchronistic manner. Primary embryonic neuronal cell culture cortical neurons
were prepared. In the study, the survival % of neurons in camptothecin P38 group,
after 6 hours (85%), 24 hours (64%) and 48 hours (50%), compared to camptothecin 
ATF-2 and P38 group after 4 hours (97 and 95%), have been significantly lower,
and the expression % of neurons in camptothecin P38 group , after 6 hours (20%), 
24 hours (40%) and 48 hours (55%), compared to camptothecin ATF-2 and P38 group
after 4 hours (5 and 3%) have been significant lower (p<0.05). The expression %
of neurons in camptothecin P38 group, after 24 hours (40%), compared to
camptothecin ATF-2 group after 24hours (30%), have been significant lower
(p<0.05). This study revealed that camptothecin induces P38 expression and P38 in
embryonic cortical neurons to determine the importance of the P38 pathway in
neuronal death following DNA damage, and P38 is induce phosphorylation of ATF-2
in embryonic cortical neurons following DNA damage.

PMID: 19909561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. EMBO J. 2010 Jan 6;29(1):196-208. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.318. Epub 2009 Nov 5.

Social isolation stress induces ATF-7 phosphorylation and impairs silencing of
the 5-HT 5B receptor gene.

Maekawa T(1), Kim S, Nakai D, Makino C, Takagi T, Ogura H, Yamada K, Chatton B,
Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,
Japan. maekawa@rtc.riken.jp

Many symptoms induced by isolation rearing of rodents may be relevant to
neuropsychiatric disorders, including depression. However, identities of
transcription factors that regulate gene expression in response to chronic social
isolation stress remain elusive. The transcription factor ATF-7 is structurally
related to ATF-2, which is activated by various stresses, including inflammatory 
cytokines. Here, we report that Atf-7-deficient mice exhibit abnormal behaviours 
and increased 5-HT receptor 5B (Htr5b) mRNA levels in the dorsal raphe nuclei.
ATF-7 silences the transcription of Htr5B by directly binding to its
5'-regulatory region, and mediates histone H3-K9 trimethylation via interaction
with the ESET histone methyltransferase. Isolation-reared wild-type (WT) mice
exhibit abnormal behaviours that resemble those of Atf-7-deficient mice. Upon
social isolation stress, ATF-7 in the dorsal raphe nucleus is phosphorylated via 
p38 and is released from the Htr5b promoter, leading to the upregulation of
Htr5b. Thus, ATF-7 may have a critical role in gene expression induced by social 
isolation stress.

PMCID: PMC2808367
PMID: 19893493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Free Radic Biol Med. 2010 Jan 15;48(2):298-305. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2009.10.054. Epub 2009 Nov 3.

Variation in gene expression profiles of human monocytic U937 cells exposed to
various fluxes of nitric oxide.

Turpaev K(1), Glatigny A, Bignon J, Delacroix H, Drapier JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Chimie des Substances Naturelles, Centre de Recherche de Gif,
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

We examined early and late alterations in gene expression patterns and
phosphorylation levels of key regulators of selected signaling pathways in U937
cells exposed to various (*)NO fluxes. cDNA microarray analysis and real-time
quantitative PCR identified 45 NO-sensitive genes (>or=2-fold change), among
which KLF2, KLF6, TSC22D3, DDIT4, MKP-5 (up-regulated), KIF23, histone H4,
ARL6IP2, CLNS1A, SLC7A6, CDKN3, SRP19, and BCL11A (down-regulated) have not been 
reported before. For two selected genes, KLF2 and DDIT4, the sensitivity to (.)NO
was also proven at the protein level. Among the examined genes, only KLF2 had a
higher sensitivity to slow release of NO (DETA-NO) than to high-dose,
short-duration exposure (DPTA-NO), reaching an about 50-fold increase in mRNA
level. Our study revealed that fast and slow NO donors activate similar signaling
pathways and induce phosphorylation of MAP kinases and downstream transcription
factors ATF2 and c-Jun. Inhibitory analysis of major signaling pathways showed
that activity of p38 MAPK and tyrosine kinases is indispensable for gene
induction in cells exposed to DPTA-NO, whereas G-protein Rho suppression caused
superinduction of KLF2 in (*)NO-stimulated cells. Finally, we showed that both
(*)NO donors caused a marked decrease in phosphorylation of p70S6K, an mTOR
substrate and regulator of mRNA translation, and protein kinase Akt, an upstream 
positive regulator of mTOR.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19892011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Dec 1;27(34):5772-80. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.22.8239. Epub 2009
Nov 2.

Melanoma prognostic model using tissue microarrays and genetic algorithms.

Gould Rothberg BE(1), Berger AJ, Molinaro AM, Subtil A, Krauthammer MO, Camp RL, 
Bradley WR, Ariyan S, Kluger HM, Rimm DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520-8023, USA.

PURPOSE: As a result of the questionable risk-to-benefit ratio of adjuvant
therapies, stage II melanoma is currently managed by observation because
available clinicopathologic parameters cannot identify the 20% to 60% of such
patients likely to develop metastatic disease. Here, we propose a multimarker
molecular prognostic assay that can help triage patients at increased risk of
recurrence.
METHODS: Protein expression for 38 candidates relevant to melanoma oncogenesis
was evaluated using the automated quantitative analysis (AQUA) method for
immunofluorescence-based immunohistochemistry in formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded specimens from a cohort of 192 primary melanomas collected
during 1959 to 1994. The prognostic assay was built using a genetic algorithm and
validated on an independent cohort of 246 serial primary melanomas collected from
1997 to 2004.
RESULTS: Multiple iterations of the genetic algorithm yielded a consistent
five-marker solution. A favorable prognosis was predicted by ATF2
ln(non-nuclear/nuclear AQUA score ratio) of more than -0.052, p21(WAF1) nuclear
compartment AQUA score of more than 12.98, p16(INK4A) ln(non-nuclear/nuclear AQUA
score ratio) of < or = -0.083, beta-catenin total AQUA score of more than 38.68, 
and fibronectin total AQUA score of < or = 57.93. Primary tumors that met at
least four of these five conditions were considered a low-risk group, and those
that met three or fewer conditions formed a high-risk group (log-rank P < .0001).
Multivariable proportional hazards analysis adjusting for clinicopathologic
parameters shows that the high-risk group has significantly reduced survival on
both the discovery (hazard ratio = 2.84; 95% CI, 1.46 to 5.49; P = .002) and
validation (hazard ratio = 2.72; 95% CI, 1.12 to 6.58; P = .027) cohorts.
CONCLUSION: This multimarker prognostic assay, an independent determinant of
melanoma survival, might be beneficial in improving the selection of stage II
patients for adjuvant therapy.

PMCID: PMC2792999
PMID: 19884546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2010 Jan 15;44(1):7-15. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2009.10.002.
Epub 2009 Oct 27.

cJun modulates Ggamma-globin gene expression via an upstream cAMP response
element.

Kodeboyina S(1), Balamurugan P, Liu L, Pace BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas, PO
Box 830688, FO 3.1, Richardson, TX 75083, USA.

The upstream Ggamma-globin gene cAMP response element (G-CRE) was previously
shown to play a role in drug-mediated fetal hemoglobin induction. This effect is 
achieved via p38 mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK)-dependent CREB1 and
ATF-2 phosphorylation and G-CRE transactivation. Since this motif is also a
predicted consensus binding site for cJun we extended our analysis to determine
the ability of cJun to transactivate gamma-globin through the G-CRE. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays we showed comparable in vivo cJun and CREB1 
binding to the G-CRE region. Protein-protein interactions were confirmed between 
cJun/ATF-2 and CREB1/ATF-2 but not between CREB1 and cJun. However, we observed
cJun and CREB1 binding to the G-CRE in vitro by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. Promoter pull-down assay followed by sequential western blot analysis
confirmed co-localization of cJun, CREB1, and ATF-2 on the G-CRE. To show
functional relevance, enforced expression studies with pLen-cJun and a
Ggamma-promoter (-1500 to +36) luciferase reporter were completed; we observed a 
concentration-dependent increase in luciferase activity with pLen-cJun similar to
that produced by CREB1 enforced expression. Moreover, the G/A mutation at -1225
in the G-CRE abolished cJun transactivation. Finally, enforced cJun expression in
K562 cells and normal primary erythroid progenitors enhanced endogenous
gamma-globin gene expression. We conclude that these data indicate that cJun
activates the Ggamma-globin promoter via the G-CRE in a manner comparable with
CREB1 and propose a model for gamma-globin activation based on DNA-protein
interactions in the G-CRE.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2818355
PMID: 19861239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Dec;29(24):6515-26. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00489-09. Epub 2009 Oct 
12.

Identification of a novel amino acid response pathway triggering ATF2
phosphorylation in mammals.

Chaveroux C(1), Jousse C, Cherasse Y, Maurin AC, Parry L, Carraro V, Derijard B, 
Bruhat A, Fafournoux P.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 1019, Unité Nutrition Humaine, INRA de Theix, 63122 St. Genès Champanelle,
France.

It has been well established that amino acid availability can control gene
expression. Previous studies have shown that amino acid depletion induces
transcription of the ATF3 (activation transcription factor 3) gene through an
amino acid response element (AARE) located in its promoter. This event requires
phosphorylation of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2), a constitutive
AARE-bound factor. To identify the signaling cascade leading to phosphorylation
of ATF2 in response to amino acid starvation, we used an individual gene
knockdown approach by small interfering RNA transfection. We identified the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) module MEKK1/MKK7/JNK2 as the pathway
responsible for ATF2 phosphorylation on the threonine 69 (Thr69) and Thr71
residues. Then, we progressed backwards up the signal transduction pathway and
showed that the GTPase Rac1/Cdc42 and the protein Galpha12 control the MAPK
module, ATF2 phosphorylation, and AARE-dependent transcription. Taken together,
our data reveal a new signaling pathway activated by amino acid starvation
leading to ATF2 phosphorylation and subsequently positively affecting the
transcription of amino acid-regulated genes.

PMCID: PMC2786873
PMID: 19822663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Biosci Bioeng. 2009 Nov;108(5):359-64. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2009.05.002.

Using promoter replacement and selection for loss of heterozygosity to generate
an industrially applicable sake yeast strain that homozygously overproduces
isoamyl acetate.

Sahara H(1), Kotaka A, Kondo A, Ueda M, Hata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, Gekkeikan Sake Co. Ltd., 101 Shimotoba-koyanagi-cho,
Fushimi-ku, Kyoto 612-8385, Japan. sahara@gekkeikan.co.jp

By application of the high-efficiency loss of heterozygosity (HELOH) method for
disrupting genes in diploid sake yeast (Kotaka et al., Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol., 82, 387-395 (2009)), we constructed, from a heterozygous integrant, 
a homozygous diploid that overexpresses the alcohol acetyltransferase gene ATF2
from the SED1 promoter, without the need for sporulation and mating. Under the
conditions of sake brewing, the homozygous integrant produced 1.4 times more
isoamyl acetate than the parental, heterozygous strain. Furthermore, the
homozygous integrant was more genetically stable than the heterozygous
recombinant. Thus, the HELOH method can produce homozygous, recombinant sake
yeast that is ready to be grown on an industrial scale using the well-established
procedures of sake brewing. The HELOH method, therefore, facilitates genetic
modification of this rarely sporulating diploid yeast strain while maintaining
those characteristics required for industrial applications.

PMID: 19804856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Development. 2009 Nov;136(21):3557-66. doi: 10.1242/dev.036335. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

BMP7 promotes proliferation of nephron progenitor cells via a JNK-dependent
mechanism.

Blank U(1), Brown A, Adams DC, Karolak MJ, Oxburgh L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, 81 
Research Drive, Scarborough, ME 04074, USA.

The iterative formation of nephrons during embryonic development relies on
continual replenishment of progenitor cells throughout nephrogenesis. Defining
molecular mechanisms that maintain and regulate this progenitor pool is essential
to understanding nephrogenesis in developmental and regenerative contexts.
Maintenance of nephron progenitors is absolutely dependent on BMP7 signaling, and
Bmp7-null mice exhibit rapid loss of progenitors. However, the signal
transduction machinery operating downstream of BMP7 as well as the precise target
cell remain undefined. Using a novel primary progenitor isolation system, we have
investigated signal transduction and biological outcomes elicited by BMP7. We
find that BMP7 directly and rapidly activates JNK signaling in nephron
progenitors resulting in phosphorylation of Jun and ATF2 transcription factors.
This signaling results in the accumulation of cyclin D3 and subsequent
proliferation of PAX2(+) progenitors, inversely correlating with the loss of
nephron progenitors seen in the Bmp7-null kidney. Activation of Jun and ATF2 is
severely diminished in Bmp7-null kidneys, providing an important in vivo
correlate. BMP7 thus promotes proliferation directly in nephron progenitors by
activating the JNK signaling circuitry.

PMCID: PMC2761106
PMID: 19793891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2010 May 15;12(10):1147-54. doi: 10.1089/ars.2009.2899.

The effect of hydrogen sulfide donors on lipopolysaccharide-induced formation of 
inflammatory mediators in macrophages.

Whiteman M(1), Li L, Rose P, Tan CH, Parkinson DB, Moore PK.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, University of Exeter, St. Luke's Campus, Exeter,
Devon, England.

The role of hydrogen sulfide (H(2)S) in inflammation is controversial, with both 
pro- and antiinflammatory effects documented. Many studies have used simple
sulfide salts as the source of H(2)S, which give a rapid bolus of H(2)S in
aqueous solutions and thus do not accurately reflect the enzymatic generation of 
H(2)S. We therefore compared the effects of sodium hydrosulfide and a novel
slow-releasing H(2)S donor (GYY4137) on the release of pro- and antiinflammatory 
mediators in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-treated murine RAW264.7 macrophages. For
the first time, we show that GYY4137 significantly and concentration-dependently 
inhibits LPS-induced release of proinflammatory mediators such as IL-1beta, IL-6,
TNF-alpha, nitric oxide (*NO), and PGE(2) but increased the synthesis of the
antiinflammatory chemokine IL-10 through NF-kappaB/ATF-2/HSP-27-dependent
pathways. In contrast, NaHS elicited a biphasic effect on proinflammatory
mediators and, at high concentrations, increased the synthesis of IL-1beta, IL-6,
NO, PGE(2) and TNF-alpha. This study clearly shows that the effects of H(2)S on
the inflammatory process are complex and dependent not only on H(2)S
concentration but also on the rate of H(2)S generation. This study may also
explain some of the apparent discrepancies in the literature regarding the pro-
versus antiinflammatory role of H(2)S.

PMCID: PMC2875982
PMID: 19769459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Mol Oncol. 2009 Dec;3(5-6):464-8. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2009.07.002. Epub 2009
Jul 28.

Transcription factors down-stream of Ras as molecular indicators for targeting
malignancies with oncolytic herpes virus.

Esfandyari T(1), Tefferi A, Szmidt A, Alain T, Zwolak P, Lasho T, Lee PW,
Farassati F.

Author information: 
(1)The Molecular Medicine Laboratory, Department of Medicine, University of
Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Overactivation in Ras signaling has been under intensive study as the molecular
basis for development of cancer. Such overactivation can occur in the presence or
absence of mutations in Ras gene resulting in activation of a series of
down-stream effectors such as transcription factors. Different studies have shown
the activation of Ras down-stream effectors in non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)
although mutations in Ras are not prevalent in this malignancy. Since
overactivation in Ras signaling also increases permissiveness of cancer cells to 
infection by oncolytic versions of herpes simplex virus (e.g. R3616), we were
interested in evaluating the value of transcription factors down-stream of Ras as
molecular indicators for permissiveness to herpes therapy. In order to accomplish
this, and also to assess the permissiveness of lymphoma cells to infection with
R3616, we used NHL cell lines Daudi, Jurkat, NC37, Raji, Ramos and ST486. Once
the levels of phosphorylation (activation) of extracellular-signal regulated
kinase (ERK, a Ras effector pathway) and its down-stream transcription factor ELK
were evaluated, Raji and NC37 showed a significant increase in the
phosphorylation levels of both molecules while ATF2 (another transcription factor
down-stream of p38-kinase pathway) seemed to be activated in all studied cells.
Raji and NC37 cells were also most permissive cells to infection with R3616 while
their permissiveness was decreased upon treatment of cells with an inhibitor of
ELK-DNA binding portraying ERK/ELK as a suitable predictive indicator for
selection of cancer cells with increased sensitivity to R3616. This study,
therefore, for the first time documents permissiveness of lymphoma cells to
oncolytic herpes viruses and introduces ELK as a suitable factor for predicting
tumor susceptibility to these novel anticancer agents.

PMID: 19766068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 9;4(9):e6953. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006953.

Insulin gene expression is regulated by DNA methylation.

Kuroda A(1), Rauch TA, Todorov I, Ku HT, Al-Abdullah IH, Kandeel F, Mullen Y,
Pfeifer GP, Ferreri K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology, & Metabolism, Research Institute of
City of Hope, Duarte, California, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2009;4(10) 10.1371/annotation/947a8d4a-3585-4b23-ac84-b47a255a70d9.

BACKGROUND: Insulin is a critical component of metabolic control, and as such,
insulin gene expression has been the focus of extensive study. DNA sequences that
regulate transcription of the insulin gene and the majority of regulatory factors
have already been identified. However, only recently have other components of
insulin gene expression been investigated, and in this study we examine the role 
of DNA methylation in the regulation of mouse and human insulin gene expression.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Genomic DNA samples from several tissues were
bisulfite-treated and sequenced which revealed that cytosine-guanosine
dinucleotide (CpG) sites in both the mouse Ins2 and human INS promoters are
uniquely demethylated in insulin-producing pancreatic beta cells. Methylation of 
these CpG sites suppressed insulin promoter-driven reporter gene activity by
almost 90% and specific methylation of the CpG site in the cAMP responsive
element (CRE) in the promoter alone suppressed insulin promoter activity by 50%. 
Methylation did not directly inhibit factor binding to the CRE in vitro, but
inhibited ATF2 and CREB binding in vivo and conversely increased the binding of
methyl CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2). Examination of the Ins2 gene in mouse
embryonic stem cell cultures revealed that it is fully methylated and becomes
demethylated as the cells differentiate into insulin-expressing cells in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings suggest that insulin promoter CpG
demethylation may play a crucial role in beta cell maturation and tissue-specific
insulin gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2735004
PMID: 19742322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Int J Oncol. 2009 Oct;35(4):837-44.

The differential cell signaling effects of two positional isomers of the
anticancer NO-donating aspirin.

Hua A(1), Mackenzie GG, Rigas B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Prevention, Department of Medicine, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, New York 11794-5200, USA.

We studied the mechanism by which the para and meta positional isomers of nitric 
oxide-donating aspirin (NO-ASA) inhibit human colon cancer cell growth. These
compounds are promising chemopreventive agents and represent a broader class of
novel drugs. The two isomers differ drastically in their 24-h IC50s for cell
growth, which are 12 microM for p-NO-ASA and 230 microM for m-NO-ASA. We examined
their effects on cell signaling cascades, including predominantly the mitogen
activated protein kinases (MAPKs). The principal differences between the two
isomers were: a) p-NO-ASA exerts its effect earlier than m-NO-ASA; b) the
predominant effect of m-NO-ASA is on ERK1/2 and Akt; whereas that of p-NO-ASA is 
on JNK1/2, while both activate p38, with p-NO-ASA showing a stronger and earlier 
effect; c) ATF-2 is more responsive to m-NO-ASA and c-Jun to p-NO-ASA; d) both
isomers seem to have similar effects on AP-1 binding, the main difference between
them being the timing of the effect; p-NO-ASA's effect is early and m-NO-ASA's is
late; e) p-NO-ASA has an earlier and stronger effect on p21, while m-NO-ASA's
effect occurs later and is weaker; and f) cell cycle changes follow the effect on
p21 expression. Our findings underscore the role of positional isomerism in
modulating the pharmacological effects of drugs and have potentially important
implications for the further development of these chemoprevention agents.

PMCID: PMC3565755
PMID: 19724920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Infect Immun. 2009 Nov;77(11):4947-52. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00607-09. Epub 2009 Aug
31.

Mycobacteria exploit p38 signaling to affect CD1 expression and lipid antigen
presentation by human dendritic cells.

Gagliardi MC(1), Teloni R, Giannoni F, Mariotti S, Remoli ME, Sargentini V,
Videtta M, Pardini M, De Libero G, Coccia EM, Nisini R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Malattie Infettive, Parassitarie e Immunomediate, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena, 299, 00161 Roma, Italy.

Group I CD1 proteins are specialized antigen-presenting molecules that present
both microbial and self lipid antigens to CD1-restricted alpha/beta T
lymphocytes. The production of high levels of gamma interferon and lysis of
infected macrophages by lipid-specific T lymphocytes are believed to play pivotal
roles mainly in the defense against mycobacterial infections. We previously
demonstrated that Mycobacterium tuberculosis and bacillus Calmette-Guérin
(Mycobacterium bovis BCG) induce human monocytes to differentiate into CD1-
dendritic cells (DC), which cannot present lipid antigens to specific T cells.
Here, we show that in human monocytes mycobacteria trigger phosphorylation of p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase to inhibit CD1 expression in DC derived from
infected monocytes. Pretreatment with a specific p38 inhibitor renders monocytes 
insensitive to mycobacterial subversion and allows them to differentiate into
CD1+ DC, which are fully capable of presenting lipid antigens to specific T
cells. We also report that one of the pathogen recognition receptors triggered by
BCG to activate p38 is complement receptor 3 (CR3), as shown by reduced p38
phosphorylation and partial reestablishment of CD1 membrane expression obtained
by CR3 blockade before infection. In conclusion, we propose that p38 signaling is
a novel pathway exploited by mycobacteria to affect the expression of CD1
antigen-presenting cells and avoid immune recognition.

PMCID: PMC2772541
PMID: 19720761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2010 Jul;43(1):121-7. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2008-0395OC.
Epub 2009 Aug 28.

p38 Mitogen-activated protein kinase modulates endotoxin-induced diaphragm
caspase activation.

Supinski GS(1), Ji XY, Callahan LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, 740 South Limestone, K-528, Lexington, KY 40536-0284, 
USA. gsupi2@email.uky.edu

We postulated that the p38 pathway is activated in the diaphragm during sepsis
and contributes to sepsis-induced diaphragm caspase activation and contractile
dysfunction. This study determined whether: (1) endotoxin administration elicits 
p38 activation in the diaphragm; (2) cytokines activate p38 in isolated muscle
cells; (3) activation of p38 is accompanied by caspase 8 activation; (4)
inhibition of p38 prevents caspase 8 activation and; (5) inhibition of p38
prevents diaphragm dysfunction in endotoxin-treated animals. We first evaluated
the time course of diaphragm p38 activation after endotoxin in mice. We then
determined if p38 inhibitor administration could prevent caspase 8 activation in 
endotoxin-treated mice. We also assessed p38 and caspase 8 activation in C2C12
muscle cells treated with control media or a cytokine mixture, with or without
concomitant chemical inhibition of p38 (using SB203580, 25 muM) or loss of p38
function due to cell transfection with a dominant negative p38 genetic construct.
Endotoxin administration activated diaphragm p38 (P < 0.001), and cytokines
activated p38 in C2C12 cells (P < 0.05). In both the diaphragm and cells, p38
activation was accompanied by increases in active caspase 8 (P < 0.01).
Inhibition of p38 with either SB203580 or with a dominant negative p38 construct 
prevented caspase activation (P < 0.001). p38 inhibitors also prevented
endotoxin-induced diaphragm weakness (P < 0.001). p38 modulates cytokine-induced 
skeletal muscle caspase activation.

PMCID: PMC2911566
PMID: 19717815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Dev Growth Differ. 2009 Sep;51(7):669-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2009.01126.x.

Spatio-temporal expression of activating transcription factor 5 in the skeletal
development of mouse limb.

Satake H(1), Ito K, Takahara M, Furukawa T, Takagi M, Ogino T, Shinomura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Yamagata University School of Medicine,
Yamagata, Yamagata 990-9585, Japan.

There are no data about the expression pattern of activating transcription factor
5 (Atf5) during limb development. The aim of the present study was to describe
the expression of Atf5 throughout mouse limb development. Some specimens were
examined for the expression of type II collagen alpha1 (Col2a1), sex-determining 
region Y-related high-mobility-group-box 9 (Sox9), and activating transcription
factor 2 (Atf2) by in situ hybridization. ATDC5 cells, mouse limb buds, and
epiphyseal cartilage were examined for the expression of Atf5alpha and Atf5beta
by quantitative real-time PCR. Atf5 transcripts were detected in condensed
mesenchymal cells, cartilage primordia, proliferative, prehypertrophic, and
articular chondrocytes, but not in hypertrophic chondrocytes. Atf5 was
predominantly expressed by osteoblasts in the primary spongiosa. At the postnatal
stage, Atf5 was expressed in epiphyseal chondrocytes and osteoblasts lining the
bone trabeculae. Spatial distribution of Col2a1, Sox9, and Atf2 transcripts
closely corresponded to that of Atf5 within developing limbs, except for bony
tissues. In cartilage, Atf5alpha is the dominant form in the embryonic stage as
well as in the postnatal stage.

PMID: 19712269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Biochem J. 2009 Nov 11;424(2):285-96. doi: 10.1042/BJ20090371.

Activating transcription factor 2 increases transactivation and protein stability
of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha in hepatocytes.

Choi JH(1), Cho HK, Choi YH, Cheong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea.

HIF-1 (hypoxia inducible factor 1) performs a crucial role in mediating the
response to hypoxia. However, other transcription factors are also capable of
regulating hypoxia-induced target-gene transcription. In a previous report, we
demonstrated that the transcription factor ATF-2 (activating transcription factor
2) regulates hypoxia-induced gene transcription, along with HIF-1alpha. In the
present study, we show that the protein stability of ATF-2 is induced by hypoxia 
and the hypoxia-mimic CoCl2 (cobalt chloride), and that ATF-2 induction enhances 
HIF-1alpha protein stability via direct protein interaction. The knockdown of
ATF-2 using small interfering RNA and translation-inhibition experiments
demonstrated that ATF-2 plays a key role in the maintenance of the expression
level and transcriptional activity of HIF-1alpha. Furthermore, we determined that
ATF-2 interacts directly with HIF-1alpha both in vivo and in vitro and competes
with the tumour suppressor protein p53 for HIF-1alpha binding. Collectively,
these results show that protein stabilization of ATF-2 under hypoxic conditions
is required for the induction of the protein stability and transactivation
activity of HIF-1alpha for efficient hypoxia-associated gene expression.

PMID: 19712049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Oct 15;108(3):612-20. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22293.

JNK1/c-Jun and p38 alpha MAPK/ATF-2 pathways are responsible for upregulation of 
Fas/FasL in human chronic myeloid leukemia K562 cells upon exposure to Taiwan
cobra phospholipase A2.

Chen KC(1), Chiou YL, Chang LS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen University-Kaohsiung
Medical University Joint Research Center, Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan.

Fas and FasL expression upregulation was found in human leukemia K562 cells upon 
exposure to Naja naja atra phospholipase A(2) (PLA(2)). PLA(2) treatment induced 
an increase in intracellular Ca(2+) ([Ca(2+)]i) and ROS generation levels,
leading to activation of p38 MAPK and JNK. Suppression of both p38 MAPK and JNK
abrogated Fas and FasL upregulation. Unlike PLA(2), catalytically inactive PLA(2)
treatment did not markedly increase Fas and FasL protein expression, and p38 MAPK
activation was exclusively responsible for catalytically inactive PLA(2)-induced 
increase in Fas and FasL protein expression. Knockdown of p38 alpha MAPK and JNK1
by siRNA proved that p38 alpha MAPK and JNK1 were involved in ATF-2 and c-Jun
phosphorylation, respectively. Compared with the p38 alpha MAPK/ATF-2 pathway,
the JNK1/c-Jun pathway played a crucial role in Fas/FasL upregulation. Unlike
arachidonic acid, lysophosphatidylcholine mimicked the PLA(2) action in inducing 
Fas/FasL upregulation. Together with the previous finding that c-Jun and ATF-2
are involved in transcriptional regulation of Fas and FasL, our data suggest that
PLA(2) induces Fas and FasL upregulation through p38 alpha MAPK/ATF-2 and
JNK1/c-Jun pathways in K562 cells, and PLA(2) catalytic activity is involved in
this action.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19670268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2009 Nov 13;311(1-2):94-100. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2009.07.023.
Epub 2009 Jul 30.

The nuclear appearance of ERK1/2 and p38 determines the sequential induction of
ATF2-Thr71 and ATF2-Thr69 phosphorylation by serum in JNK-deficient cells.

Baan B(1), van der Zon GC, Maassen JA, Ouwens DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Section Signal Transduction and Ageing, 
Leiden University Medical Centre, Postzone S1-P, PO Box 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Growth factors activate ATF2 via sequential phosphorylation of Thr69 and Thr71,
where the ATF2-Thr71-phosphorylation precedes the induction of
ATF2-Thr69+71-phosphorylation. Here, we studied the mechanisms contributing to
serum-induced two-step ATF2-phosphorylation in JNK1,2-deficient embryonic
fibroblasts. Using anion exchange chromatography, ERK1/2 and p38 were identified 
as ATF2-kinases in vitro. Inhibitor studies as well as nuclear localization
experiments show that the sequential nuclear appearance of ERK1/2 and p38
determines the induction of ATF2-Thr71 and ATF2-Thr69+71-phosphorylation in
response to serum.

PMID: 19647037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Bone Miner Res. 2010 Feb;25(2):330-8. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.090729.

Candidate gene analysis of femoral neck trabecular and cortical volumetric bone
mineral density in older men.

Yerges LM(1), Klei L, Cauley JA, Roeder K, Kammerer CM, Ensrud KE, Nestlerode CS,
Lewis C, Lang TF, Barrett-Connor E, Moffett SP, Hoffman AR, Ferrell RE, Orwoll
ES, Zmuda JM; Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

In contrast to conventional dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry, quantitative
computed tomography separately measures trabecular and cortical volumetric bone
mineral density (vBMD). Little is known about the genetic variants associated
with trabecular and cortical vBMD in humans, although both may be important for
determining bone strength and osteoporotic risk. In the current analysis, we
tested the hypothesis that there are genetic variants associated with trabecular 
and cortical vBMD at the femoral neck by genotyping 4608 tagging and potentially 
functional single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 383 bone metabolism
candidate genes in 822 Caucasian men aged 65 years or older from the Osteoporotic
Fractures in Men Study (MrOS). Promising SNP associations then were tested for
replication in an additional 1155 men from the same study. We identified SNPs in 
five genes (IFNAR2, NFATC1, SMAD1, HOXA, and KLF10) that were robustly associated
with cortical vBMD and SNPs in nine genes (APC, ATF2, BMP3, BMP7, FGF18, FLT1,
TGFB3, THRB, and RUNX1) that were robustly associated with trabecular vBMD. There
was no overlap between genes associated with cortical vBMD and trabecular vBMD.
These findings identify novel genetic variants for cortical and trabecular vBMD
and raise the possibility that some genetic loci may be unique for each bone
compartment.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMCID: PMC3153388
PMID: 19619005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 4;284(36):24006-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.025528. Epub 2009
Jul 10.

AP-1 activated by toll-like receptors regulates expression of IL-23 p19.

Liu W(1), Ouyang X, Yang J, Liu J, Li Q, Gu Y, Fukata M, Lin T, He JC, Abreu M,
Unkeless JC, Mayer L, Xiong H.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029-6574, USA.

Interleukin (IL)-23, a new member of the IL-12 family, plays a central role in
the Th17 immune response and in autoimmune diseases. It is clear that activated
macrophages and dendritic cells produce IL-23, but the molecular mechanisms
whereby inflammatory signals stimulate IL-23 expression are not fully understood.
We demonstrate that induction of IL-23 p19 gene expression by LPS depends on the 
TLR4 and MyD88 pathways. All three MAPK pathways (ERK, JNK, and p38) that are
activated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation were shown to exert a positive 
effect on p19 expression. We cloned a 1.3-kb putative p19 promoter and defined
its transcription initiation sites by the 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends
method. By analyzing IL-23 p19 promoter mutants, we have identified a promoter
region (-413 to +10) that contains several important elements, including
NF-kappaB and AP-1. In addition to NF-kappaB, we have demonstrated that the
proximal AP-1 site is important for p19 promoter activation. Mutation of the AP-1
site resulted in the loss of p19 promoter activation. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) analysis showed that c-Jun and c-Fos bind to the AP-1 site,
which was confirmed by a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Furthermore,
co-transfection of c-Jun and ATF2 synergistically induced p19 promoter
activation, and c-Jun and ATF2 formed a protein complex, demonstrated by
co-immunoprecipitation. Finally, LPS-stimulated peritoneal macrophages from
IL-10-deficient mice expressed significantly higher IL-23 p19 than macrophages
from wild type mice, and the addition of recombinant IL-10 strongly inhibited
LPS-induced p19 expression. Thus, this study suggests that MyD88-dependent
Toll-like receptor signaling induces IL-23 p19 gene expression through both MAPKs
and NF-kappaB.

PMCID: PMC2781995
PMID: 19592489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Cancer Res. 2009 Jul 15;69(14):5954-60. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0778. Epub 
2009 Jul 7.

Activating transcription factor 2 and c-Jun-mediated induction of FoxP3 for
experimental therapy of mammary tumor in the mouse.

Liu Y(1), Wang Y, Li W, Zheng P, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunotherapy, Department of Surgery, Section of General Surgery, 
and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109, USA.

FOXP3 is inactivated in breast cancer cells by a number of mechanisms, including 
somatic mutations, deletion, and epigenetic silencing. Because the mutation and
deletion are usually heterozygous in the cancer samples, it is of interest to
determine whether the gene can be induced for the purpose of cancer therapy.
Here, we report that anisomycin, a potent activator of activating transcription
factor (ATF) 2, and c-Jun-NH(2)-kinase, induces expression of FoxP3 in both
normal and malignant mammary epithelial cells. The induction is mediated by ATF2 
and c-Jun. Targeted mutation of ATF2 abrogates both constitutive and inducible
expression of FoxP3 in normal epithelial cells. Both ATF2 and c-Jun interact with
a novel enhancer in the intron 1 of the FoxP3 locus. Moreover, shRNA silencing of
ATF2 and FoxP3 reveals an important role of ATF2-FoxP3 pathway in the
anisomycin-induced apoptosis of breast cancer cells. A low dose of anisomycin was
also remarkably effective in treating established mammary tumor in the mice. Our 
data showed that FoxP3 can be reactivated for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC2742913
PMID: 19584270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 4;284(36):23989-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.018309. Epub 2009
Jul 7.

The transcription factor Atf1 binds and activates the APC/C ubiquitin ligase in
fission yeast.

Ors A(1), Grimaldi M, Kimata Y, Wilkinson CR, Jones N, Yamano H.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Cycle Control Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, The Chart,
Oxted, Surrey RH8 0TL, United Kingdom.

Fission yeast Atf1 is a member of the ATF/CREB basic leucine zipper (bZIP) family
of transcription factors with strong homology to mammalian ATF2. Atf1 regulates
transcription in response to stress stimuli and also plays a role in controlling 
heterochromatin formation and recombination. However, its DNA binding independent
role is poorly studied. Here, we report that Atf1 has a distinct role in
regulating the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) ubiquitin ligase. We 
have identified atf1(+) as a dose-dependent suppressor of apc5-1, a mutation
causing mitotic arrest. Remarkably, the suppression is not dependent upon the
bZIP domain and is therefore independent of the ability of Atf1 to bind DNA.
Interestingly, Atf1 physically binds the APC/C in vivo. Furthermore, we show that
addition of purified Atf1 proteins into a cell-free system stimulates
ubiquitylation of cyclin B and securin by the APC/C. These results reveal a novel
role for Atf1 in cell cycle control through protein-protein interaction.

PMCID: PMC2781993
PMID: 19584054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Neurooncol. 2009 Dec;95(3):307-16. doi: 10.1007/s11060-009-9929-x. Epub 2009
Jun 11.

Inhibition of c-Jun N-terminal kinase enhances temozolomide-induced cytotoxicity 
in human glioma cells.

Ohba S(1), Hirose Y, Kawase T, Sano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.

Previous studies have revealed that p38, a member of the family of
stress-activated protein kinases (SAPKs), cooperates with the Chk1-pathway to
bring about temozolomide (TMZ)-induced G2 arrest, and that the inhibition of
either pathway alone is sufficient to sensitize U87MG glioma cells to TMZ-induced
cytotoxicity. c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), another SAPK, has been reported to
have several roles of cell survival, oncogenesis, growth, differentiation and
cell death. To elucidate the functions of JNK in glioma cells treated with TMZ,
we analyzed alterations in JNK and the effect of modification of JNK in U87MG
human glioma cells treated with TMZ. We found that JNK was phosphorylated 1-2
days after TMZ treatment and that pretreatment (for 24 h) and post-treatment (for
72 h) with a JNK inhibitor SP600125 at a concentration of 200 nM or higher
remarkably reduced clonogenicity in the TMZ-treated cells. The phosphorylation of
the JNK target protein c-Jun, but not of ATF-2, was inhibited by this
concentration of SP600125. Therefore JNK was proved to have a role of survival in
glioma cells treated with TMZ, and c-Jun-related responses were suggested to be
more important in the JNK-mediated survival of glioma cells with DNA damage.
SP600125 amplified the percentage of senescence-like cells and of mitotic
catastrophe cells in TMZ-treated U87MG and U87MG-E6 cells, respectively,
suggesting that the enhancement of TMZ-induced cytotoxicity by a JNK inhibitor in
glioma cells is induced (at least in part) by the potentiation of cell death
pathways induced by TMZ alone. Further investigation based on the present data
may provide a viable approach for enhancing TMZ-induced cytotoxicity in human
gliomas.

PMID: 19517066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 31;284(31):20738-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.021766. Epub
2009 Jun 2.

Combinatorial transcription factor regulation of the cyclic AMP-response element 
on the Pgc-1alpha promoter in white 3T3-L1 and brown HIB-1B preadipocytes.

Karamitri A(1), Shore AM, Docherty K, Speakman JR, Lomax MA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonington Campus,
Loughborough LE12 5RD.

Cold stress in rodents increases the expression of UCP1 and PGC-1alpha in brown
and white adipose tissue. We have previously reported that C/EBPbeta specifically
binds to the CRE on the proximal Pgc-1alpha promoter and increases
forskolin-sensitive Pgc-1alpha and Ucp1 expression in white 3T3-L1 preadipocytes.
Here we show that in mice exposed to a cold environment for 24 h, Pgc-1alpha,
Ucp1, and C/ebpbeta but not C/ebpalpha or C/ebpdelta expression were increased in
BAT. Conversely, expression of the C/EBP dominant negative Chop10 was increased
in WAT but not BAT during cold exposure. Reacclimatization of cold-exposed mice
to a warm environment for 24 h completely reversed these changes in gene
expression. In HIB-1B, brown preadipocytes, forskolin increased expression of
Pgc-1alpha, Ucp1, and C/ebpbeta early in differentiation and inhibited Chop10
expression. Employing chromatin immunoprecipitation, we demonstrate that
C/EBPbeta, CREB, ATF-2, and CHOP10 are bound to the Pgc-1alpha proximal CRE, but 
CHOP10 does not bind in HIB-1B cell lysates. Forskolin stimulation and C/EBPbeta 
overexpression in 3T3-L1 cells increased C/EBPbeta and CREB but displaced ATF-2
and CHOP10 binding to the Pgc-1alpha proximal CRE. Overexpression of ATF-2 and
CHOP10 in 3T3-L1 cells decreased Pgc-1alpha transcription. Knockdown of Chop10 in
3T3-L1 cells using siRNA increased Pgc-1alpha transcription, whereas siRNA
against C/ebpbeta in HIB-1B cells decreased Pgc-1alpha and Ucp1 expression. We
conclude that the increased cAMP stimulation of Pgc-1alpha expression is
regulated by the combinatorial effect of transcription factors acting at the CRE 
on the proximal Pgc-1alpha promoter.

PMCID: PMC2742839
PMID: 19491401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Psychiatr Genet. 2009 Aug;19(4):165-70. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e32832a4faa.

No evidence for excess runs of homozygosity in bipolar disorder.

Vine AE(1), McQuillin A, Bass NJ, Pereira A, Kandaswamy R, Robinson M, Lawrence
J, Anjorin A, Sklar P, Gurling HM, Curtis D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Psychiatry, University College London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have reported large common regions of homozygosity
(ROHs) that are the result of autozygosity, that is, the cooccurrence within
individuals of long haplotypes that have a high frequency in the population. A
recent study reports that such regions are found more commonly in individuals
with schizophrenia compared with controls, and identified nine 'risk ROHs' that
were individually more common in cases. Of these, four contained or neighboured
genes associated with schizophrenia (NOS1AP/UHMK1, ATF2, NSF and PIK3C3).
METHODS: We have applied the same methodology to a UK sample of 506 cases with
bipolar disorder and 510 controls.
RESULTS: There was no overall excess of common ROHs among bipolar individuals.
With one exception, the haplotypes accounting for the ROHs appeared to be
distributed according to the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. One ROH was individually
more common among cases (uncorrected P = 0.0003). This ROH spanned the chromosome
2p23.3 gene ITSN2 (the gene for intersectin 2 isoform 2). However, inspection of 
the homozygous haplotypes and haplotype-based tests for association failed to
provide a clearer understanding of why this ROH was occurring more commonly.
CONCLUSION: Overall, we conclude that, in contrast with schizophrenia, common
ROHs are rarely associated with susceptibility to bipolar disorder. This supports
the idea that predominantly different genes are increasing susceptibility to
schizophrenia and bipolar affective disorders.

PMID: 19451863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jul 17;385(1):72-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.05.001. Epub 2009 May 5.

ATF-2 regulates lipopolysaccharide-induced transcription in macrophage cells.

Hirose N(1), Maekawa T, Shinagawa T, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, 3-1-1 Koyadai,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

The transcription factor ATF-2, a member of the ATF/CREB family, is a target of
p38 that are involved in stress-induced apoptosis and in Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-mediated signaling. Phosphorylation of ATF-2 at Thr-71 was enhanced by
treating of RAW264.7 macrophage cells with either LPS, MALP-2, or CpG-ODN. LPS
treatment enhanced the trans-activation capacity of ATF-2. Among multiple
LPS-induced genes, the LPS-induced expression of Socs-3 was significantly reduced
by the treatment of RAW264.7 cells with an Atf-2 siRNA. Transcription from the
Socs-3 promoter was synergistically stimulated by ATF-2 and LPS, whereas it was
suppressed by Atf-2 siRNA. Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) interacted with ATF-2
after LPS treatment, but not before treatment. Treatment of RAW264.7 cells with
trichostatin A, an inhibitor of HDAC, suppressed the LPS-induced Socs-3
expression, suggesting that HDAC1 positively regulates the LPS-induced
transcription of Socs-3. Thus, ATF-2 plays an important role in TLR-mediated
transcriptional control in macrophage cells.

PMID: 19422799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jun 26;284(26):17428-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.007823. Epub
2009 Apr 24.

Loss of Wip1 sensitizes cells to stress- and DNA damage-induced apoptosis.

Xia Y(1), Ongusaha P, Lee SW, Liou YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore.

In response to various environmental stresses, the stress-responsive MAPKs p38
and JNK are activated and phosphorylate ATF2 and c-Jun transcription factors,
thereby affecting cell-fate decision. Targeted gene disruption studies have
established that JNK-c-Jun signaling plays a vital role in stress-induced
apoptosis. The oncogenic phosphatase Wip1 acts as an important regulator in DNA
damage pathway by dephosphorylating a spectrum of proteins including p53, p38,
Chk1, Chk2, and ATM. In this study we show that Wip1 negatively regulates the
activation of MKK4-JNK-c-Jun signaling during stress-induced apoptosis. The loss 
of Wip1 function sensitizes mouse embryonic fibroblasts to stress-induced
apoptosis via the activation of both p38-ATF2 and JNK-c-Jun signaling. Here we
reveal that Wip1 has dual roles in alternatively regulating stress- and DNA
damage-induced apoptosis through p38/JNK MAPKs and p38/p53-dependent pathways,
respectively. Our results point to Wip1 as a general regulator of apoptosis,
which further supports its role in tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2719383
PMID: 19395378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2009;2009:726728. doi: 10.1155/2009/726728. Epub 2009 Apr
14.

Integrative decomposition procedure and Kappa statistics for the distinguished
single molecular network construction and analysis.

Wang L(1), Sun Y, Jiang M, Zheng X.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Center, School of Electronics Engineering, Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China. wanglin98@tsinghua.org.cn

Our method concentrates on and constructs the distinguished single gene network. 
An integrated method was proposed based on linear programming and a decomposition
procedure with integrated analysis of the significant function cluster using
Kappa statistics and fuzzy heuristic clustering. We tested this method to
identify ATF2 regulatory network module using data of 45 samples from the same
GEO dataset. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of such integrated way in 
terms of developing novel prognostic markers and therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC2668912
PMID: 19390583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jun 12;383(4):426-32. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.04.040. Epub 2009 Apr 17.

UVC-induced apoptosis in Dubca cells is independent of JNK activation and
p53(Ser-15) phosphorylation.

Chathoth S(1), Thayyullathil F, Hago A, Shahin A, Patel M, Galadari S.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signaling Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, UAE University, P.O. Box 17666, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.

Ultraviolet C (UVC) irradiation in mammalian cell lines activates a complex
signaling network that leads to apoptosis. By using Dubca cells as a model
system, we report the presence of a UVC-induced apoptotic pathway that is
independent of c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) activation and p53 phosphorylation
at Ser(15). Irradiation of Dubca cells with UVC results in a rapid JNK activation
and phosphorylation of its downstream target c-Jun, as well as, phosphorylation
of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2). Pre-treatment with JNK inhibitor,
SP600125, inhibited UVC-induced c-Jun phosphorylation without preventing
UVC-induced apoptosis. Similarly, inhibition of UVC-induced p53 phosphorylation
did not prevent Dubca cell apoptosis, suggesting that p53(Ser-15) phosphorylation
is not associated with UVC-induced apoptosis signaling. The pan-caspase inhibitor
z-VAD-fmk inhibited UVC-induced PARP cleavage, DNA fragmentation, and ultimately 
apoptosis of Dubca cells. Altogether, our study clearly indicates that
UVC-induced apoptosis is independent of JNK and p53 activation in Dubca cells,
rather, it is mediated through a caspase dependent pathway. Our findings are not 
in line with the ascribed critical role for JNKs activation, and downstream
phosphorylation of targets such as c-Jun and ATF2 in UVC-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 19376088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Leuk Res. 2009 Oct;33(10):1372-8. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.03.003. Epub 2009
Mar 31.

c-Jun N-terminal kinase 2 (JNK2) antagonizes the signaling of differentiation by 
JNK1 in human myeloid leukemia cells resistant to vitamin D.

Chen-Deutsch X(1), Garay E, Zhang J, Harrison JS, Studzinski GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical
School, 185 So. Orange Avenue, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

Comment in
    Leuk Res. 2009 Oct;33(10):1298-300.

1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D) induces differentiation of myeloid leukemia
cells, but resistant cells are also encountered. We studied the mechanistic basis
for the resistance in a model system using enhancers of 1,25D, the antioxidant
carnosic acid and a kinase inhibitor SB202190. Knock-down (KD) of JNK2p54
unexpectedly increased the intensity of differentiation induced by the 1,25D,
carnosic acid and SB202190 (DCS) combination. This was associated with
upregulation of activated JNK1p46, and the transcription factors regulated by the
JNK pathway, c-Jun, ATF2 and JunB, as well as C/EBP beta. In contrast, KD of
JNK1p46 reduced the intensity of DCS-induced differentiation, and partially
abrogated activation of c-Jun/AP-1 transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2706390
PMID: 19339050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Anticancer Res. 2009 Jan;29(1):183-9.

Expression and prognostic value of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) and
its phosphorylated form in mammary carcinomas.

Knippen S(1), Löning T, Müller V, Schröder C, Jänicke F, Milde-Langosch K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor ATF2 is overexpressed in various tumors, but
its role in breast cancer is still not understood.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In a study of mammary carcinomas, the expression of ATF2
and its phosphorylated active forms was analyzed by Western blot analysis (WB;
pThr69/pThr71-ATF2, n=134) and immunohistochemistry (IHC; p-ATF2-Thr6, n=110).
Results were correlated with histological and clinical data, survival data,
expression of ERK1/2 and two matrix metalloproteinases.
RESULTS: Patients with high ATF2 expression as detected by WB had a significantly
shorter overall survival (p = 0.038). This tendency was corroborated by IHC. In
contrast, high p-ATF2 expression as found by WB correlated significantly with a
well-differentiated phenotype, but not with prognosis. Immunohistochemically
detected p-ATF2 overexpression was even associated with prolonged survival (p =
0.047).
CONCLUSION: Although high ATF2 expression is associated with a poor prognosis,
our data do not point to an oncogenic role of active p-ATF2 in mammary
carcinomas.

PMID: 19331149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 May;37(9):3044-60. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp175. Epub 2009 Mar
20.

The proapoptotic dp5 gene is a direct target of the MLK-JNK-c-Jun pathway in
sympathetic neurons.

Towers E(1), Gilley J, Randall R, Hughes R, Kristiansen M, Ham J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Haematology and Cancer Biology Unit, Camelia Botnar Laboratories,
UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

The death of sympathetic neurons after nerve growth factor (NGF) withdrawal
requires de novo gene expression. Dp5 was one of the first NGF withdrawal-induced
genes to be identified and it encodes a proapoptotic BH3-only member of the Bcl-2
family. To study how dp5 transcription is regulated by NGF withdrawal we cloned
the regulatory regions of the rat dp5 gene and constructed a series of
dp5-luciferase reporter plasmids. In microinjection experiments with sympathetic 
neurons we found that three regions of dp5 contribute to its induction after NGF 
withdrawal: the promoter, a conserved region in the single intron, and sequences 
in the 3' untranslated region of the dp5 mRNA. A construct containing all three
regions is efficiently activated by NGF withdrawal and, like the endogenous dp5, 
its induction requires mixed-lineage kinase (MLK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK) activity. JNKs phosphorylate the AP-1 transcription factor c-Jun, and
thereby increase its activity. We identified a conserved ATF site in the dp5
promoter that binds c-Jun and ATF2, which is critical for dp5 promoter induction 
after NGF withdrawal. These results suggest that part of the mechanism by which
the MLK-JNK-c-Jun pathway promotes neuronal apoptosis is by activating the
transcription of the dp5 gene.

PMCID: PMC2685101
PMID: 19304750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Cardiology. 2009;113(4):291-8. doi: 10.1159/000209256. Epub 2009 Mar 20.

Fibronectin gene expression in aortic regurgitation: relative roles of
mitogen-activated protein kinases.

Truter SL(1), Catanzaro DF, Supino PG, Gupta A, Carter J, Ene AR, Herrold EM,
Dumlao TF, Beltran F, Borer JS.

Author information: 
(1)Wyeth Research, Collegeville, PA, USA.

OBJECTIVES: In aortic regurgitation (AR), fibronectin (FN) expression is
upregulated. This study sought to determine signal transduction pathways involved
in upregulation of FN expression in AR.
METHODS: Cardiac fibroblasts (CF) from rabbits with surgically induced AR and
matched controls (NL) were cultured and assayed for FN expression and kinase
activity with and without inhibitors of kinases JNK, p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and extracellular response kinase (ERK). NL CF also were
subjected to cyclic strain mimicking AR for 24 h in culture with and without
inhibitors.
RESULTS: AR CF exhibited 2.9-fold greater c-Jun phosphorylation (p < 0.01) and
1.5- to 2-fold greater ATF2 phosphorylation (p < 0.05-0.01) than NL. JNK and
p38MAPK inhibition reduced c-Jun and ATF2 phosphorylation to NL; ERK inhibition
had no effect. FN mRNA expression was similar in pattern to kinase activities.
Cyclic strain in NL CF increased c-Jun phosphorylation 2-fold versus unstrained
controls (p < 0.005). This was suppressed by inhibition of JNK but not p38MAPK.
CONCLUSION: FN expression in response to the acute mechanical strain resembling
AR is upregulated primarily via JNK. However, in chronic AR both JNK and p38MAPK 
are involved. These signaling pathways represent potential therapeutic targets
for normalizing extracellular matrix (ECM) composition and contractile force
transmission, believed to be related to ECM composition/organization, in AR.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19299894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Cutan Pathol. 2009 Apr;36(4):402-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0560.2008.01076.x.

Concordant overexpression of phosphorylated ATF2 and STAT3 in extramammary
Paget's disease.

Chen SY(1), Takeuchi S, Moroi Y, Hayashida S, Kido M, Tomoeda H, Uenotsuchi T, Tu
YT, Furue M, Urabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) and signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) play important roles in the pathogenesis of 
various tumors, but ATF2 expression/activation and the relationship with STAT3
activation have not yet been investigated in extramammary Paget's disease (EMPD).
OBJECTIVE: To investigate potential contributions of ATF2 and STAT3 pathways to
the pathogenesis of EMPD.
METHOD: Paraffin-embedded 45 EMPD specimens (43 primary EMPD and 2 nodal
metastases) were subjected to immunohistochemical staining for ATF2,
phosphorylated (p)-ATF2 and p-STAT3.
RESULTS: P-ATF2 expression in advanced EMPD, non-invasive EMPD and normal skin
(NS) controls were 97.9 +/- 1.8%, 82.0 +/- 23.4% and 45.8 +/- 3.2%, respectively,
and p-STAT3 expression in advanced EMPD, non-invasive EMPD and NS were 97.0 +/-
2.9%, 83.2 +/- 23.3% and 50.1 +/- 6.7%, respectively. P-ATF2 and p-STAT3
expressions in EMPD were significantly higher than those in NS, indicating a
possible contribution of these pathways to the tumor development. P-ATF2 and
p-STAT3 expressions in advanced EMPD were significantly higher than those in
non-invasive EMPD, possibly indicating that these pathways might also contribute 
to the tumor invasion and/or metastasis. We also found an exceptionally high
positive correlation between p-ATF2 and p-STAT3 expressions in EMPD.
CONCLUSIONS: P-ATF2 and p-STAT3 are concordantly overexpressed in EMPD and their 
expressions may possibly be associated with the tumor stage.

PMID: 19278424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Med Chem. 2009 Apr 9;52(7):1943-52. doi: 10.1021/jm801503n.

Design, synthesis, and structure-activity relationship of substrate competitive, 
selective, and in vivo active triazole and thiadiazole inhibitors of the c-Jun
N-terminal kinase.

De SK(1), Stebbins JL, Chen LH, Riel-Mehan M, Machleidt T, Dahl R, Yuan H, Emdadi
A, Barile E, Chen V, Murphy R, Pellecchia M.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious and Inflammatory Disease Center and Cancer Center, Burnham
Institute for Medical Research, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

We report comprehensive structure-activity relationship studies on a novel series
of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitors. The compounds are substrate
competitive inhibitors that bind to the docking site of the kinase. The reported 
medicinal chemistry and structure-based optimizations studies resulted in the
discovery of selective and potent thiadiazole JNK inhibitors that display
promising in vivo activity in mouse models of insulin insensitivity.

PMCID: PMC2667321
PMID: 19271755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 8;284(19):12853-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809430200. Epub 2009 
Mar 4.

Structure-activity relationships and X-ray structures describing the selectivity 
of aminopyrazole inhibitors for c-Jun N-terminal kinase 3 (JNK3) over p38.

Kamenecka T(1), Habel J, Duckett D, Chen W, Ling YY, Frackowiak B, Jiang R, Shin 
Y, Song X, LoGrasso P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics and Translational Research Institute, The
Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA.

c-Jun N-terminal kinase 3alpha1 (JNK3alpha1) is a mitogen-activated protein
kinase family member expressed primarily in the brain that phosphorylates protein
transcription factors, including c-Jun and activating transcription factor-2
(ATF-2) upon activation by a variety of stress-based stimuli. In this study, we
set out to design JNK3-selective inhibitors that had >1000-fold selectivity over 
p38, another closely related mitogen-activated protein kinase family member. To
do this we employed traditional medicinal chemistry principles coupled with
structure-based drug design. Inhibitors from the aminopyrazole class, such as
SR-3576, were found to be very potent JNK3 inhibitors (IC(50) = 7 nm) with
>2800-fold selectivity over p38 (p38 IC(50) > 20 microm) and had cell-based
potency of approximately 1 microm. In contrast, indazole-based inhibitors
exemplified by SR-3737 were potent inhibitors of both JNK3 (IC(50) = 12 nm) and
p38 (IC(50) = 3 nm). These selectivity differences between the indazole class and
the aminopyrazole class came despite nearly identical binding (root mean square
deviation = 0.33 A) of these two compound classes to JNK3. The structural
features within the compounds giving rise to the selectivity in the aminopyrazole
class include the highly planar nature of the pyrazole, N-linked phenyl
structures, which better occupied the smaller active site of JNK3 compared with
the larger active site of p38.

PMCID: PMC2676016
PMID: 19261605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 May;29(9):2431-42. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01344-08. Epub 2009 Mar
2.

Opposing roles for ATF2 and c-Fos in c-Jun-mediated neuronal apoptosis.

Yuan Z(1), Gong S, Luo J, Zheng Z, Song B, Ma S, Guo J, Hu C, Thiel G, Vinson C, 
Hu CD, Wang Y, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen
University, 74 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou, China.

The activator protein 1 (AP-1) transcription factor c-Jun is crucial for neuronal
apoptosis. However, c-Jun dimerization partners and the regulation of these
proteins in neuronal apoptosis remain unknown. Here we report that c-Jun-mediated
neuronal apoptosis requires the concomitant activation of activating
transcription factor-2 (ATF2) and downregulation of c-Fos. Furthermore, we have
observed that c-Jun predominantly heterodimerizes with ATF2 and that the
c-Jun/ATF2 complex promotes apoptosis by triggering ATF activity. Inhibition of
c-Jun/ATF2 heterodimerization using dominant negative mutants, small hairpin
RNAs, or decoy oligonucleotides was able to rescue neurons from apoptosis,
whereas constitutively active ATF2 and c-Jun mutants were found to
synergistically stimulate apoptosis. Bimolecular fluorescence complementation
analysis confirmed that, in living neurons, c-Fos downregulation facilitates
c-Jun/ATF2 heterodimerization. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay also
revealed that c-Fos expression prevents the binding of c-Jun/ATF2 heterodimers to
conserved ATF sites. Moreover, the presence of c-Fos is able to suppress the
expression of c-Jun/ATF2-mediated target genes and, therefore, apoptosis. Taken
together, our findings provide evidence that potassium deprivation-induced
neuronal apoptosis is mediated by concurrent upregulation of c-Jun/ATF2
heterodimerization and downregulation of c-Fos expression. This paradigm
demonstrates opposing roles for ATF2 and c-Fos in c-Jun-mediated neuronal
apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2668374
PMID: 19255142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Circ Res. 2009 Mar 27;104(6):813-21. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.191171. Epub
2009 Feb 12.

Bosentan enhances viral load via endothelin-1 receptor type-A-mediated p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase activation while improving cardiac function
during coxsackievirus-induced myocarditis.

Marchant D(1), Dou Y, Luo H, Garmaroudi FS, McDonough JE, Si X, Walker E, Luo Z, 
Arner A, Hegele RG, Laher I, McManus BM.

Author information: 
(1)The James Hogg iCAPTURE Centre for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research,
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, 
Providence Heart and Lung Institute, St Paul's Hospital, Vancouver, BC V6Z1Y6,
Canada.

Reduced cardiac output is one of the consequences of myocarditis. Bosentan, an
endothelin-1 receptor (ET1R) antagonist, could be useful to reduce cardiac
afterload, preserving cardiac output. In this study, we investigated the
potential therapeutic use of bosentan in an animal model of viral myocarditis.
Using a mouse model of coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3)-induced myocarditis, we
demonstrated preserved ejection fraction (EF) and fractional shortening (FS) by
treatment with bosentan (68+/-5.8% EF and 40+/-3.7% FS for treated versus
48+/-2.2% EF and 25+/-2.6% FS for controls; P=0.028). However, bosentan enhanced 
cardiac viral load (10.4+/-6.7% in the bosentan group versus 5.0+/-5.5% in
control group; P=0.02), likely through enhancement of p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation (0.77+/-0.40% ATF2 activation in the
bosentan group versus 0.03+/-0.02% in controls; P=0.0002), mediated by endothelin
receptor type-A. We further demonstrate that a water soluble inhibitor of p38
MAPK, SB203580 HCl, is a potent inhibitor of virus replication in the heart
(0.28% antisense viral genome stained area for 3 mg/kg dose versus 2.9% stained
area for controls; P=0.01), attenuates CVB3-induced myocardial damage (blinded
cardiac histopathologic scores of 1.8+/-1.6 and 2.05+/-1.2 for the 3 mg/kg and 10
mg/kg doses, respectively, versus 3.25+/-1.2 for the controls), and preserves
cardiac function (69+/-3.5% EF for 3 mg/kg dose and 71+/-6.7% EF for 10 mg/kg
dose versus 60+/-1.5% EF control; P=0.038 and P=0.045, as compared to control,
respectively). Bosentan, a prescribed vasodilator, improves cardiac function but 
enhances viral load and myocarditis severity through ETRA mediated p38 MAPK
activation; p38 MAPK is a desirable antiviral target. Caution must be exercised
during treatment of suspected infectious myocarditis with supportive vasoactive
remedies.

PMID: 19213955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Virol. 2009 May;83(9):4081-91. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02591-08. Epub 2009 Feb 11.

Adenovirus induction of IRF3 occurs through a binary trigger targeting Jun
N-terminal kinase and TBK1 kinase cascades and type I interferon autocrine
signaling.

Nociari M(1), Ocheretina O, Murphy M, Falck-Pedersen E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Weill Medical College, Cornell University, New York,
New York 10021, USA.

Pathogen recognition is a critical function of immune sentinel cells. Naïve
macrophages or dendritic cells (DCs) undergo pathogen-directed activation and
maturation, and as mature antigen-presenting cells (APCs), they contribute
essential functions to both innate and adaptive immunity. Using recombinant
adenovirus (rAdV) as a model for murine APC activation by DNA viruses, we
demonstrate a critical role for stress kinase activation in cell intrinsic and
extrinsic antiviral signaling cascades. We propose two viral triggers, viral
capsid and viral DNA, are required for APC activation. Endosomal escape and
presentation of cytosolic rAdV DNA induces phosphorylation of TANK-binding kinase
1 (TBK1) at serine 172 but does not induce IkappaB kinase epsilon activity as
determined by in vitro kinase assays. However, induction of TBK1 alone is not
sufficient for interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) phosphorylation. We show
that capsid-dependent activation of Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) stress kinase is 
a necessary step, licensing TBK1 phosphorylation of IRF3 at Ser 396. A second
later phase of JNK activity is required to coordinate phosphorylation of
JNK-dependent transcription factors (c-Jun/ATF2) with activated IRF3 in the
induction of primary IRF3-responsive transcripts. Finally, we demonstrate that
maximal JNK/TBK1/IRF3 stimulation by rAdV depends on an intact type I interferon 
(IFN) signaling cascade. By requiring multiple viral triggers and type I IFN
autocrine regulation, APCs have an inherent fail-safe mechanism against
inappropriate activation and maturation.

PMCID: PMC2668477
PMID: 19211767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 8;284(19):13165-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M900080200. Epub 2009 
Feb 5.

Selectivity of docking sites in MAPK kinases.

Bardwell AJ(1), Frankson E, Bardwell L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697-2300, USA.

Protein kinases often recognize their substrates and regulators through docking
interactions that occur outside of the active site; these interactions can help
us to understand kinase networks, and to target kinases with drugs. During
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling, the ability of MAPK kinases
(MKKs, or MEKs) to recognize their cognate MAPKs is facilitated by a short
docking motif (the D-site) in the MKK N terminus, which binds to a complementary 
region on the MAPK. MAPKs then recognize many of their targets using the same
strategy, because many MAPK substrates also contain D-sites. The extent to which 
docking contributes to the specificity of MAPK transactions is incompletely
understood. Here we characterize the selectivity of the interaction between
MKK-derived D-sites and MAPKs by measuring the ability of D-site peptides to
inhibit MAPK-mediated phosphorylation of D-site-containing substrates. We find
that all MKK D-sites bind better to their cognate MAPKs than they do to
non-cognate MAPKs. For instance, the MKK3 D-site peptide, which is a remarkably
potent inhibitor of p38alpha (IC(50) < 10 nm), does not inhibit JNK1 or JNK2.
Likewise, MAPKs generally bind as well or better to cognate D-sites than to
non-cognate D-sites. For instance, JNK1 and JNK2 do not appreciably bind to any
D-sites other than their cognate D-sites from MKK4 and MKK7. In general, cognate,
within-pathway interactions are preferred about an order of magnitude over
non-cognate interactions. However, the selectivity of MAPKs and their cognate
MKK-derived D-sites for each other is limited in some cases; in particular, ERK2 
is not very selective. We conclude that MAPK-docking sites in MAPK kinases bind
selectively to their cognate MAPKs.

PMCID: PMC2676048
PMID: 19196711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 27;284(13):8567-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808719200. Epub 2009 
Jan 28.

Phosphorylation of Activation Transcription Factor-2 at Serine 121 by Protein
Kinase C Controls c-Jun-mediated Activation of Transcription.

Yamasaki T(1), Takahashi A, Pan J, Yamaguchi N, Yokoyama KK.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Engineering Division, RIKEN BioResource Center, 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305-0074.

Activation transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) is phosphorylated by various protein
kinases, such as JNK/p38/ERK, calmodulin kinase IV, protein kinase A, and protein
kinase C (PKC), in response to a variety of stimuli. However, the role of the
phosphorylation of ATF-2 by PKC in vivo in the transcriptional control of genes
that include the activation protein-1 (AP-1)/cyclic AMP-response element remains 
to be defined. Using antibodies against the phosphorylated serine residue
(Ser(P)) at position 121 of ATF-2, we have demonstrated that PKC phosphorylates
ATF-2 at Ser-121 and that phosphorylation of Ser-121 (to yield ATF-2pS121)
becomes detectable at the late stage of the response of HeLa cells to
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) and is maintained for more than 2 h.
By contrast, phosphorylation of ATF-2 at threonine residues 69 and 71 (Thr-69/71,
to yield ATF-2pT69/71) and at Ser-340 and Ser-367 (to yield ATF-2pS340 and
ATF-2pS367) is detectable as an immediate early response. Unlike levels of
ATF-2pT69/71 and ATF-2pS340, the level of ATF-2pS121 increases in the nuclei of
HeLa cells in response to TPA. A serine-to-alanine mutation at position 121 of
ATF-2 represses the c-Jun-dependent transcription of AP-1/cyclic AMP-response
element reporter genes and also the p300-mediated activation of a Gal4-reporter
gene in response to TPA. Our results suggest that the phosphorylation of ATF-2 at
Ser-121 plays a key role in the c-Jun-mediated activation of transcription that
occurs in response to TPA.

PMCID: PMC2659215
PMID: 19176525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Pancreas. 2009 Jan;38(1):78-84.

Antiproliferative effects of CC-8062 and CC-8075 in pancreatic cancer cells.

Mouratidis PX(1), Colston KW, Bartlett JB, Muller GW, Man HW, Stirling D,
Dalgleish AG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, St
George's University of London, London, UK. pmouratidis@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVES: Pancreatic cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer related
deaths in the western world. It is also resistant to most chemotherapeutic
modalities. Phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors (PDE4is) have found applications in
the treatment of respiratory diseases. The aim of this study is to investigate
the cytotoxic effect of 2 novel PDE4is, the CC-8075 and CC-8062 compounds in
pancreatic cancer cells.
METHODS: Cell proliferation was measured using the sulforhodamine B protein dye. 
Induction of apoptosis was detected using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
Regulation of proteins and posttranslational modifications were determined using 
immunoblotting.
RESULTS: Treatment of pancreatic cancer cells with CC-8075 and CC-8062 reduces
their proliferation and increases apoptosis that is caspase dependent in T3M4
cells. Furthermore, PDE4is increase phosphorylation of p38MAPK, mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) kinase 3/6,MAPKYactivated protein kinase 2, Atf2, and
Hsp27. The use of thep38MAPK-specific inhibitors SB202190 and SB203580 results in
a modest reduction in PDE4i-induced apoptosis in T3M4 cells. Also, retinoids
enhance apoptosis induced by CC-8075 and CC-8062 in GER cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results highlight the antiproliferative effects of the
phosphodiesterase inhibitors CC-8075 and CC-8062 in pancreatic cancer cells and
suggest that activation of p38MAPK signaling pathway may be associated with this 
process.

PMID: 19117086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Exp Mol Med. 2008 Dec 31;40(6):699-708.

Transcription of the protein kinase C-delta gene is activated by JNK through
c-Jun and ATF2 in response to the anticancer agent doxorubicin.

Min BW(1), Kim CG, Ko J, Lim Y, Lee YH, Shin SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Korea University College of Medicine, Ansan 425-707,
Korea.

Expression of protein kinase C-delta (PKCdelta) is up-regulated by
apoptosis-inducing stimuli. However, very little is known about the signaling
pathways that control PKCdelta gene transcription. In the present study, we
demonstrate that JNK stimulates PKCdelta gene expression via c-Jun and ATF2 in
response to the anticancer agent doxorubicin (DXR) in mouse lymphocytic leukemia 
L1210 cells. Luciferase reporter assays showed that DXR-induced activation of the
PKCdelta promoter was enhanced by ectopic expression of JNK1, c-Jun, or ATF2,
whereas it was strongly reduced by expression of dominant negative JNK1 or by
treatment with the JNK inhibitor SP600125. Furthermore, point mutations in the
core sequence of the c-Jun/ATF2 binding site suppressed DXR-induced activation of
the PKCdelta promoter. Our results suggest an additional role for a JNK signaling
cascade in DXR-induced PKCdelta gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2679346
PMID: 19116455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Biogerontology. 2009 Jun;10(3):291-8. doi: 10.1007/s10522-008-9204-0. Epub 2008
Dec 11.

p53 and ATF-2 partly mediate the overexpression of COX-2 in H(2)O (2)-induced
premature senescence of human fibroblasts.

Zdanov S(1), Toussaint O, Debacq-Chainiaux F.

Author information: 
(1)University of Namur, Rue de Bruxelles, 61, 5000, Namur, Belgium.

Cyclooxygenase-2 and release of prostaglandin E2 are up-regulated in replicative 
senescence of dermal and prostate fibroblasts and in H(2)O(2)-induced premature
senescence of IMR-90 lung fibroblasts expressing the catalytic subunit of
telomerase. Inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 activity by specific chemical
inhibitor or siRNA attenuates the H(2)O(2)-induced increase of senescence
associated beta-galactosidase positive cells and attenuates growth arrest. In
this work, p38(MAPK) activation and increased DNA binding activities of ATF-2 and
p53 are shown to mediate cyclooxygenase-2 overexpression in premature senescence.

PMID: 19082758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Ai Zheng. 2008 Dec;27(12):1239-43.

[Impact of PTEN gene knockout in human breast carcinoma MCF-7 cells on activity
of JNK pathway].

[Article in Chinese]

Jin Y(1), Hu JL, Xiao L, Cui W.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Oncology, Union Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430022, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: PTEN plays a critical role in the development and
progression of many cancers. PTEN may act directly or indirectly to integrate
complex signal network system, to influence the downstream signal pathway and
target molecules. This study was to investigate the impact of PTEN gene knockout 
in human breast carcinoma MCF-7 cells on the activity of JNK pathway.
METHODS: MCF-7 cells were transfected with PTEN antisense oligonucleotide, or
treated with 10 micromol/L SP600125, or received both transfection and SP600125
treatment. The expression of PTEN protein was detected by confocal spectral
microscopy. The early stage cell apoptosis and cell cycle were detected by flow
cytometry (FCM). The proliferation of MCF-7 cells was determined by MTT assay.
The phosphorylated JNK and downstream substrate ATF-2, C-Jun protein were assayed
by Western blot.
RESULTS: The expression of PTEN protein in MCF-7 cells was effectively blocked by
PTEN antisense oligonucleotide. Early apoptosis of MCF-7 cells was induced by
SP600125 after knocking down PTEN, with an early apoptosis rate of (32.4+/-2.4)%;
MCF-7 cells were arrested at G1 phase. The proliferation rate was significantly
lower in combination group than in SP600125 group and antisense oligonucleotide
group (P < 0.05). The phosphorylation levels of JNK, ATF-2 and C-Jun was
down-regulated in combination group.
CONCLUSIONS: PTEN plays an important role in the activation of JNK pathway in
MCF-7 cells. Loss of PTEN results in the activation of JNK pathway in MCF-7
cells, and improves sensitivity of MCF-7 cells to JNK inhibitor.

PMID: 19079986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Inflamm (Lond). 2008 Dec 4;5:22. doi: 10.1186/1476-9255-5-22.

P38 MAP kinase inhibitors as potential therapeutics for the treatment of joint
degeneration and pain associated with osteoarthritis.

Brown KK(1), Heitmeyer SA, Hookfin EB, Hsieh L, Buchalova M, Taiwo YO, Janusz MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals, Inc, 8700 Mason-Montgomery Rd,, Mason, OH
45040-9462, USA. janusz.mj@pg.com.

BACKGROUND: Evaluate the potential role of p38 inhibitors for the treatment of
osteoarthritis using an animal model of joint degeneration (iodoacetate-induced
arthritis) and a pain model (Hargraeves assay).
METHODS: P38 kinase activity was evaluated in a kinase assay by measuring the
amount of phosphorylated substrate ATF2 using a phosphoATF2 (Thr71) specific
primary antibody and an alkaline phosphate coupled secondary antibody and
measuring the OD at 405 nm. TNFalpha and IL-1beta secretion from LPS stimulated
THP-1 monocytic cells and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells were measured 
by ELISA. Rats treated with vehicle or p38 inhibitor were injected
intra-articularly in one knee with iodoacetate and damage to the tibial plateau
was assessed from digitized images captured using an image analyzer. The effect
of p38 inhibitors on hyperalgesia was evaluated in rats given an intraplantar
injection of carrageenan and 4 h later the paw withdrawal time to a radiant heat 
source was measured.
RESULTS: SB-203580 and VX-745 are both potent inhibitors of p38 with IC50s of 136
+/- 64 nM and 35 +/- 14 nM (mean +/- S.D.), respectively. Similarly, SB-203580
and VX-745 potently inhibited TNF release from LPS stimulated human THP-1 cells
with IC50s of 72 +/- 15 nM; and 29 +/- 14 nM (mean +/- S.D.) respectively. TNF
release from LPS stimulated human peripheral blood mononuclear cells was
inhibited with IC50s 16 +/- 6 nM and 14 +/- 8 nM, (mean +/- S.D.) for SB-203580
and VX-745 and IL-1 was inhibited with IC50s of 20 +/- 8 nM and 15 +/- 4 nM (mean
+/- S.D.), respectively. SB-203580 and VX-745 administered orally at a dose of 50
mg/kg resulted in the significant (p < 0.05) inhibition of joint degeneration in 
the rat iodoacetate model of 45% and 31%, respectively. SB-203580 demonstrated a 
dose related inhibition of joint degeneration of 30, 25, 12 and 8% at 50, 25, 10 
and 5 mg/kg p.o. b.i.d. in the rat iodoacetate model. Similarly, both p38
inhibitors significantly (p < 0.05) attenuated the pain response (paw withdrawal 
time) in the Hargraeves hyperalgesia assay when administered orally at 30, 10 and
3 mg/kg.
CONCLUSION: SB203580 and VX-745 demonstrated attenuation of both cartilage
degeneration and pain in animal models and suggest that p38 inhibitors may be a
useful approach for the treatment of osteoarthritis.

PMCID: PMC2612656
PMID: 19055838  [PubMed]


390. Cancer Res. 2008 Dec 1;68(23):9663-70. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2229.

Ionizing radiation induces prostate cancer neuroendocrine differentiation through
interplay of CREB and ATF2: implications for disease progression.

Deng X(1), Liu H, Huang J, Cheng L, Keller ET, Parsons SJ, Hu CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology and the Purdue
Cancer Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA.

Radiation therapy is a first-line treatment for prostate cancer patients with
localized tumors. Although some patients respond well to the treatment,
approximately 10% of low-risk and up to 60% of high-risk prostate cancer patients
experience recurrent tumors. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying tumor
recurrence remain largely unknown. Here we show that fractionated ionizing
radiation (IR) induces differentiation of LNCaP prostate cancer cells into
neuroendocrine (NE)-like cells, which are known to be implicated in prostate
cancer progression, androgen-independent growth, and poor prognosis. Further
analyses revealed that two cyclic AMP-responsive element binding transcription
factors, cyclic AMP-response element binding protein (CREB) and activating
transcription factor 2 (ATF2), function as a transcriptional activator and a
repressor, respectively, of NE-like differentiation and that IR induces NE-like
differentiation by increasing the nuclear content of phospho-CREB and cytoplasmic
accumulation of ATF2. Consistent with this notion, stable expression of a
nonphosphorylatable CREB or a constitutively nuclear-localized ATF2 in LNCaP
cells inhibits IR-induced NE-like differentiation. IR-induced NE-like
morphologies are reversible, and three IR-resistant clones isolated from
dedifferentiated cells have acquired the ability to proliferate and lost the
NE-like cell properties. In addition, these three IR-resistant clones exhibit
differential responses to IR- and androgen depletion-induced NE-like
differentiation. However, they are all resistant to cell death induced by IR and 
the chemotherapeutic agent docetaxel and to androgen depletion-induced growth
inhibition. These results suggest that radiation therapy-induced NE-like
differentiation may represent a novel pathway by which prostate cancer cells
survive the treatment and contribute to tumor recurrence.

PMCID: PMC3100895
PMID: 19047143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Immunol. 2008 Nov 15;181(10):6797-802.

IFN-beta production by TLR4-stimulated innate immune cells is negatively
regulated by GSK3-beta.

Wang H(1), Garcia CA, Rehani K, Cekic C, Alard P, Kinane DF, Mitchell T, Martin
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Louisville School of 
Medicine, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

TLR 4 stimulation of innate immune cells induces a MyD88-independent signaling
pathway that leads to the production of IFN-beta. In this study, we demonstrate
glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta (GSK3-beta) plays a fundamental role in this
process. Suppression of GSK3-beta activity by either pharmacological inhibition, 
small interfering RNA-mediated gene silencing, or ectopic expression of a
kinase-dead GSK3-beta mutant enhanced IFN-beta production by TLR4-stimulated
macrophages. Conversely, ectopic expression of a constitutively active GSK3-beta 
mutant severely attenuated IFN-beta production. GSK3-beta was found to negatively
control the cellular levels of the transcription factor c-Jun and its nuclear
association with ATF-2. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of c-Jun levels 
abrogated the ability of GSK3-beta inhibition to augment IFN-beta, demonstrating 
that the ability of GSK3 to control IFN-beta production was due to its ability to
regulate c-Jun levels. The ability of GSK3 inhibition to control IFN-beta
production was confirmed in vivo as mice treated with a GSK3 inhibitor exhibited 
enhanced systemic levels of IFN-beta upon LPS challenge. These findings identify 
a novel regulatory pathway controlling IFN-beta production by TLR4-stimulated
innate immune cells.

PMCID: PMC2849978
PMID: 18981097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Mol Biol. 2008 Dec 26;384(4):980-91. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.10.008. Epub 2008 
Oct 11.

p38beta2-mediated phosphorylation and sumoylation of ATF7 are mutually exclusive.

Camuzeaux B(1), Diring J, Hamard PJ, Oulad-Abdelghani M, Donzeau M, Vigneron M,
Kedinger C, Chatton B.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Strasbourg I, Institut Gilbert Laustriat, CNRS-UMR7175, Ecole
Supérieure de Biotechnologie de Strasbourg, BP10413, Strasbourg Illkirch Cedex,
France.

The ubiquitous activating transcription factor (ATF) 7 binds as a homodimer to
the cAMP response element/TPA response element motifs present in the promoters of
its target genes. ATF7 is homologous to ATF2 and heterodimerizes with Jun or Fos 
proteins, modulating their DNA-binding specificities. We previously demonstrated 
that TAF12, a component of the TFIID general transcription factor, mediates ATF7 
transcriptional activity through direct interactions between the two proteins. By
contrast, ATF7, but not ATF2, is modified in vivo by sumoylation, which restricts
its subcellular localization, thereby inhibiting its transcriptional activity. In
the present study, we dissect the mechanism of this functional switch. We
characterized the multisite phosphorylation of the ATF7 activation domain and
identified one of the involved kinase, p38beta2 mitogen-activated protein kinase.
In addition, we show that epidermal growth factor treatment results in a two-step
modification mechanism of ATF7 activation domain. The Thr53 residue is
phosphorylated first by a presently unknown kinase, allowing p38beta2
mitogen-activated protein kinase to modify the Thr51 residue, excluding the
sumoylation of ATF7 protein. The resulting activation of transcription is related
to an increased association of TAF12 with this phosphorylated form of ATF7. Our
data therefore conclusively establish that sumoylation and phosphorylation of
ATF7 are two antagonistic posttranslational modifications.

PMID: 18950637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Jan;23(1):86-99. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0257. Epub 2008 Oct
22.

A novel mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-1 and glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) interacting protein-1-dependent combinatorial mechanism of gene
transrepression by GR.

Cho IJ(1), Kim SG.

Author information: 
(1)Innovative Drug Research Center for Metabolic and Inflammatory Disease,
College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Sillim-dong, Kwanak-gu, Seoul
151-742, Korea.

Glucocorticoids have major antiinflammatory effects. Because COX-2 is the
rate-limiting enzyme for proinflammatory prostaglandins, this study investigated 
the combinatorial inhibitory role of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in COX-2 gene
induction in macrophages and sought to identify the molecular mechanisms for that
inhibition. Glucocorticoid-activated GR repressed COX-2 gene induction by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Activated GR inhibited LPS-induced activator protein 1 
activity, which in turn decreased activating transcription factor 2/c-Jun
phosphorylation. The inhibition of MAPK-dependent activating transcription factor
2/c-Jun phosphorylation by GR in COX-2 repression was a result of MAPK
phosphatase-1 (MKP-1) induction. Although GR did not inhibit LPS-induced p65
phosphorylation or nuclear factor-kappaB DNA binding activity, deletion of the
nuclear factor-kappaB binding site in the COX-2 gene suppressed the ability of
glucocorticoid to attenuate COX-2 induction. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and
transfection assays revealed that a p65 DNA complex involving GR-bound
GR-interacting protein 1 (GRIP1) also contributed to COX-2 repression. Additional
knockdown and transfection assays identified other inflammatory genes
coordinately regulated by MKP-1 and GRIP1. In summary, activated GR was found to 
antagonize the LPS-dependent induction of the COX-2 gene via a novel
combinatorial mechanism involving MKP-1-mediated activator protein 1 inhibition
and GR/GRIP1 recruitment to the p65 DNA complex; moreover, this work facilitated 
the identification of other GR-responding MKP-1/GRIP1-regulated genes.

PMID: 18945810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Gen Virol. 2008 Nov;89(Pt 11):2833-42. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.2008/003392-0.

Epstein-Barr virus-encoded EBNA1 modulates the AP-1 transcription factor pathway 
in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells and enhances angiogenesis in vitro.

O'Neil JD(1), Owen TJ, Wood VH, Date KL, Valentine R, Chukwuma MB, Arrand JR,
Dawson CW, Young LS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Institute for Cancer Studies, University of Birmingham,
Vincent Drive, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK. ONeilJD@bham.ac.uk

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded EBNA1 protein is expressed in all
virus-associated tumours, including nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), where it
plays an essential role in EBV genome maintenance, replication and transcription.
Previous studies suggest that EBNA1 may have additional effects relevant to
oncogenesis, including enhancement of cell survival, raising the possibility that
EBNA1 may influence cellular gene expression. We have recently demonstrated by
gene expression microarray profiling in an NPC cell model that EBNA1 influences
the expression of a range of cellular genes, including those involved in
transcription, translation and cell signalling. Here, we report for the first
time that EBNA1 enhances activity of the AP-1 transcription factor in NPC cells
and demonstrate that this is achieved by EBNA1 binding to the promoters of c-Jun 
and ATF2, enhancing their expression. In addition, we demonstrate elevated
expression of the AP-1 targets interleukin 8, vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) and hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha in response to EBNA1 expression, which
enhances microtubule formation in an in vitro angiogenesis assay. Furthermore, we
confirm elevation of VEGF and the phosphorylated isoforms of c-Jun and ATF2 in
NPC biopsies. These findings implicate EBNA1 in the angiogenic process and
suggest that this viral protein might directly contribute to the development and 
aggressively metastatic nature of NPC.

PMID: 18931081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Lipid Res. 2009 Mar;50(3):521-33. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M800388-JLR200. Epub 2008
Oct 10.

A novel role for activating transcription factor-2 in
15(S)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid-induced angiogenesis.

Zhao T(1), Wang D, Cheranov SY, Karpurapu M, Chava KR, Kundumani-Sridharan V,
Johnson DA, Penn JS, Rao GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

To investigate the mechanisms underlying 15(S)-HETE-induced angiogenesis, we have
studied the role of the small GTPase, Rac1. We find that 15(S)-HETE activated
Rac1 in human retinal microvascular endothelial cells (HRMVEC) in a
time-dependent manner. Blockade of Rac1 by adenovirus-mediated expression of its 
dominant negative mutant suppressed HRMVEC migration as well as tube formation
and Matrigel plug angiogenesis. 15(S)-HETE stimulated Src in HRMVEC in a
time-dependent manner and blockade of its activation inhibited 15(S)-HETE-induced
Rac1 stimulation in HRMVEC and the migration and tube formation of these cells as
well as Matrigel plug angiogenesis. 15(S)-HETE stimulated JNK1 in
Src-Rac1-dependent manner in HRMVEC and adenovirus-mediated expression of its
dominant negative mutant suppressed the migration and tube formation of these
cells and Matrigel plug angiogenesis. 15(S)-HETE activated ATF-2 in HRMVEC in
Src-Rac1-JNK1-dependent manner and interference with its activation via
adenovirus-mediated expression of its dominant negative mutant abrogated
migration and tube formation of HRMVEC and Matrigel plug angiogenesis. In
addition, 15(S)-HETE-induced MEK1 stimulation was found to be dependent on
Src-Rac1 activation. Blockade of MEK1 activation inhibited 15(S)-HETE-induced
JNK1 activity and ATF-2 phosphorylation. Together, these findings show that
15(S)-HETE activates ATF-2 via the Src-Rac1-MEK1-JNK1 signaling axis in HRMVEC
leading to their angiogenic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2638108
PMID: 18849464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Endocrinology. 2009 Feb;150(2):977-89. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0541. Epub 2008 Oct
9.

Transcription of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein in the rodent ovary and
placenta: alternative modes of cyclic adenosine 3', 5'-monophosphate dependent
and independent regulation.

Yivgi-Ohana N(1), Sher N, Melamed-Book N, Eimerl S, Koler M, Manna PR, Stocco DM,
Orly J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life 
Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

Steroid hormone synthesis is a vital function of the adrenal cortex, serves a
critical role in gonadal function, and maintains pregnancy if normally executed
in the placenta. The substrate for the synthesis of all steroid hormones is
cholesterol, and its conversion to the first steroid, pregnenolone, by the
cholesterol side-chain cleavage cytochrome P450 (CYP11A1) enzyme complex takes
place in the inner mitochondrial membranes. Steroidogenic acute regulatory
protein (STAR) facilitates the rate-limiting transfer of cholesterol from the
outer mitochondrial membrane to CYP11A1 located in the inner organelle membranes.
The current study explored the mechanisms controlling transcription of the Star
gene in primary cell cultures of mouse placental trophoblast giant cells and rat 
ovarian granulosa cells examined throughout the course of their functional
differentiation. Our findings show that the cis-elements required for Star
transcription in the rodent placenta and the ovary are centered in a relatively
small proximal region of the promoter. In placental trophoblast giant cells, cAMP
is required for activation of the Star promoter, and the cis-elements mediating a
maximal response were defined as cAMP response element 2 and GATA. EMSA studies
show that placental cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB)-1 and
activating transcription factor-2 (ATF2) bind to a -81/-78 sequence, whereas
GATA-2 binds to a -66/-61 sequence. In comparison, patterns of Star regulation in
the ovary suggested tissue-specific and developmental controlled modes of Star
transcription. During the follicular phase, FSH/cAMP induced CREB-1 dependent
activity, whereas upon luteinization STAR expression becomes cAMP and CREB
independent, a functional shift conferred by FOS-related antigen-2 displacement
of CREB-1 binding, and the appearance of a new requirement for CCAAT
enhancer-binding protein beta and steroidogenic factor 1 that bind to upstream
elements (-117/-95). These findings suggest that during evolution, the promoters 
of the Star gene acquired nonconsensus sequence elements enabling expression of a
single gene in different organs, or allowing dynamic temporal changes
corresponding to progressing phases of differentiation in a given cell type.

PMCID: PMC2732291
PMID: 18845640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Reproduction. 2009 Jan;137(1):13-21. doi: 10.1530/REP-08-0077. Epub 2008 Sep 19.

Spatiotemporal expression of transcriptional regulators in concert with the
maternal-to-embryonic transition during bovine in vitro embryogenesis.

Vigneault C(1), McGraw S, Sirard MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departement des Sciences Animales, Pavillon Paul-Comtois, Centre de Recherche 
en Biologie de la Reproduction, Université Laval, Sainte-Foy, Quebec, Canada.

Cleavage-stage bovine embryos are transcriptionally quiescent until they reach
the 8- to 16-cell stage, and thus rely on the reserves provided by the stored
maternal mRNAs and proteins found in the oocytes to achieve their first cell
divisions. The objective of this study was to characterize the expression and
localization of the transcriptional and translational regulators, Y box binding
protein 2 (YBX2), TATA box-binding protein (TBP), and activating transcription
factor 2 (ATF2), during bovine early embryo development. Germinal vesicle (GV)-
and metaphase II (MII)-stage oocytes, as well as 2-, 4-, 8-, 16-cell-stage
embryos, morula, and blastocysts, produced in vitro were analyzed for temporal
and spatial protein expression. Using Q-PCR, ATF2 mRNA expression was shown to
remain constant from the GV-stage oocyte to the four-cell embryo, and then
decreased through to the blastocyst stage. By contrast, the protein levels of
ATF2 remained constant throughout embryo development and were found in both the
cytoplasm and the nucleus. Both TBP and YBX2 showed opposite protein expression
patterns, as YBX2 protein levels decreased throughout development, while TBP
levels increased through to the blastocyst stage. Immunolocalization studies
revealed that TBP protein was localized in the nucleus of 8- to 16-cell-stage
embryos, whereas the translational regulator YBX2 was exclusively cytoplasmic and
disappeared from the 16-cell stage onward. This study shows that YBX2, TBP, and
ATF2 are differentially regulated through embryo development, and provides
insight into the molecular events occurring during the activation of the bovine
genome during embryo development in vitro.

PMID: 18805820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Immunol. 2008 Oct 1;181(7):4523-33.

Promoter analysis reveals critical roles for SMAD-3 and ATF-2 in expression of
IL-23 p19 in macrophages.

Al-Salleeh F(1), Petro TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology and Nebraska Center for Virology, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Lincoln, NE 68583, USA.

IL-23 p19/p40, produced by macrophages and dendritic cells, is critical for
development of Th17 in several autoimmune diseases. In this study, bone
marrow-derived (BMM) and splenic macrophages (SPM) from SJL/J mice, susceptible
to autoimmune demyelinating disease following Theiler's virus (TMEV) infection,
expressed IL-23 in response to TMEV. We identified potential binding sites for
IFN response factor (IRF)-3 (nt -734 to -731), Sma- and Mad-related protein
(SMAD)-3 (nt -584 to -581), activating transcription factor (ATF)-2 (nt -571 to
-568), IRF-7 (nt -533 to-525), and NF-kappaB (nt -215 to -209) in the murine p19 
promoter. The p19(prom) in the pGL3 promoter-reporter vector responded to TMEV or
poly(I:C), a TLR3 agonist in the RAW264.7 macrophage cell line. Deletions
upstream from the IRF-3 site and mutations at the IRF-3, SMAD-3, ATF-2, or
NF-kappaB, but not the IRF-7, sites significantly reduced promoter activity.
ATF-2 or SMAD-3, but not IRF-3, short-hairpin RNA reduced p19 promoter activity
and protein expression in RAW264.7 cells responding to TMEV. Chromosomal DNA
immunoprecipitation assays revealed that SMAD-3 and ATF-2 bind to the endogenous 
p19 promoter in RAW264.7 cells and SJL/J SPM following challenge with TMEV.
TGF-beta1, which activates SMAD-3, was induced in RAW264.7 cells, BMM, and SPM by
TMEV. Neutralizing Ab to TGF-beta1 eliminated TMEV-induced IL-23 production and
SMAD-3 activation in RAW264.7 cells, BMM, and SPM. Activation of ATF-2 was JNK,
but not p38 or ERK MAPK dependent. Inhibition of the JNK, but also the ERK MAPK
pathways decreased expression of p19. These results suggest that ATF-2 and SMAD-3
are transcription factors, which are, in addition to NF-kappaB, essential for
IL-23 p19 expression.

PMID: 18802055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008 Oct 30;76(9):1121-33. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2008.08.023.
Epub 2008 Aug 27.

Helioxanthin inhibits interleukin-1 beta-induced MIP-1 beta production by
reduction of c-jun expression and binding of the c-jun/CREB1 complex to the
AP-1/CRE site of the MIP-1 beta promoter in Huh7 cells.

Tseng PC(1), Hsu HC, Janmanchi D, Lin CH, Kuo YH, Chou CK, Yeh SF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei City 112, Taiwan, ROC.

An elevated level of macrophage inflammatory protein-1beta (MIP-1beta) induced by
IL-1beta has been correlated with chronic hepatic inflammatory disease. However, 
molecular mechanism of IL-1beta-induced MIP-1beta expression in hepatic cells is 
obscure. Previously, we reported the mechanism of the anti-hepatitis B virus
(HBV) activity of helioxanthin (HE-145). Here, we demonstrated that HE-145
inhibited IL-1beta-induced MIP-1beta expression in a dose-dependent manner in
Huh7 cells. To understand the mode of action of HE-145, we first examined how
IL-1beta induced MIP-1beta expression at the molecular level. Using selective
inhibitors, we found that JNK and p38 pathways participated in IL-1beta-induced
MIP-1beta expression. HE-145 specifically suppressed IL-1beta-induced c-jun mRNA 
and protein expression and prevented c-jun-mediated AP-1 DNA-binding activity,
whereas it had no effect on IL-1beta-induced activation of JNK, p38 and ATF2.
Further studies indicated that HE-145 may downregulate c-jun mRNA expression
directly at transcriptional level without requirement of de novo protein
synthesis. Mutational analysis and supershift assays indicated that IL-1beta
stimulated c-jun and CREB1 binding to the essential AP-1/CRE site of the
MIP-1beta promoter. The inhibitory effect of HE-145 on IL-1beta-induced MIP-1beta
promoter activity was completely reversed by overexpressing c-jun.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay consistently revealed that HE-145 reduced c-jun binding to the
AP-1/CRE site in vitro and in vivo. Our results established a major role for
c-jun in IL-1beta-induced MIP-1beta expression in hepatic cells. The reduction in
IL-1beta-induced c-jun expression and subsequent binding of the c-jun/CREB1
complex to AP-1/CRE site mainly contributed to the inhibitory action of HE-145 on
IL-1beta-induced MIP-1beta production.

PMID: 18789903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2008 Oct;80(6):1039-51. doi:
10.1007/s00253-008-1645-5. Epub 2008 Aug 27.

Monitoring the influence of high-gravity brewing and fermentation temperature on 
flavour formation by analysis of gene expression levels in brewing yeast.

Saerens SM(1), Verbelen PJ, Vanbeneden N, Thevelein JM, Delvaux FR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Malting and Brewing Science, Department of Microbial and Molecular 
Systems, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Heverlee, Belgium.
Sofie.Saerens@biw.kuleuven.be

During fermentation, the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae produces a broad range of
aroma-active substances, which are vital for the complex flavour of beer. In
order to obtain insight into the influence of high-gravity brewing and
fermentation temperature on flavour formation, we analysed flavour production and
the expression level of ten genes (ADH1, BAP2, BAT1, BAT2, ILV5, ATF1, ATF2,
IAH1, EHT1 and EEB1) during fermentation of a lager and an ale yeast. Higher
initial wort gravity increased acetate ester production, while the influence of
higher fermentation temperature on aroma compound production was rather limited. 
In addition, there is a good correlation between flavour production and the
expression level of specific genes involved in the biosynthesis of aroma
compounds. We conclude that yeasts with desired amounts of esters and higher
alcohols, in accordance with specific consumer preferences, may be identified
based on the expression level of flavour biosynthesis genes. Moreover, these
results demonstrate that the initial wort density can determine the final
concentration of important volatile aroma compounds, thereby allowing beneficial 
adaptation of the flavour of beer.

PMID: 18751696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Endocrinology. 2008 Dec;149(12):6311-25. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0251. Epub 2008 Aug
21.

Expression of the transcriptional repressor ATF3 in gonadotrophs is regulated by 
Egr-1, CREB, and ATF2 after gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor stimulation.

Mayer SI(1), Dexheimer V, Nishida E, Kitajima S, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Building 44,
University of Saarland Medical Center, D-66421 Homburg, Germany.

Stimulation of GnRH receptors enhances expression of activating transcription
factor (ATF) 3 in a pituitary gonadotroph cell line. The signaling pathway
requires elevated cytosolic Ca2+ levels and activation of ERK and c-Jun
N-terminal protein kinase. The signaling cascade was blocked by overexpression of
either MAPK phosphatase (MKP)-1 or MAPK phosphatase-5 that dephosphorylate
nuclear ERK and c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase. In addition, ATF3 biosynthesis
was impaired after lentiviral-mediated expression of a constitutively active
mutant of calcineurin A. Thus, MKP-1, MKP-5, and calcineurin may function as
shut-off devices for GnRH receptor signaling. Expression of dominant-negative
mutants of early growth response protein (Egr)-1, cAMP response element binding
protein (CREB), and ATF2 blocked the biosynthesis of ATF3, indicating that these 
transcription factors connect the intracellular signaling cascade elicited by
activation of GnRH receptors with transcription of the ATF3 gene. This view was
corroborated by chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealing that Egr-1
and the phosphorylated forms of CREB and ATF2 bound to the 5'-upstream region of 
the ATF3 gene in buserelin-stimulated gonadotrophs. Together the data indicate
that the ATF3 gene is a bona fide target gene of Egr-1, CREB, and ATF2 in
gonadotrophs. Moreover, we show that in gonadotrophs ATF3 bound to its own
promoter under physiological conditions. The analysis of a lentiviral-transmitted
ATF3 promoter/luciferase reporter gene, embedded into the chromatin of the cells,
revealed that ATF3 blocked the activity of its own promoter. We additionally
identified the chromogranin B gene as bona fide target gene of ATF3 in
gonadotrophs.

PMID: 18719024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008 Nov 1;232(3):396-407. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2008.07.019. Epub 2008 Jul 29.

Involvement of MAPKs, NF-kappaB and p300 co-activator in IL-1beta-induced
cytosolic phospholipase A2 expression in canine tracheal smooth muscle cells.

Luo SF(1), Lin CC, Chen HC, Lin WN, Lee IT, Lee CW, Hsiao LD, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan,
Taiwan.

Cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) plays a pivotal role in mediating
agonist-induced arachidonic acid release for prostaglandin (PG) synthesis during 
stimulation with interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta). However, the mechanisms underlying
IL-1beta-induced cPLA2 expression and PGE2 synthesis by canine tracheal smooth
muscle cells (CTSMCs) have not been defined. IL-1beta induced cPLA2 protein and
mRNA expression, PGE2 production, and phosphorylation of p42/p44 MAPK, p38 MAPK
(ATF2), and JNK (c-Jun) in a time- and concentration-dependent manner, determined
by Western blotting, RT-PCR, and ELISA, which was attenuated by the inhibitors of
MEK1/2 (U0126), p38 MAPK (SB202190), and JNK (SP600125), or transfection with
dominant negative mutants of MEK1/2, p38, and JNK, respectively. Furthermore,
IL-1beta-induced cPLA2 expression and PGE2 synthesis was inhibited by a selective
NF-kappaB inhibitor (helenalin) or transfection with dominant negative mutants of
NF-kappaB inducing kinase (NIK), IkappaB kinase (IKK)-alpha, and IKK-beta.
Consistently, IL-1beta stimulated both IkappaB-alpha degradation and NF-kappaB
translocation into nucleus in these cells. NF-kappaB translocation was blocked by
helenalin, but not by U0126, SB202190, and SP600125. MAPKs together with
NF-kappaB-activated p300 recruited to cPLA2 promoter thus facilitating the
binding of NF-kappaB to cPLA2 promoter region and expression of cPLA2 mRNA.
IL-1beta-induced cPLA2 expression and PGE2 production was inhibited by
actinomycin D and cycloheximide, indicating the involvement of transcriptional
and translational events in these responses. These results suggest that in
CTSMCs, IL-1beta-induced cPLA2 expression and PGE2 synthesis was independently
mediated through activation of MAPKs and NF-kappaB pathways and was connected to 
p300 recruitment and activation.

PMID: 18708082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Cutan Pathol. 2008 Aug;35(8):722-30.

Overexpression of phosphorylated-ATF2 and STAT3 in cutaneous angiosarcoma and
pyogenic granuloma.

Chen SY(1), Takeuchi S, Urabe K, Hayashida S, Kido M, Tomoeda H, Uchi H, Dainichi
T, Takahara M, Shibata S, Tu YT, Furue M, Moroi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Activating transcription factor-2/Activator protein-1 (AP-1), Signal 
transducer and activator of transcription-3 and p53 are important regulators of
cellular proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation in the pathogenesis of many
human tumors, but the expression of phosphorylated (p)-activating transcription
factor-2 (p-ATF2), phosphorylated (p)-signal transducer and activator of
transcription-3 (p-STAT3) and p53 family (p63 and p73) has not been investigated 
in cutaneous angiosarcoma (CAS) and pyogenic granuloma (PG) so far.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the expression of p-ATF2, p-STAT3 and p53 and its
family in cutaneous vascular tumors (CAS and PG).
METHODS: Paraffin-embedded specimens of 14 CAS and 19 PG were subjected to
immunohistochemical staining for p-ATF2, p-STAT3, p53, p63 and p73.
RESULTS: P-ATF2 was expressed in 13 out of 14 CAS and in all of 19 PG. P-STAT3
was expressed in all of 14 CAS and 19 PG. P53 was expressed in all of 14 CAS and 
19 PG, while both p63 and p73 were negative in CAS and PG. The p-ATF2-, p-STAT3- 
and p53 expression (% positive cells) in CAS and PG were significantly higher
than in normal dermal vessels, but none of these transcription factors
distinguished malignant (CAS)- from benign (PG) vascular tumor.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that overexpression of p-ATF2, p-STAT3
and possibly p53, but not p63 or p73, may contribute to the tumorigenesis of
cutaneous vascular tumors.

PMID: 18700251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Cell Cycle. 2008 Aug;7(15):2341-5. Epub 2008 Jun 17.

ATF2: a transcription factor that elicits oncogenic or tumor suppressor
activities.

Bhoumik A(1), Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Program, Burnham Institute for Medical Research, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

The Activating Transcription Factor (ATF2) gene encodes a transcription factor
important for normal cellular development and survival. In addition to its role
as a transcription factor, ATF2 functions in the DNA damage response and in
control of HAT complex activity. So far genetic changes in ATF2 have not been
identified in human tumors. Yet altered expression and subcellular localization
of ATF2 are associated with tumor stage and prognosis. Our studies in melanoma
tumor models identified oncogenic ATF2 activity correlating with development of
this tumor type. Inhibiting ATF2 suffices to impede melanoma development. Yet
work in other tumor models, including breast and skin tumors reveals that ATF2,
in cooperation with mutated oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes, can also elicit 
tumor suppressor function. These findings suggest tissue- and tumor-specific
function of ATF2. This review summarizes the current understanding of ATF2
regulation and function.

PMID: 18677098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. FEBS Lett. 2008 Aug 20;582(19):2833-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.07.033. Epub
2008 Jul 29.

IRF2-binding protein-1 is a JDP2 ubiquitin ligase and an inhibitor of
ATF2-dependent transcription.

Kimura M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gene Engineering Division, RIKEN, 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
makimura@riken.jp

Jun-dimerization protein 2 (JDP2) is a member of the activating protein-1 (AP-1) 
family of transcription factors. JDP2 dimerizes with other AP-1 proteins such as 
activating transcription factor-2 (ATF2) and Jun to repress transcription from
promoters that contain a cyclic AMP-responsive element (CRE). Interferon
regulatory factor-2-binding protein-1 (IRF2-BP1), which is reported to be a
transcriptional corepressor of IRF2, was isolated as a JDP2-binding protein using
an epitope-tagging method. As anticipated from the presence of a RING-finger
domain, IRF2-BP1 enhanced the polyubiquitination of JDP2. Moreover, IRF2-BP1
repressed ATF2-mediated transcriptional activation from a CRE-containing
promoter.

PMID: 18671972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Microbiology. 2008 Aug;154(Pt 8):2327-35. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.2008/016568-0.

Cloning and characterization of a gene involved in triacylglycerol biosynthesis
and identification of additional homologous genes in the oleaginous bacterium
Rhodococcus opacus PD630.

Alvarez AF(1), Alvarez HM, Kalscheuer R, Wältermann M, Steinbüchel A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Regional de Investigación y Desarrollo Científico Tecnológico
(CRIDECIT), Facultad de Ciencias Naturales, Universidad Nacional de la Patagonia 
San Juan Bosco, Comodoro Rivadavia, Argentina.

The oleaginous bacterium Rhodococus opacus strain PD630 serves as a model
organism to investigate the metabolism of storage triacylglycerols (TAGs) in
bacteria. The key enzyme catalysing the last step of TAG biosynthesis in bacteria
is a promiscuous acyltransferase (Atf), exhibiting acyl-CoA acyltransferase
activity to both diacylglycerols (DGAT activity) and fatty alcohols (wax ester
synthase, WS activity). An 800 bp PCR product was obtained from chromosomal DNA
of strain PD630 by using degenerate primers designed from conserved stretches of 
Atf proteins of Acinetobacter baylyi strain ADP1 and Mycobacterium smegmatis
mc(2)155. The atf fragment was used as a probe on a strain PD630 gene library,
resulting in the identification of a 3948 bp chromosomal DNA fragment containing 
the complete atf1 gene. An atf1 disruption mutant of strain PD630 exhibited a
TAG-leaky phenotype and accumulated up to 50 % less fatty acids than the
wild-type, with significantly reduced oleic acid content when cultivated in the
presence of gluconate or oleic acid. Whereas DGAT activity was drastically
reduced in comparison to the wild-type, WS activity remained almost unchanged in 
the mutant. RT-PCR analysis of gluconate-grown cells of strain PD630 showed that 
there is expression of atf1 under conditions of TAG synthesis. To identify
additional Atfs in strain PD630, PCR employing non-degenerate primers deduced
from Rhodococcus jostii RHA1 sequence data was used. This yielded nine additional
atf-homologous genes exhibiting 88-99 % sequence identity to the corresponding
strain RHA1 enzymes. Besides Atf1 only Atf2 exhibited high DGAT and/or WS
activity when heterologously expressed in Escherichia coli.

PMID: 18667565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2008 Dec;10(12):2035-46. doi: 10.1089/ars.2008.2032.

15d-PGJ2 upregulates synthesis of IL-8 in endothelial cells through induction of 
oxidative stress.

Jozkowicz A(1), Was H, Taha H, Kotlinowski J, Mleczko K, Cisowski J, Weigel G,
Dulak J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics, and 
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland. alicia@mol.uj.edu.pl

15-Deoxy-Delta(12,14)-prostaglandin-J(2) (15d-PGJ(2)) is a cyclopentenone
prostaglandin regarded as antiinflammatory mediator, which can act through
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) or through G
protein-coupled surface receptors. It has been demonstrated that 15d-PGJ(2)
potently increases the generation of interleukin-8 (IL-8) in human microvascular 
endothelial cells (HMEC-1s); however, the mechanism of this induction is not
known. The aim of the study was to find the pathway involved in
15d-PGJ(2)-mediated IL-8 stimulation. Our data confirmed that the effect of
15d-PGJ(2) is independent of PPARgamma. For the first time, we excluded the
activation of G proteins and the contribution of G protein-coupled surface
receptors in endothelial cells treated with 15d-PGJ(2). Instead, we demonstrated 
that stimulation of IL-8 involved induction of oxidative stress, activation of
p38 kinases, and increase in stability of IL-8 mRNA. Upregulation of IL-8
promoter, although measurable, seemed to play a less-pronounced role.
Additionally, our results indicate the involvement of cAMP elevation and may
suggest a role for ATF2 transcription factor. Concomitant induction of heme
oxygenase-1 in HMEC-1s did not influence the synthesis of IL-8. In summary, we
showed that 15d-PGJ(2), acting through oxidative stress, may exert
proinflammatory effects. The upregulation of IL-8 is mostly associated with
p38-mediated stabilization of mRNA.

PMID: 18665800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Mech Dev. 2008 Sep-Oct;125(9-10):843-56. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2008.06.010. Epub
2008 Jun 28.

Activating transcription factor-2 affects skeletal growth by modulating pRb gene 
expression.

Vale-Cruz DS(1), Ma Q, Syme J, LuValle PA.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Program in Biomedical Sciences, Molecular Cell Biology
Concentration, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610,
USA.

Endochondral ossification is the process of skeletal bone growth via the
formation of a cartilage template that subsequently undergoes mineralization to
form trabecular bone. Genetic mutations affecting the proliferation or
differentiation of chondrocytes result in skeletal abnormalities. Activating
transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) modulates expression of cell cycle regulatory
genes in chondrocytes, and mutation of ATF-2 results in a dwarfed phenotype. Here
we investigate the regulatory role that ATF-2 plays in expression of the pocket
proteins, cell cycle regulators important in cellular proliferation and
differentiation. The spatial and temporal pattern of pocket protein expression
was identified in wild type and mutant growth plates. Expression of
retinoblastoma (pRb) mRNA and protein were decreased in ATF-2 mutant primary
chondrocytes. pRb mRNA expression was coordinated with chondrogenic
differentiation and cell cycle exit in ATDC5 cells. Type X collagen
immunohistochemistry was performed to visualize a delay in differentiation in
response to loss of ATF-2 signaling. Chondrocyte proliferation was also affected 
by loss of ATF-2. These studies suggest pRb plays a role in chondrocyte
proliferation, differentiation and growth plate development by modulating cell
cycle progression. ATF-2 regulates expression of pRb within the developing growth
plate, contributing to the skeletal phenotype of ATF-2 mutant mice through the
regulation of chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation.

PMID: 18638549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2008 Mar-Apr;42(2):295-305.

[Ap1-like cis-elements in 5'-regulatory region of human apolipoprotein A-I gene].

[Article in Russian]

Lapikov IA, Mogilenko DA, Dizhe EB, Ignatovich IA, Orlov SV, Perevozchikov AP.

Several Ap1-like cis-acting elements were found within 5'-regulatory region
(-2497...+173 versus transcription start point) of human apolipoprotein A-I gene 
(5'-apoA-I). Those elements are capable to interact with transcription factors
belonging to Ap1 and CREB/ATF families. Those elements are localized outside of
the hepatic enhancer (-220...-110) and the sequence responsible for apoA-I gene
transcription in Caco2 cells (-595...-192). One of Ap1-like sites (5'-TGAGGTCT-3,
Cre/jun2/apo) is present within 5'-apoA-I in two copies - distal (-1798 ...-1791)
and proximal (+99...+106) ones. This and other Ap1-like sites - 5'-TGACTCT-3'
(-1798...-1791, PF1) and 5'-TGACATCA-3' (-1171...-1163, Cre/jun1) were
characterized by EMSA. It was shown by using the specific antibodies to c-Jun and
ATF2 transcription factors in EMSA supershift experiments, that the DNA-protein
complexes formed by Cre/jun2/apo, Cre/jun1 elements with nuclear proteins of
human hepatoma HepG2 cells contain ATF2. The functional role of 5'-apoA-I regions
containing Ap1-like sites was studied in cotransfection experiments of HepG2
cells (synthesize endogenous ApoA-I), human duodenum adenocarcinoma Hutu80 cells 
(do not synthesize endogenous ApoA-I), human neuroblastoma SK-N-SH cells (do not 
synthesize endogenous A-I) with expression vectors of c-jun and mekk1 genes. It
was shown, that those Ap1-like sites appears to be responsible (the proximal
Cre/jun2/apo is more efficient) for tissue-specific regulation of human apoA-I
gene expression.

PMID: 18610838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Proteome Res. 2008 Aug;7(8):3516-24. doi: 10.1021/pr8002479. Epub 2008 Jun 26.

Proteomic analysis of the balance between survival and cell death responses in
cisplatin-mediated ototoxicity.

Jamesdaniel S(1), Ding D, Kermany MH, Davidson BA, Knight PR 3rd, Salvi R, Coling
DE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Hearing and Deafness, Department of Anesthesiology, Pathology, and 
Microbiology and Immunology, University at Buffalo, the State University of New
York, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

Cisplatin, a widely used anticancer drug, preferentially damages outer hair cells
(OHCs) of the inner ear. In this study, an antibody microarray was used to
identify early changes in protein expression in the rat cochlea induced by
cisplatin. Only small changes in hearing thresholds (4-34 dB elevation) were
detected two days after cisplatin treatment (12 mg/kg). OHC function, measured by
otoacoustic emissions, was slightly depressed (10 dB), and little or no receptor 
cell loss was observed. However, cisplatin induced large changes in the
expression of 19 proteins involved in apoptosis, cell survival, or progression
through the cell cycle. Fifteen of the proteins are novel to the study of the
inner ear. Immunoblotting confirmed increases in the levels of the pro-survival
activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2), of pro-apoptotic serine-threonine
protein kinase, receptor interacting protein, and a 70/75 kDa nitrotyrosine
bearing doublet of unknown function. Anti-nitrotyrosine antibodies localized
these oxidatively damaged proteins to the stereocilia of OHCs, the
Golgi-centrosome region of Hensen's cells, nuclei of outer pillar cells, and
tunnel crossing fibers innervating OHCs. The results of this proteomic analysis
reflect the commencement of ototoxic and cell survival responses before the
observation of a significant functional or anatomical loss.

PMCID: PMC2570323
PMID: 18578524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2008 Sep 15;477(2):324-9. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2008.06.001.
Epub 2008 Jun 5.

Mechanistic characterization for c-jun-N-Terminal Kinase 1alpha1.

Ember B(1), LoGrasso P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics and Drug Discovery, The Scripps Research 
Institute, Scripps Florida, 5353 Parkside Drive, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA.

c-jun-N-terminal kinase 1alpha1 (JNK1alpha1) is a serine/threonine kinase of the 
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase family that phosphorylates protein
transcription factors after activation by a variety of environmental stressors.
In this study, the kinetic mechanism for JNK1alpha1 phosphorylation of activating
transcription factor 2 (ATF2) was determined utilizing steady-state kinetics in
the presence and absence of both ATF2 and ATP competitive inhibitors. Data from
initial velocity studies were consistent with a sequential mechanism for
JNK1alpha1. AMP-PCP exhibited competitive inhibition versus ATP and pure
noncompetitive inhibition versus ATF2. JIP-1 peptide (RPKRPTTLNLF) was
competitive versus ATF2 and mixed noncompetitive versus ATP. These data suggest
that JNK1alpha1 proceeded via a random sequential kinetic mechanism with
non-interacting ATF2 and ATP substrate sites.

PMID: 18559253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Dermatol Sci. 2008 Sep;51(3):210-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2008.04.008. Epub
2008 Jun 10.

Overexpression of phosphorylated-ATF2 and STAT3 in cutaneous squamous cell
carcinoma, Bowen's disease and basal cell carcinoma.

Chen SY, Takeuchi S, Moroi Y, Hayashida S, Kido M, Chen SJ, Tomoeda H, Uenotsuchi
T, Tu YT, Furue M, Urabe K.

PMID: 18547788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Aug;22(8):1767-80. doi: 10.1210/me.2007-0574. Epub 2008 Jun 
5.

Restriction to Fos family members of Trip6-dependent coactivation and
glucocorticoid receptor-dependent trans-repression of activator protein-1.

Diefenbacher M(1), Sekula S, Heilbock C, Maier JV, Litfin M, van Dam H,
Castellazzi M, Herrlich P, Kassel O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Toxikologie und Genetik, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe,
Hermann-von-Helmholtz Platz 1, D- 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany.

The term activator protein (AP)-1 describes homodimeric and heterodimeric
transcription factors composed of members of the Jun, Fos, and cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB)/activating transcription factor (ATF) families of 
proteins. Distinct AP-1 dimers, for instance the prototypical c-Jun:c-Fos and
c-Jun:ATF2 dimers, are differentially regulated by signaling pathways and bind
related yet distinct response elements in the regulatory regions of AP-1 target
genes. Little is known about the dimer-specific regulation of AP-1 activity at
the promoter of its target genes. We have previously shown that nTrip6, the
nuclear isoform of the LIM domain protein Trip6, acts as an AP-1 coactivator.
Moreover, nTrip6 is an essential component of glucocorticoid receptor
(GR)-mediated trans-repression of AP-1, in that it mediates the tethering of GR
to the promoter-bound AP-1. We have now discovered a striking specificity of
nTrip6 actions determined by the binding preference of its LIM domains. We show
that nTrip6 interacts only with Fos family members. Consequently, nTrip6 is a
selective coactivator for AP-1 dimers containing Fos. nTrip6 also assembles
activated GR to c-Jun:c-Fos-driven promoters. Neither nTrip6 nor GR are recruited
to a promoter occupied by c-Jun:ATF2. Thus, only Fos-containing dimers are
trans-repressed by GR. Thus, the dimer composition of AP-1 determines the
mechanism of both the positive and negative regulation of AP-1 transcriptional
activity. Interestingly, on a second level of action, GR represses the increase
in transcriptional activity of c-Jun:ATF2 induced by c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK)-dependent phosphorylation. This repression depends on GR-mediated induction
of MAPK phosphatase 1 (MKP-1) expression, which results in c-Jun N-terminal
kinase inactivation.

PMCID: PMC2505324
PMID: 18535250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. BMC Syst Biol. 2008 May 22;2:46. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-2-46.

Transcription profiling of lung adenocarcinomas of c-myc-transgenic mice:
identification of the c-myc regulatory gene network.

Reymann S(1), Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Center for Drug 
Research and Medical Biotechnology, Nikolai-Fuchs-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover,
Germany. reymann@item.fraunhofer.de

BACKGROUND: The transcriptional regulator c-Myc is the most frequently
deregulated oncogene in human tumors. Targeted overexpression of this gene in
mice results in distinct types of lung adenocarcinomas. By using microarray
technology, alterations in the expression of genes were captured based on a
female transgenic mouse model in which, indeed, c-Myc overexpression in alveolar 
epithelium results in the development of bronchiolo-alveolar carcinoma (BAC) and 
papillary adenocarcinoma (PLAC). In this study, we analyzed exclusively the
promoters of induced genes by different in silico methods in order to elucidate
the c-Myc transcriptional regulatory network.
RESULTS: We analyzed the promoters of 361 transcriptionally induced genes with
respect to c-Myc binding sites and found 110 putative binding sites in 94
promoters. Furthermore, we analyzed the flanking sequences (+/- 100 bp) around
the 110 c-Myc binding sites and found Ap2, Zf5, Zic3, and E2f binding sites to be
overrepresented in these regions. Then, we analyzed the promoters of 361 induced 
genes with respect to binding sites of other transcription factors (TFs) which
were upregulated by c-Myc overexpression. We identified at least one binding site
of at least one of these TFs in 220 promoters, thus elucidating a potential
transcription factor network. The analysis correlated well with the significant
overexpression of the TFs Atf2, Foxf1a, Smad4, Sox4, Sp3 and Stat5a. Finally, we 
analyzed promoters of regulated genes which where apparently not regulated by
c-Myc or other c-Myc targeted TFs and identified overrepresented Oct1, Mzf1,
Ppargamma, Plzf, Ets, and HmgIY binding sites when compared against control
promoter background.
CONCLUSION: Our in silico data suggest a model of a transcriptional regulatory
network in which different TFs act in concert upon c-Myc overexpression. We
determined molecular rules for transcriptional regulation to explain, in part,
the carcinogenic effect seen in mice overexpressing the c-Myc oncogene.

PMCID: PMC2430022
PMID: 18498649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 11;283(28):19704-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M707744200. Epub 2008
May 12.

All JNKs can kill, but nuclear localization is critical for neuronal death.

Björkblom B(1), Vainio JC, Hongisto V, Herdegen T, Courtney MJ, Coffey ET.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi
University, Turku, FIN 20521 Finland.

JNKs are implicated in a range of brain pathologies and receive considerable
attention as potential therapeutic targets. However, JNKs also regulate
physiological and homeostatic processes. An attractive hypothesis from the drug
development perspective is that distinct JNK isoforms mediate "physiological" and
"pathological" responses. However, this lacks experimental evaluation. Here we
investigate the isoforms, subcellular pools, and c-Jun/ATF2 targets of JNK in
death of central nervous system neurons following withdrawal of trophic support. 
We use gene knockouts, gene silencing, subcellularly targeted dominant negative
constructs, and pharmacological inhibitors. Combined small interfering RNA
knockdown of all JNKs 1, 2, and 3, provides substantial neuroprotection. In
contrast, knockdown or knock-out of individual JNKs or two JNKs together does not
protect. This explains why the evidence for JNK in neuronal death has to date
been largely pharmacological. Complete knockdown of c-Jun and ATF2 using small
interfering RNA also fails to protect, casting doubt on c-Jun as a critical
effector of JNK in neuronal death. Nonetheless, the death requires nuclear but
not cytosolic JNK activity as nuclear dominant negative inhibitors of JNK
protect, whereas cytosolic inhibitors only block physiological JNK function. Thus
any one of the three JNKs is capable of mediating apoptosis and inhibition of
nuclear JNK is protective.

PMID: 18474608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2008;28(1-2):59-70. doi: 10.1080/10799890801941939
.

GRK2-dependent desensitization downstream of G proteins.

Jurado-Pueyo M(1), Campos PM, Mayor F, Murga C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Molecular and Centro de Biologia Molecular "Severo
Ochoa," CSIC-UAM, Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain.

G protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) are serine/threonine kinases first
discovered by its role in receptor desensitization. Phosphorylation of the
C-terminal tail of GPCRs by GRKs triggers the docking of beta-arrestins and the
functional uncoupling of G proteins and receptors. In addition, we and others
have uncovered new direct ways by which GRKs could impinge into intracellular
signalling pathways independently of receptor phosphorylation. In particular, we 
have characterized that elevated GRK2 levels can reduce CCR2-mediated activation 
of the ERK MAPK route in a manner that is independent of kinase activity and also
of G proteins. This inhibition of ERK occurred in the absence of any reduction on
MEK phosphorylation, what implicates that GRK2 is acting at the level of MEK or
at the MEK-ERK interface to achieve a downregulation of ERK phosphorylation. In
fact, we describe here that a direct association between GRK2 and MEK proteins
can be detected in vitro. p38 MAPK pathway also appears to be regulated directly 
by GRK2 in a receptor-independent manner. p38 can be phosphorylated by GRK2 in
threonine 123, a residue sitting at the entrance of a docking groove by which
this MAPK associates to substrates and upstream activators. The
T123phospho-mimetic mutant of p38 shows a reduced ability to bind to MKK6,
concomitant with an impaired p38 activation, and a decreased phosphorylation of
downstream substrates such as MEF2, MK2 and ATF2. Elevated levels of GRK2
downregulate p38-dependent cellular responses, such as differentiation of
preadipocytic cells, while LPS-induced cytokine release is enhanced in
macrophages from GRK2 (+/-) mice. In sum, we describe in this article different
ways by which GRK2 directly regulates MAPK-mediated cellular events. This
regulation of the MAPK modules by GRK2 could be relevant in pathological
situations where the levels of this kinase are altered, such as during
inflammatory diseases or cardiovascular pathologies.

PMID: 18437630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2008 Jul;295(1):C288-92. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00104.2008. Epub 2008 Apr 23.

Functional interaction of regulatory factors with the Pgc-1alpha promoter in
response to exercise by in vivo imaging.

Akimoto T(1), Li P, Yan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27704, USA.

Real-time optical bioluminescence imaging is a powerful tool for studies of gene 
regulation in living animals. To elucidate exercise-induced
signaling/transcriptional control of the peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma coactivator-1alpha (Pgc-1alpha) gene in skeletal muscle, we
combined this technology with electric pulse-mediated gene transfer to
cotransfect the Pgc-1alpha reporter gene with plasmid DNA encoding
mutant/deletion forms of putative regulatory factors and, thereby, assess the
responsiveness of the promoter to skeletal muscle contraction. We show that each 
of the myocyte enhancer factor 2 sites on the Pgc-1alpha promoter is required for
contractile activity-induced Pgc-1alpha transcription. The responsiveness of the 
Pgc-1alpha promoter to contractile activity could be completely blocked by
overexpression of the dominant-negative form of activating transcription factor 2
(ATF2), the signaling-resistant form of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 5 (HDAC5), or 
protein kinase D (PKD), but not by HDAC4. These findings provide in vivo evidence
for functional interactions between PKD/HDAC5 and ATF2 regulatory factors and the
Pgc-1alpha gene in adult skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC2493547
PMID: 18434626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Gen Virol. 2008 May;89(Pt 5):1131-41. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.83538-0.

Mouse cytomegalovirus inhibits beta interferon (IFN-beta) gene expression and
controls activation pathways of the IFN-beta enhanceosome.

Le VT(1), Trilling M, Zimmermann A, Hengel H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Institut für Virologie, 40225
Düsseldorf, Germany.

We have investigated beta interferon (IFN-beta) and IFN-alpha4 gene expression
and activation of related transcription factors in mouse cytomegalovirus
(MCMV)-infected fibroblasts. mRNA analysis demonstrated an initial phase of IFN
gene induction upon MCMV infection, which was followed by a sustained
MCMV-mediated simultaneous downregulation of IFN-beta and IFN-alpha4 gene
expression. The induction of IFN transcription resulted from the activation of
the components of the IFN-beta enhanceosome, i.e. IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3, 
nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB, activating transcription factor (ATF)-2 and c-Jun.
Activation of the transcription factors occurred rapidly and in a sequential
order upon infection, but only lasted a while. As a consequence, IFN-alpha/beta
gene expression became undetectable 6 h post-infection and throughout the MCMV
replication cycle. This effect is based on an active interference since
restimulation of IFN gene induction by further external stimuli (e.g. Sendai
virus infection) was completely abolished. This inhibition required MCMV gene
expression and was not observed in cells infected with UV-inactivated MCMV
virions. The efficiency of inhibition is achieved by a concerted blockade of
IkappaBalpha degradation and a lack of nuclear accumulation of IRF3 and
ATF-2/c-Jun. Using an MCMV mutant lacking pM27, a signal transducer and activator
of transcription (STAT) 2-specific inhibitor of Jak/STAT signalling, we found
that the initial phase of IFN induction and the subsequent inhibition does not
depend on the positive-IFN feedback loop. Our findings indicate that the
MCMV-mediated downregulation of IFN transcription in fibroblasts relies on a
large arsenal of inhibitory mechanisms targeting each pathway that contributes to
the multiprotein enhanceosome complex.

PMID: 18420790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Hippocampus. 2008;18(5):519-29. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20435.

Transient 23-30 Hz oscillations in mouse hippocampus during exploration of novel 
environments.

Berke JD(1), Hetrick V, Breck J, Greene RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48104,
USA. jdberke@umich.edu

The hippocampus is a key brain structure for the encoding of new experiences and 
environments. Hippocampal activity shows distinct oscillatory patterns, but the
relationships between oscillations and memory are not well understood. Here we
describe bursts of hippocampal approximately 23-30 Hz (beta2) oscillations in
mice exploring novel, but not familiar, environments. In marked contrast to the
relatively invariant approximately 8 Hz theta rhythm, beta2 power was weak during
the very first lap of the novel environment, increased sharply as the mice
reencountered their start point, then persisted for only a few minutes.
Novelty-evoked oscillations reflected precise synchronization of individual
neurons, and participating pyramidal cells showed a selective enhancement of
spatial specificity. Through focal viral manipulations, we found that
novelty-evoked oscillations required functional NMDA receptors in CA3, a
subregion critical for fast oscillations in vitro. These findings suggest that
beta2 oscillations indicate a hippocampal dynamic state that facilitates the
formation of unique contextual representations.

2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18398852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 20;283(25):17605-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802030200. Epub 2008
Apr 8.

Regulation of TIP60 by ATF2 modulates ATM activation.

Bhoumik A(1), Singha N, O'Connell MJ, Ronai ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Program, Burnham Institute for Medical Research, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

TIP60 (HTATIP) is a histone acetyltransferase (HAT) whose function is critical in
regulating ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) activation, gene expression, and
chromatin acetylation in DNA repair. Here we show that under non-stressed
conditions, activating transcription factor-2 (ATF2) in cooperation with Cul3
ubiquitin ligase promotes degradation of TIP60, thereby attenuating its HAT
activity. Inhibiting either ATF2 or Cul3 expression by small interfering RNA
stabilizes the TIP60 protein. ATF2 association with TIP60 on chromatin is
decreased following exposure to ionizing radiation (IR), resulting in enhanced
TIP60 stability and activity. We also identified a panel of melanoma and prostate
cancer cell lines whose ATF2 expression is inversely correlated with TIP60 levels
and ATM activation after IR. Inhibition of ATF2 expression in these lines
restored TIP60 protein levels and both basal and IR-induced levels of ATM
activity. Our study provides novel insight into regulation of ATM activation by
ATF2-dependent control of TIP60 stability and activity.

PMCID: PMC2427333
PMID: 18397884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. FEBS Lett. 2008 Apr 30;582(10):1537-41. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.03.050. Epub 
2008 Apr 7.

Role of the repressor JDP2 in the amino acid-regulated transcription of CHOP.

Chérasse Y(1), Chaveroux C, Jousse C, Maurin AC, Carraro V, Parry L, Fafournoux
P, Bruhat A.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 1019 of Human Nutrition, INRA de Theix, 63122 Saint Genès Champanelle,
France.

The transcriptional activation of CHOP (C/EBP-homologous protein) by amino acid
deprivation involves ATF2 and ATF4 binding at the amino acid response element
within the promoter. In this report, we investigate the role of JDP2 (Jun
Dimerization Protein 2) in the amino acid control of CHOP transcription following
amino acid starvation. Our results show that JDP2 binds to the CHOP AARE in
unstimulated cells and that its binding decreases following amino acid
starvation. We demonstrate that JDP2 acts as a repressor and suggest that it
could be functionally associated with HDAC3 to inhibit CHOP transcription.

PMID: 18396163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 30;283(22):15003-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801621200. Epub 2008
Apr 3.

Transforming growth factor beta up-regulates cysteine-rich protein 2 in vascular 
smooth muscle cells via activating transcription factor 2.

Lin DW(1), Chang IC, Tseng A, Wu ML, Chen CH, Patenaude CA, Layne MD, Yet SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

CRP2 (cysteine-rich protein) is a vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC)-expressed
LIM-only protein. CRP2 associates with the actin cytoskeleton and interacts with 
transcription factors in the nucleus to mediate smooth muscle cell gene
expression. Using Csrp2 (gene symbol of the mouse CRP2 gene)-deficient mice, we
previously demonstrated that an absence of CRP2 enhances VSMC migration and
increases neointima formation following arterial injury. Despite its importance
in vascular injury, the molecular mechanisms controlling CRP2 expression in VSMC 
are largely unknown. Transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta), a key factor
present in the vessel wall in the early phases of arterial response to injury,
plays an important role in modulating lesion formation. Because both CRP2 and
TGFbeta are mediators of VSMC responses, we examined the possibility that TGFbeta
might regulate CRP2 expression. TGFbeta significantly induced CRP2 mRNA and
protein expression in VSMCs. Promoter analysis identified a conserved
cAMP-responsive element (CRE)-like site (TAACGTCA) in the Csrp2 promoter that was
critical for basal promoter activity and response to TGFbeta. Gel mobility shift 
assays revealed that mainly ATF2 bound to this CRE-like element, and mutation of 
the CRE sequences abolished binding. TGFbeta enhanced the activation of ATF2,
leading to increased phospho-ATF2 levels within the DNA-protein complexes.
Furthermore, ATF2-transactivated Csrp2 promoter activity and TGFbeta enhanced
this activation. In addition, a phosphorylation-negative ATF2 mutant construct
decreased basal and TGFbeta-mediated Csrp2 promoter activity. Our results show
for the first time in VSMC that TGFbeta activates ATF2 phosphorylation and Csrp2 
gene expression via a CRE promoter element.

PMCID: PMC2397482
PMID: 18387947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2008 May;65(9):1435-45. doi: 10.1007/s00018-008-8047-9.

The JNK/AP1/ATF2 pathway is involved in H2O2-induced acetylcholinesterase
expression during apoptosis.

Zhang JY(1), Jiang H, Gao W, Wu J, Peng K, Shi YF, Zhang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

We show that H2O2 increases acetylcholinesterase (AChE) expression via
transcriptional activation through c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), since the JNK
inhibitor SP600125, but not the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
pathway inhibitor PD98059 or p38 kinase inhibitor SB203580, attenuated
H2O2-induced AChE expression and its promoter activity. Overexpression of
hemagglutinin (HA)-JNK increases H2O2-induced AChE expression and its promoter
activity, whereas the dominant negative mutant form of JNK suppressed
H2O2-induced AChE expression and promoter activity. Mutation analysis indicates
that the major response elements for JNK in the AChE promoter are the AP1-like
element (TGAGTCT) site, located within the -1565/-1569 region of the AChE
promoter, and the ATF2 element (CCACGTCA), within the -2185/-2177 region. The
AP1-like element binds to the transcription factors, c-jun and ATF2, while the
ATF2 element binds mainly ATF2. Taken together, our results strongly suggest that
H2O2 induces AChE expression via the JNK/AP1/ ATF2 signaling pathway.

PMID: 18385943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Immunol. 2008 Apr 1;180(7):5017-27.

Molecular characterization of Helicobacter pylori VacA induction of IL-8 in U937 
cells reveals a prominent role for p38MAPK in activating transcription factor-2, 
cAMP response element binding protein, and NF-kappaB activation.

Hisatsune J(1), Nakayama M, Isomoto H, Kurazono H, Mukaida N, Mukhopadhyay AK,
Azuma T, Yamaoka Y, Sap J, Yamasaki E, Yahiro K, Moss J, Hirayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki
University, Nagasaki, Japan.

Helicobacter pylori VacA induces multiple effects on susceptible cells, including
vacuolation, mitochondrial damage, inhibition of cell growth, and enhanced
cyclooxygenase-2 expression. To assess the ability of H. pylori to modulate the
production of inflammatory mediators, we examined the mechanisms by which VacA
enhanced IL-8 production by promonocytic U937 cells, which demonstrated the
greatest VacA-induced IL-8 release of the cells tested. Inhibitors of p38 MAPK
(SB203580), ERK1/2 (PD98059), IkappaBalpha
((E)-3-(4-methylphenylsulfonyl)-2-propenenitrile), Ca(2+) entry (SKF96365), and
intracellular Ca(2+) channels (dantrolene) blocked VacA-induced IL-8 production. 
Furthermore, an intracellular Ca(2+) chelator (BAPTA-AM), which inhibited
VacA-activated p38 MAPK, caused a dose-dependent reduction in VacA-induced IL-8
secretion by U937 cells, implying a role for intracellular Ca(2+) in mediating
activation of MAPK and the canonical NF-kappaB pathway. VacA stimulated
translocation of NF-kappaBp65 to the nucleus, consistent with enhancement of IL-8
expression by activation of the NF-kappaB pathway. In addition, small interfering
RNA of activating transcription factor (ATF)-2 or CREB, which is a p38MAPK
substrate and binds to the AP-1 site of the IL-8 promoter, inhibited VacA-induced
IL-8 production. VacA activated an IL-8 promoter containing an NF-IL-6 site, but 
not a mutated AP-1 or NF-kappaB site, suggesting direct involvement of the
ATF-2/CREB binding region or NF-kappaB-binding regions in VacA-induced IL-8
promoter activation. Thus, in U937 cells, VacA directly increases IL-8 production
by activation of the p38 MAPK via intracellular Ca(2+) release, leading to
activation of the transcription factors, ATF-2, CREB, and NF-kappaB.

PMCID: PMC3404739
PMID: 18354227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Bioessays. 2008 Apr;30(4):314-27. doi: 10.1002/bies.20734.

The role of ATF-2 in oncogenesis.

Vlahopoulos SA(1), Logotheti S, Mikas D, Giarika A, Gorgoulis V, Zoumpourlis V.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Biomedical Applications, Institute of Biological Research and
Biotechnology, National Hellenic Research Foundation, Athens, Greece.

Activating Transcription Factor-2 is a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that
belongs to the bZIP family of proteins and plays diverse roles in the mammalian
cells. In response to stress stimuli, it activates a variety of gene targets
including cyclin A, cyclin D and c-jun, which are involved in oncogenesis in
various tissue types. ATF-2 expression has been correlated with maintenance of a 
cancer cell phenotype. However, other studies demonstrate an antiproliferative or
apoptotic role for ATF-2. In this review, we summarize the signaling pathways
that activate ATF-2, as well as its downstream targets. We examine the role of
ATF-2 in carcinogenesis with respect to other bZIP proteins, using data from
studies in human cancer cell lines, human tumours and mouse models, and we
propose a potential model for its function in carcinogenesis, as well as a
theoretical basis for its utility in anticancer drug design.

PMID: 18348191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Dig Dis Sci. 2008 Oct;53(10):2680-6. doi: 10.1007/s10620-008-0218-x. Epub 2008
Mar 5.

c-Jun, Fra-2, and ATF-2 immunoreactivity in the jejunal tissues of the healthy
rat.

Keklikoglu N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Histology and Embryology, Istanbul
University, Capa, Istanbul, Turkey. nkeklik@istanbul.edu.tr

The aim of this study was to compare the localization of some activator protein-1
(AP-1) proteins in healthy rat jejunum. For this purpose, the AP-1 members c-Jun,
Fra-2, and ATF-2 immunoreactivity (c-Jun-IR, Fra-2-IR, ATF-2-IR) in villus
epithelial cells (ECs), intravillous lamina propria cells (LPCs), crypt cells
(CCs), and smooth muscle cells (SMCs) were analyzed by immunohistochemical
methods. Among all the cell groups, the lowest positivity ratio was found in
c-Jun-IR and the highest positivity ratio was found in ATF-2-IR. For each group
of ECs, LPCs, CCs, and SMCs, c-Jun-IR, Fra-2-IR, and ATF-2-IR were compared and
statistically significant differences found. There were no significant
differences among the cell groups with respect to c-Jun-IR and Fra-2-IR, but
there was a statistically significant difference in ATF-2-IR. These findings
suggest that each member of AP-1 is expressed differently and that ATF-2 is more 
active than c-Jun and Fra-2 in physiological conditions in healthy rat jejunum.

PMID: 18320311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2008 Apr;78(5):783-92. doi: 10.1007/s00253-008-1366-9.
Epub 2008 Feb 29.

Flavour formation in fungi: characterisation of KlAtf, the Kluyveromyces lactis
orthologue of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae alcohol acetyltransferases Atf1 and
Atf2.

Van Laere SD(1), Saerens SM, Verstrepen KJ, Van Dijck P, Thevelein JM, Delvaux
FR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Malting and Brewing Science, Centre for Food and Microbial
Technology, Department of Microbial and Molecular Systems, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 22, 3001 Leuven-Heverlee, Belgium.
stijn.vanlaere@student.kuleuven.be

Volatile aroma-active esters are responsible for the fruity character of
fermented alcoholic beverages, such as beer and wine. In the brewers' yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the major part of these esters is formed by two alcohol
acetyltransferases, Atf1 and Atf2. In this paper, the existence of orthologues of
these S. cerevisiae alcohol acetyltransferases in several ascomycetous fungi was 
investigated. Bioinformatic analysis of sequenced fungal genomes revealed the
presence of multiple orthologues. The Saccharomyces sensu stricto yeasts all have
two genes coding for orthologues. More distantly related fungi like Saccharomyces
castelii, Candida glabrata, Kluyveromyces waltii and Kluyveromyces lactis have
only one orthologue in their genome. The homology between the identified proteins
and the S. cerevisiae alcohol acetyltransferases suggests a role for these
orthologues in the aroma-active ester formation. To verify this, the K. lactis
orthologue KlAtf was cloned and expressed in S. cerevisiae. Gas chromatographic
analysis of small-scale fermentations with the transformant strains showed that, 
while S. cerevisiae ATF1 overexpression resulted in a substantial increase in
acetate ester levels, S. cerevisiae ATF2 and K. lactis ATF overexpression only
caused a moderate increase in acetate esters. This study is the first report of
the presence of an ester synthesis gene in K. lactis.

PMID: 18309479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Neurosci. 2008 Feb 27;28(9):2025-32. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5273-07.2008.

Induction of activating transcription factors (ATFs) ATF2, ATF3, and ATF4 in the 
nucleus accumbens and their regulation of emotional behavior.

Green TA(1), Alibhai IN, Unterberg S, Neve RL, Ghose S, Tamminga CA, Nestler EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9070, USA.

Previous research has shown that cAMP response element (CRE) binding protein
(CREB) in the nucleus accumbens gates behavioral responses to emotional stimuli. 
For example, overexpression of CREB decreases anxiety, sucrose preference, and
sensitivity to drugs of abuse and increases depression-like behavior, whereas
blocking CREB via overexpression of inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) or
other dominant-negative inhibitors of CRE-mediated transcription has the opposite
effects. However, CREB and ICER are but two members of a larger family of leucine
zipper-containing transcription factors composed of multiple products of the
creb, crem (cAMP response element modulator), and atf (activating transcription
factor) genes. We demonstrate here that ATF2, ATF3, and ATF4 are each robustly
induced in the nucleus accumbens and dorsal striatum by restraint stress or by
amphetamine administration. In contrast, little induction is seen for ATF1 or
CREM. Using viral-mediated gene transfer, we show that ATF2 overexpression in
nucleus accumbens produces increases in emotional reactivity and
antidepressant-like responses, a behavioral phenotype similar to that caused by
dominant-negative antagonists of CREB. In contrast, ATF3 or ATF4 overexpression
in nucleus accumbens decreases emotional reactivity and increases depression-like
behavior, consistent with the behavioral phenotype induced by CREB. Because
amphetamine and stress induce ATF2, ATF3, and ATF4 in nucleus accumbens, and
overexpression of these transcription factors in this brain region in turn alters
behavioral responsiveness to amphetamine and stress, our findings support novel
roles for these ATF family members in regulating emotional behavior.

PMID: 18305237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Am J Pathol. 2008 Apr;172(4):1088-99. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.070603. Epub 2008 
Feb 21.

Regulation of arterial-venous differences in tumor necrosis factor responsiveness
of endothelial cells by anatomic context.

Liu M(1), Kluger MS, D'Alessio A, García-Cardeña G, Pober JS.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, 10 Amistad Street, New Haven, CT 06509,
USA.

We analyzed tumor necrosis factor (TNF) responses of human umbilical artery and
vein endothelial cells (HUAECs and HUVECs) in organ and cell culture. In organ
culture, TNF induced expression of E-selectin, VCAM-1, and ICAM-1 on HUVECs but
only ICAM-1 on HUAECs. Activation of nuclear factor-kappaB, c-jun, and ATF2 by
TNF was comparable in HUAECs and HUVECs, whereas binding of transcription factors
and p300 co-activator to the E-selectin enhancer was lower in HUAECs compared to 
HUVECs. In cell culture, HUAECs rapidly acquired inducible E-selectin and VCAM-1 
whereas ICAM-1 inducibility decreased. Culture of HUVECs rapidly decreased TNF
responses of all three genes. By 72 hours in cell culture, TNF-treated HUVECs and
HUAECs showed comparable adhesion molecule induction and transcription factor
binding to the E-selectin enhancer. Freshly isolated HUAECs expressed higher
levels of Kruppel-like factor 2 (KLF2) than HUVECs, consistent with greater KLF2 
induction by arterial levels of shear stress in vitro. KLF2 expression decreased 
rapidly in both cell types during culture. Transduction of HUVECs with KLF2
reduced TNF-mediated induction of E-selectin and VCAM-1 while increasing ICAM-1
induction and reduced transcription factor/co-activator binding to the E-selectin
enhancer. In conclusion, the differential responses of HUAECs and HUVECs to TNF
in organ culture correlate with transcription factor/co-activator binding to DNA 
and converge during cell culture. Flow-induced expression of KLF2 contributes to 
the in situ responses of HUAECs but not of HUVECs.

PMCID: PMC2276407
PMID: 18292233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Biochemistry. 2008 Mar 11;47(10):3076-84. doi: 10.1021/bi701852z. Epub 2008 Feb
13.

Kinetic mechanism and inhibitor characterization for c-jun-N-terminal kinase
3alpha1.

Ember B(1), Kamenecka T, LoGrasso P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics and Drug Discovery, The Scripps Research 
Institute, Scripps Florida, 5353 Parkside Drive, Jupiter, Florida 33458, USA.

c-jun-N-Terminal kinase 3alpha1 (JNK3alpha1) is a mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinase family member expressed primarily in the brain that phosphorylates protein
transcription factors including c-jun and activating transcription factor 2
(ATF2) upon activation by a variety of stress-based stimuli. In this study, the
kinetic mechanism for JNK3alpha1 was determined via initial velocity patterns in 
the presence and absence of both ATP and ATF2 competitive inhibitors. Peptide
inhibitors from both ATF2 (peptide 1) and JNK-interacting protein 1 (JIP-1)
(peptide 3), derived from the homologous delta-domain JNK docking sequence,
inhibited JNK3alpha1 activity in a competitive fashion versus ATF2 while being
pure noncompetitive toward ATP. In contrast, peptides derived from the
phosphoacceptor activation domain on ATF2 (peptides 4 and 5) were recognized
neither as substrates nor as inhibitors of JNK3alpha1. AMP-PCP and compound 6, a 
small molecule analinopyrimidine, exhibited pure noncompetitive inhibition versus
ATF2 and competitive inhibition versus ATP. Peptide inhibitors based on the
delta-domain sites of JIP ( 3) and ATF2 ( 1) were not recognized by p38, also of 
the MAPK family, which may give insight into finding more selective inhibitors
for the JNK family of kinases. Collectively these data showed that JNK3alpha1
proceeded by a random sequential kinetic mechanism and that the ATP and ATF2
substrate sites were non-interacting. Moreover, these results established the
11-mer JIP peptide ( 3) as a potent ( K i = 25 +/- 6 nM) competitive inhibitor
versus ATF2 in JNK3alpha1.

PMID: 18269248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Jul;216(1):101-10. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21379.

ERalpha and AP-1 interact in vivo with a specific sequence of the F promoter of
the human ERalpha gene in osteoblasts.

Lambertini E(1), Tavanti E, Torreggiani E, Penolazzi L, Gambari R, Piva R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Molecular Biology Section,
University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

Estrogen-responsive genes often have an estrogen response element (ERE)
positioned next to activator protein-1 (AP-1) binding sites. Considering that the
interaction between ERE and AP-1 elements has been described for the modulation
of bone-specific genes, we investigated the 17-beta-estradiol responsiveness and 
the role of these cis-elements present in the F promoter of the human estrogen
receptor alpha (ERalpha) gene. The F promoter, containing the sequence analyzed
here, is one of the multiple promoters of the human ERalpha gene and is the only 
active promoter in bone tissue. Through electrophoretic mobility shift (EMSA),
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and re-ChIP assays, we investigated the
binding of ERalpha and four members of the AP-1 family (c-Jun, c-fos, Fra-2, and 
ATF2) to a region located approximately 800 bp upstream of the transcriptional
start site of exon F of the human ERalpha gene in SaOS-2 osteoblast-like cells.
Reporter gene assay experiments in combination with DNA binding assays
demonstrated that F promoter activity is under the control of upstream cis-acting
elements which are recognized by specific combinations of ERalpha, c-Jun, c-fos, 
and ATF2 homo- and heterodimers. Moreover, ChIP and re-ChIP experiments showed
that these nuclear factors bind the F promoter in vivo with a simultaneous
occupancy stimulated by 17-beta-estradiol. Taken together, our findings support a
model in which ERalpha/AP-1 complexes modulate F promoter activity under
conditions of 17-beta-estradiol stimulation.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18247370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Arch Toxicol. 2008 Oct;82(10):749-53. doi: 10.1007/s00204-008-0283-0. Epub 2008
Jan 29.

Piperonyl butoxide activates c-Jun and ATF-2 in the hepatocytes of mice.

Muguruma M(1), Arai K, Moto M, Nishimura J, Dewa Y, Mitsumori K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Faculty of Agriculture, Tokyo University
of Agriculture and Technology, 3-5-8 Saiwai, Fuchu, Tokyo 183-8509, Japan.
lauramh@pd6.so-net.ne.jp

In order to clarify the possible mechanism of hepatocarcinogenesis induced by
piperonyl butoxide, we attempted to identify the transcription factor activated
by piperonyl butoxide in the male ICR mouse liver. Administration of 0.6%
piperonyl butoxide for 24 h elevated the level of liver nuclear proteins that
bind to an AP-1 consensus oligonucleotide, and these proteins demonstrated a
supershift with the anti-c-Jun antibody. Additionally, immunoblot analysis
revealed that piperonyl butoxide induced c-Jun phosphorylation within 8 h of
administration, and phosphorylated ATF-2 was detected after 24 h of piperonyl
butoxide treatment. Immunohistochemical analysis also demonstrated the presence
of phosphorylated ATF-2 in the hepatocyte nuclei of mice fed with 0.6% piperonyl 
butoxide for 24 h. Furthermore, piperonyl butoxide induced ATF-2 phosphorylation 
in TLR-3, a mouse immortalized hepatocyte cell line. These results indicated that
piperonyl butoxide activated c-Jun and ATF-2 in mouse hepatocytes during the
early stage of hepatocarcinogenesis.

PMID: 18228000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Feb 5;105(5):1674-9. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0706057105.
Epub 2008 Jan 28.

Suppressor role of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) in skin cancer.

Bhoumik A(1), Fichtman B, Derossi C, Breitwieser W, Kluger HM, Davis S, Subtil A,
Meltzer P, Krajewski S, Jones N, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute for Medical Research, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) regulates transcription in response to
stress and growth factor stimuli. Here, we use a mouse model in which ATF2 was
selectively deleted in keratinocytes. Crossing the conditionally expressed ATF2
mutant with K14-Cre mice (K14.ATF2(f/f)) resulted in selective expression of
mutant ATF2 within the basal layer of the epidermis. When subjected to a
two-stage skin carcinogenesis protocol [7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene/phorbol
12-tetradecanoate 13-acetate (DMBA/TPA)], K14.ATF2(f/f) mice showed significant
increases in both the incidence and prevalence of papilloma development compared 
with the WT ATF2 mice. Consistent with these findings, keratinocytes of
K14.ATF2(f/f) mice exhibit greater anchorage-independent growth compared with
ATF2 WT keratinocytes. Papillomas of K14.ATF2(f/f) mice exhibit reduced
expression of presenilin1, which is associated with enhanced beta-catenin and
cyclin D1, and reduced Notch1 expression. Significantly, a reduction of nuclear
ATF2 and increased beta-catenin expression were seen in samples of squamous and
basal cell carcinoma, as opposed to normal skin. Our data reveal that loss of
ATF2 transcriptional activity serves to promote skin tumor formation, thereby
indicating a suppressor activity of ATF2 in skin tumor formation.

PMCID: PMC2234203
PMID: 18227516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Cell Signal. 2008 Apr;20(4):675-83. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2007.12.003. Epub 2007
Dec 8.

Activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) by widely used specific p38 MAPK
inhibitors SB202190 and SB203580: a MLK-3-MKK7-dependent mechanism.

Muniyappa H(1), Das KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and the Arkansas Cancer Research Center, University of
Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 4301 West Markham, Slot # 845, Little Rock, AR
72205, United States.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are key signaling molecules that
respond to mitogenic stimulation or environmental stress, resulting in the
expression of target proteins. c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 MAPKs are
activated by inflammatory cytokines or environmental stress. Specific p38 MAPK
inhibitors, such as SB202190 or SB203580, are widely used to dissect p38
MAPK-related signal transduction mechanisms. While using SB202190 to inhibit p38 
MAPK-related signaling, we observed that SB202190 treatment could activate JNK.
Further experiments showed that treatment of cells with SB202190 could
phosphorylate JNK and activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2), and increased
AP-1 DNA binding. Using multiple cell lines and primary endothelial cells, we
demonstrated that specific p38 MAPK inhibitors SB202190 or SB203580 induces the
activation of the JNK pathway. Further, using with RNA interference and
kinase-inactive expression of intermediates of the JNK pathway, we demonstrated
SB202190- or SB203580-induced JNK activation is dependent on the
MLK-3-MKK4/MKK7-dependent signal transduction pathway. Finally, we demonstrate
that treatment of cells with SB202190 or SB203580 induces the phosphorylation and
activation of MLK3.

PMCID: PMC2423944
PMID: 18222647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Biophys J. 2008 Apr 1;94(7):2566-79. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.107.116673. Epub 2008 
Jan 4.

Functions of bifans in context of multiple regulatory motifs in signaling
networks.

Lipshtat A(1), Purushothaman SP, Iyengar R, Ma'ayan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Systems Therapeutics, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA. azi.lipshtat@mssm.edu
<azi.lipshtat@mssm.edu>

Representation of intracellular signaling networks as directed graphs allows for 
the identification of regulatory motifs. Regulatory motifs are groups of nodes
with the same connectivity structure, capable of processing information. The
bifan motif, made of two source nodes directly crossregulating two target nodes, 
is an overrepresented motif in a mammalian cell signaling network and in
transcriptional networks. One example of a bifan is the two MAP-kinases, p38, and
JNK that phosphorylate and activate the two transcription factors ATF2 and Elk-1.
We have used a system of coupled ordinary differential equations to analyze the
regulatory capability of this bifan motif by itself, and when it interacts with
other motifs such as positive and negative feedback loops. Our results indicate
that bifans provide temporal regulation of signal propagation and act as signal
sorters, filters, and synchronizers. Bifans that have OR gate configurations show
rapid responses whereas AND gate bifans can introduce delays and allow
prolongation of signal outputs. Bifans that have AND gates can filter noisy
signal inputs. The p38/JNK-ATF2/Elk-1bifan synchronizes the output of activated
transcription factors. Synchronization is a robust property of bifans and is
exhibited even when the bifan is adjacent to a positive feedback loop. The
presence of the bifan promotes the transcription and translation of the dual
specificity protein phosphatase MKP-1 that inhibits p38 and JNK thus enabling a
negative feedback loop. These results indicate that bifan motifs in cell
signaling networks can contribute to signal processing capability both
intrinsically and by enabling the functions of other regulatory motifs.

PMCID: PMC2267139
PMID: 18178648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Mol Carcinog. 2008 Mar;47(3):172-83.

Fyn is a novel target of (-)-epigallocatechin gallate in the inhibition of JB6
Cl41 cell transformation.

He Z(1), Tang F, Ermakova S, Li M, Zhao Q, Cho YY, Ma WY, Choi HS, Bode AM, Yang 
CS, Dong Z.

Author information: 
(1)Hormel Institute, The University of Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota 55912, USA.

The cancer preventive action of (-)-epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), found in
green tea, is strongly supported by epidemiology and laboratory research data.
However, the mechanism by which EGCG inhibits carcinogenesis and cell
transformation is not clear. In this study, we report that EGCG suppressed
epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced cell transformation in JB6 cells. We also
found that EGCG inhibited EGF-induced Fyn kinase activity and phosphorylation in 
vitro and in vivo. Fyn was implicated in the process because EGF-induced JB6 cell
transformation was inhibited by small interfering RNA (siRNA)-Fyn-JB6 cells. With
an in vitro protein-binding assay, we found that EGCG directly bound with the
GST-Fyn-SH2 domain but not the GST-Fyn-SH3 domain. The K(d) value for EGCG
binding to the Fyn SH2 domain was 0.367 +/- 0.122 microM and B(max) was 1.35 +/- 
0.128 nmol/mg. Compared with control JB6 Cl41 cells, EGF-induced phosphorylation 
of p38 MAP kinase (p38 MAPK) (Thr180/Tyr182), ATF-2 (Thr71) and signal transducer
and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) (Thr727) was decreased in siRNA-Fyn-JB6 
cells. EGCG could inhibit the phosphorylation of p38 MAPK, ATF-2, and STAT1. The 
DNA binding ability of AP-1, STAT1, and ATF-2 was also decreased in siRNA-Fyn-JB6
cells. Overall, these results demonstrated that EGCG interacted with Fyn and
inhibited Fyn kinase activity and thereby regulated EGF-induced cell
transformation. Inhibition of Fyn kinase activity is a novel and important
mechanism that may be involved in EGCG-induced inhibition of cell transformation.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2832836
PMID: 18095272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Eukaryot Cell. 2008 Feb;7(2):294-301. Epub 2007 Dec 14.

Atf2 transcription factor binds to the APP1 promoter in Cryptococcus neoformans: 
stimulatory effect of diacylglycerol.

Tommasino N(1), Villani M, Qureshi A, Henry J, Luberto C, Del Poeta M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

The fungus Cryptococcus neoformans is an environmental human pathogen which
enters the lung via the respiratory tract and produces a unique protein, called
antiphagocytic protein 1 (App1), that protects it from phagocytosis by
macrophages. In previous studies, we proposed genetic evidences that
transcription of APP1 is controlled by the enzymatic reaction catalyzed by
inositol phosphorylceramide synthase 1 (Ipc1) via the production of
diacylglycerol through the activating transcription factor 2 (Atf2). We
investigated here the mechanism by which Atf2 binds to the APP1 promoter in vitro
and in vivo. To this end, we produced Atf2 recombinant proteins (rAtf2) and found
that rAtf2 binds to ATF cis-acting element present in the APP1 promoter. Indeed, 
mutation of two key nucleotides in the ATF consensus sequence abolishes the
binding of rAtf2 to the APP1 promoter. Next, we produced C. neoformans strains
with a hemagglutinin-tagged ATF2 gene and showed that endogenous Atf2 binds to
APP1 promoter in vivo. Finally, by a novel DNA protein-binding precipitation
assay, we showed that treatment with 1,2-dioctanoylglycerol positively increases 
binding of Atf2-APP1 promoter in vivo. These studies provide new insights into
the molecular mechanism by which Atf2 regulates APP1 transcription in vivo with
important implications for a better understanding of how C. neoformans escapes
the phagocytic process.

PMCID: PMC2238156
PMID: 18083832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Dec 11;104(50):19942-7. Epub 2007 Dec 5.

Runs of homozygosity reveal highly penetrant recessive loci in schizophrenia.

Lencz T(1), Lambert C, DeRosse P, Burdick KE, Morgan TV, Kane JM, Kucherlapati R,
Malhotra AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry Research, Zucker Hillside Hospital, North Shore-Long 
Island Jewish Health System, 75-59 263rd Street, Glen Oaks, NY 11004, USA.
lencz@lij.edu

Evolutionarily significant selective sweeps may result in long stretches of
homozygous polymorphisms in individuals from outbred populations. We developed
whole-genome homozygosity association (WGHA) methodology to characterize this
phenomenon in healthy individuals and to use this genomic feature to identify
genetic risk loci for schizophrenia (SCZ). Applying WGHA to 178 SCZ cases and 144
healthy controls genotyped at 500,000 markers, we found that runs of homozygosity
(ROHs), ranging in size from 200 kb to 15 mb, were common in unrelated
Caucasians. Properties of common ROHs in healthy subjects, including chromosomal 
location and presence of nonancestral haplotypes, converged with prior reports
identifying regions under selective pressure. This interpretation was further
supported by analysis of multiethnic HapMap samples genotyped with the same
markers. ROHs were significantly more common in SCZ cases, and a set of nine ROHs
significantly differentiated cases from controls. Four of these 9 "risk ROHs"
contained or neighbored genes associated with SCZ (NOS1AP, ATF2, NSF, and
PIK3C3). Several of these risk ROHs were very rare in healthy subjects,
suggesting that recessive effects of relatively high penetrance may explain a
proportion of the genetic liability for SCZ. Other risk ROHs feature haplotypes
that are also common in healthy individuals, possibly indicating a source of
balancing selection.

PMCID: PMC2148402
PMID: 18077426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Neurogenetics. 2008 Feb;9(1):41-9. Epub 2007 Dec 12.

A neonatal encephalopathy with seizures in standard poodle dogs with a missense
mutation in the canine ortholog of ATF2.

Chen X(1), Johnson GS, Schnabel RD, Taylor JF, Johnson GC, Parker HG, Patterson
EE, Katz ML, Awano T, Khan S, O'Brien DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, University of Missouri, 322 Connaway
Hall, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA, johnsongs@missouri.edu.

Neonatal encephalopathy with seizures (NEWS) is a previously undescribed
autosomal recessive disease of standard poodle puppies. Affected puppies are
small and weak at birth. Many die in their first week of life. Those surviving
past 1 week develop ataxia, a whole-body tremor, and, by 4 to 6 weeks of age,
severe generalized clonic-tonic seizures. None have survived to 7 weeks of age.
Cerebella from affected puppies were reduced in size and often contained
dysplastic foci consisting of clusters of intermixed granule and Purkinje
neurons. We used deoxyribonucleic acid samples from related standard poodles to
map the NEWS locus to a 2.87-Mb segment of CFA36, which contains the canine
ortholog of ATF2. This gene encodes activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2),
which participates in the cellular responses to a wide variety of stimuli. We
amplified and sequenced all coding regions of canine ATF2 from a NEWS-affected
puppy and identified a T > G transversion that predicts a methionine-to-arginine 
missense mutation at amino acid position 51. Methionine-51 lies within a
hydrophobic docking site for mitogen-activated protein kinases that activate
ATF-2 so the arginine substitution is likely to interfere with ATF-2 activation. 
All 20 NEWS-affected puppies in the standard poodle family were homozygous for
the mutant G allele. The 58 clinically normal family members were either G/T
heterozygotes or homozygous for the ancestral T allele. There are no previous
reports of spontaneous ATF2 mutations in people or animals; however,
atf2-knockout mice have cerebellar lesions that are similar to those in puppies
with NEWS.

PMID: 18074159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2008 Feb;104(2):429-38. Epub 2007 Dec 6.

AMP-activated protein kinase phosphorylates transcription factors of the CREB
family.

Thomson DM(1), Herway ST, Fillmore N, Kim H, Brown JD, Barrow JR, Winder WW.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Physiology and Developmental Biology, 545 WIDB, Brigham Young Univ., 
Provo, UT 84602, USA.

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) has been identified as a regulator of gene
transcription, increasing mitochondrial proteins of oxidative metabolism as well 
as hexokinase expression in skeletal muscle. In mice, muscle-specific knockout of
LKB1, a component of the upstream kinase of AMPK, prevents contraction- and
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-D-ribofuranoside (AICAR)-induced activation
of AMPK in skeletal muscle, and the increase in hexokinase II protein that is
normally observed with chronic AICAR activation of AMPK. Since previous reports
show a cAMP response element in the promoter region of the hexokinase II gene, we
hypothesized that the cAMP-response element (CRE) binding protein (CREB) family
of transcription factors could be targets of AMPK. Using radioisotopic kinase
assays, we found that recombinant and rat liver and muscle AMPK phosphorylated
CREB1 at the same site as cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). AMPK was also
found to phosphorylate activating transcription factor 1 (ATF1), CRE modulator
(CREM), and CREB-like 2 (CREBL2), but not ATF2. Treatment of HEK-293 cells stably
transfected with a CREB-driven luciferase reporter with AICAR increased
luciferase activity approximately threefold over a 24-h time course. This
increase was blocked with compound C, an AMPK inhibitor. In addition,
AICAR-induced activation of AMPK in incubated rat epitrochlearis muscles resulted
in an increase in both phospho-acetyl-CoA carboxylase and phospho-CREB. We
conclude that CREB and related proteins are direct downstream targets for AMPK
and are therefore likely involved in mediating some effects of AMPK on expression
of genes having a CRE in their promoters.

PMID: 18063805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. EMBO J. 2007 Dec 12;26(24):5109-19. Epub 2007 Nov 22.

An acetylation/deacetylation cycle controls the export of sterols and steroids
from S. cerevisiae.

Tiwari R(1), Köffel R, Schneiter R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Biochemistry, Institute of Biochemistry,
University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.

Sterol homeostasis in eukaryotic cells relies on the reciprocal interconversion
of free sterols and steryl esters. Here we report the identification of a novel
reversible sterol modification in yeast, the sterol acetylation/deacetylation
cycle. Sterol acetylation requires the acetyltransferase ATF2, whereas
deacetylation requires SAY1, a membrane-anchored deacetylase with a putative
active site in the ER lumen. Lack of SAY1 results in the secretion of acetylated 
sterols into the culture medium, indicating that the substrate specificity of
SAY1 determines whether acetylated sterols are secreted from the cells or whether
they are deacetylated and retained. Consistent with this proposition, we find
that acetylation and export of the steroid hormone precursor pregnenolone depends
on its acetylation by ATF2, but is independent of SAY1-mediated deacetylation.
Cells lacking Say1 or Atf2 are sensitive against the plant-derived allylbenzene
eugenol and both Say1 and Atf2 affect pregnenolone toxicity, indicating that
lipid acetylation acts as a detoxification pathway. The fact that homologues of
SAY1 are present in the mammalian genome and functionally substitute for SAY1 in 
yeast indicates that part of this pathway has been evolutionarily conserved.

PMCID: PMC2140111
PMID: 18034159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Nov 15;13(22 Pt 1):6769-78.

Preclinical studies of celastrol and acetyl isogambogic acid in melanoma.

Abbas S(1), Bhoumik A, Dahl R, Vasile S, Krajewski S, Cosford ND, Ronai ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Program, Cancer Center, Burnham Institute for Medical
Research, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

PURPOSE: Sensitize melanomas to apoptosis and inhibit their growth and metastatic
potential by compounds that mimic the activities of activating transcription
factor 2 (ATF2)-driven peptides.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Small-molecule chemical library consisting of 3,280
compounds was screened to identify compounds that elicit properties identified
for ATF2 peptide, including (a) sensitization of melanoma cells to apoptosis, (b)
inhibition of ATF2 transcriptional activity, (c) activation of c-Jun
NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) and c-Jun transcriptional activity, and (d)
inhibition of melanoma growth and metastasis in mouse models.
RESULTS: Two compounds, celastrol (CSL) and acetyl isogambogic acid, could,
within a low micromolar range, efficiently elicit cell death in melanoma cells.
Both compounds efficiently inhibit ATF2 transcriptional activities, activate JNK,
and increase c-Jun transcriptional activities. Similar to the ATF2 peptide, both 
compounds require JNK activity for their ability to inhibit melanoma cell
viability. Derivatives of CSL were identified as potent inducers of cell death in
mouse and human melanomas. CSL and a derivative (CA19) could also efficiently
inhibit growth of human and mouse melanoma tumors and reduce the number of lung
metastases in syngeneic and xenograft mouse models.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies show for the first time the effect of CSL and acetyl
isogambogic acid on melanoma. These compounds elicit activities that resemble the
well-characterized ATF2 peptide and may therefore offer new approaches for the
treatment of this tumor type.

PMCID: PMC2874065
PMID: 18006779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Antiviral Res. 2008 Feb;77(2):153-6. Epub 2007 Oct 8.

Genistein treatment of cells inhibits arenavirus infection.

Vela EM(1), Bowick GC, Herzog NK, Aronson JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Center for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious
Diseases, Institute for Human Infections and Immunity, The University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, United States. emvela@utmb.edu

Arenaviridae is a family of enveloped viruses some of which are capable of
causing hemorrhagic fever syndromes in humans. In this report, we demonstrate
that treatment of host cells with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein
inhibits infection of cells with the New World arenavirus Pichindé (PICV). The
greatest degree of inhibition was observed in pre-treated target cells, but
modest inhibition of infection was also seen when drug was added to cultures up
to 48h after infection. We show that PICV-induced phosphorylation of the
activating transcription factor-2 protein (ATF-2) and cyclic adenosine
monophosphate response element binding protein (CREB) is inhibited following
genistein treatment. Lastly, genistein treatment also inhibited transduction of
cells with pseudotyped retrovirus particles expressing envelope proteins of the
Old World arenavirus Lassa virus. These results demonstrate that kinase activity 
is required for arenavirus infection and that therapeutics designed to inhibit
kinase activity should be explored.

PMCID: PMC2259390
PMID: 17961732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2007 Dec;77(3):675-87. Epub 2007 Oct 16.

Influence of wine fermentation temperature on the synthesis of yeast-derived
volatile aroma compounds.

Molina AM(1), Swiegers JH, Varela C, Pretorius IS, Agosin E.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ingeniería Química y Bioprocesos, Facultad de Ingeniería,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Casilla 306 Correo 22, Santiago, Chile.

The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae synthesises a variety of volatile aroma
compounds during wine fermentation. In this study, the influence of fermentation 
temperature on (1) the production of yeast-derived aroma compounds and (2) the
expression of genes involved in aroma compounds' metabolism (ADH1, PDC1, BAT1,
BAT2, LEU2, ILV2, ATF1, ATF2, EHT1 and IAH1) was assessed, during the
fermentation of a defined must at 15 and 28 degrees C. Higher concentrations of
compounds related to fresh and fruity aromas were found at 15 degrees C, while
higher concentrations of flowery related aroma compounds were found at 28 degrees
C. The formation rates of volatile aroma compounds varied according to growth
stage. In addition, linear correlations between the increases in concentration of
higher alcohol and their corresponding acetates were obtained. Genes presented
different expression profiles at both temperatures, except ILV2, and those
involved in common pathways were co-expressed (ADH1, PDC1 and BAT2; and ATF1,
EHT1 and IAH1). These results demonstrate that the fermentation temperature plays
an important role in the wine final aroma profile, and is therefore an important 
control parameter to fine-tune wine quality during winemaking.

PMID: 17938912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Pigment Cell Res. 2007 Dec;20(6):498-506.

ATF2 on the double - activating transcription factor and DNA damage response
protein.

Bhoumik A(1), Lopez-Bergami P, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Program, Burnham Institute for Medical Research, La Jolla,
CA, USA.

Signal transduction pathways play a key role in the regulation of key cellular
processes, including survival and death. Growing evidence points to changes in
signaling pathway that occur during skin tumor development and progression. Such 
changes impact the activity of downstream substrates, including transcription
factors. The activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) has been implicated in
malignant and non-malignant skin tumor developments. ATF2 mediates both
transcription and DNA damage control, through its phosphorylation by JNK/p38 or
ATM/ATR respectively. Here, we summarize our present understanding of ATF2
regulation, function and contribution to malignant and non-malignant skin tumor
development.

PMCID: PMC2997391
PMID: 17935492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Neurosci Res. 2008 Feb 15;86(3):544-52.

Increased expression of tyrosine hydroxylase and anomalous neurites in
catecholaminergic neurons of ATF-2 null mice.

Kojima M(1), Suzuki T, Maekawa T, Ishii S, Sumi-Ichinose C, Nomura T, Ichinose H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama, Japan.

ATF-2/CRE-BP1 was originally identified as a cAMP-responsive element (CRE)
binding protein abundant in the brain. We previously reported that
phosphorylation of ATF-2 increased the expression of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH),
which is the rate-limiting enzyme for catecholamine biosynthesis, directly acting
on the CRE in the promoter region of the TH gene in PC12D cells (Suzuki et al.
[2002] J. Biol. Chem. 277:40768-40774). To examine the role of ATF-2 on
transcriptional control of the TH gene in the brain, we investigated the TH
expression in ATF-2-/- mice. We found that TH expression was greatly increased in
medulla oblongata and locus ceruleus of the ATF-2-deficient embryos. Ectopic
expression of TH was observed in the raphe magnus nucleus, where serotonergic
neural cell bodies are located. Interestingly, A10 dorsal neurons were lost in
the embryos of ATF-2-/- mice. There was no difference in the TH immunoreactivity 
in the olfactory bulb. The data showed that alteration in TH expression by
absence of ATF-2 gradually declined from caudal to rostral part of the brain. We 
also found anomalous neurite extension in catecholaminergic neurons of ATF-2 null
mice, i.e., increased dendritic arborization and shortened axons. These data
suggest that ATF-2 plays critical roles for proper expression of the TH gene and 
for neurite extension of catecholaminergic neurons, possibly through a
repressor-like action.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17896792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Free Radic Biol Med. 2007 Nov 1;43(9):1335-47. Epub 2007 Jul 27.

Glutathione depletion activates mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways 
that display organ-specific responses and brain protection in mice.

Limón-Pacheco JH(1), Hernández NA, Fanjul-Moles ML, Gonsebatt ME.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina Genómica y Toxicología Ambiental, Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad
Universitaria, Distrito Federal, México.

Because mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) are downstream effectors of
antioxidant responses, changes in GSH levels in an organism might induce
organ-specific responses. To test our hypothesis, mice were treated
intraperitoneally with L-buthionine-S-R-sulfoximine (BSO) to inhibit GSH
synthesis. A time-related GSH depletion in the liver and kidney correlated with
p38(MAPK) phosphorylation and induction of thioredoxin 1 (Tx-1) transcription.
This positive regulation was associated with nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB
and ATF-2 and c-Jun phosphorylation in the liver, but only c-Jun phosphorylation 
in the kidney. Increased levels of GSH were observed in the brain together with
extracellular regulated kinase 2 (ERK2) activation, Nrf2 nuclear accumulation,
and increases in transcription of Nrf2, xCT, gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase
(gammaGCSr), and Tx-1. Pretreatment with MAPK inhibitors SB203580 and U0126, or
addition of the exogenous thiol N-acetylcysteine, abrogated both p38(MAPK) and
ERK2 activation as well as downstream effects on gene expression. No effect on
gammaGCSr was observed. These results indicate that in mice, GSH depletion is
associated with p38(MAPK) phosphorylation in the liver and kidney and with ERK2
activation in the brain, in what could be considered part of the brain's
protective response to thiol depletion.

PMID: 17893047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Pathol. 2007 Oct;213(2):219-28.

Glomerular and tubular induction of the transcription factor c-Jun in human renal
disease.

De Borst MH(1), Prakash J, Melenhorst WB, van den Heuvel MC, Kok RJ, Navis G, van
Goor H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Center
Groningen and University of Groningen, The Netherlands. m.h.de.borst@umcg.nl

The transcription factor c-Jun regulates the expression of genes involved in
proliferation and inflammation in many cell types but its role in human renal
disease is largely unclear. In the current study we investigated whether c-Jun
activation is associated with human renal disease and if c-Jun activation
regulates pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic genes in renal cells. Activation of
c-Jun was quantified by scoring renal expression of phosphorylated c-Jun (pc-Jun)
in control human renal tissue and in biopsies from patients with various renal
diseases (diabetic nephropathy, focal glomerulosclerosis, hypertension, IgA
nephropathy, membranous glomerulopathy, minimal change disease,
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, acute
rejection, and Wegener's granulomatosis); this was correlated with parameters of 
renal damage. Furthermore, we studied the functional role of c-Jun activation in 
human tubular epithelial cells (HK-2) stimulated with TGF-beta. Activated c-Jun
was present in nuclei of glomerular and tubular cells in all human renal
diseases, but only sporadically in controls. Across the diseases, the extent of
pc-Jun expression correlated with the degree of focal glomerulosclerosis,
interstitial fibrosis, cell proliferation, kidney injury molecule-1 (Kim-1)
expression, macrophage accumulation, and impairment of renal function. In HK-2
cells, TGF-beta induced c-Jun activation after 1 h (+40%, p < 0.001) and 24 h
(+160%, p < 0.001). The specific c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitor SP600125
abolished c-Jun phosphorylation at all time points and blunted TGF-beta- or
BSA-induced procollagen-1alpha 1 and MCP-1 gene expression in HK-2 cells. We
conclude that in human renal disease, the transcription factor c-Jun is activated
in glomerular and tubular cells. Activation of c-Jun may be involved in the
regulation of inflammation and/or fibrosis in human renal disease.

PMID: 17891746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Bioprocess Biosyst Eng. 2008 Jun;31(4):299-306. Epub 2007 Sep 21.

Aerobic production of isoamyl acetate by overexpression of the yeast alcohol
acetyl-transferases AFT1 and AFT2 in Escherichia coli and using low-cost
fermentation ingredients.

Singh R(1), Vadlani PV, Harrison ML, Bennett GN, San KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, 6100 Main Street, Houston, TX
77005, USA.

Isoamyl acetate, produced via fermentation, is a natural flavor chemical with
applications in the food industry. Two alcohol acetyltransferases from
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (ATF1 and ATF2) can catalyze the esterification of
isoamyl alcohol with acetyl coenzyme A. The respective genes were cloned and
expressed in an appropriate ack-pta(-) strain of Escherichia coli. The engineered
strains produce isoamyl acetate when isoamyl alcohol is added to the culture
medium. Aerobic shake flask experiments examined isoamyl acetate production over 
various growth times, temperatures, and initial optical densities. The strain
carrying the pBAD-ATF1 plasmid exhibited a high molar ester yield from glucose
(1.13) after 48 h of aerobic growth at 25 degrees C. Low-cost media components,
such as fusel oil, sorghum glucose and corn steep liquor, were found to give a
high yield of isoamyl acetate. High-cell-density gave an increased isoamyl
acetate yield of 0.18 g/g of glucose consumed.

PMID: 17891501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Cancer Res. 2007 Sep 15;67(18):8914-22.

Prostaglandin E(2) induces breast cancer related aromatase promoters via
activation of p38 and c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase in adipose fibroblasts.

Chen D(1), Reierstad S, Lin Z, Lu M, Brooks C, Li N, Innes J, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.
dong-chen@northwestern.edu

Aromatase is the key enzyme for estrogen biosynthesis. A distal promoter, PI.4,
maintains baseline levels of aromatase in normal breast adipose tissue. In
contrast, malignant breast epithelial cells secrete prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)), 
which stimulates aromatase expression via proximal promoters PI.3/PII in a cyclic
AMP (cAMP)- and protein kinase C (PKC)-dependent manner in adjacent breast
adipose fibroblasts (BAF), leading to increased local concentrations of estrogen.
Although an effective treatment for breast cancer, aromatase inhibitors
indiscriminately abolish estrogen synthesis in all tissues, causing major side
effects. To identify drug targets to selectively block aromatase and estrogen
production in breast cancer, we investigated PGE(2)-stimulated signaling pathways
essential for aromatase induction downstream of cAMP and PKC in human BAFs. Here,
we show that PGE(2) or its surrogate hormonal mixture dibutyryl cAMP (Bt(2)cAMP) 
+ phorbol diacetate (PDA) stimulated the p38, c-jun NH(2)-terminal kinase
(JNK)-1, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathways. Inhibition or small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown
of p38 or JNK1, but not ERK, inhibited PGE(2)- or Bt(2)cAMP + PDA-induced
aromatase activity and expression via PI.3/PII. Conversely, overexpression of
wild-type p38alpha or JNK1 enhanced PGE(2)-stimulated aromatase expression via
PII. PGE(2) or Bt(2)cAMP + PDA stimulated c-Jun and activating transcription
factor-2 (ATF2) phosphorylation and binding to the PI.3/PII region. Specific
activation of protein kinase A (PKA) or EPAC with cAMP analogues stimulated p38
and JNK1; however, only PKA-activating cAMP analogues induced aromatase
expression. The PKC activator PDA effectively stimulated p38 and JNK1
phosphorylation but not aromatase expression. Taken together, PGE(2) activation
of p38 and JNK1 via PKA and PKC is necessary for aromatase induction in BAFs, and
p38 and JNK1 are potential new drug targets for tissue-specific ablation of
aromatase expression in breast cancer.

PMID: 17875734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Dermatol Sci. 2008 Feb;49(2):170-3. Epub 2007 Sep 14.

Overexpression of phosphorylated ATF2 and STAT3 in eccrine porocarcinoma and
eccrine poroma.

Chen SY, Takeuchi S, Urabe K, Kido M, Hayashida S, Tomoeda H, Uchi H, Dainichi T,
Takahara M, Shibata S, Furue M, Moroi Y, Tu YT.

PMID: 17869487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. PLoS One. 2007 Sep 12;2(9):e873.

Brain expressed microRNAs implicated in schizophrenia etiology.

Hansen T(1), Olsen L, Lindow M, Jakobsen KD, Ullum H, Jonsson E, Andreassen OA,
Djurovic S, Melle I, Agartz I, Hall H, Timm S, Wang AG, Werge T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Sct. Hans Hospital, Roskilde,
Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Protein encoding genes have long been the major targets for research 
in schizophrenia genetics. However, with the identification of regulatory
microRNAs (miRNAs) as important in brain development and function, miRNAs genes
have emerged as candidates for schizophrenia-associated genetic factors. Indeed, 
the growing understanding of the regulatory properties and pleiotropic effects
that miRNA have on molecular and cellular mechanisms, suggests that alterations
in the interactions between miRNAs and their mRNA targets may contribute to
phenotypic variation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have studied the association between
schizophrenia and genetic variants of miRNA genes associated with
brain-expression using a case-control study design on three Scandinavian samples.
Eighteen known SNPs within or near brain-expressed miRNAs in three samples
(Danish, Swedish and Norwegian: 420/163/257 schizophrenia patients and
1006/177/293 control subjects), were analyzed. Subsequently, joint analysis of
the three samples was performed on SNPs showing marginal association. Two SNPs
rs17578796 and rs1700 in hsa-mir-206 (mir-206) and hsa-mit-198 (mir-198) showed
nominal significant allelic association to schizophrenia in the Danish and
Norwegian sample respectively (P = 0.0021 & p = 0.038), of which only rs17578796 
was significant in the joint sample. In-silico analysis revealed that 8 of the 15
genes predicted to be regulated by both mir-206 and mir-198, are transcriptional 
targets or interaction partners of the JUN, ATF2 and TAF1 connected in a tight
network. JUN and two of the miRNA targets (CCND2 and PTPN1) in the network have
previously been associated with schizophrenia.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We found nominal association between brain-expressed
miRNAs and schizophrenia for rs17578796 and rs1700 located in mir-206 and mir-198
respectively. These two miRNAs have a surprising large number (15) of targets in 
common, eight of which are also connected by the same transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC1964806
PMID: 17849003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Int J Mol Med. 2007 Oct;20(4):461-9.

Molecular basis of aggressive disease in chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients
with 11q deletion and trisomy 12 chromosomal abnormalities.

Mittal AK(1), Hegde GV, Aoun P, Bociek RG, Dave BJ, Joshi AD, Sanger WG,
Weisenburger DD, Joshi SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
68198-6395, USA.

In B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), Rai stage, immunoglobulin gene
mutational status, chromosomal abnormalities, CD38 and ZAP-70 expression were
used as prognostic markers. In this study, to understand the molecular basis of
chromosomal abnormalities leading to tumor progression, 90 CLL patients were
grouped into poor prognosis (with 11q deletion and trisomy 12) and good prognosis
(with normal karyotype and 13q deletion) and their clinical outcome was assessed.
Gene expression profiles of 35 CLL samples with poor outcome (11q deletion, n=9; 
trisomy 12, n=5) and good outcome (13q deletion, n=13; normal karyotype, n=8)
were analyzed using oligonucleotide microarray. Significance analysis of
microarray (SAM) identified 27 differentially expressed genes between these two
subgroups with significant overexpression of ATF5 and underexpression of CDC16,
PCDH8, SLAM, MNDA and ATF2 in CLL patients with poor outcome. ATF5 gene
expression in CLL was further studied because of its role in the regulation of
cell cycle progression/differentiation and apoptosis. The overexpression of ATF5 
was confirmed by real-time PCR using 39 CLL samples from the poor and good
outcome groups. ATF5 was significantly (p<0.001) overexpressed in the poor
outcome group. Furthermore, ATF5 expression was significantly higher in the 11q
deletion as well as trisomy 12 group alone compared to the 13q deletion and
normal karyotype groups. ATF5 overexpression was also associated with
significantly (p=0.04) shorter time to treatment. Similarly, expression of five
underexpressed genes also correlated with longer time to treatment. Thus, this
report demonstrates that ATF5 may be one of the key genes involved in increased
proliferation and survival in 11q deletion or trisomy 12, whereas CD16, CD86,
SLAM, MNDA and ATF2 may be involved in the decreased proliferation of CLL cells
with 13q deletion or normal karyotype.

PMID: 17786276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Oncogene. 2008 Feb 14;27(8):1045-54. Epub 2007 Aug 13.

ATF-2 controls transcription of Maspin and GADD45 alpha genes independently from 
p53 to suppress mammary tumors.

Maekawa T(1), Sano Y, Shinagawa T, Rahman Z, Sakuma T, Nomura S, Licht JD, Ishii 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, Koyadai, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, Japan. maekawa@rtc.riken.jp

Erratum in
    Oncogene. 2014 Jul 3;33(27):3618.

The activating transcription factor, ATF-2, is a target of p38 and JNK that are
involved in stress-induced apoptosis. Heterozygous Atf-2 mutant (Atf-2+/-) mice
are highly prone to mammary tumors. The apoptosis-regulated gene GADD45alpha and 
the breast cancer suppressor gene Maspin, both of which are known to be p53
target genes, are downregulated in the mammary tumors arisen in Atf-2+/- mice.
Here, we have analysed how ATF-2 controls the transcription of GADD45alpha and
Maspin. ATF-2 and p53 independently activate the GADD45alpha transcription. ATF-2
does not directly bind to the GADD45alpha promoter; instead, it is recruited via 
Oct-1 and NF-I. ATF-2 simultaneously binds to Oct-1, NF-I and breast cancer
suppressor BRCA1 to activate transcription. With regard to Maspin, ATF-2 and p53 
directly bind to different sites in the Maspin promoter to independently activate
its transcription. Consistent with the observation that ATF-2 and p53
independently activate the transcription of Maspin and GADD45alpha is that the
loss of one copy of p53 shortened the period required for mammary tumor
development in Atf-2+/- mice. These studies suggest the functional link between
the ATF-2 and the two tumor suppressors BRCA1 and p53.

PMID: 17700520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Genes Dev. 2007 Aug 15;21(16):2069-82.

Feedback regulation of p38 activity via ATF2 is essential for survival of
embryonic liver cells.

Breitwieser W(1), Lyons S, Flenniken AM, Ashton G, Bruder G, Willington M, Lacaud
G, Kouskoff V, Jones N.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Regulation Department, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, University
of Manchester, Manchester M20 4BX, United Kingdom.

The ATF2 transcription factor is phosphorylated by the stress-activated
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) JNK and p38. We show that this
phosphorylation is essential for ATF2 function in vivo, since a mouse carrying
mutations in the critical phosphorylation sites has a strong phenotype identical 
to that seen upon deletion of the DNA-binding domain. In addition, combining this
mutant with a knockout of the ATF2 homolog, ATF7, results in embryonic lethality 
with severe abnormalities in the developing liver and heart. The mutant fetal
liver is characterized by high levels of apoptosis in developing hepatocytes and 
haematopoietic cells. Furthermore, we observe a significant increase in active
p38 due to loss of a negative feedback loop involving the ATF2-dependent
transcriptional activation of MAPK phosphatases. In embryonic liver cells, this
increase drives apoptosis, since it can be suppressed by chemical inhibition of
p38. Our findings demonstrate the importance of finely regulating the activities 
of MAPKs during development.

PMCID: PMC1948861
PMID: 17699753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Lung Cancer. 2007 Dec;58(3):303-9. Epub 2007 Aug 8.

Alteration of the VRK1-p53 autoregulatory loop in human lung carcinomas.

Valbuena A(1), Suárez-Gauthier A, López-Rios F, López-Encuentra A, Blanco S,
Fernández PL, Sánchez-Céspedes M, Lazo PA.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Oncología Translacional, Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular
del Cáncer, CSIC, Universidad de Salamanca, Spain.

Human VRK1 (vaccinia-related kinase 1) is a novel serine-threonine kinase that
regulates several transcription factors, including p53, ATF2 and c-Jun; and its
loss results in defects of cell proliferation. VRK1 stabilizes p53 and the
accumulated p53 downregulates VRK1 forming an autoregulatory loop. Wild-type p53,
but not mutant p53, was able to downregulate VRK1 in the A549 lung carcinoma cell
line. VRK1 expression has been studied in human lung carcinomas. VRK1 protein
level was significantly higher in squamous cell lung carcinomas than in
adenocarcinomas, and inversely correlated with p16. Tumours with p53 mutations
have a positive trend with those having very high levels of VRK1 protein,
particularly in squamous cell lung carcinomas. These data indicate that the
VRK1-p53 autoregulatory loop was not functional in a group of lung carcinomas.
The accumulation of VRK1 in tumours with mutant p53 could result in stimulation
of other signalling pathways that can contribute to tumour growth and progression
in addition to those resulting from loss of p53 function.

PMID: 17689819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 28;282(39):28395-407. Epub 2007 Aug 6.

Several dual specificity phosphatases coordinate to control the magnitude and
duration of JNK activation in signaling response to oxidative stress.

Teng CH(1), Huang WN, Meng TC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, 128 Academia Rd., Section 
2, Taipei 11529, Taiwan.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are important mediators that integrate 
signaling from upstream pathways in response to various environmental cues. In
order to control appropriate gene expression through phosphorylation of
transcription factors, the activity of MAPKs must be tightly regulated by the
actions coordinated between protein kinases and phosphatases. In this study, we
explore the underlying mechanism through which the oxidative stress-activated
c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs), members of MAPKs, are regulated by dual
specificity phosphatases (DUSPs). DUSPs are a group of enzymes that belong to the
superfamily of protein-tyrosine phosphatases. They are able to recognize
phospho-Ser/Thr and phospho-Tyr residues in substrates. Using quantitative real
time PCR, we found that stimulation of human embryonic kidney 293T cells with
H(2)O(2) or xanthine/xanthine oxidase led to inducible expression of multiple
DUSPs. We used RNA interference to characterize the functional role of these
DUSPs and found rapid and transient induction of DUSP1 and DUSP10 to be essential
for determining the appropriate magnitude of JNK activation in response to
oxidative stress. The transcription factor ATF2, which is phosphorylated and
activated by JNK, is a critical mediator for inducible expression of DUSP1 and
DUSP10 in this signaling pathway. We further demonstrated that DUSP4 and DUSP16, 
both showing significant late phase induction, dephosphorylate JNK effectively,
causing the down-regulation of the signaling cascade. Thus, this study provides
new insights into the role of several DUSPs that coordinate with each other to
control the magnitude and duration of JNK activity in response to oxidative
stress.

PMID: 17681939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Oct;293(4):G780-7. Epub 2007 Aug 2.

Bacterial symbionts induce a FUT2-dependent fucosylated niche on colonic
epithelium via ERK and JNK signaling.

Meng D(1), Newburg DS, Young C, Baker A, Tonkonogy SL, Sartor RB, Walker WA,
Nanthakumar NN.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Gastroenterology Laboratory, Massachusetts General
Hospital-East, 114 16th St., Rm 3650, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

The intestinal epithelium of the adult gut supports a complex, dynamic microbial 
ecosystem and expresses highly fucosylated glycans on its surface. Uncolonized
gut contains little fucosylated glycan. The transition toward adult colonization,
such as during recovery from germ-free status or from antibiotic treatment,
increased expression of fucosylated epitopes in the colonic epithelium. This
increase in fucosylation is accompanied by induction of fut2 mRNA expression and 
alpha1,2/3-fucosyltransferase activity. Colonization stimulates ERK and JNK
signal transduction pathways, resulting in activation of transcription factors
ATF2 and c-Jun, respectively. This increases transcription of fut2 mRNA and
expression of alpha1,2/3-fucosyltransferase activity, resulting in a highly
fucosylated intestinal mucosa characteristic of the adult mammalian gut. Blocking
the ERK and JNK signaling cascade inhibits the ability of colonization to induce 
elevated fut2 mRNA and fucosyltransferase activity in the mature colon. Thus
pioneer-mutualist symbiotic bacteria may utilize the ERK and JNK signaling
cascade to induce the high degree of fucosylation characteristic of adult
mammalian colon, and we speculate that this fucosylation facilitates colonization
by adult microbiota.

PMID: 17673542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Virol. 2007 Oct;81(20):10950-60. Epub 2007 Jul 25.

Binding of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus K-bZIP to
interferon-responsive factor 3 elements modulates antiviral gene expression.

Lefort S(1), Soucy-Faulkner A, Grandvaux N, Flamand L.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology and Immunology Research Center, Room T1-49, 2705 Laurier Blvd.,
Quebec, Quebec G1V 4G2, Canada.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus encodes numerous regulatory proteins
capable of modulating viral and cellular gene expression and affecting host cell 
functions. K-bZIP, a leucine zipper-containing transcription factor encoded by
ORFK8, is one such protein. During infection, transcription of the ORFK8 early
gene is turned on by the immediate-early replication and transcription factor
activator (RTA). One described function of the K-bZIP nuclear protein is to
interact with and repress RTA-mediated transactivation of viral promoters,
including that of the K8 gene. In the present work, we provide evidence that the 
expression of K-bZIP results in the activation of the ifn-beta gene. Of interest,
ifn-beta gene activation by K-bZIP is independent of interferon (IFN)-responsive 
factor 3 (IRF-3) and nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation. Using a DNA
binding affinity assay and electromobility shift assay, we report that K-bZIP
binds efficiently to the PRDIII-I region of the beta IFN (IFN-beta) promoter,
and, in doing so, it prevents the attachment of activated IRF-3 but not that of
NF-kappaB or ATF2/c-Jun to the IFN-beta promoter sequence. As a consequence,
ifn-beta gene activation in response to IFN inducers such as Sendai virus
infection or expression of retinoic acid-inducible gene I, mitochondrial
antiviral signaling protein, or TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK-1) is severely
impaired (>90%) by the presence of K-bZIP. K-bZIP also prevents the activation of
RANTES and CXCL11, whose promoters are also regulated by IRF-3. Lysine 158
(target for SUMO conjugation), threonine 111, and serine 167 (targets for
phosphorylation) mutants of K-bZIP were equally effective as wild-type K-bZIP in 
mediating the repression of TBK-1-activated ifn-beta gene expression. Lastly, the
overexpression of CREB binding protein could not reverse the K-bZIP repression of
TBK-1-activated ifn-beta gene expression. In all, our results indicate that
K-bZIP binds directly to the PRDIII-I region of the IFN-beta promoter and, as a
consequence, causes a low level of ifn-beta gene transcription. In doing so,
K-bZIP prevents IRF-3 from binding to the IFN-beta promoter and precludes the
formation of the enhanceosome, which is required for maximal ifn-beta gene
transcription. A new role for K-bZIP as a protein involved in immune evasion is
therefore uncovered.

PMCID: PMC2045525
PMID: 17652396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 31;282(35):25177-81. Epub 2007 Jul 11.

Constitutive activation of TAK1 by HTLV-1 tax-dependent overexpression of TAB2
induces activation of JNK-ATF2 but not IKK-NF-kappaB.

Suzuki S(1), Singhirunnusorn P, Mori A, Yamaoka S, Kitajima I, Saiki I, Sakurai
H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathogenic Biochemistry, Institute of Natural Medicine, University
of Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.

HTLV-1 Tax oncoprotein induces persistent activation of the transcription factor 
NF-kappaB and CREB (cAMP-response element-binding protein)/ATF. Transforming
growth factor-beta-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) has been shown to play a critical
role in these transcription factors. Here, we found that TAK1 was constitutively 
activated in Tax-positive HTLV-1-transformed T cells. Tax induced persistent
overexpression of TAK1-binding protein 2 (TAB2), but not TAB3, which is essential
for TAK1 activation. Surprisingly, TAK1 was not involved in the activation of
NF-kappaB. On the other hand, JNK and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases were 
activated by TAK1. In addition, ATF2, but not CREB, was a target for the TAK1-JNK
pathway, and p38 negatively regulated TAK1 activity through TAB1 phosphorylation.
These results indicate that Tax-mediated TAK1 activation is important for the
activation of ATF2 rather than NF-kappaB.

PMID: 17626013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Jul;48(7):3126-37.

p38 MAP kinase pathway and stromelysin regulation in trabecular meshwork cells.

Kelley MJ(1), Rose A, Song K, Lystrup B, Samples JW, Acott TS.

Author information: 
(1)Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon
97239-4197, USA. kelleyma@ohsu.edu

PURPOSE: Increased expression of stromelysin-1 (matrix metalloproteinase [MMP]-3)
by the trabecular meshwork (TM) initiates extracellular matrix turnover and
increases aqueous humor outflow facility. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)alpha and
interleukin (IL)-1alpha are efficacious inducers of MMP-3 in TM. To facilitate
understanding of the regulation of MMP-3, the authors investigated the
involvement of p38 MAP kinase pathway proteins in this process.
METHODS: Western immunoblots were used to determine the effects of these
cytokines and p38 MAP kinase pathway inhibitors on MMP-3 protein levels, p38 MAP 
kinase isoforms, and phosphorylation levels in human and porcine TM cells. The
effects of a dominant-negative p38 MAP kinase construct on MMP-3 expression were 
evaluated. Morphologic changes in the cells were also examined.
RESULTS: Both cytokines increased MMP-3 levels. The p38 MAP kinase inhibitor
SB202190 diminished MMP-3 induction by TNFalpha at all times and at 24 hours by
IL-1alpha but potentiated the IL-1alpha-induced increase in MMP-3 at later times.
MMP-3 induction by both cytokines was blocked by dominant-negative p38 MAP kinase
constructs. Each cytokine increased phosphorylation of the p38 MAP kinase pathway
components and altered TM cell morphology. The p38 inhibitor blocked only the
morphologic changes produced by TNFalpha. Human and porcine TM cells expressed
p38 alpha, beta, delta, and gamma isoforms, which migrate coincident with bands
of specific phosphorylation.
CONCLUSIONS: The effects of p38 inhibitors and the dominant-negative construct on
TNFalpha and IL-1alpha induction of MMP-3 demonstrate an essential role for p38
in this signaling process. Differences between p38 inhibitor effects on TNFalpha 
and IL-1alpha induction of MMP-3 suggest divergent p38 isoform use, as do the
morphologic responses. The anomalous p38 inhibitor effect on IL-1alpha induction 
of MMP-3 and phosphorylation of p38 delta/gamma suggests complex interactions
between p38 MAP kinase isoforms and their differential uses by TNFalpha and
IL-1alpha in TM.

PMID: 17591882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Biochemistry. 2007 Jul 17;46(28):8207-16. Epub 2007 Jun 23.

Multiple roles for acetylation in the interaction of p300 HAT with ATF-2.

Karanam B(1), Wang L, Wang D, Liu X, Marmorstein R, Cotter R, Cole PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, 725 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

The transcriptional coactivator paralogues p300 and CBP contain acetyltransferase
domains (HAT) and catalyze the lysine acetylation of histones and other proteins 
as an important aspect of their functions. Prior studies revealed that the basic 
leucine zipper domain (b-ZIP) of transcription factor ATF-2 (also called CRE-BP1)
can interact with the CBP HAT domain. In this study, we have examined the ATF-2
b-ZIP interaction with the p300 HAT domain and shown that p300 HAT
autoacetylation can enhance the binding affinity. Pull-down assays revealed that 
hyperacetylated p300 HAT is more efficiently retained by immobilized ATF-2 b-ZIP 
than hypoacetylated p300 HAT. Loop deleted p300 HAT lacking autoacetylation was
retained about as well as hyperacetylated p300 HAT, suggesting that the loop and 
ATF-2 compete for p300 HAT binding. While ATF-2 b-ZIP is a weak inhibitor of
hypoacetylated p300 HAT acetylation of a histone H4 peptide, hyperacetylated p300
HAT is much more potently inhibited by ATF-2 b-ZIP. Moreover, we showed that
ATF-2 b-ZIP could serve as an acetyltransferase substrate for p300 HAT. Using
mass spectrometry, two p300 HAT lysine acetylation sites were mapped in ATF-2
b-ZIP. Immunoprecipitation-Western blot analysis with anti-acetyl-lysine antibody
revealed that ATF-2 can undergo reversible acetylation in vivo. Mutational
analysis of the two ATF-2 b-ZIP acetylation sites revealed their potential
contributions to ATF-2-mediated transcriptional activation. Taken together, these
studies suggest multiple roles for protein acetylation in the regulation of
transcription by p300/CBP and ATF-2.

PMCID: PMC2532843
PMID: 17590016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Exp Eye Res. 2007 Aug;85(2):250-8. Epub 2007 May 13.

Regulation of cell death and survival pathways in experimental glaucoma.

Levkovitch-Verbin H(1), Harizman N, Dardik R, Nisgav Y, Vander S, Melamed S.

Author information: 
(1)Sam Rothberg Ophthalmic Molecular Biology Laboratory, Goldschleger Eye
Institute, Sheba Medical Center, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv
University, Tel-Hashomer 52621, Israel. halevko@hotmail.com

This study investigates cell death and survival pathways in experimental glaucoma
using the translimbal photocoagulation laser model. Glaucoma was induced
unilaterally in 79 Wistar rats and all eyes developed elevated intraocular
pressure. The involvement of caspase-3, p-AKT and members of the MAP kinase
pathway was evaluated by immunohistochemistry and Western blotting. We found that
protein levels of caspase-3 were elevated from day 15 to day 30 (p<0.05). All
investigated members of the MAP kinase pathway were significantly activated.
P-SAPK/JNK activation began on day 2, reaching a 6-fold elevation by day 30
(p<0.05). The p-P38 level was elevated on days 2 and 8 (p<0.05), followed by a
decrease to baseline on day 15. The level of p-ATF-2, the substrate of P38, was
significantly elevated at all time points tested, up to day 30 (p<0.05). P-ERK
was detected early (p<0.05) on day 1, returning to normal on day 15. The
pro-survival protein p-Akt, a member of the PI3-kinase survival pathway, was also
detected early on day 1 (p<0.05) returning to baseline on day 8 and remaining
unchanged up to 64days. We conclude that retinal ganglion cell death in glaucoma 
involves activation, at different time points, of multiple pro-apoptotic pathways
(the MAP kinase pathway and the caspase family) and pro-survival (PI-3 Kinase/
Akt and p-ERK).

PMID: 17586494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Jun;56(6):1787-97.

Interleukin-18 induces angiogenic factors in rheumatoid arthritis synovial tissue
fibroblasts via distinct signaling pathways.

Amin MA(1), Mansfield PJ, Pakozdi A, Campbell PL, Ahmed S, Martinez RJ, Koch AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of
Michigan Medical School, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA. maamin@med.umich.edu

OBJECTIVE: Interleukin-18 (IL-18) is a proinflammatory cytokine implicated in the
pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). This study was undertaken to examine
the role of IL-18 in up-regulating secretion of the angiogenic factors stromal
cell-derived factor 1alpha (SDF-1alpha)/CXCL12, monocyte chemoattractant protein 
1 (MCP-1)/CCL2, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in RA synovial
tissue (ST) fibroblasts, and the underlying signaling mechanisms involved.
METHODS: We used enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays, Western blotting, and
chemical inhibitors/antisense oligodeoxynucleotides to signaling intermediates to
assess the role of IL-18.
RESULTS: IL-18 significantly enhanced the production of SDF-1alpha/CXCL12,
MCP-1/CCL2, and VEGF in RA ST fibroblasts, in a time- and concentration-dependent
manner. IL-18-induced SDF-1alpha/CXCL12 up-regulation was dependent on JNK, p38
MAPK, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), and NFkappaB. While IL-18-induced
production of SDF-1alpha/CXCL12 was also dependent on protein kinase Cdelta
(PKCdelta), production of MCP-1/CCL2 was dependent on PKCalpha, not PKCdelta.
Additionally, RA ST fibroblast IL-18-induced MCP-1/CCL2 production was mediated
by JNK, PI3K, and NFkappaB. In contrast, IL-18 did not induce secretion of RA ST 
fibroblast MCP-1/CCL2 or VEGF via p38 MAPK. IL-18-induced RA ST fibroblast
production of VEGF was mediated mainly by JNK-2, PKCalpha, and NFkappaB. IL-18
induced phosphorylation of JNK, PKCdelta, p38 MAPK, and activating transcription 
factor 2 (ATF-2) in RA ST fibroblasts in a time-dependent manner, with JNK-2
being upstream of PKCdelta, ATF-2, and NFkappaB.
CONCLUSION: These data support the notion that IL-18 has a unique role in
inducing the secretion of angiogenic SDF-1alpha/CXCL12, MCP-1/CCL2, and VEGF in
RA ST fibroblasts, via distinct signaling intermediates.

PMID: 17530707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Blood. 2007 Sep 1;110(5):1570-7. Epub 2007 May 24.

ATF2 impairs glucocorticoid receptor-mediated transactivation in human CD8+ T
cells.

Li LB(1), Leung DY, Strand MJ, Goleva E.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, National Jewish Medical and
Research Center, Denver, CO 80206, USA.

Chronic inflammatory diseases often have residual CD8(+) T-cell infiltration
despite treatment with systemic corticosteroids, which suggests divergent steroid
responses between CD4(+) and CD8(+) cells. To examine steroid sensitivity,
dexamethasone (DEX)-induced histone H4 lysine 5 (K5) acetylation and
glucocorticoid receptor alpha (GCR alpha) translocation were evaluated. DEX
treatment for 6 hours significantly induced histone H4 K5 acetylation in normal
CD4(+) cells (P = .001) but not in CD8(+) cells. DEX responses were functionally 
impaired in CD8(+) compared with CD4(+) cells when using mitogen-activated
protein kinase phosphatase (1 hour; P = .02) and interleukin 10 mRNA (24 hours; P
= .004) induction as a readout of steroid-induced transactivation. Normal
DEX-induced GCR alpha nuclear translocation and no significant difference in GCR 
alpha and GCR beta mRNA expression were observed in both T-cell types. In
addition, no significant difference in SRC-1, p300, or TIP60 expression was
found. However, activating transcription factor-2 (ATF2) expression was
significantly lower in CD8(+) compared with CD4(+) cells (P = .009). Importantly,
inhibition of ATF2 expression by small interfering RNA in CD4(+) cells resulted
in inhibition of DEX-induced transactivation in CD4(+) cells. The data indicate
refractory steroid-induced transactivation but similar steroid-induced
transrepression of CD8(+) cells compared with CD4(+) cells caused by decreased
levels of the histone acetyltransferase ATF2.

PMCID: PMC1975841
PMID: 17525285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jul 6;282(27):19302-12. Epub 2007 May 11.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) stimulates Map4k4 expression through
TNFalpha receptor 1 signaling to c-Jun and activating transcription factor 2.

Tesz GJ(1), Guilherme A, Guntur KV, Hubbard AC, Tang X, Chawla A, Czech MP.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) is a cytokine secreted by macrophages and 
adipocytes that contributes to the low grade inflammation and insulin resistance 
observed in obesity. TNFalpha signaling decreases peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma and glucose transporter isoform 4 (GLUT4)
expression in adipocytes, impairing insulin action, and this is mediated in part 
by the yeast Ste20 protein kinase ortholog Map4k4. Here we show that Map4k4
expression is selectively up-regulated by TNFalpha, whereas the expression of the
protein kinases JNK1/2, ERK1/2, p38 stress-activated protein kinase, and
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases 4/7 shows little or no response.
Furthermore, the cytokines interleukin 1beta (IL-1beta) and IL-6 as well as
lipopolysaccharide fail to increase Map4k4 mRNA levels in cultured adipocytes
under conditions where TNFalpha elicits a 3-fold effect. Using agonistic and
antagonistic antibodies and small interfering RNA (siRNA) against TNFalpha
receptor 1 (TNFR1) and TNFalpha receptor 2 (TNFR2), we show that TNFR1, but not
TNFR2, mediates the increase in Map4k4 expression. TNFR1, but not TNFR2, also
mediates a potent effect of TNFalpha on the phosphorylation of JNK1/2 and p38
stress-activated protein kinase and their downstream transcription factor
substrates c-Jun and activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2). siRNA-based
depletion of c-Jun and ATF2 attenuated TNFalpha action on Map4k4 mRNA expression.
Consistent with this concept, the phosphorylation of ATF2 along with the
expression and phosphorylation of c-Jun by TNFalpha signaling was more robust and
prolonged compared with that of IL-1beta, which failed to modulate Map4k4. These 
data reveal that TNFalpha selectively stimulates the expression of a key
component of its own signaling pathway, Map4k4, through a TNFR1-dependent
mechanism that targets the transcription factors c-Jun and ATF2.

PMID: 17500068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. BMC Genomics. 2007 May 9;8:114.

Genomics of glycopeptidolipid biosynthesis in Mycobacterium abscessus and M.
chelonae.

Ripoll F(1), Deshayes C, Pasek S, Laval F, Beretti JL, Biet F, Risler JL, Daffé
M, Etienne G, Gaillard JL, Reyrat JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie, Université de Versailles
Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, Faculté de Médecine de Paris-Ile de France-Ouest,
F-92380 Garches, France. ripoll.f@libertysurf.fr <ripoll.f@libertysurf.fr>

BACKGROUND: The outermost layer of the bacterial surface is of crucial importance
because it is in constant interaction with the host. Glycopeptidolipids (GPLs)
are major surface glycolipids present on various mycobacterial species. In the
fast-grower model organism Mycobacterium smegmatis, GPL biosynthesis involves
approximately 30 genes all mapping to a single region of 65 kb.
RESULTS: We have recently sequenced the complete genomes of two fast-growers
causing human infections, Mycobacterium abscessus (CIP 104536T) and M. chelonae
(CIP 104535T). We show here that these two species contain genes corresponding to
all those of the M. smegmatis "GPL locus", with extensive conservation of the
predicted protein sequences consistent with the production of GPL molecules
indistinguishable by biochemical analysis. However, the GPL locus appears to be
split into several parts in M. chelonae and M. abscessus. One large cluster (19
genes) comprises all genes involved in the synthesis of the
tripeptide-aminoalcohol moiety, the glycosylation of the lipopeptide and
methylation/acetylation modifications. We provide evidence that a duplicated
acetyltransferase (atf1 and atf2) in M. abscessus and M. chelonae has evolved
through specialization, being able to transfer one acetyl at once in a sequential
manner. There is a second smaller and distant (M. chelonae, 900 kb; M. abscessus,
3 Mb) cluster of six genes involved in the synthesis of the fatty acyl moiety and
its attachment to the tripeptide-aminoalcohol moiety. The other genes are
scattered throughout the genome, including two genes encoding putative regulatory
proteins.
CONCLUSION: Although these three species produce identical GPL molecules, the
organization of GPL genes differ between them, thus constituting species-specific
signatures. An hypothesis is that the compact organization of the GPL locus in M.
smegmatis represents the ancestral form and that evolution has scattered various 
pieces throughout the genome in M. abscessus and M. chelonae.

PMCID: PMC1885439
PMID: 17490474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 29;282(26):18793-9. Epub 2007 May 7.

Calcium induces increases in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator-1alpha and mitochondrial biogenesis by a pathway leading to p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase activation.

Wright DC(1), Geiger PC, Han DH, Jones TE, Holloszy JO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

Previous studies have shown that raising cytosolic calcium in myotubes induces
increases in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha 
expression and mitochondrial biogenesis. This finding suggests that the increases
in cytosolic calcium in skeletal muscle during exercise may mediate the
exercise-induced increase in mitochondria. The initial aim of this study was to
determine whether raising calcium in skeletal muscle induces the same adaptations
as in myotubes. We found that treatment of rat epitrochlearis muscles with a
concentration of caffeine that raises cytosolic calcium to a concentration too
low to cause contraction induces increases in peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha expression and mitochondrial biogenesis. Our
second aim was to elucidate the pathway by which calcium induces these
adaptations. Raising cytosolic calcium has been shown to activate
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase in muscle. In the present study
raising cytosolic calcium resulted in increases in phosphorylation of p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase and activating transcription factor-2, which
were blocked by the calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase inhibitor KN93
and by the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitor SB202190. The increases
in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha expression
and mitochondrial biogenesis were also prevented by inhibiting p38 activation. We
interpret these findings as evidence that p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase is
downstream of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase in a signaling pathway 
by which increases in cytosolic calcium lead to increases in peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha expression and
mitochondrial biogenesis in muscle.

PMID: 17488713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Dev Cell. 2007 May;12(5):779-92.

Wnt-5A/Ror2 regulate expression of XPAPC through an alternative noncanonical
signaling pathway.

Schambony A(1), Wedlich D.

Author information: 
(1)Universitaet Karlsruhe (TH), Zoologisches Institut II, Kaiserstrasse 12,
D-76128 Karlsruhe, Germany. schambony@zi2.uka.de

XWnt-5A, a member of the nontransforming Wnt-5A class of Wnt ligands, is required
for convergent extension movements in Xenopus embryos. XWnt-5A knockdown
phenocopies paraxial protocadherin (XPAPC) loss of function: involuted mesodermal
cells fail to align mediolaterally, which results in aberrant movements and a
selective inhibition of constriction. XWnt-5A depletion was rescued by
coinjection of XPAPC RNA, indicating that XWnt-5A acts upstream of XPAPC.
XWnt-5A, but not XWnt-11, stimulates XPAPC expression independent of the
canonical Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. We show that transcriptional regulation of
XPAPC by XWnt-5A requires the receptor tyrosine kinase Ror2. XWnt-5A/Xror2 signal
through PI3 kinase and cdc42 to activate the JNK signaling cascade with the
transcription factors ATF2 and c-jun. The Wnt-5A/Ror2 pathway represents an
alternative, distinct branch of noncanonical Wnt signaling that controls gene
expression and is required in the regulation of convergent extension movements in
Xenopus gastrulation.

PMID: 17488628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Biochemistry. 2007 May 15;46(19):5687-96. Epub 2007 Apr 19.

Mutagenesis of p38alpha MAP kinase establishes key roles of Phe169 in function
and structural dynamics and reveals a novel DFG-OUT state.

Bukhtiyarova M(1), Karpusas M, Northrop K, Namboodiri HV, Springman EB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Locus Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Four Valley Square, 512
Township Line Road, Blue Bell, Pennsylvania 19422, USA.

In order to study the role of Phe169 in p38alpha MAP kinase structure and
function, wild-type p38alpha and five p38alpha DFG motif mutants were examined in
vitro for phosphorylation by MKK6, kinase activity toward ATF2 substrate, thermal
stability, and X-ray crystal structure. All six p38alpha variants were
efficiently phosphorylated by MKK6. However, only one activated p38alpha mutant
(F169Y) possessed measurable kinase activity (1% compared to wild-type). The loss
of kinase activity among the DFG mutants may result from an inability to
correctly position Asp168 in the activated form of p38alpha. Two mutations
significantly increased the thermal stability of p38alpha (F169A DeltaTm = 1.3
degrees C and D168G DeltaTm = 3.8 degrees C), and two mutations significantly
decreased the stability of p38alpha (F169R DeltaTm = -3.2 degrees C and F169G
DeltaTm = -4.7 degrees C). Interestingly, X-ray crystal structures of two
thermally destabilized p38alpha-F169R and p38alpha-F169G mutants revealed a
DFG-OUT conformation in the absence of an inhibitor molecule. This DFG-OUT
conformation, termed alpha-DFG-OUT, is different from the ones previously
identified in p38alpha crystal structures with bound inhibitors and postulated
from high-temperature molecular dynamics simulations. Taken together, these
results indicate that Phe169 is optimized for p38alpha functional activity and
structural dynamics, rather than for structural stability. The alpha-DFG-OUT
conformation observed for p38alpha-F169R and p38alpha-F169G may represent a
naturally occurring intermediate state of p38alpha that provides access for
binding of allosteric inhibitors. A model of the local forces driving the DFG
IN-OUT transition in p38alpha is proposed.

PMID: 17441692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 19;282(42):30901-9. Epub 2007 Apr 11.

dp5/HRK is a c-Jun target gene and required for apoptosis induced by potassium
deprivation in cerebellar granule neurons.

Ma C(1), Ying C, Yuan Z, Song B, Li D, Liu Y, Lai B, Li W, Chen R, Ching YP, Li
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen
University, China.

In cerebellar granule neurons, a BH3-only Bcl-2 family member, death protein
5/harakiri, is up-regulated in a JNK-dependent manner during apoptosis induced by
potassium deprivation. However, it is not clear whether c-Jun is directly
involved in the induction of dp5. Here, we showed that the up-regulation of dp5, 
but not fas ligand and bim, after potassium deprivation was suppressed by the
expression of a dominant negative form of c-Jun. Deletion analysis of the
5'-flanking sequence of the dp5 gene revealed that a major responsive element
responsible for the induction by potassium deprivation is an ATF binding site
located at -116 to -109 relative to the transcriptional start site. Mutation of
this site completely abolished promoter activation. Furthermore, a gel shift
assay showed that a specific complex containing c-Jun and ATF2 recognized this
site and increased in potassium-deprived cerebellar granule neurons. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation demonstrated that c-Jun was able to bind to this site in
vivo. Finally, we demonstrated that knockdown of Dp5 by small interfering RNA
rescued neurons from potassium deprivation-induced apoptosis. Taken together,
these results suggest that dp5 is a target gene of c-Jun and plays a critical
role in potassium deprivation-induced apoptosis in cerebellar granule neurons.

PMID: 17428807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Brain Res. 2007 Jun 2;1151:12-9. Epub 2007 Mar 13.

Infarct volume after transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo) can be
reduced by attenuation but not by inactivation of c-Jun action.

Vogel J(1), Weigand MA, Behrens A, Wagner EF, Schorpp-Kistner M, Zimmermann M,
Schenkel J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology and Pathophysiology, University of Heidelberg,
Germany.

Stroke therapy aims to save penumbral tissue from apoptosis that is activated in 
response to the ischemic injury. Since the c-Jun transcription factor plays a
crucial role in promoting apoptosis, inhibition of its activation might reduce
the final infarct size and thus increase functional outcome. To test this
hypothesis we made use of four genetically modified mouse lines influencing the
c-Jun pathway at various steps. Upon transient middle cerebral artery occlusion
for 90 min and 24 h of reperfusion, infarct volume and number of ATF-2-, TUNEL-
and cleaved Caspase-3-positive cells were determined in conditional c-Jun
knock-out mice (cond. c-Jun), mice overexpressing JunB (JunBtg), mice lacking the
phosphoacceptor serines 63 and 73 of c-Jun (JunAA) and in mice overexpressing
Bcl-2 (Bcl-2tg). Cond. c-Jun as well as JunAA mice did not show significant
differences in the infarct size when compared to their non-mutant controls. By
contrast smaller infarct volumes were detected in transgenic mice merely
attenuating c-Jun action (JunBtg and Bcl-2tg). ATF-2, TUNEL or cleaved Caspase-3 
staining revealed no significant differences between the experimental groups. A
complete lack of functional c-Jun might be compensated by other cellular
mechanisms, in contrast to its reduced function. Thus, our data suggest that
attenuation rather than a complete block of c-Jun action appears to be more
promising for therapy of stroke.

PMID: 17428453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Lab Invest. 2007 Jun;87(6):548-58. Epub 2007 Apr 2.

Renal p38 MAP kinase activity in experimental diabetes.

Komers R(1), Lindsley JN, Oyama TT, Cohen DM, Anderson S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Oregon Health and Science University,
Portland, OR 97239-2940, USA. komersr@ohsu.edu

Renal cell activity of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38) is increased in
the diabetic milieu. p38 mediates signals relevant for the development of
diabetic nephropathy (DN). However, renal p38 in Type 1 diabetes in vivo,
particularly in conditions reflecting the differences in metabolic control, and
its activity in advanced stages of DN, has received less attention. We examined
the p38 pathway in renal cortex of rats with streptozotocin diabetes (4 weeks)
with poor (DS), moderate (DM), and intensive (DII) metabolic control, achieved by
varying doses of insulin therapy. Renal p38 was also studied in 12-month diabetic
rats with established nephropathy (DM12) and compared with age-matched controls. 
p38 activity (in vitro kinase assay and expression of phosphorylated (active) p38
(P-p38)) was increased in DM and DS rats, as compared with non-diabetic controls,
and attenuated by intensive insulin treatment. In all groups, P-p38 was
predominantly localized in macula densa cells. Diabetic rats also demonstrated
P-p38 immunoreactivity in the distal tubule and glomeruli. Enhanced p38 activity 
in DS and DM rats was not associated with increases in expression of active
mitogen-activated protein kinase 3/6, an activator of p38, but paralleled with
increased expression of scaffolding protein transforming growth
factor-beta-activated protein kinase 1-binding protein 1. Expression of
mitogen-activated protein phosphatase-1 (MKP-1), one of the phosphatases involved
in inactivation of mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling, was increased in
all diabetic groups, irrespective of metabolic control. Renal p38 activation was 
also detectable in D12 rats with established albuminuria and glomerulosclerosis. 
In summary, renal cortical p38 activity was increased in diabetic rats at early
and advanced stages of nephropathy, as compared with non-diabetic animals, and
attenuated by improved metabolic control. p38 activation in diabetes is likely to
occur via multiple pathways and cannot be explained by downregulation of MKP-1.

PMID: 17401436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Biochemistry. 2007 Apr 24;46(16):4775-84. Epub 2007 Mar 31.

Kinetic characterization of human JNK2alpha2 reaction mechanism using substrate
competitive inhibitors.

Niu L(1), Chang KC, Wilson S, Tran P, Zuo F, Swinney DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Pharmacology, Roche Palo Alto LLC, 3431 Hillview
Avenue, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA.

Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) is a stress activated serine/threonine protein kinase
that phosphorylates numerous cellular protein substrates including the
transcription factors c-Jun and ATF2. In this study, we defined the kinetic
mechanism for the active form of JNK2alpha2. Double reciprocal plots of initial
rates versus concentrations of substrate revealed the sequential nature of the
JNK2alpha2 catalyzed ATF2 phosphorylation. Dead-end JNK inhibitors were then used
to differentiate ordered and random kinetic mechanisms for the reaction. A
peptide inhibitor containing the homology JNK docking sequence for substrate
recognition, derived from amino acid residues 153-163 of JNK-interacting protein 
1 (JIP-1), inhibited JNK activity via competition with ATF2. This peptide
functioned as a noncompetitive inhibitor against ATP. In contrast, the
anthrapyrazolone compound, SP600125, exhibited competitive inhibition for ATP and
noncompetitive inhibition against ATF2. Furthermore, binding of one substrate had
no significant effect on the affinity for the other substrate. The data in this
study are consistent with a kinetic mechanism for activated JNK2alpha2 in which
(1) substrate binding is primarily due to the distal contacts in the JNK2alpha2
docking groove that allow the delivery of the substrate phosphorylation sequence 
into the catalytic center, (2) there is minimal allosteric communication between 
the protein-substrate docking site and the ATP binding site in the catalytic
center for activated JNK2alpha2, and (3) the reaction proceeds via a random
sequential mechanism.

PMID: 17397142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Feb;1769(2):79-91. Epub 2007 Jan 28.

ATF-2 stimulates the human insulin promoter through the conserved CRE2 sequence.

Hay CW(1), Ferguson LA, Docherty K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Institute of Medical
Sciences, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK.

The insulin promoter contains a number of dissimilar cis-acting regulatory
elements that bind a range of tissue specific and ubiquitous transcription
factors. Of the regulatory elements within the insulin promoter, the cyclic AMP
responsive element (CRE) binds by far the most diverse array of transcription
factors. Rodent insulin promoters have a single CRE site, whereas there are four 
CREs within the human insulin gene, of which CRE2 is the only one conserved
between species. The aim of this study was to characterise the human CRE2 site
and to investigate the effects of the two principal CRE-associated transcription 
factors; CREB-1 and ATF-2. Co-transfection of INS-1 pancreatic beta-cells with
promoter constructs containing the human insulin gene promoter placed upstream of
the firefly luciferase reporter gene and expression plasmids for ATF-2 or CREB-1 
showed that ATF-2 stimulated transcriptional activity while CREB-1 elicited an
inhibitory effect. Mutagenesis of CRE2 diminished the effect of ATF-2 but not
that of CREB-1. ATF-2 was shown to bind to the CRE2 site by electrophoretic
mobility shift assay and by chromatin immunoprecipitation, while siRNA mediated
knockdown of ATF-2 diminished the stimulatory effects of cAMP related signalling 
on promoter activity. These results suggest that ATF-2 may be a key regulator of 
the human insulin promoter possibly stimulating activity in response to
extracellular signals.

PMID: 17337306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Eur J Neurosci. 2007 Jan;25(2):391-6.

JNK1 contributes to metabotropic glutamate receptor-dependent long-term
depression and short-term synaptic plasticity in the mice area hippocampal CA1.

Li XM(1), Li CC, Yu SS, Chen JT, Sabapathy K, Ruan DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Biophysics, School of Life Sciences, University
of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230027, PR China.

Several recent reports implicate an important role played by c-Jun N-terminal
kinases (JNKs) in long-term potentiation (LTP). However, little is known about
how the isoforms of JNKs participate in synaptic plasticity. Here we showed that 
short-term synaptic plasticity was impaired in the hippocampal area CA1 of
JNK1-deficient (JNK1-/-) mice; these mice showed normal LTP in response to a
strong tetanus and no alteration of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-dependent
long-term depression (LTD) in the hippocampus. However, LTD induced either by
group I metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) agonist dihydroxyphenylglycine 
or by paired-pulse low-frequency stimulation was absent in both the JNK1-/-
slices and in JNK inhibitor anthrax [1, 9-cd] pyrazol-6(2H)-1
(SP600125)-pretreated slices. Induction of mGluR-dependent LTD resulted in an
increase in phosphorylation of JNK1 substrates, including p-c-Jun and p-ATF2 in
wild-type (WT) mice, and these increases failed to occur in the JNK1-/- or
SP600125-pretreated mice. These results demonstrated that JNK1 played a crucial
role in the short-term synaptic plasticity and mGluR-dependent LTD, whereas
hippocampus LTP was not affected by JNK1 deficiency.

PMID: 17284179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Mar 23;354(4):1101-6. Epub 2007 Jan 29.

Cross-talk between Smad and p38 MAPK signalling in transforming growth factor
beta signal transduction in human glioblastoma cells.

Dziembowska M(1), Danilkiewicz M, Wesolowska A, Zupanska A, Chouaib S, Kaminska
B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transcription Regulation, Department of Cell Biology, Nencki
Institute of Experimental Biology, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is a multifunctional cytokine involved
in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, and survival. Malignant
tumour cells often do not respond to TGF-beta by growth inhibition, but retain
responsiveness to cytokine in regulating extracellular matrix deposition, cell
adhesion, and migration. We demonstrated that TGF-beta1 does not affect viability
or proliferation of human glioblastoma T98G, but increases transcriptional
responses exemplified by induction of MMP-9 expression. TGF-beta receptors were
functional in T98G glioblastoma cells leading to SMAD3/SMAD4 nuclear
translocation and activation of SMAD-dependent promoter. In parallel, a selective
activation of p38 MAPK, and phosphorylation of its substrates: ATF2 and c-Jun
proteins were followed by a transient activation of AP-1 transcription factor.
Surprisingly, an inhibition of p38 MAPK with a specific inhibitor, SB202190,
abolished TGF-inducible activation of Smad-dependent promoter and decreased Smad2
phosphorylation. It suggests an unexpected interaction between Smad and p38 MAPK 
pathways in TGF-beta1-induced signalling.

PMID: 17276399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(4):1312-21. Epub 2007 Jan 31.

ATF2 is required for amino acid-regulated transcription by orchestrating specific
histone acetylation.

Bruhat A(1), Chérasse Y, Maurin AC, Breitwieser W, Parry L, Deval C, Jones N,
Jousse C, Fafournoux P.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 1019, Unité de Nutrition Humaine, INRA de Theix, 63122 Saint Genès
Champanelle, France. bruhat@clermont.inra.fr

The transcriptional activation of CHOP (a CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-related 
gene) by amino acid deprivation involves the activating transcription factor 2
(ATF2) and the activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) binding the amino acid
response element (AARE) within the promoter. Using a chromatin
immunoprecipitation approach, we report that in vivo binding of phospho-ATF2 and 
ATF4 to CHOP AARE are associated with acetylation of histones H4 and H2B in
response to amino acid starvation. A time course analysis reveals that ATF2
phosphorylation precedes histone acetylation, ATF4 binding and the increase in
CHOP mRNA. We also show that ATF4 binding and histone acetylation are two
independent events that are required for the CHOP induction upon amino acid
starvation. Using ATF2-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts, we demonstrate that
ATF2 is essential in the acetylation of histone H4 and H2B in vivo. The role of
ATF2 on histone H4 acetylation is dependent on its binding to the AARE and can be
extended to other amino acid regulated genes. Thus, ATF2 is involved in promoting
the modification of the chromatin structure to enhance the transcription of a
number of amino acid-regulated genes.

PMCID: PMC1851658
PMID: 17267404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(4):1134-44. Epub 2007 Jan 30.

Sumoylation delays the ATF7 transcription factor subcellular localization and
inhibits its transcriptional activity.

Hamard PJ(1), Boyer-Guittaut M, Camuzeaux B, Dujardin D, Hauss C, Oelgeschläger
T, Vigneron M, Kedinger C, Chatton B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Gilbert Laustriat, Ecole Supérieure de Biotechnologie de Strasbourg, 
UMR7175 CNRS-ULP, BP10413, 67412 Strasbourg Illkirch Cedex, France.

Over the past few years, small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) modification has
emerged as an important regulator of diverse pathways and activities including
protein localization and transcriptional regulation. We identified a consensus
sumoylation motif (IKEE), located within the N-terminal activation domain of the 
ATF7 transcription factor and thus investigated the role of this modification.
ATF7 is a ubiquitously expressed transcription factor, homologous to ATF2, that
binds to CRE elements within specific promoters. This protein is able to
heterodimerize with Jun or Fos proteins and its transcriptional activity is
mediated by interaction with TAF12, a subunit of the general transcription factor
TFIID. In the present article, we demonstrate that ATF7 is sumoylated in vitro
(using RanBP2 as a E3-specific ligase) and in vivo. Moreover, we show that ATF7
sumoylation affects its intranuclear localization by delaying its entry into the 
nucleus. Furthermore, SUMO conjugation inhibits ATF7 transactivation activity by 
(i) impairing its association with TAF12 and (ii) blocking its
binding-to-specific sequences within target promoters.

PMCID: PMC1851647
PMID: 17264123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Cancer Lett. 2007 Jul 8;252(1):147-56. Epub 2007 Jan 26.

TGF-beta-induced transcriptional activation of MMP-2 is mediated by activating
transcription factor (ATF)2 in human breast epithelial cells.

Kim ES(1), Sohn YW, Moon A.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Duksung Women's University, Seoul 132-714, Republic of
Korea.

We have previously shown that transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta up-regulates 
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 leading to the induction of oncogenic signaling 
in preneoplastic MCF10A human breast epithelial cells. The present study
investigated the mechanism of transcriptional regulation of MMP-2 by TGF-beta in 
MCF10A cells. By using 5' deletion constructs of MMP-2 promoter, we demonstrated 
that binding sites for p53, S1, AP-1 and Sp1, and to a lesser extent CREB,
GCN-His and PEA3, were potential cis-acting elements for TGF-beta-induced
transcriptional activation of MMP-2 in MCF10A cells. Since activating
transcription factor (ATF)2 was shown to mediate the TGF-beta-induced cellular
responses, we examined the involvement of ATF2 in TGF-beta-activated MMP-2 gene
transcription. TGF-beta increased DNA binding activity of AP-1 in which ATF2 was 
involved as evidenced by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. TGF-beta induced
phosphorylation of ATF2 through p38 MAPK signaling. A dominant-negative (DN) ATF2
significantly inhibited the TGF-beta-induced up-regulation of MMP-2, but not that
of MMP-9, suggesting that ATF2 may be a transcription factor responsible for
transcriptional activation of MMP-2 gene by TGF-beta. Invasive and migratory
phenotypes induced by TGF-beta were significantly inhibited by DN ATF2,
indicating a critical role of ATF2 in TGF-beta-induced oncogenic progression of
MCF10A cells. Taken together, this study demonstrates that ATF2 mediates the
TGF-beta-induced MMP-2 transcriptional activation, elucidating a molecular
mechanism for the malignant progression of human breast epithelial cells exerted 
by TGF-beta.

PMID: 17258390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Blood. 2007 May 15;109(10):4249-57. Epub 2007 Jan 23.

Prolonged shear stress and KLF2 suppress constitutive proinflammatory
transcription through inhibition of ATF2.

Fledderus JO(1), van Thienen JV, Boon RA, Dekker RJ, Rohlena J, Volger OL,
Bijnens AP, Daemen MJ, Kuiper J, van Berkel TJ, Pannekoek H, Horrevoets AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Absence of shear stress due to disturbed blood flow at arterial bifurcations and 
curvatures leads to endothelial dysfunction and proinflammatory gene expression, 
ultimately resulting in atherogenesis. KLF2 has recently been implicated as a
transcription factor involved in mediating the anti-inflammatory effects of flow.
We investigated the effect of shear on basal and TNF-alpha-induced genomewide
expression profiles of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Cluster
analysis confirmed that shear stress induces expression of protective genes
including KLF2, eNOS, and thrombomodulin, whereas basal expression of
TNF-alpha-responsive genes was moderately decreased. Promoter analysis of these
genes showed enrichment of binding sites for ATF transcription factors, whereas
TNF-alpha-induced gene expression was mostly NF-kappaB dependent. Furthermore,
human endothelial cells overlying atherosclerotic plaques had increased amounts
of phosphorylated nuclear ATF2 compared with endothelium at unaffected sites. In 
HUVECs, a dramatic reduction of nuclear binding activity of ATF2 was observed
under shear and appeared to be KLF2 dependent. Reduction of ATF2 with siRNA
potently suppressed basal proinflammatory gene expression under no-flow
conditions. In conclusion, we demonstrate that shear stress and KLF2 inhibit
nuclear activity of ATF2, providing a potential mechanism by which endothelial
cells exposed to laminar flow are protected from basal proinflammatory,
atherogenic gene expression.

PMID: 17244683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Immunol. 2007 Feb 1;178(3):1405-14.

The B cell antigen receptor controls AP-1 and NFAT activity through Ras-mediated 
activation of Ral.

de Gorter DJ(1), Vos JC, Pals ST, Spaargaren M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Signaling by the BCR involves activation of several members of the Ras
superfamily of small GTPases, among which is Ras itself. Ras can control the
activity of multiple effectors, including Raf, PI3K, and guanine nucleotide
exchange factors for the small GTPase Ral. Ras, Raf, and PI3K have been
implicated in a variety of processes underlying B cell development,
differentiation, and function; however, the role of Ral in B lymphocytes remains 
to be established. In this study, we show that Ral is activated upon BCR
stimulation in human tonsillar and mouse splenic B lymphocytes and in B cell
lines. Using signaling molecule-deficient B cells, we demonstrate that this
activation is mediated by Lyn and Syk, Btk, phospholipase C-gamma2, and
inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor-mediated Ca(2+) release. In addition,
although Ral can be activated by Ras-independent mechanisms, we demonstrate that 
BCR-controlled activation of Ral is dependent on Ras. By means of expression of
the dominant-negative mutants RasN17 and RalN28, or of RalBPDeltaGAP, a Ral
effector mutant which sequesters active Ral, we show that Ras and Ral mediate
BCR-controlled transcription of c-fos. Furthermore, while not involved in
NF-kappaB activation, Ras and Ral mediate BCR-controlled activation of JUN/ATF2
and NFAT transcription factors. Taken together, our data show that Ral is
activated upon BCR stimulation and mediates BCR-controlled activation of AP-1 and
NFAT transcription factors. These findings suggest that Ral plays an important
role in B cell development and function.

PMID: 17237388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Cell Biochem. 2007 May 15;101(2):477-87.

Activating transcription factor 2 controls Bcl-2 promoter activity in growth
plate chondrocytes.

Ma Q(1), Li X, Vale-Cruz D, Brown ML, Beier F, LuValle P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610-0235, USA.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) is expressed ubiquitously in mammals.
Mice deficient in ATF-2 (ATF-2 m/m) are slightly smaller than their normal
littermates at birth. Approximately 50% of mice born mutant in both alleles die
within the first month. Those that survive develop a hypochondroplasia-like
dwarfism, characterized by shortened growth plates and kyphosis. Expression of
ATF-2 within the growth plate is limited to the resting and proliferating zones. 
We have previously shown that ATF-2 targets the cyclic AMP response element (CRE)
in the promoters of cyclin A and cyclin D1 in growth plate chondrocytes to
activate their expression. Here, we demonstrate that Bcl-2, a cell death
inhibitor that regulates apoptosis, is expressed within the growth plate in
proliferative and prehypertrophic chondrocytes. However, Bcl-2 expression
declines in hypertrophic chondrocytes. The Bcl-2 promoter contains a CRE at
-1,552 bp upstream of the translation start. Mutations within this CRE cause
reduced Bcl-2 promoter activity. We show here that the absence of ATF-2 in growth
plate chondrocytes corresponds to a decline in Bcl-2 promoter activity, as well
as a reduction in Bcl-2 protein levels. In addition, we show that ATF-2 as well
as CREB, a transcription factor that can heterodimerize with ATF-2, bind to the
CRE within the Bcl-2 promoter. These data identify the Bcl-2 gene as a novel
target of ATF-2 and CREB in growth plate chondrocytes.

PMID: 17219413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Mar;27(5):1730-44. Epub 2006 Dec 22.

Reduced levels of ATF-2 predispose mice to mammary tumors.

Maekawa T(1), Shinagawa T, Sano Y, Sakuma T, Nomura S, Nagasaki K, Miki Y,
Saito-Ohara F, Inazawa J, Kohno T, Yokota J, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, 3-1-1 Koyadai,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

Transcription factor ATF-2 is a nuclear target of stress-activated protein
kinases, such as p38, which are activated by various extracellular stresses,
including UV light. Here, we show that ATF-2 plays a critical role in hypoxia-
and high-cell-density-induced apoptosis and the development of mammary tumors.
Compared to wild-type cells, Atf-2(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were
more resistant to hypoxia- and anisomycin-induced apoptosis but remained equally 
susceptible to other stresses, including UV. Atf-2(-/-) and Atf-2(+/-) MEFs could
not express a group of genes, such as Gadd45alpha, whose overexpression can
induce apoptosis, in response to hypoxia. Atf-2(-/-) MEFs also had a higher
saturation density than wild-type cells and expressed lower levels of Maspin, the
breast cancer tumor suppressor, which is also known to enhance cellular
sensitivity to apoptotic stimuli. Atf-2(-/-) MEFs underwent a lower degree of
apoptosis at high cell density than wild-type cells. Atf-2(+/-) mice were highly 
prone to mammary tumors that expressed reduced levels of Gadd45alpha and Maspin. 
The ATF-2 mRNA levels in human breast cancers were lower than those in normal
breast tissue. Thus, ATF-2 acts as a tumor susceptibility gene of mammary tumors,
at least partly, by activating a group of target genes, including Maspin and
Gadd45alpha.

PMCID: PMC1820478
PMID: 17189429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Virol. 2007 Mar;81(5):2459-71. Epub 2006 Dec 20.

Role of the TSG101 gene in Epstein-Barr virus late gene transcription.

Chua HH(1), Lee HH, Chang SS, Lu CC, Yeh TH, Hsu TY, Cheng TH, Cheng JT, Chen MR,
Tsai CH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, No. 1 Jen-Ai Road 1st section, Taipei 10051, Taiwan.

Rta, an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded immediate-early protein, governs the
reactivation of the viral lytic program by transactivating a cascade of lytic
gene expression. Cellular transcription factors such as Sp1, ATF2, E2F, and Akt
have been demonstrated to mediate Rta transactivation of lytic genes. We report
herein that Rta associates with another potent transcription factor, tumor
susceptibility gene 101 (TSG101), to promote the activation of EBV late genes.
Results from an EBV cDNA array reveal that depletion of TSG101 by siRNA potently 
inhibits the transcription of five Rta-responsive EBV late genes, BcLF1, BDLF3,
BILF2, BLLF1, and BLRF2. Depletion of TSG101 impairs the Rta transactivation of
these late promoters severely. Moreover, a concordant augmentation of Rta
transactivating activity is observed when TSG101 is overexpressed following
ectopic transfection. Mechanistically, Rta interaction with TSG101 causes the
latter to accumulate principally in the nuclei, wherein the proteins colocalize
and are recruited to the viral promoters. Of note, TSG101 is crucial for the
efficient binding of Rta to these late promoters. As a result, cells with
defective TSG101 fail to express late viral proteins, leading to a decrease in
the yield of virus particles. Thus, the contribution of TSG101 to Rta-mediated
late gene activation is of great importance for completion of the EBV productive 
lytic cycle. These observations consolidate a role for TSG101 in the replication 
of EBV, a DNA virus, that differs from what is observed for RNA viruses, where
TSG101 aids mainly in the endosomal sorting of enveloped late viral proteins for 
assembly at the plasma membrane.

PMCID: PMC1865947
PMID: 17182691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Feb;292(2):G667-77. Epub 2006 Nov
9.

Induction of early response genes in trypsin inhibitor-induced pancreatic growth.

Guo L(1), Sans MD, Gurda GT, Lee SH, Ernst SA, Williams JA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, Univ of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0622, USA.

Endogenous CCK release induced by a synthetic trypsin inhibitor, camostat,
stimulates pancreatic growth; however, the mechanisms mediating this growth are
not well established. Early response genes often couple short-term signals with
long-term responses. To study their participation in the pancreatic growth
response, mice were fasted for 18 h and refed chow containing 0.1% camostat for
1-24 h. Expression of 18 early response genes were evaluated by quantitative PCR;
mRNA for 17 of the 18 increased at 1, 2, 4, or 8 h. Protein expression for c-jun,
c-fos, ATF-3, Egr-1, and JunB peaked at 2 h. Nuclear localization was confirmed
by immunohistochemistry of c-fos, c-jun, and Egr-1. Refeeding regular chow
induced only a small increase of c-jun and none in c-fos expression. JNKs and
ERKs were activated 1 h after camostat feeding as was the phosphorylation of
c-jun and ATF-2. AP-1 DNA binding evaluated by EMSA showed a significant increase
1-2 h after camostat feeding with participation of c-jun, c-fos, ATF-2, ATF-3,
and JunB shown by supershift. The CCK antagonist IQM-95,333 blocked camostat
feeding-induced c-jun and c-fos expression by 67 and 84%, respectively, and AP-1 
DNA binding was also inhibited. In CCK-deficient mice, the maximal response of
c-jun induction and AP-1 DNA binding were reduced by 64 and 70%, respectively.
These results indicate that camostat feeding induces a spectrum of early response
gene expression and AP-1 DNA binding and that these effects are mainly CCK
dependent.

PMID: 17095753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 15;177(10):7024-32.

Activating transcription factor/cAMP response element binding protein family
member regulated transcription of CD1A.

Colmone A(1), Li S, Wang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

CD1a has a unique expression pattern among Ag-presenting molecules, expressed
specifically on cortical thymocytes and APCs. As autoimmune disease, infection,
and tumors can all result in alteration of CD1a expression, we are attempting to 
characterize the transcriptional regulation, and thus shed some light on specific
expression, of CD1A. In this study, we have identified a minimal proximal
promoter region required for CD1A transcription. Computer searches within this
region identified numerous potential binding sites for lymphoid-specific
transcription factors, including the ETS transcription factors, C/EBP, GATA, and 
CREB. Deletion and site-specific mutant analysis revealed a critical role of a
potential cAMP response element (CRE) 965 bp upstream of the CD1A translation
start site. Two activating transcription factor (ATF)/CREB family members, CREB-1
and ATF-2, are able to bind this site in vitro and in vivo. Notably, activation
of ATF/CREB family members decreases CD1A transcription, while decrease in ATF-2 
expression results in increased CD1A RNA level. The fact that these factors also 
bind the CD1A promoter in human monocytes strongly suggests a role for ATF/CREB
family members in regulation of CD1A expression.

PMID: 17082618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 1;66(21):10487-96.

Activating transcription factor 2 mediates matrix metalloproteinase-2
transcriptional activation induced by p38 in breast epithelial cells.

Song H(1), Ki SH, Kim SG, Moon A.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Duksung Women's University, Seoul National University,
Seoul, Korea.

Mounting evidence suggests a role for matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 in the
malignant progression of breast cancer cells. We showed previously that H-Ras,
but not N-Ras, induced invasion of MCF10A human breast epithelial cells through
Rac-MKK3/6-p38 pathway resulted in MMP-2 up-regulation. Activation of p38 pathway
by MKK6 caused a selective up-regulation of MMP-2. In this study, we aimed to
elucidate the transcriptional regulation of MMP-2 by p38 pathway leading to the
invasive phenotype of MCF10A cells. By using 5' deletion mutant constructs of
MMP-2 promoter, we showed that deletion of the region containing activator
protein-1 (AP-1) site caused the greatest reduction of MMP-2 promoter activity
both in MKK6- and H-Ras-activated MCF10A cells, suggesting that the AP-1 binding 
site is critical for the MMP-2 promoter activation. DNA binding and
transcriptional activities of AP-1 were increased by MKK6 or H-Ras as evidenced
by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and luciferase assay using an AP-1-driven
plasmid. By doing immunoinhibition assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay,
we revealed the activating transcription factor (ATF) 2 as a transcription factor
for MMP-2 gene expression through binding to the functional AP-1 site. Activation
of ATF2, which depended on p38 activity, was crucial for MMP-2 promoter activity 
as well as induction of invasive and migrative phenotypes in MCF10A cells. This
is the first report revealing ATF2 as an essential transcription factor linking
MKK3/6-p38 signaling pathway to MMP-2 up-regulation, providing evidence for a
direct role of ATF2 activation in malignant phenotypic changes of human breast
epithelial cells.

PMID: 17079470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Genes Cells. 2006 Nov;11(11):1239-51.

Sin1 binds to both ATF-2 and p38 and enhances ATF-2-dependent transcription in an
SAPK signaling pathway.

Makino C(1), Sano Y, Shinagawa T, Millar JB, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, 3-1-1 Koyadai,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

Yeast Sin1 binds to the Sty1 kinase, a member of the stress-activated kinases
(SAPKs), and is required for stress-induced phosphorylation and activation of the
transcription factor Atf1, a homolog of the vertebrate-activating transcription
factor-2 (ATF-2). Here we report that mammalian Sin1 plays an important role in
the SAPK signaling pathway by binding to both ATF-2 and p38. In response to
stress, ATF-2, a member of the ATF/cAMP response element-binding protein family, 
is phosphorylated by p38/Jun NH2-terminal protein kinase and activates the
transcription of apoptosis-related genes. In contrast, in response to serum
stimulation, ATF-2 is phosphorylated via the Ras effector pathway and leads to
the induction of growth-related genes. We found that Sin1 binds directly to both 
ATF-2 and p38. Sin1 over-expression enhanced osmotic stress-induced
phosphorylation of ATF-2 and ATF-2-mediated transcription, whereas knockdown of
Sin1 expression by siRNA suppressed these responses. Moreover, a reduction in
Sin1 expression suppressed osmotic stress-induced apoptosis and the expression of
Gadd45beta, one of the ATF-2 target genes that is correlated with apoptosis.
Decreased Sin1 expression, however, did not affect the serum stimulation-induced 
phosphorylation of ATF-2. Sin1 may contribute to ATF-2 signaling specificity by
acting as a nuclear scaffold.

PMID: 17054722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. EMBO J. 2006 Oct 18;25(20):4843-53. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

Epigenetic determination of a cell-specific gene expression program by ATF-2 and 
the histone variant macroH2A.

Agelopoulos M(1), Thanos D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Biomedical Sciences Research
Center 'Al. Fleming', Vari, Athens, Greece.

Transcriptional activation of the interleukin-8 (IL-8) gene is restricted to
distinct cell types, although the transcriptional regulatory proteins controlling
IL-8 gene expression are ubiquitous. We show that cell-specific transcription of 
IL-8 is due to the distinct chromatin architecture on the enhancer/promoter
before the arrival of the inducing signal. In expressing epithelial cells the
enhancer/promoter is nucleosome-free, whereas in non-expressing B cells a
nucleosome masks the entire regulatory region. The B-cell-specific nucleosome
contains the histone variant macroH2A, which is responsible for preventing
transcription factor binding. Recruitment of the repressive macroH2A nucleosome
requires direct interactions between ATF-2 bound to the nearby AP1 site and
macroH2A and it is regulated by DNA-induced protein allostery. siRNA against
ATF-2 or macroH2A rescues IL-8 transcription in B cells. Thus, a transcription
factor can work as a transcriptional repressor by orchestrating and maintaining
the assembly of specialized local chromatin architectures.

PMCID: PMC1618095
PMID: 17036053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Apr 1;100(5):1217-31.

Differential regulation of cyclooxygenase-2 and inducible nitric oxide synthase
by 4-hydroxynonenal in human osteoarthritic chondrocytes through ATF-2/CREB-1
transactivation and concomitant inhibition of NF-kappaB signaling cascade.

Vaillancourt F(1), Morquette B, Shi Q, Fahmi H, Lavigne P, Di Battista JA,
Fernandes JC, Benderdour M.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Research Laboratory, Sacre-Coeur Hospital, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

4-hydroxynonenal (HNE), a lipid peroxidation end product, is produced abundantly 
in osteoarthritic (OA) articular tissues and was recently identified as a potent 
catabolic factor in OA cartilage. In this study, we provide additional evidence
that HNE acts as an inflammatory mediator by elucidating the signaling cascades
targeted in OA chondrocytes leading to cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) gene expression. HNE induced COX-2 protein and mRNA 
levels with accompanying increases in prostaglandin E2 (PGE(2)) production. In
contrast, HNE had no effect on basal iNOS expression or nitric oxide (NO)
release. However, HNE strongly inhibited IL-1beta-induced iNOS or NO production. 
Transient transfection experiments revealed that the ATF/CRE site (-58/-53) is
essential for HNE-induced COX-2 promoter activation and indeed HNE induced ATF-2 
and CREB-1 phosphorylation as well as ATF/CRE binding activity. Overexpression of
p38 MAPK enhanced the HNE-induced ATF/CRE luciferase reporter plasmid activation,
COX-2 synthesis and promoter activity. HNE abrogated IL-1beta-induced iNOS
expression and promoter activity mainly through NF-kappaB site (-5,817/-5,808)
possibly via suppression of IKKalpha-induced IkappaBalpha phosphorylation and
NF-kappaB/p65 nuclear translocation. Upon examination of upstream signaling
components, we found that IKKalpha was inactivated through HNE/IKKalpha adduct
formation. Taken together, these findings illustrate the central role played by
HNE in the regulation of COX-2 and iNOS in OA. The aldehyde induced selectively
COX-2 expression via ATF/CRE activation and inhibited iNOS via IKKalpha
inactivation.

c 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17031850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Infect Immun. 2006 Dec;74(12):6571-80. Epub 2006 Oct 9.

Clustering of Helicobacter pylori VacA in lipid rafts, mediated by its receptor, 
receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatase beta, is required for intoxication in 
AZ-521 Cells.

Nakayama M(1), Hisatsune J, Yamasaki E, Nishi Y, Wada A, Kurazono H, Sap J,
Yahiro K, Moss J, Hirayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki
University, Nagasaki 8528523, Japan.

Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin, VacA, induces multiple effects on
epithelial cells through different cellular events: one involves pore formation, 
leading to vacuolation, mitochondrial damage, and apoptosis, and the second
involves cell signaling, resulting in stimulation of proinflammatory responses
and cell detachment. Our recent data demonstrated that VacA uses receptor-like
protein tyrosine phosphatase beta (RPTPbeta) as a receptor, of which five
residues (QTTQP) at positions 747 to 751 are involved in binding. In AZ-521
cells, which mainly express RPTPbeta, VacA, after binding to RPTPbeta in
non-lipid raft microdomains on the cell surface, is localized with RPTPbeta in
lipid rafts in a temperature- and VacA concentration-dependent process.
Methyl-beta-cyclodextrin (MCD) did not block binding to RPTPbeta but inhibited
translocation of VacA with RPTPbeta to lipid rafts and all subsequent events. On 
the other hand, 5-nitro-2-(3-phenylpropylamino)-benzoic acid (NPPB), which
disrupts anion channels, did not inhibit translocation of VacA to lipid rafts or 
VacA-induced activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase, but
inhibited VacA internalization followed by vacuolation. Thus, p38 MAP kinase
activation did not appear to be required for internalization. In contrast,
phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC) inhibited translocation,
as well as p38 MAP kinase/ATF-2 activation, internalization, and VacA-induced
vacuolation. Neither NPPB nor PI-PLC affected VacA binding to cells and to its
receptor, RPTPbeta. Thus, receptor-dependent translocation of VacA to lipid rafts
is critical for signaling pathways leading to p38 MAP kinase/ATF-2 activation and
vacuolation.

PMCID: PMC1698068
PMID: 17030583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 17;281(46):34955-64. Epub 2006 Sep 29.

A novel mechanism of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 activation by
interleukin-1 in primary human astrocytes.

Wilczynska KM(1), Gopalan SM, Bugno M, Kasza A, Konik BS, Bryan L, Wright S,
Griswold-Prenner I, Kordula T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Commonwealth University School of
Medicine, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA.

Reactive astrogliosis is the gliotic response to brain injury with activated
astrocytes and microglia being the major effector cells. These cells secrete
inflammatory cytokines, proteinases, and proteinase inhibitors that influence
extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. In astrocytes, the expression of tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 (TIMP-1) is up-regulated by interleukin-1
(IL-1), which is a major neuroinflammatory cytokine. We report that IL-1
activates TIMP-1 expression via both the IKK/NF-kappaB and MEK3/6/p38/ATF-2
pathways in astrocytes. The activation of the TIMP-1 gene can be blocked by using
pharmacological inhibitors, including BAY11-7082 and SB202190, overexpression of 
the dominant-negative inhibitor of NF-kappaB (IkappaBalphaSR), or by the
knock-down of p65 subunit of NF-kappaB. Binding of activated NF-kappaB (p50/p65
heterodimer) and ATF-2 (homodimer) to two novel regulatory elements located -2.7 
and -2.2 kb upstream of the TIMP-1 transcription start site, respectively, is
required for full IL-1-responsiveness. Mutational analysis of these regulatory
elements and their weak activity when linked to the minimal tk promoter suggest
that cooperative binding is required to activate transcription. In contrast to
astrocytes, we observed that TIMP-1 is expressed at lower levels in gliomas and
is not regulated by IL-1. We provide evidence that the lack of TIMP-1 activation 
in gliomas results from either dysfunctional IKK/NF-kappaB or MEK3/6/p38/ATF-2
activation by IL-1. In summary, we propose a novel mechanism of TIMP-1
regulation, which ensures an increased supply of the inhibitor after brain
injury, and limits ECM degradation. This mechanism does not function in gliomas, 
and may in part explain the increased invasiveness of glioma cells.

PMID: 17012236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 10;281(45):33871-80. Epub 2006 Sep 6.

Epstein-Barr virus induces cellular transcription factors to allow active
expression of EBER genes by RNA polymerase III.

Felton-Edkins ZA(1), Kondrashov A, Karali D, Fairley JA, Dawson CW, Arrand JR,
Young LS, White RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Division of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Davidson Building, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ,
United Kingdom.

The EBER genes of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) are transcribed by RNA polymerase
(pol) III to produce untranslated RNAs that are implicated in oncogenesis. These 
EBER transcripts are the most highly expressed viral gene products in
EBV-transformed cells. We have identified changes to the cellular transcription
machinery that may contribute to the high levels of EBER RNA. These include
phosphorylation of ATF2, which interacts with EBER promoters. A second is
induction of TFIIIC, a pol III-specific factor that activates EBER genes; all
five subunits of TFIIIC are overexpressed in EBV-positive cells. In addition, EBV
induces BDP1, a subunit of the pol III-specific factor TFIIIB. Although BDP1 is
the only TFIIIB subunit induced by EBV, its induction is sufficient to stimulate 
EBER expression in vivo, implying a limiting function. The elevated levels of
BDP1 and TFIIIC in EBV-positive cells stimulate production of tRNA, 7SL, and 5S
rRNA. Abnormally high expression of these cellular pol III products may
contribute to the ability of EBV to enhance growth potential.

PMID: 16956891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Jan 1;100(1):242-55.

Interleukin-1beta and tetradecanoylphorbol acetate-induced biosynthesis of tumor 
necrosis factor alpha in human hepatoma cells involves the transcription factors 
ATF2 and c-Jun and stress-activated protein kinases.

Bauer I(1), Al Sarraj J, Vinson C, Larsen R, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, D-66421 Homburg, Germany.

The proinflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha is mainly produced
in cells from the monocyte/macrophage lineage. TNFalpha is also a key signaling
molecule in the liver functioning as an important physiological and pathogenic
mediator. In hepatocytes or human hepatoma cells TNFalpha is expressed at
extremely low levels but TNFalpha biosynthesis can be induced by interleukin
(IL)-1beta or 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Here, we show that
IL-1beta and TPA stimulated TNFalpha gene transcription in hepatoma cells
mediated by a composite TPA-responsive element/cAMP response element. Both
IL-1beta and TPA triggered phosphorylation and activation of the basic region
leucine zipper transcription factors c-Jun and ATF2 and expression of
dominant-negative mutants of c-Jun and ATF2-reduced TNFalpha promoter activity
and secretion of TNFalpha. Expression of the nuclear dual-specific MAP kinase
phosphatase-1 (MKP-1) blocked TNFalpha promoter activity and TNFalpha secretion
following IL-1beta or TPA stimulation, indicating that MKP-1 functions as a
nuclear shut-of-device of IL-1beta and TPA-induced TNFalpha expression.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16888805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Diabetes. 2006 Aug;55(8):2301-10.

Free fatty acids inhibit insulin signaling-stimulated endothelial nitric oxide
synthase activation through upregulating PTEN or inhibiting Akt kinase.

Wang XL(1), Zhang L, Youker K, Zhang MX, Wang J, LeMaire SA, Coselli JS, Shen YH.

Author information: 
(1)DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. xlwang@bcm.edu

In metabolic syndrome, a systemic deregulation of the insulin pathway leads to a 
combined deregulation of insulin-regulated metabolism and cardiovascular
functions. Free fatty acids (FFAs), which are increased in metabolic syndrome,
inhibit insulin signaling and induce metabolic insulin resistance. This study was
designed to examine FFAs' effects on vascular insulin signaling and endothelial
nitric oxide (NO) synthase (eNOS) activation in endothelial cells. We showed that
FFAs inhibited insulin signaling and eNOS activation through different
mechanisms. While linoleic acid inhibited Akt-mediated eNOS phosphorylation,
palmitic acid appeared to affect the upstream signaling. Upregulation of PTEN
(phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10) activity and
transcription by palmitic acid mediated the inhibitory effects on insulin
signaling. We further found that activated stress signaling p38, but not Jun
NH(2)-terminal kinase, was involved in PTEN upregulation. The p38 target
transcriptional factor activating transcription factor (ATF)-2 bound to the PTEN 
promoter, which was increased by palmitic acid treatment. In summary, both
palmitic acid and linoleic acid exert inhibitory effect on insulin signaling and 
eNOS activation in endothelial cells. Palmitic acid inhibits insulin signaling by
promoting PTEN activity and its transcription through p38 and its downstream
transcription factor ATF-2. Our findings suggest that FFA-mediated inhibition of 
vascular insulin signaling and eNOS activation may contribute to cardiovascular
diseases in metabolic syndrome.

PMID: 16873694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Yeast. 2006 Jul 15;23(9):641-59.

The effect of increased yeast alcohol acetyltransferase and esterase activity on 
the flavour profiles of wine and distillates.

Lilly M(1), Bauer FF, Lambrechts MG, Swiegers JH, Cozzolino D, Pretorius IS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Wine Biotechnology, Stellenbosch University, Private Bag X1,
Matieland, Stellenbosch 7600, South Africa.

The fruity odours of wine are largely derived from the synthesis of esters and
higher alcohols during yeast fermentation. The ATF1- and ATF2-encoded alcohol
acetyltransferases of S. cerevisiae are responsible for the synthesis of ethyl
acetate and isoamyl acetate esters, while the EHT1-encoded ethanol hexanoyl
transferase is responsible for synthesizing ethyl caproate. However, esters such 
as these might be degraded by the IAH1-encoded esterase. The objectives of this
study were: (a) to overexpress the genes encoding ester-synthesizing and
ester-degrading enzymes in wine yeast; (b) to prepare Colombard table wines and
base wines for distillation using these modified strains; and (c) to analyse and 
compare the ester concentrations and aroma profiles of these wines and
distillates. The overexpression of ATF1 significantly increased the
concentrations of ethyl acetate, isoamyl acetate, 2-phenylethyl acetate and ethyl
caproate, while the overexpression of ATF2 affected the concentrations of ethyl
acetate and isoamyl acetate to a lesser degree. The overexpression of IAH1
resulted in a significant decrease in ethyl acetate, isoamyl acetate, hexyl
acetate and 2-phenylethyl acetate. The overexpression of EHT1 resulted in a
marked increase in ethyl caproate, ethyl caprylate and ethyl caprate. The flavour
profile of the wines and distillates prepared using the modified strains were
also significantly altered as indicated by formal sensory analysis. This study
offers prospects for the development of wine yeast starter strains with optimized
ester-producing capability that could assist winemakers in their effort to
consistently produce wine and distillates such as brandy to definable flavour
specifications and styles.

PMID: 16845703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Apoptosis. 2006 Sep;11(9):1583-93.

Postconditioning attenuates cardiomyocyte apoptosis via inhibition of JNK and p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways.

Sun HY(1), Wang NP, Halkos M, Kerendi F, Kin H, Guyton RA, Vinten-Johansen J,
Zhao ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiothoracic Research Laboratory, Carlyle Fraser Heart Center, Emory
Crawford Long Hospital, Emory University, 550 Peachtree St., NE, Atlanta, Georgia
30308-2225, USA.

A sequence of intermittent interruptions of oxygen supply (i.e.,
postconditioning, Postcon) at reoxygenation reduces oxidant-induced cardiomyocyte
loss. This study tested the hypothesis that prevention of cardiomyocyte apoptosis
by Postcon is mediated by mitogen-activated protein kinases pathways. Primary
cultured neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were exposed to 3 h hypoxia followed by 6 h 
of reoxygenation. Cardiomyocytes were postconditioned by three cycles each of 5
min reoxygenation and 5 min hypoxia after prolonged hypoxia. Relative to hypoxia 
alone, reoxygenation stimulated expression of JNKs and p38 kinases, corresponding
to increased activity of JNKs (phospho-c-Jun) and p38 (phospho-ATF2). The level
of TNFalpha in cell lysates, activity of cytosolic caspases-8, -3, expression of 
Bax and the number of apoptotic cardiomyocytes were increased while expression of
Bcl-2 was decreased with reoxygenation. Consistent with an attenuation in
generation of superoxide anions detected by lucigenin-enhanced chemiluminescence 
at early period of reoxygenation, treatment of cardiomyocytes with Postcon
further reduced expression and activity of JNKs and p38 kinases, level of
TNFalpha, the frequency of apoptotic cells and expression of Bax. However, the
inhibitory effects of Postcon on these changes were lost when its application was
delayed by 5 min after the start of reoxygenation. Addition of a JNK/p38
stimulator, anisomycin into cardiomyocytes at the beginning of reoxygenation
eliminated protection by Postcon. These data suggest that 1)
hypoxia/reoxygenation elicits cardiomyocyte apoptosis in conjunction with
expression and activation of JNK and p38 kinases, release of TNFalpha, activation
of caspases, and an increase in imbalance of pro-/anti-apoptotic proteins; 2)
Postcon attenuates cardiomyocyte apoptosis, potentially mediated by inhibiting
JNKs/p-38 signaling pathways and reducing TNFalpha release and caspase
expression.

PMID: 16820962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Mol Microbiol. 2006 Aug;61(3):704-22. Epub 2006 Jun 27.

Pdr1 regulates multidrug resistance in Candida glabrata: gene disruption and
genome-wide expression studies.

Vermitsky JP(1), Earhart KD, Smith WL, Homayouni R, Edlind TD, Rogers PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Drexel University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Candida glabrata emerged in the last decade as a common cause of mucosal and
invasive fungal infection, in large part due to its intrinsic or acquired
resistance to azole antifungals such as fluconazole. In C. glabrata clinical
isolates, the predominant mechanism behind azole resistance is upregulated
expression of multidrug transporter genes CDR1 and PDH1. We previously reported
that azole-resistant mutants (MIC >or= 64 microg ml(-1)) of strain 66032 (MIC =
16 microg ml(-1)) similarly show coordinate CDR1-PDH1 upregulation, and in one of
these (F15) a putative gain-of-function mutation was identified in the single
homologue of Saccharomyces cerevisiae transcription factors Pdr1-Pdr3. Here we
show that disruption of C. glabrata PDR1 conferred equivalent fluconazole
hypersensitivity (MIC = 2 microg ml(-1)) to both F15 and 66032 and eliminated
both constitutive and fluconazole-induced CDR1-PDH1 expression. Reintroduction of
wild-type or F15 PDR1 fully reversed these effects; together these results
demonstrate a role for this gene in both acquired and intrinsic azole resistance.
CDR1 disruption had a partial effect, reducing fluconazole trailing in both
strains while restoring wild-type susceptibility (MIC = 16 microg ml(-1)) to F15.
In an azole-resistant clinical isolate, PDR1 disruption reduced azole MICs eight-
to 64-fold with no effect on sensitivity to other antifungals. To extend this
analysis, C. glabrata microarrays were generated and used to analyse genome-wide 
expression in F15 relative to its parent. Homologues of 10 S. cerevisiae genes
previously shown to be Pdr1-Pdr3 targets were upregulated (YOR1, RTA1, RSB1,
RPN4, YLR346c and YMR102c along with CDR1, PDH1 and PDR1 itself) or downregulated
(PDR12); roles for these genes include small molecule transport and
transcriptional regulation. However, expression of 99 additional genes was
specifically altered in C. glabrata F15; their roles include transport (e.g.
QDR2, YBT1), lipid metabolism (ATF2, ARE1), cell stress (HSP12, CTA1), DNA repair
(YIM1, MEC3) and cell wall function (MKC7, MNT3). These azole
resistance-associated changes could affect C. glabrata tissue-specific virulence;
in support of this, we detected differences in F15 oxidant, alcohol and weak acid
sensitivities. C. glabrata provides a promising model for studying the genetic
basis of multidrug resistance and its impact on virulence.

PMID: 16803598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2006 May;26(5):553-7.

[Cell-penetrating peptide-based functional study of p38 MAPK].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang LP(1), Liu ZF, Li YM, Li ZJ, Jiang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Functional Proteomics, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.

OBJECTIVE: To construct a p38 MAPK protein delivery system based on TAT protein
and study its functions in eukaryotic cells.
METHODS: Recombinant vectors pHis-TAT-p38 and pHis-TAT-p38(AF) were constructed, 
and two recombinant proteins, His-TAT-p38 and His-TAT-p38(AF), were expressed and
purified in E. coli. The two fusion proteins were then incubated with ECV304
cells, respectively. The phosphorylation of ATF2 was detected to assay the effect
of His-TAT-p38 on endogeneious p38 activity after the cells were stimulated by
sorbitol.
RESULTS: The results of restriction enzyme digestion and DNA sequencing showed
that the two recombinant vectors were correctly constructed. The recombinant
proteins of His-TAT-p38 and His-TAT-p38(AF) were isolated and purified by
SDS-PAGE, and Western blotting suggested that His-TAT-p38 and its mutant with
dual phosphorylation sites could enter the cells efficiently in a time- and
concentration-dependent manner. His-TAT-p38 was found capable of increasing the
activity of endogenous p38 in ECV304 cells, but His-TAT-p38(AF) inhibited the
phosphorylation of ATF2 so as to block the transduction of p38 signal pathway
when the cells were stimulated with sorbitol.
CONCLUSION: p38 MAPK protein delivery system based on TAT protein has been
constructed successfully. It is confirmed that TAT can transfer the proteins into
the cells in a time- and dose-depended manner. TAT-p38 and its dominant negative 
form possess high biological activity after transduction into ECV304 cells by TAT
protein delivery system, and the former can increase the activity of endogenous
ATF2, but the latter inhibits the transduction of endogeneious p38 signal pathway
in ECV304 cells with high osmotic stress.

PMID: 16762846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. EMBO J. 2006 Jun 7;25(11):2443-52. Epub 2006 May 25.

Inhibition of IFN-gamma transcription by site-specific methylation during T
helper cell development.

Jones B(1), Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Polarization of naïve CD4 T cells into T helper type 2 (TH2) cells is
characterized by expression of IL-4 and silencing of IFN-gamma. Here we show that
during TH2 polarization, the DNA methyltransferase Dnmt3a is recruited to the
IFN-gamma promoter and correspondingly the promoter undergoes progressive de novo
methylation. Notably, the CpG located at the -53 position becomes methylated
rapidly and this methylation inhibits ATF2/c-Jun and CREB transcription factor
binding in vitro. In vivo, the same factors bind to the unmethylated IFN-gamma
promoter in T helper type 1 (TH1) cells but not the methylated IFN-gamma promoter
in TH2 cells. Furthermore, methylation at the -53 CpG alone is sufficient to
inhibit the IFN-gamma promoter-driven reporter gene expression in a TH1 cell
line. These findings suggest that rapid methylation of the evolutionarily
conserved -53 CpG by Dnmt3a may suppress IFN-gamma transcription in developing
TH2 cells by directly inhibiting transcription factor binding.

PMCID: PMC1478170
PMID: 16724115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 28;281(30):20738-48. Epub 2006 May 19.

Differential expression of peptidoglycan recognition protein 2 in the skin and
liver requires different transcription factors.

Li X(1), Wang S, Wang H, Gupta D.

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University School of Medicine-Northwest, Gary, 46408, USA.

Human peptidoglycan recognition protein 2 (PGLYRP2) is an
N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidase that hydrolyzes bacterial peptidoglycan and is
differentially expressed in the two major organs in the human body, liver and
skin. PGLYRP2 has a high constitutive expression in the liver but is not
expressed in healthy human skin. PGLYRP2 mRNA is also not expressed in cultured
human keratinocytes but is highly induced upon exposure to bacteria. In this
study we identified the transcription start site for pglyrp2 and demonstrated
that the differential expression of PGLYRP2 in hepatocytes and keratinocytes is
regulated by different transcription factors whose binding sequences are located 
in different regions of the pglyrp2 promoter. Induction of pglyrp2 in
keratinocytes is regulated by sequences in the distal region of the promoter and 
requires transcription factors NF-kappaB and Sp1, whereas constitutive expression
of pglyrp2 in a hepatocyte cell line is regulated by sequences in the proximal
region of the promoter and requires transcription factors c-Jun and ATF2.
Regulation of constitutive and inducible expression of pglyrp2 is important for
systemic and local innate immune responses to bacterial infections.

PMID: 16714290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Virol. 2006 May;80(10):5021-31.

Human rhinovirus attenuates the type I interferon response by disrupting
activation of interferon regulatory factor 3.

Peng T(1), Kotla S, Bumgarner RE, Gustin KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School Of Medicine, University of Washington,
Moscow, Idaho 83844-3052, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2006 Jul;80(13):6722.

Retraction in
    Peng T, Kotla S, Bumgarner RE, Gustin KE. J Virol. 2007 Jun;81(11):6161.

The type I interferon (IFN) response requires the coordinated activation of the
latent transcription factors NF-kappaB, interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3),
and ATF-2, which in turn activate transcription from the IFN-beta promoter.
Synthesis and subsequent secretion of IFN-beta activate the Jak/STAT signaling
pathway, resulting in the transcriptional induction of the full spectrum of
antiviral gene products. We utilized high-density microarrays to examine the
transcriptional response to rhinovirus type 14 (RV14) infection in HeLa cells,
with particular emphasis on the type I interferon response and production of
IFN-beta. We found that, although RV14 infection results in altered levels of a
wide variety of host mRNAs, induction of IFN-beta mRNA or activation of the
Jak/STAT pathway is not seen. Prior work has shown, and our results have
confirmed, that NF-kappaB and ATF-2 are activated following infection. Since many
viruses are known to target IRF-3 to inhibit the induction of IFN-beta mRNA, we
analyzed the status of IRF-3 in infected cells. IRF-3 was translocated to the
nucleus and phosphorylated in RV14-infected cells. Despite this apparent
activation, very little homodimerization of IRF-3 was evident following
infection. Similar results in A549 lung alveolar epithelial cells demonstrated
the biological relevance of these findings to RV14 pathogenesis. In addition,
prior infection of cells with RV14 prevented the induction of IFN-beta mRNA
following treatment with double-stranded RNA, indicating that RV14 encodes an
activity that specifically inhibits this innate host defense pathway.
Collectively, these results indicate that RV14 infection inhibits the host type I
interferon response by interfering with IRF-3 activation.

PMCID: PMC1472094
PMID: 16641293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 15;66(8):4402-9.

The requirement for and changing composition of the activating protein-1
transcription factor during differentiation of human leukemia HL60 cells induced 
by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3.

Wang X(1), Studzinski GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Medicine and
Dentistry New Jersey-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey 07103, USA.

The activating protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factor complex is a heterogeneous
entity, composed in mammalian cells of dimers chosen from a group of at least
eight proteins belonging to three families: jun, fos, and activating
transcription factor (ATF). The AP-1 complexes participate in diverse biological 
processes that include cell proliferation, survival, and differentiation. These
seemingly contrasting functions have been attributed to the intensity and
duration of the signals provided by AP-1, but the biological consequences of
changing composition of the AP-1 complex have not been fully explored. Here, we
show that functional AP-1 is required for 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
(1,25D)-induced monocytic differentiation, and that the composition of the AP-1
protein complex that binds TRE, its cognate DNA element, changes as cells
differentiate. In HL60 cells in an early stage of differentiation, the principal 
AP-1 components detected by gel shift analysis include c-jun, ATF-2, fos-B,
fra-1, and fra-2. In cells with a more established monocytic phenotype, the
demonstrable AP-1 components are c-jun, ATF-2, jun-B, and fos-B. Following the
addition of 1 nmol/L of 1,25D, the cellular content of each of these four
proteins markedly increased in a sustained manner, whereas the increases in
c-fos, fra-1, fra-2, and jun-D were minimal, if any. Small increases in mRNA
levels encoding all AP-1 component proteins, except c-fos, were also noted. These
findings provide a basis for the previously found participation of the c-Jun
N-terminal kinase pathway in 1,25D-induced differentiation of myeloid leukemia
cells, and direct attention to jun-B and fos-B as new cellular therapeutic
targets, that may promote replicative quiescence associated with differentiation 
of malignant cells.

PMCID: PMC2820233
PMID: 16618766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Aug;20(8):1786-95. Epub 2006 Apr 6.

The role of c-Jun N-terminal kinase, p38, and extracellular signal-regulated
kinase in insulin-induced Thr69 and Thr71 phosphorylation of activating
transcription factor 2.

Baan B(1), van Dam H, van der Zon GC, Maassen JA, Ouwens DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Section Signal Transduction and Ageing, 
Leiden University Medical Centre, The Netherlands.

The stimulation of cells with physiological concentrations of insulin induces a
variety of responses, e.g. an increase in glucose uptake, induction of glycogen
and protein synthesis, and gene expression. One of the determinants regulating
insulin-mediated gene expression may be activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2).
Insulin activates ATF2 by phosphorylation of Thr69 and Thr71 via a two-step
mechanism, in which ATF2-Thr71 phosphorylation precedes the induction of
ATF2-Thr69+71 phosphorylation by several minutes. We previously found that in
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)-/- fibroblasts, cooperation of the ERK1/2 and p38
pathways is required for two-step ATF2-Thr69+71 phosphorylation in response to
growth factors. Because JNK is also capable of phosphorylating ATF2, we assessed 
the involvement of JNK, ERK1/2 and p38 in the insulin-induced two-step ATF2
phosphorylation in JNK-expressing A14 fibroblasts and 3T3L1-adipocytes. The
induction of ATF2-Thr71 phosphorylation was sensitive to MAPK kinase (MEK)
1/2-inhibition with U0126, and this phosphorylation coincided with nuclear
translocation of phosphorylated ERK1/2. Use of the JNK inhibitor SP600125 or
expression of dominant-negative JNK-activator SAPK kinase (SEK1) prevented the
induction of ATF2-Thr69+71, but not ATF2-Thr71 phosphorylation by insulin.
ATF2-dependent transcription was also sensitive to SP-treatment. Abrogation of
p38 activation with SB203580 or expression of dominant-negative MKK6 had no
inhibitory effect on these events. In agreement with this, the onset of
ATF2-Thr69+71 phosphorylation coincided with the nuclear translocation of
phosphorylated JNK. Finally, in vitro kinase assays using nuclear extracts
indicated that ERK1/2 preceded JNK translocation. We conclude that sequential
activation and nuclear appearance of ERK1/2 and JNK, rather than p38, underlies
the two-step insulin-induced ATF2 phosphorylation in JNK-expressing cells.

PMID: 16601071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Thyroid. 2006 Mar;16(3):217-24.

Selective pharmacologic inhibition of c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase radiosensitizes
thyroid anaplastic cancer cell lines via induction of terminal growth arrest.

Bulgin D(1), Podtcheko A, Takakura S, Mitsutake N, Namba H, Saenko V, Ohtsuru A, 
Rogounovitch T, Palona I, Yamashita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki
852-8523, Japan.

CONTEXT: The high radioresistance of anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) and cultured
ATC cells stipulates for the means of increasing their radiosensitivity. It has
been shown that c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) activation is one of the
manifestations of radiation response in ATC cells.
OBJECTIVE: Assessment of the effect of selective JNK inhibition on ATC cell
radiosensitivity and clarification of the associated mechanisms.
RESULTS: The JNK inhibitor markedly suppressed ATC cell growth in a reversible
cytostatic manner. The combination treatment with JNK inhibitor plus ionizing
radiation induced a significant decrease in clonogenic survival of irradiated
cells as compared with either singular treatment. The effect was not due to
apoptosis of exposed cells but to a profound senescence-like terminal growth
arrest occurring irrespectively of cells' p53 mutational status. Postradiational 
DNA damage repair was also significantly compromised in the presence of SP600125.
CONCLUSIONS: JNK signaling is an essential component of ATC cell proliferation
and survival after radiation therapy. Hence, pharmacological interference with
JNK pathway in combination with radiotherapy may be a promising treatment of ATC.

PMID: 16571083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 12;281(19):13169-79. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

Interacting JNK-docking sites in MKK7 promote binding and activation of JNK
mitogen-activated protein kinases.

Ho DT(1), Bardwell AJ, Grewal S, Iverson C, Bardwell L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, California 92697-2300, USA.

D-sites are a class of MAPK-docking sites that have been found in many MAPK
regulators and substrates. A single functional, high affinity D-site has been
identified near the N terminus of each of the MAPK kinases (MKKs or MEKs) MEK1,
MEK2, MKK3, MKK4, and MKK6. Here we demonstrated that MKK7 recognizes its target 
JNK by a novel mechanism involving a partially cooperative interaction of three
low affinity D-sites in the N-terminal domain of MKK7. Mutations of the conserved
residues within any one of the three docking sites (D1, D2, and D3) disrupted the
ability of the N-terminal domain of MKK7beta to bind JNK1 by about 50-70%.
Moreover, mutation of any two of the three D-sites reduced binding by about
80-90%, and mutation of all three reduced binding by 95%. Full-length MKK7
containing combined D1/D2 mutations was compromised for binding to JNK1 and
exhibited reduced JNK1 kinase activity when compared with wild-type MKK7. Peptide
versions of the D-sites from MKK4 or the JIP-1 scaffold protein inhibited
MKK7-JNK binding, suggesting that all three JNK regulators bind to the same
region of JNK. Moreover, peptide versions of any of the three D-sites of MKK7
inhibited the ability of JNK1 and JNK2 to phosphorylate their transcription
factor substrates c-Jun and ATF2, suggesting that D-site-containing substrates
also compete with MKK7 for docking to JNK. Finally, MKK7-derived D-site peptides 
exhibited selective inhibition of JNK1 versus ERK2. We conclude that MKK7
contains three JNK-docking sites that interact to selectively bind JNK and
contribute to JNK signal transmission and specificity.

PMCID: PMC3017509
PMID: 16533805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cell Signal. 2006 Oct;18(10):1801-12.

Involvement of JNKs and p38-MAPK/MSK1 pathways in H2O2-induced upregulation of
heme oxygenase-1 mRNA in H9c2 cells.

Aggeli IK(1), Gaitanaki C, Beis I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Human Physiology, School of Biology, Faculty of
Sciences, University of Athens, Panepistimioupolis Ilissia, 157 84 Athens,
Greece.

One of the most important challenges that cardiomyocytes experience is an
increase in the levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), i.e., during ischemia,
reperfusion as well as in the failing myocardium. HOX-1 has been found to protect
cells and tissues against oxidative damage; therefore, we decided to study the
signalling cascades involved in its transcriptional regulation. HOX-1 mRNA levels
were found to be maximally induced after 6h of treatment with 200 microM H2O2 and
remained elevated for at least 24h. Inhibition of JNKs, p38-MAPK and MSK1
pathways, by pharmacological inhibitors, reduced HOX-1 mRNA levels in
H2O2-treated H9c2 cells. In parallel, we observed that all three subfamilies of
the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) attained their maximal
phosphorylation levels at 5-15 min of H2O2 treatment, with mitogen- and
stress-activated-protein kinase 1 (MSK1) also being maximally phosphorylated at
15 min. H2O2-induced MSK1 phosphorylation was completely abrogated in the
presence of the selective p38-MAPK inhibitor SB203580. In an effort to define
possible substrates of MSK1, we found that ATF2 as well as cJun phosphorylation
were equally induced after 30 min and 60 min, respectively, a response inhibited 
by SP600125 (JNKs inhibitor) and H89 (MSK1 inhibitor), indicating the involvement
of these kinases in the observed response. This finding was further substantiated
with the detection of a potential signalling complex composed of either p-MSK1
and p-cJun or p-MSK1 and p-ATF2 (co-immunoprecipitation). ATF2 and cJun are known
AP1 components. Given the presence of an AP-1 site in HOX-1 promoter region, the 
activity of AP1 transcription factor was examined. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays performed showed a maximal upregulation of AP1 binding activity after 60
min of H2O2 treatment, which was significantly inhibited by SP600125 and H89. Our
results show for the first time the potential role of JNKs, p38-MAPK and MSK1 in 
the mechanism of transducing the oxidative stress-signal to HOX-1, possibly
promoting cell survival and preserving homeostasis.

PMID: 16531007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. EMBO J. 2006 Mar 8;25(5):1058-69. Epub 2006 Mar 2.

Mutual regulation of c-Jun and ATF2 by transcriptional activation and subcellular
localization.

Liu H(1), Deng X, Shyu YJ, Li JJ, Taparowsky EJ, Hu CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 2006 Jun 21;25(12):2952.

ATF2 and c-Jun are key components of activating protein-1 and function as
homodimers or heterodimers. c-Jun-ATF2 heterodimers activate the expression of
many target genes, including c-jun, in response to a variety of cellular and
environmental signals. Although it has been believed that c-Jun and ATF2 are
constitutively localized in the nucleus, where they are phosphorylated and
activated by mitogen-activated protein kinases, the molecular mechanisms
underlying the regulation of their transcriptional activities remain to be
defined. Here we show that ATF2 possesses a nuclear export signal in its leucine 
zipper region and two nuclear localization signals in its basic region, resulting
in continuous shuttling between the cytoplasm and the nucleus. Dimerization with 
c-Jun in the nucleus prevents the export of ATF2 and is essential for the
transcriptional activation of the c-jun promoter. Importantly, c-Jun-dependent
nuclear localization of ATF2 occurs during retinoic acid-induced differentiation 
and UV-induced cell death in F9 cells. Together, these findings demonstrate that 
ATF2 and c-Jun mutually regulate each other by altering the dynamics of
subcellular localization and by positively impacting transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC1409714
PMID: 16511568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Genome Biol. 2006;7(2):R10. Epub 2006 Feb 17.

Alternate transcription of the Toll-like receptor signaling cascade.

Wells CA(1), Chalk AM, Forrest A, Taylor D, Waddell N, Schroder K, Himes SR,
Faulkner G, Lo S, Kasukawa T, Kawaji H, Kai C, Kawai J, Katayama S, Carninci P,
Hayashizaki Y, Hume DA, Grimmond SM.

Author information: 
(1)Eskitis Institute for Cell and Molecular Therapies, School of Biological and
Biomedical Sciences, Griffith University, Brisbane 4111, Australia.
c.wells@griffith.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Alternate splicing of key signaling molecules in the Toll-like
receptor (Tlr) cascade has been shown to dramatically alter the signaling
capacity of inflammatory cells, but it is not known how common this mechanism is.
We provide transcriptional evidence of widespread alternate splicing in the
Toll-like receptor signaling pathway, derived from a systematic analysis of the
FANTOM3 mouse data set. Functional annotation of variant proteins was assessed in
light of inflammatory signaling in mouse primary macrophages, and the expression 
of each variant transcript was assessed by splicing arrays.
RESULTS: A total of 256 variant transcripts were identified, including novel
variants of Tlr4, Ticam1, Tollip, Rac1, Irak1, 2 and 4, Mapk14/p38, Atf2 and
Stat1. The expression of variant transcripts was assessed using custom-designed
splicing arrays. We functionally tested the expression of Tlr4 transcripts under 
a range of cytokine conditions via northern and quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction. The effects of variant Mapk14/p38 protein expression on
macrophage survival were demonstrated.
CONCLUSION: Members of the Toll-like receptor signaling pathway are highly
alternatively spliced, producing a large number of novel proteins with the
potential to functionally alter inflammatory outcomes. These variants are
expressed in primary mouse macrophages in response to inflammatory mediators such
as interferon-gamma and lipopolysaccharide. Our data suggest a surprisingly
common role for variant proteins in diversification/repression of inflammatory
signaling.

PMCID: PMC1431733
PMID: 16507160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Virol. 2006 Mar;80(6):3062-70.

Identification and characterization of the Orf49 protein of Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus.

González CM(1), Wong EL, Bowser BS, Hong GK, Kenney S, Damania B.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, CB#7295, University of North
Carolina--Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is the etiological agent of
Kaposi's sarcoma, primary effusion lymphoma, and multicentric Castleman's
disease. Kaposi's sarcoma is the most common neoplasm among human
immunodeficiency virus-positive individuals. Like other herpesviruses, KSHV is
able to establish a predominantly latent, life-long infection in its host. The
KSHV lytic cycle can be triggered by a number of stimuli that induce the
expression of the key lytic switch protein, the replication and transcription
activator (RTA) encoded by Orf50. The expression of Rta is necessary and
sufficient to trigger the full lytic program resulting in the ordered expression 
of viral proteins, release of viral progeny, and host cell death. We have
characterized an unknown open reading frame, Orf49, which lies adjacent and in
the opposite orientation to Orf50. Orf49 is expressed during the KSHV lytic cycle
and shows early transcription kinetics. We have mapped the 5' and 3' ends of the 
unspliced Orf49 transcript, which encodes a 30-kDa protein that is localized to
both the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Interestingly, we found that Orf49 was able
to cooperate with Rta to activate several KSHV lytic promoters containing AP-1
sites. The Orf49-encoded protein was also able to induce transcriptional
activation through c-Jun but not the ATF1, ATF2, or CREB transcription factor. We
found that Orf49 could induce phosphorylation and activation of the transcription
factor c-Jun, the Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and p38. Our data suggest that
Orf49 functions to activate the JNK and p38 pathways during the KSHV lytic cycle.

PMCID: PMC1395456
PMID: 16501115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006 May;26(5):1036-42. Epub 2006 Feb 23.

Competitive binding of CREB and ATF2 to cAMP/ATF responsive element regulates
eNOS gene expression in endothelial cells.

Niwano K(1), Arai M, Koitabashi N, Hara S, Watanabe A, Sekiguchi K, Tanaka T, Iso
T, Kurabayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Biological Science, Gunma University Graduate
School of Medicine, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Expression of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) is a critical
determinant for vascular homeostasis. We examined the effects of Beraprost sodium
(BPS), a stable analogue of prostacyclin, on the eNOS gene expression in the
presence of inflammatory cytokine interleukin (IL)-1beta in cultured endothelial 
cells.
METHOD AND RESULTS: Exposure of human and bovine endothelial cells to IL-1beta
decreased eNOS expression. Western blot analysis using phospho-specific
antibodies showed that IL-1beta stimulated p38 MAP kinase and phosphorylated
ATF2. BPS inhibited these effects via protein kinase A (PKA)/cAMP-responsive
element binding protein (CREB) activation. Transfection assays using
site-specific mutation constructs showed that CRE/ATF elements located at -733
and -603 within the human eNOS promoter are necessary for full IL-1beta
responsiveness. BPS attenuated the IL-1beta-mediated decrease in eNOS promoter
activity and the expression of eNOS gene through PKA pathway. Electrophoretic gel
mobility shift assays showed that IL-1beta increased the binding of
phosphorylated ATF2 to CRE/ATF. On treatment with BPS, phosphorylated CREB
predominantly bound to CRE/ATF.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that IL-1beta and BPS antagonistically
regulates the eNOS expression through the activation of p38 and PKA,
respectively. Furthermore, the ability to bind both CREB and ATF2 implicates the 
CRE/ATF sequence as a potential target for multiple signaling pathways in the
regulation of the eNOS gene transcription.

PMID: 16497991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Exp Neurol. 2006 Jul;200(1):26-37. Epub 2006 Feb 23.

Astrocyte-derived transgene GDNF promotes complete and long-term survival of
adult facial motoneurons following avulsion and differentially regulates the
expression of transcription factors of AP-1 and ATF/CREB families.

Parsadanian A(1), Pan Y, Li W, Myckatyn TM, Brakefield D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Hope Center for Neurological Disorders, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
parsadaniana@neuro.wustl.edu

Glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is a potent survival factor
for motoneurons (MNs). We have previously demonstrated that overexpression of
GDNF in astrocytes of GFAP-GDNF mice promotes long-term survival of neonatal MNs 
after facial nerve axotomy. In the present study, we investigated whether
astrocyte-derived GDNF could also have a neuroprotective effect on adult MNs
following facial nerve avulsion. We also examined avulsion- and GDNF-induced
changes in the expression pattern of several members of the AP-1 and ATF/CREB
families of transcription factors, which are involved in the fate determination
of neurons following injury. We demonstrated that GDNF promotes complete rescue
of avulsed MNs for at least 4 months post-injury. Transgene GDNF significantly
upregulates c-Jun expression in naive MNs, further upregulates injury-induced
c-Jun expression in facial MNs, and results in its activation in most surviving
MNs. No significant changes were found in c-Fos expression. We found that GDNF
has an opposing effect on ATF2 and ATF3 expression. It dramatically downregulates
increased levels of ATF3 in response to injury, whereas the expression of ATF2,
which is normally reduced after injury, is completely preserved in GFAP-GDNF
mice. Our data suggest that maintenance of high levels of ATF2 in injured MNs
could be crucial in modulating c-Jun function, and c-Jun/ATF2 signaling could be 
involved in GDNF-mediated survival of mature MNs.

PMID: 16497298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Br J Pharmacol. 2006 Apr;147(8):951-8.

Cholecystokinin 1 receptor modulates the MEKK1-induced c-Jun trans-activation:
structural requirements of the receptor.

Ibarz G(1), Oiry C, Carnazzi E, Crespy P, Escrieut C, Fourmy D, Galleyrand JC,
Gagne D, Martinez J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire des Aminoacides, Peptides et Protéines (LAPP), CNRS UMR 5810, UMI 
et UMII, UFR Pharmacie, 15, avenue Charles Flahault, 34093 Montpellier Cedex 5,
France.

In cells overexpressing active MEKK1 to enhance c-Jun trans-activation,
expression of rat cholecystokinin 1 receptor increased the activity of c-Jun
while in the same experimental conditions overexpression of mouse cholecystokinin
1 receptor repressed it. This differential trans-activation is specific, since it
was not observed for either the other overexpressed kinases (MEK, PKA) or for
other transcription factors (ATF2, ELK-1, CREB). This differential behaviour was 
also detected in a human colon adenocarcinoma cell-line naturally producing high 
levels of endogenous MEKK1. This differential behaviour between the two receptors
on the MEKK1-induced c-Jun trans-activation was independent of the activation
state of JNK, of the phosphorylation level of c-Jun and of its ability to bind
its specific DNA responsive elements. Two amino acids (Val43 and Phe50 in the
mouse cholecystokinin 1 receptor, replaced by Leu43 and Ileu50 in the rat
cholecystokinin 1 receptor) localized in the first transmembrane domain were
found to play a crucial role in this differential behaviour. MEKK1 probably
activates a transcriptional partner of c-Jun whose activity is maintained or
increased in the presence of the rat cholecystokinin 1 receptor but repressed in 
the presence of the mouse cholecystokinin 1 receptor.

PMCID: PMC1760718
PMID: 16491099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 Feb 14;34(3):e27.

Affinity selection of DNA-binding protein complexes using mRNA display.

Tateyama S(1), Horisawa K, Takashima H, Miyamoto-Sato E, Doi N, Yanagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Informatics, Faculty of Science and Technology, 
Keio University, 3-14-1, Hiyoshi, Kohoku-ku, Yokohama 223-8522, Japan.

Comprehensive analysis of DNA-protein interactions is important for mapping
transcriptional regulatory networks on a genome-wide level. Here we present a new
application of mRNA display for in vitro selection of DNA-binding protein
heterodimeric complexes. Under improved selection conditions using a
TPA-responsive element (TRE) as a bait DNA, known interactors c-fos and c-jun
were simultaneously enriched about 100-fold from a model library (a 1:1:20 000
mixture of c-fos, c-jun and gst genes) after one round of selection. Furthermore,
almost all kinds of the AP-1 family genes including c-jun, c-fos, junD, junB,
atf2 and b-atf were successfully selected from an mRNA display library
constructed from a mouse brain poly A(+) RNA after six rounds of selection. These
results indicate that the mRNA display selection system can identify a variety of
DNA-binding protein complexes in a single experiment. Since almost all
transcription factors form heterooligomeric complexes to bind with their target
DNA, this method should be most useful to search for DNA-binding transcription
factor complexes.

PMCID: PMC1369289
PMID: 16478713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 14;281(15):10188-95. Epub 2006 Feb 1.

Prolonged activation of cAMP-response element-binding protein and ATF-2 needed
for nicotine-triggered elevation of tyrosine hydroxylase gene transcription in
PC12 cells.

Gueorguiev VD(1), Cheng SY, Sabban EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.

Phosphorylation (P-) of cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) by protein
kinase A or mitogen-activated protein kinases was implicated in mediating the
increased tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) gene expression after prolonged exposure to
nicotine in vivo and in cell culture. We examined the time course and signaling
pathways for phosphorylation of CREB and possible involvement of ATF-2. Treatment
of PC12 cells with 200 microm nicotine triggered rapid but transient elevation of
P-CREB followed by a second sustained rise after 2-5 h of continuous nicotine. In
contrast, ERK1/2 was only phosphorylated with short term nicotine exposure. MEK
inhibitor U0126 abolished nicotine-induced rise in P-ERK1/2, but not P-CREB, nor 
did it inhibit nicotine-evoked elevation in TH promoter activity, indicating that
ERK1/2 was not needed for induction of TH gene expression by nicotine. In
contrast, protein kinase A inhibitor H-89 or Ca(2+)/calmodulin-activated protein 
kinase inhibitor KN-93 reduced the nicotine-triggered rise in P-CREB and TH
promoter activity. There was a delayed elevation of P-ATF-2 after 1 h of nicotine
treatment, accompanied by increased ATF-2 protein. Upstream kinase JNK, but not
p38, was phosphorylated especially after 5 min to 2 h of nicotine exposure. To
examine the requirement for CREB and ATF-2, cells were transfected with dominant 
negative forms of ATF-2 or CREB. Both reduced the basal TH promoter activity and 
the response to nicotine. Knockdown of ATF-2 or CREB with siRNA did not alter
basal TH promoter activity or mRNA but greatly attenuated the response to
nicotine. The results suggest that both ATF-2 and CREB mediate activation of TH
gene transcription by nicotine.

PMID: 16452470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006 May;40(5):605-18. Epub 2006 Jan 19.

Caspase-3 mediated cleavage of MEKK1 promotes p53 transcriptional activity.

Zebrowski DC(1), Alcendor RR, Kirshenbaum LA, Sadoshima J.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Cell Biology and Molecular
Medicine, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, New Jersey Medical 
School, Newark, 07103, USA.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006 May;40(5):593-6.

Myocardial ischemia/reperfusion (IR) induces myocyte apoptosis, and the
pro-apoptotic/tumor suppressor protein p53 may contribute to this process.
However, the signaling mechanism by which IR induces p53 activation remains
largely unknown. Here, we show that MEKK1 undergoes proteolytic cleavage in a
caspase-3 dependent manner in both in vivo and in vitro models of ischemic
injury. Overexpression studies both in vivo and in vitro indicated that the
caspase-3 mediated cleavage of MEKK1 promotes phosphorylation and transcriptional
activity of p53. In addition, caspase-3 inhibited the ability of the wild-type
full-length form of MEKK1 to activate ATF2, suggesting that caspase-3, by way of 
proteolytic cleavage, abrogates the ability of MEKK1 to signal JNK. We propose
that IR induces caspase-3 mediated proteolytic cleavage of MEKK1 and promotes p53
transcriptional activity via JNK-independent mechanisms, which in turn may
contribute to pathological insults associated with IR injury, such as myocyte
apoptosis.

PMID: 16427076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 24;281(12):7727-36. Epub 2006 Jan 17.

Up-regulation of PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome ten) 
mediates p38 MAPK stress signal-induced inhibition of insulin signaling. A
cross-talk between stress signaling and insulin signaling in resistin-treated
human endothelial cells.

Shen YH(1), Zhang L, Gan Y, Wang X, Wang J, LeMaire SA, Coselli JS, Wang XL.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Adult Cardiac Surgery, Texas Heart Institute at St. Luke's
Episcopal Hospital, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. hyshen@bcm.tmc.edu

The key feature of metabolic syndrome, a cluster of metabolic and cardiovascular 
disorders, is systemic insulin resistance, which is associated with dysregulated 
endothelial nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS). Stress signaling induced by
inflammation can inhibit insulin signaling. However, molecular mechanisms for the
cross-talk between stress signaling and insulin resistance are only partially
understood. Resistin, an adipokine/cytokine, is involved in inflammatory
processes that could lead to insulin resistance status and vascular diseases. In 
the current study, we observed that resistin inhibited insulin signaling and eNOS
activation in endothelial cells. Up-regulation of PTEN (phosphatase and tensin
homolog deleted on chromosome ten) expression by resistin may mediate the
inhibitory effects. Activated stress signaling p38 MAPK, but not JNK, is involved
in PTEN up-regulation. We further found that p38 target transcriptional factor
activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) bound to ATF sites in the PTEN
promoter. The phosphorylation/activation of ATF-2 and its binding to PTEN
promoter were increased by resistin treatment. In summary, up-regulation of PTEN 
is involved in the inhibitory effects of resistin on insulin signaling and eNOS
activation in endothelial cells. Resistin induces PTEN expression by activating
stress signaling p38 pathway, which may activate target transcription factor
ATF-2, which in turn induces PTEN expression. Our findings suggest that
resistin-mediated inhibition of insulin signaling and eNOS activation may
contribute to cardiovascular diseases.

PMID: 16418168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. FEBS Lett. 2006 Jan 23;580(2):585-91. Epub 2005 Dec 29.

Cyclin D1 activation through ATF-2 in Reg-induced pancreatic beta-cell
regeneration.

Takasawa S(1), Ikeda T, Akiyama T, Nata K, Nakagawa K, Shervani NJ, Noguchi N,
Murakami-Kawaguchi S, Yamauchi A, Takahashi I, Tomioka-Kumagai T, Okamoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Regenerating gene product (Reg) is induced in pancreatic beta-cells and acts as
an autocrine/paracrine growth factor for regeneration via a cell surface Reg
receptor. However, the manner by which Reg induces beta-cell regeneration was
unknown. In the present study, we found that Reg increased phospho-ATF-2, which
binds to -57 to -52 of the cyclin D1 gene to activate the promoter. The
Reg/ATF-2-induced cyclin D1 promoter activation was attenuated by PI(3)K
inhibitors such as LY294002 and wortmannin. In Reg knockout mouse islets, the
levels of phospho-ATF-2, cyclin D1, and phospho-Rb were greatly decreased. These 
results indicate that the Reg-Reg receptor system stimulates the
PI(3)K/ATF-2/cyclin D1 signaling pathway to induce beta-cell regeneration.

PMID: 16405968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005 Nov;1058:162-85.

"Promoter array" studies identify cohorts of genes directly regulated by
methylation, copy number change, or transcription factor binding in human cancer 
cells.

Wang Y(1), Hayakawa J, Long F, Yu Q, Cho AH, Rondeau G, Welsh J, Mittal S, De
Belle I, Adamson E, McClelland M, Mercola D.

Author information: 
(1)Stanley Kimmel Cancer Center, San Diego California 92121, USA.

DNA microarrays of promoter sequences have been developed in order to identify
the profile of genes bound and activated by DNA regulatory proteins such as the
transcription factors c-Jun and ATF2 as well as DNA-modifying methylases. The
arrays contain 3083 unique human promoter sequences from +500 to -1000 nts from
the transcription start site. Cisplatin-induced DNA damage rapidly leads to
specific activation of the Jun kinase pathway leading to increased
phosphorylation of c-Jun and ATF2-DNA complexes at hundreds of sites within 3
hours. Using three statistical criteria, approximately 269 most commonly
phosphorylated c-Jun/ATF2-DNA complexes were identified and representative cases 
were verified by qPCR measurement of ChIP-captured DNA. Expression was correlated
at the mRNA and protein levels. The largest functional cohort was 24 genes of
known DNA repair function, most of which exhibited increased protein expression
indicated coordinate gene regulation. In addition, cell lines of prostate cancer 
exhibit stable methylation or copy number changes that reflect the alterations of
the corresponding primary tumors. 504 (18.5%) promoters showed differential
hybridization between immortalized control prostate epithelial and cancer cell
lines. Among candidate hypermethylated genes in cancer-derived lines, eight had
previously been observed in prostate cancer, and 13 were previously determined
methylation targets in other cancers. The vast majority of genes that appear to
be both differentially methylated and differentially regulated between prostate
epithelial and cancer cell lines are novel methylation targets, including PAK6,
RAD50, TLX3, PIR51, MAP2K5, INSR, FBN1, GG2-1, representing a rich new source of 
candidate genes to study the role of DNA methylation in prostate tumors. Earlier 
studies using prototype promoter arrays examine approximately 7% of the proximal 
regulatory sequences while the current gene regulatory events surveyed here occur
on a large scale and may rapidly effect the coordinated expression of a large
number of genes.

PMID: 16394135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Immunol. 2006 Jan 15;176(2):999-1006.

Pertussis toxin B-oligomer suppresses IL-6 induced HIV-1 and chemokine expression
in chronically infected U1 cells via inhibition of activator protein 1.

Rizzi C(1), Crippa MP, Jeeninga RE, Berkhout B, Blasi F, Poli G, Alfano M.

Author information: 
(1)AIDS Immunopathogenesis Unit, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

Pertussis toxin B-oligomer (PTX-B) inhibits HIV replication in T lymphocytes and 
monocyte-derived macrophages by interfering with multiple steps of the HIV life
cycle. PTX-B prevents CCR5-dependent (R5) virus entry in a noncompetitive manner,
and it also exerts suppressive effects on both R5- and CXCR4-dependent HIV
expression at a less-characterized postentry level. We demonstrate in this study 
that PTX-B profoundly inhibits HIV expression in chronically infected
promonocytic U1 cells stimulated with several cytokines and, particularly, the
IL-6-mediated effect, a cytokine that triggers viral production in these cells
independently of NF-kappaB activation. From U1 cells we have subcloned a cell
line, named U1-CR1, with increased responsiveness to IL-6. In these cells, PTX-B 
neither down-regulated the IL-6R nor prevented IL-6 induced signaling in terms of
STAT3 phosphorylation and DNA binding. In contrast, PTX-B inhibited AP-1 binding 
to target DNA and modified its composition with a proportional increases in FosB,
Fra2, and ATF2. PTX-B inhibited IL-6-induced HIV-1 long-terminal repeat-driven
transcription from A, C, E, and F viral subtypes, which contain functional AP-1
binding sites, but failed to inhibit transcription from subtypes B and D LTR
devoid of these sites. In addition, PTX-B inhibited the secretion of
IL-6-induced, AP-1-dependent genes, including urokinase-type plasminogen
activator, CXCL8/IL-8, and CCL2/monocyte chemotactic protein-1. Thus, PTX-B
suppression of IL-6 induced expression of HIV and cellular genes in chronically
infected promonocytic cells is strongly correlated to inhibition of AP-1.

PMID: 16393986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 3;281(9):5445-52. Epub 2005 Dec 22.

CREB-AP1 protein complexes regulate transcription of the collagen XXIV gene
(Col24a1) in osteoblasts.

Matsuo N(1), Tanaka S, Gordon MK, Koch M, Yoshioka H, Ramirez F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Organogenesis, Research Division of the Hospital
for Special Surgery, and Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical
College, Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Collagen XXIV is a newly discovered and poorly characterized member of the
fibril-forming family of collagen molecules, which displays unique structural
features of invertebrate fibrillar collagens and is expressed predominantly in
bone tissue. Here we report the characterization of the proximal promoter of the 
mouse gene (Col24a1) and its regulation in osteoblastic cells. Using well
characterized murine models of osteoblast differentiation, we found that the
Col24a1 gene is activated sometime before onset of the late differentiation
marker osteocalcin. Additional analyses revealed that Col24a1 produces equal
amounts of two alternatively spliced products with different 5'-untranslated
sequences that originate from distinct transcriptional start sites. Cell
transfection experiments in combination with DNA binding assays demonstrated that
Col24a1 promoter activity in ROS17/2.8 osteosarcoma cells is under the control of
an upstream cis-acting element, which is shared by both transcripts and is
recognized by specific combinations of c-Jun, CREB1, ATF1, and ATF2 dimers.
Consistent with these results, overexpression of c-Jun, ATF1, ATF2, or CREB1 in
transiently transfected osteoblastic cells stimulated transcription from reporter
gene constructs driven by the Col24a1 promoter to different degrees. Moreover,
chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments showed that these nuclear factors bind 
the same upstream sequence of the endogenous Col24a1 gene. Collectively these
data provide new information about transcriptional control of collagen
fibrillogenesis, in addition to implicating for the first time CREB-AP1 protein
complexes in the regulation of collagen gene expression in osteoblasts.

PMID: 16373341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Pathol. 2006 Feb;208(3):401-7.

The p38 transduction pathway in prostatic neoplasia.

Ricote M(1), García-Tuñón I, Bethencourt F, Fraile B, Onsurbe P, Paniagua R,
Royuela M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, University of Alcalá, Alcalá de
Henares, Madrid, Spain.

It has been proposed that, among other cellular responses, TNF-alpha induces not 
only cell death, but also cell proliferation by activation of p38. It has also
been reported that IL-1-alpha favours cell proliferation by p38 activation. The
aim of the present study was to evaluate upstream (alpha-PAK, MEK-6) and
downstream (Elk-1 and ATF-2) components of the p38 transduction pathway in normal
prostate, benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), and prostate carcinoma (PC).
Immunohistochemical and western blot analyses were performed in 20 samples of
normal prostate, 47 samples of BPH, and 27 samples of PC. In all normal
prostates, immunoreactivity for p-Elk-1 and p-ATF-2 was observed in epithelial
cell nuclei, but no expression of alpha-PAK or MEK-6. In BPH, there was
expression of alpha-PAK (cytoplasm) and MEK-6 (cytoplasm), while the proportions 
of lesions that were immunoreactive for p-Elk-1 (nucleus and cytoplasm) and
p-ATF-2 (nucleus) decreased. In PC, the percentages of cells that were
immunoreactive for alpha-PAK (cytoplasm) or MEK-6 (cytoplasm) rose slightly in
comparison with BPH, while the percentages of cells that were immunoreactive for 
p-Elk-1 (nucleus and cytoplasm) or p-ATF-2 (nucleus and cytoplasm) were much
higher than in BPH. It is concluded that overexpression of alpha-PAK, MEK-6, p38,
p-Elk-1, and p-ATF-2 in BPH, and more intensely in PC, enhances cell
proliferation. In BPH, such proliferation is triggered by IL-1 and in part
counteracted by the TNF-alpha/AP-1 pathway, which promotes apoptosis. In PC,
proliferation is triggered by IL-1 and TNF-alpha (the TNF-alpha/AP-1 pathway is
diverted towards p38 activation). Since in a study of the same patients
immunoexpression of IL-1alpha and IL-1RI was previously observed to be increased 
in PC, inhibition of p38 is a possible target for PC treatment, as this
inhibition would both decrease IL-1-induced cell proliferation and increase
TNF-alpha-induced cell death.

PMID: 16369914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Alzheimers Dis. 2005 Dec;8(3):227-41.

Using proteomics and network analysis to elucidate the consequences of synaptic
protein oxidation in a PS1 + AbetaPP mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Soreghan BA(1), Lu BW, Thomas SN, Duff K, Rakhmatulin EA, Nikolskaya T, Chen T,
Yang AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Increasing evidence suggests that oxidative injury is involved in the
pathogenesis of many age-related neurodegenerative disorders, including
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Identifying the protein targets of oxidative stress is 
critical to determine which proteins may be responsible for the neuronal
impairments and subsequent cell death that occurs in AD. In this study, we have
applied a high-throughput shotgun proteomic approach to identify the targets of
protein carbonylation in both aged and PS1 + AbetaPP transgenic mice. However,
because of the inherent difficulties associated with proteomic database searching
algorithms, several newly developed bioinformatic tools were implemented to
ascertain a probability-based discernment between correct protein assignments and
false identifications to improve the accuracy of protein identification.
Assigning a probability to each identified peptide/protein allows one to
objectively monitor the expression and relative abundance of particular proteins 
from diverse samples, including tissue from transgenic mice of mixed genetic
backgrounds. This robust bioinformatic approach also permits the comparison of
proteomic data generated by different laboratories since it is instrument- and
database-independent. Applying these statistical models to our initial studies,
we detected a total of 117 oxidatively modified (carbonylated) proteins, 59 of
which were specifically associated with PS1 + AbetaPP mice. Pathways and network 
component analyses suggest that there are three major protein networks that could
be potentially altered in PS1 + AbetaPP mice as a result of oxidative
modifications. These pathways are 1) iNOS-integrin signaling pathway, 2) CRE/CBP 
transcription regulation and 3) rab-lyst vesicular trafficking. We believe the
results of these studies will help establish an initial AD database of
oxidatively modified proteins and provide a foundation for the design of future
hypothesis driven research in the areas of aging and neurodegeneration.

PMID: 16340081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006 Jan;40(1):131-7. Epub 2005 Nov 28.

iPLA2 inhibitor blocks negative inotropic effect of HIV gp120 on cardiac
myocytes.

Kan H(1), Xie Z, Finkel MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, WVU Cardiology, West Virginia University School of
Medicine, Robert C. Byrd Health Sciences Center, Medical Center Drive,
Morgantown, WV 26506-9157, USA.

Recent improvements in survival from AIDS have been accompanied by an increased
recognition of the potential importance of other manifestations of HIV infection,
including cardiomyopathy. Mechanisms responsible for HIV cardiomyopathy are
unknown, but may include direct effects of HIV proteins on the heart. We
previously provided support for direct effects of HIV proteins by demonstrating a
negative inotropic effect of the HIV coat protein, gp120, on isolated adult rat
ventricular myocytes (ARVM). We now report that this negative inotropic effect of
HIV gp120 is mediated by a signaling pathway involving p38 MAP kinase, iPLA2 and 
troponin I. Exposure of ARVM to HIV gp120 resulted in maximal activation of iPLA2
by 60 min as reflected in hydrolysis of arachidonyl thiophosphatidylcholine that 
was completely blocked by the iPLA2 inhibitor, bromoenol lactone (BEL) or the p38
MAP kinase inhibitor, SB203580. The negative inotropic effect of gp120 was
blocked by BEL, as well as SB203580. BEL did not block gp120 stimulated
phosphorylation of p38 MAP kinase itself, and/or its downstream effectors, ATF2
or MAPKAP2. However, BEL did block gp120-stimulated phosphorylation of troponin
I. Thus, the negative inotropic effect of HIV gp120 requires activation of p38
MAP kinase and iPLA2; as well as troponin I phosphorylation. Activation of this
novel p38 MAP kinase-iPLA2-troponin I signaling pathway may contribute to HIV
cardiomyopathy.

PMID: 16316660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 3;281(5):2585-97. Epub 2005 Nov 21.

A novel role of sodium butyrate in the regulation of cancer-associated aromatase 
promoters I.3 and II by disrupting a transcriptional complex in breast adipose
fibroblasts.

Deb S(1), Zhou J, Amin SA, Imir AG, Yilmaz MB, Lin Z, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois 60611, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 7;281(14):9832. Jianfeng, Zhou [corrected to Zhou,
Jianfeng]; Gonca, Imir Ayse [corrected to Imir, Ayse Gonca]; Bertan, Yilmaz
Mehmet [corrected to Yilmaz, Mehmet Bertan]; Zihong, Lin [corrected to Lin,
Zhihong].

The aromatase gene encodes the key enzyme for estrogen formation. Aromatase
enzyme inhibitors eliminate total body estrogen production and are highly
effective therapeutics for postmenopausal breast cancer. A distal promoter (I.4) 
regulates low levels of aromatase expression in tumor-free breast adipose tissue.
Two proximal promoters (I.3/II) strikingly induce in vivo aromatase expression in
breast fibroblasts surrounding malignant cells. Treatment of breast fibroblasts
with medium conditioned with malignant breast epithelial cells (MCM) or a
surrogate hormonal mixture (dibutyryl (Bt2)cAMP plus phorbol diacetate (PDA))
induces promoters I.3/II. The mechanism of promoter-selective expression,
however, is not clear. Here we reported that sodium butyrate profoundly decreased
MCM- or Bt2cAMP + PDA-induced promoter I.3/II-specific aromatase mRNA. MCM,
Bt2cAMP + PDA, or sodium butyrate regulated aromatase mRNA or activity only via
promoters I.3/II but not promoters I.1 or I.4 in breast, ovarian, placental, and 
hepatic cells. Mechanistically, recruitment of phosphorylated ATF-2 by a CRE
(-211/-199, promoter I.3/II) conferred inductions by MCM or Bt2cAMP + PDA.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation-PCR and immunoprecipitation-immunoblotting assays
indicated that MCM or Bt2cAMP + PDA stabilized a complex composed of
phosphorylated ATF-2, C/EBPbeta, and cAMP-response element-binding protein
(CREB)-binding protein in the common regulatory region of promoters I.3/II.
Overall, histone acetylation patterns of promoters I.3/II did not correlate with 
sodium butyrate-dependent silencing of promoters I.3/II. Sodium butyrate,
however, consistently disrupted the activating complex composed of phosphorylated
ATF-2, C/EBPbeta, and CREB-binding protein. This was mediated, in part, by
decreased ATF-2 phosphorylation. Together, these findings represent a novel
mechanism of sodium butyrate action and provide evidence that aromatase activity 
can be ablated in a signaling pathway- and cell-specific fashion.

PMID: 16303757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Apr;207(1):123-31.

Platelet-derived growth factor-BB-induced hypertrophy of peritubular smooth
muscle cells is mediated by activation of p38 MAP-kinase and of Rho-kinase.

Romano F(1), Chiarenza C, Palombi F, Filippini A, Padula F, Ziparo E, De Cesaris 
P.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur, Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Department of Histology and
Medical Embryology, La Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Peritubular smooth muscle cells (PSMC) from rat testis in primary serum-free
cultures unexpectedly undergo contraction and subsequent cell hypertrophy in
response to the growth factor PDGF-BB, remaining stationary. The present study
investigates the transduction pathways involved in the observed paradoxical
upregulation of the differentiated phenotype and induction of hypertrophy in
PSMC. PI3K, ERK, JNK, and p38 kinases, known to mediate PDGF-BB signaling in the 
canonic dedifferentiative and proliferative response of smooth muscle cells (SMC)
were rapidly activated by PDGF-BB but only p38 remained activated after 2-day
stimulation. Immunofluorescence and immunoblotting experiments showed that in
4-day treatment: (i) continuous inhibition of PI3K, of ERK, of JNK, failed to
inhibit either cell enlargement and formation of prominent alpha-SM actin
containing stress fibers or the typical increase in alpha-SM actin; (ii) when
stimulated in the presence of the p38 inhibitor SB203580 both responses were
significantly inhibited and cytofluorimetric analysis of cell size showed a
remarkable reduction of the hypertrophic response. PDGF-BB was also found to
activate the small GTPase RhoA and inhibition of Rho-dependent kinase ROCK by
Y27632 counteracted the effects of PDGF-BB similarly to SB203580. Both the
transcription factor ATF2 and the nucleosomal kinase MSK1, downstream targets of 
p38, were activated by PDGF-BB, but p38 inhibitor SB203580 inhibited only the
phosphorylation of MSK1 which appeared unaffected by ROCK inhibitor Y27632. In
concluding, p38 and the Rho-ROCK system were found to play prominent, probably
independent roles in the upregulation of PSMC differentiated phenotype and
induction of hypertrophy by PDGF-BB.

PMID: 16270352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Blood. 2006 Feb 1;107(3):1024-30. Epub 2005 Oct 13.

Arrested natural killer cell development associated with transgene insertion into
the Atf2 locus.

Kim S(1), Song YJ, Higuchi DA, Kang HP, Pratt JR, Yang L, Hong CM,
Poursine-Laurent J, Iizuka K, French AR, Sunwoo JB, Ishii S, Reimold AM, Yokoyama
WM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the Rheumatology Division, Department of
Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Natural killer (NK) cell development in the bone marrow is not fully understood. 
Following lineage commitment, these cells appear to advance through a series of
developmental stages that are beginning to be characterized. We previously
reported a selective deficiency of NK cells in a C57BL/6 mouse with a transgenic 
construct consisting of the cDNA for the Ly49A major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class 1-specific inhibitory receptor driven by the granzyme A gene. This
mouse has few NK cells in peripheral tissues with relative preservation of other 
immune cells, including T and B cells. Herein we demonstrate that these mice have
an accumulation of NK cells with an immature phenotype in the bone marrow,
consistent with a block at a previously proposed stage in normal NK-cell
development. The phenotype is associated with transgenic insertion into Atf2, the
gene for the basic leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factor family member
ATF-2. Although analysis of Atf2-null NK cells shows no defect, the transgenic
mice express abnormal truncated Atf2 transcripts that may mediate a repressor
effect because ATF2 can heterodimerize with other bZIP molecules. The defect is
cell intrinsic, suggesting that certain bZIP molecules play significant roles in 
NK-cell development.

PMCID: PMC1458371
PMID: 16223777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Apoptosis. 2005 Dec;10(6):1383-93.

Inhibition of TRAIL-induced apoptosis by IL-8 is mediated by the p38-MAPK pathway
in OVCAR3 cells.

Abdollahi T(1), Robertson NM, Abdollahi A, Litwack G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Jefferson Medical
College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19106, USA.
tabdolahi@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: TRAIL (TNF-Related Apoptosis Inducing Ligand) is a member of the
TNF superfamily of cell death inducing ligands. Interestingly, while malignant
cells are responsive to TRAIL-induced cell death when used alone or in
combination with other agents, normal cells do not appear to be sensitive to this
ligand, making it a desirable therapeutic compound against many cancers,
including many ovarian carcinomas. Interleukin-8 (IL-8), a member of the C-X-C
chemokine family, has been found to be at significantly higher level in the
ascites from patients with ovarian cancer. We have previously demonstrated a role
for IL-8 in blocking TRAIL's ability to induce apoptosis in the ovarian cancer
cell line, OVCAR3, possibly by repressing the DR4 TRAIL receptor expression and
blocking caspase-8 cleavage. In addition, we showed a member of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) superfamily, p38gamma, is among the genes
regulated in OVCAR3 cells by TRAIL and IL-8. The present study further
investigates involvement of the p38 MAPK pathway in IL-8's ability to block
TRAIL-induced apoptosis in the ovarian surface epithelial cancer cell line,
OVCAR3.
RESULTS: In this study we demonstrate that p38gamma as well as p38alpha play a
significant role in IL-8's ability to block TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Through
array analysis, as well as confirmation with other methods, we detected
regulation of p38gamma and p38alpha following treatment of the cancer cell line
with IL-8 or TRAIL. We also tested two other isoforms of p38 MAPK, p38beta and
p38delta, but did not find significant regulation by IL-8 or TRAIL. We also
examined activation of the p38 MAPK pathway, up-stream as well as down-stream,
and noticed activation of the pathway following treatment with TRAIL and
decreased activity when IL-8 was introduced. With the use of specific inhibitors,
we were able to further confirm the role of this pathway in TRAIL-induced
apoptosis, and IL-8's ability to block this apoptosis, in ovarian cancer cell
lines.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these results further solidify the role of IL-8 in
blocking the TRAIL-induced apoptosis in these ovarian carcinoma cells and provide
new molecular insight into this potentially important therapeutic target.

PMID: 16215677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Neurotoxicology. 2006 Mar;27(2):158-63. Epub 2005 Sep 26.

Ginkgo biloba extract regulates differentially the cell death induced by hydrogen
peroxide and simvastatin.

Altiok N(1), Ersoz M, Karpuz V, Koyuturk M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Kadir Has University Faculty of Medicine, Vefa Bey
Sokak No. 5, 80810 Gayrettepe, Istanbul, Turkey. naltiok@superonline.com

Several human diseases have been associated with the overproduction of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and subsequently various antioxidants emerged as potential
therapeutic agents that scavenge ROS. As an oxidative stress model of human
disease, we used hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) to study effect of ROS on C6 glioma
cells as a surrogate for astrocytes. H2O2 induced dose- and time-dependent
apoptotic cell death which was preceded by growth arrest, and transiently
activated the signalling proteins ATF-2, ERK1/2 and AKT in C6 glioma cells. While
several antioxidants failed to block H2O2-induced apoptosis of these cells,
Ginkgo biloba extract (EGb) totally prevented the cell death and growth
inhibition induced by H2O2. Interestingly, EGb did not prevent the activation of 
ATF-2, ERK1/2 and AKT induced by H2O2 excluding the role of these factors in the 
pro-apoptotic effect of H2O2. We have previously shown that the lipid-lowering
drug, simvastatin, causes apoptotic cell death in C6 glioma cells [Koyuturk M,
Ersoz M, Altiok N. Simvastatin induces proliferation inhibition and apoptosis in 
C6 glioma cells via c-jun N-terminal kinase. Neurosci Lett 2004;370(2-3):212-7]. 
However, in parallel experiments with H2O2, EGb was unable to prevent cell death 
induced by simvastatin suggesting the involvement of separate signalling pathways
between H2O2 and simvastatin. Thus, EGb and other plant flavonoids might have
potential as protective agents against apoptosis through scavenging ROS upon
cerebral or myocardial diseases associated with free radical generation.

PMID: 16185767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Dec 1;96(5):1003-20.

Regulation of GTP cyclohydrolase I gene transcription by basic region leucine
zipper transcription factors.

Al Sarraj J(1), Vinson C, Han J, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, Homburg, Germany.

Tetrahydrobiopterin is an essential cofactor for the phenylalanine, tyrosine and 
tryptophan hydroxylases, and the family of nitric oxide synthases. The initial
and rate-limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of tetrahydrobiopterin is GTP
cyclohydrolase I. The proximal promoter of the human GTP cyclohydrolase I gene
contains the sequence motif 5'-TGACGCGA-3', resembling a cAMP response element
(CRE). The objective of this study was to analyze the regulation of GTP
cyclohydrolase I gene transcription by basic region leucine zipper (bZIP)
transcription factors. A constitutively active mutant of the cAMP response
element binding (CREB) protein strongly stimulated GTP cyclohydrolase I promoter 
activity, indicating that the CRE in the context of the GTP cyclohydrolase I gene
is functional. Likewise, GTP cyclohydrolase I promoter/luciferase gene
transcription was stimulated following nuclear expression of the catalytic
subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase. Constitutively active mutants of
activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) and c-Jun additionally stimulated GTP
cyclohydrolase I promoter activity, but to a lesser extent than the
constitutively active CREB mutant. The fact that stress-activated protein kinases
target the GTP cyclohydrolase I gene was corroborated by expression experiments
involving p38 and MEKK1 protein kinases. We conclude that signaling pathways
involving either the cAMP-dependent protein kinase or stress-activated protein
kinases converge to the GTP cyclohydrolase I gene. Hence, enzymatic reactions
that require tetrahydrobiopterin as cofactor are therefore indirectly controlled 
by signaling cascades involving the signal-responsive transcription factors CREB,
c-Jun, and ATF2.

2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16149046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 28;280(43):36055-64. Epub 2005 Aug 29.

APP1 transcription is regulated by inositol-phosphorylceramide synthase
1-diacylglycerol pathway and is controlled by ATF2 transcription factor in
Cryptococcus neoformans.

Mare L(1), Iatta R, Montagna MT, Luberto C, Del Poeta M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Inositol-phosphorylceramide synthase 1 (Ipc1) is a fungal-specific enzyme that
regulates the level of two bioactive molecules, phytoceramide and diacylglycerol 
(DAG). In previous studies, we demonstrated that Ipc1 regulates the expression of
the antiphagocytic protein 1 (App1), a novel fungal factor involved in
pathogenicity of Cryptococcus neoformans. Here, we investigated the molecular
mechanism by which Ipc1 regulates App1. To this end, the APP1 promoter was fused 
to the firefly luciferase gene in the C. neofor-mans GAL7:IPC1 strain, in which
the Ipc1 expression can be modulated, and found that the luciferase activity was 
indeed regulated when Ipc1 was modulated. Next, using the luciferase reporter
assay in both C. neoformans wild-type and GAL7:IPC1 strains, we investigated the 
role of DAG and sphingolipids in the activation of the APP1 promoter and found
that treatment with 1,2-dioctanoylglycerol does increase APP1 transcription,
whereas treatment with phytosphingosine or ceramides does not. Two putative
consensus sequences were found in the APP1 promoter for ATF and AP-2
transcription factors. Mutagenesis analysis of these sequences revealed that they
play a key role in the regulation of APP1 transcription: ATF is an activator,
whereas AP-2 in a negative regulator. Finally, we identified a putative Atf2
transcription factor, which is required for APP1 transcription and under the
control of Ipc1-DAG pathway. These studies provide novel regulatory mechanisms of
the sphingolipid pathway involved in the regulation of gene transcription of C.
neoformans.

PMID: 16129666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2005 Oct;39(4):627-36.

TGF-beta1 induces cardiac hypertrophic responses via PKC-dependent ATF-2
activation.

Lim JY(1), Park SJ, Hwang HY, Park EJ, Nam JH, Kim J, Park SI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
National Institute of Health, 5 Nokbun-Dong, Eunpyung-Gu, Seoul 122-701, South
Korea.

Several reports have suggested that the TAK1-MKK3/6-p38MAPK signaling axis is
important for TGF-beta-related cardiac hypertrophy. Despite this, the effects of 
exogenous TGF-beta on cardiac hypertrophy and associated signaling mechanisms
have not been demonstrated directly. Moreover, the roles of the signaling
mechanisms involved in cardiac hypertrophy (TAK1 upstream and p38MAPK downstream)
remain unclear. In this study, we investigated the potential involvement of
protein kinase C and activating transcription factor-2 in TGF-beta1-induced
cardiac hypertrophic responses in cultured neonatal rat ventricular
cardiomyocytes. TGF-beta1 treatment resulted in upregulation of mRNA expression
or promoter activities of beta-myosin heavy chain, atrial natriuretic factor, and
brain natriuretic peptide, and increased myocyte protein content, cell size, and 
sarcomeric organization. These are all characteristic hallmarks of cardiac
hypertrophy. PKC was found to be involved throughout the signaling system, and it
was shown that it acts by mediating upstream TAK1 activation and leads to ATF-2
activation. PKC-dependent ATF-2 activation was shown to be involved in
TGF-beta1-induced cardiac hypertrophic responses. The PKC inhibitors, GO6976 and 
GF109203X, completely blocked TGF-beta1-induced TAK1 kinase activity and
subsequent downstream signaling pathways including ATF-2 phosphorylation, leading
to suppression of ATF-2 transcriptional activity. This inhibitory effect was
reflected in cardiac hypertrophic responses such as inhibitions of beta-MHC gene 
induction and ANF promoter activity. Our results suggest that PKC is involved in 
TGF-beta1-induced cardiac hypertrophic responses in our cell culture system and
that ATF-2 activation plays a role.

PMID: 16125722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 21;280(42):35272-80. Epub 2005 Aug 22.

Induction of the human oxidized base-specific DNA glycosylase NEIL1 by reactive
oxygen species.

Das A(1), Hazra TK, Boldogh I, Mitra S, Bhakat KK.

Author information: 
(1)Sealy Center for Molecular Science and Department of Human Biological
Chemistry and Genetics, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston 77555, USA.

NEIL1, a mammalian DNA glycosylase and ortholog of Escherichia coli Nei/Fpg, is
involved in the repair of oxidatively damaged bases in mammalian cells. Exposure 
of HCT116 human colon carcinoma cells to reactive oxygen species, generated by
glucose oxidase (GO), enhanced the levels of NEIL1 mRNA and polypeptide by
2-4-fold by 6 h after GO treatment. A similar oxidative stress-induced increase
in human NEIL1 (hNEIL1) promoter-dependent luciferase expression in HCT116 cells 
indicates that reactive oxygen species activates NEIL1 transcription. The
transcriptional start site of hNEIL1 was mapped, and the upstream promoter
sequence was characterized via luciferase reporter assay. Two identical
CRE/AP-1-binding sites were identified in the promoter that binds transcription
factors c-Jun and CREB/ATF2. This binding was significantly enhanced in extracts 
of cells treated with GO. Furthermore, a simultaneous increase in the level of
phosphorylated c-Jun suggests its involvement in up-regulating the NEIL1
promoter. Oxidative stress-induced activation of NEIL1 appears to be involved in 
the feedback regulation of cellular repair activity needed to handle an increase 
in the level of oxidative base damage.

PMID: 16118226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Cell Sci. 2005 Aug 1;118(Pt 15):3471-85.

Wounding activates p38 map kinase and activation transcription factor 3 in
leading keratinocytes.

Harper EG(1), Alvares SM, Carter WG.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview Avenue, Seattle, WA
98109, USA.

Quiescent epidermis anchors to laminin 5 in the basement membrane via integrin
alpha6beta4. Wounding elevates expression of laminin 5, generating leading
keratinocytes (LKs) that migrate via beta1 integrins. Laminin 5 was evaluated as 
a regulator of cell signaling, and mRNA and protein expression in LKs. An in
vitro wound model was developed based on suspension and re-adhesion of quiescent 
human keratinocytes (HKs). DNA microarrays identified multiple mRNAs elevated 1.5
hours after suspension and re-adhesion including activation transcription factor 
3 (ATF3). In vitro and in vivo, levels of ATF3 protein elevate in nuclei of LKs, 
but not in nuclei of the following cells, 2 hours after suspension or wounding
but decline by 12-18 hours post injury. Significantly, null defects in laminin 5 
or integrin beta4 that inhibit anchorage chronically elevate ATF3 in vivo. This
suggests that adhesion to laminin 5, but not other ligands, suppresses
activation. On suspension, ATF3 and other transcripts in the microarrays are
elevated by phosphorylated p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (P-p38), a stress
kinase that regulates mRNA and cell motility. Inhibition of P-p38 with SB203580
prevents phosphorylation of ATF2, a transcription factor for ATF3 in LKs.
Re-adhesion to laminin 5 via alpha6beta4 dephosphorylates P-p38 and suppresses
ATF3 protein relative to cells in suspension. Thus, wounding of quiescent HKs
disrupts laminin 5 adhesion to activate p38, generating mRNA transcripts that
define LKs. Adhesion to deposits of laminin 5 via alpha6beta4 suppresses P-p38
and activation mRNAs including ATF3. Defects in laminin 5 and alpha6beta4 sustain
P-p38 with probable pathological effects on transcription and migration.

PMID: 16079289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Oncol Res. 2005;15(3):113-28.

Activation of cyclin D1 by estradiol and spermine in MCF-7 breast cancer cells: a
mechanism involving the p38 MAP kinase and phosphorylation of ATF-2.

Lewis JS(1), Vijayanathan V, Thomas TJ, Pestell RG, Albanese C, Gallo MA, Thomas 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, New Jersey, NJ 08903,
USA.

Estradiol (E2) and the naturally occurring polyamines (putrescine, spermidine,
and spermine) play important roles in breast cancer cell growth and
differentiation. We examined the effects of E2 and spermine on the
phosphorylation and DNA binding of activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) in
MCF-7 breast cancer cells. ATF-2 is a transcription factor involved in estrogenic
regulation of cyclin D1 gene, and thereby cell cycle progression. DNA affinity
immunoblot assays showed a six- to eightfold increase in the binding of ATF-2 to 
a 74-mer ATF/CRE oligonucleotide (ODN1) from cyclin D1 promoter in the presence
of 4 nM E2 and 0.5 mM spermine, compared to untreated control. Individual
treatments with E2 or spermine caused a twofold or lower increase in ATF-2
binding to ODN1. Immunoblotting with phospho-ATF-2 antibody showed that increased
DNA binding of ATF-2 was associated with its phosphorylation. A p38 MAP kinase
inhibitor, PD169316, inhibited ATF-2 phosphorylation. In contrast, the MEK-ERK1/2
inhibitor, PD98059, or the JNK inhibitor, SP600125, had no significant effect on 
DNA binding of ATF-2. Cyclin D1 promoter (-1745CD1) activity increased by
approximately 12-fold (above control) in the presence of E2 and spermine,
compared to a sixfold increase in the presence of E2 alone and a twofold increase
with spermine. Cells transfected with a dominant negative mutant of ATF-2 showed 
decreased transactivation of cyclin D1 promoter in response to E2 and spermine.
These results indicate that spermine can enhance E2-induced cell signaling and
cyclin D1 transcription by activation of the p38 MAP kinase and phosphorylation
of ATF-2, contributing to breast cancer cell proliferation.

PMID: 16050133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005 Sep;16(9):2724-31. Epub 2005 Jul 27.

Increased activity of activator protein-1 transcription factor components ATF2,
c-Jun, and c-Fos in human and mouse autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease.

Le NH(1), van der Wal A, van der Bent P, Lantinga-van Leeuwen IS, Breuning MH,
van Dam H, de Heer E, Peters DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease is a common inherited disorder that 
predominantly manifests with the formation of fluid-filled cysts in both kidneys.
The disease can be accounted for by a mutation in either the PKD1 or the PKD2
gene. It was demonstrated previously that aberrant expression of the PKD1 gene
product, polycystin-1, results in modification of activator protein-1 (AP-1)
transcription factor activity in cultured renal epithelial cells. Here, it is
reported that activity of the AP-1 components c-Jun, ATF2, and c-Fos is altered
in renal cystic tissue of patients with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney
disease and of hypomorphic Pkd1 mice with polycystic kidney disease. Data were
obtained using immunohistochemical and Western blot analysis. Significant
upregulation of Thr71- and Thr69/71-phosphorylated ATF2 and Ser73-phosphorylated 
c-Jun and increased c-Fos were detected in small cysts and (dilated) ducts and
tubules surrounded by fibrotic interstitium. The data indicate that various AP-1 
components are constitutively activated in polycystic kidney disease and suggest 
that aberrant AP-1 activity is relevant for cyst formation.

PMID: 16049073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Anal Biochem. 2005 Sep 1;344(1):135-7.

An immunosorbent, nonradioactive p38 MAP kinase assay comparable to standard
radioactive liquid-phase assays.

Laufer S(1), Thuma S, Peifer C, Greim C, Herweh Y, Albrecht A, Dehner F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Institute of Pharmacy,
Eberhard-Karls-University Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle 8, 72076 Tübingen,
Germany. stefan.laufer@uni-tuebingen.de

PMID: 16038870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Oncogene. 2005 Oct 6;24(44):6689-98.

Nitric oxide upregulates the cyclooxygenase-2 expression through the
cAMP-response element in its promoter in several cancer cell lines.

Park SW(1), Sung MW, Heo DS, Inoue H, Shim SH, Kim KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, College of Medicine, Seoul National University,
Chongno-gu, Korea.

We previously showed that nitric oxide (NO) induces overexpression of
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and production of prostaglandin E(2) in cancer cells.
Here, we investigated the mechanisms by which NO induces COX-2 expression in
cancer cells. We found that the cAMP-response element (CRE) is a critical factor 
in NO-induced COX-2 expression in all cells tested. We found that in cancer
cells, three transcription factors (TFs) - cAMP response element-binding protein 
(CREB), activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) and c-jun, bound the CRE in the
COX-2 promoter, and their activities were increased by addition of the NO donor, 
S-nitroso-N-acetyl-D,L-penicillamine (SNAP). NO-induced activation of soluble
guanylate cyclase (sGC), p38 and c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) upregulated
the three TFs, leading to COX-2 overexpression. Addition of dibutyryl-cGMP
(db-cGMP) induced COX-2 expression in a manner similar to SNAP; this induction
was blocked by a p38 inhibitor (SB202190), but not by a JNK inhibitor (SP600125).
NO-induced cGMP was found to activate CREB and ATF-2 in a p38, but not
c-jun-dependent manner, while NO induced JNK in a cGMP-independent manner,
leading to subsequent activation of c-jun and ATF-2. These results suggest that
the low concentrations of endogenous NO present in cancer cell may induce the
expression of many genes, including COX-2, which promotes the growth and survival
of tumor cells.

PMID: 16007171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Aug 15;308(2):459-68.

c-Jun controls the efficiency of MAP kinase signaling by transcriptional
repression of MAP kinase phosphatases.

Sprowles A(1), Robinson D, Wu YM, Kung HJ, Wisdom R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology and The UC Davis Cancer Center, Research
Building III, Room 1100, 4645 2nd Avenue, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.

The mammalian JNK signaling pathway regulates the transcriptional response of
cells to environmental stress, including UV irradiation. This signaling pathway
is composed of a classical MAP kinase cascade; activation results in
phosphorylation of the transcription factor substrates c-Jun and ATF2, and leads 
to changes in gene expression. The defining components of this pathway are
conserved in the fission yeast S. pombe, where the genetic studies have shown
that the ability of the JNK homolog Spc1 to be activated in response to UV
irradiation is dependent on the presence of the transcription factor substrate
Atf1. We have used genetic analysis to define the role of c-Jun in activation of 
the mammalian JNK signaling pathway. Our results show that optimal activation of 
JNK requires the presence of its transcription factor substrate c-Jun. Mutational
analysis shows that the ability of c-Jun to support efficient activation of JNK
requires the ability of Jun to bind DNA, suggesting a transcriptional mechanism. 
Consistent with this, we show that c-Jun represses the expression of several MAP 
kinase phosphatases. In the absence of c-Jun, the increased expression of MAP
kinase phosphatases leads to impaired activation of the ERK, JNK, and p38 MAP
kinases after pathway activation. The results show that one function of c-Jun is 
to regulate the efficiency of signaling by the ERK, p38, and JNK MAP kinases, a
function that is likely to affect cellular responses to many different stimuli.

PMID: 15950217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Immunol. 2005 Jun 15;174(12):8056-63.

The role of p38 MAPK in rhinovirus-induced monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
production by monocytic-lineage cells.

Hall DJ(1), Bates ME, Guar L, Cronan M, Korpi N, Bertics PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Lawrence University, Appleton, WI 54912, USA.
halld@lawrence.edu

Viral respiratory infections are a major cause of asthma exacerbations and can
contribute to the pathogenesis of asthma. Major group human rhinovirus enters
cells by binding to the cell surface molecule ICAM-1 that is present on
epithelial and monocytic lineage cells. The focus of the resulting viral
infection is in bronchial epithelia. However, previous studies of the cytokine
dysregulation that follows rhinovirus infection have implicated monocytic lineage
cells in establishing the inflammatory environment even though productive
infection is not a result. We have determined that human alveolar macrophages and
human peripheral blood monocytes release MCP-1 upon exposure to human rhinovirus 
16 (HRV16). Indeed, we have found p38 MAPK activation in human alveolar
macrophages within 15 min of exposure to HRV16, and this activation lasts up to 1
h. The targets of p38 MAPK activation include transcriptional activators of the
MCP-1 promoter. The transcription factor ATF-2, a p38 MAPK substrate, is
phosphorylated 45 min after HRV16 exposure. Furthermore, IkappaBalpha, the
inhibitor of the transcription factor NF-kappaB, is degraded. Prevention of HRV16
binding was effective in blocking p38 MAPK activation, ATF-2 phosphorylation, and
MCP-1 release. This is the first report of a relationship between HRV16 exposure,
MCP-1 release and monocytic-lineage cells suggesting that MCP-1 plays a role in
establishing the inflammatory microenvironment initiated in the human airway upon
exposure to rhinovirus.

PMID: 15944313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Cell. 2005 May 27;18(5):577-87.

ATM-dependent phosphorylation of ATF2 is required for the DNA damage response.

Bhoumik A(1), Takahashi S, Breitweiser W, Shiloh Y, Jones N, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Program, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) is regulated by JNK/p38 in response to
stress. Here, we demonstrate that the protein kinase ATM phosphorylates ATF2 on
serines 490 and 498 following ionizing radiation (IR). Phosphoantibodies to
ATF2(490/8) reveal dose- and time-dependent phosphorylation of ATF2 by ATM that
results in its rapid colocalization with gamma-H2AX and MRN components into
IR-induced foci (IRIF). Inhibition of ATF2 expression decreased recruitment of
Mre11 to IRIF, abrogated S phase checkpoint, reduced activation of ATM, Chk1, and
Chk2, and impaired radioresistance. ATF2 requires neither JNK/p38 nor its DNA
binding domain for recruitment to IRIF and the S phase checkpoint. Our findings
identify a role for ATF2 in the DNA damage response that is uncoupled from its
transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC2954254
PMID: 15916964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Jun;29(2):269-82.

Retrograde axonal transport of JNK signaling molecules influence injury induced
nuclear changes in p-c-Jun and ATF3 in adult rat sensory neurons.

Lindwall C(1), Kanje M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Organism Biology, Lund University, Helgonavägen 3B
SE-223 62 Lund, Sweden. charlotta.lindwall@cob.lu.se

In the present study, we investigated if the previously observed JNK-mediated
activation of c-Jun and induction of ATF3 could be ascribed to axonal transport
of JNK signaling components, or if axonal transport of the transcription factors 
themselves contributes to the nuclear changes in injured sensory neurons. We
observed retrograde axonal transport of a number of JNK upstream kinases in
ligated rat sciatic nerve. In these preparations, axonal transport of JNK/p-JNK, 
the JNK scaffolding protein JIP, and the transcription factors ATF3 and
ATF2/p-ATF2 was also found. No or little retrograde transport of c-Jun and
p-c-Jun was found, whereas an anterograde transport of Hsp27, a protein
previously reported in the context of p-c-Jun and ATF3, was observed. In separate
experiments, we found that in vitro inhibition of axonal transport or axonal
inhibition of JNK reduced the number of p-c-Jun- and ATF3-positive neuronal
nuclei. The results suggest that retrograde axonal transport of JNK signaling
components contributes to the injury induced c-Jun phosphorylation and ATF3
induction.

PMID: 15911351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Med Virol. 2005 Jul;76(3):424-33.

ORF61 protein of Varicella-zoster virus influences JNK/SAPK and p38/MAPK
phosphorylation.

Rahaus M(1), Desloges N, Wolff MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Virology, University of Witten/Herdecke, Witten,
Germany.

Recently, it was demonstrated that the Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infection led
to an activation of MAP kinases. The viral protein encoded by ORF61 is a major
effector of JNK/SAPK and p38/MAPK phosphorylation. ORF61 shows homology to HSV-1 
ICP0, a multifunctional protein that influences the activity of c-Jun in infected
cells. Stable expression of ORF61 in a MeWo derived cell line gave rise to two
specific effects: (i) a major decrease of VZV replication and (ii) a strongly
elevated basal JNK/SAPK phosphorylation but a reduced p38/MAPK phosphorylation,
which were both altered following infection. A dose-dependent inhibition of
JNK/SAPK in MeWo/61 cells resulted in a step-by-step increase of VZV replication.
These findings indicate (i) that ORF61 is responsible for the elevated JNK/SAPK
phosphorylation and (ii) that the VZV replication and the JNK/SAPK
phosphorylation are related inversely. Compared to MeWo cells, the basal
phosphorylation of downstream targets c-Jun and ATF-2 was reduced following ORF61
expression but restored after infection. Subsequent cascades to induce
inflammatory responses were activated insignificantly; cascades to activate
apoptotic events also remained silent. These data point towards an important role
of ORF61 in the fine-regulation of activation of the MAPK pathways and their
downstream targets to optimize the availability of cellular factors involved in
VZV gene expression.

Copyright (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15902710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Neuroscience. 2005;133(2):437-51.

Activating transcription factor 2 expression in the adult human brain:
association with both neurodegeneration and neurogenesis.

Pearson AG(1), Curtis MA, Waldvogel HJ, Faull RL, Dragunow M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical and
Health Sciences, The University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New
Zealand.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) is a member of the activator protein-1
family of transcription factors, which includes c-Jun and c-Fos. ATF2 is highly
expressed in the mammalian brain although little is known about its function in
nerve cells. Knockout mouse studies show that this transcription factor plays a
role in neuronal migration during development but over-expression of ATF2 in
neuronal-like cell culture promotes nerve cell death. Using immunohistochemical
techniques we demonstrate ATF2 expression in the normal human brain is neuronal, 
is found throughout the cerebral cortex and is particularly high in the granule
cells of the hippocampus, in the brain stem, in the pigmented cells of the
substantia nigra and locus coeruleus, and in the granule and molecular cell
layers of the cerebellum. In contrast to normal cases, ATF2 expression is
down-regulated in the hippocampus, substantia nigra pars compacta and caudate
nucleus of the neurological diseases Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Huntington's,
respectively. Paradoxically, an increase in ATF2 expression was found in the
subependymal layer of Huntington's disease cases, compared with normal brains; a 
region reported to contain increased numbers of proliferating progenitor cells in
Huntington's disease. We propose ATF2 plays a role in neuronal viability in the
normal brain, which is compromised in susceptible regions of neurological
diseases leading to its down-regulation. In contrast, the increased expression of
ATF2 in the subependymal layer of Huntington's disease suggests a role for ATF2
in some aspect of neurogenesis in the diseased brain.

PMID: 15878807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Gut. 2005 Sep;54(9):1309-17. Epub 2005 May 4.

CREB/PKA sensitive signalling pathways activate and maintain expression levels of
the hepatitis B virus pre-S2/S promoter.

Tacke F(1), Liedtke C, Bocklage S, Manns MP, Trautwein C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover
Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: CREB (cAMP response element binding protein) transcription
factors are key regulators of homeostatic functions in the liver, and CRE binding
is increased in hepatic inflammation. During chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV)
infection, mutations or deletions in the pre-S region are frequently observed.
These mutations can affect the pre-S2/S promoter controlling HBV envelope protein
expression (hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)) and have been associated with
worsened clinical outcome. We aimed to test if CREB activation impacts on HBsAg
expression.
METHODS: The effect of the CREB inducer protein kinase A (PKA) was tested by
coexpression with HBV wild-type vector in vitro. Luciferase reporter gene
constructs were cloned to identify novel regulatory regions for the HBV pre-S2/S 
promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) gelshift and supershift
experiments were conducted to confirm DNA transcription factor binding.
RESULTS: Coexpression of HBV and PKA resulted in HBV-S mRNA induction and
enhanced small envelope protein expression. We identified a CREB binding motif in
the transcribed part of the pre-S2 region, contributing to basal S promoter
activity via binding of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2). A second CREB
motif closely linked to the S-ATG showed a similar binding pattern involving ATF2
and CREB1, without appearing essential for basal promoter activity. Moreover, a
sequence in the pre-S2 region is responsible for further transcriptional
induction via CREB activators such as PKA and forskolin. EMSA experiments
indicate that CREB1 and ATF4 are involved in complex formation conferring PKA
dependent promoter activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest a novel mechanism by which HBV may utilise CREB/PKA
signal transduction pathways of hepatocytes to enhance its HBsAg expression
during homeostasis and hepatic inflammation.

PMCID: PMC1774645
PMID: 15871998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Exp Eye Res. 2005 May;80(5):663-70. Epub 2005 Jan 4.

The transcription factor c-jun is activated in retinal ganglion cells in
experimental rat glaucoma.

Levkovitch-Verbin H(1), Quigley HA, Martin KR, Harizman N, Valenta DF, Pease ME, 
Melamed S.

Author information: 
(1)Sam Rothberg Molecular Biology Lab, Goldschleger Eye Institute, Sheba Medical 
Center, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Hashomer 52621, Israel. halevko@hotmail.com

This study investigates the role of the MAP kinase pathway including c-jun, ATF-2
and JNK in glaucomatous eyes of rats and in optic nerve transection. Glaucoma was
induced in one eye of 51 adult Wistar rats by laser treatment to the trabecular
meshwork. Eighteen further rats underwent unilateral optic nerve transection. We 
studied the transcription factor c-jun, its activated form, phospho-c-jun, the
transcription factor p-ATF-2, and the enzyme JNK by immunohistochemistry. The
activation of p-c-jun was also investigated using western blot analysis. Treated 
and control eyes were compared in a masked way at multiple time points after
injury. We found a statistically significant increase in immunolabelling for
c-jun and phospho-c-jun in retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) from 1 day to 4 weeks
after intraocular pressure (IOP) elevation. At 1 and 2 days after the laser
treatment, a mean of 2.9+/-3.3 RGCsmm(-1) were positive for c-jun (n=12, p=0.005,
t-test), increasing to a mean of 13.4+/-7.5 cells mm(-1) at 1 week (n=18,
p=0.00005), and decreasing to 2.3+/-2.0 cells mm(-1) at 2 weeks (n=5, p=0.04) and
0.1+/-0.1 cells mm(-1) at 2 months. Few of the 47 control eyes had any labelling 
for c-jun or phospho-c-jun, while between 80 and 100% of elevated IOP eyes showed
positivity during the first 2 weeks of experimental glaucoma. After optic nerve
transection, c-jun and phospho-c-jun were also significantly activated at 1, 2
and 9 days (p<0.03, t-test). Western blot analysis demonstrated significantly
increased phospho-c-jun amounts in both transected and glaucomatous eyes compared
to control fellow eyes 1 week following treatment. JNK was not significantly
activated in glaucoma or optic nerve transection. P-ATF-2 was not significantly
activated in glaucoma, but was significantly increased 2 days after optic nerve
transection. We conclude that the process leading to RGC death in experimental
glaucoma and after optic nerve transection involves the activation of c-jun at
the RGC layer. C-jun is activated more gradually in glaucoma then after optic
nerve transection.

PMID: 15862173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2005 Jan;34(1):70-3.

[Protective effects of Lovastatin on early diabetic renal tissue and the possible
mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang LH(1), Duan HJ, Shi YH, Liu QJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050017, China.
wanglh68@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the protective effects of Lovastatin on renal function 
in experimental diabetic nephropathy in rats. and the function of cAMP-responsive
element binding protein (CREB1) in this duration.
METHODS: Diabetes was induced in male Wistar rats by intrapetitoneal injection of
STZ (65 mg/kg). Three groups were divided as: Sham group, diabetic control group 
and Lovastatin treatment group. Lovastatin (20 mg/kg) was administered daily by
gavage from the next day of the induction diabetes for 4 weeks. Upro, ucr in
urine and Glu, Scr, BUN in serum were determined. Immunohistochemistry and
computer image-pattern analysis system were used to analyze expression of PCNA
and p-CREB1. Western blot were performed to valuate the expression of p-CREB1
with their specific corresponding antibodies. CREB1 mRNA was measured by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: After Lovastatin treatment, renal function were ameliorative in diabetic
rats. Decrements were also found in the expression of and PCNA, p-CREB1 and its
mRNA in the treatment group compared with the diabetic group.
CONCLUSION: Inhibition of glomerular cAMP-responsive element binding protein 1
may be responsible for the Lovastatin protective function that allevate the renal
proliferation and hypertrophy in diabetic rats.

PMID: 15862029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 May;25(9):3648-57.

Integrin-linked kinase mediates bone morphogenetic protein 7-dependent renal
epithelial cell morphogenesis.

Leung-Hagesteijn C(1), Hu MC, Mahendra AS, Hartwig S, Klamut HJ, Rosenblum ND,
Hannigan GE.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Research Institute, Hospital for Sick Children, 555
University Ave., Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Bone morphogenetic protein 7 (BMP7) stimulates renal branching morphogenesis via 
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38(MAPK)) and activating transcription
factor 2 (ATF-2) (M. C. Hu, D. Wasserman, S. Hartwig, and N. D. Rosenblum, J.
Biol. Chem. 279:12051-12059, 2004). Here, we demonstrate a novel role for
integrin-linked kinase (ILK) in mediating renal epithelial cell morphogenesis in 
embryonic kidney explants and identify p38(MAPK) as a target of ILK signaling in 
a cell culture model of renal epithelial morphogenesis. The spatial and temporal 
expression of ILK in embryonic mouse kidney cells suggested a role in branching
morphogenesis. Adenovirus-mediated expression of ILK stimulated and expression of
a dominant negative ILK mutant inhibited ureteric bud branching in embryonic
mouse kidney explants. BMP7 increased ILK kinase activity in inner medullary
collecting duct 3 (IMCD-3) cells, and adenovirus-mediated expression of ILK
increased IMCD-3 cell morphogenesis in a three-dimensional culture model. In
contrast, treatment with a small molecule ILK inhibitor or expression of a
dominant negative-acting ILK (ILK(E359K)) inhibited epithelial cell
morphogenesis. Further, expression of ILK(E359K) abrogated BMP7-dependent
stimulation. To investigate the role of ILK in BMP7 signaling, we showed that ILK
overexpression increased basal and BMP7-induced levels of phospho-p38(MAPK) and
phospho-ATF-2. Consistent with its inhibitory effects on IMCD-3 cell
morphogenesis, expression of ILK(E359K) blocked BMP7-dependent increases in
phospho-p38(MAPK) and phospho-ATF-2. Inhibition of p38(MAPK) activity with the
specific inhibitor, SB203580, failed to inhibit BMP7-dependent stimulation of ILK
activity, suggesting that ILK functions upstream of p38(MAPK) during BMP7
signaling. We conclude that ILK functions in a BMP7/p38(MAPK)/ATF-2 signaling
pathway and stimulates epithelial cell morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1084303
PMID: 15831470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Virus Genes. 2005 May;30(3):323-30.

EBV infection induces expression of the transcription factors ATF-2/c-Jun in B
lymphocytes but not in B-CLL cells.

Bandobashi K(1), Liu A, Nagy N, Kis LL, Nishikawa J, Björkholm M, Klein G, Klein 
E.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, S-171 77,
Stockholm, Sweden.

B cell type chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (B-CLL) cells carry the Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV) receptor CD21 and can be infected in vitro with the virus. The
infected cells exhibit an unusual EBV program, they express the nuclear proteins 
but not latent membrane protein 1 (LMP-1). Similar cells were encountered in
lymphoid tissues of infectious mononucleosis (IM) patients and in
lymphoproliferations of immunosuppressed patients. EBV infected B-CLL cells can
be regarded as model for this viral program. In B cells the regulation of LMP-1
is executed mainly by EBV encoded nuclear antigen 2 (EBNA-2), interacting with
several cellular proteins and these complexes bind to specific sequences in the
LMP-1 promoter. ATF2 and c-Jun were shown to be among the interacting partners of
EBNA-2. These molecules can be detected in experimentally infected B lymphocytes.
We found c-Jun and/or phosphorylated ATF-2 (p-ATF-2) expression in some B-CLL ex 
vivo samples. They disappeared or their expression declined promptly in explanted
cells, even if they were infected with EBV in vitro. Activation of the infected
B-CLL cells by exposure to CD40L was accompanied by p-ATF-2 and c-Jun but not by 
LMP-1 expression. In one of three clones tested, subsequent treatment with
histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi), TSA or n-butyrate, could induce LMP-1.
Treatment with phorbol-12, 13-dibutyrate (PDB) induced LMP-1 expression in three 
of four clones. Neither the HDACi nor the PDB treated cells survived.

PMID: 15830149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biotechnol Prog. 2005 Mar-Apr;21(2):627-31.

Redistribution of metabolic fluxes in the central aerobic metabolic pathway of E.
coli mutant strains with deletion of the ackA-pta and poxB pathways for the
synthesis of isoamyl acetate.

Dittrich CR(1), Vadali RV, Bennett GN, San KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, USA.

Although the bacterium E. coli is chosen as the host in many bioprocesses,
products derived from the central aerobic metabolic pathway often compete with
the acetate-producing pathways poxB and ackA-pta for glucose as the substrate. As
such, a significant portion of the glucose may be excreted as acetate, wasting
substrate that could have otherwise been used for the desired product. The
production of the ester isoamyl acetate from acetyl-CoA by ATF2, a yeast alcohol 
acetyl transferase, was used as a model system to demonstrate the beneficial
effects of reducing acetate production. All strains tested for ester production
also overexpressed panK, a native E. coli gene that previous studies have shown
to increase free intracellular CoA levels when fed with pantothenic acid. A
recombinant E. coli strain with a deletion in ackA-pta produces less acetate and 
more isoamyl acetate than the wild-type E. coli strain. When both
acetate-producing pathways were deleted, the acetate production was greatly
reduced. However, pyruvate began to accumulate, so that the overall ester
production remained largely unchanged. To produce more ester, a previously
established strategy of increasing the flux from pyruvate to acetyl-CoA was
adopted by overexpressing pyruvate dehydrogenase. The ester production was then
80% higher in the poxB, ackA-pta strain (0.18 mM) than that found in the single
ackA-pta mutant (0.10 mM), which also overexpressed PDH.

PMID: 15801810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Soc Gynecol Investig. 2005 Apr;12(3):185-90.

Spatial and temporal expression of the myometrial mitogen-activated protein
kinases p38 and ERK1/2 in the human uterus during pregnancy and labor.

Otun HA(1), MacDougall MW, Bailey J, Europe-Finner GN, Robson SC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Surgical and Reproductive Sciences, University of
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom. H.A.Otun@Ncl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: We have recently identified a novel putative spliced variant of the
activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) in the human myometrium during pregnancy
and labor. This protein, termed ATF2-sm like full-length ATF2, acts as a potent
transactivator of cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element
(CRE)-containing promoter reporter genes. Similarly, employing microarray gene
profiling in myometrial cells, we have shown ATF2-sm to affect the expression of 
several specific myometrial genes associated with regulating uterine activity
during pregnancy and labor. At some point after conception this transcription
factor becomes spatially expressed within the body of the uterus, with
significantly higher levels detected in the upper (corpus) compared to the lower 
uterine segment. Because ATF2 species are the primary substrate for
phosphorylation by the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) p38 and ERK1/2, 
the purpose of the current investigation was to define the expression levels of
these kinases in upper and lower segment myometrium during pregnancy and labor to
see if they also correlated with expression of ATF2-sm.
METHODS: Paired myometrial samples were collected from the upper (corpus) and
lower uterine segments from term nonlaboring and spontaneously laboring women
undergoing elective and emergency cesarean deliveries, respectively. Non-pregnant
myometrial samples were collected from premenopausal women having hysterectomies 
for benign gynecologic disorders. The MAPKs p38 and ERK1/2 present in individual 
myometrial homogenates were resolved using sodium dodecyl sulfate polacrylamide
gel electropheresis (SDS-PAGE) with subsequent Western blotting with specific
antibodies and scanning densitometry. Expression of the individual MAPKs in
myometrial tissues was confirmed in situ using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In non-pregnant tissues, p38 and ERK1/2 expression was uniform
throughout the uterus. In term pregnant nonlaboring and spontaneously laboring
samples expression of p38 and ERK1 was significantly elevated in the upper
uterine segment compared to the lower segment, respectively. In contrast, there
was no difference in ERK2 expression.
CONCLUSION: The data from this study indicate that both p38 and ERK1 are
spatially regulated in different uterine regions during pregnancy/labor and
suggest that they may be involved in regulating the activity of ATF2 isoforms and
their subsequent effects on myometrial function.

PMID: 15784503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 20;280(20):19587-93. Epub 2005 Mar 14.

Exercise stimulates Pgc-1alpha transcription in skeletal muscle through
activation of the p38 MAPK pathway.

Akimoto T(1), Pohnert SC, Li P, Zhang M, Gumbs C, Rosenberg PB, Williams RS, Yan 
Z.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma co-activator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha)
promotes mitochondrial biogenesis and slow fiber formation in skeletal muscle. We
hypothesized that activation of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathway in response to increased muscle activity stimulated Pgc-1alpha gene
transcription as part of the mechanisms for skeletal muscle adaptation. Here we
report that a single bout of voluntary running induced a transient increase of
Pgc-1alpha mRNA expression in mouse plantaris muscle, concurrent with an
activation of the p38 MAPK pathway. Activation of the p38 MAPK pathway in
cultured C2C12 myocytes stimulated Pgc-1alpha promoter activity, which could be
blocked by the specific inhibitors of p38, SB203580 and SB202190, or a dominant
negative p38. Furthermore, the p38-mediated increase in Pgc-1alpha promoter
activity was enhanced by increased expression of the downstream transcription
factor ATF2 and completely blocked by ATF2DeltaN, a dominant negative ATF2.
Skeletal muscle-specific expression of a constitutively active activator of p38, 
MKK6E, in transgenic mice resulted in enhanced Pgc-1alpha and cytochrome oxidase 
IV protein expression in fast-twitch skeletal muscles. These findings suggest
that contractile activity-induced activation of the p38 MAPK pathway promotes
Pgc-1alpha gene expression and skeletal muscle adaptation.

PMID: 15767263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Oncogene. 2005 Mar 31;24(14):2343-53.

DIM stimulates IFNgamma gene expression in human breast cancer cells via the
specific activation of JNK and p38 pathways.

Xue L(1), Firestone GL, Bjeldanes LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences and Toxicology, University of California,
119 Morgan Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720-3104, USA.

3,3'-Diindolylmethane (DIM) is a promising anticancer agent derived from Brassica
vegetables, but the mechanisms of DIM action are largely unknown. We have shown
that DIM can upregulate the expression and stimulate the secretion of
interferon-gamma (IFNgamma) in the human MCF-7 breast cancer cell line. This
novel effect may provide important clues to explain the anticancer effects of DIM
because it is well known that IFNgamma plays an important role in preventing the 
development of primary and transplanted tumors. Utilizing promoter deletions, we 
show here that the region between -108 and -36 bp in the IFNgamma promoter, which
contains two conserved and essential regulatory elements, is required for
DIM-induced IFNgamma expression. DIM activates both JNK and p38 pathways, induces
the phosphorylation of c-Jun and ATF-2, and increases the binding of the
homodimer or heterodimer of c-Jun/ATF-2 to the proximal AP-1.CREB-ATF-binding
element. Moreover, studies with specific enzyme inhibitors showed that up-stream 
Ca2+-dependent kinase(s) is required for the inducing effects of DIM in MCF-7
cells. These results establish that DIM-induced IFNgamma expression in human
breast tumor cells is mediated by activation of both JNK and p38 pathways, which 
is ultimately dependent on intracellular calcium signaling.

PMID: 15735741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):17497-506. Epub 2005 Feb 24.

Reactive oxygen species stimulates receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand
expression in osteoblast.

Bai XC(1), Lu D, Liu AL, Zhang ZM, Li XM, Zou ZP, Zeng WS, Cheng BL, Luo SQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515,
China. baixc15@fimmu.com

It has been established that reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as H2O2 or
superoxide anion is involved in bone loss-related diseases by stimulating
osteoclast differentiation and bone resorption and that receptor activator of
NF-kappaB ligand (RANKL) is a critical osteoclastogenic factor expressed on
stromal/osteoblastic cells. However, the roles of ROS in RANKL expression and
signaling mechanisms through which ROS regulates RANKL genes are not known. Here 
we report that increased intracellular ROS levels by H2O2 or xanthine/xanthine
oxidase-generated superoxide anion stimulated RANKL mRNA and protein expression
in human osteoblast-like MG63 cell line and primary mouse bone marrow stromal
cells and calvarial osteoblasts. Further analysis revealed that ROS promoted
phosphorylation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)/ATF2 and its
binding to CRE-domain in the murine RANKL promoter region. Moreover, the results 
of protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor KT5720 and CREB1 RNA interference
transfection clearly showed that PKA-CREB signaling pathway was necessary for ROS
stimulation of RANKL in mouse osteoblasts. In human MG63 cells, however, we found
that ROS promoted heat shock factor 2 (HSF2) binding to heat shock element in
human RANKL promoter region and that HSF2, but not PKA, was required for ROS
up-regulation of RANKL as revealed by KT5720 and HSF2 RNA interference
transfection. We also found that ROS stimulated phosphorylation of extracellular 
signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) and that PD98059, the inhibitor for ERKs
suppressed ROS-induced RANKL expression either in mouse osteoblasts or in MG63
cells. These results demonstrate that ROS stimulates RANKL expression via ERKs
and PKA-CREB pathway in mouse osteoblasts and via ERKs and HSF2 in human MG63
cells.

PMID: 15731115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Infect Immun. 2005 Mar;73(3):1523-31.

Helicobacter pylori induces interleukin-8 secretion by Toll-like receptor 2- and 
Toll-like receptor 5-dependent and -independent pathways.

Torok AM(1), Bouton AH, Goldberg JB.

Author information: 
(1)University of Virginia Health System, P.O. Box 800734, Charlottesville, VA
22908-0734, USA.

Helicobacter pylori is an important human pathogen that causes gastritis and is
strongly associated with gastric ulcers, gastric adenocarcinomas, and
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas. In response to H. pylori,
interleukin-8 (IL-8) is secreted from host cells to attract components of the
innate and adaptive immune systems to the site of infection. Toll-like receptor 2
(TLR2) and TLR5 have been shown to recognize H. pylori and to initiate signaling 
pathways that result in enhanced activation of NF-kappaB. Here, we evaluated the 
contribution of mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways to
TLR2-dependent and TLR5-dependent secretion of IL-8. Secretion of IL-8 from H.
pylori-infected HEK293 cells was augmented by the expression of TLR2 or TLR5.
While H. pylori infection resulted in the activation of ERK, JNK, and p38, the
enhanced IL-8 secretion from TLR2- and TLR5-expressing cells coincided with
increased p38 activation and phosphorylation of the transcription factor ATF2.
When p38 activity was inhibited in TLR2- or TLR5-expressing cells, H.
pylori-dependent IL-8 secretion returned to the level observed in infected
parental HEK293 cells that did not express TLR2 or TLR5; inhibition of p38 had no
effect on IL-8 secretion from infected parental HEK cells. In contrast,
inhibition of JNK and/or ERK resulted in substantially less IL-8 secretion from
infected cells, independent of TLR2 or TLR5 expression. Based on these data, we
propose that H. pylori induces IL-8 secretion through a dual mechanism that
includes a TLR2/5-independent component involving the activities of JNK and ERK
and a TLR2/5-dependent component that requires p38 activity.

PMCID: PMC1064968
PMID: 15731050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Virology. 2005 Mar 15;333(2):324-36.

Activation of c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling pathway is essential for 
the stimulation of hepatitis C virus (HCV) non-structural protein 3
(NS3)-mediated cell growth.

Hassan M(1), Ghozlan H, Abdel-Kader O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Duesseldorf, Mooren
Str.5, 40225 Duesseldorf, Germany.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) non-structural protein 3 (NS3) has been shown to affect
cellular functions and is thought to contribute to the development of HCV-related
hepatocarcinogenesis. In this study, we delineated part of the mechanisms whereby
NS3 protein stimulates cell growth in liver (HepG2) and non-liver (HeLa) cells.
The expression of NS3 protein enhanced cell growth, c-jun NH(2)-terminal kinase
(JNK) activation, DNA binding activities of the transcription factors AP-1 and
ATF-2, and c-jun expression, but not the activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) or p38(MAPK). Whereas co-expression of NS3 with its
cofactor NS4A inhibited NS3-mediated cell growth without to influence
NS3-mediated JNK activation, or to affect the basal activities of ERK or
p38(MAPK). Pre-treatment of NS3 protein-expressing cells with JNK inhibitor,
SP600125, abolished activation of AP-1 and ATF-2 and inhibited c-jun expression
and induced cell growth, suggesting that JNK activation is essential for the
stimulation of NS3-mediated cell growth.

PMID: 15721365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Feb;34(1):91-105.

Differential effects of 16alpha-hydroxyestrone and 2-methoxyestradiol on cyclin
D1 involving the transcription factor ATF-2 in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Lewis JS(1), Thomas TJ, Pestell RG, Albanese C, Gallo MA, Thomas T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ 08903, USA.

We studied the effects of 2-methoxyestradiol (2-ME2) and 16alpha-hydroxyestrone
(16alpha-OHE1), two metabolites of estradiol (E2), on DNA synthesis, cell cycle
progression and cyclin D1 protein levels in estrogen receptor-positive MCF-7
cells. E2 and 16alpha-OHE1 stimulated DNA synthesis, and 2-ME2 inhibited the
stimulatory effects of these agents. E2 and 16alpha-OHE1 stimulated the
progression of cells from G1 to S phase and this effect was attenuated by 2-ME2. 
Western blot analysis showed that E2 and 16alpha-OHE1 increased cyclin D1 protein
level by about fourfold compared with control. 2-ME2 had no significant effect on
cyclin D1; however, it prevented the accumulation of cyclin D1 in the presence of
E2 and 16alpha-OHE1. Cells transfected with a cyclin D1 reporter gene and treated
with E2 or 16alpha-OHE1 showed 7- and 9.5-fold increase respectively in promoter 
activity compared with control. This activity was significantly inhibited by
2-ME2. Cyclin D1 transactivation was mediated by the cAMP response element (CRE) 
region, which binds activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2). DNA affinity assay
showed 2.5- and 3.5-fold increases in ATF-2 binding to CRE in the presence of E2 
and 16alpha-OHE1 respectively. The binding of ATF-2 was inhibited by the presence
of 2-ME2. These results show that 2-ME2 can downregulate cyclin D1 and thereby
cell cycle progression by a mechanism involving the disruption of ATF-2 binding
to cyclin D1 promoter.

PMID: 15691880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Feb;34(1):19-35.

Identification of human myometrial target genes of the c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase 
(JNK) pathway: the role of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) and a novel
spliced isoform ATF2-small.

Bailey J(1), Europe-Finner GN.

Author information: 
(1)School of Surgical and Reproductive Sciences, The Medical School, University
of Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. jarrod.bailey@ncl.ac.uk

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2), a ubiquitously expressed member of the 
basic region leucine zipper (bZIP) family of transcription factors activated by
mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways, is important in the mediation
of cellular stress responses, development and transformation. We have previously 
reported the differential expression of active ATF2 in the human myometrium
throughout pregnancy and labour, and identified and partially characterized a
novel splice variant ATF2-small (ATF2-sm). To further understand the role of
these factors in the myometrium, we have used gene microarrays to define the
target genes in cultured myometrial cells stably-transfected with ATF2 and
ATF2-sm cDNAs. Many of the genes identified appear to have potential roles in
regulating myometrial function and include proteins involved in G-protein
receptor signalling, cytokine signalling, transcriptional regulation, cell-cycle 
control, formation of the extracellular matrix and cytoskeletal architecture.
ATF2 was found to affect the expression of 204 genes; 113 being up-regulated and 
91 down-regulated whereas the novel ATF2-sm factor altered the expression of 55
genes; expression was increased in 29 cases and decreased in 26. A further 25
genes affected by ATF2-sm were identified by suppression subtractive
hybridisation (SSH). Notably, the genes affected by ATF2 and ATF2-sm appear to
belong to discrete groups: only two genes were affected by both factors.

PMID: 15691875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cell Struct Funct. 2004 Dec;29(4):101-10.

Adenosine A2A receptor facilitates calcium-dependent protein secretion through
the activation of protein kinase A and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase in PC12
cells.

Mori Y(1), Higuchi M, Masuyama N, Gotoh Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1
Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

Adenosine modulates a variety of cellular functions including calcium-dependent
exocytosis. Activation of adenosine A(2A) receptor (A(2A)-R) facilitates
neurotransmitter release in some cell types, although the underlying mechanisms
are not fully understood. In this study, we found that treatment of PC12 cells
with the A(2A)-R agonist CGS21680 promotes calcium-evoked secretion of the fusion
protein between neuropeptide Y and modified yellow fluorescence protein
(NPY-Venus). CGS21680 treatment of PC12 cells transiently increased the
phosphorylation of p38 and JNK MAP kinases and Akt, as well as that of ATF2 and
CREB, reaching maximal levels at around 10-15 min of CGS21680 treatment.
Importantly, pretreatment of PC12 cells with the PI3K inhibitor LY294002,
together with the protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor KT5720, significantly
inhibited CGS21680 enhancement of calcium-dependent NPY-Venus release. Moreover, 
expression of a dominant-negative form of Akt and the PKA inhibitory polypeptide 
protein kinase inhibitor (PKI) co-operatively inhibited the facilitating effect
of CGS21680 on secretion of NPY-Venus. These data suggest that the PI3K-Akt and
PKA pathways play a critical role in A(2A)-R-mediated facilitation of
calcium-dependent secretion. We also found that CGS21680 treatment promoted
recruitment of the NPY-Venus-containing vesicles to the proximity of the plasma
membrane at around 10-15 min of CGS21680 treatment, which may in part account for
the facilitated secretion by A(2A)-R activation.

PMID: 15665505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Neurochem. 2005 Jan;92(2):321-36.

Role of basic region leucine zipper transcription factors cyclic AMP response
element binding protein (CREB), CREB2, activating transcription factor 2 and
CAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha in cyclic AMP response element-mediated
transcription.

Thiel G(1), Al Sarraj J, Vinson C, Stefano L, Bach K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, Homburg, Germany. gerald.thiel@uniklinik-saarland.de

The transcription factor cAMP response element binding protein (CREB), a member
of the basic region leucine zipper (bZIP) family of proteins, is the major cAMP
response element (CRE) binding. Other bZIP proteins, including CREB2, activating 
transcription factor 2 (ATF2), or CAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) have been
reported to transactivate CRE-containing genes or to interfere with
transactivation by CREB. We have designed a simple transactivation assay using
expression of either a constitutively active CREB mutant or a nuclear targeted
mutant of the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase. In both cases, 
a striking stimulation of transcription of CRE-containing reporter genes was
observed in noradrenergic locus coeruleus-like CATH.a cells. In addition, a
constitutively active mutant of ATF2 specifically transactivated a secretogranin 
II promoter/luciferase reporter gene, but had no effect on the tyrosine
hydroxylase promoter. In contrast, CREB2 and C/EBPalpha did not transactivate
CRE-containing reporter genes, indicating that these bZIP proteins target
distinct genetic elements. Experiments involving dominant-negative bZIP mutants
revealed that CREB does not heterodimerize with CREB2, ATF2, c-Jun or C/EBP.
Rather, CREB and ATF2 compete for binding to the CRE, and are independently able 
to up-regulate transcription of genes containing CRE motifs in their regulatory
regions.

PMID: 15663480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. BMC Mol Biol. 2005 Jan 19;6:2.

cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) activates transcription via two
distinct genetic elements of the human glucose-6-phosphatase gene.

Thiel G(1), Al Sarraj J, Stefano L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Building 44,
University of Saarland Medical Center, D-66421 Homburg, Germany.
gerald.thiel@uniklinik-saarland.de

BACKGROUND: The enzyme glucose-6-phosphatase catalyzes the dephosphorylation of
glucose-6-phosphatase to glucose, the final step in the gluconeogenic and
glycogenolytic pathways. Expression of the glucose-6-phosphatase gene is induced 
by glucocorticoids and elevated levels of intracellular cAMP. The effect of cAMP 
in regulating glucose-6-phosphatase gene transcription was corroborated by the
identification of two genetic motifs CRE1 and CRE2 in the human and murine
glucose-6-phosphatase gene promoter that resemble cAMP response elements (CRE).
RESULTS: The cAMP response element is a point of convergence for many
extracellular and intracellular signals, including cAMP, calcium, and
neurotrophins. The major CRE binding protein CREB, a member of the basic region
leucine zipper (bZIP) family of transcription factors, requires phosphorylation
to become a biologically active transcriptional activator. Since unphosphorylated
CREB is transcriptionally silent simple overexpression studies cannot be
performed to test the biological role of CRE-like sequences of the
glucose-6-phosphatase gene. The use of a constitutively active CREB2/CREB fusion 
protein allowed us to uncouple the investigation of target genes of CREB from the
variety of signaling pathways that lead to an activation of CREB. Here, we show
that this constitutively active CREB2/CREB fusion protein strikingly enhanced
reporter gene transcription mediated by either CRE1 or CRE2 derived from the
glucose-6-phosphatase gene. Likewise, reporter gene transcription was enhanced
following expression of the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase
(PKA) in the nucleus of transfected cells. In contrast, activating transcription 
factor 2 (ATF2), known to compete with CREB for binding to the canonical CRE
sequence 5'-TGACGTCA-3', did not transactivate reporter genes containing CRE1,
CRE2, or both CREs derived from the glucose-6-phosphatase gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Using a constitutively active CREB2/CREB fusion protein and a mutant
of the PKA catalytic subunit that is targeted to the nucleus, we have shown that 
the glucose-6-phosphatase gene has two distinct genetic elements that function as
bona fide CRE. This study further shows that the expression vectors encoding
C2/CREB and catalytic subunit of PKA are valuable tools for the study of
CREB-mediated gene transcription and the biological functions of CREB.

PMCID: PMC548273
PMID: 15659240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Immunol Lett. 2005 Feb 15;97(1):47-53.

ERK-MAP-kinases differentially regulate expression of IL-23 p19 compared with p40
and IFN-beta in Theiler's virus-infected RAW264.7 cells.

Petro TM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, the Nebraska Center for Virology, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Lincoln, NE 68583, USA. tpetro@unmc.edu

Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV) infection of macrophages induces 
a demyelinating disease (DD) in certain strains of mice that is similar to human 
multiple sclerosis. In contrast to IFN-beta, expression of IL-23 p19 and p40
subunits by macrophages in response to TMEV may contribute to DD. TMEV infection 
of macrophages likely induces IL-23 and IFN-beta by activating p38 or ERK
MAP-kinases (MAPK) and the p38 substrate ATF-2 within 30 min. To determine the
role of MAPKs in TMEV-induced IL-23 and IFN-beta expression, RAW264.7 cells were 
pretreated with SB203580 or U0126, inhibitors of p38 and ERK MAPKs, respectively.
SB203580 significantly increased TMEV-induced p19 but decreased p40 expression.
In contrast, U0126 decreased p19 and increased TMEV-induced p40 and IFN-beta
expression. Interestingly, U0126 prolonged TMEV-induced ATF-2 activation to at
least 3h. Thus ERK MAPKs regulate expression of TMEV-induced p19 differently than
p40 and IFN-beta suggesting the benefits of U0126 in treatment of DD.

PMID: 15626475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cancer Res. 2004 Dec 1;64(23):8573-84.

Overexpression of activating transcription factor-2 is required for tumor growth 
and progression in mouse skin tumors.

Papassava P(1), Gorgoulis VG, Papaevangeliou D, Vlahopoulos S, van Dam H,
Zoumpourlis V.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Biomedical Applications, Institute of Biological Research and
Biotechnology, National Hellenic Research Foundation, Athens, Greece.

Activating transcription factor (ATF)-2 is a member of the ATF/cyclic
AMP-responsive element binding protein family of transcription factors. It has
been shown, in vitro, to possess growth factor-independent proliferation and
transformation capacity. The information concerning the involvement of ATF-2 in
carcinogenesis is rather limited. In a previous report, we showed a progressive
increase in the levels of various activator protein (AP)-1 components, including 
phosphorylated ATF-2, in a series of mouse skin cell lines that represented
developmental stages of the mouse skin carcinogenesis system. In the present
study, we examined in detail the role of ATF-2 in the development of mouse skin
spindle cells A5 and CarB, which correspond to the late and most aggressive stage
of the mouse skin carcinogenesis model. To address this issue, we overexpressed a
dominant negative form of ATF-2 in the A5 and CarB cell lines and examined their 
behavior in vitro and in vivo at the molecular and cellular level. The stable
transfectants expressed decreased levels of phosphorylated ATF-2 and c-Jun.
Subsequently, we observed that dominant negative ATF-2 affected the composition
and reduced the activity of AP-1. The above biochemical changes were followed,
both in vitro and in vivo in BALB/c severe combined immunodeficient mice, by
suppression of the aggressive characteristics of the A5 and CarB mouse skin
spindle cells. We attributed this behavior to the significant down-regulation of 
cyclin D1, cyclin A, and ATF-3, known AP-1 targets implicated in cell cycle
control and promotion. In conclusion, our findings underscore a key regulatory
role of ATF-2 in tumor growth and progression of mouse skin tumors.

PMID: 15574764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Front Biosci. 2005 Jan 1;10:681-8. Print 2005 Jan 1.

TGF-beta signaling in chondrocytes.

Li TF(1), O'Keefe RJ, Chen D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Musculoskeletal Research, Department of Orthopaedics, University of
Rochester School of Medicine, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) regulates a large variety of cellular 
activities. Binding of TGF- beta to its cell surface receptor triggers several
signaling cascades, among which the TGF- beta -Smad pathway is the most
extensively studied. TGF- beta also activates protein kinases, including MAPK,
PKA and PKC, and modulates gene expression via its delicate interaction with
other signaling pathways. During endochondral bone formation, TGF- beta acts as a
potent inhibitor of the terminal differentiation of epiphyseal growth plate
chondrocytes. This effect appears to be primarily mediated by Smad molecules,
although MAPK-ATF2 signaling is also involved. The rate of chondrocyte maturation
is tightly regulated through the interactions of Smad-mediated signaling, the Wnt
signaling pathway, and the transcription factor Runx2. Improving our
understanding of the exact mechanisms underlying TGF- beta -mediated signaling
pathways and their effects may greatly impact the diagnosis and treatment of many
common orthopaedic diseases.

PMCID: PMC2647990
PMID: 15569609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cell Signal. 2005 Mar;17(3):365-75.

Regulation of GDF-8 signaling by the p38 MAPK.

Philip B(1), Lu Z, Gao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Technologies Group, Wyeth Research, 87 Cambridge Park Drive, Cambridge
MA 02140, USA.

Growth differentiation factor-8 (GDF-8), a member of the TGF-beta superfamily, is
a negative regulator of skeletal muscle growth, which functions through
activation of the Smad proteins. We found that GDF-8 can activate the p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) through the TGF-beta-activated kinase 1
(TAK1), and this appeared to be independent of Smad signaling. GDF-8-induced
transcriptional activation was inhibited by expression of dominant negative MKK6 
or treatment with the p38 inhibitor SB203580, while overexpression of wild-type
forms of either MKK6 or p38 augmented GDF-8-induced transcriptional activity. In 
addition, ATF-2, a known transcription factor target of p38, was found to be
phosphorylated on GDF-8 stimulation and was detected in a complex with
Smad3/Smad4 upon GDF-8 treatment. Furthermore, we found that the p38 MAPK played 
an important role in GDF-8-induced inhibition of proliferation and upregulation
of the cyclin kinase inhibitor p21. Together, these results highlight a
functional link between the p38 MAPK and GDF-8-activated Smad pathways, and
identify a critical role for the p38 MAPK in GDF-8's function as a negative
regulator of muscle growth.

PMID: 15567067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cancer Res. 2004 Nov 15;64(22):8222-30.

Inhibition of melanoma growth and metastasis by ATF2-derived peptides.

Bhoumik A(1), Gangi L, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, 
New York 10029, USA.

The resistance of melanoma to apoptosis, as well as its growth and metastasis
capabilities, can be overcome by expression of a peptide derived from amino acid 
(aa) 51 to 100 of ATF2. Here we show that expression of ATF2((51-100)) in human
melanoma cells reduced their growth in nude mice, which was additionally
inhibited upon treatment with protein kinase inhibitors UCN-01 or SB203580.
Injection of a fusion protein consisting of HIV-TAT and aa 51 to 100 of ATF2 into
SW1 melanomas efficiently inhibits their growth and their metastasis up to
complete regression. Additionally, expression of a 10aa peptide that corresponds 
to aa 51 to 60 of ATF2 sensitizes melanoma cells to spontaneous apoptosis, which 
coincides with activation of caspase 9 and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage, 
and inhibit their growth in vivo. The 10aa peptide increases the association of
c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase with c-Jun but not with ATF2, resulting in
concomitant increase in TRE-mediated transcription. Our study points to
mechanisms underlying the activities of the ATF2 peptide while highlighting its
possible use in drug design.

PMID: 15548688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Cell. 2004 Nov 19;16(4):521-35.

Identification of promoters bound by c-Jun/ATF2 during rapid large-scale gene
activation following genotoxic stress.

Hayakawa J(1), Mittal S, Wang Y, Korkmaz KS, Adamson E, English C, Ohmichi M,
McClelland M, Mercola D.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, 10835 Altman Row, San Diego, California 92121,
USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell. 2005 Jan 7;17(1):161. Omichi, Masahide [corrected to Ohmichi,
Masahide].

The NH2-terminal Jun kinases (JNKs) function in diverse roles through
phosphorylation and activation of AP-1 components including ATF2 and c-Jun.
However, the genes that mediate these processes are poorly understood. A model
phenotype characterized by rapid activation of Jun kinase and enhanced DNA repair
following cisplatin treatment was examined using chromatin immunoprecipitation
with antibodies against ATF2 and c-Jun or their phosphorylated forms and
hybridization to promoter arrays. Following genotoxic stress, we identified 269
genes whose promoters are bound upon phosphorylation of ATF2 and c-Jun. Binding
did not occur following treatment with transplatin or the JNK inhibitor SP600125 
or JNK-specific siRNA. Of 89 known DNA repair genes represented on the array, 23 
are specifically activated by cisplatin treatment within 3-6 hr. Thus, the
genotoxic stress response occurs at least partly via activation of ATF2 and
c-Jun, leading to large-scale coordinate gene expression dominated by genes of
DNA repair.

PMID: 15546613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Oncogene. 2005 Jan 6;24(1):107-17.

Characterization of vinblastine-induced Bcl-xL and Bcl-2 phosphorylation:
evidence for a novel protein kinase and a coordinated
phosphorylation/dephosphorylation cycle associated with apoptosis induction.

Du L(1), Lyle CS, Chambers TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.

Bcl-xL and Bcl-2 are phosphorylated in response to microtubule inhibitors, but
the kinase(s) responsible and the functional significance have remained unclear. 
In this study, we investigated the characteristics of Bcl-xL and Bcl-2
phosphorylation in KB-3 carcinoma cells treated with vinblastine. In both
asynchronous and synchronous cell cultures, Bcl-xL and Bcl-2 underwent a
well-defined and coordinated cycle of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, with
a lengthy period of phosphorylation preceding apoptosis induction, and with
dephosphorylation closely correlated with initiation of apoptosis. Internally,
validated inhibitors of JNK, ERK, p38(MAPK), or CDK1 failed to inhibit
vinblastine-induced phosphorylation of Bcl-xL or Bcl-2. In vitro, Bcl-xL and
Bcl-2 were poor substrates relative to c-Jun and ATF2 for active recombinant
JNK1. Both Bcl-xL and Bcl-2 were localized primarily to the mitochondrial
fraction in both control and vinblastine-treated cells, indicating that
phosphorylation did not promote subcellular redistribution. Bcl-xL kinase
activity was demonstrated in mitochondrial extracts from vinblastine-treated, but
not control, cells. These findings suggest that phosphorylation of these key
antiapoptotic proteins may be catalysed by a novel or unsuspected kinase that is 
activated or induced in response to microtubule damage. Furthermore, the same
kinase and phosphatase system may be operating in tandem on both proteins, and
phosphorylation appears to maintain their antiapoptotic function, whereas
dephosphorylation may trigger apoptosis. These results provide evidence for a
novel signaling pathway connecting microtubule damage to apoptosis induction, and
help to clarify some of the controversy concerning the role of Bcl-2
phosphorylation in microtubule inhibitor-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 15531923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Pediatr Res. 2005 Jan;57(1):115-23. Epub 2004 Nov 5.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition modulates mitogen-activated protein
kinase family expressions in the neonatal rat kidney.

Choi BM(1), Yoo KH, Bae IS, Oh MH, Hong YS, Lee JW, Kim SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Korea University, 152-703, Seoul, Korea.

Among the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family members, extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) promotes cell proliferation or differentiation,
whereas c-jun N terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 MAPK are thought to inhibit cell
growth and induce apoptosis. The MAPK family may plays some role during kidney
development, when large-scale proliferation and apoptosis have been observed to
occur. Also, in this period, the renin-angiotensin system is markedly activated. 
We have demonstrated that angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition in the
developing rat kidney increases apoptosis and decreases cell proliferation, which
may account for renal growth impairment. The aim of this study, therefore, was to
examine the relationship between the MAPK family and renin-angiotensin system
during neonatal renal development. Newborn rat pups were treated with enalapril
(30 mg . kg(-1) . d(-1)) or normal saline for 7 d. Right kidneys of both groups
were selected for immunohistochemical stains of MAPKs and activating
transcription factor-2 (ATF-2), and left kidneys were selected for reverse
transcriptase-PCR and immunoblot analysis of MAPKs, phospho-MAPKs, and ATF-2. To 
determine whether apoptosis is involved in the same tubules that highly expressed
JNK and p38, we performed terminal deoxynucleotide transferase-mediated nick-end 
labeling stain for apoptotic cells and immunohistochemical stains for JNK-2, p38,
and ATF-2 expression in the serial sections from the same kidney of the
enalapril-treated group. In the enalapril-treated group, JNK-2, p38,
phospho-JNK-2, phospho-p38, and ATF-2 protein expressions were significantly
increased, and their immunoactivities were strongly detected in the proximal
tubular epithelial cells in the cortex, compared with the control group.
Especially JNK-2 and p38 expressions were highly activated and were spatially in 
accordance with the occurrence of apoptosis. ERK1/2 and phospho-ERK expressions
were not changed by enalapril. These results suggest that the expressions of the 
MAPK family are modulated by angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition in the
developing kidney. JNK and p38 may be implicated to participate in angiotensin
II-related intracellular signaling pathways of renal apoptosis in the developing 
kidney.

PMID: 15531746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Int Immunopharmacol. 2004 Dec 20;4(14):1795-803.

Piperine is a potent inhibitor of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB), c-Fos, CREB,
ATF-2 and proinflammatory cytokine gene expression in B16F-10 melanoma cells.

Pradeep CR(1), Kuttan G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Amala Cancer Research Centre, Amala Nagar, Thrissur,
Kerala 680 555, India.

Immune regulation, induction of various inflammatory and growth regulatory genes 
such as IL-1beta, IL-6, TNF-alpha and GM-CSF require activation of transcription 
factors such as nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB), activated transcription factor
(ATF-2), c-Fos and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB). Untreated
B16F-10 cells produce very high amount of proinflammatory cytokines such as
IL-1beta, IL-6, TNF-alpha and GM-CSF. Piperine treatment significantly reduced
the above proinflammatory cytokines. We also found that piperine could reduce the
expression of IL-1beta, IL-6, TNF-alpha, GM-CSF and IL-12p40 genes. Piperine at a
concentration of 2.5, 5 and 10 microg/ml inhibited the collagen matrix invasion
of B16F-10 melanoma cells in a dose-dependent manner. Piperine could inhibit the 
matrix metalloproteinase production which was demonstrated by zymographic
analysis. We found that the nuclear translocation of p65, p50, c-Rel subunits of 
NF-kappaB and other transcription factors such as ATF-2, c-Fos and CREB were
inhibited by the treatment of piperine.

PMID: 15531295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. World J Gastroenterol. 2004 Dec 1;10(23):3433-40.

Methylation profile of the promoter CpG islands of 14 "drug-resistance" genes in 
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Ding S(1), Gong BD, Yu J, Gu J, Zhang HY, Shang ZB, Fei Q, Wang P, Zhu JD.

Author information: 
(1)The State-key Laboratory for Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Shanghai Jiaotong University, LN 2200/25, Xie-Tu Road, Shanghai
200032, China.

AIM: To establish the DNA methylation patterns of the promoter CpG islands of 14 
"drug-resistance" genes in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: The methylation specific polymerase chain reaction in conjunction with
sequencing verification was used to establish the methylation patterns of the 14 
genes in the liver tissues of four healthy liver donors, as well as tumor and the
paired non-cancerous tissues of 30 HCC patients.
RESULTS: While 11 genes (ATP-binding cassette, sub-family G (WHITE), member
2(ABCG2), activating transcription factor (ATF2), beta-2-microglobulin (B2M),
deoxycytidine kinase (DCK), occludin (OCLN), v-raf-1 murine leukemia viral
oncogene homolog (RAF1), ralA binding protein 1 (RALBP1), splicing factor (45 kD)
(SPF45), S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (p45) (SKP2), tumor protein p53
(Li-Fraumeni syndrome) (TP53) and topoisomerase (DNA) II beta (TOP2B)) maintained
the unmethylated patterns, three genes displayed to various extents the
hypermethylation state in tumor tissues in comparison with the normal
counterparts. The catalase (CAT) was hypermethylated in tumor and the neighboring
non-cancerous tissue of one case (3.3%). Both glutathione S-transferase pi
(GSTpi) (80%, 24/30 in tumor and 56.7%, 17/30 in the paired non-cancerous
tissues) and cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator, ATP-binding
cassette (sub-family C, member 7) (CFTR) (77%, 23/30 in tumor and 50%, 15/30 in
the paired non-cancerous tissues) genes were prevalently hypermethylated in HCC
as well as their neighboring non-cancerous tissues. No significant difference in 
the hypermethylation occurrence was observed between the HCC and its neighboring 
non-cancerous tissues.
CONCLUSION: Hypermethylation of promoter CpG islands of both CFTR and GSTpi genes
occurs prevalently in HCC, which may correlate with the low expression of these
two genes at the mRNA level and has the profound etiological and clinical
implications. It is likely to be specific to the early phase of HCC
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4576224
PMID: 15526362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Dec 3;325(1):109-16.

Transcriptional control of cystine/glutamate transporter gene by amino acid
deprivation.

Sato H(1), Nomura S, Maebara K, Sato K, Tamba M, Bannai S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

Recent studies have demonstrated that depletion of amino acids results in the
induction of several genes and that a genomic cis-element termed amino acid
response element (AARE) is required for the induction. System x(c)(-) is an
anionic amino acid transport system highly specific for cystine and glutamate,
and its activity is known to be induced by cystine deprivation. This transporter 
is composed of two protein components, xCT and 4F2 heavy chain, and xCT is
thought to mediate the transport activity. In the present study, the molecular
mechanism for the induction of xCT by amino acid deprivation has been
investigated. In mouse NIH3T3 cells, the activity of system x(c)(-) and xCT mRNA 
is induced not only by deprivation of cystine but also by deprivation of other
amino acids. Two AAREs, each located in the opposite direction with an
intervening sequence, were found in the 5'-flanking region of the mouse xCT gene.
Promoter analysis revealed that both AAREs were necessary for the maximal
induction of xCT mRNA in response to the amino acid deprivation. Glucose
deprivation had no effect on the induction of the activity of system x(c)(-).
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that ATF4, but not ATF2, is involved 
in the amino acid control of xCT expression. These results demonstrate that xCT
is a new member of the proteins whose transcriptional control by the amino acid
deprivation is mediated by AARE.

PMID: 15522208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Metab Eng. 2004 Oct;6(4):294-9.

Applicability of CoA/acetyl-CoA manipulation system to enhance isoamyl acetate
production in Escherichia coli.

Vadali RV(1), Bennett GN, San KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, 6100 Main Street MS-142,
Houston, TX 77005, USA.

Coenzyme A (CoA) and its thioester derivatives are important precursor molecules 
for many industrially useful compounds such as esters, PHBs, lycopene and
polyketides. Previously, in our lab we could increase the intracellular levels of
CoA and acetyl-Coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) by overexpressing one of the upstream
rate-controlling enzymes pantothenate kinase with a concomitant supplementation
of the precursor pantothenic acid to the cell culture medium. In this study, we
showed that the CoA/acetyl-CoA manipulation system could be used to increase the 
productivity of industrially useful compounds derived from acetyl-CoA. We chose
the production of isoamyl acetate as a model system. Isoamyl acetate is an
important flavor component of sake yeast and holds a great commercial value.
Alcohol acetyl transferase (AAT) condenses isoamyl alcohol and acetyl-CoA to
produce isoamyl acetate. The gene ATF2, coding for this AAT was cloned and
expressed in Escherichia coli. This genetic engineered E. coli produces isoamyl
acetate, an ester, from intracellular acetyl-CoA when isoamyl alcohol is added
externally to the cell culture medium. In the current study, we showed that in a 
strain bearing ATF2 gene, an increase in intracellular CoA/acetyl-CoA by
overexpressing panK leads to an increase in isoamyl acetate production.
Additionally, the cofactor manipulation technique was combined with more
traditional approach of competing pathway deletions to further increase isoamyl
acetate production. The acetate production pathway competes with isoamyl acetate 
production for the common intracellular metabolite acetyl-CoA. Earlier we have
shown that acetate pathway deletion (ackA-pta) increases isoamyl acetate
production. The acetate production pathway was inactivated under elevated
CoA/acetyl-CoA conditions, which lead to a further increase in isoamyl acetate
production.

PMID: 15491859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Nov 11;370(2-3):212-7.

Simvastatin induces proliferation inhibition and apoptosis in C6 glioma cells via
c-jun N-terminal kinase.

Koyuturk M(1), Ersoz M, Altiok N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Kadir Has University Faculty of
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.

The lipid-lowering drugs, statins, induce apoptosis in a variety of tumor cells. 
Here we investigated the apoptotic effect of the lipophilic statin, simvastatin, 
in C6 glioma cells and the underlying effects on intracellular signal
transduction. Simvastatin inhibited cell proliferation totally after 20h of
treatment as shown by the decrease in proliferating cell nuclear antigen
expression in the nucleus. Subsequently, simvastatin caused apoptotic cell death 
by shrinkage of cytoplasm and condensation of chromatin, and DNA fragmentation.
The features of apoptosis were visible only after 48 h of treatment, possibly
reflecting a requirement for cell commitment to growth arrest. In
immunocytochemical and immunoblotting experiments we have shown that simvastatin 
markedly increased the phosphorylation of ATF-2 and c-jun in the nucleus of the
C6 glioma cells at early time points which was preserved even 24 h after
treatment. In contrast, activities of protein kinases Erk1/2 and AKT in the cell 
survival pathway remained unchanged throughout the treatment. Selective inhibitor
of JNK, but not p38 kinase, reduced simvastatin-induced cell death and ATF-2 and 
c-jun phosphorylation suggesting that JNK-dependent activation of ATF-2 and c-jun
may play an important role in simvastatin-induced proliferation inhibition and
apoptosis in C6 glioma cells. These observations suggest that statins may have
clinical significance in the prevention of glial tumors beyond their
cholesterol-lowering effect and JNK may be a rational target for sensitizing
glioma cells to chemotherapeutic agents.

PMID: 15488325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Virology. 2004 Nov 10;329(1):142-56.

Inhibition of the stress-activated kinase, p38, does not affect the virus
transcriptional program of herpes simplex virus type 1.

Karaca G(1), Hargett D, McLean TI, Aguilar JS, Ghazal P, Wagner EK, Bachenheimer 
SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7290, USA.

To investigate the impact of stress kinase p38 activation on HSV-1 transcription,
we performed a global transcript profile analysis of viral mRNA using an
oligonucleotide-based DNA microarray. RNA was isolated from Vero cells infected
with the KOS strain of HSV-1 in the presence or absence of SB203580, a pyridinyl 
imidazole inhibitor of p38. Under conditions that eliminated ATF2 activation but 
had no effect on c-Jun, and reduced virus yield by 85-90%, no effect on
accumulation of viral IE, DE, or L transcripts was observed by array analysis or 
selected Northern blot analysis at 2, 4, and 6 h post infection. Results of array
data from cells infected with the ICP27 mutant d27-1 in the presence or absence
of SB203580 only reflected the known restricted transcription phenotype of the
ICP27 mutant. This result is consistent with a role for p38 activation on virus
replication lying downstream of the essential role of ICP27 in DE and perhaps
late transcription regulation. No effect of SB203580 on transcription was
detected after infection with the ICP0 mutant 7134, at 0.5 or 5.0 PFU/cell,
though decreases in the rate of accumulation of all kinetic classes of mRNA could
be detected, relative to wt virus. These results indicate that inhibiting p38
activity in Vero cells, while significantly reducing wt virus yield, demonstrated
no obvious impact on the program of viral transcription.

PMID: 15476882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 10;279(50):52007-15. Epub 2004 Oct 4.

Induction of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)-homologous protein/growth
arrest and DNA damage-inducible protein 153 expression during inhibition of
phosphatidylcholine synthesis is mediated via activation of a C/EBP-activating
transcription factor-responsive element.

van der Sanden MH(1), Meems H, Houweling M, Helms JB, Vaandrager AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
and Institute of Biomembranes, University of Utrecht, PO Box 80176, Utrecht 3508 
TD, The Netherlands.

The gene for the proapoptotic transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
(C/EBP)-homologous protein/growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible protein 153
(CHOP/GADD153) is induced by various cellular stresses. Previously, we described 
that inhibition of phosphatidylcholine (PC) synthesis in MT58 cells, which
contain a temperature-sensitive mutation in CTP:phosphocholine
cytidylyltransferase (CT), results in apoptosis preceded by the induction of
CHOP. Here we report that prevention of CHOP induction, by expression of
antisense CHOP, delays the PC depletion-induced apoptotic process. By mutational 
analysis of the conserved region in the promoter of the CHOP gene, we provide
evidence that the C/EBP-ATF composite site, but not the ER stress-responsive
element or the activator protein-1 site, is required for the increased expression
of CHOP during PC depletion. Inhibition of PC synthesis in MT58 cells also led to
an increase in phosphorylation of the stress-related transcription factor ATF2
and the stress kinase JNK after 8 and 16 h, respectively. In contrast, no
phosphorylation of p38 MAPK was observed in MT58 cultured at the nonpermissive
temperature. Treatment of MT58 cells with the JNK inhibitor SP600125 could rescue
the cells from apoptosis but did not inhibit the phosphorylation of ATF2 or the
induction of CHOP. Taken together, our results suggest that increased expression 
of CHOP during PC depletion depends on a C/EBP-ATF element in its promoter and
might be mediated by binding of ATF2 to this element.

PMID: 15466475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Aug 2;84(15):1283-7.

[Angiotensin II up-regulates osteopontin mRNA expression of RAW264.7 macrophages 
via p38MAPK signaling].

[Article in Chinese]

Lou N(1), Yu XQ, Zhu SL, Zheng XH, Dong XQ, Li XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510080, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the changes of osteopontin (OPN) mRNA expression
induced by angiotensin II (AngII) in RAW264.7 macrophages, and to determine the
role of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38MAPK) signaling in up-regulation
of OPN mRNA expression.
METHODS: RT-PCR was used for examining the OPN mRNA expression, and the
phosphorylation of p38MAPK and activating transcription factor2 (ATF2) was
detected by Western blot.
RESULTS: (1) AngII (1 micromol/L) enhanced the expression of OPN mRNA in RAW264.7
macrophages with time-dependent, including 0.9 fold, 2.3 folds and 2.4 folds
up-regulation at 6, 12, 24 h, respectively (all P < 0.01), whereas there was no
significant change in negative control at 0 h and 24 h, suggesting that the mRNA 
expression of OPN is inducible. (2) Following excitation by Ang II in vitro,
there was substantial up-regulation of OPN mRNA expression in RAW264.7
macrophages with dose-dependent; with a dose of 1 micromol/L incubated for 12 h, 
Ang II increased the OPN mRNA expression by 2.6 folds (P < 0.01). (3)
Pre-treatment with SB202190 (5 micromol/L) for 30 min in RAW264.7 macrophages
before AngII (1 micromol/L) used, the expression of OPN mRNA was inhibited by
61.7% (P < 0.01); but no marked inhibition had happened at the time of treatment 
with both SB202190 (5 micromol/L) and Ang II (1 micromol/L) added at the same
time and with SB202190 (5 micromol/L) for 120 min after Ang II (1 micromol/L)
used. (4) Pre-treatment with SB202190 (1, 5, 10 micromol/L) for 30 min in
RAW264.7 macrophages before Ang II (1 micromol/L) used, the expression of OPN
mRNA was decreased by 43.4%, 63.0% and 65.5%, respectively (all P < 0.01). (5)
There was a maximal expression of p38MAPK phosphorylation at 15 approximately 30 
min induced by Ang II (1 micromol/L) in RAW264.7 macrophages, and the maximal
expression of phosphorylated ATF2 was at 30 approximately 45 min. (6)
Pre-treatment with SB202190 (1, 5 micromol/L) for 30 min in RAW264.7 macrophages 
before Ang II (1 micromol/L) used, the expression of p38MAPK phosphorylation was 
inhibited markedly with dose-dependent, and the phosphorylation of p38MAPK was
decreased by 61.7% (P < 0.01) after the SB202190 (5 micromol/L) was used.
CONCLUSION: Angiotensin II may up-regulate osteopontin mRNA expression of
RAW264.7 macrophages via p38MAPK signaling.

PMID: 15387967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 5;279(45):47172-6. Epub 2004 Sep 13.

Syndecan-4 regulates ATF-2 transcriptional activity in a Rac1-dependent manner.

Saoncella S(1), Calautti E, Neveu W, Goetinck PF.

Author information: 
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Syndecan-4 is a transmembrane heparan sulfate proteoglycan that co-operates with 
integrins during cell-matrix interactions for the assembly of focal adhesions and
actin stress fibers and in the phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) on 
Tyr397. These cellular events are regulated by the small GTPase Rho, and in the
absence of syndecan-4 ligation, cellular levels of GTP-bound Rho are decreased
implicating syndecan-4 in the regulation of the small GTPases. In the present
study we report that, compared with wild type cells, fibronectin-adherent
syndecan-4-null fibroblasts showed enhanced lamellipodia and increased Rac1
activity that could be down-regulated by re-expression of syndecan-4 in the
mutant cells. Consistent with the role for Rac1 in activating p38 and JNK
signaling, syndecan-4-null cells display higher levels of active p38 MAPK and JNK
that were abolished by the expression of a dominant-negative RacN17 mutant. Since
p38 and JNK regulate gene expression by phosphorylating and activating
transcription factors, we compared both the phosphorylation state and the
transcriptional activity of the ATF-2 transcription factor, as a direct p38 and
JNK target in syndecan-4-null and wild type cells. In the absence of syndecan-4, 
both ATF-2 phosphorylation and transcriptional activity were significantly more
elevated compared with wild type cells, and both activities were decreased either
by the re-expression of syndecan-4 or by the expression of RacN17. Our results
reveal a novel function for syndecan-4 in modulating nuclear transcriptional
activity and indicate an underlying mechanism that acts at the level of
Rac1-p38/JNK signaling.

PMID: 15371457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Biochemistry. 2004 Sep 21;43(37):11658-71.

Discovery and characterization of a substrate selective p38alpha inhibitor.

Davidson W(1), Frego L, Peet GW, Kroe RR, Labadia ME, Lukas SM, Snow RJ, Jakes S,
Grygon CA, Pargellis C, Werneburg BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Inflammation, Boehringer Ingelheim
Pharmaceuticals, Research and Development Center, 900 Ridgebury Road, Ridgefield,
Connecticut 06877, USA.

A novel inhibitor of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38), CMPD1,
identified by high-throughput screening, is characterized herein. Unlike the p38 
inhibitors described previously, this inhibitor is substrate selective and
noncompetitive with ATP. In steady-state kinetics experiments, CMPD1 was observed
to prevent the p38alpha-dependent phosphorylation (K(i)(app) = 330 nM) of the
splice variant of mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated protein kinase 2
(MK2a) that contains a docking domain for p38alpha and p38beta, but it did not
prevent the phosphorylation of ATF-2 (K(i)(app) > 20 microM). In addition to
kinetic studies, isothermal titration calorimetry and surface plasmon resonance
experiments were performed to elucidate the mechanism of inhibition. While
isothermal titration calorimetry analysis indicated that CMPD1 binds to p38alpha,
CMPD1 was not observed to compete with ATP for p38alpha, nor was it able to
interrupt the binding of p38alpha to MK2a observed by surface plasmon resonance. 
Therefore, deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (DXMS) was employed to study the 
p38alpha.CMPD1 inhibitory complex, to provide new insight into the mechanism of
substrate selective inhibition. The DXMS data obtained for the p38alpha.CMPD1
complex were compared to the data obtained for the p38alpha.MK2a complex and a
p38alpha.active site binding inhibitor complex. Alterations in the DXMS behavior 
of both p38alpha and MK2a were observed upon complex formation, including but not
limited to the interaction between the carboxy-terminal docking domain of MK2a
and its binding groove on p38alpha. Alterations in the D(2)O exchange of p38alpha
produced by CMPD1 suggest that the substrate selective inhibitor binds in the
vicinity of the active site of p38alpha, resulting in perturbations to regions
containing nucleotide binding pocket residues, docking groove residues (E160 and 
D161), and a Mg(2+) ion cofactor binding residue (D168). Although the exact
mechanism of substrate selective inhibition by this novel inhibitor has not yet
been disclosed, the results suggest that CMPD1 binding in the active site region 
of p38alpha induces perturbations that may result in the suboptimal positioning
of substrates and cofactors in the transition state, resulting in selective
inhibition of p38alpha activity.

PMID: 15362850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Immunol. 2004 Sep 15;173(6):3979-90.

Histone deacetylase 3, a class I histone deacetylase, suppresses MAPK11-mediated 
activating transcription factor-2 activation and represses TNF gene expression.

Mahlknecht U(1), Will J, Varin A, Hoelzer D, Herbein G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, University of Frankfurt Medical Center,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Ulrich_Mahlknecht@med.uni-heidelberg.de

During inflammatory events, the induction of immediate-early genes, such as
TNF-alpha, is regulated by signaling cascades including the JAK/STAT, NF-kappaB, 
and the p38 MAPK pathways, which result in phosphorylation-dependent activation
of transcription factors. We observed the direct interaction of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) 3, a class I histone deacetylase, with MAPK11 (p38 beta
isoform) by West-Western-based screening analysis, pull-down assay, and
two-hybrid system analysis. Results further indicated that HDAC3 decreases the
MAPK11 phosphorylation state and inhibits the activity of the MAPK11-dependent
transcription factor, activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2). LPS-mediated
activation of ATF-2 was inhibited by HDAC3 in a time- and dose-dependent manner. 
Inhibition of HDAC3 expression by RNA interference resulted in increased ATF-2
activation in response to LPS stimulation. In agreement with decreased ATF-2
transcriptional activity by HDAC3, HDAC3-repressed TNF gene expression, and TNF
protein production observed in response to LPS stimulation. Therefore, our
results indicate that HDAC3 interacts directly and selectively with MAPK11,
represses ATF-2 transcriptional activity, and acts as a regulator of TNF gene
expression in LPS-stimulated cells, especially in mononuclear phagocytes.

Copyright 2004 The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 15356147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. FEBS Lett. 2004 Aug 13;572(1-3):177-83.

Signalling pathways involved in multisite phosphorylation of the transcription
factor ATF-2.

Morton S(1), Davis RJ, Cohen P.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, MSI/WTB Complex, University of Dundee,
Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK.

The multisite phosphorylation of the transcription factor ATF-2 was investigated 
using transformed embryonic fibroblasts from wild-type mice and mice deficient in
c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK)1 and 2, and in the presence and absence of
inhibitors of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) and the classical
MAP kinase cascade. In wild-type cells, p38 MAPK and extracellular
signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK)1/2 were not rate limiting for the
phosphorylation of Thr69, Thr71 or Ser90. In JNK-deficient cells, p38 MAPK
substituted for JNK partially in the phosphorylation of Thr69 and p38 MAPK or
ERK1/2 in the phosphorylation of Thr71. JNK was the only MAP kinase that
phosphorylated Ser90 under the conditions examined.

PMID: 15304344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 8;279(41):42850-9. Epub 2004 Aug 2.

Regulation of Swi6/HP1-dependent heterochromatin assembly by cooperation of
components of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway and a histone
deacetylase Clr6.

Kim HS(1), Choi ES, Shin JA, Jang YK, Park SD.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Gyeonggi 411-769, Republic
of Korea.

A study of gene silencing within the mating-type region of fission yeast defines 
two distinct pathways responsible for the establishment of heterochromatin
assembly. One is RNA interference-dependent and acts on centromere-homologous
repeats (cenH). The other is a stochastic Swi6 (the fission yeast HP1
homolog)-dependent mechanism that is not fully understood. Here we find that
activating transcription factor (Atf1) and Pcr1, the fission yeast bZIP
transcription factors homologous to human ATF-2, are crucial for proper histone
deacetylation of both H3 and H4. This deacetylation is a prerequisite for
subsequent H3 lysine 9 methylation and Swi6-dependent heterochromatin assembly
across the rest of the silent mating-type (mat) region lacking the RNA
interference-dependent cenH repeat. Moreover, Atf1 and Pcr1 can form complexes
with both a histone deacetylase, Clr6, and Swi6, and clr6 mutations affected the 
H3/H4 acetylation patterns, similar to the atf1 and pcr1 deletion mutant
phenotypes at the endogenous mat loci and at the ctt1+ promoter region
surrounding ATF/CRE-binding site. These data suggest that Atf1 and Pcr1
participate in an early step essential for heterochromatin assembly at the mat
locus and silencing of transcriptional targets of Atf1. Furthermore, a
phosphorylation event catalyzed by the conserved mitogen-activated protein kinase
pathway is important for regulation of heterochromatin silencing by Atf1 and
Pcr1. These findings suggest a role for the mitogen-activated protein kinase
pathway and histone deacetylase in Swi6-based heterochromatin assembly.

PMID: 15292231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 10;279(37):38797-802. Epub 2004 Jul 1.

Adenylyl cyclase type VI gene transfer reduces phospholamban expression in
cardiac myocytes via activating transcription factor 3.

Gao MH(1), Tang T, Guo T, Sun SQ, Feramisco JR, Hammond HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, USA.

Cardiac-directed expression of adenylyl cyclase type VI (AC(VI)) increases
stimulated cAMP production, improves heart function, and increases survival in
cardiomyopathy. In contrast, pharmacological agents that increase intracellular
levels of cAMP have detrimental effects on cardiac function and survival. We
wondered whether effects that are independent of cAMP might be responsible for
these salutary outcomes associated with AC(VI) expression. We therefore conducted
a series of experiments focused on how gene transcription is influenced by AC(VI)
in cultured neonatal rat cardiac myocytes, with a particular focus on genes that 
might influence cardiac function. We found that overexpression of AC(VI)
down-regulated mRNA and protein expression of phospholamban, an inhibitor of the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase. We determined that the cAMP-responsive-like
element in the phospholamban (PLB) promoter was critical for down-regulation by
AC(VI). Overexpression of AC(VI) did not alter the expression of CREB, CREM,
ATF1, ATF2, or ATF4 proteins. In contrast, overexpression of AC(VI) increased
expression of ATF3 protein, a suppressor of transcription. Following AC(VI) gene 
transfer, when cardiac myocytes were stimulated with isoproterenol or NKH477, a
water-soluble forskolin analog that directly stimulates AC, expression of ATF3
protein was increased even more, which correlated with reduced expression of PLB.
We then showed that AC(VI)-induced ATF3 protein binds to the cAMP-responsive-like
element on the PLB promoter and that overexpression of ATF3 in cardiac myocytes
inhibits PLB promoter activity. These findings indicate that AC(VI) has effects
on gene transcription that are not directly dependent on cAMP generation.

PMID: 15231818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Anat Sci Int. 2004 Jun;79(2):87-94.

Transient increase in anti-p-ATF2 immunoreactivity in the late secretion
ameloblasts apical to the transition zone of rat incisors.

Nishikawa S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Tsururmi University School of Dental Medicine, 2-1-3
Tsurumi, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-8501, Japan. nishikawa-s@tsurumi-u.ac.jp

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) was localized in the ameloblasts of rat 
incisors by immunohistochemistry. A specific antibody against phosphorylated ATF2
(p-ATF2), which is an activated form of ATF2, was detected from the proliferation
zone to maturation ameloblasts just after the transition. In the secretion zone, 
a transient increase in p-ATF2 was observed in the late secretion ameloblast
nuclei, where a stronger reactivity of p-ATF2 extended from 1 mm apical to the
transition to the transition zone, whereas ameloblast nuclei in most of the
maturation zone exhibited either weak or no reactivity. A similar pattern was
also observed in the case of c-Jun immunohistochemistry, except for in most of
the maturation zone, where strong c-Jun reactivity was detected. Thus, ATF-2 and 
c-Jun are deeply involved in amelogenesis and, in particular, ATF2 is related to 
the proliferation, differentiation, secretion and transition zones.

PMID: 15218628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Carcinogenesis. 2004 Oct;25(10):1847-52. Epub 2004 Jun 10.

Involvement of ERKs and mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase in
UVC-induced phosphorylation of ATF2 in JB6 cells.

Zhu F(1), Zhang Y, Bode AM, Dong Z.

Author information: 
(1)Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, 801 16th Avenue NE, Austin, MN
55912, USA.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) has been shown to regulate gene
expression in the cellular response to environmental stresses such as ultraviolet
(UV) irradiation. However, the signal transduction mechanism of ATF2 activation
by UV is not as yet completely understood. In the present study, we provide
evidence showing that UVC-stimulated phosphorylation of ATF2 (Thr71) was to
varying degrees prevented by a dominant negative mutant of p38beta kinase, c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase 1 (JNK1) or extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (ERK2). The
phosphorylation was also suppressed by PD98059, an MEK inhibitor, or H89, a
potent inhibitor of mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase 1 (MSK1), and a 
C- or N-terminal 'kinase-dead' mutant of MSK1 (MSK1-Cd or MSK1-Nd). Furthermore, 
co- immunoprecipitation experiments revealed a potential intracellular signaling 
complex consisting of ATF2 and ERKs and/or MSK1. In vitro kinase assays revealed 
that ERK1, ERK2 and MSK1, like p38 kinase and JNK2, directly phosphorylate ATF2
at Thr71, but addition of RSK2 or Akt1 had almost no effect. Active kinase
immunoprecipitated by an MSK1, ERKs or p38 antibody from an extract of JB6 cells 
irradiated by UVC can directly phosphorylate ATF2 at Thr71, suggesting UVC
induces a direct phosphorylation of ATF2 by ERKs or MSK1. Overall, our results
reveal that MSK1 and ERKs, like p38 kinase and JNKs, are required for ATF2
phosphorylation (Thr71) in the UVC response.

PMID: 15192015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2004 Dec;53(12):1119-26.

Analysis of the autoantibody repertoire in Burkitt's lymphoma patients: frequent 
response against the transcription factor ATF-2.

Kersten C(1), Delabie J, Gaudernack G, Smeland EB, Fosså A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Montebello, 0310
Oslo, Norway. christik@klinmed.uio.no

In the last few years, serological identification of tumour-associated antigens
(TAAs) by recombinant cDNA expression cloning (SEREX) has enabled the mapping of 
humoral immune responses against TAAs in various types of cancer. The present
paper describes the application of SEREX to Burkitt's lymphoma (BL), a malignancy
not previously characterized by SEREX. By using a cDNA library from a BL cell
line that does not express IgG, technical difficulties related to background
immunoglobulin clones were overcome. Screening with sera from three BL patients
revealed immunoreactivity against seven different gene products, six of which
represent known human genes. Five proteins had previously been characterized by
SEREX in other malignancies or identified as targets of autoantibodies in
autoimmune disease. Seroreactivity against ATF-2, a member of the AP-1
transcription factor family, was validated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) and Western blot analysis using recombinant ATF-2 protein. Autoantibody
responses against ATF-2 were detected by ELISA in 6 of 8 BL patients, compared
with 6 of 13 patients with T-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (T-NHL), 5 of 23
patients with follicular lymphoma and 2 of 27 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
patients. In contrast, reactivity was found in only 1 of 50 healthy volunteers.
Next, we showed by immunohistochemistry that the activated form of ATF2 (ATF-2pp)
was highly expressed in six different BL samples. We conclude that the SEREX
approach with a B-cell cDNA source is applicable in NHL. Furthermore, we
identified genes with possible involvement in the pathogenesis of BL using this
technique.

PMID: 15185015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 25;279(26):27458-65. Epub 2004 Apr 21.

Human vaccinia-related kinase 1 (VRK1) activates the ATF2 transcriptional
activity by novel phosphorylation on Thr-73 and Ser-62 and cooperates with JNK.

Sevilla A(1), Santos CR, Vega FM, Lazo PA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad de Salamanca, Campus Miguel de Unamuno,
E-37007 Salamanca, Spain.

In the human kinome, vaccinia-related kinase-1 (VRK1) is a new Ser-Thr kinase
associated with proliferating tissues. VRK1 colocalizes with ATF2 in the nucleus 
and can form a stable complex. We have studied the phosphorylation of the
transcription factor ATF2, which regulates gene expression by forming dimers with
proteins with basic region-leucine zipper domains and recognizing cAMP-response
element or AP1 sequences implicated in cellular responses to stress. VRK1
phosphorylates ATF2 mainly on Thr-73, stabilizing the ATF2 protein and increasing
its intracellular level. Mutagenesis studies showed that Thr-73 and Ser-62 are
implicated in ATF2 transcriptional activation by VRK1 detected in a functional
assay based on ATF2 dimerization. VRK1 can activate the collagenase gene promoter
that is regulated by ATF2 in a dose-dependent manner. Loss of kinase activity
(K179E mutant) or the T73A substitution in ATF2 prevents both its accumulation
and activation of transcription. VRK1 and JNK, which phosphorylates ATF2 in
Thr-69 and Thr-71, have an additive effect on ATF2-dependent transcription at
suboptimal doses. Therefore, two groups of amino acids in the ATF2 amino-terminal
region can integrate different cellular signals mediated by at least five
different kinases. VRK1 is an element of a novel signaling pathway that regulates
gene transcription.

PMID: 15105425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 25;279(26):27472-81. Epub 2004 Apr 15.

Aberrant polycystin-1 expression results in modification of activator protein-1
activity, whereas Wnt signaling remains unaffected.

Le NH(1), van der Bent P, Huls G, van de Wetering M, Loghman-Adham M, Ong AC,
Calvet JP, Clevers H, Breuning MH, van Dam H, Peters DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden 2333
AL, The Netherlands.

Polycystin-1, the polycystic kidney disease 1 gene product, has been implicated
in several signaling complexes that are known to regulate essential cellular
functions. We investigated the role of polycystin-1 in Wnt signaling and
activator protein-1 (AP-1) activation. To this aim, a membrane-targeted construct
encoding the conserved C-terminal region of mouse polycystin-1 reported to
mediate signal transduction activity was expressed in human embryonic and renal
epithelial cells. To ensure specificity and minimal cotransfection effects, we
focused our study on the endogenous proteins that actually transduce the signals,
beta-catenin and T-cell factor/lymphoid-enhancing factor for Wnt signaling and
(phosphorylated) c-Jun, ATF2, and c-Fos for AP-1. Our data indicate that the
C-terminal region of polycystin-1 activates AP-1 by inducing phosphorylation and 
expression of at least c-Jun and ATF2, whereas c-Fos was not affected. Under our 
experimental conditions, polycystin-1 did not modulate Wnt signaling. AP-1
activity was aberrant in human autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
(ADPKD) renal cystic epithelial cells and in renal epithelial cells expressing
transgenic full-length polycystin-1, resulting in decreased Jun-ATF and increased
Jun-Fos activity, whereas Wnt signaling remained unaffected. Since our data
indicate that aberrant polycystin-1 expression results in altered AP-1 activity, 
polycystin-1 may be required for adequate AP-1 activity.

PMID: 15087466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 11;279(24):25313-9. Epub 2004 Apr 12.

c-Fos is a mediator of the c-myc-induced apoptotic signaling in serum-deprived
hepatoma cells via the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.

Kalra N(1), Kumar V.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India.

The proto-oncogene c-myc encodes a transcription factor that plays a pivotal role
in cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. The signaling mechanism of
c-Myc-induced apoptosis was investigated on the human hepatoma Huh7 cells under
growth factor-deprived conditions. The apoptotic process did not involve p53.
Rather it was dependent on the expression of c-Fos. Activation of caspases 3 and 
9 and down-regulation of Bcl2 were observed in the apoptotic process, indicating 
it to be a mitochondria-dependent event. An increase in the p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase that was mediated by a Rac1-dependent and cdc42-independent
pathway eventually leading to up-regulation of c-Fos activity was also observed. 
Deletion analysis of the promoter region of the c-fos gene indicated that the
ATF2-responsive element conferred the Myc-induced expression of c-Fos.
Co-expression of the dominant-negative mutants of c-Fos, p38, and Rac1 blocked
the Myc-mediated apoptosis. SB20358, a chemical inhibitor of p38 pathway, also
specifically blocked the apoptotic signaling by c-Myc. Furthermore, co-expression
of the hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) along with Myc abrogated the apoptotic
signals. The HBx expression was associated with an increase in the levels of
phosphorylated AKT and down-regulation of c-Fos by Myc. Thus, c-Fos seems be a
new mediator of c-Myc-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 15078869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Cell. 2004 Apr 9;14(1):29-41.

The small GTP-binding protein RhoA regulates c-jun by a ROCK-JNK signaling axis.

Marinissen MJ(1), Chiariello M, Tanos T, Bernard O, Narumiya S, Gutkind JS.

Author information: 
(1)Oral and Pharyngeal Cancer Branch, National Institute of Dental and
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

RhoA regulates the actin cytoskeleton and the expression of genes associated with
cell proliferation. This includes c-fos and c-jun, which are members of the AP1
family of transcription factors that play a key role in normal and aberrant cell 
growth. Whereas RhoA stimulates the c-fos SRE by a recently elucidated mechanism 
that is dependent on actin treadmilling, how RhoA regulates c-jun is still poorly
understood. We found that RhoA stimulates c-jun expression through ROCK, but
independently from the ability of ROCK to promote actin polymerization. Instead, 
we found that ROCK activates JNK, which then phosphorylates c-Jun and ATF2 when
bound to the c-jun promoter. Thus, ROCK represents a point of signal divergence
downstream from RhoA, as it promotes actin reorganization and the consequent
expression from the c-fos SRE, while a parallel pathway connects ROCK to JNK,
thereby stimulating c-jun expression. Ultimately, these pathways converge in the 
nucleus to regulate AP1 activity.

PMID: 15068801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 23;101(12):4222-7. Epub 2004 Mar 9.

Transcriptional switch by activating transcription factor 2-derived peptide
sensitizes melanoma cells to apoptosis and inhibits their tumorigenicity.

Bhoumik A(1), Jones N, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, 
USA.

The notorious resistance of melanoma cells to drug treatment can be overcome by
expression of a 50-aa peptide derived from activating transcription factor 2
(ATF2(50-100)). Here we demonstrate that ATF2(50-100) induced apoptosis by
sequestering ATF2 to the cytoplasm, thereby inhibiting its transcriptional
activities. Furthermore, ATF2(50-100) binds to c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and 
increases its activity. Mutation within ATF2(50-100) that impairs association
with JNK and the inhibition of JNK or c-Jun expression by RNA interference (RNAi)
reduces the degree of ATF2(50-100)-induced apoptosis. In contrast, TAM67, a
dominant negative of the Jun family of transcription factors, or JunD RNAi
attenuates sensitization of melanoma cells expressing ATF2(50-100) to apoptosis
after treatment with anisomycin, which is used as a model drug. Mutations within 
the JNK binding region of ATF2(50-100) or expression of TAM67 or JunD RNAi
attenuates inhibition of melanoma's tumorigenicity by ATF2(50-100). We conclude
that inhibition of ATF2 in concert with increased JNK/Jun and JunD activities is 
central for the sensitization of melanoma cells to apoptosis and inhibition of
their tumorigenicity.

PMCID: PMC384722
PMID: 15010535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 7;279(19):19916-23. Epub 2004 Feb 25.

Biliverdin reductase, a novel regulator for induction of activating transcription
factor-2 and heme oxygenase-1.

Kravets A(1), Hu Z, Miralem T, Torno MD, Maines MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Rochester Medical
Center, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Biliverdin IXalpha reductase (BVR) catalyzes reduction of the HO activity
product, biliverdin, to bilirubin. hBVR is a serine/threonine kinase that
contains a bZip domain. Presently, regulation of gene expression by hBVR was
examined. 293A cells were infected with adenovirus-doxycycline (Ad-Dox)-inducible
hBVR cDNA. High level expression of hBVR was determined at mRNA, protein, and
activity levels 8 h after induction. Cell signal transduction microarray analysis
of cells infected with expression or with the control Ad-inverted (INV)-hBVR
vector identified ATF-2 among several up-regulated genes. ATF-2 is a bZip
transcription factor for activation of cAMP response element (CRE) and a dimeric 
partner to c-jun in MAPK pathway that regulates the stress protein, HO-1,
expression. Northern and Western blot analyses showed increases of approximately 
10-fold in ATF-2 mRNA and protein at 16 and 24 h after Dox addition. Ad-INV-hBVR 
did not effect ATF-2 expression. In hBVR-infected cells, levels of HO-1 mRNA and 
protein were increased. In vitro translated hBVR and nuclear extract containing
hBVR in gel mobility-shift assay bound to AP-1 sites in the ATF-2 promoter region
and to an oligonucleotide containing the CRE site. Both bindings could be
competed out by excess unlabeled probe; in the presence of hBVR antibody, they
displayed shifted bands. Co-transfection of hBVR with ATF-2 or c-jun promoters
caused a severalfold increase in luciferase activity. hBVR modulation of ATF-2
and HO-1 expression suggests it has a potential role in regulation of AP-1 and
cAMP-regulated genes and a role in cell signaling. We propose that increased
expression of the protein can be used to alter the gene expression profile in the
cell.

PMID: 14988408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Cancer Ther. 2004 Feb;3(2):111-21.

Gene expression correlating with response to paclitaxel in ovarian carcinoma
xenografts.

Bani MR(1), Nicoletti MI, Alkharouf NW, Ghilardi C, Petersen D, Erba E, Sausville
EA, Liu ET, Giavazzi R.

Author information: 
(1)Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research, Bergamo and Milan, Italy.

We have investigated gene expression profiles of human ovarian carcinomas in vivo
during Taxol(R) (paclitaxel) treatment and observed a difference in expression.
Nude mice bearing 1A9 or 1A9PTX22 xenografts were given 60 mg/kg of paclitaxel.
Therapeutic efficacy was achieved for 1A9, while 1A9PTX22 did not respond. Tumor 
tissues harvested 4 and 24 h after treatment were evaluated by cDNA microarray
against untreated tumors. Paclitaxel caused the modulation of more genes in 1A9
than in 1A9PTX22 tumors, in accordance to their therapeutic response. Most gene
expression alterations were detected 24 h after paclitaxel administration and
affected genes involved in various biological functions including cell cycle
regulation and cell proliferation (CDC2, CDKN1A, PLAB, and TOP2A), apoptosis
(BNIP3 and PIG8), signal transduction and transcriptional regulation (ARF1, ATF2,
FOS, GNA11, HDAC3, MADH2, SLUG, and SPRY4), fatty acid biosynthesis and sterol
metabolism (FDPS, IDI1, LIPA, and SC5D), and IFN-mediated signaling (G1P3, IFI16,
IFI27, IFITM1, and ISG15). The modulation of two representative genes, CDKN1A and
TOP2A, was validated by Northern analyses on a panel of seven ovarian carcinoma
xenograft models undergoing treatment with paclitaxel. We found that the changes 
in expression level of these genes was strictly associated with the
responsiveness to paclitaxel. Our study shows the feasibility of obtaining gene
expression profiles of xenografted tumor models as a result of drug exposure.
This in turn might provide insights related to the drugs' action in vivo that
will anticipate the response to treatment manifested by tumors and could be the
basis for novel approaches to molecular pharmacodynamics.

PMID: 14985451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Virol. 2004 Feb;78(4):1665-74.

Selective induction of Th2-attracting chemokines CCL17 and CCL22 in human B cells
by latent membrane protein 1 of Epstein-Barr virus.

Nakayama T(1), Hieshima K, Nagakubo D, Sato E, Nakayama M, Kawa K, Yoshie O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kinki University School of Medicine, Osaka-Sayama,
Osaka 589-8511, Japan.

Chemokines are likely to play important roles in the pathophysiology of diseases 
associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Here, we have analyzed the repertoire
of chemokines expressed by EBV-infected B cells. EBV infection of B cells induced
expression of TARC/CCL17 and MDC/CCL22, which are known to attract Th2 cells and 
regulatory T cells via CCR4, and also upregulated constitutive expression of
MIP-1 alpha/CCL3, MIP-1 beta/CCL4, and RANTES/CCL5, which are known to attract
Th1 cells and cytotoxic T cells via CCR5. Accordingly, EBV-immortalized B cells
secreted these chemokines, especially CCL3, CCL4, and CCL22, in large quantities.
EBV infection or stable expression of LMP1 also induced CCL17 and CCL22 in a
B-cell line, BJAB. The inhibitors of the TRAF/NF-kappa B pathway (BAY11-7082) and
the p38/ATF2 pathway (SB202190) selectively suppressed the expression of CCL17
and CCL22 in EBV-immortalized B cells and BJAB-LMP1. Consistently,
transient-transfection assays using CCL22 promoter-reporter constructs
demonstrated that two NF-kappa B sites and a single AP-1 site were involved in
the activation of the CCL22 promoter by LMP1. Finally, serum CCL22 levels were
significantly elevated in infectious mononucleosis. Collectively, LMP1 induces
CCL17 and CCL22 in EBV-infected B cells via activation of NF-kappa B and probably
ATF2. Production of CCL17 and CCL22, which attract Th2 and regulatory T cells,
may help EBV-infected B cells evade immune surveillance by Th1 cells. However,
the concomitant production of CCL3, CCL4, and CCL5 by EBV-infected B cells may
eventually attract Th1 cells and cytotoxic T cells, leading to elimination of
EBV-infected B cells at latency III and to selection of those with limited
expression of latent genes.

PMCID: PMC369498
PMID: 14747532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Feb 2;1644(1):17-25.

Endothelin-1 promotes phosphorylation of CREB transcription factor in primary
cultures of neonatal rat cardiac myocytes: implications for the regulation of
c-jun expression.

Harrison JG(1), Sugden PH, Clerk A.

Author information: 
(1)NHLI Division (Cardiac Medicine Section), Faculty of Medicine, Imperial
College London, Flowers Building, Armstrong Road, South Kensington, London SW7
2AZ, UK.

Cardiac myocyte hypertrophy is associated with an increase in expression of
immediate early genes (e.g. c-jun) via activation of pre-existing transcription
factors. The activity of CREB transcription factor is regulated through
phosphorylation of Ser-133 by one of several protein kinases (e.g. protein kinase
A (PKA), p90 ribosomal S6 kinases (RSKs) and the related kinase, MSK1). A
cell-permeable form of cAMP, hypertrophic agonists (endothelin-1 (ET-1),
phenylephrine (PE)) and hyperosmotic shock all promoted phosphorylation of
CREB(Ser-133) in rat neonatal cardiac myocytes. The response to endothelin-1
required the extracellular signal-regulated kinase cascade which stimulates both 
RSKs and MSK1. Phosphorylation of CREB(Ser-133) in response to ET-1 was not
associated with any increase in DNA binding to a consensus cAMP-response element 
(CRE). The rat c-jun promoter contains elements which may bind either c-Jun/ATF2 
or CREB/ATF1 dimers. Using extracts from rat cardiac myocytes, we identified at
least two complexes which bind to the most proximal of these elements, one of
which contained CREB and the other c-Jun. Thus, phosphorylation and activation of
CREB in cardiac myocytes may be effected by a range of different stimuli to
influence the expression of immediate early genes such as c-jun.

PMID: 14741741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 23;279(17):16996-7003. Epub 2004 Jan 20.

Activation and interaction of ATF2 with the coactivator ASC-2 are responsive for 
granulocytic differentiation by retinoic acid.

Hong S(1), Choi HM, Park MJ, Kim YH, Choi YH, Kim HH, Choi YH, Cheong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busan 609-735, Korea.

Terminal differentiation of hematopoietic cells follows a precisely orchestrated 
program of transcriptional regulatory events at the promoters of both
lineage-specific and ubiquitous genes. Here we show that the transcription factor
ATF2 is associated with the induction of granulocytic differentiation, and the
molecular interaction of ATF2 with a tissue-specific coactivator activating
signal cointegator-2 (ASC-2) potentiates the differentiation procedure. All-trans
retinoic acid (RA) induced the phosphorylation and expression of ATF2 in the
early and middle phase of granulocyte differentiation, respectively. The
activation of granulocyte-specific gene expression is increased with the
concerted action of another basic regionleucine zipper factor,
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBPalpha), and ASC-2, which function in a
cooperative manner. The interaction between ATF2 and C/EBPalpha in RA-treated
cells was enhanced by the ectopic expression of ASC-2. ATF2-mediated
transactivation was also increased by co-transfection of ASC-2. This resulted
from the direct protein interaction that the N-terminal transactivation domain of
ATF2 interacts with the central region of ASC-2. Furthermore, the molecular
interaction of ATF2 and ASC-2 was stimulated by RA treatment and inhibited by
p38beta kinase inhibitor. Taking these results together, these results suggest
that the differentiation-dependent expression and phosphorylation of ATF2 protein
physically and functionally interacts with C/EBPalpha and coativator ASC-2 and
synergizes to induce target gene transcription during granulocytic
differentiation.

PMID: 14734562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 26;279(13):12051-9. Epub 2004 Jan 12.

p38MAPK acts in the BMP7-dependent stimulatory pathway during epithelial cell
morphogenesis and is regulated by Smad1.

Hu MC(1), Wasserman D, Hartwig S, Rosenblum ND.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Program in Developmental Biology, The Hospital for
Sick Children, University of Toronto, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G
1X8, Canada.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-7 exerts dose-dependent stimulatory and
inhibitory effects during renal branching morphogenesis. Previously, we
identified an inhibitory role for activin-like kinase receptors and Smad1 in
BMP-dependent inhibition (Piscione, T. D., Phan, T., and Rosenblum, N. D. (2001) 
Am. J. Physiol. 280, F19-F33). Here we demonstrate a novel role for p38
mitogen-activated kinase (p38(MAPK)) in BMP7-dependent stimulatory signaling.
Stimulatory doses (0.25 nm) of BMP7 increased p38(MAPK) activity and stimulated
phosphorylation of endogenous activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) in a
p38(MAPK)-dependent manner in murine inner medullary collecting duct (mIMCD-3)
cells. In contrast, high doses (10 nm) of BMP7 inhibited p38(MAPK) activity and
phosphorylation of endogenous ATF2. Treatment with BMP7 exerted no significant
effect on the levels of the phosphorylated forms of endogenous SAPK/JNK or p44
and p42 (ERK1 and ERK2) protein kinases. To investigate the functional importance
of p38(MAPK) signaling, we showed that SB203580, a p38(MAPK) inhibitor, blocked
the stimulatory effect of BMP7 on mIMCD-3 cell morphogenesis but had no effect on
BMP7-dependent inhibition in a three-dimensional culture model. To identify
mechanisms by which BMP7-dependent inhibitory signaling suppresses p38(MAPK)
activity, we measured p38(MAPK) activity in ligand independent mIMCD-3 models of 
enhanced and suppressed Smad signaling. Basal activity of p38(MAPK) was decreased
in mIMCD-3 cells and in embryonic kidney tissue expressing a constitutively
active activin-like kinase receptor, but was increased in mIMCD-3 cells stably
expressing a dominant negative form of Smad1. We conclude that BMP7 stimulates
renal epithelial cell morphogenesis via p38(MAPK) and that p38(MAPK) activity is 
negatively regulated by Smad1.

PMID: 14718543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Acta Neuropathol. 2004 Mar;107(3):185-9. Epub 2003 Dec 20.

Active stress kinase p38 enhances and perpetuates abnormal tau phosphorylation
and deposition in Pick's disease.

Puig B(1), Vinals F, Ferrer I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Neuropatologia, Servei d'Anatomia Patològica, Hospital de
Bellvitge, carrer Feixa LLarga sn, 08907 Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.

Abnormal tau hyperphosphorylation and deposition in Pick bodies is a major
abnormality in Pick's disease (PiD). This is associated with increased expression
of the stress-activated protein kinase, p38 kinase, which has the capacity to
phosphorylate tau in vitro. The present study has shown increased expression of
phosphorylated p38 (p38-P), which does not cross-react with phospho-tau, in
sarcosyl-insoluble fractions enriched in abnormal filaments, and
hyperphosphorylated tau in the brain of two PiD cases obtained and processed with
very short (less than 2 h) post-mortem delay. Immunohistochemical studies have
shown p38-P co-localization in 90% of neurons with Pick bodies, whereas no
positive cells are encountered in control brains processed in parallel. Moreover,
p38-immunoprecipitated from sarcosyl-insoluble fractions in PiD brains is
functionally active as it has the capacity to phosphorylate its specific
substrate ATF-2. Combined biochemical, immunohistochemical and functional studies
indicate that active p38 kinase is expressed in a very high percentage of Pick
bodies, thus suggesting a critical role of this kinase in enhancing and
perpetuating tau hyperphosphorylation in PiD.

PMID: 14689204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cancer Res. 2003 Dec 1;63(23):8103-7.

Subcellular localization of activating transcription factor 2 in melanoma
specimens predicts patient survival.

Berger AJ(1), Kluger HM, Li N, Kielhorn E, Halaban R, Ronai Z, Rimm DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06510, USA.

The transcription factor activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) has been shown 
to be associated with melanocytic oncogenesis and melanoma tumor proliferation in
preclinical models. The clinical significance of ATF2 expression is unknown. To
determine the prognostic value of ATF2 in melanoma, we evaluated the pattern and 
level of ATF2 expression in a large cohort of melanoma specimens.
Immunohistochemical staining was performed on a tissue microarray representing
544 patients with a mean follow-up time of 60 months. Expression was evaluated
semiquantitatively and correlated with overall survival and other
clinicopathological data. Strong cytoplasmic ATF2 expression was associated with 
primary specimens rather than metastases (P < 0.0001) and with better survival (P
= 0.0003). Strong nuclear ATF2 expression was associated with metastatic
specimens (P < 0.0001) and with poor survival (P = 0.0008). Patients who had both
weak cytoplasmic and strong nuclear ATF2 staining had the worst outcome, both
among the full cohort of patients (P < 0.0001) and among the patients with
localized disease (n = 269; P < 0.0001). On multivariate analysis of the primary 
cutaneous specimens, weak cytoplasmic staining and strong nuclear staining was an
independent predictor of poor outcome, as was Clark level. Nuclear ATF2 is likely
to be transcriptionally active, whereas cytoplasmic ATF2 probably represents an
inactive form. These findings support other preclinical findings in which
transcriptionally active ATF2 is involved in tumor progression-proliferation in
melanoma. Moreover, our findings suggest that ATF2 might be a useful prognostic
marker in early-stage melanoma.

PMID: 14678960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2004 Mar;29(3):589-97.

ATF2, a member of the CREB/ATF family of transcription factors, in chronic stress
and consequent to antidepressant treatment: animal models and human post-mortem
brains.

Laifenfeld D(1), Karry R, Grauer E, Klein E, Ben-Shachar D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Psychobiology, The Department of Psychiatry, Rambam Medical
Center and B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion IIT, Haifa, Israel.

The regulation of gene expression has been implicated in the etiology and
treatment of depression. Transcription factors serve as the intermediates between
intracellular cascades and gene expression, and may therefore be involved in the 
pathophysiology and pharmacotherapy of depression. We and others have previously 
reported an increase in the phosphorylation of the transcription factor cAMP
response element binding protein (CREB) by antidepressants, alongside brain
region-specific alterations in pCREB by stress. In the present study, we examined
the expression of another member of the CREB/ATF family of transcription factors,
ATF2, in the brains of rats chronically treated with two different
antidepressants, and in rats 4 months after their exposure to prolonged stress.
ATF2 phosphorylation was decreased by antidepressants and increased at the
aftermath of prolonged stress, specifically in the frontal cortex. We also
examined ATF2 expression in the ventral parieto-occipital region of post-mortem
human brains of normal controls, depressed, bipolar, and schizophrenic patients, 
obtained from the Stanley Foundation Brain Consortium. No alterations were
observed in the levels of ATF2. However, in the depressed group, the pATF2 levels
were higher in unmedicated compared to medicated patients, suggesting an
antidepressant-induced reduction in pATF2. We discuss the possible role of ATF2
in depression, and propose that an interplay between ATF2 and CREB, and possibly 
other transcription factors, determines the final gene expression pattern in the 
etiology and treatment of depression.

PMID: 14647483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. EMBO J. 2003 Dec 1;22(23):6256-66.

RNA-binding protein Csx1 mediates global control of gene expression in response
to oxidative stress.

Rodríguez-Gabriel MA(1), Burns G, McDonald WH, Martín V, Yates JR 3rd, Bähler J, 
Russell P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA. miguelr@scripps.edu

Fission yeast Spc1 (Sty1), a stress-activated mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) homologous to human p38, orchestrates global changes in gene expression in
response to diverse forms of cytotoxic stress. This control is partly mediated
through Atf1, a transcription factor homologous to human ATF2. How Spc1 controls 
Atf1, and how the cells tailor gene expression patterns to different forms of
stress, are unknown. Here we describe Csx1, a novel protein crucial for survival 
of oxidative but not osmotic stress. Csx1 associates with and stabilizes atf1+
mRNA in response to oxidative stress. Csx1 controls expression of the majority of
the genes induced by oxidative stress, including most of the genes regulated by
Spc1 and Atf1. These studies reveal a novel mechanism controlling MAPK-regulated 
transcription factors and suggest how gene expression patterns can be customized 
to specific forms of stress. Csx1-like proteins in humans may perform similar
tasks.

PMCID: PMC291838
PMID: 14633985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 20;279(8):7024-8. Epub 2003 Nov 20.

Helicobacter pylori VacA activates the p38/activating transcription factor
2-mediated signal pathway in AZ-521 cells.

Nakayama M(1), Kimura M, Wada A, Yahiro K, Ogushi K, Niidome T, Fujikawa A,
Shirasaka D, Aoyama N, Kurazono H, Noda M, Moss J, Hirayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki
University, Nagasaki 8528523, Japan.

Persistent Helicobacter pylori colonization in the stomach induces gastritis and 
peptic ulcer and interferes with ulcer healing. Most strains of H. pylori produce
a cytotoxin, VacA, that induces cytoplasmic vacuolation in epithelial cells with 
structural and functional changes, leading to gastric injury. VacA is known to
cause cell death by mitochondrial damage. We hypothesized that VacA might disrupt
other signaling pathways; to that end, we examined the effects of VacA on MAPKs
to elucidate their role in the abnormalities seen in VacA-treated cells. VacA
stimulated phosphorylation of p38 and Erk1/2, but not JNK, in AZ-521 cells. Both 
phosphorylation and kinase activation of p38 were maximal 10-30 min after
addition of VacA and declined thereafter. Treatment with anti-VacA antibody or
the p38 inhibitor SB203580 blocked p38 phosphorylation caused by VacA and
inhibited VacA-induced phosphorylation of activating transcription factor 2
(ATF-2), which is implicated in transcriptional control of stress-responsive
genes. These data indicate that VacA stimulates a p38/ATF-2-mediated signal
pathway. However, 10 microM SB203580, which is sufficient to decrease p38
phosphorylation, did not inhibit VacA-induced cellular vacuolation, decrease in
mitochondrial membrane potential, or cytochrome c release from mitochondria.
These results suggest that VacA-induced activation of p38/ATF-2-mediated signal
pathway is independent of cellular vacuolation, decrease in mitochondrial
membrane potential, or cytochrome c release from mitochondria caused by VacA. The
cytotoxin may thus act independently on several cellular targets, leading to
disruption of signaling, regulatory, and metabolic pathways.

PMID: 14630932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 13;279(7):5288-97. Epub 2003 Dec 1.

Induction of CHOP expression by amino acid limitation requires both ATF4
expression and ATF2 phosphorylation.

Averous J(1), Bruhat A, Jousse C, Carraro V, Thiel G, Fafournoux P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Nutrition et Métabolisme Protéique, Institut National de la Recherche
Agronomique de Theix, 63122 Saint Genès Champanelle, France.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 9;279(15):15701.

The CHOP gene is transcriptionally induced by amino acid starvation. We have
previously identified a genomic cis-acting element (amino acid response element
(AARE)) involved in the transcriptional activation of the human CHOP gene by
leucine starvation and shown that it binds the activating transcription factor 2 
(ATF2). The present study was designed to identify other transcription factors
capable of binding to the CHOP AARE and to establish their role with regard to
induction of the gene by amino acid deprivation. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assay and transient transfection experiments show that several transcription
factors that belong to the C/EBP or ATF families bind the AARE sequence and
activate transcription. Among all these transcription factors, only ATF4 and ATF2
are involved in the amino acid control of CHOP expression. We show that
inhibition of ATF2 or ATF4 expression impairs the transcriptional activation of
CHOP by amino acid starvation. The transacting capacity of ATF4 depends on its
expression level and that of ATF2 on its phosphorylation state. In response to
leucine starvation, ATF4 expression and ATF2 phosphorylation are increased.
However, induction of ATF4 expression by the endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway
does not fully activate the AARE-dependent transcription. Taken together our
results demonstrate that at least two pathways, one leading to ATF4 induction and
one leading to ATF2 phosphorylation, are necessary to induce CHOP expression by
amino acid starvation. This work was extended to the regulation of other amino
acid regulated genes and suggests that ATF4 and ATF2 are key components of the
amino acid control of gene expression.

PMID: 14630918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Nov 28;311(4):870-6.

Activation of AP-1 signal transduction pathway by SARS coronavirus nucleocapsid
protein.

He R(1), Leeson A, Andonov A, Li Y, Bastien N, Cao J, Osiowy C, Dobie F, Cutts T,
Ballantine M, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)National Microbiology Laboratory, Health Canada, 1015 Arlington Street, R3E
3R2, Winnipeg, MB, Canada. Runtao_He@hc-sc.gc.ca

In March 2003, a novel coronavirus was isolated from patients exhibiting atypical
pneumonia and subsequently proven to be the causative agent of the disease now
referred to as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). The complete genome of
the SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) has since been sequenced. The SARS-CoV
nucleocapsid (SARS-CoV N) shares little homology with other members of the
coronavirus family. To determine if the N protein is involved in the regulation
of cellular signal transduction, an ELISA-based assay on transcription factors
was used. We found that the amount of transcription factors binding to promoter
sequences of c-Fos, ATF2, CREB-1, and FosB was increased by the expression of
SARS-CoV N. Since these factors are related to AP-1 signal transduction pathway, 
we investigated whether the AP-1 pathway was activated by SARS-CoV N protein
using the PathDetect system. The results demonstrated that the expression of N
protein, not the membrane protein (M), activated AP-1 pathway. We also found that
SARS-CoV N protein does not activate NF-kappaB pathway, demonstrating that
activation of important cellular pathways by SAS-CoV N protein is selective. Thus
our data for the first time indicate that SARS-CoV has encoded a strategy to
regulate cellular signaling process.

PMID: 14623261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Psychiatry. 2003 Nov;8(11):916-24.

Screening of nine candidate genes for autism on chromosome 2q reveals rare
nonsynonymous variants in the cAMP-GEFII gene.

Bacchelli E(1), Blasi F, Biondolillo M, Lamb JA, Bonora E, Barnby G, Parr J,
Beyer KS, Klauck SM, Poustka A, Bailey AJ, Monaco AP, Maestrini E; International 
Molecular Genetic Study of Autism Consortium (IMGSAC).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Evoluzionistica Sperimentale, University of Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.

The results from several genome scans indicate that chromosome 2q21-q33 is likely
to contain an autism susceptibility locus. We studied the potential contribution 
of nine positional and functional candidate genes: TBR-1; GAD1; DLX1; DLX2;
cAMP-GEFII; CHN1; ATF2; HOXD1 and NEUROD1. Screening these genes for DNA variants
and association analysis using intragenic single nucleotide polymorphisms did not
provide evidence for a major role in the aetiology of autism. Four rare
nonsynonymous variants were identified, however, in the cAMP-GEFII gene. These
variants were present in five families, where they segregate with the autistic
phenotype, and were not observed in control individuals. The significance of
these variants is unclear, as their low frequency in IMGSAC families does not
account for the relatively strong linkage signal at the 2q locus. Further studies
are needed to clarify the contribution of cAMP-GEFII gene variants to autism
susceptibility.

PMID: 14593429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Int J Occup Med Environ Health. 2003;16(3):191-9.

Molecular events associated with dendritic cells activation by contact
sensitizers.

Stepnik M(1), Arkusz J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, Nofer Institute of Occupational
Medicine, Lódz, Poland. mstep@imp.lodz.pl

Dendritic cells are unique heterogenous cell population capable of responding to 
different inflammatory signals. These signals induce the process of maturation
forcing cells to leave the inflamed site and to migrate to draining lymph nodes. 
During this process, dendritic cells have to initiate differentiation responses
expressed among others by up-regulation of some surface antigens (e.g., MHC or
costimulatory molecules) and down-regulation of the others (e.g., E-cadherin).
There are more and more data published indicating that chemical compounds known
to initiate contact hypersensitivity (haptens) can also induce the process of
dendritic cells maturation resembling in some aspects their maturation after
contact with common inflammatory factors. Although molecular events associated
with the process have not yet been dearly defined, there is growing evidence that
haptens mediate activation of dendritic cells by activating mitogen-activated
protein kinases, mainly p38 MAPK. It may be speculated that further downstream
signals include activation of transcription factors such as nuclear factor
kappa-B (NF-kappaB), activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) or cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB). The present review will focus on some aspects of 
signal transduction pathways in dendritic cells stimulated with contact
sensitizers.

PMID: 14587531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2004 Feb;63(6):698-704. Epub 2003 Oct 28.

Production of isoamyl acetate in ackA-pta and/or ldh mutants of Escherichia coli 
with overexpression of yeast ATF2.

Vadali RV(1), Horton CE, Rudolph FB, Bennett GN, San KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA.

The gene coding for alcohol acetyltransferase ( ATF2), which catalyzes the
esterification of isoamyl alcohol and acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA), was cloned 
from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and expressed in Escherichia coli. This genetically
engineered strain of E. coli produced the ester isoamyl acetate when isoamyl
alcohol was added externally to the cell culture medium. Various competing
pathways at the acetyl-CoA node were inactivated to increase the intracellular
acetyl-CoA pool and divert more carbon flux to the ester synthesis pathway.
Several strains with deletions in the ackA-pta and/or ldh pathways and bearing
the ATF2 on a high-copy-number plasmid were constructed and studied. Compared to 
the wild-type, ackA-pta and nuo mutants produced higher amounts of ester and an
ackA-pta-ldh-nuo mutant lower amounts. Isoamyl acetate production correlated well
with intracellular coenzyme A (CoA) and acetyl-CoA levels. The ackA-pta-nuo
mutant had the highest intracellular CoA/acetyl-CoA level and hence produced the 
highest amount of ester (1.75 mM) during the growth phase under oxic conditions
and during the production phase under anoxic conditions.

PMID: 14586577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Leukemia. 2003 Nov;17(11):2140-8.

Requirement for SAPK-JNK signaling in the induction of apoptosis by ribosomal
stress in REH lymphoid leukemia cells.

Johnson CR(1), Jiffar T, Fischer UM, Ruvolo PP, Jarvis WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology & Pharmacology, University of Texas Health
Sciences Center-Houston, Houston, TX, USA.

The present studies examined performance of SAPK cascades and apoptotic
commitment following ribosomal trauma in REH lymphoid leukemia cells. Ribostatic 
insults included disruption of ribosomal activity by mechanistically dissimilar
agents such as blasticidin-S (BCS) (which binds 28S-rRNA to block peptidyl bond
formation), kasugamycin (KSM) (which binds 18S-rRNA to prevent translational
initiation), and cycloheximide (CHX) (which blocks A-site to P-site translocation
of peptidyl-tRNA). Exposure of REH cells to BCS elicited DNA degradation and
apoptotic cytolysis. BCS stimulated JNK1/JNK2 and p38, and their shared targets
c-Jun and ATF2. Inhibition of JNK1/JNK2 (but not of p38) antagonized
blasticidin-induced apoptosis, whereas targeting alternative ribosomal sites with
KSM or CHX limited translation, but failed to activate the SAPK cascade or
initiate apoptosis. Our findings indicate that interference with 28S-rRNA by BCS 
initiates apoptosis in REH cells through recruitment of SAPK-JNK signaling.
Disparities between the lethal actions of BCS, KSM, and CHX appear to reflect
established differences in the subribosomal targets of these agents. We propose
that the SAPK cascade comprises an essential mechanism for the transduction of
specific lethal stress signals emanating from active ribosomes, and that
interference with the 28S-rRNA, rather than the peptidyl transfer center of the
large subunit, is critical to apoptotic commitment.

PMID: 12970763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Endocrinology. 2003 Oct;144(10):4338-49. Epub 2003 Jul 10.

High glucose stimulates angiotensinogen gene expression and cell hypertrophy via 
activation of the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway in rat kidney proximal tubular 
cells.

Hsieh TJ(1), Fustier P, Zhang SL, Filep JG, Tang SS, Ingelfinger JR, Fantus IG,
Hamet P, Chan JS.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Montréal Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal-Hôtel
Dieu, Centre de Recherche Pavillon Masson, Montréal, Québec, Canada H2W 1T8.

The present study investigated whether activation of the hexosamine biosynthesis 
pathway might mediate at least in part the high glucose effect on angiotensinogen
(ANG) gene expression and immortalized renal proximal tubular cell (IRPTC)
hypertrophy. IRPTC were cultured in monolayer. ANG, renin, and beta-actin mRNA
expression were determined by specific RT-PCR assays. Phosphorylation of p38
MAPK, activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2), and cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein (CREB) was determined by Western blot analysis. Cell
hypertrophy was assessed by flow cytometry, intracellular p27kip1 protein levels,
and [3H]leucine incorporation into proteins. Glucosamine stimulated ANG and renin
mRNA expression and enhanced p38 MAPK, ATF-2, and CREB phosphorylation in normal 
glucose (5 mm) medium. Azaserine and 6-diazo-5-oxo-l-norleucine (inhibitors of
glutamine: fructose-6-phosphate amino transferase enzyme) blocked the stimulatory
effect of high glucose, but not that of glucosamine, on ANG gene expression in
IRPTCs. SB 203580 (a specific p38 MAPK inhibitor) attenuated glucosamine action
on ANG gene expression as well as p38 MAPK and ATF-2 phosphorylation, but not
that of CREB. GF 109203X and calphostin C (inhibitors of protein kinase C)
blocked the effect of glucosamine on ANG gene expression and CREB
phosphorylation, but had no impact on p38 MAPK and ATF-2 phosphorylation.
Finally, both glucosamine and high glucose induced IRPTC hypertrophy. The
hypertrophic effect of glucosamine was blocked in the presence of GF 109203X, but
not azaserine and SB 203580. In contrast, the hypertrophic effect of high glucose
was blocked in the presence of azaserine and GF 109203X, but not SB203580. Our
studies demonstrate that the stimulatory effect of high glucose on ANG gene
expression and IRPTC hypertrophy may be mediated at least in part via activation 
of hexosamine biosynthesis pathway signaling.

PMID: 12960040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2003 Sep;69(9):5228-37.

Expression levels of the yeast alcohol acetyltransferase genes ATF1, Lg-ATF1, and
ATF2 control the formation of a broad range of volatile esters.

Verstrepen KJ(1), Van Laere SD, Vanderhaegen BM, Derdelinckx G, Dufour JP,
Pretorius IS, Winderickx J, Thevelein JM, Delvaux FR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Malting and Brewing Science, Department of Food and Microbial
Technology, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, B-3001 Louvain (Heverlee), Belgium.
Kevin.Verstrepen@agr.kuleuven.ac.be

Volatile aroma-active esters are responsible for the fruity character of
fermented alcoholic beverages such as beer and wine. Esters are produced by
fermenting yeast cells in an enzyme-catalyzed intracellular reaction. In order to
investigate and compare the roles of the known Saccharomyces cerevisiae alcohol
acetyltransferases, Atf1p, Atf2p and Lg-Atf1p, in volatile ester production, the 
respective genes were either deleted or overexpressed in a laboratory strain and 
a commercial brewing strain. Subsequently, the ester formation of the
transformants was monitored by headspace gas chromatography and gas
chromatography combined with mass spectroscopy (GC-MS). Analysis of the
fermentation products confirmed that the expression levels of ATF1 and ATF2
greatly affect the production of ethyl acetate and isoamyl acetate. GC-MS
analysis revealed that Atf1p and Atf2p are also responsible for the formation of 
a broad range of less volatile esters, such as propyl acetate, isobutyl acetate, 
pentyl acetate, hexyl acetate, heptyl acetate, octyl acetate, and phenyl ethyl
acetate. With respect to the esters analyzed in this study, Atf2p seemed to play 
only a minor role compared to Atf1p. The atf1Delta atf2Delta double deletion
strain did not form any isoamyl acetate, showing that together, Atf1p and Atf2p
are responsible for the total cellular isoamyl alcohol acetyltransferase
activity. However, the double deletion strain still produced considerable amounts
of certain other esters, such as ethyl acetate (50% of the wild-type strain),
propyl acetate (50%), and isobutyl acetate (40%), which provides evidence for the
existence of additional, as-yet-unknown ester synthases in the yeast proteome.
Interestingly, overexpression of different alleles of ATF1 and ATF2 led to
different ester production rates, indicating that differences in the aroma
profiles of yeast strains may be partially due to mutations in their ATF genes.

PMCID: PMC194970
PMID: 12957907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Surgery. 2003 Aug;134(2):169-79.

Suppression of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway by 17beta-estradiol can
preserve human islet functional mass from proinflammatory cytokine-induced
destruction.

Eckhoff DE(1), Smyth CA, Eckstein C, Bilbao G, Young CJ, Thompson JA, Contreras
JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Transplantation, and Transplant Center, Department of Surgery,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

BACKGROUND: The c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activation occurs after islet
isolation, oxidative stress, and proinflammatory cytokine (PIC) exposure to
beta-cells. Previous studies demonstrated that 17beta-estradiol modulates the
activity of JNK; therefore we assessed the effects of 17beta-estradiol on JNK
activation on islet survival and function after transplantation.
METHODS: Isolated human pancreatic islets were incubated with PIC and
17beta-estradiol. Viability was analyzed by a colorimetric assay, islet mass by
DNA content, JNK activity by Western blots, AP-1 nuclear activity with a
promoter-Luciferase AP-1 responsive construct, and c-Fos, Jun-D, and ATF-2
nuclear activities by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Islet functionality
was evaluated after transplantation in streptozotocin-induced diabetic NOD-SCID
mice.
RESULTS: The 17beta-estradiol enhanced islet viability and islet mass after
exposure to PIC. A significant reduction in JNK activation occurred in islets
treated with 17beta-estradiol, compared with controls, an effect partially
dependent on estrogen receptors. The 17beta-estradiol induced a significant
reduction in nuclear AP-1, c-fos, Jun-D, and ATF-2 activities. Animals that
received 17beta-estradiol-treated islets had better islet functionality compared 
with saline solution-treated controls.
CONCLUSIONS: The 17beta-estradiol improved isolated human pancreatic islets
survival after PIC exposure by inhibition of JNK. These effects were associated
with reduction in JNK targets, including the nuclear activities of transcription 
factors AP-1, c-Jun, c-Fos, Jun-D and ATF-2, involved in apoptosis in beta-cells.
The 17beta-estradiol therapy may improve the results in clinical transplantation.

PMID: 12947315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2003 Jul;30(7):427-32. Epub 2003 Jul 9.

Heterologous expression of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae alcohol acetyltransferase
genes in Clostridium acetobutylicum and Escherichia coli for the production of
isoamyl acetate.

Horton CE(1), Huang KX, Bennett GN, Rudolph FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Rice University, 6100 S Main
Street, MS140, Houston, TX 77005, USA.

Esters are formed by the condensation of acids with alcohols. The esters isoamyl 
acetate and butyl butyrate are used for food and beverage flavorings. Alcohol
acetyltransferase is one enzyme responsible for the production of esters from
acetyl-CoA and different alcohol substrates. The genes ATF1 and ATF2, encoding
alcohol acetyltransferases from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae have been
sequenced and characterized. The production of acids and alcohols in mass
quantities by the industrially important Clostridium acetobutylicum makes it a
potential organism for exploitation of alcohol acetyltransferase activity. This
report focuses on the heterologous expression of the alcohol acetyltransferases
in Escherichia coli and C. acetobutylicum. ATF1 and ATF2 were cloned and
expressed in E. coli and ATF2 was expressed in C. acetobutylicum. Isoamyl acetate
production from the substrate isoamyl alcohol in E. coli and C. acetobutylicum
cultures was determined by head-space gas analysis. Alcohol acetyltransferase I
produced more than twice as much isoamyl acetate as alcohol acetyltransferase II 
when expressed from a high-copy expression vector. The effect of substrate levels
on ester production was explored in the two bacterial hosts to demonstrate the
efficacy of utilizing ATF1 and ATF2 in bacteria for ester production.

PMID: 12937998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Gene. 2003 Jul 17;312:117-24.

Cloning and characterization of a novel member of the human ATF/CREB family: ATF2
deletion, a potential regulator of the human DNA polymerase beta promoter.

Chyan YJ(1), Rawson TY, Wilson SH.

Author information: 
(1)Sealy Center for Molecular Science, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX 77555-0851, USA.

The solitary cAMP response element (CRE)1 in the human DNA polymerase beta
(beta-pol) core promoter plays a key role in both basal expression and the
DNA-alkylating agent response of the promoter. To further understand the role of 
the CRE in the regulation of this promoter, we searched for novel CRE-binding
proteins by using a 32P-labeled beta-pol CRE oligodeoxynucleotide and a human
cDNA expression library constructed in phage lambda. A total of fourteen phage
clones were isolated, corresponding to various members of the CRE-binding protein
family. One of these clones, termed ATF2 deletion (ATF2d), encodes a novel ATF2
isoform and was chosen for further characterization in this study. Relative to
ATF2 mRNA, this clone contains an internal 97-nt deletion and a unique 3' region.
The 97-nt deletion causes a frame shift, resulting in a ATF2-like polypeptide of 
approximately 60 kDa. ATF2d retains the bZIP domain of ATF2, lacks the N-terminal
zinc-finger region, and includes novel characteristics in its N- and C-terminal
regions.

PMID: 12909347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser. 2000;(44):259-60.

Histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity of ATF-2 is necessary for the
CRE-dependent transcription.

Kawasaki H(1), Taira K, Yokoyama K.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), National Institute for Advanced Interdisciplinary Research (NAIR),
Tsukuba Science City, Ibaraki, Japan.

ATF-2 is a DNA-binding protein that binds to cAMP-response elements (CREs) and
forms a hetrodimer with c-Jun, via binding of the leucine zipper motif and then
stimulates the CRE-dependent transcription (1,2). Recently, we have reported that
ATF-2 has an intrinsic acetyltransferase activity that is controlled by
phosphorylation. Mutant form of either p300 or ATF-2 with mutations in the HAT
domain failed to stimulate the CRE-dependent transcription in response to UV
irradiation. Moreover, phosphorylation of ATF-2 enhanced its HAT activity and
CRE-dependent transcription. Thus, these results indicate that HAT activity of
ATF-2 is important for the CRE-dependent transcription.

PMID: 12903367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 Jul 23;115(2):147-56.

Biphasic expression of activating transcription factor-3 in neurons after
cerebral infarction.

Ohba N(1), Maeda M, Nakagomi S, Muraoka M, Kiyama H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
City University, 1-4-3 Asahimachi, Abeno-ku, Osaka, 545-8585 Japan.

It has been demonstrated that some of immediate early genes such as c-Jun are
induced immediately and transiently following focal cerebral ischemia. Here we
newly characterize the activating transcription factor (ATF)-3 as a focal
ischemia associated immediate early gene. Using in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry, we compared the expression profile of ATF-3 with those of
ATF-2 and c-Jun after middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion. Focal cerebral
ischemia induced two temporal and spatial patterns of ATF-3 expression. Early and
transient induction of ATF-3 mRNA was observed in the core and margins of the
cortex immediately after MCA occlusion. Late-onset and prolonged expression of
ATF-3 mRNA and its protein were specifically identified in the peri-infarct
cortex and thalamus where neurons survive at least 1 month. The expression
profiles of ATF-3 and c-Jun were virtually similar, but c-Jun expression was also
observed in other regions of the brain in control rats. Expression of ATF-2 was
ubiquitously seen in neuronal cells throughout the brain in normal rats, but was 
suppressed in ischemic regions. Double immunohistochemical labeling revealed
concurrent expression of ATF-3 and phospho-c-Jun in neurons. We conclude that the
transcription factor ATF-3 is a suitable marker of neurons subjected to ischemic 
insult directly and indirectly, and that cooperative works of ATF-3 and c-Jun may
be crucial triggers of various transcriptional responses to the ischemic insult.

PMID: 12877985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Nucleic Acids Res Suppl. 2001;(1):89-90.

Transcriptional regulation of interferon gamma gene by p300 co-activator.

Nakayama A(1), Kawasaki H, Jin C, Munekata E, Taira K, Yokoyama KK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Biochemistry, University of Tsukuba, National Institute
of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba Central 4, Tsukuba,
Japan.

Interferon gamma (IFN gamma) is an important immunoreguratory protein and is
secreted from CD4+, CD8+ T cells and NK cells. Expression of IFN gamma gene is
regulated by either DNA-methylation or cis-elements of transcriptional factors
such as AP-1, NFAT, AP-4, YY-1, ATF and GATA. At a putative ATF binding site in a
promoter region of IFN gamma gene, the position from -59 to -43, is important for
the IFN gamma promoter activity. Our gel-shift competition studies demonstrated
that addition of antibodies against ATF-2 caused super-shifts of DNA-protein
complexes. In addition, it was clarified that p300 was involved in DNA-protein
complexes by in vitro "pull-down" experiments. Moreover, a co-expression of p300 
and ATF-2 enhanced the promoter activity of IFN gamma gene. Thus, these results
indicate that p300 and ATF-2 play critical rules in a basal transcription of IFN 
gamma gene in Jurkat T cells.

PMID: 12836278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Oncogene. 2003 Jul 3;22(27):4235-42.

Induction of ATF3 by ionizing radiation is mediated via a signaling pathway that 
includes ATM, Nibrin1, stress-induced MAPkinases and ATF-2.

Kool J(1), Hamdi M, Cornelissen-Steijger P, van der Eb AJ, Terleth C, van Dam H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Genetics and Chemical Mutagenesis, Leiden University
Medical Centre, Wassenaarseweg 72, 2333AL Leiden, The Netherlands.

Exposure of human cells to genotoxic agents induces various signaling pathways
involved in the execution of stress- and DNA-damage responses. Inappropriate
functioning of the DNA-damage response to ionizing radiation (IR) is associated
with the human diseases ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) and Nijmegen Breakage
syndrome (NBS). Here, we show that IR efficiently induces Jun/ATF transcription
factor activity in normal human diploid fibroblasts, but not in fibroblasts
derived from A-T and NBS patients. IR was found to enhance the expression of
c-Jun and, in particular, ATF3, but, in contrast to various other stress stimuli,
did not induce the expression of c-Fos. Using specific inhibitors, we found that 
the ATM- and Nibrin1-dependent activation of ATF3 does neither require p53 nor
reactive oxygen species, but is dependent on the p38 and JNK MAPkinases. Via
these kinases, IR activates ATF-2, one of the transcription factors acting on the
atf3 promoter. The activation of ATF-2 by IR resembles ATF-2 activation by
certain growth factors, since IR mainly induced the second step of ATF-2
phosphorylation via the stress-inducible MAPkinases, phosphorylation of Thr69. As
IR does not enhance ATF-2 phosphorylation in ATM and Nibrin1-deficient cells,
both ATF-2 and ATF3 seem to play an important role in the protective response of 
human cells to IR.

PMID: 12833146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Oncogene. 2003 May 19;22(20):3152-61.

Death receptors and melanoma resistance to apoptosis.

Ivanov VN(1), Bhoumik A, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, 
USA.

Impaired ability to undergo programmed cell death in response to a wide range of 
external stimuli acquires melanomas a selective advantage for progression and
metastasis as well as their notorious resistance to therapy. Better understanding
of mechanisms that govern apoptosis has enabled identification of diverse routes 
by which melanomas manage to escape stimuli of apoptosis. Changes at genomic,
transcriptional and post-translational levels of G-proteins and protein kinases
(Ras, B-Raf) and their transcription factor effectors (c-Jun, ATF2, Stat3 and
NF-kappaB) affects TNF, Fas and TRAIL receptors, which play important roles in
acquiring melanoma's resistance to apoptosis. Here, we summarize our current
understanding of changes that alters the regulation of death receptors during
melanoma development.

PMID: 12789291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 29;278(35):32662-72. Epub 2003 Jun 3.

A docking site in MKK4 mediates high affinity binding to JNK MAPKs and competes
with similar docking sites in JNK substrates.

Ho DT(1), Bardwell AJ, Abdollahi M, Bardwell L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, California 92697, USA.

Specific docking interactions between MAPKs and their activating MAPK kinases
(MKKs or MEKs) are crucial for efficient and accurate signal transmission. Here, 
we report the identification of a MAPK-docking site, or "D-site," in the N
terminus of human MKK4/JNKK1. This docking site conforms to the consensus
sequence for known D-sites in other MKKs and contains the first of the two
cleavage sites for anthrax lethal factor protease that have been found in the N
terminus of MKK4. This docking site was both necessary and sufficient for the
high affinity binding of the MAPKs JNK1, JNK2, JNK3, p38 alpha, and p38 beta to
MKK4. Mutations that altered conserved residues in this docking site reduced
JNK/p38 binding. In addition, a peptide version of this docking site, as well as 
a peptide version of the JNK-binding site of the JIP-1 scaffold protein,
inhibited both MKK4/JNK binding and MKK4-mediated phosphorylation of JNK1. These 
same peptides also inhibited JNK2-mediated phosphorylation of c-Jun and ATF2,
suggesting that transcription factors, MKK4, and the JIP scaffold compete for
docking to JNK. Finally, the selectivity of the MKK4, MEK1, and MEK2 D-sites for 
JNK versus ERK was quantified. The MEK1 and MEK2 D-sites displayed a strong
selectivity for their cognate MAPK (ERK2) versus a non-cognate MAPK (JNK). In
contrast, the MKK4 D-site exhibited only limited selectivity for JNK versus ERK.

PMCID: PMC3017503
PMID: 12788955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Invest Dermatol. 2003 Jun;120(6):956-62.

Insulin-like growth factor-I enhances transforming growth factor-beta-induced
extracellular matrix protein production through the P38/activating transcription 
factor-2 signaling pathway in keloid fibroblasts.

Daian T(1), Ohtsuru A, Rogounovitch T, Ishihara H, Hirano A, Akiyama-Uchida Y,
Saenko V, Fujii T, Yamashita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Atomic Bomb Disease
Institute, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-12-4,
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

Keloids are benign dermal tumors, characterized by invasive growth of fibroblasts
and concomitant increased biosynthesis of extracellular matrix components, with
unclear etiology. We previously demonstrated that keloid fibroblasts overexpress 
insulin-like growth factor-I receptor. In investigating the role of insulin-like 
growth factor-I receptor overexpression, insulin-like growth factor-I and
transforming growth factor-beta interaction was examined in relation to
extracellular matrix protein production in cultured human and mouse fibroblasts. 
Western blotting revealed that collagen type I was expressed in keloid and normal
fibroblasts, and its expression was increased by transforming growth factor-beta 
stimulation more significantly in keloid rather than in normal fibroblasts.
Insulin-like growth factor-I and transforming growth factor-beta1 costimulation
markedly increased extracellular matrix proteins (collagen type I, fibronectin,
and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1) compared with cultures with transforming
growth factor-beta1 alone. Insulin-like growth factor-I treatment alone had no
stimulatory effect. Real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
confirmed parallel collagen type I messenger RNA level changes. Luciferase assays
were conducted to investigate intracellular signaling pathways in this
synergistic stimulation using a mouse fibroblast cell line. Transforming growth
factor-beta1 (1 or 10 ng per ml) increased the specific signaling activity
approximately 10-fold, whereas the increase with insulin-like growth factor-I
(100 ng per ml) was less than 2-fold compared with basal activity; however, the
combination of transforming growth factor-beta1 and insulin-like growth factor-I 
resulted in an approximately 25-fold increase. Insulin-like growth factor-I
markedly enhanced transforming growth factor-beta-induced phosphorylation of p38 
mitogen-activated protein kinase and activating transcription factor-2.
Luciferase assay showed that this synergistic effect was attenuated by the p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase specific inhibitor SB203580 or
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor wortmannin, but not by the
mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular-signal-regulated protein kinase
kinase inhibitor PD98059. These results indicate that insulin-like growth
factor-I enhances transforming growth factor-beta-induced keloid formation
through transforming growth factor-beta postreceptor signal cross-talk, mainly
via the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase/activating transcription factor-2
pathway.

PMID: 12787120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Biol Chem. 2003 Apr;384(4):667-72.

Regulation of gene transcription by a constitutively active mutant of activating 
transcription factor 2 (ATF2).

Steinmüller L(1), Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, D-66421 Homburg, Germany.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) belongs to the family of basic region
leucine zipper (bZIP) proteins that are characterized by the presence of a basic 
domain that functions as the DNA-binding domain and a leucine zipper domain that 
is required for dimerization. Together with bZIP proteins of the Fos and Jun
families, ATF2 constitutes the AP-1 transcription factor complex. The biological 
activity of ATF2 is controlled by phosphorylation of two threonine residues
within the N-terminal activation domain. Unphosphorylated ATF2 is
trancriptionally silent, excluding simple overexpression studies to identify
transcriptional targets of ATF2. We therefore decided to construct a
constitutively active ATF2 mutant that would allow us to uncouple the
investigation of transcriptional targets and biological functions of ATF2 from
the variety of signaling pathways that lead to an activation of ATF2. We
exchanged the phosphorylation-dependent activation domain of ATF2 with the
constitutively active transcriptional activation domain of the transcription
factor CREB2. In transient transfection experiments, this constitutively active
ATF2 mutant stimulated c-jun, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and Fas ligand
promoter activities. The transcriptional activity of the constitutively active
ATF2 mutant could be impaired by dominant-negative forms of ATF2 or c-Jun,
indicating that ATF2 and c-Jun utilize a similar dimerization code. In contrast, 
a dominant-negative CREB2 mutant did not impair ATF2-mediated transcriptional
activation, suggesting that CREB2 exhibits a different dimerization specificity
than ATF2 or c-Jun.

PMID: 12751796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 18;278(29):26435-42. Epub 2003 May 13.

p38 Mitogen-activated protein kinase regulation of JB6 Cl41 cell transformation
promoted by epidermal growth factor.

He Z(1), Cho YY, Liu G, Ma WY, Bode AM, Dong Z.

Author information: 
(1)Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota 55912, USA.

The relationship between cell transformation and p38 MAP kinase, a major
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway converting signals of various
extracellular stimuli into expression of specific target genes through activation
of transcription factors, still remains unclear. The aim of the present study was
to investigate the role of the p38 MAP kinase pathway in epidermal growth factor 
(EGF)-induced cell transformation in JB6 cells. Our data show that a dominant
negative mutant of p38 MAP (DN-p38) kinase inhibits EGF-promoted JB6 Cl41 cell
transformation and that SB202190, an inhibitor of p38 MAP kinase, also inhibits
JB6 Cl41 cell transformation in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, our results
show that DN-p38 MAP kinase inhibits the phosphorylation of EGF-stimulated
activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) and signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 1 (STAT1). Additionally, DN-p38 MAP kinase inhibits EGF-induced
phosphorylation of c-Myc (Thr58/Ser62). Gel shift assays indicate that DN-p38 MAP
kinase inhibits EGF-induced activator protein-1 (AP-1) DNA binding in a
dose-dependent manner. These results show that p38 MAP kinase plays a key role in
the regulation of EGF-induced cell transformation in JB6 cells through regulation
of phosphorylation of p38 MAP kinase and activation of its target genes in
phosphorylation, c-Myc cell transformation-related genes, and AP-1 binding
ability.

PMID: 12748197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cell Immunol. 2003 Feb;221(2):122-7.

Phosphorylation of activating transcription factor in murine splenocytes through 
delta opioid receptors.

Shahabi NA(1), McAllen K, Sharp BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

Delta opioid receptors (DORs) modulate TCR signaling through the
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), ERKs 1 and 2. These studies determined
whether a DOR agonist alone ([D-Ala(2)-D-Leu(5)]enkephalin; DADLE) affects
phosphorylation of the activating transcription factor (ATF-2) and its
interaction with the MAPK, c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK). DOR expression was 
induced on murine splenocytes by anti-CD3 and then quiescent cells were treated
with DADLE. DADLE, itself, dose-dependently induced maximal phosphorylation of
ATF-2 within 5-10min; naltrindole, a specific antagonist, abolished this.
Anti-ATF-2 immunoprecipitates from control and DADLE-treated splenocytes showed a
dominant 59kDa phosphorylated band and a 71kDa band. DADLE stimulated
phosphorylation of both bands, although the 71kDa band was selectively
immunoprecipitated by anti-JNK. Thus, DADLE stimulated phosphorylation of 71kDa
ATF-2 and its association with JNK, suggesting that JNK is activated through
DORs. Along with previous observations, these studies suggest that lymphocyte
DORs can affect the activation of MAPKs by TCR-independent stimulation (e.g.,
JNK) or indirectly by modulating TCR-dependent stimulation (e.g., ERK).

PMID: 12747953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. FASEB J. 2003 Jul;17(10):1286-8. Epub 2003 May 8.

Interaction of discoidin domain receptor 1 isoform b (DDR1b) with collagen
activates p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and promotes differentiation of
macrophages.

Matsuyama W(1), Kamohara H, Galligan C, Faure M, Yoshimura T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunoregulation, National Cancer Institute at
Frederick, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

Retraction in
    FASEB J. 2009 Sep;23(9):3251.

Discoidin domain receptor 1 (DDR1) is a receptor tyrosine kinase activated by
collagen. DDR1 is constitutively expressed in a variety of normal and transformed
epithelial cells and plays a role in cell migration and differentiation through
as yet unidentified signaling pathways. We previously reported inducible
expression of DDR1 in human leukocytes and suggested a role for the DDR1a isoform
in leukocyte migration through extracellular matrix. Here, we evaluated the
contribution of DDR1 in the differentiation of the human monocytic THP-1 cells
overexpressing these isoforms and of primary macrophages. Interestingly, collagen
activation of DDR1b, but not DDR1a, further promoted phorbol ester-induced
differentiation of THP-1 cells as determined by reduced cell proliferation and
up-regulated expression of HLA-DR, CD11c, CD14, and CD40. Collagen activation of 
DDR1b also induced the recruitment and phosphorylation of Shc and subsequent
phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase and its substrate
ATF2. A p38 MAP kinase inhibitor, SB203580, completely inhibited DDR1b-mediated
HLA-DR expression. Activation of DDR1 endogenously expressed on macrophages also 
up-regulated their HLA-DR expression in a p38 MAP kinase-dependent manner. Thus, 
DDR1b in response to collagen transduces signals that promote
maturation/differentiation of HLA-DR-positive antigen-presenting cells and
contributes to the development of adaptive immunity in a tissue microenvironment.

PMID: 12738814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Cell Biol. 2003 May 12;161(3):507-19. Epub 2003 May 5.

Mitochondria to nucleus stress signaling: a distinctive mechanism of NFkappaB/Rel
activation through calcineurin-mediated inactivation of IkappaBbeta.

Biswas G(1), Anandatheerthavarada HK, Zaidi M, Avadhani NG.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Animal Biology, Mari Lowe Center for Comparative Oncology, School of 
Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Mitochondrial genetic and metabolic stress causes activation of calcineurin (Cn),
NFAT, ATF2, and NFkappaB/Rel factors, which collectively alter the expression of 
an array of nuclear genes. We demonstrate here that mitochondrial stress-induced 
activation of NFkappaB/Rel factors involves inactivation of IkappaBbeta through
Cn-mediated dephosphorylation. Phosphorylated IkappaBbeta is a substrate for Cn
phosphatase, which was inhibited by FK506 and RII peptide. Chemical cross-linking
and coimmunoprecipitation show that NFkappaB/Rel factor-bound IkappaBbeta forms a
ternary complex with Cn under in vitro and in vivo conditions that was sensitive 
to FK506. Results show that phosphorylation at S313 and S315 from the
COOH-terminal PEST domain of IkappaBbeta is critical for binding to Cn. Mutations
at S313/S315 of IkappaBbeta abolished Cn binding, inhibited Cn-mediated increase 
of Rel proteins in the nucleus, and had a dominant-negative effect on the
mitochondrial stress-induced expression of RyR1 and cathepsin L genes. Our
results show the distinctive nature of mitochondrial stress-induced NFkappaB/Rel 
activation, which is independent of IKKalpha and IKKbeta kinases and affects gene
target(s) that are different from cytokine and TNFalpha-induced stress signaling.
The results provide new insights into the role of Cn as a critical link between
Ca2+ signaling and NFkappaB/Rel activation.

PMCID: PMC2172940
PMID: 12732617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2003;85-A Suppl 2:133-6.

The role of activating transcription factor-2 in skeletal growth control.

Luvalle P(1), Ma Q, Beier F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville
32610, USA. luvalle@ufl.edu

PMID: 12721356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Apr;23(8):2871-82.

c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase is essential for the regulation of AP-1 by tumor
necrosis factor.

Ventura JJ(1), Kennedy NJ, Lamb JA, Flavell RA, Davis RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Program in Molecular Medicine, University 
of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

The c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) is activated by the cytokine tumor necrosis
factor (TNF). This pathway is implicated in the regulation of AP-1-dependent gene
expression by TNF. To examine the role of the JNK signaling pathway, we compared 
the effects of TNF on wild-type and Jnk1(-/-) Jnk2(-/-) murine embryo
fibroblasts. We show that JNK is required for the normal regulation of AP-1 by
TNF. The JNK-deficient cells exhibited decreased expression of c-Jun, JunD,
c-Fos, Fra1, and Fra2; decreased phosphorylation of c-Jun and JunD; and decreased
AP-1 DNA binding activity. The JNK-deficient cells also exhibited defects in the 
regulation of the AP-1-related transcription factor ATF2. These changes were
associated with marked defects in TNF-regulated gene expression. The JNK signal
transduction pathway is therefore essential for AP-1 transcription factor
regulation in cells exposed to TNF.

PMCID: PMC152565
PMID: 12665585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 6;278(23):20582-92. Epub 2003 Mar 27.

The activation of c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) by DNA-damaging agents serves
to promote drug resistance via activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2)-dependent
enhanced DNA repair.

Hayakawa J(1), Depatie C, Ohmichi M, Mercola D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Gene Therapy, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, San Diego,
California 92121, USA.

The activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) is a member of the ATF/cAMP-response
element-binding protein family of basic-leucine zipper proteins involved in
cellular stress response. The transcription potential of ATF2 is enhanced
markedly by NH2-terminal phosphorylation by c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) and
mediates stress responses including DNA-damaging events. We have observed that
four DNA-damaging agents (cisplatin, actinomycin D, MMS, and etoposide), but not 
the cisplatin isomer, transplatin, which does not readily damage DNA, strongly
activate JNK, p38, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), and strongly 
increase phosphorylation and ATF2-dependent transcriptional activity. Selective
inhibition studies with PD98059, SB202190, SP600125, and the dominant negative
JNK indicate that activation of JNK but not p38 kinase or ERK kinase is required 
for the phosphorylation and transcriptional activation of ATF2. Stable expression
of ATF2 in human breast carcinoma BT474 cells increases transcriptional activity 
and confers resistance to the four DNA-damaging agents, but not to transplatin.
Conversely, stable expression of a dominant negative ATF2 (dnATF2) quantitatively
blocks phosphorylation of endogenous ATF2 leading to a marked decrease in
transcriptional activity by endogenous ATF2 and a markedly increased sensitivity 
to the four agents as judged by decreased cell viability. Similarly, application 
of SB202190 at 50 micro m or SP600125 inhibited JNK activity, blocked
transactivation, and sensitized parental cells to the four DNA-damaging drugs.
Moreover, the wild type ATF2-expressing clones exhibited rapid DNA repair after
treatment with the four DNA-damaging agents but not transplatin. Conversely,
expression of dnATF2 quantitatively blocks DNA repair. These results indicate
that JNK-dependent phosphorylation of ATF2 plays an important role in the drug
resistance phenotype likely by mediating enhanced DNA repair by a p53-independent
mechanism. JNK may be a rational target for sensitizing tumor cells to
DNA-damaging chemotherapy agents.

PMID: 12663670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Biol Reprod. 2003 Jul;69(1):202-10. Epub 2003 Mar 5.

Ischemia-reperfusion of the murine testis stimulates the expression of
proinflammatory cytokines and activation of c-jun N-terminal kinase in a pathway 
to E-selectin expression.

Lysiak JJ(1), Nguyen QA, Kirby JL, Turner TT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Virginia Health Science System,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. jl6n@virginia.edu

Ischemia-reperfusion (IR) of the testis results in germ cell-specific apoptosis
and can lead to aspermatogenesis. Germ cell-specific apoptosis after IR of the
testis has been shown to be correlated with and dependent on neutrophil
recruitment to the testis after IR. Studies that used E-selectin-deficient mice
have demonstrated that E-selectin expression is critical for neutrophil
recruitment to subtunical venules in the testis after IR and for the resultant
germ cell-specific apoptosis. The present study investigates the in vivo
signaling pathway that exists after IR that leads to neutrophil recruitment in
the murine testis. Mice were subjected to a 2-h period of testicular ischemia
followed by reperfusion. Results demonstrate that the proinflammatory cytokines, 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) and interleukin 1beta (IL-1beta), are
stimulated after IR as is the phosphorylation of c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK).
The downstream transcription factors of JNK, ATF-2 and c-jun are also
phosphorylated at specific times after IR of the testis. Activation of the JNK
stress-related kinase pathway is correlated with an increase in E-selectin
expression and neutrophil recruitment to the testis after IR. Intratesticular
injection of IL-1beta also caused JNK phosphorylation and neutrophil recruitment 
to the testis. These results suggest that testicular IR injury stimulates
IL-1beta expression, which leads to activation of the JNK signaling pathway and
ultimately E-selectin expression and neutrophil recruitment to the testis. This
provides the first evidence of a cytokine/stress-related kinase signaling pathway
to E-selectin expression in vivo.

PMID: 12620934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Neurobiol Dis. 2003 Feb;12(1):25-34.

Transient forebrain ischemia induced phosphorylation of cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein is suppressed by hyperglycemia.

He Q(1), Csiszar K, Li P.

Author information: 
(1)Pacific Biomedical Research Center and John A Burns School of Medicine,
University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA.

Hyperglycemia enhances brain damage due to transient cerebral ischemic stroke.
The hyperglycemia-mediated detrimental effect is probably due to mitochondrial
dysfunction and the resulting promotion of cell death pathways. In this study, we
determined whether hyperglycemia suppresses cell survival signals that involve
the cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB) and activating transcription
factor (ATF-2). Total and phosphorylated CREB and ATF-2 were measured in the
cingulate cortex and dentate gyrus, two structures that are ischemia-resistant
under normoglycemic conditions but become ischemia-vulnerable under hyperglycemic
conditions, using immunocytochemistry and Western blot analysis. Samples were
collected from normo-operated and hyperglycemic rats subjected to 15 min of
ischemia followed by reperfusion. Transient ischemia induced a persistent
phosphorylation of CREB in normoglycemic animals. Hyperglycemia suppressed
phosphorylation of CREB in hyperglycemia-recruited areas. Ischemia also induced a
transient increase of phospho-ATF-2 in the cingulated cortex that was suppressed 
by hyperglycmia. We conclude that suppression of neuronal survival signals by
hyperglycemia may contribute to the mechanism of converting ischemia-resistant
structures into vulnerable ones.

PMID: 12609486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Virus Res. 2003 Mar;92(1):9-21.

Reciprocal effects of varicella-zoster virus (VZV) and AP1: activation of jun,
fos and ATF-2 after VZV infection and their importance for the regulation of
viral genes.

Rahaus M(1), Wolff MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Virology, University of Witten/Herdecke,
Stockumer Str. 10, D-58448, Witten, Germany

Varicella-zoster virus, an alpha-herpesvirus that is pathogenic for man, encodes 
its own transcription activators, but ubiquitous cellular transcription factors
are of great importance, too. Performing quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) we found an increase of
transcription of AP1 components jun, fos and of ATF-2 at different times post
infection (p.i.). Jun and ATF-2 proteins were detected in infected cells. To
study general effects of AP1 in the regulation of VZV encoded genes,
oligonucleotide transfections were performed to knockout jun and ATF-2
transcription followed by infection with cell free VZV. RT-PCR analyses of ORFs
4, 9, 21, 29 and 68 belonging to all three kinetic classes of genes and
containing different combinations of AP1/TRE and ATF/CREB sites in their
respective promoters were carried out. In all cases a reduction of viral
transcription was found. Virions produced after this procedure were still
infectious, but the amount of newly synthesized virions was clearly reduced.

PMID: 12606072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Oncogene. 2003 Feb 20;22(7):955-63.

ERK signaling pathway is involved in p15INK4b/p16INK4a expression and HepG2
growth inhibition triggered by TPA and Saikosaponin a.

Wen-Sheng W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Technology, TZU CHI University, Hualien, Taiwan.
wuws@mail.tcu.edu.tw

The signal pathway mediating induction of p15(INK4b) and p16(INK4a) during HepG2 
growth inhibition triggered by the phorbol ester tumor promoter TPA
(12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate) and the Chinese herb Saikosaponin a was
investigated. Western blot of three activated forms of mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) (p-ERK, p-JNK and p-p38) demonstrated that phosphorylation of ERK
is dramatically induced (11.6-fold ) by TPA during 15 min to 1 h and
significantly induced (2.5-fold) by Saikosaponin alpha at 30 min, whereas
phosphorylation of JNK was induced only by TPA during 30 min to 1 h.
Phosphorylation of p38 was not induced by either drug. During this period,
phosphorylation of one of the downstream transcriptional factors of MAPK cascade,
ATF2, was 3.2- and 2.0-fold induced by TPA and Saikosaponin a, respectively,
whereas that of another transcriptional factor, c-jun, was induced by TPA only.
On the other hand, expressions of proto-oncogene c-jun, junB and c-fos were
induced by TPA and Saikosaponin a during 30 min to 6 h of treatment. Pretreatment
of 20 microg/ml PD98059, an inhibitor of MEK which is the upstream kinase of ERK,
prevents the TPA- and Saikosaponin a-triggered HepG2 growth inhibition by 50 and 
30%, respectively, accompanied by a 50 - 85% decrease of the
p15(INK4b)/p16(INK4a) RNAs and proteins induced by both drugs. Inductions of
c-fos RNA by both drugs and c-jun phosphorylation by TPA were also significantly 
reduced by PD98059 pretreatment. In addition, AP-1 DNA-binding assay using
nonisotopic capillary electrophoresis and laser-induced fluorescence (CE/LIF)
demonstrated that the AP-1-related DNA-binding activity was significantly induced
by TPA and Saikosaponin a, which can be reduced by PD98059 pretreatment. These
results suggested that activation of ERK together with its downstream
transcriptional machinery mediated p15(INK4b) and p16(INK4a) expression that led 
to HepG2 growth inhibition.

PMID: 12592382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Mar;23(5):1737-49.

Asymmetric recognition of nonconsensus AP-1 sites by Fos-Jun and Jun-Jun
influences transcriptional cooperativity with NFAT1.

Ramirez-Carrozzi V(1), Kerppola T.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0650, USA.

Many regulatory elements in eukaryotic promoters do not correspond to optimal
recognition sequences for the transcription factors that regulate promoter
function by binding to the elements. The sequence of the binding site may
influence the structural and functional properties of regulatory protein
complexes. Fos-Jun heterodimers were found to bind nonconsensus AP-1 sites in a
preferred orientation. Oriented Fos-Jun heterodimer binding was attributed to
nonidentical recognition of the two half-sites by Fos and Jun. Jun bound
preferentially to the consensus half-site, whereas Fos was able to bind
nonconsensus half-sites. The orientation of heterodimer binding affected the
transcriptional cooperativity of Fos-Jun-NFAT1 complexes at composite regulatory 
elements in mammalian cells. Jun dimerization with Fos versus ATF2 caused it to
bind opposite half-sites at nonconsensus AP-1 elements. Similarly, ATF2 bound to 
opposite half-sites in Fos-ATF2-NFAT1 and ATF2-Jun-NFAT1 complexes. The
orientations of nonconsensus AP-1 sites within composite regulatory elements
affected the cooperativity of Fos-Jun as well as Jun-Jun binding with NFAT1.
Since Jun homodimers cannot bind to AP-1 sites in a preferred orientation, the
effects of the orientations of nonconsensus AP-1 sites on the stabilities of
Jun-Jun-NFAT1 complexes are likely to be due to asymmetric conformational changes
in the two subunits of the homodimer. Nonconsensus AP-1 site orientation also
affected the synergy of transcription activation between Jun homodimers and NFAT1
at composite regulatory elements. The asymmetric recognition of nonconsensus AP-1
sites can therefore influence the transcriptional activities of Fos and Jun both 
through effects on the orientation of heterodimer binding and through
differential conformational changes in the two subunits of the dimer.

PMCID: PMC151706
PMID: 12588992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Neuropathology. 2002 Dec;22(4):261-8.

Changes in expression of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in the dorsal motor
nucleus of the vagus nerve and hypoglossal nucleus after axotomy in adult rats.

Shimokawara T(1), Yamada E, Masui K, Mishima K, Enomoto Y, Inoue K, Sakaki T,
Ichijima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nara Medical University, Kashihara, Japan.

Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascades are activated in response to
various extracellular stimuli. P38 MAP kinase is one of the MAP kinase family and
is activated by proinflammatory cytokines and environmental stresses. Activating 
transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) is one of the targets for p38 MAP kinase. To
obtain information on the role of the p38 MAP kinase in the neurons and glial
cells after axotomy, we investigated changes of expression of p38 MAP kinase, MAP
kinase kinase (MKK) 3, MKK4, MKK6 and ATF-2 in the dorsal motor nucleus of the
vagus nerve and the hypoglossal nucleus following axotomy in rats using in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemical techniques. Expression of p38 MAP kinase
mRNA was observed in the neurons in control rats and showed no remarkable changes
after axotomy in both nuclei. On the other hand, expression of p38 MAP kinase
mRNA was observed in the perineuronal microglias after axotomy. The expression of
p38 MAP kinase, activated p38 MAP kinase, MKK3 and ATF-2 were
immunohistochemically observed in neurons of control rats in both nuclei. After
axotomy, the expression of p38 MAP kinase, active and inactive, and ATF-2 in
neurons were reduced in both nuclei, while expression of mRNA of p38 MAP kinase
showed no reduction in neurons. These findings indicate that p38 MAP kinase is
functionally regulated not by synthesis but by phosphorylation and regulates the 
activation of ATF-2 in neurons, and this cascade plays some role in retrograde
neuronal reactions. Moreover, perineuronal microglial cells showed strong
expression of p38 MAP kinase, active and inactive, after axotomy in both nuclei. 
These findings suggest that p38 MAP kinase is related to microglial cell
reactions after axotomy.

PMID: 12564765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Sci China C Life Sci. 2003 Feb;46(1):87-94. doi: 10.1007/BF03182688.

The binding of actin to p38 MAPK and inhibiting its kinase activity in vitro.

Yang K(1), Jiang Y, Han J, Gu J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Molecular Medicine, Sun Yet-sen University of Medical
Sciences, Guangzhou 510080, China.

p38 MAP kinase mediates a signal pathway that is involved in many physiological
and pathological processes such as inflammation, cellular stress, apoptosis, cell
cycle and growth, ischemia/re-perfusion, and myocardium hypertrophy. To determine
the molecular and regulative mechanism of p38 signal pathway, we used in vitro
binding methods to screen the proteins that interact with p38. Here we report two
proteins from mouse macrophage RAW264.7 strain treated with lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) or ultraviolet radiation (UV), binding directly to p38. One of them is
beta-actin identified by peptide mass spectrum and ProFound program. Actin can
inhibit the autophosphorylation of p38 and the phosphorylation of ATF by p38. It 
suggests that the binding of actin to p38 in vitro may represent a negative
feedback to the kinase activity of p38, which leads to the regulation of p38
pathway and cellular function.

PMID: 20213365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jan 21;100(2):616-21. Epub 2003 Jan 13.

Global genome repair is required to activate KIN17, a UVC-responsive gene
involved in DNA replication.

Masson C(1), Menaa F, Pinon-Lataillade G, Frobert Y, Chevillard S, Radicella JP, 
Sarasin A, Angulo JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique de la Radiosensibilité, Département de Radiobiologie 
et de Radiopathologie (DRR), Direction des Sciences du Vivant (DSV), Commissariat
à l'Energie Atomique (CEA), B.P. 6, 92265 Fontenay aux Roses, France.

UV light provokes DNA lesions that interfere with replication and transcription. 
These lesions may compromise cell viability and usually are removed by nucleotide
excision repair (NER). In humans, inactivation of NER is associated with three
rare autosomal recessive inherited disorders: xeroderma pigmentosum (XP),
Cockayne syndrome, and trichothiodystrophy. The NER earliest step is lesion
recognition by a complex formed by XPC and HHR23B proteins. In a subsequent step,
XPA protein becomes associated to the repair complex. Here we investigate whether
XPA and XPC proteins, involved in global genome repair, may contribute to a
signal transduction pathway regulating the response to UVC-induced lesions. We
monitored the expression of several UVC-induced genes in cells deficient in
either a transduction pathway or mutated on an NER gene. Expression of the KIN17 
gene is induced after UVC irradiation independently of p53 and of activating
transcription factor 2. However, in human cells derived from XPA or XPC patients 
the UVC-induced accumulation of KIN17 RNA and protein is abolished. Our results
indicate that the presence of functional XPA and XPC proteins is essential for
the up-regulation of the KIN17 gene after UVC irradiation. They also show that
the integrity of global genome repair is required to trigger KIN17 gene
expression and probably other UVC-responsive genes.

PMCID: PMC141045
PMID: 12525703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Nat Biotechnol. 2003 Feb;21(2):143-9. Epub 2003 Jan 6.

Total biosynthesis of hydrocortisone from a simple carbon source in yeast.

Szczebara FM(1), Chandelier C, Villeret C, Masurel A, Bourot S, Duport C,
Blanchard S, Groisillier A, Testet E, Costaglioli P, Cauet G, Degryse E, Balbuena
D, Winter J, Achstetter T, Spagnoli R, Pompon D, Dumas B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Ingénierie des Protéines Membranaires, CGM du CNRS, F-91198 Gif 
sur Yvette, France.

Comment in
    Nat Biotechnol. 2003 Feb;21(2):133-4.

We report on the production of hydrocortisone, the major adrenal glucocorticoid
of mammals and an important intermediate of steroidal drug synthesis, from a
simple carbon source by recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains. An
artificial and fully self-sufficient biosynthetic pathway involving 13 engineered
genes was assembled and expressed in a single yeast strain. Endogenous sterol
biosynthesis was rerouted to produce compatible sterols to serve as substrates
for the heterologous part of the pathway. Biosynthesis involves eight mammalian
proteins (mature forms of CYP11A1, adrenodoxin (ADX), and adrenodoxin reductase
(ADR); mitochondrial forms of ADX and CYP11B1; 3beta-HSD, CYP17A1, and CYP21A1). 
Optimization involved modulating the two mitochondrial systems and disrupting of 
unwanted side reactions associated with ATF2, GCY1, and YPR1 gene products.
Hydrocortisone was the major steroid produced. This work demonstrates the
feasibility of transfering a complex biosynthetic pathway from higher eukaryotes 
into microorganisms.

PMID: 12514739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jan;23(2):526-33.

Regulation of tumor necrosis factor alpha gene expression by mycobacteria
involves the assembly of a unique enhanceosome dependent on the coactivator
proteins CBP/p300.

Barthel R(1), Tsytsykova AV, Barczak AK, Tsai EY, Dascher CC, Brenner MB,
Goldfeld AE.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Blood Research. Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School.
The Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) plays an important role in host
containment of infection by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, one of the leading causes
of death by an infectious agent globally. Using the pathogenic M. tuberculosis
strain H37Rv, we present evidence that upon stimulation of monocytic cells by M. 
tuberculosis a unique TNF-alpha enhanceosome is formed, and it is distinct from
the TNF-alpha enhanceosome that forms in T cells stimulated by antigen engagement
or virus infection. A distinct set of activators including ATF-2, c-jun, Ets,
Sp1, Egr-1 and the coactivator proteins CBP/p300 are recruited to the TNF-alpha
promoter after stimulation with M. tuberculosis. Furthermore, the formation of
this enhanceosome is dependent on inducer-specific helical phasing relationships 
between transcription factor binding sites. We also show that the transcriptional
activity of CBP/p300 is potentiated by mycobacterial stimulation of monocytes.
The identification of TNF-alpha regulatory elements and coactivators involved in 
M. tuberculosis-stimulated gene expression thus provides potential selective
molecular targets in the modulation of TNF-alpha gene expression in the setting
of mycobacterial infection.

PMCID: PMC151551
PMID: 12509451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Diabetes. 2002 Dec;51(12):3400-7.

Activating transcription factor-2 mediates transcriptional regulation of
gluconeogenic gene PEPCK by retinoic acid.

Lee MY(1), Jung CH, Lee K, Choi YH, Hong S, Cheong J.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, Chonnam National University, Kwangju, Korea.

All-trans-retinoic acid (RA) is known to increase the rate of transcription of
the PEPCK gene upon engagement of the RA receptor (RAR). RA also mediates
induction of specific gene transcription via several signaling pathways as a
nongenomic effect. Here we show that RA upregulation of PEPCK promoter activity
requires the cAMP response element (CRE)-1 in addition to the RA-response element
and that activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) binds the CRE element to
mediate this effect. Furthermore, we show that RA treatment potentiates
ATF-2-dependent transactivation by inducing specific phosphorylation of ATF-2 by 
p38beta kinase. ATF-2 activation by RA blocked the inhibitory intramolecular
interaction of ATF-2 amino and carboxyl terminal domains in a p38beta
kinase-dependent manner. Consistent with these results, RA treatment increased
the DNA binding activity of ATF-2 on the PEPCK CRE-1 sequence. Taken together,
the data suggest that RA activates the p38beta kinase pathway leading to
phosphorylation and activation of ATF-2, thereby enhancing PEPCK gene
transcription and glucose production.

PMID: 12453892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Free Radic Biol Med. 2002 Nov 15;33(10):1334-46.

Signal transduction in H2O2-induced senescence-like phenotype in human diploid
fibroblasts.

Frippiat C(1), Dewelle J, Remacle J, Toussaint O.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Cellular Biology, University of Namur, Namur, Belgium

A stress-induced senescence-like phenotype is induced by exposure of human
diploid fibroblasts to subcytotoxic H2O2 stress. Previous studies showed that
TGF-beta1 is responsible for the induction of several biomarkers of replicative
senescence within 72 h after stress: senescence-like morphology,
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase activity, and an increase in the mRNA
steady state level of four senescence-associated genes. Other studies showed that
the retinoblastoma protein is responsible for the appearance of these biomarkers 
in the same conditions. Here we show that sustained p38(MAPK) phosphorylation is 
responsible for both H2O2-induced overexpression of TGF-beta 1 and subsequent
TGF-beta 1-induced appearance of these biomarkers. p38(MAPK) phosphorylation is
shown to be necessary for a self-sustained TGF-beta 1 overexpression after H2O2
stress through the activation of ATF-2 transcription factor, thereby creating a
regulatory loop between sustained p38(MAPK) activation and sustained TGF-beta 1
overexpression after stress. p38(MAPK) activation is also shown to be responsible
in part for the growth arrest observed in stress-induced senescence-like
phenotype. At 48 h after stress, ATF-2 starts to interact with hypophosphorylated
Rb, which allows the biomarkers of stress-induced senescence-like phenotype to
appear. This report gives an overall explanation of how a senescence-like
phenotype is established after subcytotoxic H2O2 stress.

PMID: 12419465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cell Signal. 2003 Jan;15(1):57-64.

Mitochondrial calcium-mediated reactive oxygen species are essential for the
rapid induction of the grp78 gene in 9L rat brain tumour cells.

Chang WM(1), Chen KD, Chen LY, Lai MT, Lai YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30043,
Taiwan, ROC. wmchang@lie.nthu.edu.tw

The glucose-regulated protein grp78 gene is rapidly transactivated in 9L rat
brain tumour (RBT) cells treated with okadaic acid (OA) followed by heat shock
(HS) (termed OA-->HS treatment). By Northern blotting analyses and transient
transfection assays, we herein show that transactivation of grp78 by OA-->HS is
abolished by an intracellular calcium chelator, bis(aminophenoxy)ethane
N,N'-tetraacetic acid (BAPTA), and an inhibitor of mitochondrial Ca(2+)
uniporter, ruthenium red (RR), while unaffected by cyclosporin A (CsA), an
inhibitor of mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MTP). The inhibitory
effects of BAPTA and RR also present in OA-->HS induction of transient elevation 
of intracellular hydrogen peroxide. The requirement of reactive oxygen
intermediates (ROIs) is confirmed by substitutional addition of antioxidants,
N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) and pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate (PDTC) during OA-->HS
treatment, mimicking these inhibitory effects of BAPTA and RR. Western blotting
analyses show that phosphorylation of transcription factor CREB is diminished
only by BAPTA but not by RR, while phosphorylation of ATF-2 is unaffected by
either agent. Conclusively, we present that both the disturbances of
mitochondrial calcium homeostasis and reactive oxygen intermediates are essential
for rapid transactivation of grp78, and this pathway is separate from protein
kinase A (PKA)-dependent CREB activation or p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(p38(MAPK))-dependent ATF-2 activation and signalling.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Inc.

PMID: 12401520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Cell Sci. 2002 Nov 15;115(Pt 22):4341-51.

Keratin mutations of epidermolysis bullosa simplex alter the kinetics of stress
response to osmotic shock.

D'Alessandro M(1), Russell D, Morley SM, Davies AM, Lane EB.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Cell Structure Research Group, University of Dundee School 
of Life Sciences, MSI/WTB Complex, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK.

The intermediate filament cytoskeleton is thought to confer physical resilience
on tissue cells, on the basis of extrapolations from the phenotype of cell
fragility that results from mutations in skin keratins. There is a need for
functional cell assays in which the impact of stress on intermediate filaments
can be induced and analyzed. Using osmotic shock, we have induced cytoskeleton
changes that suggest protective functions for actin and intermediate filament
systems. Induction of the resulting stress response has been monitored in
keratinocyte cells lines carrying K5 or K14 mutations, which are associated with 
varying severity of epidermolysis bullosa simplex. Cells with severe mutations
were more sensitive to osmotic stress and took longer to recover from it. Their
stress-activated response pathways were induced faster, as seen by early
activation of JNK, ATF-2 and c-Jun. We demonstrate that the speed of a cell's
response to hypotonic stress, by activation of the SAPK/JNK pathway, is
correlated with the clinical severity of the mutation carried. The response to
hypo-osmotic shock constitutes a discriminating stress assay to distinguish
between the effects of different keratin mutations and is a potentially valuable 
tool in developing therapeutic strategies for keratin-based skin fragility
disorders.

PMID: 12376565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Environ Health Perspect. 2002 Oct;110(10):985-90.

Transcription factor activation following exposure of an intact lung preparation 
to metallic particulate matter.

Samet JM(1), Silbajoris R, Huang T, Jaspers I.

Author information: 
(1)Human Studies Division, National Health and Environmental Effects Research
Laboratory, Office of Research and Development, U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27599, USA. samet.jim@epa.gov

Metallic constituents contained in ambient particulate matter have been
associated with adverse effects in a number of epidemiologic, in vitro, and in
vivo studies. Residual oil fly ash (ROFA) is a metallic by-product of the
combustion of fossil fuel oil, which has been shown to induce a variety of
proinflammatory responses in lung cells. We have examined signaling pathways
activated in response to ROFA exposure and recently reported that ROFA treatment 
activates multiple mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases in the rat lung. In
the present study we extended our investigations on the mechanism of toxicity of 
ROFA to include transcription factors whose activities are regulated by MAP
kinases as well as possible effectors of transcriptional changes that mediate the
effects of ROFA. We applied immunohistochemical methods to detect ROFA-induced
activation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF kappa B), activating transcription
factor-2 (ATF-2), c-Jun, and cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) in
intact lung tissue and confirmed and characterized their functional activation
using DNA binding assays. We performed these studies using a perfused rabbit lung
model that is devoid of blood elements in order to distinguish between intrinsic 
lung cell effects and effects that are secondary to inflammatory cell influx. We 
report here that exposure to ROFA results in a rapid activation of all of the
transcription factors studied by exerting direct effects on lung cells. These
findings validate the use of immunohistochemistry to detect transcription factor 
activation in vivo and demonstrate the utility of studying signaling changes in
response to environmental exposures.

PMCID: PMC1241023
PMID: 12361922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 13;277(50):48107-14. Epub 2002 Sep 25.

Differences in the molecular mechanisms involved in the transcriptional
activation of the CHOP and asparagine synthetase genes in response to amino acid 
deprivation or activation of the unfolded protein response.

Bruhat A(1), Averous J, Carraro V, Zhong C, Reimold AM, Kilberg MS, Fafournoux P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Nutrition et Métabolisme Protéique, Institut National de la Recherche
Agronomique de Theix, 63122 Saint Genès Champanelle, France.
bruhat@clermont.inra.fr

A promoter element called the amino acid response element (AARE), which is
essential for the induction of CHOP (a CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-related
gene) transcription by amino acid depletion, has been previously characterized.
Conversely, the human asparagine synthetase (AS) promoter contains two cis-acting
elements termed nutrient-sensing response elements (NSRE-1 and NSRE-2) that are
required to activate the gene by either amino acid deprivation or the endoplasmic
reticulum stress response. The results reported here document the comparison
between CHOP and AS transcriptional control elements used by the amino acid
pathway. We first establish that the AS NSRE-1 sequence shares nucleotide
sequence and functional similarities with the CHOP AARE. However, we demonstrate 
that the CHOP AARE can function independently, whereas AS NSRE-1 is functionally 
weak by itself and instead requires the presence of NSRE-2. Furthermore, AS
NSRE-2 can confer endoplasmic reticulum stress responsiveness to the CHOP AARE.
Using activating transcription factor-2-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts, we
also show that lack of this transcription factor does not abolish the amino acid 
inducibility of AS transcription, but this transcription factor is necessary to
obtain the full AS response to amino acid starvation. Collectively, these results
document that there are significant differences in the molecular mechanisms
involved in the transcriptional activation of CHOP and AS by amino acid
limitation.

PMID: 12351626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2002 Sep 15;405(2):265-74.

Multiple basic-leucine zipper proteins regulate induction of the mouse heme
oxygenase-1 gene by arsenite.

Gong P(1), Stewart D, Hu B, Vinson C, Alam J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Ochsner Clinic Foundation, 1516 Jefferson
Highway, New Orleans, LA 70121, USA.

The mechanism of heme oxygenase-1 (ho-1) gene activation by arsenite was
examined. Arsenite-stimulated expression of a ho-1 promoter/luciferase chimera in
a dose-dependent manner in mouse hepatoma (Hepa) cells. Mutation analyses
identified the arsenite-responsive sequence as the stress-response element
(StRE), which resembles the binding sites for the AP-1 superfamily of
basic-leucine zipper factors. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays, up to
seven specific StRE-protein complexes were routinely detected using extracts from
untreated Hepa cells whereas a single complex was typically observed after
treatment with arsenite. Antibody "supershift" experiments identified Nrf2, JunD,
and ATF3 in control complexes and the amount of these factors increased
significantly in the arsenite-induced complex. MafG, ATF2, FosB, and JunB were
also detected in the arsenite complex. Activation of a StRE-dependent luciferase 
gene by arsenite was inhibited to varying degrees by dominant-negative mutants of
Nrf2, MafK, c-Fos, and CREB but most strongly with the latter. Together, these
results implicate multiple basic-leucine zipper transcription factors in ho-1
gene activation by arsenite.

PMID: 12220541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. DNA Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;21(8):551-60.

Transcriptional activation of C/EBPbeta gene by c-Jun and ATF2.

Lin WC(1), Shen BJ, Tsay YG, Yen HC, Lee SC, Chang CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

C/EBPbeta is one of the key transcription factors responsible for the induction
of a wide array of genes. Like many proto-oncogenes and transcription factors,
transcription of C/EBPbeta gene can be induced by multiple extracellular signals.
Using nuclear extracts from lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated mouse liver, five
trans-acting factor-binding motifs, URE1 (-376 to -352), URE2 (-253 to -223),
URE3 (-220 to -190), URE4 (-123 to -103), and URE5 (-72 to -45) were identified
by DNAse I footprinting assays. Competition and supershift analysis of the
complexes formed at the URE2 and URE4 indicated that they contain CREB/ATF and
AP-1 family factors. Furthermore, recombinant ATF2 and c-Jun proteins from
mammalian and bacterial cells can bind to URE2 and URE4 but not URE1.
Cotransfection experiments showed that ATF2 and c-Jun activate the C/EBPbeta gene
expression cooperatively through URE2 and URE4, and this activation was greatly
increased under the treatment of low concentration of anisomycin. During acute
phase response, the phosphorylation of c-Jun and ATF2 was found to correlate with
C/EBPbeta gene expression. Taken together, our results provide the evidences that
both c-Jun and ATF2 are the regulators of C/EBPbeta gene.

PMID: 12215258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Clin Invest. 2002 Sep;110(5):643-50.

An ATF2-derived peptide sensitizes melanomas to apoptosis and inhibits their
growth and metastasis.

Bhoumik A(1), Huang TG, Ivanov V, Gangi L, Qiao RF, Woo SL, Chen SH, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

Melanomas are among the aggressive tumor types because of their notorious
resistance to treatment and their high capacity to metastasize. ATF2 is among
transcription factors implicated in the progression of melanoma and its
resistance to treatment. Here we demonstrate that the expression of a peptide
spanning amino acids 50-100 of ATF2 (ATF2(50-100)) reduces ATF2 transcriptional
activities while increasing the expression and activity of c-Jun. Altering the
balance of Jun/ATF2 transcriptional activities sensitized melanoma cells to
apoptosis, an effect that could be attenuated by inhibiting c-Jun. Inhibition of 
ATF2 via RNA interference likewise increased c-Jun expression and primed melanoma
cells to undergo apoptosis. Growth and metastasis of SW1 and B16F10 mouse
melanomas were inhibited by ATF2(50-100) to varying degrees up to a complete
regression, depending on the mode (inducible, constitutive, or adenoviral
delivery) of its expression.

PMCID: PMC151112
PMID: 12208865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Aug 30;296(4):1013-8.

CREB DNA binding activation by a 50-Hz magnetic field in HL60 cells is dependent 
on extra- and intracellular Ca(2+) but not PKA, PKC, ERK, or p38 MAPK.

Zhou J(1), Yao G, Zhang J, Chang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, People's Republic of China.

To investigate the possible mechanism of gene transcription changes induced by
magnetic field (MF), we examined the DNA binding behavior of the transcription
factor cyclic-AMP responsive element binding protein (CREB) in HL60 cells after
exposure to a 0.1mT 50-Hz extremely low frequency (ELF) sinusoidal MF by a gel
shift assay. Magnetic field induced a time-dependent activation of CREB binding. 
The complex formation increased shortly after MF exposure for 10min, reaching a
peak level after 1h, and then recovered to basal level at 4h after exposure. A
novel MF-induced ATF2/ATF2 homodimer formation was observed after MF exposure for
30min, 1, and 2h. Furthermore, We found that the MF-induced increase of CREB DNA 
binding in HL60 cells was dependent on both extracellular and intracellular
Ca(2+) but not PKA, PKC, ERK, or p38 MAPK by using various pathway inhibitors.
These data indicate that MF exposure activates CREB DNA binding through
calcium-related signal transduction pathways under our experimental conditions.

PMID: 12200150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 25;277(43):40768-74. Epub 2002 Aug 23.

Identification of ATF-2 as a transcriptional regulator for the tyrosine
hydroxylase gene.

Suzuki T(1), Yamakuni T, Hagiwara M, Ichinose H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science,
Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Aichi 470-1192, Japan.

Transcriptional regulation of catecholamine-synthesizing genes is important for
the determination of neurotransmitters during brain development. We found that
three catecholamine-synthesizing genes were transcriptionally up-regulated in
cloned PC12D cells overexpressing V-1, a protein that is highly expressed during 
postnatal brain development (1). To reveal the molecular mechanism to regulate
the expression of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), which is the rate-limiting enzyme
for catecholamine biosynthesis, we analyzed the transcription factors responsible
for TH induction in the V-1 clonal cells. First, by using reporter constructs, we
found that the transcription mediated by cAMP-responsive element (CRE) was
selectively enhanced in the V-1 cells, and TH promoter activity was totally
dependent on the CRE in the promoter region of the TH gene. Next, immunoblot
analyses and a transactivation assay using a GAL4 reporter system revealed that
ATF-2, but not cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB), was highly
phosphorylated and activated in the V-1 cells, while both CREB and ATF-2 were
bound to the TH-CRE. Finally, the enhanced TH promoter activity was competitively
attenuated by expression of a plasmid containing the ATF-2 transactivation
domain. These data demonstrated that activation of ATF-2 resulted in the
increased transcription of the TH gene and suggest that ATF-2 may be deeply
involved in the transcriptional regulation of catecholamine-synthesizing genes
during neural development.

PMID: 12196528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Radiat Prot Dosimetry. 2002;99(1-4):159-62.

Bystander effects: intercellular transmission of radiation damage signals.

Little JB(1), Azzam EI, de Toledo SM, Nagasawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard School of Public Health, Laboratory of Radiobiology, 665 Huntington
Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. jlittle@hsph.harvard.edu

Biological effects were examined in confluent cultures of fibroblasts and
epithelial cells exposed to very low mean doses of alpha radiation, doses by
which only 1-2% of the cells were actually traversed by an alpha particle.
Enhanced frequencies of sister chromatid exchanges and HPRT mutations occurred in
the non-irradiated, 'bystander' cells associated with a similar increase in the
frequency of micronuclei, indicating the induction of DNA damage in these cells. 
In order to gain information concerning molecular pathways, changes in gene
expression were examined in bystander cells by western analysis and in situ
immunofluorescence staining. The expression levels of p53, p21 and MDM2 were
significantly modulated in bystander cells; the damage signals leading to these
changes were transmitted from irradiated to bystander cells by gap junction
mediated intercellular communication. The bystander response was suppressed by
incubation with superoxide dismutase as well as an inhibitor of NADPH oxidase,
suggesting the effect may be mediated by oxidative stress. To examine other
signalling pathways responsive to oxidative stress, the activation of
stress-related kinases and their downstream transcription factors were analysed
in bystander cells by western blotting and electrophoretic mobility shift assays;
a 2-4-fold increase in the phosphorylation levels of JNK, ERK1/2, p90RSK, Elk-1
and ATF2 was observed. These changes were detected by 15 min after irradiation
and persisted for at least 1 h. These findings indicate the activation of
multiple signal transduction pathways in bystander cells, involving signals
arising from the plasma membrane as well as from DNA damage.

PMID: 12194273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Genome Res. 2002 Aug;12(8):1190-200.

B-ZIP proteins encoded by the Drosophila genome: evaluation of potential
dimerization partners.

Fassler J(1), Landsman D, Acharya A, Moll JR, Bonovich M, Vinson C.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology Branch, National Center for Biotechnology Information,
National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20814, USA.

Comment in
    Genome Res. 2002 Aug;12(8):1156-8.

The basic region-leucine zipper (B-ZIP) (bZIP) protein motif dimerizes to bind
specific DNA sequences. We have identified 27 B-ZIP proteins in the recently
sequenced Drosophila melanogaster genome. The dimerization specificity of these
27 B-ZIP proteins was evaluated using two structural criteria: (1) the presence
of attractive or repulsive interhelical g<-->e' electrostatic interactions and
(2) the presence of polar or charged amino acids in the 'a' and 'd' positions of 
the hydrophobic interface. None of the B-ZIP proteins contain only aliphatic
amino acids in the'a' and 'd' position. Only six of the Drosophila B-ZIP proteins
contain a "canonical" hydrophobic interface like the yeast GCN4, and the
mammalian JUN, ATF2, CREB, C/EBP, and PAR leucine zippers, characterized by
asparagine in the second 'a' position. Twelve leucine zippers contain polar amino
acids in the first, third, and fourth 'a' positions. Circular dichroism
spectroscopy, used to monitor thermal denaturations of a heterodimerizing leucine
zipper system containing either valine (V) or asparagine (N) in the 'a' position,
indicates that the V-N interaction is 2.3 kcal/mole less stable than an N-N
interaction and 5.3 kcal/mole less stable than a V-V interaction. Thus, we
propose that the presence of polar amino acids in novel positions of the 'a'
position of Drosophila B-ZIP proteins has led to leucine zippers that
homodimerize rather than heterodimerize.

PMCID: PMC186634
PMID: 12176927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Neuroendocrinology. 2002 Aug;76(2):111-20.

Sustained increases in activating transcription factor-2 and activator protein-2 
in the rat supraoptic nucleus during water deprivation.

Meeker RB(1), Fernandes A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 27599,
USA. meeker@glial.med.unc.edu

During increases in plasma osmolality, extrinsic and intrinsic stimuli converge
on the neuroendocrine cells within the supraoptic nucleus (SON) and
paraventricular nucleus and evoke the release of vasopressin (VP). This release
is accompanied by an increase in VP synthesis, but the signal transduction
pathways that coordinate these two processes are still poorly understood. Several
transcription factors have been suggested to be intermediates in this process,
but their expression is often transient in spite of continued VP synthesis.
Transcription factor expression during chronic neuroendocrine cell stimulation
has rarely been examined. In an effort to identify sustained increases, we
examined the expression of several transcription factors in the SON of normal
rats and rats deprived of water for 44 h. Alpha and beta isoforms of activator
protein-2 (AP-2 alpha; AP-beta), activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2), the
phosphorylated form of cyclic AMP response element binding protein and
phospho-cJun were all expressed in the rat SON under basal conditions. Increases 
in AP-2 alpha and ATF-2 were sustained throughout the SON during water
deprivation, suggesting that these transcription factors could play a role in the
maintenance of VP and oxytocin gene transcription in response to dehydration.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12169772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Neurosci Lett. 2002 Aug 23;329(1):9-12.

Region-specific phosphorylation of ATF-2, Elk-1 and c-Jun in rat hippocampus and 
cerebellum after electroconvulsive shock.

Ahn YM(1), Kang UG, Oh SW, Juhnn YS, Joo YH, Park JB, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Eulji University School of Medicine, Seoul
139-711, South Korea.

There have been reports of regional differences in the activation of mitogen
activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and in the induction of immediate early genes
after electroconvulsive shock (ECS) in the rat brain. This study was performed to
determine whether ECS induce the region-specific phosphorylation of
MAPK-downstream transcription factors, ATF-2, Elk-1, c-Jun, in rat hippocampus
and cerebellum. Following ECS, the phosphorylation of ATF-2 was highly increased 
in the hippocampus but slightly in the cerebellum. The phosphorylation of Elk-1
was increased in the cerebellum but not in the hippocampus. In contrast, the
phosphorylation of c-Jun was increased only in the hippocampus. These results
indicate that ECS can induce the region-specific phosphorylation of
MAPK-downstream transcription factors in rat hippocampus and cerebellum.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12161250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Hypertension. 2002 Aug;40(2):148-54.

Norepinephrine enhances fibrosis mediated by TGF-beta in cardiac fibroblasts.

Akiyama-Uchida Y(1), Ashizawa N, Ohtsuru A, Seto S, Tsukazaki T, Kikuchi H,
Yamashita S, Yano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.

Cardiac fibrosis results from proliferation of interstitial fibroblasts and
concomitant increased biosynthesis of extracellular matrix (ECM) components and
is often complicated by cardiac hypertrophy. This study was conducted to
investigate whether norepinephrine (NE) potentiates transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-beta)-induced cardiac fibrosis. The expression of the cardiac
ECM proteins, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), fibronectin, and
collagen type I, was examined by Western blotting using extracts from neonatal
rat primary cardiac fibroblasts. In cardiac fibroblasts, treatment with a
combination of NE and TGF-beta1 increased cell proliferation and ECM expression. 
Luciferase assays were conducted to clarify the effect of NE on TGF-beta
signaling. TGF-beta1 (1 ng/mL) increased the specific signaling activity 2-fold, 
whereas the combination of NE (10 micro mol/L) and TGF-beta1 (1 ng/mL) resulted
in an approximate 10-fold increase in specific signaling activity. We confirmed
that treatment with NE markedly enhances TGF-beta-induced phosphorylation of
activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2). These results indicated that NE has a 
synergistic effect on TGF-beta signaling. To determine whether this activation by
NE was mediated by the TGF-beta1 receptor, we used a dominant negative vector of 
the TGF-beta1 type II receptor, and the synergistic effects were inhibited.
Furthermore, this synergistic effect was attenuated by a specific inhibitor of
p38, SB203680. These data indicate that NE enhances cardiac fibrosis through
TGF-beta1 post-receptor signaling, predominantly via the p38 MAP kinase pathway.

PMID: 12154105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2002 Aug;27(2):204-13.

Regulation of airway smooth muscle cyclin D1 transcription by protein kinase
C-delta.

Page K(1), Li J, Corbit KC, Rumilla KM, Soh JW, Weinstein IB, Albanese C, Pestell
RG, Rosner MR, Hershenson MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and the Ben May Institute for Cancer Research,
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

The precise mechanism by which protein kinase C-delta (PKCdelta) inhibits cell
cycle progression is not known. We investigated the regulation of cyclin D1
transcription by PKCdelta in primary bovine airway smooth muscle cells.
Overexpression of the active catalytic subunit of PKCdelta attenuated
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-mediated transcription from the cyclin D1
promoter, whereas overexpression of a dominant-negative PKCdelta increased
promoter activity. A PKCdelta-specific pseudosubstrate increased cyclin D1
protein abundance. To determine the transcriptional mechanism by which PKCdelta
negatively regulates cyclin D1 expression, we transiently transfected cells with 
cDNAs encoding cyclin D1 promoter 5' deletions and site mutations in the context 
of a -66 promoter fragment. We found that the -57 to -52 CRE/ATF2 site functions 
as a basal level and PDGF enhancer, whereas the -39 to -30 nuclear factor-kappaB 
site functions as a basal level suppressor. Further, PDGF and PKCdelta
responsiveness of the cyclin D1 promoter was maintained following 5' deletion to 
the Ets-containing -22 minimal promoter. Finally, using electrophoretic mobility 
gel shift and reporter assays, we determined that PKCdelta inhibits CRE/ATF2
binding and transactivation, activates nuclear factor-kappaB binding and
transactivation, and attenuates Ets transactivation. These data suggest that
PKCdelta attenuates cyclin D1 promoter activity via the regulation of three
distinct cis-acting regulatory elements.

PMID: 12151312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 4;277(40):37212-8. Epub 2002 Jul 30.

P38 and activating transcription factor-2 involvement in osteoblast osmotic
response to elevated extracellular glucose.

Zayzafoon M(1), Botolin S, McCabe LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan
48824, USA.

Poorly controlled or untreated type I diabetes mellitus is characterized by
hyperglycemia and is associated with decreased bone mass and osteoporosis. We
have demonstrated that osteoblasts are sensitive to hyperglycemia-associated
osmotic stress and respond to elevated extracellular glucose or mannitol by
increasing c-jun and collagen I expression. To determine whether MAPKs are
involved in this response, MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts were treated with 16.5 mm
glucose, mannitol, or contrast dye for 1 h. Immunoblotting of phosphorylated p38 
demonstrated activation of p38 MAPK by hyperosmotic stress in vitro and in vivo. 
Activation peaked at 20 min, remained detectable after 24 h, and was protein
kinase C-independent. Activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) activation
followed the same pattern as phospho-p38. Transactivation of cAMP response
element (CRE)- and c-jun promoter (containing a CRE-like element)-reporter
constructs increased following hyperosmotic treatment. SB 203580 (a p38 MAPK
inhibitor) blocked ATF-2 phosphorylation, CRE transactivation, and c-jun promoter
activation. Hyperosmotic activation of collagen I promoter activity was also
inhibited by SB 203580, consistent with the involvement of c-jun in collagen I
up-regulation. Therefore, we propose that hyperglycemia-induced increases in p38 
MAPK activity and ATF-2 phosphorylation contribute to CRE activation and
modulation of c-jun and collagen I expression in osteoblasts.

PMID: 12149242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Endocrinology. 2002 Aug;143(8):3105-13.

p38 MAPK-mediated signals are required for inducing osteoclast differentiation
but not for osteoclast function.

Li X(1), Udagawa N, Itoh K, Suda K, Murase Y, Nishihara T, Suda T, Takahashi N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Oral Science, Department of Biochemistry, Matsumoto Dental
University, 1780 Gobara, Hirooka, Shiojiri, Nagano 399-0781, Japan.

Receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL)-induced signals play
critical roles in osteoclast differentiation and function. SB203580, an inhibitor
of p38 MAPK, blocked osteoclast formation induced by 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D(3) and prostaglandin E(2) in cocultures of mouse osteoblasts and bone marrow
cells. Nevertheless, SB203580 showed no inhibitory effect on RANKL expression in 
osteoblasts treated with 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) and prostaglandin E(2). 
RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis in bone marrow cultures was inhibited by
SB203580, suggesting a direct effect of SB203580 on osteoclast precursors, but
not on osteoblasts, in osteoclast differentiation. However, SB203580 inhibited
neither the survival nor dentine-resorption activity of osteoclasts induced by
RANKL. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), IL-1, and TNFalpha all stimulated the survival
of osteoclasts, which was not inhibited by SB203580. Phosphorylation of p38 MAPK 
was induced by RANKL, IL-1, TNFalpha, and LPS in osteoclast precursors but not in
osteoclasts. LPS stimulated phosphorylation of MAPK kinase 3/6 and ATF2, upstream
and downstream signals of p38 MAPK, respectively, in osteoclast precursors but
not in osteoclasts. Nevertheless, LPS induced degradation of IkappaB and
phosphorylation of ERK in osteoclasts as well as in osteoclast precursors. These 
results suggest that osteoclast function is induced through a mechanism
independent of p38 MAPK-mediated signaling.

PMID: 12130576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Neurosci Res. 2002 Aug 1;69(3):305-17.

CNS myelinogenesis in vitro: myelin basic protein deficient shiverer
oligodendrocytes.

Seiwa C(1), Kojima-Aikawa K, Matsumoto I, Asou H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology,
Japan.

The shiverer mutant mouse is an autosomal recessive mutant characterized by
incomplete myelin sheath formation in the central nervous system (CNS). Such mice
contain a deletion in the MBP gene, do not produce MBP proteins, and have little 
or no compact myelin in the CNS. To investigate the myelin sheath formation in
shiverer mutant mice resulting from the absence of compact myelin, firstly we
developed new methods for generating oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) from 
an E17 mouse brain, and examined homozygous shiverer (shi/shi) OPCs with respect 
to myelinogenesis in vitro. After treatment of shi/shi OPCs in vitro with PDGF or
bFGF, proliferation of shi/shi OPCs was enhanced similar to that observed in
wild-type OPCs. The majority of cells from the shiverer mutant mouse, however,
remained as A2B5-immunoreactive early OPCs. To determine which molecular events
affect the differentiation of shi/shi OPCs, we determined the signaling pathway
that could be responsible for activating myelin sheath-specific proteins. We
found that the developmental schedule of shi/shi OPCs in vitro was accelerated by
the addition of cyclic AMP analogs, dibutyryl cAMP (dbcAMP). Treatment of shi/shi
OPCs with dbcAMP had significant effect on the differentiation of OPCs that
became MAG-expressing oligodendrocytes. To further determine the possible
mechanism involved in the activation of MAG by dbcAMP, we examined the
cAMP-dependent signaling cascades. The activation of JNK was markedly stimulated 
by treatment with dbcAMP, and the phosphorylation of transcription factor ATF-2
was also stimulated by dbcAMP. We demonstrated that the MAG-positive shi/shi
oligodendrocytes extend processes around axons and finally covered the axon, this
was clearly observed by immunocytochemistry of shi/shi oligodendrocyte-DRG
cocultures. These results suggest that ATF-2 coupled to specific signal
transduction cascades plays an important regulatory role in MAG expression at a
specific stage of shi/shi oligodendrocyte differentiation, and OPCs grow to
become myelin-forming cells with numerous cell processes that wraps around an
axon to form a thin myelin sheath.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12125072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Cell Sci. 2002 Aug 1;115(Pt 15):3193-206.

p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase is required for TGFbeta-mediated
fibroblastic transdifferentiation and cell migration.

Bakin AV(1), Rinehart C, Tomlinson AK, Arteaga CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 777 Preston 
Research Building, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) contributes to tumor progression by
inducing an epithelial to mesenchymal transdifferentiation (EMT) and cell
migration. We found that TGFbeta-induced EMT was blocked by inhibiting activation
of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) with H-7, a protein kinase C
inhibitor, and with SB202190, a direct inhibitor of p38MAPK. Inhibition of the
p38MAPK pathway affected TGFbeta-mediated phosphorylation of ATF2, but did not
inhibit phosphorylation of Smad2. SB202190 impaired TGFbeta-mediated changes in
cell shape and reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. Forced expression of
dominant-negative (DN) MAPK kinase 3 (MKK3) inhibited TGFbeta-mediated activation
of p38MAPK and EMT. Expression of DN-p38alpha impaired TGFbeta-induced EMT.
Inhibition of p38MAPK blocked TGFbeta-induced migration of non-tumor and tumor
mammary epithelial cells. TGFbeta induced activation of the p38MAPK pathway
within 15 minutes. Expression of TGFbeta type II (TbetaRII) and type I
(TbetaRI/Alk5) kinase-inactive receptors blocked EMT and activation of p38MAPK,
whereas expression of constitutively active Alk5-T204D resulted in EMT and
phosphorylation of MKK3/6 and p38MAPK. Finally, dominant-negative Rac1N17 blocked
TGFbeta-induced activation of the p38MAPK pathway and EMT, suggesting that Rac1
mediates activation of the p38MAPK pathway. These studies suggest that the
p38MAPK pathway is required for TGFbeta-mediated EMT and cell migration.

PMID: 12118074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2002 Aug;283(2):L418-27.

TNF-alpha inhibits SP-A gene expression in lung epithelial cells via p38 MAPK.

Miakotina OL(1), Snyder JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242-1109, USA.

Surfactant protein A (SP-A), the major lung surfactant-associated protein,
mediates local defense against pathogens and modulates inflammation in the
alveolus. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, a proinflammatory cytokine, inhibits
SP-A gene expression in lung epithelial cells. Inhibitors of the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway, i.e., wortmannin, LY-294002, and
rapamycin, did not block the inhibitory effects of TNF-alpha on SP-A mRNA levels.
An inhibitor of the p44/42 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway,
PD-98059, was also ineffective. PD-169316 and SB-203580, inhibitors of p38 MAPK, 
blocked the TNF-alpha-mediated inhibition of SP-A mRNA levels. TNF-alpha
increased the phosphorylation of p38 MAPK within 15 min. Anisomycin, an activator
of p38 MAPK, increased p38 MAPK phosphorylation and decreased SP-A mRNA levels in
a dose-dependent manner. Finally, TNF-alpha increased the phosphorylation of
ATF-2, a transcription factor that is a p38 MAPK substrate. We conclude that
TNF-alpha downregulates SP-A gene expression in lung epithelial cells via the p38
MAPK signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 12114204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Yeast. 2002 Jul;19(10):873-86.

Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) metabolism in Saccharomyces cerevisiae expressing
mammalian steroid hydroxylase CYP7B: Ayr1p and Fox2p display
17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity.

Vico P(1), Cauet G, Rose K, Lathe R, Degryse E.

Author information: 
(1)Transgene SA, 11 Rue de Molsheim, 67000 Strasbourg, France. rlathe@ed.ac.uk

We have engineered recombinant yeast to perform stereospecific hydroxylation of
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). This mammalian pro-hormone promotes brain and
immune function; hydroxylation at the 7alpha position by P450 CYP7B is the major 
pathway of metabolic activation. We have sought to activate DHEA via yeast
expression of rat CYP7B enzyme. Saccharomyces cerevisiae was found to metabolize 
DHEA by 3beta-acetylation; this was abolished by mutation at atf2. DHEA was also 
toxic, blocking tryptophan (trp) uptake: prototrophic strains were
DHEA-resistant. In TRP(+) atf2 strains DHEA was then converted to
androstene-3beta,17beta-diol (A/enediol) by an endogenous 17beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase (17betaHSD). Seven yeast polypeptides similar to human 17betaHSDs
were identified: when expressed in yeast, only AYR1 (1-acyl dihydroxyacetone
phosphate reductase) increased A/enediol accumulation, while the hydroxyacyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase Fox2p, highly homologous to human 17betaHSD4, oxidized A/enediol to
DHEA. The presence of endogenous yeast enzymes metabolizing steroids may relate
to fungal pathogenesis. Disruption of AYR1 eliminated reductive 17betaHSD
activity, and expression of CYP7B on the combination background (atf2, ayr1,
TRP(+)) permitted efficient (>98%) bioconversion of DHEA to 7alpha-hydroxyDHEA, a
product of potential medical utility.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12112241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. EMBO J. 2002 Jul 15;21(14):3782-93.

Growth factors can activate ATF2 via a two-step mechanism: phosphorylation of
Thr71 through the Ras-MEK-ERK pathway and of Thr69 through RalGDS-Src-p38.

Ouwens DM(1), de Ruiter ND, van der Zon GC, Carter AP, Schouten J, van der Burgt 
C, Kooistra K, Bos JL, Maassen JA, van Dam H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Section of Signal Transduction, Leiden
University Medical Centre, Wassenaarseweg 72, 2333 AL Leiden, The Netherlands.

Transcription factor ATF2 regulates gene expression in response to environmental 
changes. Upon exposure to cellular stresses, the mitogen-activated proteinkinase 
(MAPK) cascades including SAPK/JNK and p38 can enhance ATF2's transactivating
function through phosphorylation of Thr69 and Thr71. How ever, the mechanism of
ATF2 activation by growth factors that are poor activators of JNK and p38 is
still elusive. Here, we show that in fibroblasts, insulin, epidermal growth
factor (EGF) and serum activate ATF2 via a so far unknown two-step mechanism
involving two distinct Ras effector pathways: the Raf-MEK-ERK pathway induces
phosphorylation of ATF2 Thr71, whereas subsequent ATF2 Thr69 phosphorylation
requires the Ral-RalGDS-Src-p38 pathway. Cooperation between ERK and p38 was
found to be essential for ATF2 activation by these mitogens; the activity of p38 
and JNK/SAPK in growth factor-stimulated fibroblasts is insufficient to
phosphorylate ATF2 Thr71 or Thr69 + 71 significantly by themselves, while ERK
cannot dual phosphorylate ATF2 Thr69 + 71 efficiently. These results reveal a so 
far unknown mechanism by which distinct MAPK pathways and Ras effector pathways
cooperate to activate a transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC126107
PMID: 12110590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 6;277(36):33509-17. Epub 2002 Jul 1.

The serine protease plasmin triggers expression of MCP-1 and CD40 in human
primary monocytes via activation of p38 MAPK and janus kinase (JAK)/STAT
signaling pathways.

Burysek L(1), Syrovets T, Simmet T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology of Natural Products and Clinical Pharmacology,
University of Ulm, D-89081 Ulm, Germany.

The mechanism of proinflammatory activation of human monocytes by plasmin is
unknown. Here we demonstrate that in human primary monocytes, plasmin stimulates 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling via phosphorylation of MAPK
kinase 3/6 (MKK3/6) and p38 MAPK that triggers subsequent DNA binding of
transcription factor activator protein-1 (AP-1). The AP-1 complex contained
phosphorylated c-Jun and ATF2, and its DNA binding activity was blocked by the
p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580. In addition, plasmin elicits Janus kinase
(JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) signaling, as
detected by phosphorylation of JAK1 tyrosine kinase and STAT1 and STAT3 proteins.
Plasmin-induced DNA binding of STAT1 and STAT3 was blocked by SB203580 and AG490,
inhibitors of p38 MAPK and JAK, respectively, but not by U0126, an inhibitor of
MKK1/2. DNA binding of NF-kappaB remained unaffected by any of these inhibitors. 
The plasmin-induced signaling led to expression of monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1 (MCP-1) and CD40, which required activation of both p38 MAPK and
JAK/STAT signaling pathways. Additionally, signaling through both p38 MAPK and
JAK is involved in the plasmin-mediated monocyte migration, whereas the
formylmethionylleucylphenylalanine-induced chemotaxis remained unaffected. Taken 
together, our data demonstrate a novel function of the serine protease plasmin in
a proinflammatory signaling network.

PMID: 12093796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2002 Jul;283(1):L103-12.

A p38 MAPK inhibitor, FR-167653, ameliorates murine bleomycin-induced pulmonary
fibrosis.

Matsuoka H(1), Arai T, Mori M, Goya S, Kida H, Morishita H, Fujiwara H, Tachibana
I, Osaki T, Hayashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

To elucidate the pathophysiology of pulmonary fibrosis, we investigated the
involvement of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), which is one of the
major signal transduction pathways of proinflammatory cytokines, in a murine
model of bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis. p38 MAPK and its substrate, activating 
transcription factor (ATF)-2, in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid cells were
phosphorylated by intratracheal exposure of bleomycin, and the phosphorylation of
ATF-2 was inhibited by subcutaneous administration of a specific inhibitor of p38
MAPK, FR-167653. FR-167653 also inhibited augmented expression of tumor necrosis 
factor -alpha, connective tissue growth factor, and apoptosis of lung cells
induced by bleomycin administration. Moreover, daily subcutaneous administration 
of FR-167653 (from 1 day before to 14 days after bleomycin administration)
ameliorated pulmonary fibrosis and pulmonary cachexia induced by bleomycin. These
findings demonstrated that p38 MAPK is involved in bleomycin-induced pulmonary
fibrosis, and its inhibitor, FR-167653, may be a feasible therapeutic agent.

PMID: 12060566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jul;22(13):4815-26.

JDP2, a repressor of AP-1, recruits a histone deacetylase 3 complex to inhibit
the retinoic acid-induced differentiation of F9 cells.

Jin C(1), Li H, Murata T, Sun K, Horikoshi M, Chiu R, Yokoyama KK.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Engineering Division, RIKEN Institute of Physical and Chemical Research, 
BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

Up-regulation of the c-jun gene is a critical event in the retinoic acid
(RA)-mediated differentiation of embryonal carcinoma F9 cells. Activating
transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) and p300 cooperate in the activation of
transcription of the c-jun gene during the differentiation of F9 cells. We show
here that the overexpression of Jun dimerization protein 2 (JDP2), a repressor of
AP-1, inhibits the transactivation of the c-jun gene by ATF-2 and p300 by
recruitment of the histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) complex, thereby repressing the 
RA-induced transcription of the c-jun gene and inhibiting the RA-mediated
differentiation of F9 cells. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
showed that the JDP2/HDAC3 complex, which binds to the differentiation response
element within the c-jun promoter in undifferentiated F9 cells, was replaced by
the p300 complex in response to RA, with an accompanying change in the histone
acetylation status of the chromatin, the initiation of transcription of the c-jun
gene, and the subsequent differentiation of F9 cells. These results suggest that 
JDP2 may be a key factor that controls the commitment of F9 cells to
differentiation and shed new light on the mechanism by which an AP-1 repressor
functions.

PMCID: PMC133911
PMID: 12052888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 16;277(33):29584-92. Epub 2002 Jun 4.

p38 MAPK-mediated transcriptional activation of inducible nitric-oxide synthase
in glial cells. Roles of nuclear factors, nuclear factor kappa B, cAMP response
element-binding protein, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-beta, and activating
transcription factor-2.

Bhat NR(1), Feinstein DL, Shen Q, Bhat AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston,
South Carolina 29425, USA. bhatnr@musc.edu

Previous studies have shown that mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades
signal the induction of inducible nitric-oxide synthase (iNOS) in glial cells
(Bhat, N. R., Zhang, P., Lee, J. C., and Hogan E. L. (1998) J. Neurosci. 18,
1633-1641; Bhat, N. R., Zhang, P., and Bhat, A. N. (1999) J. Neurochem. 72,
472-478). This study further investigates the role of p38 MAPK in the
transcriptional activation of the iNOS gene by transient transfection with
constitutively active upstream kinases in the pathway (i.e. MAPK kinase 3
(MKK3b(E)) and MAPK kinase 6 (MKK6b(E)). Expression in C-6 glial cells of either 
MKK3b(E) or MKK6b(E) resulted in an induction of the activity of a cotransfected 
rat iNOS promoter-reporter (iNOS-luciferase (Luc)) gene and an enhancement of
cytokine-induced expression of iNOS mRNA, both of which were inhibitable by the
p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580. The MKK constructs also induced cAMP response
element-mediated (CRE-Luc) and nuclear factor kappa B-dependent (nuclear factor
kappa B-Luc) transcriptional activities. Transfection with dominant negative (dn)
forms of CRE-binding protein (CREB) and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP),
the two CRE-binding transcription factors targeted by the p38 MAPK pathway,
resulted in opposite effects; dnCREB enhanced and dnC/EBP inhibited iNOS-Luc
parallel to their effects on CRE-Luc. In addition, the induction, by MKK3b(E) and
MKK6b(E), of iNOS promoter activity was enhanced by a wild-type activating
transcription factor (ATF-2), whereas a phosphorylation-defective form of ATF-2
had a suppressive effect. The results of these molecular studies provide evidence
for an important role for the p38 MAPK pathway in the transcriptional activation 
of the iNOS gene in rat glial cells involving the transcription factors nuclear
factor kappa B, C/EBP, and ATF-2.

PMID: 12048217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Biotechniques. 2002 May;32(5):1168, 1170-2, 1174 passim.

Multiple transcription factor profiling by enzyme-linked immunoassay.

Shen Z(1), Peedikayil J, Olson GK, Siebert PD, Fang Y.

Author information: 
(1)BD Biosciences Clontech, Palo Alto, CA 94303, USA.

Transcription factor-DNA interactions have been widely studied in the regulation 
of gene expression. We have established an enzyme-linked immunoassay platform to 
quantify specific transcriptionfactor-DNA interactions. In our assay, dsDNA
immobilized on a 96-well plate captures the transcriptionfactor from the nuclear 
extract of mammalian cells. The DNA-bound transcription factor is detected and
quantified by enzyme-linked immunoassay using a transcription factor-specific
antibody. We have profiled multiple transcription factors involved in
inflammation including NFkappaB p50, NFkappaB p65, c-Rel, c-Fos, CREB-1, and
ATF-2. When compared with the traditional electrophoretic mobility shift assay,
the enzyme-linked immunoassay shows a 10-fold higher sensitivity, eliminates the 
use of radioactivity, allows for a high-throughput format, and is faster.

PMID: 12019791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Apr;87(4):1717-28.

Characterization and functional analysis of cAMP response element modulator
protein and activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) isoforms in the human
myometrium during pregnancy and labor: identification of a novel ATF2 species
with potent transactivation properties.

Bailey J(1), Phillips RJ, Pollard AJ, Gilmore K, Robson SC, Europe-Finner GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Newcastle upon Tyne,
Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 4LP, United Kingdom.
jarrod.bailey@ncl.ac.uk

There is now extensive evidence to indicate that components of the cAMP signaling
pathway are up-regulated in the human myometrium during pregnancy so as to
potentiate the maintenance of uterine quiescence until term. In many tissue and
cell types, increased signaling of the cAMP pathway results in profound changes
in gene expression that are catalyzed via stimulation of PKA and activation of
cAMP-dependent transcription factors that bind cAMP response elements (CREs)
within the promoter regions of affected genes. In the myometrium, these CRE
containing genes include beta2-adrenoceptor, cyclo-oxygenase 2, oxytocin
receptor, and connexin-43. In preliminary investigations, we reported the
differential expression of members of the cAMP bZIP protein family in the
myometrium during pregnancy and labor. In this present study, we have now
identified and functionally characterized these proteins with respect to
myometrial gene expression. We report the identification of a 39,000 mol wt CRE
response element modulator protein (CREM)tau2alpha protein having both
transactivation and transrepressor properties whose expression is sequentially
decreased in the myometrium during gestation and parturition. In contrast,
expression of a myometrial 28,000 mol wt CREMalpha protein having only
transrepressor actions progressively increased in the myometrium during pregnancy
and labor. Similarly, we have isolated two ATF2 proteins of 60,000 and 28,000 mol
wts, which represent full-length ATF2 and a novel small isoform of ATF2 that we
have termed ATF2-small (ATF2-sm). These proteins are potent transactivators of
gene expression and appear to be spatially expressed within the myometrium of the
upper and lower uterine regions. The identification and functional
characterization of these basic region/leucine zipper proteins in the myometrium 
may provide further insight into the molecular mechanisms regulating uterine
activity during fetal maturation and parturition.

PMID: 11932306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Acta Neuropathol. 2002 Apr;103(4):391-407. Epub 2002 Jan 31.

Active, phosphorylation-dependent MAP kinases, MAPK/ERK, SAPK/JNK and p38, and
specific transcription factor substrates are differentially expressed following
systemic administration of kainic acid to the adult rat.

Ferrer I(1), Blanco R, Carmona M, Puig B, Domínguez I, Viñals F.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Biologia Cel.lular i Anatomia Patològica, Hospital Princeps
d'Espanya, Universitat de Barcelona, Campus de Bellvitge, Hospitalet de
Llobregat, Spain. iferrer@sakma.es

Excitotoxicity is considered a major cell death inductor in neurodegeneration.
Yet the mechanisms involved in cell death and cell survival following excitotoxic
insults are poorly understood. Expression of active, phosphorylation-dependent
mitogen-activated extracellular signal-regulated kinases (MAPK/ERKs),
stress-activated c-Jun N-terminal kinases (SAPK/JNKs) and p38 kinases, as well as
their putative active, phosphorylation-dependent specific transcriptional factor 
substrates CREB, Elk-1, ATF-2, c-Myc and c-Jun, has been examined following
systemic administration of kainic acid (KA) at convulsant doses to rats.
Increased phosphorylated MAPK (MAPK(P)) immunoreactivity has been found at 3 and 
6 h in the vulnerable regions entorhinal cortex and CA3, in which neurons are
committed to die, as well as in sensitive regions dentate gyrus and gyrus
cinguli, in which neurons will survive. JNK(P) has been observed in the
entorhinal cortex and dentate gyrus, and p38(P) immunoreactivity occurs in the
entorhinal cortex. Strong c-Myc(P) expression parallels MAPK(P) immunoreactivity 
in the entorhinal cortex, CA3, dentate gyrus and gyrus cinguli, showing that
enhanced c-Myc(P) expression does not preclude cell death or cell survival.
Selective decrease of CREB(P) immunoreactivity in entorhinal cortex and CA3
indicates CREB(P) reduction associated with cell death. Strong c-Jun(P)
immunoreactivity has been found in the entorhinal cortex, CA3 and dentate gyrus, 
thus suggesting that regulation of two opposing cellular programs (cell death or 
cell survival) of c-Jun(P) depends on c-Jun interactions with other factors.
Interestingly, ATF-2(P), and to a lesser extent Elk-1(P), is selectively
increased in the dentate gyrus. These results suggest ATF-2(P) involvement in
cell survival of dentate gyrus granule cells. The present results demonstrate
activation of specific MAPK pathways in association with either cell death or
cell survival triggered by KA. Furthermore, increased Ras activation, as seen
with p21 Ras activation assay, indicates a crucial role for Ras in activating MAP
kinases following excitotoxic insult.

PMID: 11904760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Leukoc Biol. 2002 Mar;71(3):503-10.

Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) mediates activation of stress-activated MAP kinase
p38.

Vasselon T(1), Hanlon WA, Wright SD, Detmers PA.

Author information: 
(1)Merck Research Laboratories, 126 East Lincoln Avenue, RY80W-250, Rahway, NJ
07065, USA.

Early events in the response of cells to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) include
activation of NF-kappaB and stress-activated MAP kinase p38. Recent studies have 
shown that the human Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) mediates activation of NF-kappaB
in response to commercial preparations of LPS (comLPS), membrane lipoproteins,
and Gram-positive bacterial products. Here, we show that expression of TLR2 in
human embryonic kidney 293 cells enabled p38 phosphorylation in response to
comLPS, a synthetic bacterial lipoprotein, and B. subtilis. Activation of p38 was
confirmed by an in vitro kinase assay using ATF2 as substrate and by an assay
measuring activation of the downstream effector of p38, MAP kinase-activated
protein kinase in cells. Thus, TLR2 initiated the signaling pathway for p38 in
response to bacterial products.

PMID: 11867688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 24;277(21):18383-9. Epub 2002 Feb 20.

Activation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling pathway is essential
during PBOX-6-induced apoptosis in chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) cells.

Mc Gee MM(1), Campiani G, Ramunno A, Nacci V, Lawler M, Williams DC, Zisterer DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland.

The mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase family is activated in response to a
wide variety of external stress signals such as UV irradiation, heat shock, and
many chemotherapeutic drugs and leads to the induction of apoptosis. A novel
series of pyrrolo-1,5-benzoxazepines have been shown to potently induce apoptosis
in chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) cells, which are resistant to many
chemotherapeutic agents. In this study we have delineated part of the mechanism
by which a representative compound known as PBOX-6 induces apoptosis. We have
investigated whether PBOX-6 induces activation of MAP kinase signaling pathways
in CML cells. Treatment of K562 cells with PBOX-6 resulted in the transient
activation of two JNK isoforms, JNK1 and JNK2. In contrast, PBOX-6 did not
activate the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) or p38. Apoptosis was
found to occur independently of the small GTPases Ras, Rac, and Cdc42 but
involved phosphorylation of the JNK substrates, c-Jun and ATF-2. Pretreatment of 
K562 cells with the JNK inhibitor, dicoumarol, abolished PBOX-6-induced
phosphorylation of c-Jun and ATF-2 and inhibited the induced apoptosis,
suggesting that JNK activation is an essential component of the apoptotic pathway
induced by PBOX-6. Consistent with this finding, transfection of K562 cells with 
the JNK scaffold protein, JIP-1, inhibited JNK activity and apoptosis induced by 
PBOX-6. JIP-1 specifically scaffolds JNK, MKK7, and members of the mixed-lineage 
kinase (MLK) family, implicating these kinases upstream of JNK in the apoptotic
pathway induced by PBOX-6 in K562 cells.

PMID: 11856743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Oncogene. 2002 Feb 7;21(7):1000-8.

Hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor activates proliferation in melanoma cells
through p38 MAPK, ATF-2 and cyclin D1.

Recio JA(1), Merlino G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4264, USA.

Members of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) superfamily, including p38
kinase and SAPK/JNK, play a central role in mediating cellular response to
environmental stress, growth factors and cytokines. Hepatocyte growth
factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF) is a multifunctional cytokine capable of eliciting
mitogenic, motogenic and morphogenetic activities in responsive cells, and has
been implicated in tumor development and metastasis. Binding of HGF/SF to its
tyrosine kinase receptor c-Met stimulates multiple signal transduction pathways, 
leading to the activation of numerous transcription factors. We here report that 
HGF/SF can induce cyclin D1 expression in mouse melanoma cells, and that this
up-regulation is mediated in part by the activating transcription factor-2
(ATF-2). HGF/SF-mediated phosphorylation of ATF-2 was reduced in the presence of 
either the p38 kinase-specific inhibitor SB203580, a dominant negative p38
mutant, the SAPK/JNK inhibitor JNK-interacting protein-1 (JIP-1), or the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-specific inhibitor LY294002. Activation of
p38 kinase by HGF/SF was partially blocked by the PI3K-specific inhibitor as
well. The upstream kinases for p38, MKK3/6, did not become activated following
HGF/SF exposure, and ATF-2 activation was undiminished by transient transfection 
of a dominant negative MKK6 mutant. However, transcriptional up-regulation of
cyclin D1 by HGF/SF was partially inhibited by the p38 kinase-specific inhibitor,
and cyclin D1 protein induction was partially blocked by a dominant negative
ATF-2 mutant. Notably, the p38 kinase-specific inhibitor was able to block
melanoma cell proliferation but not motility. We conclude that the ATF-2
transcription factor becomes activated by HGF/SF through p38 MAPK and SAPK/JNK.
Moreover, the p38-ATF-2 pathway can help mediate proliferation signals in tumor
cells through transcriptional activation of key cell cycle regulators.

PMID: 11850817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Int J Oncol. 2002 Mar;20(3):527-31.

Infrequent mutations of the activating transcription factor-2 gene in human lung 
cancer, neuroblastoma and breast cancer.

Woo IS(1), Kohno T, Inoue K, Ishii S, Yokota J.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo 104-0045,
Japan.

The activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) gene, which encodes a transcription
factor involved in multiple intracellular signal transduction pathways, is
located on human chromosome 2q32, which is a common region of LOH in human lung
cancer. In neuroblastoma and breast cancer, a high incidence of LOH was detected 
on chromosome 2q. Recently we found that breast cancer is frequently developed in
heterozygous mutant mice for the ATF-2 gene. Therefore, the ATF-2 gene was
considered as a candidate tumor suppressor gene on 2q. To assess the role of the 
ATF-2 gene as a tumor suppressor in human carcinogenesis, we examined genetic
alterations of the ATF-2 gene in 9 breast cancer cell lines, 10 neuroblastoma
cell lines and 46 lung cancer cell lines. For this purpose, we first determined
the exon-intron structure of the ATF-2 gene in the human genome. The ATF-2 gene
was composed of 14 exons and 13 introns, and the ATG start codon and the TGA stop
codon were present in exons 3 and 14, respectively. Genetic variants of the ATF-2
gene were detected in 5 of the 46 (10.6%) lung cancers, but not in neuroblastomas
and breast cancers. Three of the five variants detected in lung cancers were
genetic polymorphisms, while the remaining two, consisting of non-synonymous and 
synonymous substitutions, were possibly somatic mutations. The present result
indicates that the ATF-2 gene is not a major tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 
2q, however, it is possible that ATF-2 alterations may be involved in the
development of a small subset of lung cancers.

PMID: 11836564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 29;277(13):10987-97. Epub 2002 Jan 14.

Identification of the critical features of a small peptide inhibitor of JNK
activity.

Barr RK(1), Kendrick TS, Bogoyevitch MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Australia, Crawley 6009,
Australia.

The c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) are a subfamily of the mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPKs). Although progress in evaluating the functions of other
MAPKs has been facilitated by the characterization of specific inhibitors, no
JNK-directed inhibitor is commercially available. We have identified a 21-amino
acid peptide inhibitor of activated JNKs, based on amino acids 143-163 of the
JNK-binding domain (JBD) of the JNK scaffolding protein, JNK-interacting
protein-1 (JIP-1). This peptide, I-JIP (Inhibitor of JNK-based on JIP-1),
inhibited JNK activity in vitro toward recombinant c-Jun, Elk, and ATF2 up to
90%. A truncated I-JIP (TI-JIP), the C-terminal 11 amino acids of I-JIP, directly
interacted with recombinant JNKs but not its substrates as shown by surface
plasmon resonance analysis. Scanning alanine replacement within truncated I-JIP
identified 4 residues (Arg-156, Pro-157, Leu-160, or Leu-162) as independently
critical for inhibition. JBD peptide sequences from JIP-2 and JIP-3 shared these 
critical residues and accordingly were effective JNK inhibitors. In contrast,
peptides based on the JBDs of ATF2 and c-Jun inhibited JNK activity by <40%,
which agreed with their lack of homology to the critical Arg-156 and Pro-157.
These studies thus define a small peptide inhibitor sequence of JNKs based on the
JIP proteins.

PMID: 11790767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Oncogene. 2001 Dec 6;20(56):8116-24.

Crosstalk between Myc and activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2): Myc prolongs 
the half-life and induces phosphorylation of ATF2.

Miethe J(1), Schwartz C, Wottrich K, Wenning D, Klempnauer KH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität Münster,
Wilhelm-Klemm-Str. 2, D-48149 Münster, Germany.

Myc is a key regulator of cell growth, differentiation and apoptosis, and affects
cell fate decisions by activating as well as by inhibiting the expression of
cellular genes. Myc is a member of the basic region-helix-loop-helix-leucine
zipper (b-HLH-Zip) class of transcription factors, which heterodimerizes with the
Max protein and recognizes a consensus Myc binding motif. Stimulation of gene
expression by Myc is thought to be mediated by direct binding of Myc-Max
heterodimers to specific target genes. So far, only a few genes have been
identified as direct binding targets of Myc, raising the possibility that Myc
affects gene expression also by indirect mechanisms. In this work we present
evidence that v-Myc encoded by the avian retrovirus MC29 stimulates activating
transcription factor 2 (ATF2)-dependent transcription. Analysis of the effect of 
Myc on ATF2 shows that v-Myc prolongs the half-life of ATF2 and induces the
phosphorylation of N-terminal sites of ATF2 (Thr-69 and Thr-71) which have
previously been identified as the target sites of stress-activated protein
kinases and implicated in the regulation of ATF2 activity. Taken together, our
results suggest that v-Myc can affect gene expression indirectly by modulating
the activity of ATF2.

PMID: 11781825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Oncogene. 2001 Nov 29;20(55):7998-8008.

Opposing functions of ATF2 and Fos-like transcription factors in c-Jun-mediated
myogenin expression and terminal differentiation of avian myoblasts.

Daury L(1), Busson M, Tourkine N, Casas F, Cassar-Malek I, Wrutniak-Cabello C,
Castellazzi M, Cabello G.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Endocrinologie Cellulaire, UMR Différenciation Cellulaire et
Croissance, Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA), 2 place Viala, 
34060 Montpellier Cedex 1, France.

With the aim to identify the oncoprotein partners implicated in the c-Jun
myogenic influence, we carried out stable transfection experiments of c-Jun
and/or ATF2, Fra2, c-Fos overexpression in avian myoblasts. Before induction of
differentiation, c-Jun repressed myoblast withdrawal from the cell cycle, as did 
a TPA treatment. However, after serum removal, unlike TPA, c-Jun significantly
stimulated myoblast differentiation. In search for specific partners involved in 
this dual influence, we found that a reduction in the amounts of c-Fos and Fra2
and an increase in c-Jun proteins occurred at cell confluence, a situation likely
to favor cooperation between c-Jun and ATF2 during terminal differentiation.
Whereas c-Fos and Fra2 cooperated with c-Jun to abrogate myoblast withdrawal from
the cell cycle and terminal differentiation, ATF2 co-expression potentiated the
positive myogenic c-Jun influence. In addition, myogenin expression was a
positive target of this cooperation and this regulation occurred through a
stimulation of myogenin promoter activity: (1) whereas c-Fos or Fra2
co-expression abrogated c-Jun stimulatory activity on this promoter, ATF2
co-expression potentiated this influence; (2) using a dominant negative ATF2
mutant, we established that c-Jun transcriptional activity required functionality
of endogenous ATF2. These data suggest that through this dual myogenic influence 
due to cooperations with different partners, c-Jun is involved in the control of 
duration of myoblast proliferation and thereafter of fusion efficiency.

PMID: 11753683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Biol Cell. 2001 Dec;12(12):3852-63.

TGFbeta and PTHrP control chondrocyte proliferation by activating cyclin D1
expression.

Beier F(1), Ali Z, Mok D, Taylor AC, Leask T, Albanese C, Pestell RG, LuValle P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

Exact coordination of growth plate chondrocyte proliferation is necessary for
normal endochondral bone development and growth. Here we show that PTHrP and
TGFbeta control chondrocyte cell cycle progression and proliferation by
stimulating signaling pathways that activate transcription from the cyclin D1
promoter. The TGFbeta pathway activates the transcription factor ATF-2, whereas
PTHrP uses the related transcription factor CREB, to stimulate cyclin D1 promoter
activity via the CRE promoter element. Inhibition of cyclin D1 expression with
antisense oligonucleotides causes a delay in progression of chondrocytes through 
the G1 phase of the cell cycle, reduced E2F activity, and decreased
proliferation. Growth plates from cyclin D1-deficient mice display a smaller zone
of proliferating chondrocytes, confirming the requirement for cyclin D1 in
chondrocyte proliferation in vivo. These data identify the cyclin D1 gene as an
essential component of chondrocyte proliferation as well as a fundamental target 
gene of TGFbeta and PTHrP during skeletal growth.

PMCID: PMC60760
PMID: 11739785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Biochem J. 2001 Dec 15;360(Pt 3):599-607.

Regulation and composition of activator protein 1 (AP-1) transcription factors
controlling collagenase and c-Jun promoter activities.

Steinmüller L(1), Cibelli G, Moll JR, Vinson C, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Building 44,
University of Saarland, D-66421 Homburg, Germany.

The activator protein 1 (AP-1) transcription factor is composed of heterodimers
of the Fos/activating transcription factor (ATF) and Jun subfamilies of
basic-region leucine-zipper (B-ZIP) proteins. In order to determine the
identities of individual B-ZIP proteins in various AP-1 complexes we tested the
effect of dominant-negative mutants to the B-ZIP proteins c-Fos, ATF2, ATF4 and
CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) on the activities of the collagenase and
c-Jun promoters. These dominant-negative mutants inhibit DNA binding of wild-type
B-ZIP proteins in a leucine-zipper-dependent fashion. Transcription of a
collagenase promoter/reporter gene was induced in HepG2 hepatoma cells by
expression of c-Fos and c-Jun, administration of PMA ("TPA") or by expression of 
a truncated form of MEK (mitogen-activated/extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 
kinase) kinase-1, MEKK1Delta. In all cases, the dominant-negative mutants A-Fos
and A-ATF2 decreased collagenase promoter activity. However, A-ATF4 and A-C/EBP
had no effect. A-Fos and A-ATF2 also reduced MEKK1Delta-induced stimulation of
the c-Jun promoter. In contrast, constitutive c-Jun promoter activity was blocked
solely by A-ATF2, strongly suggesting that ATF2 and/or an ATF2-dimerizing protein
are of major importance for c-Jun transcription in unstimulated cells. These
results demonstrate that AP-1 transcription factors of different compositions
control c-jun gene transcription in resting or stimulated cells.

PMCID: PMC1222262
PMID: 11736649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2001 Dec;33(12):2157-77.

p38 MAPK activation triggers pharmacologically-induced beta-adrenergic
preconditioning, but not ischaemic preconditioning.

Marais E(1), Genade S, Strijdom H, Moolman JA, Lochner A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physiology, University of Stellenbosch Faculty of Health
Sciences, Tygerberg, Republic of South Africa.

p38 Mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) is activated by short episodes of
ischaemia-reperfusion as well as by sustained ischemia followed by reperfusion,
Whether activation of this kinase is beneficial or deleterious to the ischaemic
heart is still a subject of controversy. Since transient beta-adrenergic
stimulation (5 min) stimulates p38 MAPK activation and mimics the
cardioprotection of ischaemic preconditioning, it was used as a tool to further
evaluate the role of this kinase in cardioprotection. The isolated perfused
working rat heart, subjected to 25 min ischaemia and 30 min reperfusion was used 
as experimental model. p38 MAPK and ATF2 activation was determined using Western 
blots. The results showed that isoproterenol stimulated p38 MAPK in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. Ischaemia-induced activation of p38 MAPK could be
partially abolished by beta- and alpha1-adrenergic receptor blockade.
Isoproterenol activation of the kinase could be abolished by alprenolol and
verapamil, but not by 8-cyclopentyladenosine. p38 MAPK activation induced by
either a multi-episode preconditioning protocol or isoproterenol (10(-7) M for 5 
min) was associated with a significant reduction in p38 MAPK activation at all
time intervals studied during 25 min global ischaemia and at 20 and 30 min of
reperfusion, compared with the marked activation observed in untreated
non-preconditioned hearts. In each case attenuation of p38 MAPK activation during
ischaemia and during reperfusion was associated with improved functional recovery
during reperfusion. Cyclic elevations in tissue cAMP during an ischaemic
preconditioning protocol acted as trigger of cardioprotection, since pretreatment
of such hearts with alprenolol abolished cardioprotection. Mechanical failure in 
such hearts was characterized by a significant stimulation of p38 MAPK activity
during ischaemia and reperfusion. However, p38 MAPK activation during an
ischaemic preconditioning protocol did not act as trigger: inhibition of p38 MAPK
activation by SB 203580 during the preconditioning phase did not abolish
cardioprotection. In fact, functional recovery was significantly better than that
of untreated preconditioned hearts. On the other hand, SB 203580, when
administered before and during the isoproterenol-preconditioning protocol
abolished cardioprotection, suggesting that p38 MAPK activation by a beta
-adrenergic-induced preconditioning protocol does act as trigger of
cardioprotection. In addition, attenuation of p38 MAPK activity during sustained 
ischaemia and reperfusion as occurs in ischaemic- or isoproterenol-preconditioned
hearts, is beneficial.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11735262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2000 Jul;57(7):685-91.

Increased levels of transcription factors Elk-1, cyclic adenosine monophosphate
response element-binding protein, and activating transcription factor 2 in the
cerebellar vermis of schizophrenic patients.

Kyosseva SV(1), Elbein AD, Hutton TL, Griffin ST, Mrak RE, Sturner WQ, Karson CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, USA.

BACKGROUND: We investigated the levels of transcription factors associated with
activation of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway in
schizophrenics using postmortem brain samples. These studies were done to
determine whether our previous findings of abnormal levels of the MAP kinases in 
the cerebellar vermis were linked to additional downstream targets of this signal
transduction pathway.
METHOD: We measured the protein levels of 3 transcription factors in nuclear
fractions of postmortem samples from cerebellar vermis of 10 patients with
schizophrenia and 13 control subjects: Elk-1, cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP) response element binding protein (CREB), and activating transcription
factor 2 (ATF-2). Studies in rats examined the postmortem stability and effect of
haloperidol and risperidone on levels of Elk-1, cAMP, and ATF-2 proteins.
RESULTS: We found a significant increase in the protein levels of Elk-1 (mean+SD,
4489+/-659 vs 2915+/-583 arbitrary densitometric units [P<.001]), CREB (mean +/- 
SD, 2149 1061 vs 904+/-711 arbitrary densitometric units [P=.003]) and ATF-2
(mean+/-SD, 1421 854 vs 512+/-394 arbitrary densitometric units [P=.003]) in the 
cerebellar vermis of schizophrenic subjects. Complementary studies in rats
indicate that these findings can not be attributed to subacute treatment with
antipsychotic medications.
CONCLUSION: Taken together with the alterations of MAP kinases previously
reported, and the findings of elevations of downstream transcription targets, we 
suggest that the MAP kinase signal transduction pathway contributes to the
cerebellar abnormalities in schizophrenia.

PMID: 10891039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Oncogene. 2000 Jun 15;19(26):3003-12.

p38 protects human melanoma cells from UV-induced apoptosis through
down-regulation of NF-kappaB activity and Fas expression.

Ivanov VN(1), Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)The Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
10029, USA.

Identifying mechanisms that underlie the resistance of human melanoma to
radiation and chemotherapy is expected to assist in developing new strategies for
the treatment of this tumor type. We recently demonstrated that through
up-regulation of TNFalpha, ATF2 increases the resistance of late stage melanoma
cells to apoptosis induced by UV-irradiation. In elucidating the role of ATF2
kinases, we now demonstrate that ASK1/MKK6/p38 elicits suppression of Fas
expression. ASK1/p38 downregulates the expression of a Fas via NF-kappaB/SP1 site
on the Fas promoter. Deletion or mutation of NF-kappaB/SP1 within the Fas
promoter abrogates p38 effect. ASK1/p38 silences the Fas promoter by inhibition
of IkappaBalpha phosphorylation - thereby limiting NF-kappaB activity. Forced
expression of a dominant negative form of p38 (p38-ASP) or treatment with p38
pharmacological inhibitor, SB203580, increases NF-kappaB activity, Fas expression
and the levels of UVC-induced apoptosis in late stage melanoma cells. Inhibition 
of p38 activity also restored NF-kappaB activity and Fas expression in
early-phase melanoma cells, suggesting that p38 elicited suppression of Fas
expression is not restricted to late phase melanoma. Identifying p38-mediated
down-regulation of Fas expression illustrates a novel regulatory pathway by which
ASK1/MKK6/p38 alters the degree and nature of the UV-induced apoptosis of
melanoma cells. Oncogene (2000).

PMID: 10871852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Hum Reprod. 2000 Jul;6(7):648-60.

Expression of the cyclic AMP-dependent transcription factors, CREB, CREM and
ATF2, in the human myometrium during pregnancy and labour.

Bailey J(1), Sparey C, Phillips RJ, Gilmore K, Robson SC, Dunlop W, Europe-Finner
GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Newcastle upon Tyne,
UK. jarrod.bailey@ncl.ac.uk

Elevated concentrations of cyclic AMP (cAMP) in the human myometrium may promote 
uterine quiescence during pregnancy by protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated
phosphorylation and subsequent inactivation of myosin light-chain kinase, as well
as by the phosphorylation and activation of cAMP-dependent transcription factors.
In this context, we show that the altered expression of cAMP response-element
binding protein (CREB), cAMP response-element modulator protein (CREM) and
activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) are implicated in the maintenance of
myometrial quiescence during fetal maturation and the switch to uterine
activation at term. Using electrophoretic mobility shift and super shift assays, 
as well as immunoblotting of paired myometrial tissue samples from non-pregnant, 
pregnant non-labouring and spontaneous labouring women, we defined the patterns
of expression of various isoforms of these proteins in the human uterus. Here, we
report spatio-temporal changes in the expression of a 43 kDa form of CREB, a 28
kDa CREM-like protein, and a novel 28 kDa ATF2-like protein which are
differentially expressed, depending on the gestational state of the uterus.
Changes in the pattern of expression of these potent transcription factors may
have an important role in the control of uterine activity throughout pregnancy.

PMID: 10871653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Leukoc Biol. 2000 Jun;67(6):885-93.

Activation of TNF-alpha transcription utilizes distinct MAP kinase pathways in
different macrophage populations.

Means TK(1), Pavlovich RP, Roca D, Vermeulen MW, Fenton MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Boston University School of Medicine, Massachusetts, 
USA.

Stimulation of macrophages by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) leads to the rapid
activation of MAP kinases (MAPK) and the subsequent induction of cytokine gene
expression. We sought to determine whether LPS-inducible cytokine genes were
differentially regulated in macrophages derived from different tissues. Our
studies revealed that PD98059, an inhibitor of the extracellular-regulated kinase
(ERK) pathway, blocked LPS-induced activation of tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-alpha) gene expression in a murine cell line derived from alveolar
macrophages but not in a nonpulmonary macrophage cell line. These findings were
confirmed using primary murine alveolar and peritoneal macrophages. This suggests
that the TNF-alpha promoter contains MAPK-dependent and -independent regulatory
elements that are used in a cell type-specific manner. We also found that
differences in MAPK-regulated signaling were not mediated by NF-KB, LITAF, Egr-1,
CREB, or ATF2/ c-Jun. Together, these studies demonstrate that transcriptional
activation of the TNF-alpha gene requires the ERK signaling cascade in selected
macrophage populations.

PMID: 10857863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 1;275(35):26856-63.

Angiotensin II initiates tyrosine kinase Pyk2-dependent signalings leading to
activation of Rac1-mediated c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase.

Murasawa S(1), Matsubara H, Mori Y, Masaki H, Tsutsumi Y, Shibasaki Y,
Kitabayashi I, Tanaka Y, Fujiyama S, Koyama Y, Fujiyama A, Iba S, Iwasaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Kansai Medical University, Fumizonocho 10-15,
Moriguchi, Osaka 570-8507, Japan.

Ca(2+)-sensitive tyrosine kinase Pyk2 was shown to be involved in angiotensin
(Ang) II-mediated activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) via
transactivation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R). In this study, we
tested the involvement of Pyk2 and EGF-R in Ang II-induced activation of JNK and 
c-Jun in cardiac fibroblasts. Ang II markedly stimulated JNK activities, which
were abolished by genistein and intracellular Ca(2+) chelators but partially by
protein kinase C depletion. Inhibition of EGF-R did not affect Pyk2 and JNK
activation by Ang II. Stable transfection with a dominant negative (DN) mutant
for Pyk2 (PKM) completely blocked JNK activation by Ang II. DN mutants of Rac1
(DN-Rac1) and MEK kinase (DN-MEKK1) also abolished it, whereas those of Cdc42,
RhoA, and Ha-Ras had no effect. Induction of c-Jun gene transcription by Ang II
was abolished in PKM, DN-Rac1, and DN-MEKK1, in which Ang II-induced binding of
ATF2/c-Jun heterodimer to the activator protein-1 sequence at -190 played a key
role. These results suggest that 1) in cardiac fibroblasts activation of JNK and 
c-Jun by Ang II is initiated by Pyk2-dependent signalings but not by downstream
signals of EGF-R or Ras, 2) Rac1 but not Cdc42 is required for JNK activation by 
Ang II upstream of MEKK1, and 3) ATF-2/c-Jun binding to the activator protein-1
sequence at -190 plays a key role for induction of c-Jun gene by Ang II.

PMID: 10856308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 4;275(31):23413-6.

Selective activation of p38 MAPK cascade and mitotic arrest caused by low level
oxidative stress.

Kurata S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.
kushbgen@mri.tmd.ac.jp

Apoptosis induced by high level oxidative stress accompanies diverse cellular
biochemical events including activation of the stress signal cascades of JNK and 
NF-kappaB. We report here selective activation of p38 MAPK cascade and mitotic
arrest under a low level oxidative stress that lacks apoptosis induction. U937
human lymphoid cells treated with low dose (0.02 mm) H(2)O(2) rapidly caused p38 
MAPK cascade activation detectable by phosphorylation of MKK3/6, p38 MAPK,
activating transcription factor-2, and cAMP-responsive element-binding protein,
leaving the JNK and NF-kappaB cascades unaffected. The p38 kinase activation was 
sustained for 24 h under the low level stress conditions and led to formation of 
polyploid nuclei. N-Acetyl-l-cysteine, a precursor of anti-oxidant glutathione,
canceled both p38 MAPK activation and abnormal cell cycle progression, whereas
blockage of the kinase by specific inhibitor SB203580 allowed the appearance of
apoptotic cells. Thus, mimicking the effects of nocodazole, the low level
oxidative stimulus caused inhibition of cell division in the M phase through p38 
MAPK activation. The kinase cascade may serve as a primary transducer of
cytoplasmic oxidative signals to nucleus for stress-relieving gene expression and
cell cycle control before apoptosis-inducing signals are transduced. This is the 
first report demonstrating that oxidative stress can participate in cell cycle
control by induction of a signal cascade.

PMID: 10856288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(13):4814-25.

Assembly of a functional beta interferon enhanceosome is dependent on ATF-2-c-jun
heterodimer orientation.

Falvo JV(1), Parekh BS, Lin CH, Fraenkel E, Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

Heterodimeric transcription factors, including the basic region-leucine zipper
(bZIP) protein ATF-2-c-jun, are well-characterized components of an enhanceosome 
that mediates virus induction of the human beta interferon (IFN-beta) gene. Here 
we report that within the IFN-beta enhanceosome the ATF-2-c-jun heterodimer binds
in a specific orientation, which is required for assembly of a complex between
ATF-2-c-jun and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3). We demonstrate that
correct orientation of the ATF-2-c-jun binding site is required for virus
induction of the IFN-beta gene and for IRF-3-dependent activation of a composite 
ATF-2- c-jun-IRF site in the IFN-beta promoter. We also show that in vitro the
DNA-bound ATF-2-c-jun heterodimer adopts a fixed orientation upon the binding of 
IRF-3 at an adjacent site in the IFN-beta enhancer and that the DNA-binding
domain of IRF-3 is sufficient to mediate this effect. In addition, we show that
the DNA-binding domain of ATF-2 is necessary and sufficient for selective
protein-protein interactions with IRF-3. Strikingly, in vivo chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments with IFN-beta reporter constructs reveal that
recruitment of IRF-3 to the IFN-beta promoter upon virus infection is dependent
on the orientation of the ATF-2-c-jun heterodimer binding site. These
observations demonstrate functional and physical cooperativity between the bZIP
and IRF transcription factor families and illustrate the critical role of
heterodimeric transcription factors in formation of the IFN-beta enhanceosome.

PMCID: PMC85927
PMID: 10848607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Neurochem Res. 2000 Apr;25(4):527-31.

Contribution of MAP kinase pathways to the activation of ATF-2 in human
neuroblastoma cells.

Tindberg N(1), Porsmyr-Palmertz M, Simi A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Division of Molecular Toxicology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. nictin@ki.se

Activated Transcription Factor-2 (ATF-2) is important during development of and
during injury to the brain. Both Jun N-terminal Kinases (JNKs) and p38
Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases (p38MAPKs) may phosphorylate ATF-2, but the
contribution of these two pathways in cells has never been investigated. We have 
assayed endogenous p38MAPK activity in SK-N-MC and SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma
cells for activation of a GAL4/ATF-2 fusionprotein, by means of titrations of
transfected expression plasmids and by using the p38MAPK inhibitor SB203580. It
was found that basal activation of ATF-2 was independent of p38MAPK and that
whereas MAPK kinase-3 (MKK3) was a weak inducer of ATF-2 activation, it was a
potent activator of the stress activated transcription factor CHOP. In contrast, 
ATF-2 was very potently activated by the JNK pathway activator MAPK kinase
kinase-1 (MEKK1). Thus, kinases downstream of MEKK1 appear relevant, but it is
unlikely that p38MAPKs contribute quantitatively to activation of ATF-2 in these 
cells.

PMID: 10823586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Nature. 2000 May 11;405(6783):195-200.

ATF-2 has intrinsic histone acetyltransferase activity which is modulated by
phosphorylation.

Kawasaki H(1), Schiltz L, Chiu R, Itakura K, Taira K, Nakatani Y, Yokoyama KK.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, The Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), Japan.

Transcription factors carry functional domains, which are often physically
distinct, for sequence-specific DNA binding, transcriptional activation and
regulatory functions. The transcription factor ATF-2 is a DNA-binding protein
that binds to cyclic AMP-response elements (CREs), forms a homodimer or
heterodimer with c-Jun, and stimulates CRE-dependent transcription. Here we
report that ATF-2 is a histone acetyltransferase (HAT), which specifically
acetylates histones H2B and H4 in vitro. Motif A, which is located in the HAT
domain, is responsible for the stimulation of CRE-dependent transcription;
moreover, in response to ultraviolet irradiation, phosphorylation of ATF-2 is
accompanied by enhanced HAT activity of ATF-2 and CRE-dependent transcription.
These results indicate that phosphorylation of ATF-2 controls its intrinsic HAT
activity and its action on CRE-dependent transcription. ATF-2 may represent a new
class of sequence-specific factors, which are able to activate transcription by
direct effects on chromatin components.

PMID: 10821277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jul 14;275(28):21737-45.

The homeodomain protein Barx2 contains activator and repressor domains and
interacts with members of the CREB family.

Edelman DB(1), Meech R, Jones FS.

Author information: 
(1)Neurosciences Institute, San Diego, California 92121 and the Department of
Neurobiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Barx1 and Barx2 are homeodomain proteins originally identified using regulatory
elements of genes encoding certain cell adhesion molecules (CAMs). In the present
study, we characterize regions of Barx2 that bind to regulatory elements of genes
encoding three CAMs, L1, neuron-glia CAM (Ng-CAM), and neural CAM (N-CAM), and
identify domains of Barx2 that regulate N-CAM transcription. The homeodomain of
Barx2 was sufficient for binding to homeodomain binding sites (HBS) from all
three CAM genes. The presence of a 17-amino acid Barx basic region resulted in a 
2-fold decrease in binding to HBS sequences from the Ng-CAM and L1 genes, whereas
it led to a 6.5-fold increase in binding to the HBS from the N-CAM promoter.
Thus, the Barx basic region influences the strength and specificity of Barx2
binding to DNA. In co-transfection experiments, Barx2 repressed N-CAM promoter
activity. A 24-residue N-terminal region of Barx2 was essential for repression.
When this region was absent, Barx2 activated the N-CAM promoter. A 63-residue
C-terminal domain was required for this activation. In GST pull-down experiments,
Barx2 bound to proteins of the CREB family, CREB1 and ATF2. Overall, these
findings provide a framework for understanding developmental and physiological
contexts that influence repressor or activator functions of Barx2.

PMID: 10781615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Biol Chem. 2000 Apr 28;275(17):12948-53.

Activating transcription factor 2 is necessary for maximal activity and serum
induction of the cyclin A promoter in chondrocytes.

Beier F(1), Taylor AC, LuValle P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada.

Endochondral bone growth is regulated through the proliferation and
differentiation of growth plate chondrocytes. Mice deficient for the activating
transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) gene show reduced proliferation of chondrocytes.
Here we demonstrate that the cyclin A gene is a target of ATF-2 in chondrocytes. 
Serum stimulation of chondrogenic rat chondrosarcoma cells induces cyclin A
expression. A cyclic AMP response element (CRE) is necessary for optimal activity
and serum inducibility of the cyclin A promoter and confers regulation by ATF-2. 
Phosphorylation and activity of ATF-2 are enhanced dramatically upon serum
stimulation of rat chondrosarcoma cells. Mutation of the CRE or overexpression of
dominant-negative ATF-2 inhibits serum induction of the cyclin A promoter.
Chondrocytes from ATF-2-deficient mice display reduced and delayed induction of
cyclin A upon serum stimulation. The ATF-2-related transcription factor
CRE-binding protein contributes to the activity of the cyclin A CRE in
chondrocytes, whereas c-Jun and c-Fos regulate the promoter independently of the 
CRE. Our data suggest that the reduction in cyclin A levels in chondrocytes from 
ATF-2-deficient mice contributes to their phenotype of reduced chondrocyte
proliferation and dwarfism.

PMID: 10777595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Biol Chem. 2000 Apr 28;275(17):12560-4.

Stability of the ATF2 transcription factor is regulated by phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation.

Fuchs SY(1), Tappin I, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

Trans-activation of the activating transcription factor-2 (ATF2) in response to
cellular stress requires the N-terminal phosphorylation of ATF2 by
stress-activated protein kinases (SAPK). In this study, we investigated the role 
of ATF2 phosphorylation in the maintenance of ATF2 stability. Activation of SAPK 
by forced expression of DeltaMEKK1 increased overall ATF2 ubiquitination,
presumably because of the enhanced dimerization of ATF2. Treatment of
DeltaMEKK1-expressing cells with okadaic acid led to the increase in N-terminal
phosphorylation, protection from ubiquitination, and accumulation of exogenously 
expressed ATF2, indicating the role of protein phosphatases in balancing the
effects of stress kinases. Analysis of ubiquitination and degradation of the
constitutively dimerized ATF2 mutant (ATF2(Delta150-248)) showed that activation 
of JNK or p38 kinase renders ATF2 resistant to ubiquitination and degradation.
This effect is mediated by JNK/p38-dependent phosphorylation of ATF2 at Thr-69
and Thr-71, because the phosphorylation-deficient mutant
(ATF2(Delta150-248-T69A,T71A)) was not protected from ubiquitination and
degradation by the activation of SAPK. Treatment of cells with okadaic acid
elevated the tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced ATF2 level and the extent of its
specific N-terminal phosphorylation. Cycloheximide, which activates SAPK, while
inhibiting protein synthesis, stabilized endogenous ATF2. However, treatment of
cells with the high dose of SB203580, which inhibits JNK and p38 kinase, resulted
in efficient degradation of ATF2 in cells exposed to cycloheximide. This
degradation was abrogated by co-treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG132.
Our findings suggest that N-terminal phosphorylation of ATF2 dimers protect ATF2 
from ubiquitination and degradation. We propose the hypothesis that the balance
between SAPK and protein phosphatases affects the duration and magnitude of ATF2 
transcriptional output because of the effect on substrate recognition for
ubiquitination and degradation.

PMID: 10777545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Leukoc Biol. 2000 Apr;67(4):450-6.

Toll-like receptors: a growing family of immune receptors that are differentially
expressed and regulated by different leukocytes.

Muzio M(1), Polentarutti N, Bosisio D, Prahladan MK, Mantovani A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Mario Negri Institute, Milano, Italy.
MUZIOM@IRFMN.MNEGRI.IT

Toll is a Drosophila gene essential for ontogenesis and antimicrobial resistance.
Several hortologues of Toll have been identified and cloned in vertebrates,
namely Toll-like receptors (TLR). Human TLR are a growing family of molecules
involved in innate immunity. TLR are structurally characterized by a cytoplasmic 
Toll/interleukin-1R (TIR) domain and by extracellular leucine-rich repeats. TLR
characterized so far activate the MyD88/IRAK signaling cascade, which bifurcates 
and leads to NF-kappaB and c-Jun/ATF2/TCF activation. Genetic, gene transfer, and
dominant-negative approaches have involved TLR family members (TLR2 and TLR4) in 
lipopolysaccharide recognition and signaling. Accumulating evidence suggests that
some TLR molecules are also involved in signaling receptor complexes that
recognize components of gram-positive bacteria and mycobacteria. However, the
definitive role of other TLR is still lacking. A systematic approach has been
used to determine whether different human leukocyte populations selectively or
specifically expressed TLR mRNA. Based on expression pattern, TLR can be
classified as ubiquitous (TLR1), restricted (TLR2, TLR4, and TLR5), and specific 
(TLR3). Expression and regulation of distinct though overlapping ligand
recognition patterns may underlie the existence of a numerous, seemingly
redundant, TLR family. Alternately, the expression of a TLR in a single cell type
may indicate a specific role for this molecule in a restricted setting.

PMID: 10770275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Immunol Methods. 2000 Apr 21;238(1-2):161-72.

In vivo selection of single-chain antibodies using a yeast two-hybrid system.

Pörtner-Taliana A(1), Russell M, Froning KJ, Budworth PR, Comiskey JD, Hoeffler
JP.

Author information: 
(1)Invitrogen, 1600 Faraday Avenue, Carlsbad, CA 92008, USA.
ataliana@invitrogen.com

The current methodology for screening libraries of single-chain fragments of
immunoglobulin variable domains (sFvs) utilizes bacterial phage systems. We have 
developed a unique in vivo selection protocol combining a modified yeast
two-hybrid assay with a novel prey vector expressing sFvs. The viability of the
system is demonstrated with the screen of a sFv library cloned into a yeast
two-hybrid prey vector for molecules that target the bait ATF-2, a member of the 
CREB/ATF family of transcriptional regulatory proteins. The isolated sFv was
capable of recognizing ATF-2 in vitro on Western blots and in vivo in mammalian
cells.

PMID: 10758246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 2;275(22):16590-6.

Amino-terminal-derived JNK fragment alters expression and activity of c-Jun,
ATF2, and p53 and increases H2O2-induced cell death.

Buschmann T(1), Yin Z, Bhoumik A, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

The stress-activated protein kinase JNK plays an important role in the stability 
and activities of key regulatory proteins, including c-Jun, ATF2, and p53. To
better understand mechanisms underlying the regulation of JNK activities, we
studied the effect of expression of the amino-terminal JNK fragment (N-JNK; amino
acids 1-206) on the stability and activities of JNK substrates under nonstressed 
growth conditions, as well as after exposure to hydrogen peroxide. Mouse
fibroblasts that express N-JNK under tetracycline-off (tet-off) inducible
promoter exhibited elevated expression of c-Jun, ATF2, and p53 upon tetracycline 
removal. This increased coincided with elevated transcriptional activities of
p53, but not of c-Jun or ATF2, as reflected in luciferase activities of
p21(Waf1/Cip1)-Luc, AP1-Luc, and Jun2-Luc, respectively. Expression of N-JNK in
cells that were treated with H(2)O(2) impaired transcriptional output as
reflected in a delayed and lower level of c-Jun-, limited ATF2-, and reduced
p53-transcriptional activities. N-JNK elicited an increase in H(2)O(2)-induced
cell death, which is p53-dependent, because it was not seen in p53 null cells yet
could be observed upon coexpression of p53 and N-JNK. The ability to alter the
activity of ATF2, c-Jun, and p53 and the degree of stress-induced cell death by a
JNK-derived fragment identifies new means to elucidate the nature of JNK
regulation and to alter the cellular response to stress.

PMID: 10748185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 2;275(22):16466-72.

IB1 reduces cytokine-induced apoptosis of insulin-secreting cells.

Bonny C(1), Oberson A, Steinmann M, Schorderet DF, Nicod P, Waeber G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics and the Department of Internal Medicine, CHUV
University Hospital, 1011 Lausanne Switzerland. christophe.bonny@chuv.hospvd.ch

IB1/JIP-1 is a scaffold protein that interacts with upstream components of the
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling pathway. IB1 is expressed at high levels 
in pancreatic beta cells and may therefore exert a tight control on signaling
events mediated by JNK in these cells. Activation of JNK by interleukin 1
(IL-1beta) or by the upstream JNK constitutive activator DeltaMEKK1 promoted
apoptosis in two pancreatic beta cell lines and decreased IB1 content by 50-60%. 
To study the functional consequences of the reduced IB1 content in beta cell
lines, we used an insulin-secreting cell line expressing an inducible IB1
antisense RNA that lead to a 38% IB1 decrease. Reducing IB1 levels in these cells
increased phosphorylation of c-Jun and increased the apoptotic rate in presence
of IL-1beta. Nitric oxide production was not stimulated by expression of the IB1 
antisense RNA. Complementary experiments indicated that overexpression of IB1 in 
insulin-producing cells prevented JNK-mediated activation of the transcription
factors c-Jun, ATF2, and Elk1 and decreased IL-1beta- and DeltaMEKK1-induced
apoptosis. These data indicate that IB1 plays an anti-apoptotic function in
insulin-producing cells probably by controlling the activity of the JNK signaling
pathway.

PMID: 10748095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 2;275(22):16910-7.

Signaling pathways to the assembly of an interferon-beta enhanceosome. Chemical
genetic studies with a small molecule.

Kim T(1), Kim TY, Lee WG, Yim J, Kim TK.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Initiative Center for Genetic Reprogramming,
Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Korea. tk_kim@hms.harvard.edu

Small molecules that modulate specific protein functions are valuable tools for
dissecting complex signaling pathways. Here, we identified a small molecule that 
induces the assembly of the interferon-beta (IFN-beta) enhanceosome by
stimulating all the enhancer-binding activator proteins: ATF2/c-JUN, IRF3, and
p50/p65 of NF-kappaB. This compound stimulates mitogen-activated protein kinase
kinase kinase 1 (MEKK1), which is a member of a family of proteins involved in
stress-mediated signaling pathways. Consistent with this, MEKK1 activates IRF3 in
addition to ATF2/c-JUN and NF-kappaB for the assembly of the IFN-beta
enhanceosome. MEKK1 activates IRF3 through the c-JUN amino-terminal kinase (JNK) 
pathway but not the p38 and IkappaB kinase (IKK) pathway. Taken together with
previous observations, these results implicate that, for the assembly of an
IFN-beta enhanceosome, MEKK1 can induce IRF3 and ATF2/c-JUN through the JNK
pathway, whereas it can induce NF-kappaB through the IKK pathway. Thus, specific 
MEKK family proteins may be able to integrate some of multiple signal
transduction pathways leading to the specific activation of the IFN-beta
enhanceosome.

PMID: 10747925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Biochemistry. 2000 Mar 21;39(11):3141-8.

Activation of JNK3 alpha 1 requires both MKK4 and MKK7: kinetic characterization 
of in vitro phosphorylated JNK3 alpha 1.

Lisnock J(1), Griffin P, Calaycay J, Frantz B, Parsons J, O'Keefe SJ, LoGrasso P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Design and Diversity, Merck Research Laboratories,
P.O. Box 2000, Rahway, New Jersey 07065, USA.

JNK3 alpha 1 is predominantly a neuronal specific MAP kinase that is believed to 
require, like all MAP kinases, both threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation for
maximal enzyme activity. In this study we investigated the in vitro activation of
JNK3 alpha 1 by MAP kinase kinase 4 (MKK4), MAP kinase kinase 7 (MKK7), and the
combination of MKK4 + MKK7. Mass spectral analysis showed that MKK7 was capable
of monophosphorylating JNK3 alpha 1 in vitro, whereas both MKK4 and MKK7 were
required for bisphosphorylation and maximal enzyme activity. Measuring catalysis 
under Vmax conditions showed MKK4 + MKK7-activated JNK3 alpha 1 had Vmax 715-fold
greater than nonactivated JNK3 alpha 1 and MKK7-activated JNK3 alpha 1 had Vmax
250-fold greater than nonactivated JNK3 alpha 1. In contrast, MKK4-activated JNK3
alpha 1 had no increase in Vmax compared to nonactivated levels and had no
phosphorylation on the basis of mass spectrometry. These data suggest that MKK7
was largely responsible for JNK3 alpha 1 activation and that a single threonine
phosphorylation may be all that is needed for JNK3 alpha 1 to be active. The
steady-state rate constants kcat, Km(GST-ATF2++), and Km(ATP) for both
monophosphorylated and bisphosphorylated JNK3 alpha 1 were within 2-fold between 
the two enzyme forms, suggesting the addition of tyrosine phosphorylation does
not affect the binding of ATF2, ATP, or maximal turnover. Finally, the MAP kinase
inhibitor, SB203580, had an IC50 value approximately 4-fold more potent on the
monophosphorylated JNK3 alpha 1 compared to the bisphosphorylated JNK3 alpha 1,
suggesting only a modest effect of tyrosine phosphorylation on inhibitor binding.

PMID: 10715136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Br J Pharmacol. 2000 Feb;129(3):612-8.

Extracellular nucleotides activate the p38-stress-activated protein kinase
cascade in glomerular mesangial cells.

Huwiler A(1), Wartmann M, van den Bosch H, Pfeilschifter J.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum der Pharmakologie, Klinikum der J.W. Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany.

1. Extracellular ATP and UTP have been reported to activate a nucleotide receptor
(P2Y2-receptor) that mediates arachidonic acid release with subsequent
prostaglandin formation, a reaction critically depending on the activity of a
cytosolic phospholipase A2. In addition, extracellular nucleotides trigger
activation of the classical mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade and
cell proliferation as well as of the stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK)
cascade. 2. In this study, we report that ATP and UTP are also able to activate
the p38-MAPK pathway as measured by phosphorylation of the p38-MAPK and its
upstream activators MKK3/6, as well as phosphorylation of the transcription
factor ATF2 in a immunocomplex-kinase assay. 3. Time courses reveal that ATP and 
UTP induce a rapid and transient activation of the p38-MAPK activity with a
maximal activation after 5 min of stimulation which declined to control levels
over the next 20 min. 4. A series of ATP and UPT analogues were tested for their 
ability to stimulate p38-MAPK activity. UTP and ATP were very effective analogues
to activate p38-MAPK, whereas ADP and gamma-thio-ATP had only moderate activating
effects. 2-Methyl-thio-ATP, beta gamma-imido-ATP, AMP, adenosine and UDP had no
significant effects of p38-MAPK activity. In addition, the extracellular
nucleotide-mediated effect on p38-MAPK was almost completely blocked by 1 mM of
suramin, a putative P2-purinoceptor antagonist. 5. In summary, these results
demonstrate for the first time that extracellular nucleotides are able to
activate the MKK3/6- p38-MAPK cascade most likely via the P2Y2-receptor.
Moreover, this finding implies that all three MAPK subtypes are signalling
candidates for extracellular nucleotide-stimulated cell responses.

PMCID: PMC1571861
PMID: 10711362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Oncogene. 2000 Feb 17;19(7):933-42.

Role of TRAF2/GCK in melanoma sensitivity to UV-induced apoptosis.

Ivanov VN(1), Kehrl JH, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York NY, 10029, 
USA.

Radiation resistance is a hallmark of human melanoma, and yet mechanisms
underlying this resistance are not well understood. We recently established the
role of ATF2 in this process, suggesting that stress kinases, which contribute to
regulation of ATF2 stability and activity, play an important role in the
acquisition of such resistance. Here we demonstrate that changes in the
expression and respective activities of TRAF2/GCK occur during melanoma
development and regulate its sensitivity to UV-induced apoptosis. Comparing
early- and late-stage melanoma cells revealed low expression of TRAF2 and GCK in 
early-stage melanoma, which coincided with poor resistance to UV-induced,
TNF-mediated apoptosis; forced expression of GCK alone or in combination with
TRAF2 efficiently increased JNK and NF-kappaB activities, which coincided with
increased protection against apoptosis. Conversely, forced expression of the
dominant negative form of TRAF2 or GCK in late-stage melanoma cells reduced
NF-kappaB activity and decreased Fas expression, resulting in a lower degree of
UV-induced, Fas-mediated cell death. Our results illustrate a mechanism in which 
protection from, or promotion of, UV-induced melanoma cell death depends on the
nature of the apoptotic cascade (TNF or Fas) and on the availability of
TRAF2/GCK, whose expression increases during melanoma progression. Oncogene
(2000) 19, 933 - 942.

PMID: 10702802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1999 Dec;31(12):2087-99.

Pro-inflammatory cytokines stimulate mitogen-activated protein kinase
subfamilies, increase phosphorylation of c-Jun and ATF2 and upregulate c-Jun
protein in neonatal rat ventricular myocytes.

Clerk A(1), Harrison JG, Long CS, Sugden PH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Sciences (Molecular Pathology), Imperial College School
of Medicine, Sir Alexander Fleming Building, London, South Kensington, SW7 2AZ,
UK.

Pro-inflammatory cytokines may be important in the pathophysiological responses
of the heart. We investigated the activation of the three mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) subfamilies ¿c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs), p38-MAPKs and
extracellularly-responsive kinases (ERKs) by interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta) or
tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF alpha) in primary cultures of myocytes isolated
from neonatal rat ventricles. Both cytokines stimulated a rapid (maximal within
10 min) increase in JNK activity. Although activation of JNKs by IL-1 beta was
transient returning to control values within 1 h, the response to TNF alpha was
sustained. IL-1 beta and TNF alpha also stimulated p38-MAPK phosphorylation, but 
the response to IL-1 beta was consistently greater than TNF alpha. Both cytokines
activated ERKs, but to a lesser degree than that induced by phorbol esters. The
transcription factors, c-Jun and ATF2, are phosphorylated by the MAPKs and are
implicated in the upregulation of c-Jun. IL-1 beta and TNF alpha stimulated the
phosphorylation of c-Jun and ATF2. However, IL-1 beta induced a greater increase 
in c-Jun protein. Inhibitors of protein kinase C (PKC) (Ro318220, GF109203X) and 
the ERK cascade (PD98059) attenuated the increase in c-Jun induced by IL-1 beta, 
but LY294002 (an inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3' kinase) and SB203580 (an
inhibitor of p38-MAPK, which also inhibits certain JNK isoforms) had no effect.
These data illustrate that some of the pathological effects of IL-1 beta and TNF 
alpha may be mediated through the MAPK cascades, and that the ERK cascade, rather
than JNKs or p38-MAPKs, are implicated in the upregulation of c-Jun by IL-1 beta.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10640438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 21;275(3):2103-14.

Janus kinase 2-dependent activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase by
growth hormone. Resultant transcriptional activation of ATF-2 and CHOP,
cytoskeletal re-organization and mitogenesis.

Zhu T(1), Lobie PE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National University of Singapore, 30 
Medical Drive, Singapore 117609, Republic of Singapore.

We demonstrate here that p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase is activated 
in response to cellular stimulation by human GH (hGH) in Chinese hamster ovary
cells stably transfected with GH receptor cDNA. This activation requires the
proline-rich box 1 region of the GH receptor required for JAK2 association and is
prevented by pretreatment of cells with the JAK2-specific inhibitor AG490. ATF-2 
is both phosphorylated and transcriptionally activated by hGH, and its
transcriptional activation also requires the proline-rich box 1 region of the GH 
receptor. Expression of wild type JAK2 can further enhance hGH-induced ATF-2-,
CHOP-, and Elk-1-mediated transcriptional activation, whereas pretreatment with
AG490 is inhibitory. Use of either specific pharmacological inhibitors or
transient transfection of cells with p38alpha MAP kinase cDNA or a dominant
negative variant demonstrated that hGH-stimulated transcriptional activation of
ATF-2 and CHOP, but not Elk-1, is regulated by p38 MAP kinase. Both the p38 MAP
kinase and p44/42 MAP kinase are critical for hGH-stimulated mitogenesis, whereas
only p38 MAP kinase is required for hGH-induced actin cytoskeletal
re-organization. p38 MAP kinase is therefore an important regulator in
coordinating the pleiotropic effects of GH.

PMID: 10636915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Virol. 2000 Feb;74(3):1224-33.

Epstein-Barr virus immediate-early proteins BZLF1 and BRLF1 activate the ATF2
transcription factor by increasing the levels of phosphorylated p38 and c-Jun
N-terminal kinases.

Adamson AL(1), Darr D, Holley-Guthrie E, Johnson RA, Mauser A, Swenson J, Kenney 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7295, USA.

Expression of either Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) immediate-early protein BZLF1 (Z)
or BRLF1 (R) is sufficient to convert EBV infection from the latent to lytic
form. Disruption of viral latency requires transcriptional activation of the Z
and R promoters. The Z and R proteins are transcriptional activators, and each
immediate-early protein activates expression of the other immediate-early
protein. Z activates the R promoter through a direct binding mechanism. However, 
R does not bind directly to the Z promoter. In this study, we demonstrate that
the ZII element (a cyclic AMP response element site) in the Z promoter is
required for efficient activation by R. The ZII element has been shown to be
important for induction of lytic EBV infection by tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate
and surface immunoglobulin cross-linking and is activated by Z through an
indirect mechanism. We demonstrate that both R and Z activate the cellular stress
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, p38 and JNK, resulting in
phosphorylation (and activation) of the cellular transcription factor ATF2.
Furthermore, we show that the ability of R to induce lytic EBV infection in
latently infected cells is significantly reduced by inhibition of either the p38 
kinase or JNK pathways. In contrast, inhibition of stress MAP kinase pathways
does not impair the ability of Z expression vectors to disrupt viral latency,
presumably because expression of Z under the control of a strong heterologous
promoter bypasses the need to activate Z transcription. Thus, both R and Z can
activate the Z promoter indirectly by inducing ATF2 phosphorylation, and this
activity appears to be important for R-induced disruption of viral latency.

PMCID: PMC111456
PMID: 10627532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Immunol. 2000 Jan 15;164(2):944-53.

Mechanism and function of a newly identified CpG DNA motif in human primary B
cells.

Hartmann G(1), Krieg AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

The vertebrate immune system recognizes bacterial DNA based on the presence of
unmethylated CpG-dinucleotides in particular base contexts ("CpG motifs"). In
contrast to mice, knowledge about CpG-mediated effects on human B cells is poor. 
In the present study we identify and determine an optimal human CpG motif. A
phosphodiester oligonucleotide containing this motif strongly stimulated CD86,
CD40, CD54, and MHC class II expression, IL-6 synthesis, and proliferation of
primary human B cells. These effects required internalization of the
oligonucleotide and endosomal maturation. The molecular mechanism of action of
this CpG motif was associated with the sustained induction of the NF-kappaB
p50/p65 heterodimer and of the transcription-factor complex AP-1.
Transcription-factor activation by CpG DNA was preceded by increased
phosphorylation of the stress kinases c-Jun N-terminal kinase and p38, and of
activating transcription factor-2. In contrast to CpG, signaling through the B
cell receptor led to activation of extracellular receptor kinase and to
phosphorylation of a different isoform of c-Jun N-terminal kinase. These studies 
define the structure of a highly active human CpG motif and characterize its
molecular mechanism of action in primary human B cells.

PMID: 10623843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Jan 3;1456(1):45-55.

Involvement of a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-p38 mitogen activated protein
kinase pathway in antigen-induced IL-4 production in mast cells.

Hirasawa N(1), Sato Y, Fujita Y, Ohuchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiological Biochemistry, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.
hirasawa@mail.pharm.tohoku.ac.jp

We studied the involvement of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase) in the
antigen-induced IL-4 production in a rat mast cell line, RBL-2H3. The stimulation
of IgE-sensitized RBL-2H3 cells by the antigen resulted in increased IL-4 mRNA
levels followed by increased IL-4 production. Wortmannin and LY294002, PI3-kinase
inhibitors, partially reduced both the antigen-induced increases in the IL-4 mRNA
levels and IL-4 production in a concentration-dependent manner. Extracellular
signal-regulated kinase, p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) and
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), which belong to the MAPK family, were activated by
the antigen stimulation, and the activation of p38 MAPK in addition to JNK was
suppressed markedly by wortmannin. The phosphorylation of endogenous activating
transcription factor-2, a substrate of p38 MAPK, was also inhibited by
wortmannin. The specific p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580 partially inhibited the
antigen-induced IL-4 production at mRNA levels, but the MEK-1 inhibitor PD98059
enhanced it. These findings suggest that the activation of PI3-kinase and p38
MAPK is partially responsible for the antigen-induced IL-4 production in RBL-2H3 
cells.

PMID: 10611455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Hypertens. 1999 Nov;17(11):1535-41.

Growth factors and extracellular signal-regulated kinase in vascular smooth
muscle cells of normotensive and spontaneously hypertensive rats.

Ebisui O(1), Dilley RJ, Li H, Funder JW, Liu JP.

Author information: 
(1)Baker Medical Research Institute, Prahran, Victoria, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) stimulates vascular
smooth muscle cell growth in spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR), but inhibits 
cell growth in normotensive Wistar- Kyoto (WKY) rats. The present study was
undertaken to test the hypothesis that TGF-beta1 might differentially modulate
the activities of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase family members (ERK, JNK
and p38) in vascular smooth muscle cells of SHR and WKY rats.
METHODS: MAP kinase activity was measured from cultured vascular smooth muscle
cells in response to TGF-1 by specific substrate phosphorylation of myelin basic 
protein, GST-c-Jun and GST-ATF2.
RESULTS: Exposure of cultured vascular smooth muscle cells from SHR or WKY rats
to TGF-beta1 resulted in a marked increase in the activity of ERK, but not of JNK
or p38. The increase of ERK activity stimulated by TGF-beta1 appeared similar in 
time course and extent in both WKY and SHR cells, with increased activity peaking
at 15 min of incubation. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) also stimulated the
activity of ERK, in both WKY and SHR cells, but nor of JNK or p38, with
stimulation of ERK activity by EGF occurring more rapidly in SHR cells than in
those from WKY rats. Co-incubation of SHR cells with TGF-beta1 and EGF showed
additive effect on ERK activity.
CONCLUSIONS: The results provide the first evidence that TGF-beta1 activates ERK 
in vascular smooth muscle cells of both normotensive and hypertensive rats. The
matching response of ERK activation to TGF-1 in SHR cells suggests that the MAP
kinase-signaling pathway remains largely unchanged in the regulation of vascular 
smooth muscle growth by TGF-1 in spontaneously hypertensive rats.

PMID: 10608465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 10;274(50):35475-82.

Synergistic transcriptional activation by hGABP and select members of the
activation transcription factor/cAMP response element-binding protein family.

Sawada J(1), Simizu N, Suzuki F, Sawa C, Goto M, Hasegawa M, Imai T, Watanabe H, 
Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Function for Biotechnology, Frontier Collaborative Research Center,
Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, 
Japan.

The Ets-related DNA-binding protein human GA-binding protein (hGABP) alpha
interacts with the four ankyrin-type repeats of hGABPbeta to form an hGABP
tetrameric complex that stimulates transcription through the adenovirus early 4
(E4) promoter. Using co-transfection assays, this study demonstrated that the
hGABP complex mediated efficient activation of transcription from E4 promoter
synergistically with activating transcription factor (ATF) 1 or cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB), but not ATF2/CRE-BP1. This synergy also partially
occurred when hGABPalpha was used alone in place of the combination of hGABPalpha
and hGABPbeta. hGABP activated an artificial promoter containing only
ATF/CREB-binding sites under coexistence of ATF1 or CREB. Consistent with these
results, physical interactions of hGABPalpha with ATF1 or CREB were observed in
vitro. Functional domain analyses of the physical interactions revealed that the 
amino-terminal region of hGABPalpha bound to the DNA-binding domain of ATF1,
which resulted in the formation of ternary complexes composed of ATF1,
hGABPalpha, and hGABPbeta. In contrast to hGABPalpha, hGABPbeta did not
significantly interact with ATF1 and CREB. Taken together, these results indicate
that hGABP functionally interacts with selective members of the ATF/CREB family, 
and also suggest that synergy results from multiple interactions which mediate
stabilization of large complexes within the regulatory elements of the promoter
region, including DNA-binding and non-DNA-binding factors.

PMID: 10585419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Dec 9;266(1):284-9.

Identification of two distinct regions of p38 MAPK required for substrate binding
and phosphorylation.

Gum RJ(1), Young PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals, King of
Prussia, PA19406, USA.

The mechanism by which different mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPKs)
distinguish between different substrates is poorly understood. For example, p38
and SAPK4 are two closely related p38 MAPKs that both phosphorylate ATF2 and MBP.
However, p38 phosphorylates MAPKAPK-2 and -3, whereas SAPK4 does not. In this
study, we have used mutagenesis to determine the regions of p38 required for
substrate selection. Alanine scanning mutagenesis identified one region of p38
that was required for its ability to phosphorylate MAPKAPK-2 and -3, but that did
not significantly affect its binding to these substrates. Chimeras of p38 and
SAPK4 identified a second region of p38 that affected the ability of p38 to both 
bind and phosphorylate MAPKAPK-2 and -3. Hence, we show for the first time that
MAPKs contain two distinct regions for recognizing and phosphorylating protein
substrates.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10581204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999 Nov 1;160(3):262-70.

Selective activation in the MAPK pathway by Hg(II) in precision-cut rabbit renal 
cortical slices.

Turney KD(1), Parrish AR, Orozco J, Gandolfi AJ.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of Arizona, Tuscon, Arizona, 85721, USA.

The kidneys are the primary organ for the accumulation and toxicity of inorganic 
mercury. In these studies the molecular response of precision-cut rabbit renal
cortical slices to low levels of inorganic mercury was examined. Cortical slices 
(275 microm) were obtained from 1.0 kg NZW rabbits and exposed to mercuric
chloride [Hg(II)] at concentrations of 0.01-10 microM for 2-8 h. Overt
cytotoxicity, as assessed by intracellular K(+) levels, was not observed
following exposure to these concentrations of Hg(II). However, an induction of
heme-oxygenase-1 (Hsp32) was seen following a 2-h challenge to Hg(II). A
dose-dependent induction of the DNA binding activity of the AP-1 transcription
factor after 4 h of Hg(II) exposure correlated with a dose-dependent enhancement 
of c-jun gene expression following 2 h of Hg(II) exposure. Additionally, an
increase in phosphorylated c-Jun NH(2)-terminal protein kinase (JNK) was observed
following 2 h of Hg(II) exposure. These results suggest activation of the
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) signal transduction pathway, specifically the
c-Jun NH(2)-terminal protein kinase (JNK) pathway. No changes were observed,
however, in the DNA binding activity of ATF2 and Elk-1, transcription factors
involved in both the JNK and p38 pathways of MAP signal transduction, nor in the 
gene expression of c-myc. This selectivity of alterations in molecular signaling 
suggests an acute response in signal transduction, specifically activation of the
JNK pathway in renal tissue following exposure to nanomolar concentrations of
Hg(II).

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10544060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 22;274(43):30882-6.

Engagement of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor 1 leads to ATF-2- and p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase-dependent TNF-alpha gene expression.

Brinkman BM(1), Telliez JB, Schievella AR, Lin LL, Goldfeld AE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Blood Research, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Engagement of the tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) receptors by the
TNF-alpha ligand results in the rapid induction of TNF-alpha gene expression. The
study presented here shows that autoregulation of TNF-alpha gene transcription by
selective signaling through tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1) requires p38
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activity and the binding of the
transcription factors ATF-2 and Jun to the TNF-alpha cAMP-response element (CRE) 
promoter element. Consistent with these findings, TNFR1 engagement results in
increased p38 MAP kinase activity and p38-dependent phosphorylation of ATF-2.
Furthermore, overexpression of MADD (MAP kinase-activating death domain protein),
an adapter protein that binds to the death domain of TNFR1 and activates MAP
kinase cascades, results in CRE-dependent induction of TNF-alpha gene expression.
Thus, the TNF-alpha CRE site is the target of TNFR1 stimulation and mediates the 
autoregulation of TNF-alpha gene transcription.

PMID: 10521481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Nov;265(3):1075-84.

Ca2+-induced p38/SAPK signalling inhibited by the immunosuppressant cyclosporin A
in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Kreideweiss S(1), Ahlers C, Nordheim A, Rühlmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Institut für Molekularbiologie, Hannover,
Germany.

To understand the effects of the immunosuppressant cyclosporin A (CsA) on
Ca2+-mediated intracellular signalling pathways in human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs), we investigated its effects on the activity profiles
of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades. PBMCs, or subpopulations
thereof, were simultaneously stimulated with a phorbol ester and the calcium
ionophore ionomycin, in the presence or absence of therapeutic concentrations of 
CsA. In these primary human cells, CsA significantly inhibited
PMA/ionomycin-mediated and ionomycin-mediated activation of the MAPK kinase MKK6,
as well as its downstream kinases SAPK2a (p38alpha) and MAPKAP-K2. PMA/ionomycin 
treatment also mediated activation of SAPK1 (JNKs) which was inhibited by CsA.
Treatment with ionomycin alone also resulted in CsA-sensitive activation of
SAPK1. With regard to transcription factors targeted by the Ca2+-induced MAPK
signalling network, we found CsA to inhibit the ionomycin-mediated
phosphorylation of ATF2 at Thr71. We identified the heterodimeric transcription
factor ATF2/CREB as constitutively binding to the essential cAMP response element
(CRE) site within the Ca2+-regulated DNA polymerase beta promoter and
contributing to the activation of this promoter. Our data implicate ATF2
phosphorylation status as a nuclear sensor within PBMCs that monitors converging 
intracellular Ca2+-signalling pathways.

PMID: 10518804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 15;274(42):29595-8.

Stress-induced JNK activation is independent of Gadd45 induction.

Shaulian E(1), Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0636, USA.

DNA damage and environmental stress activate signaling and induce genes involved 
in cell cycle and cell death. Expression of the Gadd45 protein is induced
following DNA damage and other stress. Gadd45 is believed to play a role in
growth arrest and possibly in cell death. The JNK signaling pathway is also
activated by some DNA-damaging agents. This activation leads to phosphorylation
and activation of transcription factors, such as c-Jun/AP-1 and ATF2, which
mediate immediate early gene induction. Recently Gadd45 was suggested to be
involved in JNK activation. However, as this suggestion relied on in vitro
experiments and ectopic overexpression of Gadd45 protein, we examined whether
physiological levels of Gadd45 that are induced following exposure to DNA
damaging agents and stress can lead to JNK induction. We found that JNK
activation by UV irradiation and anisomycin treatment precedes the induction of
gadd45 mRNA by these agents. Gadd45 protein induction by methyl methanesulfonate 
also lagged behind JNK activation. The use of protein synthesis inhibitors
suggested that newly synthesized proteins, including the stress-induced Gadd45,
make only a marginal contribution to JNK activation. We also found that stresses 
such as gamma irradiation induce Gadd45 and do not activate JNK in mouse
fibroblasts. Therefore, stress-induced JNK does not depend on Gadd45 induction.

PMID: 10514425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Kidney Int. 1999 Oct;56(4):1366-77.

Role of MAP kinase pathways in mediating IL-6 production in human primary
mesangial and proximal tubular cells.

Leonard M(1), Ryan MP, Watson AJ, Schramek H, Healy E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University College Dublin, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Both interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha)
are pleiotropic cytokines that have been implicated in the development of
glomerular and tubular injury in various forms of immune-mediated renal disease, 
including glomerulonephritis. Although TNF-alpha has been shown to stimulate IL-6
production in renal cells in culture, the signaling mechanisms that regulate IL-6
production are not fully understood. The aim of this study was to examine the
role of the p38 and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) pathways in regulating TNF-alpha-mediated IL-6 production
from both primary human mesangial cells (HMCs) and human proximal tubular (HPT)
cells.
METHODS: Primary mesangial and proximal tubular cells were prepared from
nephrectomized human kidney tissue. Cells were treated for 24 hours with
TNF-alpha in the presence and absence of the specific p38 and ERK1,2 MAPK
inhibitors SB203580 and PD98059, respectively, either alone or in combination.
IL-6 levels in the cell culture media were measured by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay. MAPK activation was demonstrated by immunoblot for the
active kinase (tyrosine/threonine phosphorylated) in whole cell extracts using
phospho-specific antibodies. p38 MAPK activity in HPT cells was measured using an
in vitro immunokinase assay using ATF2 as the substrate.
RESULTS: TNF-alpha (0.1 to 100 ng/ml) stimulated a dose-dependent increase in
IL-6 production in both renal cell types. The activation of the p38 and the
ERK1,2 MAPKs occurred following TNF-alpha stimulation. The role of these
activations in IL-6 production was confirmed by the ability of both inhibitors
SB203580 (1 to 30 microM) and PD98059 (0.01 to 10 microM) to inhibit basal and
TNF-alpha-stimulated IL-6 production in both cell types. The addition of both
inhibitors in combination caused greater decreases in IL-6 production compared
with either inhibitor alone. Pretreatment with SB203580 (10 microM) had no effect
on basal or TNF-alpha-stimulated phosphorylation of p38 MAPK but completely
abolished TNF-alpha-stimulated p38 MAPK activity. PD98059 decreased both basal
and TNF-alpha-stimulated phosphorylation of ERK1,2.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence that both the p38 and ERK MAPK pathways
are important for the regulation of the production of IL-6 from the proximal
tubular and glomerular mesangial regions of the nephron. In response to
TNF-alpha, the activation of both pathways leads to IL-6 production. These
findings could aid in an understanding of the cellular mechanisms that regulate
IL-6 production and could provide insights into possible pharmacological
strategies in inflammatory renal disease.

PMID: 10504489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Sep 28;96(20):11217-22.

Estrogen induction of the cyclin D1 promoter: involvement of a cAMP response-like
element.

Sabbah M(1), Courilleau D, Mester J, Redeuilh G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U482, Hôpital
Saint-Antoine, 184 Rue du Faubourg Saint-Antoine, 75571 Paris Cedex 12, France.

Estrogens induce cell proliferation in target tissues by stimulating progression 
through the G(1) phase of the cell cycle. Induction of cyclin D1 expression is a 
critical feature of the mitogenic action of estrogen. We have determined a region
between -96 and -29 in the cyclin D1 promoter that confers regulation by
estrogens in the human mammary carcinoma cells MCF-7. This region encompasses a
unique known transcription factor binding site with a sequence of a potential
cAMP response element (CRE-D1). The induction is strictly hormone dependent and
requires the DNA binding domain as well as both AF-1 and AF-2 domains of the
estrogen receptor (ER) alpha. Destruction of the CRE-D1 motif caused complete
loss of estrogen responsiveness. Both c-Jun and ATF-2 transactivated the cyclin
D1 promoter in transient transfection experiments, and a clear additional
increase was detected when ER was cotransfected with either c-Jun or with c-Jun
and ATF-2 but not with ATF-2 alone. Furthermore, the expression of a dominant
negative variant of c-Jun, TAM67, completely abolished the induction of the
cyclin D1 promoter both in the absence and presence of ER. We show that ATF-2
homodimers and ATF-2/c-Jun heterodimers, but not c-Jun homodimers, were able to
bind the CRE of the cyclin D1 promoter. To interpret these results, we propose a 
mechanism in which ATF-2/c-Jun heterodimers bind to the CRE-D1 element and
mediate the activation of cyclin D1 promoter by the ER. This mechanism represents
a pathway by which estrogens control the proliferation of target cells.

PMCID: PMC18014
PMID: 10500157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Virol. 1999 Oct;73(10):8415-26.

Activation of cJUN N-terminal kinase by herpes simplex virus type 1 enhances
viral replication.

McLean TI(1), Bachenheimer SL.

Author information: 
(1)Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of North Carolina
School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Signal transduction pathways convey signals generated at the cell surface into
the cell nucleus in order to initiate a program of gene expression that is
characteristic for particular stimuli. Here we present evidence that infection by
herpes simplex virus type 1 activated the two terminal kinases, cJUN N-terminal
kinase (JNK) and p38, of stress-activated signal transduction kinase cascades. By
using a solid-phase kinase assay, a phospho-specific antibody, and extracts
prepared from a variety of infected cell types, we determined that activation of 
both kinases began 3 to 4 h postinfection (p.i.) and remained elevated out to 14 
h p.i. Through the use of UV-irradiated or antibody-neutralized wild-type virus
and the temperature-sensitive mutant tsB7, the high level of JNK activation was
shown to be dependent on viral gene expression. Activation of JNK following
infection by vi13, an ICP4 mutant virus that does not express early or late
genes, suggested that only virus entry and immediate-early gene expression were
necessary for JNK activation. The activation of JNK and p38 correlated with
increased chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) activity in reporter assays
dependent upon the activity of cJUN and ATF2 trans-activation domains. Increased 
CAT activity dependent on TRE and CRE promoter sites was also observed in
response to herpes simplex virus infection. The activities of ERK and
ERK-dependent transcription factors were unchanged or depressed following
infection, showing that activation of JNK and p38 was a specific event. Finally, 
the activation of JNK was important for the efficiency of viral replication. The 
yield of virus in NIH 3T3 cells stably expressing JIP-1, an inhibitor of JNK
translocation to the nucleus, was reduced 70% compared to that of control cells, 
in single-step growth experiments.

PMCID: PMC112860
PMID: 10482593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Neurosci. 1999 Sep 15;19(18):RC24.

Axonal transport of activating transcription factor-2 is modulated by nerve
growth factor in nociceptive neurons.

Delcroix JD(1), Averill S, Fernandes K, Tomlinson DR, Priestley JV, Fernyhough P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, School of Biological Sciences, University of
Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, United Kingdom.

The aim of this study was to determine whether axonal transport of activating
transcription factor-2 (ATF2) occurs in adult sensory neurons, and whether this
process is under neurotrophin control. Antisera to both total ATF2 and to the
activated (i.e., phosphorylated) form were used for immunocytochemistry and
Western blotting. ATF2 was localized to predominantly nociceptive dorsal root
ganglion cells in adult rats and shown to accumulate proximal and distal to a
sciatic nerve ligature as a result of axonal transport. Subcutaneous injection of
nerve growth factor (NGF) decreased the levels of fast retrograde axonal
transport of activated ATF2 by 97% (p < 0.05) and elevated levels of retrograde
axonal transport of total ATF2 by twofold (p < 0.02). In contrast, blocking
endogenous NGF using an anti-NGF antibody induced an elevation in retrograde
axonal transport of activated ATF2 of 4. 5-fold (p < 0.05) and decreased
retrograde axonal transport of total ATF2 by 72% (p < 0.05). NGF or anti-NGF
treatment had no effect on the anterograde transport levels of total or activated
ATF2. This study shows that signaling by target-derived NGF to the cell bodies of
sensory neurons consists, in part, of the modulation of levels and activation
status of a retrogradely transported transcription factor, ATF2.

PMID: 10479717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. FEBS Lett. 1999 Sep 3;457(3):445-51.

Interaction between the (-170) CRE and the (-150) CCAAT box is necessaryfor
efficient activation of the fibronectin gene promoter by cAMP and ATF-2.

Pesce CG(1), Nogués G, Alonso CR, Baralle FE, Kornblihtt AR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Fisiología y Biología Molecular, Departamento de Ciencias
Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos
Aires, Ciudad Universitaria, Pabellón II (1428), Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The fibronectin promoter contains an ATF/cyclic AMP (cAMP) response element (CRE)
site two helical turns upstream of a CCAAT site with which it interacts. We
investigated the effects of mutating these (-170) CRE and(-150) CCAAT elements on
the promoter activity regulated by three different modulators previously known to
act through CRE: ATF-2, cAMP and E1a. While the cooperation seems to play no role
in E1a action, integrity of the (-150) CCAAT is necessary for ATF-2 and cAMP
efficient activation in a cell-specific manner. These results show that the CRE
and CCAAT elements function as a 'composite element' and establish a
cell-specific function for CRE-CCAAT synergy.

PMID: 10471826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Sep;19(9):6240-52.

Role of distinct mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways and cooperation
between Ets-2, ATF-2, and Jun family members in human urokinase-type plasminogen 
activator gene induction by interleukin-1 and tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate.

Cirillo G(1), Casalino L, Vallone D, Caracciolo A, De Cesare D, Verde P.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, CNR, 80125 Naples, Italy.

We have investigated the in vivo and in vitro regulation of the human
urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) gene by interleukin-1 (IL-1) and
analyzed the transcription factors and signalling pathways involved in the
response of the -2.0-kb uPA enhancer to IL-1 induction and to tetradecanoyl
phorbol acetate (TPA) induction. Mutational analysis showed the cooperative
activity of the Ets-binding site (EBS) and the two AP-1 elements of the enhancer.
The results reveal that the EBS is required for the response to both inducers
mediated by Ets-2, which is regulated at a level subsequent to DNA binding, by an
IL-1- and phorbol ester-inducible transactivation domain. Both the IL-1 and the
TPA-mediated induction result in a drastic increase of AP-1 binding to the
downstream site of the enhancer (uPA 3' TPA-responsive element), while a mostly
qualitative change, resulting from the interplay between ATF-2 homodimers and
c-Jun-ATF-2 heterodimers, takes place at the upstream AP-1 element. The analysis 
of two distinct mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways shows that
stress-activated protein kinase-Jun N-terminal kinase activation, resulting in
the phosphorylation of ATF-2, c-Jun, and JunD, is required not only for the IL-1-
but also for the TPA-dependent induction, while the extracellular signal-related 
kinase 1 (ERK-1) and ERK-2 activation is involved in the TPA- but not in the
IL-1-dependent stimulation of the uPA enhancer.

PMCID: PMC84576
PMID: 10454570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Aug 11;261(3):859-63.

Transcriptional activation of apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease (Ape, Ref-1) by 
oxidative stress requires CREB.

Grösch S(1), Kaina B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, University of Mainz, Obere Zahlbacher Strasse 67,
Mainz, D-55131, Germany.

Apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease (APE alias Ref-1) is a multifunctional enzyme 
involved in DNA repair and redox regulation of transcription factors (e.g.,
AP-1). It also acts as a repressor of its own and other genes. Recently, it was
shown that the level of APE mRNA and protein is enhanced upon treatment of cells 
with oxidative agents, such as hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)), which gives rise to 
an adaptive response of cells to oxidative stress. Induction of APE is due to APE
promoter activation. To elucidate the mechanism of transcriptional activation of 
APE by oxidative agents, we introduced mutations into the cloned human APE
promoter and checked its activity in transient transfection assays. Here we
demonstrate that mutational inactivation of a CREB binding site (CRE) present
within the promoter completely abolished APE promoter activation by H(2)O(2),
indicating that CREB is required for APE induction. The CRE element in the
context of the APE promoter sequence binds c-Jun and ATF-2, which was shown in
gel retardation experiments. Under conditions of induction of APE by H(2)O(2),
the expression of c-Jun was significantly enhanced, which supports the view that 
induction of c-Jun is involved in signaling leading to APE promoter activation by
oxidative stress.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10441516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Jul 7;1446(1-2):71-81.

Identification of a novel transcriptional regulatory element within the promoter 
region of the keratinocyte growth factor gene that mediates inducibility to
cyclic AMP.

Zhou J(1), Finch PW.

Author information: 
(1)The Derald H. Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Box 1130, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, 1 Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029-6574, USA.

Keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) plays a critical role for the normal development
and morphogenesis of many different tissues and organs. Furthermore, its
expression is induced during wound healing and in various chronic inflammatory
diseases. To determine the molecular mechanisms which regulate KGF gene induction
at the transcriptional level, we carried out in vitro studies using the human KGF
promoter. We have identified a novel regulatory element, TGAGGTCAG, located
between -39 and -46 bp (relative to the transcription start site) in the KGF
basal promoter region, which binds to inducible transcription factors as
determined by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. When cloned in front of a
heterologous SV40 promoter this region conferred inducibility to forskolin, a
stimulator of adenylate cyclase. In contrast, various mutated forms of this
region were either partially or completely impaired in their ability to mediate
induction to forskolin. The TGAGGTCAG sequence shared homology to both the cAMP
responsive element (CRE) and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) consensus
binding sites. An oligonucleotide comprising a consensus CRE binding site
partially competed for the nuclear protein binding to the TGAGGTCAG site. Gel
mobility supershift assays indicated that two members of the activating
transcription factor (ATF) family of CRE binding proteins, ATF1 and ATF2, were
part of the nuclear protein complex bound to this regulatory region. Furthermore,
purified recombinant ATF2 was able to directly recognize and bind the TGAGGTCAG
sequence. In contrast, no evidence was obtained for C/EBP transcription factors
being part of the complex. These results suggest that members of the ATF family
are involved in mediating the transcriptional regulation of the KGF gene in
response to extracellular stimuli via a novel CRE regulatory element.

PMID: 10395920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1999 Jul;21(1):54-64.

Thiol depletion induces apoptosis in cultured lung fibroblasts.

Aoshiba K(1), Yasui S, Nishimura K, Nagai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Chest Institute, Tokyo Women's Medical College, Tokyo,
Japan.

Thiol antioxidants are implicated in the protection of cells from oxidative
injury. We studied the role of thiols in the regulation of apoptosis in cultured 
lung fibroblasts. Thiol depletion by culturing fibroblasts in cystine-free medium
or with thiol-depleting agents induced oxidant accumulation and cell death by
apoptosis. The cell death was prevented by the antioxidants ascorbic acid (AA)
and catalase. Thiol depletion also induced leukotriene (LT) C4, LTD4, and LTE4
production and selective phosphorylation of p38-mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK) and its nuclear substrate ATF2. LT production and p38-MAPK phosphorylation
were required for induction of apoptosis because thiol depletion-induced
apoptosis was completely blocked by the 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor AA861, the LT
antagonists FPL55712 and ONO1078, and the p38-MAPK inhibitor SB203580. LT
production was inhibited by AA and p38-MAPK phosphorylation was inhibited by AA, 
AA861, and FPL55712. In an in vitro scratch wound model, repopulating fibroblasts
at the wound margin, but not quiescent cells at the intact site, selectively
underwent thiol depletion- induced apoptosis that was completely blocked by
AA861, FPL55712, and SB203580. Thus, thiol depletion induces apoptosis through an
ordered pathway involving oxidant accumulation, LT production, and p38-MAPK
activation. Apoptosis of wound fibroblasts may be responsible for impaired wound 
healing in various organs, including the lung.

PMID: 10385593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1999 Jun 8;69(2):232-41.

Co-expression of c-Jun and ATF-2 characterizes the surviving retinal ganglion
cells which maintain axonal connections after partial optic nerve injury.

Kreutz MR(1), Bien A, Vorwerk CK, Böckers TM, Seidenbecher CI, Tischmeyer W,
Sabel BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurochemistry/Molecular Biology, Leibniz Institute for
Neurobiology, Magdeburg, Germany. kreutz@ifn-magdeburg.de

The expression of c-fos, c-jun, jun-b, jun-d, srf and pc4 mRNA was examined after
partial optic nerve crush in the adult rat retina by in situ hybridization. Optic
nerve injury led exclusively to the upregulation of c-jun, with cellular label
indicative for c-jun mRNA in the retinal ganglion cell layer after two days,
three days and one week post-injury. This expression pattern was in accordance
with the appearance of c-Jun immunoreactivity in retinal flat mounts. Injection
of an antisense but not a missense oligonucleotide against c-jun after partial
crush resulted in a reduced number of connected retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) as 
shown by retrograde labeling. Prelabeling of RGCs with fluorogold before optic
nerve section and subsequent antisense targeting against c-jun, however, led to a
slightly higher number of surviving but axotomized RGCs. C-Jun antibody staining 
of retinal whole mounts pre- or postlabeled after crush by intracollicular
administration of fluorogold showed strong c-Jun immunoreactivity in connected
RGCs and also in a population of disconnected RGCs. Double labeling with an
antibody directed against the transcription factor ATF-2 revealed strong
co-expression of c-Jun and ATF-2 in connected RGCs but not in axotomized cells.
Taken together these data indicate that both RGCs in continuity and those in
discontinuity with the superior colliculus respond both equally to the noxious
stimulus with c-Jun expression. Moreover, the co-expression of c-Jun with high
levels of ATF-2 appears to be essential for either the continuity or survival of 
RGCs which remain connected with their target. In disconnected RGCs, however, low
levels of ATF-2 and the co-expression of c-Jun may be related to cell death.

Copyright 1999 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 10366744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Thromb Haemost. 1999 May;81(5):767-74.

Transcriptional regulation of the murine urokinase-type plasminogen activator
gene in skeletal myoblasts.

Miralles F(1), Ibáñez-Tallon I, Parra M, Crippa M, Blasi F, Besser D, Nagamine Y,
Muñoz-Cánoves P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recerca Oncològica, Barcelona, Spain.

We have previously shown that urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) is
highly expressed in murine C2C12 myoblasts and that antibodies against uPA are
able to block both myoblast fusion and differentiation. Here we show the
characterization of cis-acting elements in the mouse uPA promoter in vitro which 
are involved in uPA gene expression in C2C 12 myoblast cells. DNase I
hypersensitive (HS) site analysis revealed the presence of three HS sites in
myoblasts. Deletion analysis of stably transfected uPA-promoter constructs
revealed that at least two of the three HS sites accounted for the high
transcriptional expression in C2C12 cells. One was located at -2.4 kb and
corresponded to a known PEA3/AP1A element and the other one was located at -4.9
kb and contained a CArG box and a CRE element. So far, no regulatory function had
been assigned to this CRE/CArG element. Both HS sites alone were able to activate
transcription of a heterologous promoter and showed a cooperative effect when
placed together. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays using myoblast nuclear
extracts and specific antibodies demonstrated that cJun, JunD and ATF2 bound to
the PEA3/AP1A element, whereas the CRE/CArG element bound SRF. Altogether, these 
results suggest that high uPA expression in myoblasts is dependent on the
cooperation of two regulatory sites in the uPA promoter.

PMID: 10365752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 18;274(25):17813-9.

Mouse ATF-2 null mutants display features of a severe type of meconium aspiration
syndrome.

Maekawa T(1), Bernier F, Sato M, Nomura S, Singh M, Inoue Y, Tokunaga T, Imai H, 
Yokoyama M, Reimold A, Glimcher LH, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Tsukuba Life Science Center, RIKEN, 3-1-1
Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

Mouse null mutants of transcription factor ATF-2 were generated by the gene
targeting method. They died shortly after birth and displayed symptoms of severe 
respiratory distress with lungs filled with meconium. These features are similar 
to those of a severe type of human meconium aspiration syndrome. The increased
expression of the hypoxia inducible genes suggests that hypoxia occurs in the
mutant embryos and that it may lead to strong gasping respiration with consequent
aspiration of the amniotic fluid containing meconium. A reduced number of
cytotrophoblast cells in the mutant placenta was found and may be responsible for
an insufficient supply of oxygen prior to birth. Using the cDNA subtraction and
microarray-based expression monitoring method, the expression level of the
platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha gene, which plays an important role
in the proliferation of trophoblasts, was found to be low in the cytotrophoblasts
of the mutant placenta. In addition, ATF-2 can trans-activate the PDGF receptor
alpha gene promoter in the co-transfection assay. These results indicate the
important role of ATF-2 in the formation of the placenta and the relationship
between placental anomalies and neonatal respiratory distress. The ATF-2 null
mutants should enhance our understanding of the mechanism of severe neonatal
respiratory distress.

PMID: 10364225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. EMBO J. 1999 Jun 1;18(11):3074-89.

The role of HMG I(Y) in the assembly and function of the IFN-beta enhanceosome.

Yie J(1), Merika M, Munshi N, Chen G, Thanos D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, 630 
West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Transcriptional activation of the virus inducible enhancer of the human
interferon-beta (IFN-beta) gene in response to virus infection requires the
assembly of an enhanceosome, consisting of the transcriptional activators
NF-kappaB, ATF-2/c-Jun, IRFs and the architectural protein of the mammalian high 
mobility group I(Y) [HMG I(Y)]. Here, we demonstrate that the first step in
enhanceosome assembly, i.e. HMG I(Y)-dependent recruitment of NF-kappaB and
ATF-2/c-Jun to the enhancer, is facilitated by discrete regions of HMG I and is
mediated by allosteric changes induced in the DNA by HMG I(Y) and not by
protein-protein interactions between HMG I(Y) and these proteins. However, we
show that completion of the enhanceosome assembly process requires
protein-protein interactions between HMG I(Y) and the activators. Finally, we
demonstrate that once assembled, the IFN-beta enhanceosome is an unusually stable
nucleoprotein structure that can activate transcription at high levels by
promoting multiple rounds of reinitiation of transcription.

PMCID: PMC1171389
PMID: 10357819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 4;274(23):16085-96.

Activation of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway by Epstein-Barr
virus-encoded latent membrane protein 1 coregulates interleukin-6 and
interleukin-8 production.

Eliopoulos AG(1), Gallagher NJ, Blake SM, Dawson CW, Young LS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Campaign Institute for Cancer Studies, the University of
Birmingham Medical School, Birmingham B15 2TA, United Kingdom.

The Epstein-Barr virus-encoded latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) is a pleiotropic 
protein the activities of which include effects on gene expression and cell
transformation, growth, and death. LMP1 has been shown to induce nuclear factor
(NF)-kappaB and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase/AP-1 activities in target cells, and in
this study we demonstrate that LMP1 also engages the p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase cascade, leading to activation of the transcription factor ATF2.
Mutational analysis of the LMP1 cytoplasmic COOH terminus revealed that p38
activation occurs from both the tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 
(TRAF)-interacting, membrane-proximal COOH-terminal activating region (CTAR)1
domain (amino acids 186-231) and the extreme tumor necrosis factor
receptor-associated death domain (TRADD) binding CTAR2 region (amino acids
351-386). Because LMP1 also engages signaling on the NF-kappaB axis through CTAR1
and CTAR2, we have examined whether these two pathways are overlapping or
independent. We have found that inhibition of p38 by the highly specific
inhibitor SB203580 did not affect NF-kappaB binding activity. Conversely,
although the metabolic inhibitor D609 blocked NF-kappaB activation, it did not
impair the ability of LMP1 to signal on the p38 axis, suggesting that these two
LMP1-mediated pathways are primarily independent. Divergence of signals must,
however, occur downstream of TRAF2 as a dominant negative TRAF2 mutant that
blocks LMP1-induced NF-kappaB activation also inhibited p38 signaling. In
addition, we have found that p38 inhibition significantly impaired LMP1-mediated 
interleukin-6 and -8 expression. Thus, p38 may play a significant cooperative
role in regulating at least some of the pleiotropic activities of LMP1.

PMID: 10347160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Oncogene. 1999 Apr 8;18(14):2311-21.

The N-terminal transactivation domain of ATF2 is a target for the co-operative
activation of the c-jun promoter by p300 and 12S E1A.

Duyndam MC(1), van Dam H, Smits PH, Verlaan M, van der Eb AJ, Zantema A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Carcinogenesis, Leiden University Medical Center, The
Netherlands.

The adenovirus E1A proteins activate the c-jun promoter through two
Jun/ATF-binding sites, jun1 and jun2. P300, a transcriptional coactivator of
several AP1 and ATF transcription factors has been postulated to play a role in
this activation. Here, we present evidence that p300 can control c-jun
transcription by acting as a cofactor for ATF2: (1) Over-expression of p300 was
found to stimulate c-jun transcription both in the presence and absence of E1A.
(2) Like E1A, p300 activates the c-jun promoter through the junl and jun2
elements and preferentially activates the N-terminal domain of ATF2. (3)
Co-immunoprecipitation assays of crude cell extracts indicate that endogenous
p300/CBP(-like) proteins and ATF2 proteins are present in a multiprotein complex 
that can bind specifically to the jun2 element. We further demonstrate that the
Stress-Activated-Protein-Kinase (SAPK) target sites of ATF2, Thr69 and Thr71 are 
not required for the formation of the p300/CBP-ATF2 multiprotein complex. These
data indicate that E1A does not inhibit all transcription activation functions of
p300, and, in fact, cooperates with p300 in the activation of the ATF2
N-terminus.

PMID: 10327051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 14;274(20):14079-89.

Down-regulation of tumor necrosis factor alpha expression by activating
transcription factor 2 increases UVC-induced apoptosis of late-stage melanoma
cells.

Ivanov VN(1), Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029-6574, USA.

To identify mechanisms whereby activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) alters
the radiation resistance of human melanoma cells, we examined the possible role
of ATF2 in UVC-induced apoptosis. Forced expression of full-length or truncated
(Delta1-195 amino acids) forms of ATF2 in LU1205, a late-stage human melanoma
cell line, elevated the levels of UVC-induced apoptosis. At the same time, either
truncated or full-length forms of ATF2 reduced UVC-induced activation of the
tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) promoter and decreased expression of
TNFalpha. Forced expression of c-Jun in ATF2-expressing melanoma cells restored
TNFalpha expression, suggesting that both forms of ATF2 sequestered transcription
factors that positively regulate TNFalpha expression in response to UV
irradiation. Antagonistic antibodies to Fas, but not to TNFR1, efficiently
suppressed UVC-induced apoptosis, suggesting that the Fas pathway mediates the
primary apoptotic signal in melanoma cells whereas the TNFR1 pathway elicits a
survival signal. Indeed, treatment of melanoma cells with TNFalpha before UVC
irradiation partially suppressed UVC-induced apoptosis, further supporting the
protective role of TNFalpha in UVC-treated melanoma cells. Taken together, our
findings suggest that ATF2 contributes to UVC-induced apoptosis through
transcriptional silencing of TNFalpha, which balances Fas-mediated cell death in 
melanoma.

PMID: 10318823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Yeast. 1999 Mar 30;15(5):409-17.

Isolation and characterization of the ATF2 gene encoding alcohol
acetyltransferase II in the bottom fermenting yeast Saccharomyces pastorianus.

Yoshimoto H(1), Fujiwara D, Momma T, Tanaka K, Sone H, Nagasawa N, Tamai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratories for Key Technology, Kirin Brewery Co., Ltd, Kanagawa,
Japan. hyoshimoto@kirin.co.jp

The ATF2 gene encodes alcohol acetyltransferase II, which catalyses the synthesis
of isoamyl acetate from acetyl coenzyme A and isoamyl alcohol. To characterize
the ATF2 gene from the bottom fermenting yeast Saccharomyces pastorianus, the S. 
pastorianus ATF2 gene was cloned by colony hybridization using the S. cerevisiae 
ATF2 gene as a probe. When an atf1 null mutant strain was transformed with a
multi-copy plasmid carrying the S. pastorianus ATF2 gene, the AATase activity of 
this strain was increased by 2.5-fold compared to the control. The S. pastorianus
ATF2 gene has 99% nucleic acid homology in the coding region and 100% amino acid 
homology with the S. cerevisiae ATF2 gene. Southern blot analysis of chromosomes 
separated by pulse-field gel electrophoresis indicated that the ATF2 gene probe
hybridized to chromosome VII in S. cerevisiae and to the 1100 kb chromosome in S.
pastorianus. As S. pastorianus is thought to be a hybrid of S. cerevisiae and S. 
bayanus, the S. bayanus-type gene, which has a relatively low level of homology
with the S. cerevisiae-type gene, is also usually detected. Interestingly, an S. 
bayanus-type ATF2 gene could not be detected. These results suggested that the
cloned ATF2 gene was derived from S. cerevisiae. Analysis using an ATF2-lacZ
fusion gene in S. pastorianus showed that expression of the ATF2 gene was
relatively lower than that of the ATF1 gene and that it is repressed by aeration 
but activated by the addition of unsaturated fatty acids. The S. pastorianus
ATF1, Lg-ATF1 and ATF2 Accession Numbers in the DDBJ Nucleotide Sequence Database
are D63449, D63450 and D86480, respectively.

PMID: 10219999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 30;274(18):12890-7.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-1 (MKP-1) expression is induced by
low oxygen conditions found in solid tumor microenvironments. A candidate MKP for
the inactivation of hypoxia-inducible stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun
N-terminal protein kinase activity.

Laderoute KR(1), Mendonca HL, Calaoagan JM, Knapp AM, Giaccia AJ, Stork PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Discovery Division, SRI International, Menlo Park, California
94025, USA. keith.laderoute@sri.com

Pathophysiological hypoxia is an important modulator of gene expression in solid 
tumors and other pathologic conditions. We observed that transcriptional
activation of the c-jun proto-oncogene in hypoxic tumor cells correlates with
phosphorylation of the ATF2 transcription factor. This finding suggested that
hypoxic signals transmitted to c-jun involve protein kinases that target AP-1
complexes (c-Jun and ATF2) that bind to its promoter region. Stress-inducible
protein kinases capable of activating c-jun expression include stress-activated
protein kinase/c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase (SAPK/JNK) and p38 members of the 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) superfamily of signaling molecules. To
investigate the potential role of MAPKs in the regulation of c-jun by tumor
hypoxia, we focused on the activation SAPK/JNKs in SiHa human squamous carcinoma 
cells. Here, we describe the transient activation of SAPK/JNKs by tumor-like
hypoxia, and the concurrent transcriptional activation of MKP-1, a
stress-inducible member of the MAPK phosphatase (MKP) family of dual specificity 
protein-tyrosine phosphatases. MKP-1 antagonizes SAPK/JNK activation in response 
to diverse environmental stresses. Together, these findings identify MKP-1 as a
hypoxia-responsive gene and suggest a critical role in the regulation of SAPK/JNK
activity in the tumor microenvironment.

PMID: 10212278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 May;19(5):3289-98.

Ubiquitination and degradation of ATF2 are dimerization dependent.

Fuchs SY(1), Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)The Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New
York 10029, USA.

Ubiquitination and proteasome-dependent degradation are key determinants of the
half-lives of many transcription factors. Homo- or heterodimerization of basic
region-leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors is required for their
transcriptional activities. Here we show that activating transcription factor 2
(ATF2) heterodimerization with specific bZIP proteins is an important determinant
of the ubiquitination and proteasome-dependent degradation of ATF2. Depletion of 
c-Jun as one of the ATF2 heterodimer partners from the targeting proteins
decreased the efficiency of ATF2 ubiquitination in vitro, whereas the addition of
exogenously purified c-Jun restored it. Similarly, overexpression of c-Jun in
293T human embryo kidney cells increased ATF2 ubiquitination in vivo and reduced 
its half-life in a dose-dependent manner. Mutations of ATF2 that disrupt its
dimerization inhibited ATF2 ubiquitination in vitro and in vivo. Conversely,
removal of residues 150 to 248, as in a constitutively active ATF2 spliced form, 
enhanced ATF2 dimerization and transactivation, which coincided with increased
ubiquitination and decreased stability. Our findings indicate the increased
sensitivity of transcriptionally active dimers of ATF2 to ubiquitination and
proteasome-dependent degradation. Based on these observations, we conclude that
increased targeting of a transcriptionally active ATF2 form indicates the
mechanism by which the magnitude and the duration of the cellular stress response
are regulated.

PMCID: PMC84123
PMID: 10207054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Immunol. 1999 Apr 1;162(7):3819-29.

p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase mediates signal integration of TCR/CD28
costimulation in primary murine T cells.

Zhang J(1), Salojin KV, Gao JX, Cameron MJ, Bergerot I, Delovitch TL.

Author information: 
(1)Autoimmunity/Diabetes Group, John P. Robarts Research Institute, London,
Ontario, Canada.

Optimal T cell activation requires two signals, one generated by TCR and another 
by the CD28 costimulatory receptor. In this study, we investigated the regulation
of costimulation-induced mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activation in
primary mouse T cells. In contrast to that reported for human Jurkat T cells, we 
found that p38 MAPK, but not Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK), is weakly activated
upon stimulation with either anti-CD3 or anti-CD28 in murine thymocytes and
splenic T cells. However, p38 MAPK is activated strongly and synergistically by
either CD3/CD28 coligation or PMA/Ca2+ ionophore stimulation, which mimics
TCR-CD3/CD28-mediated signaling. Activation of p38 MAPK correlates closely with
the stimulation of T cell proliferation. In contrast, PMA-induced JNK activation 
is inhibited by Ca2+ ionophore. T cell proliferation and production of IL-2,
IL-4, and IFN-gamma induced by both CD3 and CD3/CD28 ligation and the nuclear
expression of the c-Jun and ATF-2 proteins are each blocked by the p38 MAPK
inhibitor SB203580. Our findings demonstrate that p38 MAPK 1) plays an important 
role in signal integration during costimulation of primary mouse T cells, 2) may 
be involved in the induction of c-Jun activation and augmentation of AP-1
transcriptional activity, and 3) regulates whether T cells enter a state of
functional unresponsiveness.

PMID: 10201899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Apr;261(1):317-24.

Pregnenolone esterification in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. A potential
detoxification mechanism.

Cauet G(1), Degryse E, Ledoux C, Spagnoli R, Achstetter T.

Author information: 
(1)Transgene SA, Strasbourg, France. cauet@transgene.fr

While studying the effect of steroids on the growth of the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, we found that pregnenolone was converted into the acetate ester. This
reaction was identified as a transfer of the acetyl group from acetyl-CoA to the 
3beta-hydroxyl group of pregnenolone. The corresponding enzyme,
acetyl-CoA:pregnenolone acetyltransferase (APAT) is specific for Delta5- or
Delta4-3beta-hydroxysteroids and short-chain acyl-CoAs. The apparent Km for
pregnenolone is approximately 0.5 microm. The protein associated with APAT
activity was partially purified and finally isolated from an SDS/polyacrylamide
gel. Tryptic peptides were generated and N-terminally sequenced. Two peptide
sequences allowed the identification of an open reading frame (YGR177c, in the S.
cerevisiae genome database) translating into a 62-kDa protein of hitherto unknown
function. This protein encoded by a gene known as ATF2 displays 37% identity with
an alcohol acetyltransferase encoded by the yeast gene ATF1. Disruption of ATF2
led to the complete elimination of APAT activity and consequently abolished the
esterification of pregnenolone. In addition, a toxic effect of pregnenolone
linked to the disruption of ATF2 was observed. Pregnenolone toxicity is more
pronounced when the atf2-Delta mutation is introduced in a yeast strain devoid of
the ATP-binding cassette transporters, PDR5 and SNQ2. Our results suggest that
Atf2p (APAT) plays an active role in the detoxification of 3beta-hydroxysteroids 
in association with the efflux pumps Pdr5p and Snq2p.

PMID: 10103065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Mol Biol. 1999 Apr 2;287(3):593-607.

Solution structure of the transactivation domain of ATF-2 comprising a zinc
finger-like subdomain and a flexible subdomain.

Nagadoi A(1), Nakazawa K, Uda H, Okuno K, Maekawa T, Ishii S, Nishimura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Science, Yokohama City University, 22-2 Seto
Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, 236-0027, Japan.

Activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) is a transcription factor that binds to
cAMP response element (CRE). ATF-2 contains two functional domains, an N-terminal
transactivation domain and a C-terminal DNA-binding domain. The DNA-binding
domain contains the basic leucine zipper (bZip) motif. Here, the
three-dimensional structure of the transactivation domain of ATF-2 has been
determined by NMR. The transactivation domain consists of two subdomains: the
structure of an N-terminal half (N-subdomain) is well determined, while a
C-terminal half (C-subdomain) takes a highly flexible and disordered structure.
The architecture of the N-subdomain is very similar to that of the well-known
zinc finger motif found in DNA-binding domains, consisting of an antiparallel
beta-sheet and an alpha-helix. The zinc atom is tetrahedrally coordinated to two 
cysteine residues and two histidine residues. Amino acids that form the
hydrophobic core in all of the DNA-binding zinc fingers are well conserved in the
N-subdomain of the transactivation domain, whereas some amino acids that are
responsible for binding to the phosphate backbone of DNA in the DNA-binding zinc 
fingers are substituted with other amino acids. The flexible C-subdomain, which
contains two threonine residues that the stress-activated protein kinases
phosphorylate, is likely to undergo a conformational change by specific binding
to a target protein.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10092462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 26;274(13):8949-57.

ATF-2 is a common nuclear target of Smad and TAK1 pathways in transforming growth
factor-beta signaling.

Sano Y(1), Harada J, Tashiro S, Gotoh-Mandeville R, Maekawa T, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Tsukuba Life Science Center, RIKEN, 3-1-1
Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

Upon transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) binding to its cognate receptor, 
Smad3 and Smad4 form heterodimers and transduce the TGF-beta signal to the
nucleus. In addition to the Smad pathway, another pathway involving a member of
the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase family of kinases,
TGF-beta-activated kinase-1 (TAK1), is required for TGF-beta signaling. However, 
it is unknown how these pathways function together to synergistically amplify
TGF-beta signaling. Here we report that the transcription factor ATF-2 (also
called CRE-BP1) is bound by a hetero-oligomer of Smad3 and Smad4 upon TGF-beta
stimulation. ATF-2 is one member of the ATF/CREB family that binds to the cAMP
response element, and its activity is enhanced after phosphorylation by
stress-activated protein kinases such as c-Jun N-terminal kinase and p38. The
binding between ATF-2 and Smad3/4 is mediated via the MH1 region of the Smad
proteins and the basic leucine zipper region of ATF-2. TGF-beta signaling also
induces the phosphorylation of ATF-2 via TAK1 and p38. Both of these actions are 
shown to be responsible for the synergistic stimulation of ATF-2 trans-activating
capacity. These results indicate that ATF-2 plays a central role in TGF-beta
signaling by acting as a common nuclear target of both Smad and TAK1 pathways.

PMID: 10085140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Neuroscience. 1999 Mar;89(2):437-52.

Persistent phosphorylation of cyclic AMP responsive element-binding protein and
activating transcription factor-2 transcription factors following transient
cerebral ischemia in rat brain.

Hu BR(1), Fux CM, Martone ME, Zivin JA, Ellisman MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences and National Center for Microscopy and Imaging
Research, University of California, San Diego 92093-0624, USA.

The transcription factors cyclic AMP responsive element-binding protein (CREB)
and activating transcription factor-2 were studied in rat brains subjected to 15 
min ischemia followed by varied periods of reperfusion using western blot and
immunocytochemical analyses. The total amounts of both CREB and activating
transcription factor-2 were not altered in the hippocampus after ischemia. In
contrast, levels of the phosphorylated forms of both transcription factors
decreased during ischemia but rebounded following reperfusion. The phospho-forms 
of CREB and activating transcription factor-2 showed regional and temporal
differences in their expression. Phospho-CREB was increased relative to control
levels at 30 min, and continued to increase for at least three days postischemia,
mainly in dentate granule cells. The level of phospho-activating transcription
factor-2 appeared to be higher in CAI pyramidal cells than in dentate granule
cells after ischemia. The present findings suggest that the signaling pathways
for phosphorylation of CREB may be neuroprotective for dentate cells, which are
relatively resistant to ischemic insults. The increased phospho-activating
transcription factor-2 may reflect increased stresses in these neurons. The more 
modest activation of CREB pathways in CA1 neurons may not be enough to overcome
the increased stresses in these neurons, contributing to delayed neuronal death.

PMID: 10077326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 12;274(11):7341-50.

pp60(v-src) induction of cyclin D1 requires collaborative interactions between
the extracellular signal-regulated kinase, p38, and Jun kinase pathways. A role
for cAMP response element-binding protein and activating transcription factor-2
in pp60(v-src) signaling in breast cancer cells.

Lee RJ(1), Albanese C, Stenger RJ, Watanabe G, Inghirami G, Haines GK 3rd,
Webster M, Muller WJ, Brugge JS, Davis RJ, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Developmental and Molecular Biology and Medicine, Albert
Einstein Cancer Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York
10461, USA.

The cyclin D1 gene is overexpressed in breast tumors and encodes a regulatory
subunit of cyclin-dependent kinases that phosphorylate the retinoblastoma
protein. pp60(c-src) activity is frequently increased in breast tumors; however, 
the mechanisms governing pp60(c-src) regulation of the cell cycle in breast
epithelium are poorly understood. In these studies, pp60(v-src) induced cyclin D1
protein levels and promoter activity (48-fold) in MCF7 cells. Cyclin
D1-associated kinase activity and protein levels were increased in mammary tumors
from murine mammary tumor virus-pp60(c-src527F) transgenic mice. Optimal
induction of cyclin D1 by pp60(v-src) involved the extracellular signal-regulated
kinase, p38, and c-Jun N-terminal kinase members of the mitogen-activated protein
kinase family. Cyclin D1 promoter activation by pp60(v-src) involved a cAMP
response element-binding protein (CREB)/activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2)
binding site. Dominant negative mutants of CREB and ATF-2 but not c-Jun inhibited
pp60(v-src) induction of cyclin D1. pp60(v-src) induction of CREB was blocked by 
the p38 inhibitor SB203580 or by mutation of CREB at Ser133. pp60(v-src)
induction of ATF-2 was abolished by the c-Jun N-terminal kinase inhibitor
JNK-interacting protein-1 or by mutation of ATF-2 at Thr69 and Thr71. CREB and
ATF-2, which bind to a common pp60(v-src) response element, are transcriptionally
activated by distinct mitogen-activated protein kinases. Induction of cyclin D1
activity by pp60(v-src) may contribute to breast tumorigenesis through
phosphorylation and inactivation of the retinoblastoma protein.

PMID: 10066798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 5;274(10):6783-9.

Platelet-derived growth factor induces interleukin-6 transcription in osteoblasts
through the activator protein-1 complex and activating transcription factor-2.

Franchimont N(1), Durant D, Rydziel S, Canalis E.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Research and Medicine, Saint Francis Hospital and Medical
Center, Hartford, Connecticut 06105, USA.

Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) BB, a mitogen that stimulates bone
resorption, increases the expression of interleukin-6 (IL-6), a cytokine that
induces osteoclast recruitment. The mechanisms involved in IL-6 induction by PDGF
BB are poorly understood. We examined the effect of PDGF BB on IL-6 expression in
cultures of osteoblasts from fetal rat calvariae (Ob cells). PDGF BB increased
IL-6 mRNA and heterogeneous nuclear RNA levels, the rate of transcription, and
the activity of base pairs (bp) -2906 to +20 IL-6 promoter fragments transiently 
transfected into Ob cells. Deletion analysis revealed two responsive regions, one
containing an activator protein-1 (AP-1) site located between bp -276 and -257,
and a second, less well defined, downstream of -257. Targeted mutations of a
cyclic AMP-responsive element (CRE), and nuclear factor-IL-6 and nuclear
factor-kappaB binding sites in a bp -257 to +20 IL-6 construct that was
transfected into Ob cells, revealed that the CRE also contributed to IL-6
promoter induction by PDGF BB. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay revealed AP-1
and CRE nuclear protein complexes that were enhanced by PDGF BB. Supershift
assays revealed binding of Jun and Fos to AP-1 and CRE sequences and binding of
activating transcription factor-2 to CRE. In conclusion, PDGF BB induces IL-6
transcription in osteoblasts by regulating nuclear proteins of the AP-1 complex
and activating transcription factor-2.

PMID: 10037779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Feb 16;1444(2):191-200.

ATF-2-binding regulatory element is responsible for the Ly49A expression in
murine T lymphoid line, EL-4.

Kubo S(1), Nagasawa R, Nishimura H, Shigemoto K, Maruyama N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of
Gerontology, 35-2 Sakaecho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173, Japan.

To understand the mechanism of Ly49A-expression and its significance in T-cell
differentiation, we analyzed the 5'-flanking region of the Ly49A gene in a search
for the Ly49A-regulatory element. Since very few known regulatory elements have
been found in this region, presumably a novel regulatory sequence(s) could exist.
Accordingly, we defined the 13-bp regulatory element, 5'-ATGACGAGGAGGA-3',
restricted to Ly49A-expression in EL-4 cells in comparison with two other
representative cell lines tested. This element, designated as EL13, proved to be 
previously undiscovered by homology search and is highly homologous with several 
virus DNAs. Using EL13 as a probe we have cloned a cDNA encoding a binding
protein to EL13. Its deduced nucleotide sequence revealed that EL13-binding
protein is almost identical with rat ATF-2. Although ATF-2 is known to bind to
cyclic AMP responsive element (CRE), EL13 shares five out of eight nucleotides
with this consensus sequence. Our results suggested that ATF-2 may play an
important role via binding to EL13 for the expression of Ly49A. These data will
provide useful information for understanding T-cell and NK-cell differentiation
in murine immune system.

PMID: 10023056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Exp Biol. 1999 Mar;202(Pt 6):655-60.

Nitric oxide stimulates the stress-activated protein kinase p38 in rat renal
mesangial cells.

Huwiler A(1), Pfeilschifter J.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum der Pharmakologie, Klinikum der Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universität,
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Nitric oxide (NO) has gained increased attention as a diffusible universal
messenger that plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of inflammatory and
autoimmune diseases. Recently, we reported that exogenous NO is able to activate 
the stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK) cascade in mesangial cells. Here, we
demonstrate that exposure of glomerular mesangial cells to compounds releasing
NO, including spermine-NO and (Z)-1-
(N-methyl-N-[6-(N-methylammoniohexyl)amino]diazen)-1-ium-1,2-diolate (MAHMA-NO), 
results in an activation of the stress-activated p38-mitogen-activated protein
kinase (p38-MAPK) cascade as measured by the phosphorylation of the activator of 
transcription factor-2 (ATF2) in an immunocomplex kinase assay. Activation of the
p38-MAPK cascade by a short stimulation (10 min) with the NO donor MAHMA-NO
causes a large increase in ATF2 phosphorylation that is several times greater
than that observed after stimulation with interleukin-1beta, a well-known
activator of the p38-MAPK pathway. Time course studies reveal that MAHMA-NO
causes rapid and maximal activation of p38-MAPK after 10 min of stimulation and
that activation declines to basal levels within 60 min. The longer-lived NO donor
spermine-NO causes a comparable rapid activation of the p38-MAPK pathway;
however, the increased activation state of p38-MAPK was maintained for several
hours before control values were reattained after 24 h of stimulation.
Furthermore, the NO donors also activated the classical extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) p44-MAPK cascade as shown by phosphorylation of the
specific substrate cytosolic phospholipase A2 in an immunocomplex kinase
reaction. Both MAHMA-NO and spermine-NO cause a rapid activation of p44-MAPK
after 10 min of stimulation. Interestingly, there is a second delayed peak of
p44-MAPK activation after 4-24 h of stimulation with NO donors. These results
suggest that there is a differential activation pattern for stress-activated and 
mitogen-activated protein kinases by NO and that the integration of these signals
may lead to specific cell responses.

PMID: 10021319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Feb 16;96(4):1433-8.

Identification of the cyclin D1 gene as a target of activating transcription
factor 2 in chondrocytes.

Beier F(1), Lee RJ, Taylor AC, Pestell RG, LuValle P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Calgary; 3330 Hospital Drive
NW, Calgary, AB, Canada, T2N 4N1.

Endochondral bone growth is regulated by the rates of chondrocyte proliferation
and differentiation. However, the intracellular mechanisms regulating these
processes are poorly understood. Recently, interruption of the gene encoding the 
transcription factor activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) was shown to
inhibit proliferation of chondrocytes in mice [Reimold, A. M., et al. (1996)
Nature (London) 379, 262-265]. The target genes of ATF-2 that are responsible for
this phenotype remain unknown. Here we report that the cyclin D1 gene is a direct
target of ATF-2 in chondrocytes. ATF-2 is present in nuclear extracts from
chondrogenic cell lines and binds, as a complex with a CRE-binding protein
(CREB)/CRE modulator protein, to the cAMP response element (CRE) in the cyclin D1
promoter. Mutation of the cyclin D1 CRE caused a 78% reduction in the activity of
the promoter in chondrocytes. Overexpression of ATF-2 in chondrocytes enhanced
activity of the cyclin D1 promoter 3. 5-fold. In contrast, inhibition of
endogenous ATF-2 or CREB by expression of dominant-negative inhibitors of CREB
and ATF-2 significantly reduced the activity of the promoter in chondrocytes
through the CRE. In addition, levels of cyclin D1 protein are greatly reduced in 
the chondrocytes of ATF-2-deficient mice. These data identify the cyclin D1 gene 
as a direct target of ATF-2 in chondrocytes and suggest that reduced expression
of cyclin D1 contributes to the defective cartilage development of these mice.

PMCID: PMC15480
PMID: 9990041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. EMBO J. 1999 Feb 1;18(3):522-33.

Retrograde Ca2+ signaling in C2C12 skeletal myocytes in response to mitochondrial
genetic and metabolic stress: a novel mode of inter-organelle crosstalk.

Biswas G(1), Adebanjo OA, Freedman BD, Anandatheerthavarada HK, Vijayasarathy C, 
Zaidi M, Kotlikoff M, Avadhani NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, and the Mari Lowe Center for Comparative
Oncology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

We have investigated the mechanism of mitochondrial-nuclear crosstalk during
cellular stress in mouse C2C12 myocytes. For this purpose, we used cells with
reduced mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) contents by ethidium bromide treatment or
myocytes treated with known mitochondrial metabolic inhibitors, including
carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP), antimycin, valinomycin and
azide. Both genetic and metabolic stresses similarly affected mitochondrial
membrane potential (Deltapsim) and electron transport-coupled ATP synthesis,
which was also accompanied by an elevated steady-state cytosolic Ca2+ level
([Ca2+]i). The mitochondrial stress resulted in: (i) an enhanced expression of
the sarcoplasmic reticular ryanodine receptor-1 (RyR-1), hence potentiating the
Ca2+ release in response to its modulator, caffeine; (ii) enhanced levels of
Ca2+-responsive factors calineurin, calcineurin-dependent NFATc (cytosolic
counterpart of activated T-cell-specific nuclear factor) and c-Jun N-terminal
kinase (JNK)-dependent ATF2 (activated transcription factor 2); (iii) reduced
levels of transcription factor, NF-kappaB; and (iv) enhanced transcription of
cytochrome oxidase Vb (COX Vb) subunit gene. These cellular changes, including
the steady-state [Ca2+]i were normalized in genetically reverted cells which
contain near-normal mtDNA levels. We propose that the mitochondria-to-nucleus
stress signaling occurs through cytosolic [Ca2+]i changes, which are likely to be
due to reduced ATP and Ca2+ efflux. Our results indicate that the mitochondrial
stress signal affects a variety of cellular processes, in addition to
mitochondrial membrane biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1171145
PMID: 9927412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1998 Dec 10;63(1):198-204.

ATF-2 phosphorylation in apoptotic neuronal death.

Walton M(1), Woodgate AM, Sirimanne E, Gluckman P, Dragunow M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, University
of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

Activating transcription factor (ATF-2) is a basic region-leucine zipper
transcription factor that can mediate a diverse range of transcriptional
responses including those generated by various forms of cellular stress.
Activation of ATF-2 in response to these stimuli requires post-translational
modification, in particular the phosphorylation of Thr69 and Thr71. To
investigate whether ATF-2 activation also has a role in neuronal apoptosis,
immunocytochemistry using a phospho-specific ATF-2 (Thr71) antibody was carried
out in the 21 day old rat brain following a unilateral hypoxic-ischemic (HI)
insult and PC12 cells cultured in the presence of okadaic acid. In both models a 
dramatic increase in phosphorylated ATF-2 was found within cells undergoing
apoptosis.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 9838112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 1998 Oct;62(10):1852-7.

Cloning and nucleotide sequence of the alcohol acetyltransferase II gene (ATF2)
from Saccharomyces cerevisiae Kyokai No. 7.

Nagasawa N(1), Bogaki T, Iwamatsu A, Hamachi M, Kumagai C.

Author information: 
(1)General Research Laboratory, Ozeki Corp., Hyogo, Japan.
fvbb5555@mb.infoweb.ne.jp

The ATF2 gene, which encodes alcohol acetyltransferase II (AATase II), was cloned
from Saccharomyces cerevisiae Kyokai No. 7 (sake yeast). The ATF2 gene coded for 
a protein of 535 amino acid residues with a calculated molecular mass of 61,909
daltons. The deduced amino acid sequences of the ATF2 showed 36.9% similarity
with that of ATF1, which encodes AATase I. The hydrophobicity profiles for the
Atf2 protein and Atf1 protein were similar. A transformant carrying multiple
copies of the ATF2 gene had 2.5-fold greater AATase activity than the control,
and this activity was not significantly inhibited by linoleic acid. A Southern
analysis of the yeast genomes in which the ATF2 gene was used as a probe showed
that S. cerevisiae and brewery larger yeast have one ATF2 gene, while S. bayanus 
has no similar gene.

PMID: 9836419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Immunol. 1998 Dec 1;161(11):6105-12.

Regulation of the activity of IFN-gamma promoter elements during Th cell
differentiation.

Zhang F(1), Wang DZ, Boothby M, Penix L, Flavell RA, Aune TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN 37232, USA.

Before they can deliver their effector functions, CD4+ Th cells must
differentiate into Th1 or Th2 subsets. We have prepared reporter transgenic mice 
that express the luciferase gene under the control of proximal (prox.IFN-gamma)
and distal (dist.IFN-gamma) regulatory elements from the IFN-gamma promoter to
permit investigation of mechanisms that regulate IFN-gamma gene transcription
during Th cell differentiation. Precursor Th cells (pTh) contain high levels of
cAMP response element binding protein-activation transcription factor-1
(CREB-ATF1) proteins that bind these promoter elements from the IFN-gamma gene,
and these cells fail to express promoter activity. Restimulated effector Th (eTh)
cells have reduced levels of CREB-ATF1 proteins, their nuclear extracts exhibit
reduced CREB-ATF1 binding and greater Jun and Jun-ATF2 binding to
dist.IFN-gamma), and eTh cells express promoter activity. CREB directly competes 
with effector T cell nuclear proteins for dist.IFN-gamma binding, and
overexpression of CREB inhibits both prox.IFN-gamma- and dist.IFN-gamma-directed 
transcription in Jurkat T cells. IL-12-stimulated Thl differentiation increases
dist.IFN-gamma activity in restimulated eTh1 cells; eTh1 nuclear extracts form
increased levels of Jun-ATF2-dist.IFN-gamma complexes. Taken together, these data
suggest that both de-repression and trans-activation contribute to the induction 
of IFN-gamma gene transcription during Th1 differentiation.

PMID: 9834094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Dec 1;26(23):5480-5.

Nrf1 in a complex with fosB, c-jun, junD and ATF2 forms the AP1 component at the 
TNF alpha promoter in stimulated mast cells.

Novotny V(1), Prieschl EE, Csonga R, Fabjani G, Baumruker T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Novartis Research Institute, Brunner Strasse 59,
A-1235 Vienna, Austria.

Cap 'n' collar-basic leucine zipper (CNC-bZIP) proteins are widely implicated in 
developmental processes throughout different species. Evidence is accumulating
that some of them are also participating in induced gene expression in the adult.
Here we show that the three CNC-bZIP members NF-E2, Nrf1 and Nrf2 are
constitutively expressed in the murine mast cell line CPII and that they form
transcription factor complexes with several AP1 binding proteins. Upon induction,
complexes are observed at the 2 x NF-E2 consensus binding site and the extended
kappa3/AP1(+) site of the TNFalpha promoter. The interaction of Nrf1 with c -jun,
junD, fosB and ATF2 in mast cells is in contrast to the recently reported binding
of Nrf1 alone at the kappa3/AP1(-) site in dendritic cells. We speculated that
this may be the result of the expression of isoforms of Nrf1 in mast cells. Using
a PCR cloning strategy, we have isolated six novel splice variants of this
transcription factor. Some of them have deleted the translational stop codon,
resulting in an Nrf1 protein with an altered leucine zipper region. Expression of
this altered binding/interaction domain interferes with TNFalpha induction,
indicating an interaction of this splice variant with the active AP1/NF-AT
complex at this promoter.

PMCID: PMC147998
PMID: 9826775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Dec;18(12):7020-9.

Transcription factor ATF2 cooperates with v-Jun to promote growth
factor-independent proliferation in vitro and tumor formation in vivo.

Huguier S(1), Baguet J, Perez S, van Dam H, Castellazzi M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Virologie Humaine, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale (INSERM-U412), Ecole Normale Supérieure, 69364 Lyon Cedex 07, France.

ATF2 belongs to the bZIP family of transcription factors and controls gene
expression via 8-bp ATF/CREB motifs either as a homodimer or as a heterodimer-for
instance, with Jun-but has never been shown to be directly involved in
oncogenesis. Experiments were designed to evaluate a possible role of ATF2 in
oncogenesis in chick embryo fibroblasts (CEFs) in the presence or absence of
v-Jun. We found that (i) forced expression of ATF2 cannot alone cause
transformation, (ii) overexpression of ATF2 plus v-Jun specifically stimulates
v-Jun-induced growth in medium with a reduced amount of serum, and (iii) the
efficiency of low-serum growth correlates with the activity of a
Jun-ATF2-dependent model promoter in stably transformed CEFs. Analysis of ATF2
and Jun dimerization mutants showed that the growth-stimulatory effect of ATF2 is
likely to be mediated by v-Jun-ATF2 heterodimers since (i) v-Jun-m1, a mutant
with enhanced affinity for ATF2, induces growth in low-serum medium much more
efficiently than v-Jun, when expressed alone or in combination with ATF2; and
(ii) ATF2/fos, a mutant that efficiently binds to v-Jun but is unable to form
stable homodimers, shows enhanced oncogenic cooperation with v-Jun. In addition, 
we examined the role of ATF2 in tumor formation by subcutaneous injection of CEFs
into chickens. In contrast to v-Jun, v-Jun-m1 gave rise to numerous fibrosarcomas
while coexpression of ATF2 and v-Jun-m1 led to a dramatic development of
fibrosarcomas visible within 1 week. Together these data demonstrate that
overexpressed ATF2 potentiates the ability of v-Jun-transformed CEFs to grow in
low-serum medium in vitro and contributes to the formation of tumors in vivo.

PMCID: PMC109284
PMID: 9819389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1998 Nov 20;62(2):158-66.

Rapid and long-lasting suppression of the ATF-2 transcription factor is a common 
response to neuronal injury.

Martin-Villalba A(1), Winter C, Brecht S, Buschmann T, Zimmermann M, Herdegen T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 326,
69120, Heidelberg, Germany.

The activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) protein, a neuronal constitutively 
expressed CRE-binding transcription factor, is essential for the intact
development of the mammalian brain. ATF-2 is activated by c-Jun N-terminal
kinases and modulates both the induction of the c-jun gene and the function of
the c-Jun protein, a mediator of neuronal death and survival. Here we show by
immunocytochemistry and Western blotting that ATF-2 is rapidly suppressed in
neurons within 1-4 h following neuronal stress such as transient focal ischemia
by occlusion of the medial cerebral artery, mechanical injury of the
neuroparenchym, stimulation of adult dorsal root ganglion neurons in vitro by
doxorubicin as well as within 24 h following nerve fiber transection. ATF-2
reappears and regains basal levels between 12 h and 72 h following ischemia,
between 50 and 100 days following axotomy, but remains absent around the site of 
mechanical injury during the process of degeneration. Following ischemia and
tissue injury, ATF-2-IR also disappeared in areas remote from the affected brain 
compartments indicating the regulation of its expression by diffusible molecules.
These findings demonstrate that the rapid and persistent down-regulation of ATF-2
is a constituent of the long-term neuronal stress response and that the
reappearance of ATF-2 after weeks is a marker for the normalization of neuronal
gene transcription following brain injury.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 9813301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. EMBO J. 1998 Nov 2;17(21):6230-40.

CpG-DNA-specific activation of antigen-presenting cells requires stress kinase
activity and is preceded by non-specific endocytosis and endosomal maturation.

Häcker H(1), Mischak H, Miethke T, Liptay S, Schmid R, Sparwasser T, Heeg K,
Lipford GB, Wagner H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, Technische
Universität München, Trogerstrasse 9, D-81675 Munich, Germany.

Unmethylated CpG motifs in bacterial DNA, plasmid DNA and synthetic
oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG ODN) activate dendritic cells (DC) and macrophages in 
a CD40-CD40 ligand-independent fashion. To understand the molecular mechanisms
involved we focused on the cellular uptake of CpG ODN, the need for endosomal
maturation and the role of the stress kinase pathway. Here we demonstrate that
CpG-DNA induces phosphorylation of Jun N-terminal kinase kinase 1
(JNKK1/SEK/MKK4) and subsequent activation of the stress kinases JNK1/2 and p38
in murine macrophages and dendritic cells. This leads to activation of the
transcription factor activating protein-1 (AP-1) via phosphorylation of its
constituents c-Jun and ATF2. Moreover, stress kinase activation is essential for 
CpG-DNA-induced cytokine release of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) and
interleukin-12 (IL-12), as inhibition of p38 results in severe impairment of this
biological response. We further demonstrate that cellular uptake via endocytosis 
and subsequent endosomal maturation is essential for signalling, since
competition by non-CpG-DNA or compounds blocking endosomal maturation such as
chloroquine or bafilomycin A prevent all aspects of cellular activation. The data
suggest that endosomal maturation is required for translation of intraendosomal
CpG ODN sequences into signalling via the stress kinase pathway, where p38 kinase
activation represents an essential step in CpG-ODN-triggered activation of
antigen-presenting cells.

PMCID: PMC1170949
PMID: 9799232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Immunol. 1998 Nov 1;161(9):4493-7.

Rapid induction of mitogen-activated protein kinases by immune stimulatory CpG
DNA.

Yi AK(1), Krieg AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa 
City 52242, USA.

Unmethylated CpG motifs in bacterial DNA or synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG 
DNA) rapidly activate B cells and monocyte-derived cells; however, the
intracellular signaling pathways involved in this process are unclear. Here, we
demonstrate that CpG DNA induces the activation of c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase and 
p38 but does not activate the extracellular receptor kinase in murine B and
monocyte-like cell lines. CpG DNA also induces the phosphorylation of activating 
transcription factor-2, c-Jun, and mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK)-activated protein kinase 2 as well as the activation of activator
protein-1 (AP-1) DNA binding. Inhibition of p38 led to the suppression of CpG
DNA-induced AP-1 DNA-binding activity and cytokine production, indicating that
the p38 pathway is required for mediating these immune stimulatory effects of CpG
DNA. Chloroquine, an endosomal acidification inhibitor, selectively abolished CpG
DNA-mediated MAPK activation. Our results indicate that CpG DNA activates the p38
and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase MAPK and leads to the activation of AP-1 via a
pathway which is sensitive to chloroquine.

PMID: 9794373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Biol Chem. 1998 Aug-Sep;379(8-9):1101-11.

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for measurement of JNK, ERK, and p38 kinase
activities.

Forrer P(1), Tamaskovic R, Jaussi R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Radiobiology of the Paul Scherrer Institute and the
University of Zürich, Villigen PSI, Switzerland.

A rapid enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for the enzyme activity measurement of 
three well-known mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, JNK2, ERK2, and p38 is 
described. The assay involves immobilization of the respective kinase substrates 
c-Jun, Elk1, or ATF2 on microtiter plates, addition of the kinase reaction
mixture, and measurement of substrate phosphorylation using
phospho-epitope-specific antibodies. This novel procedure represents a marked
improvement to conventional radioactive MAP kinase assays in terms of
quantification, precision, performance at physiological ATP concentration, high
throughput, time consumption and amenability to automation. In addition to the
standard solid phase assay using plastic-bound protein substrates, we developed
an alternative solution phase protocol using soluble protein substrates. By
comparing the results of the two assays, we found that MAP kinases retained much 
of their substrate specificity in the phosphorylation of immobilized protein
substrates. Interestingly, we observed a strong preference of JNK2 and p38 for
the phosphorylation of dimeric over monomeric substrates. We further
characterized the kinase inhibitory activity of olomoucine, staurosporine, and SB
203580 for JNK2, ERK2, and p38. Taken together, this assay could assist in the
biochemical characterization of MAP kinases and in identifying potent and
specific inhibitors of these enzymes.

PMID: 9792443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 30;273(44):29098-105.

CBP alleviates the intramolecular inhibition of ATF-2 function.

Sano Y(1), Tokitou F, Dai P, Maekawa T, Yamamoto T, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Tsukuba Life Science Center, RIKEN, 3-1-1
Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

The transcription factor ATF-2 (also called CRE-BP1), whose DNA-binding domain
consists of a basic amino acid cluster and a leucine zipper (b-ZIP) region, binds
to the cAMP response element as a homodimer or as a heterodimer with c-Jun. The
amino-terminal region of ATF-2 containing the transcriptional activation domain
is phosphorylated by stress-activated kinases, which leads to activation of
ATF-2. We report here that CBP, which was originally identified as a co-activator
of CREB, directly binds to the b-ZIP region of ATF-2 via a Cys/His-rich region
termed C/H2, and potentiates trans-activation by ATF-2. The b-ZIP region of ATF-2
was previously shown to interact with the amino-terminal region intramolecularly 
and to inhibit trans-activating capacity. The binding of CBP to the b-ZIP region 
abrogates this intramolecular interaction. The adenovirus 13S E1A protein which
binds to the b-ZIP region of ATF-2 also inhibited this intramolecular
interaction, suggesting that both CBP and 13S E1A share a similar function as
positive regulators of ATF-2. We found that the b-ZIP regions of c-Jun and CREB
also interact with the C/H2 domain of CBP, suggesting that CBP acts as a
regulator for a group of b-ZIP-containing proteins. These results shed light on a
novel aspect of CBP function as a regulator for a group of b-ZIP-containing
proteins.

PMID: 9786917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Oct 13;95(21):12191-6.

Efficient recruitment of TFIIB and CBP-RNA polymerase II holoenzyme by an
interferon-beta enhanceosome in vitro.

Kim TK(1), Kim TH, Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard University, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, 7 Divinity
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

The transcriptional activity of an in vitro assembled human interferon-beta gene 
enhanceosome is highly synergistic. This synergy requires five distinct
transcriptional activator proteins (ATF2/c-JUN, interferon regulatory factor 1,
and p50/p65 of NF-kappaB), the high mobility group protein HMG I(Y), and the
correct alignment of protein-binding sites on the face of the DNA double helix.
Here, we investigate the mechanisms of enhanceosome-dependent transcriptional
synergy during preinitiation complex assembly in vitro. We show that the
stereospecific assembly of the enhanceosome is critical for the efficient
recruitment of TFIIB into a template-committed TFIID-TFIIA-USA (upstream
stimulatory activity complex) and for the subsequent recruitment of the RNA
polymerase II holoenzyme complex. In addition, we provide evidence that
recruitment of the holoenzyme by the enhanceosome is due, at least in part, to
interactions between the enhanceosome and the transcriptional coactivator CREB,
cAMP responsive element binding protein (CBP). These studies reveal a unique role
of enhanceosomes in the cooperative assembly of the transcription machinery on
the human interferon-beta promoter.

PMCID: PMC22807
PMID: 9770462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Neurosci. 1998 Oct 15;18(20):8163-74.

Regulation of tyrosine hydroxylase gene expression during transdifferentiation of
striatal neurons: changes in transcription factors binding the AP-1 site.

Guo Z(1), Du X, Iacovitti L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of Pennsylvania and
Hahnemann University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19129, USA.

We have shown previously that the synergistic interaction of acidic fibroblast
growth factor (aFGF) and a coactivator (dopamine, protein kinase A, or protein
kinase C activator) will induce the novel expression of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)
in neurons of the developing striatum. In this study we sought to determine
whether, concomitant with TH expression, there were unique changes in
transcription factors binding the AP-1 regulatory element on the TH gene. Indeed,
we found a significant recruitment of proteins into TH-AP-1 complexes as well as 
a shift from low- to high-affinity binding. Supershift experiments further
revealed dramatic changes in the proteins comprising the AP-1 complexes,
including recruitment of the transcriptional activators c-Fos, a novel Fos
protein, Fos-B, and Jun-D. Concomitantly, there was a decrease in repressor-type 
factors ATF-2 and CREM-1. aFGF appeared to play a central but insufficient role, 
requiring the further participation of at least one of the coactivating
substances. Experiments examining the signal transduction pathway involved in
mediating these nuclear events demonstrated that the presence of only an FGF (1, 
2, 4, 9) competent to induce TH caused the phosphorylation of mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK). Moreover, the treatment of cells with MEK/ERK inhibitors
(apigenin or PD98059) eliminated TH expression and the associated AP-1 changes,
suggesting that MAPK was a critical mediator of these events. We conclude that,
during transdifferentiation, signals may be transmitted via MAPK to the TH-AP-1
site to increase activators and reduce repressors, helping to shift the balance
in favor of TH gene expression at this and possibly other important regulatory
sites on the gene.

PMID: 9763463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Biochemistry. 1998 Oct 6;37(40):14078-87.

Transactivation of the ApoCIII promoter by ATF-2 and repression by members of the
Jun family.

Hadzopoulou-Cladaras M(1), Lavrentiadou SN, Zannis VI, Kardassis D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Biochemistry, Cardiovascular Institute, Boston
University Medical Center, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

It was shown previously that cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha that
stimulate signal transduction pathways involving transcription factors ATF-2 and 
Jun repress apoCIII promoter activity in HepG2 cells. In the present study, DNase
I footprinting analysis established that ATF-2 protected three regions in the
apoCIII promoter. One region (-747/-726) present in the apoCIII enhancer is
within the previously identified footprint I and has overlapping boundaries with 
the binding sites of Sp1 (-764/-742) and HNF-4 (-736/-714). The other two regions
represent new footprints and have been designated D/E (-219/-199) and B/C
(-102/-75). The B/C region overlaps with the previously identified footprint B
which contains an HNF-4 binding site (-87/-63). Cotransfection experiments in
HepG2 cells showed that ATF-2 transactivated the -890/+24 apoCIII promoter
1.6-fold. In addition, mutations in the proximal D/E (-219/-199) and distal I
(-747/-726) ATF-2-binding sites reduced the apoCIII promoter strength to 33 and
9% of control, respectively, indicating that ATF-2 is a positive regulator of
apoCIII gene transcription. Cotransfections with ATF-2 and HNF-4 expression
plasmids resulted in additive transactivation of the apoCIII promoter.
Furthermore, apoCIII promoter constructs bearing mutations in the D/E and I ATF-2
binding sites were efficiently transactivated by HNF-4, suggesting that these two
factors contribute independently to the apoCIII promoter strength. Members of the
Jun family (c-Jun, JunB, and JunD) caused a dose-dependent inhibition of the
-890/+24 apoCIII promoter activity. A synthetic promoter containing the apoCIII
enhancer in front of the minimal AdML promoter was also repressed by Jun. In
contrast, apoCIII promoter segments lacking the enhancer region were
transactivated by Jun. The findings suggest that homodimers of Jun or
heterodimers of Jun with other AP-1 subunits could be responsible for the
observed repression by interfering with the function(s) of the apoCIII enhancer. 
Repression by Jun could be reversed in the presence of ATF-2 and HNF-4,
suggesting that ATF2 and possibly Jun/ATF-2 heterodimers exert a positive effect 
on apoCIII gene transcription, as opposed to Jun homodimers or heterodimers with 
other AP-1 members. These findings suggest a role for members of the Jun family
and ATF-2 that participate in signal transduction pathways in basal or induced
apoCIII promoter activity in cells of hepatic origin.

PMID: 9760243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Biochemistry. 1998 Sep 29;37(39):13846-53.

The activation state of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase determines the
efficiency of ATP competition for pyridinylimidazole inhibitor binding.

Frantz B(1), Klatt T, Pang M, Parsons J, Rolando A, Williams H, Tocci MJ, O'Keefe
SJ, O'Neill EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inflammation Research, Merck Research Laboratories, Rahway, New 
Jersey 07065, USA.

The serine/threonine kinase p38 is a ubiquitous, highly conserved, stress
responsive, signal-transducing enzyme. It regulates the production of
proinflammatory mediators and is the target of the cytokine synthesis inhibitory 
pyridinylimidazoles. We have expressed human p38 in Drosophila S2 cells and
characterized preparations of mixed unphosphorylated/monophosphorylated
(inactive) and homogeneously diphosphorylated (active) forms of the enzyme. We
observed that only the active preparation of the enzyme has significant kinase
activity when assayed using an ATF2-GST fusion protein as the substrate. We
determined that the value of KM[ATP] in this reaction is 25 microM and that the
pyridinylimidazole inhibitor of p38 kinase activity, SB203580, competes with ATP.
We have found that a tritiated pyridinylimidazole, SB202190, has an equal
affinity for both the active and inactive forms of the enzyme and that SB203580
competes with it equally well for binding to either form of the enzyme. However, 
ATP can compete with the tritiated inhibitor for binding to only the active form 
of the enzyme. Further, we demonstrate in vivo that at concentrations consistent 
with its IC50 as a cytokine inhibitor, SB203580 can inhibit stimulus-induced
phosphorylation of p38 at the Thr-Gly-Tyr activation motif. Our observations
suggest that pyridinylimidazoles may block the biological activity of p38 kinase 
by binding to the inactive form of p38 and reducing its rate of activation. Under
these conditions, ATP would not effectively compete with the inhibitors in vivo.

PMID: 9753474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 2;273(40):25840-9.

Characterization of functional domains of an embryonic stem cell coactivator UTF1
which are conserved and essential for potentiation of ATF-2 activity.

Fukushima A(1), Okuda A, Nishimoto M, Seki N, Hori TA, Muramatsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Medical School, 38 Morohongo, Moroyama,
Iruma-gun Saitama 350-0495, Japan.

We have recently cloned a cDNA encoding an embryonic stem cell transcriptional
coactivator termed UTF1 from the mouse F9 teratocarcinoma cell line (Okuda, A.,
Fukushima, A., Nishimoto, M., Orimo, A., Yamagishi, T., Nabeshima, Y., Kuro-o,
M., Nabeshima, Y., Boon, K., Keaveney, M., Stunnenberg, H.G., and Muramatsu, M.
(1998) EMBO J. 17, 2019-2032). Here we have cloned a cDNA for human UTF1 and
identified two highly conserved domains termed conserved domain (CD)1 and CD2.
Human UTF1, like that of mouse, binds to ATF-2 and the mutagenesis analyses
reveal that the leucine zipper motif within the CD2 of the UTF1 and metal binding
motif of ATF-2 are involved in this interaction. The factor also binds to
TATA-binding protein containing complex. By means of immunoprecipitation
analysis, we mapped two domains which are independently able to bind to the
complex. Importantly, both domains are located within the conserved domains (one 
in CD1 and the other in CD2). Furthermore, transient transfection analyses point 
out the importance of these domains for activating ATF-2. Thus, these results
suggest that these two conserved domains identified here play important roles in 
activating specific transcription at least in part by supporting physical
interaction between the upstream factor, ATF-2, and basal transcription
machinery.

PMID: 9748258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Am J Physiol. 1998 Sep;275(3 Pt 1):L551-8.

Activation of MAPKs in human bronchial epithelial cells exposed to metals.

Samet JM(1), Graves LM, Quay J, Dailey LA, Devlin RB, Ghio AJ, Wu W, Bromberg PA,
Reed W.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Medicine and Lung Biology, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599, USA.

We have previously shown that in vitro exposure to metallic compounds enhances
expression of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha in human 
bronchial epithelial cells. To characterize signaling pathways involved in
metal-induced expression of inflammatory mediators and to identify metals that
activate them, we studied the effects of As, Cr, Cu, Fe, Ni, V, and Zn on the
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) extracellular receptor kinase (ERK),
c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK), and P38 in BEAS cells. Noncytotoxic
concentrations of As, V, and Zn induced a rapid phosphorylation of MAPK in BEAS
cells. Activity assays confirmed marked activation of ERK, JNK, and P38 in BEAS
cells exposed to As, V, and Zn. Cr and Cu exposure resulted in a relatively small
activation of MAPK, whereas Fe and Ni did not activate MAPK under these
conditions. Similarly, the transcription factors c-Jun and ATF-2, substrates of
JNK and P38, respectively, were markedly phosphorylated in BEAS cells treated
with As, Cr, Cu, V, and Zn. The same acute exposure to As, V, or Zn that
activated MAPK was sufficient to induce a subsequent increase in IL-8 protein
expression in BEAS cells. These data suggest that MAPK may mediate metal-induced 
expression of inflammatory proteins in human bronchial epithelial cells.

PMID: 9728050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Aug;12(8):1228-40.

Characterization of a human-specific regulator of placental
corticotropin-releasing hormone.

Scatena CD(1), Adler S.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, Washington University, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

The hypothalamic hormone CRH is also expressed in the placentas of humans and
higher primates and may play an important role in the regulation of labor. In
choriocarcinoma cell lines, activation of cAMP-dependent pathways increases human
(h)CRH reporter gene expression. A cAMP-responsive region distinct from the cAMP 
response element at -220 bp, has been identified between -200 and -99 bp, and a
candidate transcription factor was identified in nuclear extracts of human, but
not rodent, choriocarcinoma cell lines. This region, which does not contain a
canonical cAMP response element (CRE), transfers protein kinase A responsiveness 
to a heterologous promoter. Electromobility shift assays and methylation and
uracil interference studies localized factor binding to a 20-bp region from -128 
to -109 bp of the hCRH promoter. This 20-bp fragment exhibited a similar shift in
nuclear extracts from both human term placenta and from human JEG-3 cells. Base
contacts, identified in interference studies, were confirmed as critical for
binding, as a mutation of these bases abolished factor binding. Furthermore, a
CRH promoter containing this mutation exhibited a diminished response to
forskolin. UV cross-linking demonstrated the protein in nuclear extracts from
human, but not rodent, choriocarcinoma cell lines and estimated its size as 58
kDa. Although this factor participates in cAMP-regulated gene expression,
competition electrophoretic mobility assays demonstrated that the factor does not
bind to a CRE. Furthermore, neither anti-CREB nor anti-ATF2 antibodies alter
factor binding. These data identify this 58-kDa protein as the human-specific CRH
activator previously identified as a candidate factor contributing to the
species-specific expression of CRH in human placenta.

PMID: 9717848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;18(9):5414-24.

Stress-induced Fas ligand expression in T cells is mediated through a MEK kinase 
1-regulated response element in the Fas ligand promoter.

Faris M(1), Latinis KM, Kempiak SJ, Koretzky GA, Nel A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Department of Medicine, UCLA
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

T lymphocytes undergo apoptosis in response to a variety of stimuli, including
exposure to UV radiation and gamma-irradiation. While the mechanism by which
stress stimuli induce apoptosis is not well understood, we have previously shown 
that the induction of Fas ligand (FasL) gene expression by environmental stress
stimuli is dependent on c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activation. Using inducible
dominant-active (DA) JNK kinase kinase (MEKK1) expression in Jurkat cells, we map
a specific MEKK1-regulated response element to positions -338 to -316 of the Fas 
ligand (FasL) promoter. Mutation of that response element abrogated
MEKK1-mediated FasL promoter activation and interfered in stress-induced
activation of that promoter. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we
demonstrate that activator protein 1 (AP-1) binding proteins, namely, activating 
transcription factor 2 (ATF2) and c-Jun, bind to the MEKK1 response element.
Transient transfection of interfering c-Jun and ATF2 mutants, which lack the
consensus JNK phosphorylation sites, abrogated the transcriptional activation of 
the FasL promoter, demonstrating the involvement of these transcription factors
in the regulation of the FasL promoter. Taken together, our data indicate that
MEKK1 and transcription factors regulated by the JNK pathway play a role in
committing lymphocytes to undergo apoptosis by inducing FasL expression via a
novel response element in the promoter of that gene.

PMCID: PMC109126
PMID: 9710625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Am J Physiol. 1998 Aug;275(2 Pt 1):C527-34.

p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase expression and activation in smooth muscle.

Hedges JC(1), Yamboliev IA, Ngo M, Horowitz B, Adam LP, Gerthoffer WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Nevada School of Medicine, Reno,
Nevada 89557-0046, USA.

There is relatively little known about expression and activation of p38
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) through G protein-linked,
seven-transmembrane-spanning (STM) receptors in mammalian smooth muscle. To
investigate the role of p38 MAPK in smooth muscle, we cloned and sequenced the
p38 MAPK expressed in canine smooth muscles. A full-length clone of the canine
p38 MAPK expressed in colonic smooth muscle was obtained by RT-PCR. The deduced
amino acid sequence revealed 99% identity to the human p38 MAPK and differed from
the human enzyme in only two conservative substitutions. The deduced molecular
mass of the canine p38 MAPK is 41.2 kDa, with a calculated isoelectric point of
5.41. Canine p38 MAPK was found to be expressed in colonic, tracheal, and
vascular smooth muscles and underwent increased tyrosine phosphorylation in
response to motor neurotransmitters, acetylcholine (ACh) and neurokinin A (NKA), 
in colonic smooth muscle. There was an eightfold increase in p38 MAPK
phosphorylation after a 10-min incubation with ACh and a threefold increase with 
NKA. We also identified a p38 immunoreactive kinase activity isolated from
colonic smooth muscle homogenate by Mono Q chromatography. Partially purified p38
MAPK and activated recombinant p38 MAPK (Mpk2) phosphorylated both the known p38 
MAPK substrate ATF2, as well as porcine stomach h-caldesmon in vitro. The results
suggest that elements of the "stress-response" pathway may be coupled to
transcriptional control as well as to cytoskeletal and possibly contractile
protein phosphorylation in mammalian smooth muscle.

PMID: 9688607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Gene. 1998 May 28;212(1):95-102.

Molecular cloning and characterization of a human protein kinase that
specifically activates c-Jun N-terminal kinase.

Yang J(1), New L, Jiang Y, Han J, Su B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston 77030, USA.

The c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs), also called stress-activated protein kinases
(SAPKs), belong to the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) gene super-family.
Like all the MAPKs, JNKs are activated through dual phosphorylation of a
theronine residue and a tyrosine residue by a dual specificity kinase such as
JNKK1/MKK4/SEK1. Here, we report the molecular cloning and characterization of
hJNKK2 alpha, a human homolog of the recently reported murine MKK7 alpha. hJNKK2 
alpha belongs to the MAPK kinase gene family and is expressed in many adult
tissues. It is nearly identical to a recently reported human JNKK2 at the kinase 
domain but with major differences in both amino- and carboxyl-terminal sequences,
suggesting that hJNKK2 alpha may be an alternative spliced form of this kinase.
Expression of hJNKK2 alpha, but not its related kinases JNKK1/MKK4/SEK1, MEK1,
MKK3, or MKK6, leads to strong activation of JNK in several cell lines. No
activation of ERK or p38 kinases was observed with this kinase. An in-vitro
kinase assay demonstrated that JNK1 activation by hJNKK2 alpha requires
phosphorylation of the theronine and tyrosine residues at positions 183 and 185
in JNK1. Furthermore, hJNKK2 alpha activated the JNK-dependent signal
transduction pathway in vivo by induction of c-Jun- and ATF2-mediated gene
transcription. In conclusion, we have cloned the human homolog of murine MKK7
alpha, which may be an alternative spliced form of human JNKK2 involved in
transducing specific upstream signals to regulate JNK activity in vivo.

PMID: 9661668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Mol Cell. 1998 Mar;1(4):507-18.

Virus infection induces the assembly of coordinately activated transcription
factors on the IFN-beta enhancer in vivo.

Wathelet MG(1), Lin CH, Parekh BS, Ronco LV, Howley PM, Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell 1999 Jun;3(6):813.

We have identified a virus-activated factor (VAF) that binds to a regulatory
element shared by different virus-inducible genes. We provide evidence that VAF
contains two members of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family of
transcriptional activator proteins (IRF-3 and IRF-7), as well as the
transcriptional coactivator proteins p300 and CBP. Remarkably, VAF, as well as
recombinant IRF-3 and IRF-7 proteins, binds very weakly to the interferon-beta
(IFN-beta) gene promoter in vitro. However, in virus-infected cells, both
proteins are recruited to the endogenous IFN-beta promoter as part of a protein
complex that includes ATF-2/c-Jun and NF-kappa B. These observations provide a
unique example of the coordinate activation of multiple transcriptional activator
proteins and their highly cooperative assembly into a transcriptional enhancer
complex in vivo.

PMID: 9660935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mol Cell. 1998 Jan;1(2):277-87.

Recruitment of CBP/p300 by the IFN beta enhanceosome is required for synergistic 
activation of transcription.

Merika M(1), Williams AJ, Chen G, Collins T, Thanos D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, New York 10032, USA.

Transcriptional activation of the IFN beta gene in response to virus infection
requires the assembly of an enhanceosome, consisting of the transcriptional
activators NF-kappa B, IRF1, ATF2/c-Jun, and the architectural protein HMG I(Y). 
The level of transcription generated by all of these activators is greater than
the sum of the levels generated by individual factors, a phenomenon designated
transcriptional synergy. We demonstrate that this synergy, in the context of the 
enhanceosome, requires a new protein-protein interaction domain in the p65
subunit of NF-kappa B. Transcriptional synergy requires recruitment of the
CBP/p300 coactivator to the enhanceosome, via a new activating surface assembled 
from the novel p65 domain and the activation domains of all of the activators.
Deletion, substitution, or rearrangement of any one of the activation domains in 
the context of the enhanceosome decreases both recruitment of CBP and
transcriptional synergy.

PMID: 9659924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mol Cell. 1997 Dec;1(1):119-29.

The mechanism of transcriptional synergy of an in vitro assembled interferon-beta
enhanceosome.

Kim TK(1), Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard University, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

A functional interferon-beta gene enhanceosome was assembled in vitro using the
purified recombinant transcriptional activator proteins ATF2/c-JUN, IRF1, and
p50/p65 of NF-kappa B. Maximal levels of transcriptional synergy between these
activators required the specific interactions with the architectural protein HMG 
I(Y) and the correct helical phasing of the binding sites of these proteins on
the DNA helix. Analyses of the in vitro assembled enhanceosome revealed that the 
transcriptional synergy is due, at least in part, to the cooperative assembly and
stability of the complex. Reconstitution experiments showed that the formation of
a stable enhanceosome-dependent preinitiation complex require cooperative
interactions between the enhanceosome; the general transcription factors TFID,
TFIIA, and TFIIB; and the cofactor USA. These studies provide a direct
biochemical demonstration of the importance of the structure and function of
natural multicomponent transcriptional enhancer complexes in gene regulation.

PMID: 9659909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. EMBO J. 1998 Apr 1;17(7):2019-32.

UTF1, a novel transcriptional coactivator expressed in pluripotent embryonic stem
cells and extra-embryonic cells.

Okuda A(1), Fukushima A, Nishimoto M, Orimo A, Yamagishi T, Nabeshima Y, Kuro-o
M, Nabeshima Yi, Boon K, Keaveney M, Stunnenberg HG, Muramatsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Medical School, 38 Morohongo, Moroyama,
Iruma-gun, Saitama 350-0495, Japan.

We have obtained a novel transcriptional cofactor, termed undifferentiated
embryonic cell transcription factor 1 (UTF1), from F9 embryonic carcinoma (EC)
cells. This protein is expressed in EC and embryonic stem cells, as well as in
germ line tissues, but could not be detected in any of the other adult mouse
tissues tested. Furthermore, when EC cells are induced to differentiate, UTF1
expression is rapidly extinguished. In normal mouse embryos, UTF1 mRNA is present
in the inner cell mass, the primitive ectoderm and the extra-embryonic tissues.
During the primitive streak stage, the induction of mesodermal cells is
accompanied by the down-regulation of UTF1 in the primitive ectoderm. However,
its expression is maintained for up to 13.5 days post-coitum in the
extra-embryonic tissue. Functionally, UTF1 boosts the level of transcription of
the adenovirus E2A promoter. However, unlike the pluripotent cell-specific
E1A-like activity, which requires the E2F sites of the E2A promoter for increased
transcriptional activation, UTF1-mediated activation is dependent on the upstream
ATF site of this promoter. This result indicates that UTF1 is not a major
component of the E1A-like activity present in pluripotent embryonic cells.
Further analyses revealed that UTF1 interacts not only with the activation domain
of ATF-2, but also with the TFIID complex in vivo. Thus, UTF1 displays many of
the hallmark characteristics expected for a tissue-specific transcriptional
coactivator that works in early embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1170547
PMID: 9524124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Genes Dev. 1998 Apr 15;12(8):1227-39.

Autocrine growth and anchorage independence: two complementing Jun-controlled
genetic programs of cellular transformation.

van Dam H(1), Huguier S, Kooistra K, Baguet J, Vial E, van der Eb AJ, Herrlich P,
Angel P, Castellazzi M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Carcinogenesis, Sylvius Laboratories, University of
Leiden, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands.

Cellular transformation can be achieved by constitutive activation of
growth-regulatory signaling pathways, which, in turn, activate nuclear
transcription factors thought to execute a transformation-specific program of
gene expression. Members of the dimeric transcription factor family AP-1 are at
the receiving end of such growth-regulating pathways and the viral form of the
AP-1 subunit Jun establishes one important aspect of transformation in chick
embryo fibroblasts (CEFs): enhanced growth in agar and in low serum. Enhanced Jun
activity is likely to target several different genetic programs as Jun forms
heterodimers with one of several members of the Fos and ATF2 subfamilies,
resulting in transcription factors with different sequence specificities. To
identify the programs relevant for transformation, we have reduced the complexity
of AP-1 factors by constructing Jun bZip mutants that can efficiently dimerize
and transactivate with only a restricted set of partner subunits. Upon
introduction into CEFs, a Jun mutant selective for the Fos family induced
anchorage-independent growth but no growth factor-independence. In contrast, a
c-Jun mutant with preference for ATF2-like proteins caused growth
factor-independence, but no growth in agar. Coexpression of both mutants
reestablished the combined transformation program as induced by wild-type Jun.
These data show that Jun-dependent cell transformation can be resolved into at
least two distinct and independent processes, anchorage and growth factor
independence, obviously triggered by two classes of Jun heterodimers likely
regulating different sets of target genes.

PMCID: PMC316714
PMID: 9553051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Cell Physiol. 1998 Jun;175(3):239-46.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) activates Raf-1, mitogen-activated
protein (MAP) kinases, and S6 kinase (p90rsk) in cultured rat cardiac myocytes.

Seko Y(1), Takahashi N, Tobe K, Ueki K, Kadowaki T, Yazaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

Rapid activation of intracellular signaling cascades is induced in cardiac
myocytes in response to various external stresses. Vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) is a potent angiogenic mitogen secreted from tumor cells and cells 
exposed to hypoxia such as ischemic myocardial cells. To clarify the mechanisms
of how cardiac myocytes respond and adapt to ischemic stresses, we investigated
the intracellular signaling cascades in cultured rat cardiac myocytes in response
to VEGF. We show that rapid activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase
kinase (MAPKKK) of Raf-1, MAP kinases, and S6 kinase (p90rsk) was induced in
cardiac myocytes in response to VEGF. This activation of MAP kinases was also
induced in fibroblasts. VEGF also caused phosphorylation of the activating
transcription factor 2. Furthermore, VEGF strongly induced a transcription factor
jun-B mRNA in cardiac myocytes. These results indicated that MAP kinase pathway
is rapidly activated in cardiac myocytes and fibroblasts in response to VEGF. It 
is strongly suggested that cardiac myocytes are one of the targets of VEGF and
that cardiac response to ischemic stresses may be at least partly mediated by
VEGF.

PMID: 9572468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 27;273(13):7566-71.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha induces interleukin-6 production and integrin ligand 
expression by distinct transduction pathways.

De Cesaris P(1), Starace D, Riccioli A, Padula F, Filippini A, Ziparo E.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Rome, Italy.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) is a pleiotropic cytokine that elicits a 
large number of biological effects. However, the intracellular signaling
mechanisms that are responsible for the TNF-alpha effects remain largely unknown.
We have previously demonstrated that cultured mouse Sertoli cells, after
TNF-alpha treatment, increase the surface expression of adhesion molecules such
as intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and vascular cell adhesion
molecule-1 (VCAM-1) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) production (Riccioli, A., Filippini,
A., De Cesaris, P., Barbacci, E., Stefanini, M., Starace, G., and Ziparo, E.
(1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92, 5808-5812). Here, we show that, in
cultured Sertoli cells, TNF-alpha activates the mitogen-activated protein kinase 
pathway (p38, c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase/stress-activated protein kinase,
and the p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein kinases) as revealed by an increased
phosphorylation of p38, activating transcription factor-2, c-Jun, and Elk-1.
Furthermore, our data indicate that the biological effects induced by TNF-alpha
in Sertoli cells (enhancement of ICAM-1, VCAM-1, and IL-6 expression) depend on
the activation of different signaling pathways. SB203580, a highly specific p38
inhibitor, does not affect ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 expression, but strongly inhibits
IL-6 production. Moreover, interferon-gamma, which up-regulates adhesion molecule
expression and reduces IL-6 production, does not induce phosphorylation of p38.
Our data strongly support the hypothesis that, in response to TNF-alpha,
activation of p38 leads to IL-6 production, whereas ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 expression 
could be induced by activation of the c-Jun N-terminal protein
kinase/stress-activated protein kinase pathway.

PMID: 9516459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Clin Invest. 1998 Mar 15;101(6):1432-40.

Retinoic acid inhibits induction of c-Jun protein by ultraviolet radiation that
occurs subsequent to activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways in
human skin in vivo.

Fisher GJ(1), Talwar HS, Lin J, Lin P, McPhillips F, Wang Z, Li X, Wan Y, Kang S,
Voorhees JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109-0609, USA. dianemch@umich.edu

Human skin is exposed daily to solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation. UV induces the
matrix metalloproteinases collagenase, 92-kD gelatinase, and stromelysin, which
degrade skin connective tissue and may contribute to premature skin aging
(photoaging). Pretreatment of skin with all-trans retinoic acid (tRA) inhibits UV
induction of matrix metalloproteinases. We investigated upstream signal
transduction pathways and the mechanism of tRA inhibition of UV induction of
matrix metalloproteinases in human skin in vivo. Exposure of human skin in vivo
to low doses of UV activated EGF receptors, the GTP-binding regulatory protein
p21Ras, and stimulated mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK), c-Jun amino-terminal kinase (JNK), and p38. Both
JNK and p38 phosphorylated, and thereby activated transcription factors c-Jun and
activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2), which bound to the c-Jun promoter and 
upregulated c-Jun gene expression. Elevated c-Jun, in association with
constitutively expressed c-Fos, formed increased levels of transcription factor
activator protein (AP) 1, which is required for transcription of matrix
metalloproteinases. Pretreatment of human skin with tRA inhibited UV induction of
c-Jun protein and, consequently, AP-1. c-Jun protein inhibition occurred via a
posttranscriptional mechanism, since tRA did not inhibit UV induction of c-Jun
mRNA. These data demonstrate, for the first time, activation of MAP kinase
pathways in humans in vivo, and reveal a novel posttranscriptional mechanism by
which tRA antagonizes UV activation of AP-1 by inhibiting c-Jun protein
induction. Inhibition of c-Jun induction likely contributes to the previously
reported prevention by tRA of UV induction of AP-1-regulated matrix-degrading
metalloproteinases in human skin.

PMCID: PMC508699
PMID: 9502786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 6;273(10):5892-902.

Association of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) with the
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme hUBC9. Implication of the ubiquitin/proteasome
pathway in regulation of ATF2 in T cells.

Firestein R(1), Feuerstein N.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gerontology, Allegheny University of the Health Sciences and the
Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) is regulated by phosphorylation via the 
Jun N-terminal kinase, and its binding activity is markedly induced at late
stages of T and B lymphocyte activation (Feuerstein, N., Firestein, R., Aiyer,
N., Xiao, H., Murasko, D., and Cristofalo, V. (1996) J. Immunol. 156, 4582-4593).
To identify proteins that interact specifically with ATF2 in lymphocytes, the
yeast two-hybrid interaction system was employed using ATF2 cDNA as a "bait." In 
two separate screenings, a clone was identified that revealed a novel sequence
with homology to several members of the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme family. An
identical sequence was recently reported as the human homolog of the yeast UBC9, 
hUBC9. Northern blot analysis revealed a 1.3-kilobase RNA transcript, which
showed differential levels of expression in various human tissues and a moderate 
induction after a 48-h stimulation of peripheral blood T lymphocytes. An antibody
that was generated against the bacterially expressed glutathione
S-transferase-hUBC9 detected a approximately 19-kDa protein, which localizes
predominantly in the nuclei of T cells. Further quantitative assays using the
yeast two-hybrid system confirmed a high and specific level of interaction of
hUBC9 with ATF2 and lack of interaction with lamin or control vectors. Two other 
cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding transcription factors, CREB and ATF1, also 
showed significant levels of interaction with hUBC9. However, this interaction
was severalfold lower as compared with ATF2. Far Western blot analysis confirmed 
the specific binding of ATF2 and hUBC9 also in vitro. Evidence is presented that 
indicates a physiological significance for the interaction of hUBC9 with ATF2.
(a) We show that ATF2 is ubiquitinated in vivo and in vitro, and (b) ATF2
ubiquitination in vitro is facilitated by addition of purified hUBC9. (c) ATF2 is
shown to undergo a proteolytic process, which is rapidly regulated upon T cell
activation concomitant with induction of ATF2 phosphorylation. (d) A proteasome
inhibitor delays the down-regulation of ATF2 phophorylation after T cell
activation. Taken collectively, these results implicate a role for hUBC9 and the 
ubiquitin/proteasome pathway in regulation of ATF2 in T cells.

PMID: 9488727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Neuroscience. 1998 May;84(1):163-76.

Expression of Jun, Fos, and ATF-2 proteins in axotomized explanted and cultured
adult rat dorsal root ganglia.

Buschmann T(1), Martin-Villalba A, Kocsis JD, Waxman SG, Zimmermann M, Herdegen
T.

Author information: 
(1)II. Institute of Physiology, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

The expression of c-Jun, JunB, JunD, c-Fos and ATF-2 transcription factors was
studied in L4/L5 dorsal root ganglion neurons of adult rats, in order to
determine the extent to know to which extend the expression of transcription
factors in vitro parallels the pathophysiological expression in vivo. First,
dorsal root ganglia were dissociated and cultured for up to 15 days in vitro
(culture). Second, the dorsal root and the peripheral nerve fibres were
transected close at the dorsal root ganglia, and the completely axotomized dorsal
root ganglia were kept in artificial cerebrospinal fluid for up to 24 h. This
procedure (explantation) preserves the intraganglionic morphology intact. Culture
evoked a persistent expression of c-Jun and JunD in the majority of small neurons
independent on neurite extension, In contrast, the number of large neurons with
c-Jun decreased and with JunD increased with incubation time. JunB and c-Fos,
which were also visible in the majority of neurons, strongly decreased with
culture time in both small and large neurons. ATF-2 was visible in the vast
majority of neurons and did not change during the observation period. Incubation 
with brain-derived neurotrophic factor for 15 days reduced JunB expression and
raised c-Fos expression, but did not affect c-Jun or JunD labelings. Explantation
of dorsal root ganglia evoked a dramatic and rapid induction of c-Jun in neurons 
located in the periphery of the ganglia, an area that showed prominent apoptosis 
as visualized by transferase dUTP nick end-labelling, followed by a delayed
increase in neurons of the central parts of dorsal root ganglia. Expression of
JunB showed a dramatic increase within 2 h in the whole ganglion, but disappeared
within the following hours. JunD dropped from its basal levels within 4 h and was
almost absent after 8 h. c-Fos did not appear until 6 h, when transferase dUTP
nick end-labelling also became detectable, and remained visible in a rather small
number of neurons. As with culture, incubation of explanted dorsal root ganglia
with brain-derived neurotrophic factor prevented the initial rise in JunB,
accelerated and enhanced c-Fos expression, but did not alter c-Jun and JunD
expression. Immunoreactivity of ATF-2 declined or disappeared in those dorsal
root ganglia compartments that showed a rise in c-Jun and transferase dUTP nick
end-labelling. These findings demonstrate that inducible transcription factors
such as Jun and Fos proteins are differentially expressed in adult neurons in
vitro when compared to pathophysiological conditions in vivo such as nerve fibre 
transection (axotomy or rhizotomy). Moreover, the comparison between the
explantation and culture experiments suggests that it is the complete axotomy of 
neurons that provokes those expression patterns found in neuronal cultures of
adult neurons. The rapid and persisting expression of c-Jun during neurite
extension and apoptosis points at the activation of a pivotal program that might 
be determined by the presence or absence of ATF-2 and that is involved in
regeneration or degeneration.

PMID: 9522371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Exp Cell Res. 1998 Feb 25;239(1):93-103.

Activation of the rat cyclin A promoter by ATF2 and Jun family members and its
suppression by ATF4.

Shimizu M(1), Nomura Y, Suzuki H, Ichikawa E, Takeuchi A, Suzuki M, Nakamura T,
Nakajima T, Oda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
Japan.

Cyclin A plays an essential role in the G1 to S phase transition in the cell
cycle. The expression of cyclin A is restrained during G0 and G1, but steeply
induced at the G1/S boundary. Analysis of the rat cyclin A promoter elements with
the 5' sequential deletion derivatives of the promoter fused to the luciferase
cDNA indicated that the ATF/CRE motif primarily determines the inducibility at
G1/S. Gel shift analysis of the complex formed at the ATF/CRE site indicated that
the complex was not formed with the G0/G1 cell extract, but maximally formed with
the late-G1 cell extract. The complex was supershifted by anti-JunD antibody, and
Western blot analysis of the immune complexes prepared with anti-JunD antibody
revealed the presence of ATF2, suggesting heterodimerization of JunD with ATF2.
The cyclin A promoter in a reporter plasmid was activated by nearly 10-fold in
quiescent rat 3Y1 cells by cotransfection with the expression of plasmids
encoding ATF2 and Jun family members. In contrast, cotransfection with the ATF4
expression plasmid suppressed the promoter activation mediated by ATF2 and Jun
family members. The expression of Jun family members during G1 to S progression
was induced biphasically in early and late G1 and the level of JunD increased
markedly at the G1/S, while that of ATF family members was gradually increased
along with the G1 to S progression. These results indicate that the cyclin A
promoter activity is regulated, at least in part, by relative amounts of the ATF 
and Jun family members.

PMID: 9511728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Genes Dev. 1998 Jan 15;12(2):233-45.

p300 and ATF-2 are components of the DRF complex, which regulates retinoic acid- 
and E1A-mediated transcription of the c-jun gene in F9 cells.

Kawasaki H(1), Song J, Eckner R, Ugai H, Chiu R, Taira K, Shi Y, Jones N,
Yokoyama KK.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, The Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), Tsukuba 305, Japan.

Transcriptional activation of the c-jun gene is a critical event in the
differentiation of F9 cells. In our previous studies we characterized an element 
[differentiation response element (DRE)] in the c-jun promoter that is both
necessary and sufficient to confer the capacity for differentiation-dependent
up-regulation. This element binds the differentiation regulatory factor (DRF)
complex, of which one component is the adenovirus E1A-associated protein p300. We
have now identified activation transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) as a DNA-binding
subunit of the DRF complex. p300 and ATF-2 interact with each other in vivo and
in vitro. The bromodomain and the C/H2 domain of p300 mediate the binding to
ATF-2, which in turn requires a proline-rich region between amino acids 112 and
350 for its interaction with p300. The phosphorylation of the serine residue at
position 121 of ATF-2 appears to be induced by protein kinase C alpha (PKC alpha)
after treatment of cells with retinoic acid (RA) or induction with E1A. In
cotransfection assays, wild-type ATF-2 enhanced the transcription of an
E2/tk-luciferase construct, in conjunction with p300-E2. However, a mutant form
of ATF-2 with a mutation at position 121 (pCMVATF-2(Ser121-Ala)) did not. These
results suggest that ATF-2 and p300 cooperate in the control of transcription by 
forming a protein complex that is responsive to differentiation-inducing signals,
such as RA or E1A, and moreover, that the phosphorylation of ATF-2 by PKC alpha
is probably a signaling event in the pathway that leads to the transactivation of
the c-jun gene in F9 cells.

PMCID: PMC316443
PMID: 9436983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Oncogene. 1998 Jan 29;16(4):523-31.

ATF2 confers radiation resistance to human melanoma cells.

Ronai Z(1), Yang YM, Fuchs SY, Adler V, Sardana M, Herlyn M.

Author information: 
(1)The Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai Medical School, New York, NY
10029-6574, USA.

We have previously identified a U.V.-response element (URE; TGACAACA) and its
bound proteins, members of the AP1 and ATF transcription factor families, in
melanoma cells. Using a mutant form of cylic AMP response element binding (CREB),
we found that CREB-associated-URE-bound proteins conferred characteristic
melanoma phenotypes, including radiation resistance (Oncogene 12: 2223, 1996). In
the present study we sought to determine which of the CREB-associated proteins
confers radiation resistance on human melanoma cells. To this end we purified and
identified via microsequencing ATF2 as a major URE- bound and CREB-associated
protein in MeWo cells--a late stage human melanoma cell line. To determine the
contribution of ATF2 to radiation resistance, MeWo cells were transfected with
ATF2 cDNA lacking the trans-activation domain (ATF2(delta1-195)). MeWo cells that
stably express ATF2(delta1-195) showed weaker transcriptional activities and an
altered pattern of homo/hetero dimers. ATF2(delta1-195) clones exhibited up to
tenfold lower resistance to irradiation by either U.V. or X-rays. The degree of
resistance to radiation in the ATF2(delta1-195)-expressing clones could be
increased upon transient transfection with ATF2(wt), but not with
phosphorylation-defective mutant ATF2(69,71). Similarly, transfection of ATF2(wt)
to WM3211, an early stage human melanoma cells line, increased resistance to
radiation. Finally, changes elicited through ATF2(delta1-195) also led to reduced
drug resistance, as shown for MMC, araC and cisplatinum. Our results suggest that
ATF2 is a regulator of radiation and drug resistance in melanomas, and that tumor
targeted ATF2 modulators may be useful sensitizers in the treatment of tumors of 
this type.

PMID: 9484842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Genes Dev. 1997 Dec 15;11(24):3351-64.

Nuclear hormone receptor antagonism with AP-1 by inhibition of the JNK pathway.

Caelles C(1), González-Sancho JM, Muñoz A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas, E-28029 Madrid, Spain.

The activity of c-Jun, the major component of the transcription factor AP-1, is
potentiated by amino-terminal phosphorylation on serines 63 and 73 (Ser-63/73).
This phosphorylation is mediated by the Jun amino-terminal kinase (JNK) and
required to recruit the transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP).
AP-1 function is antagonized by activated members of the steroid/thyroid hormone 
receptor superfamily. Recently, a competition for CBP has been proposed as a
mechanism for this antagonism. Here we present evidence that hormone-activated
nuclear receptors prevent c-Jun phosphorylation on Ser-63/73 and, consequently,
AP-1 activation, by blocking the induction of the JNK signaling cascade.
Consistently, nuclear receptors also antagonize other JNK-activated transcription
factors such as Elk-1 and ATF-2. Interference with the JNK signaling pathway
represents a novel mechanism by which nuclear hormone receptors antagonize AP-1. 
This mechanism is based on the blockade of the AP-1 activation step, which is a
requisite to interact with CBP. In addition to acting directly on gene
transcription, regulation of the JNK cascade activity constitutes an alternative 
mode whereby steroids and retinoids may control cell fate and conduct their
pharmacological actions as immunosupressive, anti-inflammatory, and
antineoplastic agents.

PMCID: PMC316827
PMID: 9407028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Virol. 1998 Feb;72(2):1365-76.

An ATF/CRE element mediates both EBNA2-dependent and EBNA2-independent activation
of the Epstein-Barr virus LMP1 gene promoter.

Sjöblom A(1), Yang W, Palmqvist L, Jansson A, Rymo L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Göteborg
University, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
anna.sjoblom@ss.gu.se

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) is a viral oncogene
whose expression is regulated by both viral and cellular factors. EBV nuclear
antigen 2 (EBNA2) is a potent transactivator of LMP1 expression in human B cells,
and several EBNA2 response elements have been identified in the promoter
regulatory sequence (LRS). We have previously shown that an activating
transcription factor/cyclic AMP response element (ATF/CRE) site in LRS is
involved in EBNA2 responsiveness. We now establish the importance of the ATF/CRE 
element by mutational analysis and show that both EBNA2-dependent activation and 
EBNA2-independent activation of the promoter occur via this site but are mediated
by separate sets of factors. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) with 
specific antibodies showed that the ATF-1, CREB-1, ATF-2 and c-Jun factors bind
to the site as ATF-1/CREB-1 and ATF-2/c-Jun heterodimers whereas the Sp1 and Sp3 
factors bind to an adjacent Sp site. Overexpression of ATF-1 and CREB-1 in the
cells by expression vectors demonstrated that homodimeric as well as
heterodimeric forms of the factors transactivate the LMP1 promoter in an
EBNA2-independent manner. The homodimers of ATF-2 and c-Jun did not significantly
stimulate promoter activity. In contrast, the ATF-2/c-Jun heterodimer had only a 
minor stimulatory effect in the absence of EBNA2 but induced a strong
transactivation of the LMP1 promoter when coexpressed with this protein. Evidence
for a direct interaction between the ATF-2/c-Jun heterodimeric complex and EBNA2 
was obtained by EMSA and coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Thus, our results
suggest that EBNA2-induced transactivation via the ATF/CRE site occurs through a 
direct contact between EBNA2 and an ATF-2/c-Jun heterodimer. EBNA2-independent
promoter activation via this site, on the other hand, is mediated by a
heterodimeric complex between the ATF-1 and CREB-1 factors.

PMCID: PMC124615
PMID: 9445037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 19;272(51):32163-8.

c-Jun NH2-terminal kinases target the ubiquitination of their associated
transcription factors.

Fuchs SY(1), Xie B, Adler V, Fried VA, Davis RJ, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

Regulatory proteins are often ubiquitinated, depending on their phosphorylation
status as well as on their association with ancillary proteins that serve as
adapters of the ubiquitination machinery. We previously demonstrated that c-Jun
is targeted for ubiquitination by its association with inactive c-Jun
NH2-terminal kinase (JNK). Phosphorylation by activated JNK protects c-Jun from
ubiquitination, thus by prolonging its half-life. In the study reported here, we 
determined the ability of JNK to target ubiquitination of its other substrates
(Elk1 and activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2)) and associated proteins (ATF2
and JunB). We demonstrate that phosphorylation by JNK protects ATF2, but not
Elk1, from JNK-targeted ubiquitination. We also show that association of inactive
JNK with JunB or ATF2 is necessary to target them for ubiquitination. Unlike its 
targeting of c-Jun, JNK requires additional cellular components, yet to be
identified, to target the ubiquitination of ATF2. Elk1 is phosphorylated by JNK, 
but JNK neither associates with nor targets Elk1 for ubiquitination. The
implications for the dual role of JNK in the regulation of ubiquitination and
stability of c-Jun, ATF2, and JunB in normally growing versus stressed cells are 
discussed.

PMID: 9405416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Biochemistry. 1997 Nov 25;36(47):14447-55.

ATF1 and CREB trans-activate a cell cycle regulated histone H4 gene at a distal
nuclear matrix associated promoter element.

Guo B(1), Stein JL, van Wijnen AJ, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655, USA.

Proteins of the ATF/CREB class of transcription factors stimulate gene expression
of several cell growth-related genes through protein kinase A-related cAMP
response elements. The promoter activity of cell cycle regulated histone H4 genes
is regulated by at least four principal cis-acting elements which mediate G1/S
phase control and/or enhancement of transcription during the cell cycle. Using
protein-DNA interaction assays we show that the H4 promoter contains two ATF/CREB
recognition motifs which interact with CREB, ATF1, and ATF2 but not with
ATF4/CREB2. One ATF/CRE motif is located in the distal promoter at the nuclear
matrix-associated Site IV, and the second motif is present in the proximal
promoter at Site I. Both ATF/CRE motifs overlap binding sequences for the
multifunctional YY1 transcription factor, which has previously been shown to be
nuclear matrix associated. Subnuclear fractionation reveals that there are two
ATF1 isoforms which appear to differ with respect to DNA binding activity and
partition selectively between nuclear matrix and nonmatrix compartments,
consistent with the role of the nuclear matrix in regulating gene expression.
Site-directed mutational studies demonstrate that Site I and Site IV together
support ATF1- and CREB-induced trans-activation of the H4 promoter. Thus, our
data establish that ATF/CREB factors functionally modulate histone H4 gene
transcription at distal and proximal promoter elements.

PMID: 9398163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Oct 29;239(3):840-4.

Hypoxia and hypoxia/reoxygenation activate p65PAK, p38 mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK), and stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK) in cultured rat cardiac
myocytes.

Seko Y(1), Takahashi N, Tobe K, Kadowaki T, Yazaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

We previously reported that both hypoxia and hypoxia followed by reoxygenation
(hypoxia/reoxygenation) rapidly activate Src family tyrosine kinases and p21ras
in cultured rat cardiac myocytes. This was followed by the sequential activation 
of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase (MAPKKK) activity of Raf-1, MAP
kinase kinase (MAPKK), MAPKs (p44mapk and p42mapk, also called extracellular
signal-regulated protein kinase [ERK]1 and ERK2, respectively), and S6 kinase
(p90rsk). In this study, we demonstrated that both hypoxia and
hypoxia/reoxygenation caused rapid activation of stress-activated MAPK signaling 
cascades involving p65PAK, p38MAPK, and SAPK. These stimuli also caused
phosphorylation of activating transcription factor (ATF)-2. Because p65PAK is
known to be upstream of p38MAPK and also be a target of p21rac-1, which belongs
to the rho subfamily of p21ras-related small GTP-binding proteins, these results 
strongly suggested that two different stress-activated MAPK pathways distinct
from the classical MAPK pathway were activated in response to hypoxia and
hypoxia/reoxygenation in cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 9367856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Immunol. 1997 Oct 1;159(7):3508-18.

TNF initiates E-selectin transcription in human endothelial cells through
parallel TRAF-NF-kappa B and TRAF-RAC/CDC42-JNK-c-Jun/ATF2 pathways.

Min W(1), Pober JS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiobiology Program, Boyer Center for Molecular Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06536, USA.

TNF acts on the E-selectin gene promoter at three kappa B elements and at a
variant cAMP-responsive element that binds ATF2/c-Jun. In human endothelial
cells, TNF rapidly induces N-terminal domain phosphorylation of both c-Jun and
ATF2. Transient overexpression of N-terminal truncated c-Jun or catalytically
inactive Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) 1 and 2 inhibits TNF-induced transcription
of an E-selectin but not a kappa B promoter-reporter gene. Transient
overexpression of the TRAF2 adaptor protein can activate NF-kappaB and endogenous
JNK, whereas N-terminal truncated TRAF2 protein blocks TNF-induced NF-kappa B and
JNK activation as well as E-selectin promoter-reporter gene transcription.
Transient overexpression of RAC1 or CDC42, but not RAS, constitutively activates 
JNK and augments TNF-induced E-selectin transcription. Finally, transient
overexpression of catalytically inactive JNK or truncated TRAF2 partially
inhibits endogenous E-selectin protein expression in human endothelial cells.
These data suggest that TNF activates parallel TRAF-NF-kappa B and
TRAF-RAC/CDC42-JNK-c-Jun/ATF2 pathways to initiate E-selectin transcription.

PMID: 9317150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Neuroscience. 1997 Nov;81(1):199-212.

Expression of activating transcription factor-2, serum response factor and
cAMP/Ca response element binding protein in the adult rat brain following
generalized seizures, nerve fibre lesion and ultraviolet irradiation.

Herdegen T(1), Blume A, Buschmann T, Georgakopoulos E, Winter C, Schmid W, Hsieh 
TF, Zimmermann M, Gass P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Kiel, Germany.

The expression of the constitutive transcription factors activating transcription
factor-2 (ATF-2), serum response factor (SRF) and cAMP/Ca response element
binding factor (CREB), and the phosphorylation of SRF and CREB were studied in
the untreated adult rat nervous system and following seizure activities and
neurodegenerative stimuli. In the untreated rat, intense nuclear SRF
immunoreactivity was present in the vast majority of neurons in the forebrain,
cortex, striatum, amygdala and hippocampus, and in some scattered neurons in the 
medulla and spinal cord. In contrast, SRF immunoreactivity was absent in the
midline areas of the forebrain, e.g., the globus pallidum and septum, and in the 
hypothalamus, thalamus, mesencephalon and motoneurons. Nuclear ATF-2 was
expressed at high levels in apparently all neurons, but not glial cells,
throughout the neuraxis except for those neuronal populations which exhibit a
high basal level of c-Jun, i.e. dentate gyrus and the motoneurons of cranial and 
somatosensory neurons. CREB immunoreactivity was present at a rather uniform
intensity in all neuronal and glial cells throughout the neuraxis. Two hours, but
not 5 h or 24 h, following systemic application of kainic acid, an increase in
SRF was detectable by western blot analysis in hippocampal and cortical
homogenates whereas the expression of ATF-2 and CREB did not change.
Phosphorylation of CREB at serine 133 and of SRF at serine 103 were studied with 
specific antisera. In untreated rats, intense phosphoCREB and phosphoSRF
immunoreactivities labelled many glial cells and/or neurons with the highest
levels in the dentate gyrus, the entorhinal cortex and the retrosplenial cortex. 
Following kainate-induced seizures, phosphoSRF-IR but not phosphoCREB-IR
transiently increased between 0.5 h and 2 h. Following transection of peripheral 
or central nerve fibres such as optic nerve, medial forebrain bundle, vagal and
facial nerve fibres, ATF-2 rapidly decreased in the axotomized neurons during
that period when c-Jun was rapidly expressed. SRF remained unchanged and CREB
disappeared in some axotomized subpopulations. Similar to axotomy, c-Jun
increased and ATF-2 decreased in cultured adult dorsal root ganglion neurons
following ultraviolet irradiation. The distribution of SRF and ATF-2 suggests
that their putative target genes c-fos, junB, krox-24 and c-jun can be
independently regulated from SRF and ATF-2. The suppression of ATF-2 and the
expression of c-Jun following axotomy and ultraviolet irradiation might be part
of a novel neuronal stress response in the brain that strongly resembles the
stress response characterized in non-neuronal cells.

PMID: 9300412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Biochemistry. 1997 Aug 26;36(34):10422-7.

Kinetic mechanism for p38 MAP kinase.

LoGrasso PV(1), Frantz B, Rolando AM, O'Keefe SJ, Hermes JD, O'Neill EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Design and Diversity, Merck Research Laboratories,
P.O. Box 2000, Rahway, New Jersey 07065, USA. lograsso@merck.com

p38 has been shown to be a critical enzyme in the pro-inflammatory cytokine
pathway and is a member of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase family.
While the details for p38 activation and subsequent signal transduction have
begun to be elucidated, little is known about the kinetic mechanism for p38. In
this study, we have determined the kinetic mechanism for p38 MAP kinase. Data
from initial velocity patterns in the presence and absence of a dead-end
inhibitor and two triarylimidazole p38 inhibitors were consistent with an ordered
sequential mechanism for p38 with protein substrate, glutathione
S-transferase-activating transcription factor 2 (GST-ATF2), binding before ATP.
The ATP analog, adenylyl methylenediphosphonate (AMP-PCP), and two
triarylimidazoles were competitive inhibitors versus ATP and uncompetitive
inhibitors versus GST-ATF2. Equilibrium binding studies utilizing a tritiated
ATP-competitive inhibitor were also consistent with this mechanism and suggest an
inability of ATP to bind to p38 in the absence of protein substrate. Moreover,
the Michaelis constant for GST-ATF2 was 12-fold greater than the dissociation
constant, indicating that the binding of ATP affected the binding of GST-ATF2. An
ordered sequential mechanism with protein substrate binding first is unique to
p38 compared to cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (cAPK) and most tyrosine
kinases and helps to explain the interaction between enzyme, substrates, and
inhibitors.

PMID: 9265622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Aug 15;248(1):120-9.

Rapid induction of the Grp78 gene by cooperative actions of okadaic acid and
heat-shock in 9L rat brain tumor cells--involvement of a cAMP responsive
element-like promoter sequence and a protein kinase A signaling pathway.

Chen KD(1), Hung JJ, Huang HL, Chang MD, Lai YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan,
Republic of China.

We have demonstrated that treatment with 200 nM okadaic acid (OA) for 1 h
followed by a 15-min heat shock (HS) at 45 degrees C (termed OA-->HS treatment)
leads to a rapid transactivation of grp78, the gene for the 78-kDa
glucose-regulated protein, in 9L rat brain tumor cells. The level of Grp78 mRNA
rose 15-fold in 60 min after the combined treatment. Nuclear extracts from cells 
subjected to OA-->HS treatment, compared to those of treatment with OA or HS
alone, exhibited an increased binding activity toward an oligonucleotide probe
containing the cAMP-responsive element-like (CRE-like, TGACGTGA) regulatory
element in electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA). The binding resulted in 
the formation of two protein-EMSA probe complexes exhibiting different
association and dissociation rates in kinetic studies. The protein factors in the
upper band (complex I) and lower band (complex II) were identified as the
activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) and the CRE binding factor 1 (CREB-1), 
respectively, by antibody interference assays. In addition, the identity of
CREB-1 was confirmed by supershift analysis. The binding activity, as well as the
transactivation of the grp78 gene, can be abolished by a 1-h treatment with the
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) inhibitor but not with protein kinase C or
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II inhibitors. Accumulation of
steady-state level of ATF-2 was observed and was also modulated by treatment with
H-89, a PKA inhibitor. From these results, we conclude that the CRE-like element 
plays an important role in the rapid transactivation of the grp78 gene and that
the PKA signaling pathway is involved. In addition, PKA-mediated transcriptional 
regulation of grp78 in OA-->HS treatment is through regulation of protein
phosphorylation as well as de novo synthesis of ATF-2.

PMID: 9310369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 15;272(33):20691-7.

Signaling from G protein-coupled receptors to the c-jun promoter involves the
MEF2 transcription factor. Evidence for a novel c-jun amino-terminal
kinase-independent pathway.

Coso OA(1), Montaner S, Fromm C, Lacal JC, Prywes R, Teramoto H, Gutkind JS.

Author information: 
(1)Oral and Pharyngeal Cancer Branch, NIDR, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4330, USA.

The c-Jun amino-terminal kinases (JNKs) are a subfamily of mitogen-activated
protein kinases that phosphorylate c-Jun and ATF2, and it has been postulated
that phosphorylated c-Jun enhances its own expression through AP-1 sites on the
c-jun promoter. In this study, we asked whether signals activating JNK regulate
the c-jun promoter. Using NIH 3T3 cells expressing G protein-coupled m1
acetylcholine receptors as an experimental model, we have recently shown that the
cholinergic agonist carbachol, but not platelet-derived growth factor, potently
elevates JNK activity. Consistent with these findings, carbachol, but not
platelet-derived growth factor, increased the activity of a c-jun promoter-driven
reporter gene (for chloramphenicol acetyltransferase). However, coexpression of
JNK kinase kinase (MEKK) effectively increased JNK activity, but resulted in
surprisingly limited induction of the c-jun promoter. This raised the possibility
that pathway(s) distinct from JNK control the c-jun promoter, and prompted us to 
explore which of its regulatory elements participate in transcriptional control. 
We observed that deletion of the 3' AP-1 site diminished chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase activity in response to carbachol, but only to a limited
extent. In contrast, deletion of a MEF2 site dramatically reduced expression, and
deletion of both the MEF2 and 3' AP-1 sites abolished induction. Furthermore,
cotransfection with MEF2C and MEF2D cDNAs potently enhanced the activity of the
c-jun promoter in response to carbachol, and stimulation of m1 receptors, but not
direct JNK activation, induced expression of a MEF2-responsive plasmid. Taken
together, these data strongly suggest that MEF2 mediates c-jun promoter
expression by G protein-coupled receptors through a yet to be identified pathway,
distinct from that of JNK.

PMID: 9252389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Biochem J. 1997 Aug 1;325 ( Pt 3):801-10.

Cell stress-induced phosphorylation of ATF2 and c-Jun transcription factors in
rat ventricular myocytes.

Clerk A(1), Sugden PH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiac Medicine, Imperial College School of Medicine at N.H.L.I.,
Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LY, U.K.

Ventricular myocytes are exposed to various pathologically important cell
stresses in vivo. In vitro, extreme stresses (sorbitol-induced hyperosmotic shock
in the presence or absence of okadaic acid, and anisomycin) were applied to
ventricular myocytes cultured from neonatal rat hearts to induce a robust
activation of the 46 and 54 kDa stress-activated protein kinases (SAPKs). These
activities were increased in nuclear extracts of cells in the absence of any net 
import of SAPK protein. Phosphorylation of ATF2 and c-Jun was increased as shown 
by the appearance of reduced-mobility species on SDS/PAGE, which were sensitive
to treatment with protein phosphatase 2A. Hyperosmotic shock and anisomycin had
no effect on the abundance of ATF2. In contrast, cell stresses induced a greater 
than 10-fold increase in total c-Jun immunoreactivity detected on Western blots
with antibody to c-Jun (KM-1). Cycloheximide did not inhibit this increase, which
we conclude represents phosphorylation of c-Jun. This conclusion was supported by
use of a c-Jun(phospho-Ser-73) antibody. Immunostaining of cells also showed
increases in nuclear phospho-c-Jun in response to hyperosmotic stress. Severe
stress (hyperosmotic shock+okadaic acid for 2 h) induced proteins (migrating at
approx. 51 and 57 kDa) that cross-reacted strongly with KM-1 antibodies in both
the nucleus and the cytosol. These may represent forms of c-Jun that had
undergone further modification. These studies show that stresses induce
phosphorylation of transcription factors in ventricular myocytes and we suggest
that this response may be pathologically relevant.

PMCID: PMC1218626
PMID: 9271103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 1;272(31):19509-17.

p38-2, a novel mitogen-activated protein kinase with distinct properties.

Stein B(1), Yang MX, Young DB, Janknecht R, Hunter T, Murray BW, Barbosa MS.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Pharmaceuticals Inc., San Diego, California 92121, USA.
bstein@signalpharm.com

Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases are involved in many cellular processes. 
Here we describe the cloning and characterization of a new MAP kinase, p38-2.
p38-2 belongs to the p38 subfamily of MAP kinases and shares with it the TGY
phosphorylation motif. The complete p38-2 cDNA was isolated by polymerase chain
reaction. It encodes a 364-amino acid protein with 73% identity to p38. Two
shorter isoforms missing the phosphorylation motif were identified. Analysis of
various tissues demonstrated that p38-2 is differently expressed from p38.
Highest expression levels were found in heart and skeletal muscle. Like p38,
p38-2 is activated by stress-inducing signals and proinflammatory cytokines. The 
preferred upstream kinase is MEK6. Although p38-2 and p38 phosphorylate the same 
substrates, the site specificity of phosphorylation can differ as shown by
two-dimensional phosphopeptide analysis of Sap-1a. Additionally, kinetic studies 
showed that p38-2 appears to be about 180 times more active than p38 on certain
substrates such as ATF2. Both kinases are inhibited by a class of pyridinyl
imidazoles. p38-2 phosphorylation of ATF2 and Sap-1a but not Elk1 results in
increased transcriptional activity of these factors. A sequential kinetic
mechanism of p38-2 is suggested by steady state kinetic analysis. In conclusion, 
p38-2 may be an important component of the stress response required for the
homeostasis of a cell.

PMID: 9235954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jul 18;272(29):18261-6.

Specific activation of a c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase isoform and induction of
neurite outgrowth in PC-12 cells by staurosporine.

Yao R(1), Yoshihara M, Osada H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Antibiotics, The Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-01, Japan.

Staurosporine, a protein kinase inhibitor, is known to mimic the effect of nerve 
growth factor (NGF) in promoting neurite outgrowth. To elucidate the mechanism by
which staurosporine induces neurite outgrowth in PC-12 cells, we performed an
in-gel kinase assay using myelin basic protein as a substrate, and found that
staurosporine induced the activation of a kinase with an apparent molecular mass 
of 57 kDa. The dose of staurosporine required to activate this kinase was
consistent with that required to induce neurite outgrowth. Interestingly, the
staurosporine-activated kinase was immunoprecipitated by anti-c-Jun NH2-terminal 
kinase (JNK) isoforms antibody, but not by anti-JNK1-specific antibody or
anti-ERK1 antibody, raising the possibility that this kinase is a novel JNK
isoform. The substrate specificity of the kinase was distinct from those of
osmotic shock-activated JNKs and NGF-activated ERK1. The kinase phosphorylates
transcription factors including c-Jun, Elk-1, and ATF2, as well as myelin basic
protein, suggesting that it plays a role in gene induction. Furthermore,
staurosporine induced immediate-early genes including Nur77 and fos, but not jun.
The activation of the staurosporine-activated kinase, as well as the induction of
neurite outgrowth, did not require Ras function, while Ras was required for the
activation of ERKs and neurite outgrowth induced by NGF. Taken together, these
results indicate staurosporine specifically activates a JNK isoform, which may
contribute to biological activities including neurite outgrowth.

PMID: 9218464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jul 4;272(27):16934-9.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) down-regulates hepatitis B virus X
promoter activity by the competition for the activating protein 1 binding site
and the formation of the ATF2-Jun heterodimer.

Choi CY(1), Choi BH, Park GT, Rho HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Research Center for Cell Differentiation, 
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

The hepatitis B viral X promoter is known to be positively autoregulated by its
own HBx protein, which also interacts with many cellular regulatory proteins. We 
investigated the effect of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) on the
activity of the X promoter. Cotransfection of the ATF2 expression vector with a X
promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase plasmid repressed the X promoter
activity in HepG2 cells. HBx activated activating protein 1 (AP-1)-mediated
transcription through the hepatitis B virus E element by 35-fold, while its
activation activity was inhibited in the presence of ATF2, suggesting that ATF2
inhibited the autoactivation of X promoter by HBx and basal transcription
mediated by AP-1. Since the binding sites of AP-1 and ATF2 in the hepatitis B
virus E element overlap, the repression of X promoter activity by ATF2 is exerted
by the competition for the AP-1 binding site and the formation of the ATF2-Jun
heterodimer as in the case of the consensus AP-1 element. However, the small X
promoter had a ATF2 binding site and was activated by ATF2. These results suggest
that the syntheses of X proteins are differentially regulated by ATF2.

PMID: 9202004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Protein Expr Purif. 1997 Jul;10(2):263-74.

Expression, purification, and characterization of an activated
cytokine-suppressive anti-inflammatory drug-binding protein 2 (CSBP2) kinase from
baculovirus-infected insect cells.

Cai XY(1), Shanahan M, Miller K, Gommoll C, Lundell D, Zavodny P, Dalie B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Schering-Plough Research Institute, Kenilworth, New 
Jersey 07033, USA.

An activated form of the human cytokine-suppressive anti-inflammatory
drug-binding protein 2 (CSBP2) kinase was expressed in Spodoptera frugiperda
(SF9) cells from a baculovirus vector. To maximize expression and to facilitate
purification of the recombinant protein, CSBP2 kinase was expressed as a
carboxy-terminal fusion protein to glutathione S-transferase (GST). Under optimal
conditions, 2-3 mg of GST-CSBP2 could be obtained per liter of infected cell
culture. The fusion protein was easily purified from the soluble fraction of the 
total cell lysate under nondenaturing conditions by using a glutathione-Sepharose
4B affinity resin. As expected, the purified GST-CSBP2 fusion protein was
approximately 68 kDa as determined by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis analysis and reacted with antibodies directed toward either the
GST or the CSBP amino terminus. To obtain activated CSBP2, SF9 cells were
coinfected with two recombinant baculovirus vectors: one that directed the
synthesis of the GST-CSBP2 fusion protein and a second vector that directed the
synthesis of a constitutively active form of the CSBP activating kinase, MKK3.
Coexpression of GST-CSBP2 kinase with the MKK3 activator increased GST-CSBP2
activity 8- to 10-fold based on the ability of GST-CSBP2 to phosphorylate the
substrate, myelin basic protein (MBP), and the ATF2 transcription factor, in
vitro. Moreover, activated GST-CSBP2 was capable of activating a bacterially
derived mitogen-activated protein kinase-activating protein kinase 2 in vitro.
The activity of insect-derived GST-CSBP2 was also inhibited by the CSBP
inhibitor, SB202190. We anticipate that the preparation and purification
techniques described in this study will facilitate further biochemical
characterization of this kinase.

PMID: 9226723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Jun 27;235(3):533-8.

Novel homologues of CSBP/p38 MAP kinase: activation, substrate specificity and
sensitivity to inhibition by pyridinyl imidazoles.

Kumar S(1), McDonnell PC, Gum RJ, Hand AT, Lee JC, Young PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals, King 
of Prussia, Pennsylvania 19406-0939, USA. SanjayKumar-1@sbphrd.com

A novel homologue of p38 MAP kinase, called SAPK4, has been cloned which shares
61% amino acid identity with p38 and is expressed predominantly in testes,
pancreas and small intestine. We also cloned an alternative form of p38beta,
termed p38beta2, which lacks the additional 8 amino acid insertion unique to
p38beta. p38, p38beta, p38beta2, ERK6/p38gamma/SAPK3, and SAPK4 were
characterized with respect to stimulus-dependent activation in transfected cells,
substrate specificity, and sensitivity to inhibition by pyridinyl imidazoles. All
homologues were stimulated, although to differing extents, by IL-1beta, TNF,
sorbitol, and UV. Only SAPK3 and SAPK4 were stimulated significantly by PMA.
p38beta showed the weakest activation overall. MBP, ATF-2, and both MAPKAP
kinase-2 and kinase-3 were good substrates of p38 and p38beta in vitro. In
contrast, only MBP, ATF2, and MAPKAP kinase-3 proved to be significant substrates
of SAPK3 and SAPK4, and of these three, MAPKAP kinase-3 was by far the weakest.
p38beta had very poor kinase activity for all substrates except MBP. While both
p38 and p38beta2 were comparably inhibited by SB 203580 and SB 202190, neither
SAPK3 nor SAPK4 were inhibited. p38beta was partially inhibited by both
inhibitors. These data suggest that SAPK3 and SAPK4 form a distinct subset of the
p38 MAP kinases with different expression pattern, response to stimuli, substrate
specificity, and inhibitor sensitivity.

PMID: 9207191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Virology. 1997 Jun 23;233(1):235-45.

U5 region of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 long terminal repeat
contains TRE-like cAMP-responsive elements that bind both AP-1 and CREB/ATF
proteins.

Rabbi MF(1), Saifuddin M, Gu DS, Kagnoff MF, Roebuck KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's
Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Activating protein-1 (AP-1) binding phorbol ester responsive elements (TRE) are
located downstream of the transcription initiation site in the U5 region of the
human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) long terminal repeat (LTR). These
downstream sequence elements, termed DSE, can bind cFos and junD and transmit
protein kinase C (PKC) activation signals to the LTR. Further studies suggested
the DSE might also bind AP-1-related proteins of the CREB/ATF family. Since
enhanced HIV-1 expression is associated with activation of the cAMP-dependent
protein kinase A (PKA) signaling pathway, we determined whether binding of
CREB/ATF proteins to the DSE mediate cAMP/PKA activation of the HIV-1 LTR. In the
present study. DSE binding complexes in nuclear protein extracta from colonic
epithelial cells are shown to contain ATF-1, ATF-2, and CREB and transfection of 
either an ATF-2 or PKA expressing plasmid transactivated the DSE. Cholera toxin
(Ctx), a potent activator of the cAMP/PKA pathway. Increased HIV-1 virus
production from a latently infected promonocytic cell line, U1. Ctx increased LTR
promoter activity and increased the CREB content of DSE binding complexes.
Transfection of U1 cells with a series of mutant LTR reporter constructs
demonstrated that the Ctx response was in large part mediated by the DSE. The Ctx
response was also mediated by a heterologous promoter containing multiple TRE
sites. Nuclear protein extracts from a T-cell line infected by HIV-1 contained
higher levels of CREB/ATF proteins and manifested increased CREB/ATF binding
activity. Collectively, these results indicate the DSE are TRE-like cAMP
responsive elements that bind both AP-1 and CREB/ATF permitting induction of the 
HIV-1 LTR by both PKC and PKA activation signals.

PMID: 9201233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jun 20;272(25):15920-7.

Yersinia enterocolitica promotes deactivation of macrophage mitogen-activated
protein kinases extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2, p38, and c-Jun
NH2-terminal kinase. Correlation with its inhibitory effect on tumor necrosis
factor-alpha production.

Ruckdeschel K(1), Machold J, Roggenkamp A, Schubert S, Pierre J, Zumbihl R,
Liautard JP, Heesemann J, Rouot B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U431, Université Montpellier II, Place E. Bataillon, CC100, F-34095
Montpellier Cedex 05, France.

The enteropathogenic bacterium Yersinia enterocolitica counteracts host defense
mechanisms by interfering with eukaryotic signal transduction pathways. In this
study, we investigated the mechanism by which Y. enterocolitica prevents
macrophage tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) production. Murine J774A.1
macrophages responded to Y. enterocolitica infection by rapid activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK), p38, and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK). However, after initial
activation, the virulent Y. enterocolitica strain harboring the Y. enterocolitica
virulence plasmid caused a substantial decrease in ERK1/2 and p38 tyrosine
phosphorylation. Simultaneously, the virulent Y. enterocolitica strain gradually 
suppressed phosphorylation of the transcription factors Elk-1, activating
transcription factor 2 (ATF2), and c-Jun, indicating time-dependent inhibition of
ERK1/2, p38, and JNK kinase activities, respectively. Analysis of different Y.
enterocolitica mutants revealed that (i) MAPK inactivation parallels the
inhibition of TNFalpha release, (ii) the suppressor effect on TNFalpha
production, which originates from the lack of TNFalpha mRNA, is distinct from the
ability of Y. enterocolitica to resist phagocytosis and to prevent the oxidative 
burst, (iii) the tyrosine phosphatase YopH, encoded by the Y. enterocolitica
virulence plasmid, is not involved in the decrease of ERK1/2 and p38 tyrosine
phosphorylation or in the cytokine suppressive effect. Altogether, these results 
indicate that Y. enterocolitica possesses one or more virulence proteins that
suppress TNFalpha production by inhibiting ERK1/2, p38, and JNK kinase
activities.

PMID: 9188492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. EMBO J. 1997 Jun 16;16(12):3563-71.

Activation of the novel stress-activated protein kinase SAPK4 by cytokines and
cellular stresses is mediated by SKK3 (MKK6); comparison of its substrate
specificity with that of other SAP kinases.

Goedert M(1), Cuenda A, Craxton M, Jakes R, Cohen P.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.

A cDNA was cloned that encodes human stress-activated protein kinase-4 (SAPK4), a
novel MAP kinase family member whose amino acid sequence is approximately 60%
identical to that of the other three SAP kinases which contain a TGY motif in
their activation domain. The mRNA encoding SAPK4 was found to be widely
distributed in human tissues. When expressed in KB cells, SAPK4 was activated in 
response to cellular stresses and pro-inflammatory cytokines, in a manner similar
to other SAPKs. SAPK4 was activated in vitro by SKK3 (also called MKK6) or when
co-transfected with SKK3 into COS cells. SKK3 was the only activator of SAPK4
that was induced when KB cells were exposed to a cellular stress or stimulated
with interleukin-1. These findings indicate that SKK3 mediates the activation of 
SAPK4. The substrate specificity of SAPK4 in vitro was similar to that of SAPK3. 
Both enzymes phosphorylated the transcription factors ATF2, Elk-1 and SAP-1 at
similar rates, but were far less effective than SAPK2a (also called RK/p38) or
SAPK2b (also called p38beta) in activating MAPKAP kinase-2 and MAPKAP kinase-3.
Unlike SAPK1 (also called JNK), SAPK3 and SAPK4 did not phosphorylate the
activation domain of c-Jun. Unlike SAPK2a and SAPK2b, SAPK4 and SAPK3 were not
inhibited by the drugs SB 203580 and SB 202190. Our results suggest that cellular
functions previously attributed to SAPK1 and/or SAPK2 may be mediated by SAPK3 or
SAPK4.

PMCID: PMC1169981
PMID: 9218798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 16;272(20):13229-35.

Cdc42Hs, but not Rac1, inhibits serum-stimulated cell cycle progression at G1/S
through a mechanism requiring p38/RK.

Molnár A(1), Theodoras AM, Zon LI, Kyriakis JM.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital East,
Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Antimitogenic stimuli such as environmental or genotoxic stress, transforming
growth factor-beta, and the inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor and
interleukin-1 activate two extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-based
signaling pathways: the stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK/JNK) pathway and
the p38 pathway. Activated p38 phosphorylates transcription factors important in 
the regulation of cell growth and apoptosis, including activating transcription
factor 2 (ATF2), Max, cAMP response element-binding protein-homologous
protein/growth arrest DNA damage 153 (CHDP/GADD153). In turn, p38 lies downstream
of the Rho family GTPases Cdc42Hs and Rac1, as well as at least three
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/ERK-kinases (MEKs): MAPK kinases-3, -6,
and SAPK/ERK-kinase-1. Although many of the stimuli that activate p38 can also
inhibit cell cycle progression, a clear-cut role for the p38 pathway in cell
cycle regulation has not been established. Using a quantitative microinjection
approach, we show here that Cdc42Hs, but not Rac1 or RhoA, can inhibit cell cycle
progression at G1/S through a mechanism requiring activation of p38. These
results suggest a novel role for Cdc42Hs in cell cycle inhibition. Furthermore,
these results suggest that although both Cdc42Hs and Rac1 can activate p38 in
situ, the effects of Cdc42Hs and Rac1 on cell cycle progression are, in fact,
quite distinct.

PMID: 9148940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 9;272(19):12793-800.

ATF-2 and C/EBPalpha can form a heterodimeric DNA binding complex in vitro.
Functional implications for transcriptional regulation.

Shuman JD(1), Cheong J, Coligan JE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Structure, NIAID, National Institutes of Health,
Rockville, Maryland 20892-1727, USA. JShuman@atlas.niaid.nih.gov

We screened an expression cDNA library with a radiolabeled C/EBPalpha fusion
protein and isolated three independent cDNAs encoding ATF-2, a bZIP protein that 
binds cAMP response elements (CRE). This interaction requires the respective bZIP
domains, which form a typical bZIP heterodimer with altered DNA binding
selectivity. C/EBPalpha and ATF-2 homodimers bind CRE sites, but ATF-2:C/EBPalpha
heterodimers do not. Heterodimers bind an asymmetric sequence composed of one
consensus half-site for each monomer, and may thus have a unique regulatory
function. As predicted, co-transfection of ATF-2 with C/EBPalpha results in
decreased activation of transcription driven from consensus C/EBP-binding sites. 
In contrast, C/EBPalpha and ATF-2 function cooperatively to activate
transcription driven by the asymmetric sequence. Both factors are expressed in
liver, where immunoprecipitation experiments show that ATF-2 co-precipitates with
C/EBPalpha. These results are consistent with the interpretation that C/EBPalpha 
and ATF-2 can associate in vivo. Moreover, the formation of ATF-2:C/EBPbeta
heterodimers suggests that cross-family dimerization with ATF-2 may be a general 
property for C/EBP family proteins.

PMID: 9139739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. FEBS Lett. 1997 May 5;407(3):343-6.

Activation of MAP kinase cascade induced by human pancreatic phospholipase A2 in 
a human pancreatic cancer cell line.

Kinoshita E(1), Handa N, Hanada K, Kajiyama G, Sugiyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hiroshima University School of Medicine,
Minami-ku, Japan.

We have found that the growth of human pancreatic cancer cells MIAPaCa-2, induced
by human pancreatic phospholipase A2 group I (hPLA2-I), is mediated via its
specific receptor but not via its catalytic property. The present study showed
that the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade in
MIAPaCa-2 cells is induced by hPLA2-I: this digestive enzyme induced
phosphorylation of MEK1/2, p44/42 MAPK and ATF-2, and the phosphorylation in the 
MAPK cascade was inhibited after the cells were pre-incubated with a selective
inhibitor of MEK, PD98059. In addition, this inhibitor dose-dependently blocked
the hPLA2-I-induced MIAPaCa-2 proliferation, suggesting that activation of the
MAPK cascade is essential for the hPLA2-I-induced MIAPaCa-2 proliferation.

PMID: 9175881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Biochem Soc Trans. 1997 May;25(2):222S.

Phosphorylation c-Jun and ATF2 in ventricular myocytes by endothelin and
phenylephrine.

Clerk A(1), Sugden PH.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College of Medicine, N.H.L.I., London, U.K.

PMID: 9191266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Biochem Soc Trans. 1997 May;25(2):221S.

Cell stresses regulate the phosphorylation state of c-Jun and ATF2 in ventricular
myocytes.

Sugden PH(1), Clerk A.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College of Medicine, N.H.L.I., London, U.K.

PMID: 9191265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Immunol. 1997 Mar 15;158(6):2522-5.

Identification of a novel, spliced variant of CREB that is preferentially
expressed in the thymus.

Yang L(1), Lanier ER, Kraig E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio 78284, USA.

A conserved decamer sequence, AGTGA(T/C)(G/A)TCA, related to the cAMP response
element (CRE), is found in the promoter regions of most TCR V beta gene segments.
It has been shown to be a critical element for T cell-specific transcriptional
regulation of the TCR genes. However, none of the decamer or CRE-binding proteins
identified thus far is restricted in its expression to cells of the T cell
lineage. Therefore, to find T cell-restricted decamer-binding proteins, we
screened thymus cDNA expression libraries using the decamer probe. One of the
thymus cDNAs identified, clone pmLY2, a novel spliced variant of CREB, was shown 
to be preferentially expressed in thymus. Therefore, clone pmLY2 is the first T
cell-enriched decamer-binding sequence identified. We hypothesize that this CREB 
variant may play a role in the developmental regulation of TCR and of other T
cell specific genes.

PMID: 9058782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Brain Res. 1997 Feb 28;749(2):329-34.

Expression of activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2), one of the cyclic AMP
response element (CRE) binding proteins, in Alzheimer disease and
non-neurological brain tissues.

Yamada T(1), Yoshiyama Y, Kawaguchi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Chiba University, Chuo-ku, Japan.

Cyclic AMP response element (CRE) is a specific DNA sequence which mediates
transcriptional activation in the response to the cyclic AMP-activated and
protein kinase A dependent signaling pathway. We examined the localization of one
of the CRE binding proteins which is preferentially expressed in the brain,
activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2), by immunohistochemistry and
Southwestern histochemistry, using the brains of neurologically normal and
Alzheimer disease (AD) cases. In all brains, the anti-ATF-2 antibody stained
white matter microglial cells. In AD, the cytoplasm of some cortical neurons was 
also positively stained, but no such staining was seen in the neocortex in
non-neurological cases staining. However, both the nuclei and cytoplasm of some
hippocampal neurons were positive in non-neurological brain tissues. In AD,
except for severely damaged areas such as CA1, positive neuronal staining was
seen. Southwestern histochemistry gave the same results as immunohistochemistry. 
These data suggest that the localization of ATF-2 in cortical neurons in AD may
reflect early pathological changes characteristic of AD, and that these
histochemistrical methods may allow one to differentiate between healthy and
mildly damaged neurons.

PMID: 9138733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 31;272(5):2753-61.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced E-selectin expression is activated by the
nuclear factor-kappaB and c-JUN N-terminal kinase/p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase pathways.

Read MA(1), Whitley MZ, Gupta S, Pierce JW, Best J, Davis RJ, Collins T.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Research Division, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

E-selectin expression by endothelium is crucial for leukocyte recruitment during 
inflammatory responses. Transcriptional regulation of the E-selectin promoter by 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) requires multiple nuclear factor-kappaB
(NF-kappaB) binding sites and a cAMP-responsive element/activating transcription 
factor-like binding site designated positive domain II (PDII). Here we
characterize the role of the stress-activated family of mitogen-activated protein
(MAP) kinases in induced expression of this adhesion molecule. By UV
cross-linking and immunoprecipitation, we demonstrated that a heterodimer of
transcription factors ATF-2 and c-JUN is constitutively bound to the PDII site.
TNFalpha stimulation of endothelial cells induces transient phosphorylation of
both ATF-2 and c-JUN and induces marked activation of the c-JUN N-terminal kinase
(JNK1) and p38 but not extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1). JNK and p38 
are constitutively present in the nucleus, and DNA-bound c-JUN and ATF-2 are
stably contacted by JNK and p38, respectively. MAP/ERK kinase kinase 1 (MEKK1),
an upstream activator of MAP kinases, increases E-selectin promoter transcription
and requires an intact PDII site for maximal induction. MEKK1 can also activate
NF-kappaB -dependent gene expression. The effects of dominant interfering forms
of the JNK/p38 signaling pathway demonstrate that activation of these kinases is 
critical for cytokine-induced E-selectin gene expression. Thus, TNFalpha
activates two signaling pathways, NF-kappaB and JNK/p38, which are both required 
for maximal expression of E-selectin.

PMID: 9006914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Virology. 1997 Jan 20;227(2):323-30.

Characterization of proteins binding to the ZII element in the Epstein-Barr virus
BZLF1 promoter: transactivation by ATF1.

Wang YC(1), Huang JM, Montalvo EA.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Biotechnology, Center for Molecular Medicine, University of
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, 78245, USA.

Previous studies have shown that the ZII element in the BZLF1 promoter (P1) is
responsive to TPA and anti-immunoglobulin induction. In this report, we have
studied the DNA/protein complexes formed when ZII is used as a binding site.
Twelve distinct DNA/protein complexes were seen in mobility shift experiments
using Akata cell nuclear extracts and radiolabeled ZII. Eleven of these complexes
were also formed when either BJAB or Raji cell nuclear extracts were used in the 
binding reaction. Six DNA/protein complexes were affected by mutations in the
core TGACATCA motif of ZII which abolish responsiveness to TPA,
anti-immunoglobulin treatment, and HHV6 transactivation. The relative sizes of
the proteins in the DNA/protein complexes were determined by UV crosslinking.
Four distinct specific binding proteins affected by core mutations in ZII were
identified as ATFa, ATF1, ATF2, and c-jun. Overexpression of ATF1 in
cotransfection experiments caused transactivation of the wild-type P1 promoter
but had no effect on a promoter containing a mutant ZII element. An ATF1 mutant
with a deleted DNA binding domain failed to transactivate P1. Overexpression of
c-jun, ATFa, or ATF2 had no effect on the wild-type or mutant P1 promoter. Our
results suggest that ATF1 interacts with the ZII element and may be involved in
Epstein-Barr virus reactivation.

PMID: 9018131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. EMBO J. 1997 Jan 15;16(2):295-305.

Activation of stress-activated protein kinase-3 (SAPK3) by cytokines and cellular
stresses is mediated via SAPKK3 (MKK6); comparison of the specificities of SAPK3 
and SAPK2 (RK/p38).

Cuenda A(1), Cohen P, Buée-Scherrer V, Goedert M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Dundee, UK.

Stress-activated protein kinase-3 (SAPK3), a recently described MAP kinase family
member with a wide-spread tissue distribution, was transfected into several
mammalian cell lines and shown to be activated in response to cellular stresses, 
interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumour necrosis factor (TNF) in a similar manner to
SAPK1 (also termed JNK) and SAPK2 (also termed p38, RK, CSBP and Mxi2). SAPK3 and
SAPK2 were activated at similar rates in vitro by SAPKK3 (also termed MKK6), and 
SAPKK3 was the only activator of SAPK3 that was induced when KB or 293 cells were
exposed to cellular stresses or stimulated with IL-1 or TNF. Co-transfection with
SAPKK3 induced SAPK3 activity and greatly enhanced activation in response to
osmotic shock. These experiments indicate that SAPKK3 mediates the activation of 
SAPK3 in several mammalian cells. SAPK3 and SAPK2 phosphorylated a number of
proteins at similar rates, including the transcription factors ATF2, Elk-1 and
SAP1, but SAPK3 was far less effective than SAPK2 in activating MAPKAP kinase-2
and MAPKAP kinase-3. Unlike SAPK2, SAPK3 was not inhibited by the drug SB 203580.
SAPK3 phosphorylated ATF2 at Thr69, Thr71 and Ser90, the same residues
phosphorylated by SAPK1, whereas SAPK2 only phosphorylated Thr69 and Thr71. Our
results suggest that cellular functions previously attributed to SAPK1 and/or
SAPK2 may be mediated by SAPK3.

PMCID: PMC1169636
PMID: 9029150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 13;271(50):31964-72.

The proximal regulatory element of the interferon-gamma promoter mediates
selective expression in T cells.

Penix LA(1), Sweetser MT, Weaver WM, Hoeffler JP, Kerppola TK, Wilson CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8064, USA. cbwilson@u.washington.edu

Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) is produced by natural killer cells and certain
subsets of T cells, but the basis for its selective expression is unknown. Within
the region between -108 and -40 base pairs of the IFN-gamma promoter are two
conserved and essential regulatory elements, which confer activation-specific
expression in T cells. This report describes studies indicating that the most
proximal of these two regulatory elements is an important determinant of its
restricted expression. The proximal element is a composite site that binds
members of the CREB/ATF, AP-1, and octamer families of transcription factors. Jun
is essential for activation-induced transcription and binds preferably as a
heterodimer with ATF-2. In contrast, CREB appears to dampen transcription from
this element. The CpG dinucleotide in this element is selectively methylated in
Th2 T cells and other cells that do not express IFN-gamma, and methylation
markedly reduces transcription factor binding. As a target for DNA methylation
and for binding of transcription factors that mediate or impede transcription,
this element appears to play a central role in controlling IFN-gamma expression.

PMID: 8943243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 6;271(49):31650-6.

The cAMP response elements of the alpha subunit gene bind similar proteins in
trophoblasts and gonadotropes but have distinct functional sequence requirements.

Heckert LL(1), Schultz K, Nilson JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA. jhn@po.cwru.edu

The alpha subunit gene encodes a common subunit shared by all glycoprotein
hormones. This single copy gene is expressed in pituitary gonadotropes and
thyrotropes of all mammals and in placental trophoblasts of primates and horses. 
Tandem cAMP response elements (CREs) in the promoter of the human gene are key
mediators of this pattern of cell-specific expression. Replacing the palindromic 
CREs with non-primate variant CREs significantly attenuated activity in
trophoblasts but not in gonadotropes. Furthermore, proteins binding the
palindromic CRE cross-reacted with antibodies for CREB, CREM, ATF1, ATF2, and
c-Jun, while proteins binding the variant CRE cross-reacted only with ATF2 and
c-Jun antibodies. The data suggest that ATF2 and c-Jun can activate transcription
through the CREs in gonadotropes but not in trophoblasts. Additional analyses
indicated that while promoters with either palindromic or variant CREs have
similar overall activity in gonadotropes, the variant CREs make a much smaller
contribution to promoter activity than their palindromic counterparts. The weaker
contribution of the variant CREs is compensated by the activity of two upstream
elements present in the promoter. This compensation probably occurs through an
indirect mechanism, as the binding affinity of proteins to the CRE is not
influenced by the presence of these upstream elements.

PMID: 8940185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 1;93(20):10803-8.

Regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinases by a calcium/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase cascade.

Enslen H(1), Tokumitsu H, Stork PJ, Davis RJ, Soderling TR.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland 97201, USA.

Membrane depolarization of NG108 cells gives rapid (< 5 min) activation of
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV (CaM-KIV), as well as activation of
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). To investigate whether the Ca2+-dependent
activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (ERK, JNK, and p38) might be
mediated by the CaM kinase cascade, we have transfected PC12 cells, which lack
CaM-KIV, with constitutively active mutants of CaM kinase kinase and/or CaM-KIV
(CaM-KKc and CaM-KIVc, respectively). In the absence of depolarization, CaM-KKc
transfection had no effect on Elk-dependent transcription of a luciferase
reporter gene, whereas CaM-KIVc alone or in combination with CaM-KKc gave 7- to
10-fold and 60- to 80-fold stimulations, respectively, which were blocked by
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase phosphatase cotransfection. When
epitope-tagged constructs of MAP kinases were co-transfected with CaM-KKc plus
CaM-KIVc, the immunoprecipitated MAP kinases were activated 2-fold (ERK-2) and 7-
to 10-fold (JNK-1 and p38). The JNK and p38 pathways were further investigated
using specific c-Jun or ATF2-dependent transcriptional assays. We found that
c-Jun/ATF2-dependent transcriptions were enhanced 7- to 10-fold by CaM-KIVc and
20- to 30-fold by CaM-KKc plus CaM-KIVc. In the case of the Jun-dependent
transcription, this effect was not due to direct phosphorylation of c-Jun by
activated CaM-KIV, since transcription was blocked by a dominant-negative JNK and
by two MAP kinase phosphatases. Mutation of the phosphorylation site (Thr196) in 
CaM-KIV, which mediates its activation by CaM-KIV kinase, prevented activation of
Elk-1, c-Jun, and ATF2 by the CaM kinase cascade. These results establish a new
Ca2+-dependent mechanism for regulating MAP kinase pathways and resultant
transcription.

PMCID: PMC38236
PMID: 8855261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Circ Res. 1996 Oct;79(4):736-47.

Ceramide is not a signal for tumor necrosis factor-induced gene expression but
does cause programmed cell death in human vascular endothelial cells.

Slowik MR(1), De Luca LG, Min W, Pober JS.

Author information: 
(1)Boyer Center for Molecular Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Conn. 06536-0812, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) activates transcription of endothelial leukocyte
adhesion molecule-1 (CD62E) in endothelial cells (ECs) through the binding to the
gene promoter of the p50/p65 heterodimeric form of nuclear factor-kappa B
(NF-kappa B) and of the N-terminal phosphorylated form of the ATF2/c-Jun
transcription factor, which is phosphorylated by Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK).
However, the intracellular signaling pathways that activate endothelial NF-kappa 
B and JNK in TNF-induced responses are unknown. In this study we have examined
the role of a recently described TNF signaling pathway involving sphingomyelin
activation to generate ceramide, a potential intracellular mediator. We find that
concentrations of TNF that strongly activate NF-kappa B and JNK within 15 minutes
do not produce either a measurable decline in sphingomyelin or a measurable
generation of ceramide in cultured human umbilical vein ECs at any time examined.
Stimulation of ECs with purified sphingomyelinase (SMase) enzyme causes a rapid
60% to 80% decrease in cellular sphingomyelin content and a large increase in
ceramide. However, SMase treatment only minimally activates NF-kappa B, achieving
levels that are insufficient to initiate gene transcription. Extracellular SMase 
does not have access to intracellular sphingomyelin, but treatment of ECs with
membrane-permeant ceramide analogues still completely fails to activate NF-kappa 
B and only activates JNK at late times. Neither SMase nor ceramide analogues
induce gene transcription or surface expression of endothelial leukocyte adhesion
molecules that are readily induced by TNF. Strikingly, low concentrations of
membrane-permeant ceramide cause programmed cell death in ECs, a finding not
observed at any concentrations of TNF tested. We conclude that ceramide is not an
important second messenger for TNF signaling of gene transcription in ECs but may
be a second messenger for cell death in response to as-yet-unidentified signals.

PMID: 8831497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;16(10):5232-44.

Cell-type-specific regulation of the human tumor necrosis factor alpha gene in B 
cells and T cells by NFATp and ATF-2/JUN.

Tsai EY(1), Yie J, Thanos D, Goldfeld AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

The human tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) gene is one of the earliest
genes transcribed after the stimulation of a B cell through its antigen receptor 
or via the CD-40 pathway. In both cases, induction of TNF-alpha gene
transcription can be blocked by the immunosuppressants cyclosporin A and FK506,
which suggested a role for the NFAT family of proteins in the regulation of the
gene in B cells. Furthermore, in T cells, two molecules of NFATp bind to the
TNF-alpha promoter element kappa 3 in association with ATF-2 and Jun proteins
bound to an immediately adjacent cyclic AMP response element (CRE) site. Here,
using the murine B-cell lymphoma cell line A20, we show that the TNF-alpha gene
is regulated in a cell-type-specific manner. In A20 B cells, the TNF-alpha gene
is not regulated by NFATp bound to the kappa 3 element. Instead, ATF-2 and Jun
proteins bind to the composite kappa 3/CRE site and NFATp binds to a newly
identified second NFAT site centered at -76 nucleotides relative to the TNF-alpha
transcription start site. This new site plays a critical role in the
calcium-mediated, cyclosporin A-sensitive induction of TNF-alpha in both A20 B
cells and Ar-5 cells. Consistent with these results, quantitative DNase
footprinting of the TNF-alpha promoter using increasing amounts of recombinant
NFATp demonstrated that the -76 site binds to NFATp with a higher affinity than
the kappa 3 site. Two other previously unrecognized NFATp-binding sites in the
proximal TNF-alpha promoter were also identified by this analysis. Thus, through 
the differential use of the same promoter element, the composite kappa 3/CRE
site, the TNF-alpha gene is regulated in a cell-type-specific manner in response 
to the same extracellular signal.

PMCID: PMC231523
PMID: 8816436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 6;271(36):22271-9.

The CCAAT-binding proteins CP1 and NF-I cooperate with ATF-2 in the transcription
of the fibronectin gene.

Alonso CR(1), Pesce CG, Kornblihtt AR.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones en Ingeniería Genética y Biología Molecular,
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas of Argentina), Vuelta 
de Obligado 2490, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

We have previously proposed a molecular interaction between the liver factors
that bind to the cyclic AMP response element (CRE) and CCAAT sites of the
fibronectin (FN) gene based on the following evidence: (i) the close spacing of
20 base pairs between CRE and CCAAT elements is conserved in the FN genes from
rats, mice, and humans; (ii) footprinting competitions showed that CRE
oligonucleotides are able to detach both liver factors; (iii) CCAAT binding and
transcriptional activity of liver extracts are reduced when the distance between 
the CRE and CCAAT elements is increased; and (iv) CCAAT-binding is stimulated by 
the addition of a liver extract fraction containing the CRE-binding factor ATF-2.
This report provides binding and immunochemical evidence that nuclear factor I
(CTF/NF-I) and CP1 (NF-Y or CBF) are the only liver factors that bind to the -150
CCAAT element of the FN gene, forming distinct complexes. We show that these
factors bind less efficiently to the CCAAT site of a FN promoter in which the
-170 CRE has been disrupted by site-directed mutagenesis and that each element
contributes positively to the liver transcriptional activity assessed in vitro
with a G-less cassette construct and in vivo by transfection of hepatoma cells
with CAT constructs. Furthermore, using a method that combines UV cross-linking
and immunoprecipitation, we show that antibodies specific to ATF-2 are able to
specifically precipitate protein-protein-DNA complexes containing NF-I and CP1.
This simple method preserves weak macromolecular interactions, avoiding the
disruptive electrophoresis conditions of gel mobility shifts assays.

PMID: 8703044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1996 Sep 5;41(1-2):57-64.

Changes in the expression of transcription factors ATF-2 and Fra-2 after axotomy 
and during regeneration in rat retinal ganglion cells.

Robinson GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 27599,
USA.

The expression of one member of the bZip superfamily of transcription factors,
c-Jun, is known to be induced by axotomy in retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and is 
associated with axonal regrowth. This study used immunohistochemistry combined
with retrograde labeling to examine the expression of two additional bZip
transcription factors (ATF-2 and Fra-2) in identified adult rat RGCs under
favorable and unfavorable conditions for axonal regrowth. For unfavorable
regrowth conditions, ganlgion cell axons within the optic nerve were cut close to
the eye. For favorable conditions, the optic nerve was replaced with an
autologous peripheral nerve graft to allow axonal regrowth. At regular intervals,
after axotomy alone or in conjunction with graft placement, the expression of
these transcription factors was examined in retinal wholemounts using
protein-specific antibodies. The strong cytoplasmic expression of Fra-2 seen in
unaxotomized RGCs was reduced beginning 24 h after axotomy. Similarly, the strong
nuclear expression of ATF-2 seen prior to axotomy was also reduced after axotomy.
These reduction persisted in surviving ganglion cells throughout the 3 week study
period. One to 6 months after axotomy and peripheral nerve graft placement,
identified RGCs with regrown axons showed strong ATF-2 and Fra-2 expression,
suggesting a return to basal conditions. These findings support roles for ATF-2
and Fra-2 in the survival and regeneration process of these central nervous
system neurons after axotomy.

PMID: 8883934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Carcinogenesis. 1996 Sep;17(9):2073-6.

Dose rate and mode of exposure are key factors in JNK activation by UV
irradiation.

Adler V(1), Polotskaya A, Kim J, Dolan L, Davis R, Pincus M, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Carcinogenesis Program, American Health Foundation, Valhalla, NY
10595, USA.

Single exposure of cells to UVC (254 nm for 30 s) or to UVB (300 nm for 10 min)
was shown to activate jun-NH2 kinases which, in turn, phosphorylate their
substrates ELK-1, c-jun and ATF-2. While UVC (40-80 J/m2) activates JNK up to 4
h, with maximal induction after 30 min, UVB (150-300 J/m2) activates JNK over a
prolonged period, up to 24 h, with maximal induction after 6 h. UV-mediated
activation of src-related tyrosine kinases and MAPK revealed different kinetics, 
with maximal induction after 24 h. As recent studies had indicated a role of a
UVC component in mediating the ability of UVB to activate JNK, we have examined
the effect of dose rate as well as of multiplicity of exposures on the activation
of these kinases. The UVC portion found in 300 J/m2 UVB (5%, corresponding to 15 
J/m2, administered within 10 s) did not activate JNK. However, when the same dose
was administered at a lower rate (i.e. over 10 min, as needed for UVB
irradiation) it was found capable of activating JNK, MAPK and src kinases, but to
a lower degree and with different kinetics than found for UVB. Such differences
point to cellular changes which are elicited by UVB, but not UVC. Although a
single UVB exposure using a filter that blocks wavelengths below 300 nm prevented
activation of JNK, multiple exposures of filtered UVB wavelengths (mimicking
chronic exposure) were able to activate JNK. We conclude that the mode of UVB
exposure (dose rate and multiplicity) is a crucial determinant for
physiologically relevant activation of JNK.

PMID: 8824537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Virol. 1996 Sep;70(9):5852-9.

The CR1 and CR3 domains of the adenovirus type 5 E1A proteins can independently
mediate activation of ATF-2.

Duyndam MC(1), van Dam H, van der Eb AJ, Zantema A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Carcinogenesis, Sylvius Laboratory, Leiden
University, The Netherlands.

The adenovirus 12S E1A protein can stimulate the activity of the c-jun promoter
through a conserved region 1 (CR1)-dependent mechanism. The effect is mediated by
two AP-1/ATF-like elements, jun1 and jun2, that preferentially bind c-Jun-ATF-2
heterodimers. In this study, we show that the ATF-2 component of the c-Jun-ATF-2 
heterodimer is the primary target for 12S E1A: 12S E1A can enhance the
transactivating activity of the N terminus of ATF-2 when fused to a heterologous 
DNA-binding domain, whereas the transactivating activity of the c-Jun N terminus 
is not significantly affected. Activation of the ATF-2 N terminus by 12S E1A is
dependent on CR1. In the context of the 13S E1A protein, CR1 and CR3 can both
contribute to activation of ATF-2, and their relative contributions are dependent
on the cell type. In contrast to activation of ATF-2 by stress-inducing agents,
CR1-dependent activation of ATF-2 was found not to depend strictly on the
presence of threonines 69 and 71 in the N terminus of ATF-2, which are targets
for phosphorylation by stress-activated protein kinases (SAPKs). In agreement
with this observation, we did not observe phosphorylation of threonines 69 and 71
or constitutively enhanced SAPK activity in E1A- plus E1B-transformed cell lines.
These data suggest that CR1-dependent activation of ATF-2 by 12S E1A does not
require phosphorylation of threonines 69 and 71 by SAPK.

PMCID: PMC190602
PMID: 8709204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Biochem J. 1996 Aug 15;318 ( Pt 1):247-53.

Tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of a new mitogen-activated protein
(MAP)-kinase cascade in human neutrophils stimulated with various agonists.

Nahas N(1), Molski TF, Fernandez GA, Sha'afi RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington 
06030, USA.

The presence of a novel 38 kDa protein that is tyrosine phosphorylated in human
neutrophils, a terminally differentiated cell, upon stimulation of these cells
with low concentrations of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in combination with serum has
been demonstrated. This 38 kDa protein was identified as the mammalian homologue 
of HOG1 in yeast, the p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase. This conclusion
is based on the experimental findings that anti-phosphotyrosine (anti-PY)
antibody immunoprecipitates a 38 kDa protein that is recognized by anti-p38 MAP
kinase antibody, and conversely, anti-p38 MAP kinase antibody immunoprecipitates 
a 38 kDa protein that can be recognized by anti-PY antibody. Moreover, this
tyrosine phosphorylated protein is found associated entirely with the cytosol. It
was also found that this p38 MAP kinase is activated following stimulation of
these cells with low concentrations of LPS in combination with serum. This
conclusion is based on three experimental findings. First, soluble fractions
isolated from LPS-stimulated cells phosphorylate heat shock protein 27 (hsp27) in
an in vitro assay, and this effect is not inhibited by protein kinase C and
protein kinase A inhibitor peptides. This effect is similar to the effect
produced by the commercially available phosphorylated and activated MAPKAP
kinase-2 (MAP kinase activated protein kinase-2). Secondly, a 27 kDa protein that
aligns with a protein recognized by anti-hsp27 antibody is phosphorylated upon
LPS stimulation of intact human neutrophils prelabelled with radioactive
phosphate. Lastly, immune complex protein kinase assays, using [gamma-32P]ATP and
activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) as substrates, showed increased p38 MAP 
kinase activity from LPS-stimulated human neutrophils. The phosphorylation and
activation of this p38 MAP kinase can be affected by both G-protein-coupled
receptors such as platelet-activating factor (PAF) and non-G-protein-coupled
receptors such as the cytokine-coupled receptors for granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha). 
The effect of low concentrations of PAF is greatly increased in cells pretreated 
with LPS. The tyrosine phosphorylation of the p38 MAP kinase is not restricted to
stimuli that mediate their actions through membrane-associated receptors, but it 
can be affected by agents that bypass membrane-associated receptors such as the
protein translation blocker anisomycin. While anisomycin is known to increase the
tyrosine phosphorylation of the 54 kDa SAPK (stress-activated protein kinase),
this is the first report that shows that anisomycin also tyrosine phosphorylates 
the p38 MAP kinase. Cytokine receptors that increase the tyrosine phosphorylation
and activation of the erk1 and erk2 MAP kinases have less effect on this p38 MAP 
kinase than those that do not affect the erk1 and erk2 MAP kinases. The possible 
role of the p38 MAP kinase in the phosphorylation of cytosolic phospholipase A2
is discussed.

PMCID: PMC1217615
PMID: 8761479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Curr Biol. 1996 Aug 1;6(8):1028-31.

p38/RK is essential for stress-induced nuclear responses: JNK/SAPKs and
c-Jun/ATF-2 phosphorylation are insufficient.

Hazzalin CA(1), Cano E, Cuenda A, Barratt MJ, Cohen P, Mahadevan LC.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Signalling Laboratory, Developmental Biology Research Centre, The
Randall Institute, King's College London, 26-29 Drury Lane, London WC2B 5RL, UK.

The ERK, JNK/SAPK and p38/RK MAP kinase subtypes (reviewed in [1]) are
differentially activated in mammalian cells by various stimuli, which elicit
induction of immediate-early (IE) genes, such as c-fos and c-jun (reviewed in
[1-3]), as well as phosphorylation of histone H3 [4] and HMG-14 [5]. Anisomycin
and UV radiation have been suggested to induce c-fos and c-jun transcription via 
JNK/SAPK-mediated phosphorylation of TCF (ternary complex factor), for c-fos
induction [6-8], and c-Jun and/or ATF-2 for c-jun induction [9-11] [12,13]. We
report here that anisomycin and ultraviolet radiation (UV) activate MAP kinase
kinase-6 (MKK6) [14,15], p38/RK [16] [17,18] and MAPKAP kinase-2 (MAPKAP K-2)
[17-19]. By using the p38/RK inhibitor SB 203580 [20,21], we show that activation
of p38/RK and/or its downstream effectors are essential for anisomycin- and
UV-stimulated c-fos/c-jun induction and histone H3/HMG-14 phosphorylation,
whereas JNK/SAPK activation and phosphorylation of c-Jun and ATF-2 are
insufficient for these responses.

PMID: 8805335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Circ Res. 1996 Aug;79(2):162-73.

Stimulation of the stress-activated mitogen-activated protein kinase subfamilies 
in perfused heart. p38/RK mitogen-activated protein kinases and c-Jun N-terminal 
kinases are activated by ischemia/reperfusion.

Bogoyevitch MA(1), Gillespie-Brown J, Ketterman AJ, Fuller SJ, Ben-Levy R,
Ashworth A, Marshall CJ, Sugden PH.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute (Cardiac Medicine), Imperial College of
Science, University of London, UK.

It has recently been recognized that cellular stresses activate certain members
of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) superfamily. One role of these
"stress-activated" MAPKs is to increase the transactivating activity of the
transcription factors c-Jun, Elk1, and ATF2. These findings may be particularly
relevant to hearts that have been exposed to pathological stresses. Using the
isolated perfused rat heart, we show that global ischemia does not activate the
42- and 44-kD extracellular signal-regulated (protein) kinase (ERK) subfamily of 
MAPKs but rather stimulates a 38-kD activator of MAPK-activated protein kinase-2 
(MAPKAPK2). This activation is maintained during reperfusion. The molecular
characteristics of this protein kinase suggest that it is a member of the
p38/reactivating kinase (RK) group of stress-activated MAPKs. In contrast,
stress-activated MAPKs of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK/SAPKs) subfamily are
not activated by ischemia alone but are activated by reperfusion following
ischemia. Furthermore, transfection of ventricular myocytes with activated
protein kinases (MEKK1 and SEK1) that may be involved in the upstream activation 
of JNK/ SAPKs induces increases in myocyte size and transcriptional changes
typical of the hypertrophic response. We speculate that activation of multiple
parallel MAPK pathways may be important in the responses of hearts to cellular
stresses.

PMID: 8755992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jul 26;271(30):17920-6.

Characterization of the structure and function of a new mitogen-activated protein
kinase (p38beta).

Jiang Y(1), Chen C, Li Z, Guo W, Gegner JA, Lin S, Han J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascades represent one of the major signal
systems used by eukaryotic cells to transduce extracellular signals into cellular
responses. Four MAP kinase subgroups have been identified in humans: ERK, JNK
(SAPK), ERK5 (BMK), and p38. Here we characterize a new MAP kinase, p38beta.
p38beta is a 372-amino acid protein most closely related to p38. It contains a
TGY dual phosphorylation site, which is required for its kinase activity. Like
p38, p38beta is activated by proinflammatory cytokines and environmental stress. 
A comparison of events associated with the activation of p38beta and p38 revealed
differences, most notably in the preferred activation of p38beta by MAP kinase
kinase 6 (MKK6), whereas p38 was activated nearly equally by MKK3, MKK4, and
MKK6. Moreover, in vitro and in vivo experiments showed a strong substrate
preference by p38beta for activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2). Enhancement
of ATF2-dependent gene expression by p38beta was approximately20-fold greater
than that of p38 and other MAP kinases tested. The data reported here suggest
that while closely related, p38beta and p38 may be regulated by differing
mechanisms and may exert their actions on separate downstream targets.

PMID: 8663524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Immunol. 1996 Jun 15;156(12):4582-93.

Late induction of CREB/ATF binding and a concomitant increase in cAMP levels in T
and B lymphocytes stimulated via the antigen receptor.

Feuerstein N(1), Firestein R, Aiyar N, He X, Murasko D, Cristofalo V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gerontologic Research, Medical College of Pennsylvania and
Hahnemann University, Philadelphia, PA 19129, USA.

Transcription factors of the cAMP-responsive element (CRE) binding
protein/activating transcription factor (CREB/ATF) family were implicated in the 
expression of T cell-specific genes and in the expression of oncogenic
retroviruses associated with leukemia in T and B lymphocytes. To study the
regulation of CREB/ATF transcription factors during lymphocyte activation,
studies were pursued in primary cultures of resting murine splenic T and B
lymphocytes stimulated via the Ag receptor. Using consensus/CRE and proliferating
cell nuclear Ag (PCNA)/CRE as probes in the DNA binding assay, we showed that a
marked induction of CRE binding is associated with activation of splenic T
lymphocytes with anti-CD3 Ab. CRE binding was markedly induced after 48 h; it
gradually declined at 72 h, but remained elevated above control levels after 120 
h. Most significant, activation by anti-CD3 was associated with a marked
induction of cAMP levels that preceded the onset of DNA synthesis and the
induction of IL-2 secretion and reached a peak after 48 h (9.5- to 11-fold),
concomitant with the peak in CRE binding. Rapamycin, a potent immunosuppressant, 
inhibited the induction of cAMP levels by anti-CD3 concomitant with inhibition of
CRE binding activity and arrest of DNA synthesis. A marked induction in CRE
binding after 48 h was also found in splenic B lymphocytes stimulated by LPS and 
anti-Ig and was correlated with a 3- to 4-fold increase in the intracellular
levels of cAMP. Two inducible CRE complexes were found to bind to consensus/CRE
and PCNA/CRE; the major complex contained primarily CREB homodimers and was
constitutively expressed in resting lymphocytes. Conversely, stimulation of
lymphocytes was associated with formation of a new, slow migrating CRE complex
that demonstrated high inducibility in both consensus/CRE and PCNA/CRE. We show
that this de novo inducible CRE complex contains CREB and ATF2, but not ATF1.
Taken collectively, these results suggest that recruitment of CREB and ATF2 to
the promoter of genes is tightly regulated during activation of T and B
lymphocytes and implicate a cross-talk of cAMP and non-cAMP pathways in the
regulation of transcriptional processes at late stages of activation in T and B
lymphocytes stimulated via the Ag receptor.

PMID: 8648100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. EMBO J. 1996 Jun 3;15(11):2760-70.

Selective interaction of JNK protein kinase isoforms with transcription factors.

Gupta S(1), Barrett T, Whitmarsh AJ, Cavanagh J, Sluss HK, Dérijard B, Davis RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Moleular Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The JNK protein kinase is a member of the MAP kinase group that is activated in
response to dual phosphorylation on threonine and tyrosine. Ten JNK isoforms were
identified in human brain by molecular cloning. These protein kinases correspond 
to alternatively spliced isoforms derived from the JNK1, JNK2 and JNK3 genes. The
protein kinase activity of these JNK isoforms was measured using the
transcription factors ATF2, Elk-1 and members of the Jun family as substrates.
Treatment of cells with interleukin-1 (IL-1) caused activation of the JNK
isoforms. This activation was blocked by expression of the MAP kinase phosphatase
MKP-1. Comparison of the binding activity of the JNK isoforms demonstrated that
the JNK proteins differ in their interaction with ATF2, Elk-1 and Jun
transcription factors. Individual members of the JNK group may therefore
selectively target specific transcription factors in vivo.

PMCID: PMC450211
PMID: 8654373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Jun;7(6):841-6.

Impaired jun-NH2-terminal kinase activation by ultraviolet irradiation in
fibroblasts of patients with Cockayne syndrome complementation group B.

Dhar V(1), Adler V, Lehmann A, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Carcinogenesis Program, American Health Foundation, Valhalla, New
York 10595, USA.

c-jun-NH2 kinases (JNK) are among the UV-activated protein kinases that play an
important role in cellular stress response via the phosphorylation of c-jun,
ATF2, and p53. Activation of JNK by UV irradiation requires cooperation between
membrane and nuclear components, including DNA lesions per se. The role of DNA
lesions in JNK activation led us to explore the inducibility of these kinases in 
cells of repair-deficient patients. Analyses of primary fibroblast cell lines
from patients with Cockayne Syndrome of complementation group B (CS-B) revealed
poor JNK activation after UV irradiation in four of five cases when compared with
three repair-proficient, normal human fibroblast cell lines. Impaired ability to 
activate JNK persisted at various time points and with different doses of UV
irradiation and coincided with failure of in vitro damaged DNA to activate these 
kinases. In contrast to UV irradiation, other forms of stress, such as H2O2 or
heat shock were capable of inducing JNK activation in CS-B cells. Interestingly, 
when UV irradiation was administered after osmotic shock, it led to JNK
activation in CS-B cells, indicating that alternate signal transduction pathways 
that are activated in response to other forms of stress can potentiate JNK
activation by UV irradiation. Unlike CS-B cells, those of other repair-deficient 
cells, including xeroderma pigmentosum of different complementation groups,
revealed proper activation of JNK by UV irradiation. Together, our findings point
to deficiency of JNK activation by UV irradiation in CS-B cells, a phenomenon
which may be associated with impaired CS-B, the mutant repair gene in these
patients.

PMID: 8780897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 10;271(19):11427-33.

Cloning and characterization of MEK6, a novel member of the mitogen-activated
protein kinase kinase cascade.

Stein B(1), Brady H, Yang MX, Young DB, Barbosa MS.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Pharmaceuticals Inc., San Diego, California 92121, USA.
bstein@signalpharm.com

Mitogen-activated protein kinases are members of a conserved cascade of kinases
involved in many signal transduction pathways. They stimulate phosphorylation of 
transcription factors in response to extracellular signals such as growth
factors, cytokines, ultraviolet light, and stress-inducing agents. A novel
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase, MEK6, was cloned and characterized. The 
complete MEK6 cDNA was isolated by polymerase chain reaction. It encodes a
334-amino acid protein with 82% identity to MKK3. MEK6 is highly expressed in
skeletal muscle like many other members of this family, but in contrast to MKK3
its expression in leukocytes is very low. MEK6 is a member of the p38 kinase
cascade and efficiently phosphorylates p38 but not c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) 
and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) family members in direct kinase
assays. Coupled kinase assays demonstrated that MEK6 induces phosphorylation of
ATF2 by p38 but does not phosphorylate ATF2 directly. MEK6 is strongly activated 
by UV, anisomycin, and osmotic shock but not by phorbol esters, nerve growth
factor, and epidermal growth factor. This separates MEK6 from the ERK subgroup of
protein kinases. MEK6 is only a poor substrate for MEKK, a mitogen-activated
protein kinase kinase kinase that efficiently phosphorylates the related family
member JNKK.

PMID: 8626699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Eur J Biochem. 1996 May 1;237(3):532-8.

Differential binding of cAMP-responsive-element (CRE)-binding protein-1 and
activating transcription factor-2 to a CRE-like element in the human tissue-type 
plasminogen activator (t-PA) gene promoter correlates with opposite regulation of
t-PA by phorbol ester in HT-1080 and HeLa cells.

Costa M(1), Medcalf RL.

Author information: 
(1)Monash University Department of Medicine, Victoria, Australia.

The human tissue-type plasminogen activator gene (t-PA) is induced by the phorbol
ester, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), in HeLa cells. Previous studies in 
transfected HeLa cells identified two cis-acting regulatory elements within the
t-PA gene promoter responsible for both constitutive and PMA-inducible
expression. One element differs from the consensus cAMP response element (CRE) by
a single nucleotide substitution (referred to in this report as t-PACRE) and
another which bears similarity to the AP-2 recognition sequence. In HT-1080
fibrosarcoma cells, t-PA mRNA levels are expressed at higher constitutive levels 
and are suppressed by PMA. Nuclear run-on transcription experiments indicate that
PMA-mediated suppression of t-PA in these cells is associated with a decrease in 
t-PA gene template activity. We designed experiments to determine whether nuclear
t-PACRE or AP-2-like binding proteins were differentially expressed in HeLa and
HT-1080 cells and, accordingly, if these could be correlated with the opposite
effect of PMA on t-PA expression. Band shift analyses indicated that the
migration profiles of HeLa and HT-1080 nuclear proteins interacting with the
AP-2-like site were indistinguishable; however, those produced with the t-PACRE
binding site were qualitatively and quantitatively distinct. The distribution of 
t-PACRE binding proteins in these cells was investigated in a supershift assay
using specific antibodies against members of the fos/jun and CRE-binding protein 
(CREB)/activating transcription factor (ATF) families. In HT-1080 cells, CREB-1
was the most prominent t-PACRE-binding activity detected and was greatly
increased in cells treated with PMA. In contrast, CREB-1 activity was absent in
HeLa cells, but antibodies specific for ATF-2 produced a marked supershifted
complex which was unaffected by PMA treatment. Since CREB-1 can repress
transcription of other target genes (including c-jun) via association with
identical cis-acting CRE-like sequences, we suggest that the mechanism for the
transcriptional down-regulation of t-PA by PMA in HT-1080 cells requires CREB-1
binding to the t-PACRE while ATF-2, by associating with the same site, plays a
role in PMA-mediated induction of t-PA in HeLa cells.

PMID: 8647095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Virology. 1996 Apr 15;218(2):362-71.

Sequence requirements of ATF2 and CREB binding to the human T-cell leukemia virus
type 1 LTR R region.

Xu X(1), Kang SH, Heidenreich O, Brown DA, Nerenberg MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Scripps Research Institute,
La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

We have identified crucial transcription factor contact sites within the distal
portion of the HTLV-1 LTR R region. Single base substitutions within this region 
greatly reduce formation of a complex which we previously described as a 70-kDa
nuclear protein interacting with a CREB-like protein. Comparison of published
sequences of HTLV-1 isolates obtained from scattered geographic locations
revealed that clustered mutations in an 8-base segment near the U5 junction do,
in fact, occur naturally. A single base substitution corresponding to a common
naturally occurring mutation was introduced into the R region of an HTLV-1-LTR
Cat construct. This resulted in derepression of the promoter in a cell line
expressing high levels of the R region binding complex when compared to the
wild-type LTR promoter. Affinity purification and electrophoretic mobility
super-shift analysis identified a dominant 70-kDa DNA binding protein as ATF-2.
Phosphorylated ATF-2 apparently interacts with CREB to form this downstream
complex.

PMID: 8610463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 5;271(14):8307-12.

Interleukin-1 beta-induced ceramide and diacylglycerol generation may lead to
activation of the c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase and the transcription factor ATF2 in 
the insulin-producing cell line RINm5F.

Welsh N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Uppsala University, Biomedicum, P. O. Box 
571, S-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden.

The aim of this investigation was to study the putative involvement of lipid
second messengers, protein kinases, and transcription factors in interleukin-1
beta (IL-1beta)-induced signal transduction in insulin-producing cells. For this 
purpose, insulin-producing RINm5F cells were exposed to IL-1beta (25 units/ml),
and the ceramide, ceramide 1-phosphate, sphingomyelin, diacylglycerol, and
phosphatidic acid contents of the cells were subsequently determined. It was
found that IL-1beta induced a transient increase (2-5 min) in ceramide and
diacylglycerol, which was not paralleled by an increase in ceramide 1-phosphate
and phosphatidic acid. A rapid decrease in the sphingomyelin content of the cells
was, however, observed. The cell-permeable ceramide analogue N-acetylsphingosine 
and the phorbol ester phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) both induced the
phosphorylation and increased the activities of the protein kinase JNK1 and the
transcription factor ATF2. These effects were, however, not as pronounced as
those induced by IL-1beta. The DNA binding activity of transcription factors in
nuclear extracts was determined using the electrophoretic mobility shift assay
method. Transcription factor binding to the ATF/cAMP-responsive element consensus
sequence was increased 4-5-fold by acetylsphingosine, PMA, or IL-1beta, whereas
binding to the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein and AP-1 elements was found to be
only slightly stimulated by these three agents. Binding to the NF-kappaB element 
was strongly induced by IL-1beta, but not by acetylsphingosine or PMA. Finally,
acetylsphingosine and PMA did not mimic the nitric oxide-inducing effects of
IL-1beta. It is concluded that IL-1beta-stimulated formation of ceramide and
diacylglycerol may contribute to JNK1 and ATF2 transcription factor activation,
which may be a necessary (but not sufficient) step in beta-cell nitric-oxide
synthase induction.

PMID: 8626526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Biol Chem. 1996 Mar 29;271(13):7508-15.

Synergistic induction of osteocalcin gene expression: identification of a
bipartite element conferring fibroblast growth factor 2 and cyclic AMP
responsiveness in the rat osteocalcin promoter.

Boudreaux JM(1), Towler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are important regulators of calvarial osteoblast
growth and differentiation. We have studied the regulation of the
osteoblast-specific gene osteocalcin (OC) by FGF2 in phenotypically immature
MC3T3-E1 calvarial osteoblastic cells. FGF2 markedly induces OC mRNA accumulation
in MC3T3-E1 cells in the presence of forskolin (FSK). Similarly, OC promoter
activity (luciferase reporter) is up-regulated 6-10-fold by FGF2/FSK or by
FGF2/8-bromo cyclic AMP. Half-maximal induction of OC promoter activity occurs at
1 nM FGF2. By 5' deletion analysis and dinucleotide point mutations, we map one
component of this FGF2/FSK response to a GCAGTCA motif in the region -144 to -138
relative to the OC transcription initiation site. The OC promoter region -154 to 
-90 confers FGF2/FSK responsiveness on the Rous sarcoma virus minimal promoter.
By 3' and internal deletion analyses, the region between -90 to -99 is also found
to be necessary for FGF2/FSK synergy (encodes a PuGGTCA motif previously
identified as a component of FSK induction). A DNA binding activity that
recognizes the region -148 to -125 of the rat OC promoter is induced in crude
nuclear extracts from MC3T3-E1 cells treated with FGF2 or FGF2/FSK. This binding 
activity is sequence-specific and does not recognize the TCAGTCA DNA cognate of
AP1. Members of the ATF, Fos, and Jun family are not immunologically detected in 
this inducible DNA binding activity. However, transient co-expression of ATF3 but
not ATF2 selectively attenuates the FGF2 component of induction. Thus, a novel
FGF2-regulated DNA-protein interaction in the OC promoter participates in the
transcriptional control of OC expression by FGF and cyclic AMP in MC3T3-E1
calvarial osteoblasts.

PMID: 8631781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Mar;16(3):1247-55.

MKK3- and MKK6-regulated gene expression is mediated by the p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase signal transduction pathway.

Raingeaud J(1), Whitmarsh AJ, Barrett T, Dérijard B, Davis RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Program in Molecular Medicine, University 
of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester 01605 USA.

The p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signal transduction pathway is
activated by proinflammatory cytokines and environmental stress. The detection of
p38 MAP kinase in the nucleus of activated cells suggests that p38 MAP kinase can
mediate signaling to the nucleus. To test this hypothesis, we constructed
expression vectors for activated MKK3 and MKK6, two MAP kinase kinases that
phosphorylate and activate p38 MAP kinase. Expression of activated MKK3 and MKK6 
in cultured cells caused a selective increase in p38 MAP kinase activity.
Cotransfection experiments demonstrated that p38 MAP kinase activation causes
increased reporter gene expression mediated by the transcription factors ATF2 and
Elk-1. These data demonstrate that the nucleus is one target of the p38 MAP
kinase signal transduction pathway.

PMCID: PMC231107
PMID: 8622669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Genes Dev. 1996 Mar 1;10(5):517-27.

Intramolecular inhibition of activating transcription factor-2 function by its
DNA-binding domain.

Li XY(1), Green MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

ATF-2 is a cellular basic region-leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factor that 
can mediate diverse transcriptional responses, including activation by the
adenovirus Ela protein. ATF-2 contains an activation domain, required for
transcriptional activity, but in the absence of an appropriate inducer,
full-length ATF-2 is transcriptionally inactive. Here we have investigated the
mechanism underlying this regulated inhibition of ATF-2 transcriptional activity.
We show that the region of ATF-2 that suppresses the activation region is the
bZIP DNA-binding domain and that maximal inhibition requires both the basic
region and leucine zipper subdomains. Inhibition is activation domain specific:
The ATF-2 bZIP suppresses the ATF-2 and the related Ela activation domains but
not acidic- and glutamine-rich activation domains. In vitro protein interaction
assays demonstrate that the ATF-2 activation domain and bZIP specifically bind to
one another. Finally, we show that bZIP-mediated inhibition can be modulated in a
cell-type-specific manner by another sequence element within ATF-2. On the basis 
of these and other data, we propose that the ATF-2 bZIP and activation domain are
engaged in an inhibitory intramolecular interaction and that inducers of ATF-2
disrupt this interaction to activate transcription.

PMID: 8598283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Feb;16(2):459-67.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha gene regulation in activated T cells involves
ATF-2/Jun and NFATp.

Tsai EY(1), Jain J, Pesavento PA, Rao A, Goldfeld AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

The human tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) gene is one of the earliest
genes expressed upon the activation of a T or B cell through its antigen
receptor. Previous experiments have demonstrated that in stimulated T cells, a
TNF-alpha promoter element, kappa 3, which binds NFATp, is required for the
cyclosporin A-sensitive transcriptional activation of the gene. Here, we
demonstrate that a cyclic AMP response element (CRE), which lies immediately
upstream of the kappa 3 site, is also required for induction of TNF-alpha gene
transcription in T cells stimulated by calcium ionophore or T-cell receptor
ligands. The CRE binds ATF-2 and Jun proteins in association with NFATp bound to 
kappa 3. These proteins bind noncooperatively in vitro; however, the
transcriptional activity of the CRE/kappa 3 composite site is dramatically higher
than the activity of the kappa 3 site alone, indicating that the two sites
cooperate in vivo. This study is the first demonstration of a role for ATF-2 in
TNF-alpha gene transcription and of a functional interaction between ATF-2/Jun
and NFATp. This novel pairing of NFATp with ATF-2/Jun may account for the
specific and immediate pattern of TNF-alpha gene transcription in stimulated T
cells.

PMCID: PMC231022
PMID: 8552071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 19;271(3):1695-701.

ATF3 gene. Genomic organization, promoter, and regulation.

Liang G(1), Wolfgang CD, Chen BP, Chen TH, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, Ohio State University, Columbus 43210, USA.

ATF3 gene, which encodes a member of the activating transcription factor/cAMP
responsive element binding protein (ATF/CREB) family of transcription factors, is
induced by many physiological stresses. As a step toward understanding the
induction mechanisms, we isolated the human ATF3 gene and analyzed its genome
organization and 5'-flanking region. We found that the human ATF3 mRNA is derived
from four exons distributed over 15 kilobases. Sequence analysis of the
5'-flanking region revealed a consensus TATA box and a number of transcription
factor binding sites including the AP-1, ATF/CRE, NF-kappa B, E2F, and Myc/Max
binding sites. As another approach to understanding the mechanisms by which the
ATF3 gene is induced by stress signals, we studied the regulation of the ATF3
gene in tissue culture cells by anisomycin, an approach that has been used to
study the stress responses in tissue culture cells. We showed that anisomycin at 
a low concentration activates the ATF3 promoter and stabilizes the ATF3 mRNA.
Significantly, co-transfection of DNAs expressing ATF2 and c-Jun activates the
ATF3 promoter. A possible mechanism implicating the C-Jun NH2-terminal
kinase/stress-activated protein kinase (JNK/SAPK) stress-inducible signaling
pathway in the induction of the ATF3 gene is discussed.

PMID: 8576171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Nature. 1996 Jan 18;379(6562):262-5.

Chondrodysplasia and neurological abnormalities in ATF-2-deficient mice.

Reimold AM(1), Grusby MJ, Kosaras B, Fries JW, Mori R, Maniwa S, Clauss IM,
Collins T, Sidman RL, Glimcher MJ, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) is a basic region leucine zipper
protein whose DNA target sequence is the widely distributed cAMP response element
(CRE). We report here that mice carrying a germline mutation in ATF-2
demonstrated unique actions of ATF-2 not duplicated by other ATF/CREB family
members. Mutant mice had decreased postnatal viability and growth, with a defect 
in endochondral ossification at epiphyseal plates similar to human
hypochondroplasia. The animals had ataxic gait, hyperactivity and decreased
hearing. In the brain, there were reduced numbers of cerebellar Purkinje cells,
atrophic vestibular sense organs and enlarged ventricles. Unlike CREB
alpha/delta-deficient mice whose main defect is in long-term potentiation, the
widespread abnormalities in ATF-2 mutant mice demonstrate its absolute
requirement for skeletal and central nervous system development, and for maximal 
induction of select genes with CRE sites, such as E-selectin.

PMID: 8538792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. EMBO J. 1996 Jan 2;15(1):92-101.

Cross-linking CD40 on B cells preferentially induces stress-activated protein
kinases rather than mitogen-activated protein kinases.

Berberich I(1), Shu G, Siebelt F, Woodgett JR, Kyriakis JM, Clark EA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut fur Virologie und Immunbiologie, Universitat Wurzburg, Versbacher
Strasse, Wurzburg, Germany.

The B cell-associated surface molecule CD40 plays a key role in T cell-dependent 
B cell maturation, as individuals with defects in either CD40 or its ligand are
impaired in immunoglobulin isotype class switching and germinal center formation.
CD40 signaling activates downstream effectors, including the tyrosine protein
kinase, Lyn, the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI-3 kinase), and the
transcription factor, NF-kappa B. In this study, we demonstrate that
stress-activated protein kinases (SAPK) are activated after CD40 cross-linking on
various B cell lines or human tonsillar B cells. The activation is rapid and
transient and is mediated through a cyclosporin A-insensitive pathway.
Furthermore, this signaling pathway appears not to rely on protein kinase C.
While CD40 ligation strongly activates the SAPKs (up to 25-fold), it does not
affect members of the mitogen-activated protein kinase family (MAPK; ERK1 and
ERK2). Consistent with these data, CD40 signals up-regulate c-jun but not c-fos
mRNA and alter the transcription factor ATF2 but not the Raf-1 protein. In
summary, CD40 signaling preferentially induces SAPK but not MAPK.

PMCID: PMC449921
PMID: 8598210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Cell. 1995 Dec 29;83(7):1101-11.

Reversal of intrinsic DNA bends in the IFN beta gene enhancer by transcription
factors and the architectural protein HMG I(Y).

Falvo JV(1), Thanos D, Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

In this paper, we investigate DNA bending induced by proteins required for virus 
induction of the human interferon-beta (IFN beta) gene. We show that NF-kappa
B-DNA complexes that are functionally distinct in the context of the IFN beta
enhancer are also conformationally distinct and that two sites in the enhancer
contain in-phase bends that are counteracted or reversed by the binding of
NF-kappa B, ATF-2/c-Jun, and HMG I(Y). Strikingly, this modulation of intrinsic
enhancer architecture results in an orientation that favors predicted
protein-protein interactions in a functional nucleoprotein complex, the
enhanceosome. Furthermore, the subtle modulation of DNA structure by HMG I(Y) in 
this process distinguishes it from other architectural factors.

PMID: 8548798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 15;270(50):30084-92.

Ischemia and reperfusion enhance ATF-2 and c-Jun binding to cAMP response
elements and to an AP-1 binding site from the c-jun promoter.

Morooka H(1), Bonventre JV, Pombo CM, Kyriakis JM, Force T.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Services, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown 02129, USA.

The transcription factors controlling the complex genetic response to ischemia
and their modes of regulation are poorly understood. We found that ATF-2 and
c-Jun DNA binding activity is markedly enhanced in post-ischemic kidney or in
LLC-PK1 renal tubular epithelial cells exposed to reversible ATP depletion. After
40 min of renal ischemia followed by reperfusion for as little as 5 min, binding 
of ATF-2 and c-Jun, but not ATF-3 or CREB (cAMP response element binding
protein), to oligonucleotides containing either an ATF/cAMP response element
(ATF/CRE) or the jun2TRE from the c-jun promoter, was significantly increased.
Binding to jun2TRE and ATF/CRE oligonucleotides occurred with an identical time
course. In contrast, nuclear protein binding to an oligonucleotide containing a
canonical AP-1 element was not detected until 40 min of reperfusion, and although
c-Jun was present in the complex, ATF-2 was not. Incubating nuclear extracts from
reperfused kidney with protein phosphatase 2A markedly reduced binding to both
the ATF/CRE and jun2TRE oligonucleotides, compatible with regulation by an ATF-2 
kinase. An ATF-2 kinase, which phosphorylated both the transactivation and DNA
binding domains of ATF-2, was activated by reversible ATP depletion. This kinase 
coeluted on Mono Q column chromatography with a c-Jun amino-terminal kinase and
with the peak of stress-activated protein kinase, but not p38, immunoreactivity. 
In conclusion, DNA binding activity of ATF-2 directed at both ATF/CRE and jun2TRE
motifs is modulated in response to the extreme cellular stress of ischemia and
reperfusion or reversible ATP depletion. Phosphorylation-dependent activation of 
the DNA binding activity of ATF-2, which appears to be regulated by the
stress-activated protein kinases, may play an important role in the earliest
stages of the genetic response to ischemia/reperfusion by targeting ATF-2 and
c-Jun to specific promoters, including the c-jun promoter and those containing
ATF/CREs.

PMID: 8530413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Cell Growth Differ. 1995 Nov;6(11):1437-46.

jun-NH2-terminal kinase activation mediated by UV-induced DNA lesions in melanoma
and fibroblast cells.

Adler V(1), Fuchs SY, Kim J, Kraft A, King MP, Pelling J, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Carcinogenesis Program, American Health Foundation, Valhalla, New
York 10595, USA.

jun-NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) belongs to a family of protein kinases that
phosphorylates c-Jun, ATF2, and Elk1 in response to various forms of stress
including UV irradiation and heat shock. Although in previous studies we have
demonstrated the importance of membrane components for JNK activation by UV
irradiation, here we have elucidated the role of DNA damage in this response. We 
show that in vitro-irradiated or sonicated DNA that is added to proteins prepared
from UV-treated cells can further induce JNK activation in a dose-dependent
manner. When compared with UV-B (300 nm), UV-C (254 nm), which is better absorbed
by the DNA, is significantly more potent in activating JNK. Furthermore, when
wavelengths lower than 300 nm were filtered out, UV-B was no longer able to
activate JNK. With the aid of melanoma and fibroblast cells, which exhibit
different resistances to irradiation and require different UV doses to generate
the same number of DNA lesions, we demonstrate that above a threshold level of
0.45 lesions and up to 0.75 lesions per 1875 bp, the degree of JNK activation
correlates with the amount of lesions induced by UV-C irradiation. Finally, to
explore the role of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in mediating JNK
activation after UV irradiation, we have used cells that lacks mtDNA. Although
the lack of mtDNA did not impair the ability of UV to activate JNK, when
enucleated, these cells had lost the ability to activate JNK in response to UV
irradiation. Overall, our results suggest that DNA damage in the nuclear
compartment is an essential component that acts in concert with membrane-anchored
proteins to mediate c-Jun phosphorylation by JNK.

PMID: 8562482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Curr Biol. 1995 Oct 1;5(10):1191-200.

Activation of ternary complex factor Elk-1 by stress-activated protein kinases.

Gille H(1), Strahl T, Shaw PE.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Immunbiologie, Spemann Laboratories, Freiburg,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: The mammalian response to stress results in the activation of
stress-activated protein kinases (also known as cJun N-terminal kinases; SAPKs or
JNKs), which are a sub-group of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase
family. The SAPKs are involved in the upregulation of activity of the
transcription factor AP-1 by post-translational modification of two of its
components, cJun and ATF2. AP-1 activity can also be elevated by increased
expression of the Fos protein, a further AP-1 component. Elk-1 (also called
p62TCF), a transcription factor involved in the induction of the expression from 
the c-fos promoter through the promoter's serum response element, is known to be 
activated as a result of phosphorylation by the MAP kinases ERK1 and ERK2.
However, induction of c-fos expression in response to noxious agents takes place 
in the absence of ERK activation. We therefore investigated whether SAPKs
similarly upregulate c-fos expression by phosphorylating Elk-1.
RESULTS: Elk-1 is activated in response to stimuli other than mitogenic signals. 
Both p46SAPK and p54SAPK interact physically with, and phosphorylate, Elk-1. The 
capacity of Elk-1 to form a ternary complex with serum response factor in vitro
is thereby elevated. In vivo, selective activation of SAPKs stimulates formation 
of the ternary complex containing Elk-1, serum response factor and the serum
response element, and enhances Elk-1-dependent transcription. Expression of the
SAPK upstream-activator kinase, MEKK1, induces SAPK activation and c-fos
transcription in the absence of ERK activity. Phosphopeptide mapping of Elk-1
phosphorylated with p46SAPK or p54SAPK reveals Ser383, a residue critical for
ternary complex formation and transcriptional activation, to be the major
phosphorylation site.
CONCLUSION: Elk-1 responds to stress-induced, as well as mitogenic, signals by
stimulating c-fos transcription through the serum response element.
Phosphorylation of Elk-1 by SAPKs and the ensuing expression of Fos protein thus 
constitutes an additional mechanism by which cells can upregulate AP-1 activity
in response to stress.

PMID: 8548291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Oncogene. 1995 Jul 20;11(2):365-76.

Heterodimerization of c-Jun with ATF-2 and c-Fos is required for positive and
negative regulation of the human urokinase enhancer.

De Cesare D(1), Vallone D, Caracciolo A, Sassone-Corsi P, Nerlov C, Verde P.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, Naples, Italy.

Dimerization plays a pivotal role in modulating the activity of the c-Jun
proto-oncogene product. Heterodimerization with activating transcription factor-2
(ATF-2) alters the DNA-binding specificity of c-Jun, allowing its targeting to
several cAMP responsive element (CRE)-related sequences, which control a subset
of AP-1-responsive genes. Here we show that a c-Jun/ATF-2 heterodimer binds to
the AP-1 site (uPA 5'-TRE) essential for the activity of the human urokinase
enhancer, conferring on this element several distinctive regulatory properties.
The c-Jun/ATF-2 heterodimer was identified by binding competition assays, u.v.
cross linking, and monospecific antibodies. In vitro binding studies revealed
that the uPA 5'-TRE sequence is recognized by the cyclic AMP-unresponsive ATF-2
factor, but not by the cyclic AMP-inducible CREB. In addition, in vivo studies
suggest that ATF-2 can mediate, at the same time, the activation of the
c-Jun/ATF-2 site and the repression of the canonical collagenase AP-1 site. We
report that heterodimerization with c-Fos does not increase the binding of c-Jun 
to the uPA 5'-TRE, in contrast to the increased binding at a consensus AP-1 site.
Our data further suggest that c-Fos can act as a repressor of the c-Jun/ATF-2
binding site, revealing an important functional difference, with respect to
canonical AP-1 elements.

PMID: 7624151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Virol. 1995 Jul;69(7):4323-30.

Transcriptional repression of the c-fos gene by YY1 is mediated by a direct
interaction with ATF/CREB.

Zhou Q(1), Gedrich RW, Engel DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cancer Center, University of Virginia School of
Medicine, Charlottesville 22908, USA.

Transcriptional activation of the mouse c-fos gene by the adenovirus
243-amino-acid E1A protein requires a binding site for transcription factor YY1
located at -54 of the c-fos promoter. YY1 normally represses transcription of
c-fos, and this repression depends on the presence of a cyclic AMP (cAMP)
response element located immediately upstream of the -54 YY1 DNA-binding site.
This finding suggested that the mechanism of transcriptional repression by YY1
might involve a direct interaction with members of the ATF/CREB family of
transcription factors. In vitro and in vivo binding assays were used to
demonstrate that YY1 can interact with ATF/CREB proteins, including CREB, ATF-2, 
ATFa1, ATFa2, and ATFa3. Structure-function analyses of YY1 and ATFa2 revealed
that the C-terminal zinc finger domain of YY1 is necessary and sufficient for
binding to ATFa2 and that the basic-leucine zipper region of ATFa2 is necessary
and sufficient for binding to YY1. Overexpression of YY1 in HeLa cells resulted
in repression of a mutant c-fos chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter that
lacked binding sites for YY1, suggesting that repression can be triggered through
protein-protein interactions with ATF/CREB family members. Consistent with this
finding, repression was relieved upon removal of the upstream cAMP response
element. These data support a model in which YY1 binds simultaneously to its own 
DNA-binding site in the c-fos promoter and also to adjacent DNA-bound ATF/CREB
proteins in order to effect repression. They further suggest that the
ATF/CREB-YY1 complex serves as a target for the adenovirus 243-amino-acid E1A
protein.

PMCID: PMC189172
PMID: 7769693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Bioessays. 1995 Jul;17(7):621-9.

Modulation of AP-1/ATF transcription factor activity by the adenovirus-E1A
oncogene products.

Hagmeyer BM(1), Angel P, van Dam H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Carcinogenesis, University of Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Bioessays. 1995 Nov;17(11):1002.

The proteins encoded by early region 1 A (E1A) of human adenoviruses (Ad)
modulate the expression of both adenovirus genes and various host cell genes.
With these transcription-regulating properties the E1A proteins redirect the
cell's metabolism, which enables them to induce oncogenic transformation in
rodent cells. The E1A proteins modulate transcription by interacting both with
gene-specific and general cellular transcription factors. Various members of the 
AP-1 and ATF/CREB families of transcription factors are targets for E1A-dependent
regulation, including cJun, the protein product of the c-jun proto-oncogene. The 
E1A proteins modulate cJun-dependent transcription both positively and
negatively, and affect the activity as well as the expression levels of cJun. By 
increasing the phosphorylation status of cJun, E1A can stimulate transcription
regulated by cJun/ATF2 heterodimers. In contrast, E1A inhibits the expression of 
various metalloproteases by interfering with the DNA-binding capacity of
cJun/cJun and cJun/cFos dimers, which might involve the association of E1A with
the putative transcriptional coactivator p300. Since the ability of E1A to alter 
cJun-dependent transcription correlates with its transforming capacity,
interference with cJun-dependent transcription may be an essential step in
E1A-induced transformation.

PMID: 7646484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1995 Jun 1;319(2):445-50.

Interaction of retinoblastoma gene product with transcription factors ATFa and
ATF2.

Gong Q(1), Huang Z, Wicks WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Tennessee, Knoxville 37996, USA.

Two highly related transcription factors, activating transcription factors a and 
2 (ATFa and ATF2) are able to activate expression in CHO cells of a reporter gene
driven by the human transforming growth factor beta 2 gene promoter. This action 
is dependent on the intact motif CGTCA which is found as part of the cAMP
responsive element in a number of promoters and to which both factors can bind in
vitro. The retinoblastoma gene product also weakly stimulates expression of this 
reporter gene but, in combination with the factors, it exhibits a differential
action: additive or greater stimulatory effects with ATF2 but strong inhibition
of the actions of ATFa. Thus, although both of these two related factors are able
to exert the same apparent effect on this promoter, coexpression of the
retinoblastoma gene product reveals at least one significant difference in their 
actions.

PMID: 7786026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. EMBO J. 1995 Apr 18;14(8):1798-811.

ATF-2 is preferentially activated by stress-activated protein kinases to mediate 
c-jun induction in response to genotoxic agents.

van Dam H(1), Wilhelm D, Herr I, Steffen A, Herrlich P, Angel P.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institut für Genetik, Germany.

The major regulators of the c-jun promoter are ATF-2 and c-Jun. They act as
pre-bound heterodimers on two 'AP-1-like' sites, and are preferentially addressed
by different types of extracellular signals. The transactivating potential of
ATF-2 is stimulated to a higher extent than that of c-Jun by a broad group of
agents causing DNA damage and other types of cellular stress, such as
short-wavelength UV, or the alkylating compounds
N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitroso-guanidine (MNNG) or methylmethanesulphonate (MMS). In
contrast, treatment with the phorbol ester TPA preferentially enhances
c-Jun-dependent transactivation but does not affect ATF-2. Accordingly, UV and
MMS but not TPA induce c-jun transcription in F9 cells, which express ATF-2, but 
not c-Jun. Stimulation of ATF-2-dependent transactivation by genotoxic agents
requires the presence of threonines 69 and 71 located in the N-terminal
transactivation domain. These sites are the target of p54 and p46
stress-activated protein kinases (SAPKs) which bind to, and phosphorylate ATF-2
in vitro. However, p46 and p54 kinase activity is not increased by phorbol ester,
which strongly suggests that the protein kinase phosphorylating c-Jun in response
to TPA is distinct from SAPKs and does not act on ATF-2. Our data demonstrate
that distinct signal transduction pathways converge at c-Jun/ATF-2, whereby each 
subunit is individually addressed by a specific class of protein kinases. This
allows fine tuned modulation of c-jun expression by a large spectrum of
extracellular signals.

PMCID: PMC398273
PMID: 7737130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. EMBO J. 1995 Apr 18;14(8):1785-97.

ATF-2 contains a phosphorylation-dependent transcriptional activation domain.

Livingstone C(1), Patel G, Jones N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

The ATF-2 transcription factor can mediate adenovirus E1A-inducible
transcriptional activation. Deletion analysis has indicated that the N-terminal
region of ATF-2 is essential for this response. Furthermore, the N-terminus can
activate transcription in the absence of E1A when fused to a heterologous DNA
binding domain. However, in the intact protein this activation domain is masked. 
In this report we show that residues in the N-terminus required for activation
are also required for mediating E1A stimulation. In particular two threonine
residues at positions 69 and 71 are essential. These residues are phosphorylated 
in vivo and can be efficiently phosphorylated in vitro by the JNK/SAPK subgroup
of the MAPK family. ATF-2 can bind to a UV-inducible kinase through a region in
the N-terminus that is distinct from the sites of phosphorylation; this binding
region is both necessary for phosphorylation by JNK/SAPK in vitro and for
transcriptional activation in vivo. The activity of the N-terminus is stimulated 
by UV irradiation which stimulates the signalling pathway leading to JNK/SAPK.
Finally, although ATF-2 binds to the E1A protein, the N-terminal activation
domain is not required for this interaction. The results show that ATF-2, like
other members of the ATF/CREB family of DNA binding proteins is regulated by
specific signalling pathways.

PMCID: PMC398272
PMID: 7737129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Mar 25;23(6):925-31.

Functional interactions between YY1 and adenovirus E1A.

Lee JS(1), See RH, Galvin KM, Wang J, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

YY1 is a C2H2-type zinc finger transcription factor that is a member of the human
GLl-Kruppel family of proteins. YY1 represses transcription when bound upstream
of transcription initiation sites. The repression can be relieved by adenovirus
E1A and activation of target genes occurs. We have mapped the repression domain
of YY1 to the C-terminal region, overlapping its DNA binding domain. We have also
identified an activation domain within the first 69 amino acids of YY1. The YY1
C-terminal region is involved in physical interactions with E1A and is
functionally necessary for YY1 to respond to E1A. This suggests that relief of
YY1 repression by E1A involves YY1-E1A physical interactions. Although not
involved in interactions with E1A, the N-terminal activation domain is also
necessary for YY1 to respond to E1A. Presumably, under repressing conditions, the
activation domain is masked by the conformation of YY1, but is released upon
binding of E1A and is required to subsequently activate transcription. Consistent
with this hypothesis, an ATF-2-YY1 chimeric protein containing the activation
domain of ATF-2 and the C-terminal two-thirds of YY1 is still a potent repressor.
Unlike the mutant YY1 lacking its own N-terminal activation domain, the chimeric 
protein is fully responsive to E1A.

PMCID: PMC306787
PMID: 7731805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Gene. 1995 Feb 14;153(2):225-9.

Analysis of ATF2 gene expression during early Xenopus laevis development.

Villarreal XC(1), Richter JD.

Author information: 
(1)Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Shrewsbury, MA 01545.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) is a cellular sequence-specific
DNA-binding protein that mediates transcriptional activation by the adenovirus
(Ad) E1A protein. In injected Xenopus laevis oocytes, E1A-induced transactivation
requires an ATF2 recognition sequence within the responding promoters, thereby
suggesting that ATF2 is present in oocytes and perhaps has a developmentally
important function. As a first step in assessing this, an ATF2 cDNA was cloned
and sequenced. The protein encoded by this cDNA contains 486 amino acids and is
92% identical to mammalian ATF2. ATF2 RNA and protein levels are very low in
oocytes, but rise dramatically during blastulation. These high levels are
maintained through gastrulation, but return to low levels during neurulation. In 
the blastula, ATF2 RNA and protein are virtually completely confined to cells of 
the animal pole. The temporal and spatial regulation of ATF2 suggests that it has
an important function in early development.

PMID: 7875593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Exp Cell Res. 1995 Feb;216(2):422-30.

Down-regulation of the cyclin A promoter in differentiating human embryonal
carcinoma cells is mediated by depletion of ATF-1 and ATF-2 in the complex at the
ATF/CRE site.

Nakamura T(1), Okuyama S, Okamoto S, Nakajima T, Sekiya S, Oda K.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical R & D Department, Sumitomo Electric Industries, Yokohama, Japan.

The human embryonal carcinoma cell line NEC14 can be induced to differentiate by 
the addition of N,N'-hexamethylene-bis-acetamide (HMBA). After treatment with
HMBA, the level of cyclin A transcript decreased steeply, reaching less than
one-tenth of the original level by 48 h. The promoter elements concerned with
this down-regulation were studied by using reporter genes and by analyzing
DNA-protein complexes. The deletion of the sequence between -608 and -259
containing three GC boxes decreased the promoter activity to about a half, and
further deletion up to -194, eliminating the ATF/CRE site, resulted in a decrease
to about a tenth of the original level in undifferentiated NEC14 cells. These
sequences were involved in down-regulation of the promoter activity in
differentiation-induced NEC14 cells. DNA-protein complexes formed at the ATF/CRE 
site with extracts prepared from undifferentiated and differentiation-induced
cells gave the same footprint, but showed different electrophoretic mobilities.
The supershift assay with specific antibodies against ATF-1 and ATF-2 indicated
that both factors were depleted in the complex after induction of NEC14 cell
differentiation. Both the ATF/CRE site and GC boxes seemed to be also involved in
up-regulation of the cyclin A promoter in growth-stimulated human fibroblasts at 
the G1/S boundary.

PMID: 7843287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Science. 1995 Jan 20;267(5196):389-93.

Transcription factor ATF2 regulation by the JNK signal transduction pathway.

Gupta S(1), Campbell D, Dérijard B, Davis RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester 01605.

Treatment of cells with pro-inflammatory cytokines or ultraviolet radiation
causes activation of the c-Jun NH2-terminal protein kinase (JNK). Activating
transcription factor-2 (ATF2) was found to be a target of the JNK signal
transduction pathway. ATF2 was phosphorylated by JNK on two closely spaced
threonine residues within the NH2-terminal activation domain. The replacement of 
these phosphorylation sites with alanine inhibited the transcriptional activity
of ATF2. These mutations also inhibited ATF2-stimulated gene expression mediated 
by the retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor suppressor and the adenovirus early region 1A
(E1A) oncoprotein. Furthermore, expression of dominant-negative JNK inhibited
ATF2 transcriptional activity. Together, these data demonstrate a role for the
JNK signal transduction pathway in transcriptional responses mediated by ATF2.

PMID: 7824938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Nov 22;91(24):11318-22.

The high mobility group protein HMG I(Y) can stimulate or inhibit DNA binding of 
distinct transcription factor ATF-2 isoforms.

Du W(1), Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138.

The high mobility group protein HMG I(Y) stimulates the binding of a specific
isoform of the activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2(195)) to the interferon
beta (IFN-beta) gene promoter. HMG I(Y) specifically interacts with the
basic-leucine zipper region of ATF-2(195), and HMG I(Y) binds to two sites
immediately flanking the ATF-2 binding site of the IFN-beta promoter. Here, we
show that HMG I(Y) can stimulate the binding of ATF-2(195), at least in part, by 
promoting ATF-2 dimerization. In addition, we report the characterization of a
naturally occurring isoform of ATF-2 (ATF-2(192)) that binds specifically to the 
IFN-beta promoter but is unable to interact with HMG I(Y). Remarkably, HMG I(Y)
inhibits the binding of ATF-2(192) to the IFN-beta promoter. Thus, the ability of
HMG I(Y) to specifically interact with ATF-2 correlates with its ability to
stimulate ATF-2 binding to the IFN-beta promoter. Comparisons of the amino acid
sequences of the basic-leucine zipper domains of ATF-2(195) and ATF-2(192)
suggest that HMG I(Y) interacts with a short stretch of basic amino acids near
the amino terminus of the basic-leucine zipper domain of ATF-2(195).

PMCID: PMC45222
PMID: 7972056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. DNA Cell Biol. 1994 Nov;13(11):1063-9.

Regulation of the urokinase gene by the retinoblastoma protein.

Novak U(1), Paradiso L, Hamilton JA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Melbourne, Department of Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

The promoter of the human urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) gene contains a
sequence identical with the retinoblastoma control element (RCE) of the murine
c-fos gene, as well as several Sp1 binding sites. In a number of cell lines, the 
uPA promoter is activated during enforced expression of the retinoblastoma
protein, pRB. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays revealed that the RCE
sequence of the uPA gene forms only one specific DNA-protein complex that does
not contain pRB. The formation of the RCE-protein complex can be inhibited by 20 
molar excess of the unlabeled RCE sequences and by 5 molar excess of the
unlabeled E2F binding site. The RCE of the human uPA gene interacts specifically 
with a protein, which appears to be distinct from members of the E2F family of
proteins, Sp1, ATF2, and Elf-1, which are all transcription factors shown to be
regulated by pRB.

PMID: 7702750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Oct;14(10):6464-75.

A striking similarity in the organization of the E-selectin and beta interferon
gene promoters.

Whitley MZ(1), Thanos D, Read MA, Maniatis T, Collins T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115.

Transcription of the endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule 1 (E-selectin or
ELAM-1) gene is induced by the inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1 beta and
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha). In this report, we identify four
positive regulatory domains (PDI to PDIV) in the E-selectin promoter that are
required for maximal levels of TNF-alpha induction in endothelial cells. In vitro
DNA binding studies reveal that two of the domains contain novel adjacent binding
sites for the transcription factor NF-kappa B (PDIII and PDIV), a third
corresponds to a recently described CRE/ATF site (PDII), and a fourth is a
consensus NF-kappa B site (PDI). Mutations that decrease the binding of NF-kappa 
B to any one of the NF-kappa B binding sites in vitro abolished cytokine-induced 
E-selectin gene expression in vivo. Previous studies demonstrated a similar
correlation between ATF binding to PDII and E-selectin gene expression. Here we
show that the high-mobility-group protein I(Y) [HMG I(Y)] also binds specifically
to the E-selectin promoter and thereby enhances the binding of both ATF-2 and
NF-kappa B to the E-selectin promoter in vitro. Moreover, mutations that
interfere with HMG I(Y) binding decrease the level of cytokine-induced E-selectin
expression. The organization of the TNF-alpha-inducible element of the E-selectin
promoter is remarkably similar to that of the virus-inducible promoter of the
human beta interferon gene in that both promoters require NF-kappa B, ATF-2, and 
HMG I(Y). We propose that HMG I(Y) functions as a key architectural component in 
the assembly of inducible transcription activation complexes on both promoters.

PMCID: PMC359176
PMID: 7523851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jul 29;269(30):19193-6.

cAMP and tumor necrosis factor competitively regulate transcriptional activation 
through and nuclear factor binding to the cAMP-responsive element/activating
transcription factor element of the endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule-1
(E-selectin) promoter.

De Luca LG(1), Johnson DR, Whitley MZ, Collins T, Pober JS.

Author information: 
(1)Boyer Center for Molecular Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06536-0812.

The cAMP-responsive element/activating transcription factor (CRE/ATF) element
(also known as NF-ELAM1) of the endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule-1
(ELAM-1) promoter is necessary for full cytokine responsiveness. It differs from 
a consensus cAMP-responsive element (CRE) by 1 nucleotide (G-->A conversion) and 
does not mediate transcriptional activation in response to cAMP. We reported
previously that cAMP actually decreases ELAM-1 synthesis induced by tumor
necrosis factor (TNF). We now show that cAMP decreases the ELAM-1 promoter
response to TNF in transient transfection assays in bovine aortic endothelial
cells and that cAMP-mediated inhibition maps to the CRE/ATF element.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using the ELAM-1 CRE/ATF DNA sequence
reveal three complexes. Antibody supershift assays suggest the slowest migrating 
form (complex 1) contains ATF2, the middle form (complex 2) contains ATF2 and
c-Jun, and the fastest migrating form (complex 3) contains a CRE-binding protein.
TNF increases c-Jun-containing complex 2 while diminishing complex 1, whereas
cAMP decreases complex 2 and increases complex 1. Complex 3 is unchanged by
either treatment, and the CRE-binding protein is not phosphorylated. Our data
suggest that a change in the composition of the proteins binding to the CRE/ATF
promoter element contributes to the competing effects of TNF and cAMP on ELAM-1
gene expression.

PMID: 7518452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Leukoc Biol. 1994 Jul;56(1):27-35.

Interaction of nuclear proteins with an AP-1/CRE-like promoter sequence in the
human TNF-alpha gene.

Newell CL(1), Deisseroth AB, Lopez-Berestein G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Investigation, University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030.

The tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) promoter contains an AP-1/CRE-like
binding site, TGAGCTCA. AP-1 elements generally transduce signals involving
protein kinase C; the CRE site mediates a cAMP response, involving protein kinase
A. Thus, this element has the potential to receive signals through divergent
signaling pathways. Nuclear protein binding studies using extracts from THP-1
monocytic cells treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which stimulates, or
dexamethasone (Dex) or pentoxifylline (PTX), which inhibit TNF production,
respectively, suggest that two low-mobility complexes could be involved in
regulation through this promoter region. PTX and Dex increase binding of both
these complexes compared with untreated cells; approximately 2 hours after LPS
induction, the upper complex becomes undetectable. This upper complex is composed
of ATF2 (activating transcription factor 2, a cyclic AMP responsive element
binding protein) homodimers; the lower is a heterodimer of jun/ATF2. LPS induces 
c-jun and thus may enhance formation of jun/ATF2 complexes, which could be
activating complexes. In this case, the simultaneous presence of both complexes, 
which would occur in the presence of Dex or PTX, could reduce the amount of TNF
transcription through competitive binding. Through in vitro competitive binding
studies comparing the binding affinities of the TNF promoter sequence and a
consensus CRE, we further suggest how variation of endogenous binding sequences
from consensus may be an important property for regulatory control of particular 
genes.

PMID: 8027667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Nov;13(11):7180-90.

Cyclic AMP-independent ATF family members interact with NF-kappa B and function
in the activation of the E-selectin promoter in response to cytokines.

Kaszubska W(1), Hooft van Huijsduijnen R, Ghersa P, DeRaemy-Schenk AM, Chen BP,
Hai T, DeLamarter JF, Whelan J.

Author information: 
(1)Glaxo Institute for Molecular Biology, Geneva, Switzerland.

We previously reported that NF-kappa B and a complex we referred to as NF-ELAM1
play a central role in cytokine-induced expression of the E-selectin gene. In
this study we identify cyclic AMP (cAMP)-independent members of the ATF family
binding specifically to the NF-ELAM1 promoter element. The NF-ELAM1 element
(TGACATCA) differs by a single nucleotide substitution from the cAMP-responsive
element consensus sequence. We demonstrate that this sequence operates in a
cAMP-independent manner to induce transcription and thus define it as a
non-cAMP-responsive element (NCRE). We show that ATFa is a component of the
NF-ELAM1 complex and its overexpression activates the E-selectin promoter. In
addition, ATFa, ATF2, and ATF3 interact directly with NF-kappa B in vitro,
linking two unrelated families of transcription factors in a novel
protein-protein interaction. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the ability of
overexpressed NF-kappa B to transactivate the E-selectin promoter in vivo is
dependent on the NF-ELAM1 complex. Our results suggest that a direct interaction 
between ATFs and NF-kappa B is, at least in part, the mechanism by which these
factors specifically regulate E-selectin promoter activity.

PMCID: PMC364779
PMID: 7692236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Biol Chem. 1993 Oct 5;268(28):21225-31.

Transactivation by the human T-cell leukemia virus Tax protein is mediated
through enhanced binding of activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) ATF-2
response and cAMP element-binding protein (CREB).

Franklin AA(1), Kubik MF, Uittenbogaard MN, Brauweiler A, Utaisincharoen P,
Matthews MA, Dynan WS, Hoeffler JP, Nyborg JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Colorado State University, Fort Collins 80523.

The human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I)-encoded transcriptional activator
protein Tax is strongly implicated in HTLV-I pathogenesis. Tax regulates HTLV-I
gene expression through three 21-base pair (bp) repeat enhancer elements located 
in the transcriptional control region of the virus. Tax does not bind these
elements directly, but mediates transactivation through the cellular
transcription factors that recognize a cAMP response element (CRE)-like sequence 
centered within each of the 21-bp repeats. In this report, we identify activating
transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) and CRE-binding protein (CREB) as the principal
T-cell proteins that bind the three 21-bp repeats in vitro. Purified Tax protein 
augments the level of RNA synthesis induced by ATF-2 and CREB in a cell-free
transcription assay, providing evidence that Tax cooperates with these cellular
proteins to activate HTLV-I transcription. Furthermore, Tax dramatically
increases the binding of both the T-cell-derived and recombinant forms of ATF-2
and CREB to each of the 21-bp repeats. The target sequences for this enhancement 
reside within the DNA binding/dimerization domains of these proteins. These data 
suggest that Tax transactivates HTLV-I gene expression by increasing the number
of bound ATF-2 and CREB molecules at the viral promoter.

PMID: 8407959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Cell. 1993 Sep 10;74(5):887-98.

Mechanisms of transcriptional synergism between distinct virus-inducible enhancer
elements.

Du W(1), Thanos D, Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.

The high mobility group protein HMG I(Y) and the transcription factor NF-kappa B 
are required for the activity of positive regulatory domain II (PRDII), a
virus-inducible regulatory element of the human interferon-beta gene promoter. In
this paper we provide evidence that HMG I(Y) is also required for the activity of
PRDIV, a regulatory element that synergizes with PRDII. In this case, HMG I(Y)
stimulates binding of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) and the assembly 
of inducible complexes containing ATF-2 and c-Jun. Remarkably, HMG I(Y) also
specifically interacts with the leucine zipper/basic region of ATF-2, and ATF-2
in turn interacts with NF-kappa B. We therefore propose that the HMG I(Y) plays a
critical structural role in establishing transcriptional synergy between PRDII
and PRDIV by promoting the activities and/or binding of NF-kappa B and ATF-2 and 
by facilitating their interaction.

PMID: 8374955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Sep;13(9):5479-89.

Selective DNA bending by a variety of bZIP proteins.

Kerppola TK(1), Curran T.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Institute of Molecular Biology, Nutley, New Jersey 07110.

We have investigated DNA bending by bZIP family proteins that can bind to the
AP-1 site. DNA bending is widespread, although not universal, among members of
this family. Different bZIP protein dimers induced distinct DNA bends. The DNA
bend angles ranged from virtually 0 to greater than 40 degrees as measured by
phasing analysis and were oriented toward both the major and the minor grooves at
the center of the AP-1 site. The DNA bends induced by the various heterodimeric
complexes suggested that each component of the complex induced an independent DNA
bend as previously shown for Fos and Jun. The Fos-related proteins Fra1 and Fra2 
bent DNA in the same orientation as Fos but induced smaller DNA bend angles. ATF2
also bent DNA toward the minor groove in heterodimers formed with Fos, Fra2, and 
Jun. CREB and ATF1, which favor binding to the CRE site, did not induce
significant DNA bending. Zta, which is a divergent member of the bZIP family,
bent DNA toward the major groove. A variety of DNA structures can therefore be
induced at the AP-1 site through combinatorial interactions between different
bZIP family proteins. This diversity of DNA structures may contribute to
regulatory specificity among the plethora of proteins that can bind to the AP-1
site.

PMCID: PMC360261
PMID: 8355695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Biol Chem. 1993 Feb 25;268(6):4259-66.

Isolation and characterization of a novel member of the gene family encoding the 
cAMP response element-binding protein CRE-BP1.

Nomura N(1), Zu YL, Maekawa T, Tabata S, Akiyama T, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Nippon Medical School, Kanagawa, Japan.

Among multiple CRE (cyclic AMP response element)-binding proteins, CRE-BP1 (also 
designated ATF-2) has two unique characteristics: it mediates the adenovirus
E1A-induced trans-activation and forms a heterodimer with c-Jun. Two structures, 
a putative metal finger and a leucine zipper, in CRE-BP1 are responsible for
these capacities. As a new member of a CRE-BP1 family that has similar metal
finger and leucine zipper structures, we have isolated cDNA clones of CRE-BPa by 
cross-hybridization with CRE-BP1 cDNA. CRE-BPa protein consists of 508 amino
acids and has a molecular weight of 56,840. CRE-BPa protein is highly homologous 
with CRE-BP1 in four regions: two of them are the regions containing the putative
metal finger or the DNA-binding domain consisting of the basic amino acid cluster
and the leucine zipper. Like CRE-BP1, CRE-BPa binds to CRE with higher affinity
than to the 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate response element as a homodimer 
or a CRE-BPa/c-Jun or CRE-BPa/CRE-BP1 heterodimer. However, using the
c-Myb-CRE-BPa fusion protein, it was show that CRE-BPa could not mediate the
E1A-induced trans-activation. Expression of CRE-BPa mRNA was found in a limited
number of cell lines, and multiple sizes of CRE-BPa mRNA species were detected in
some cell lines and tissues. CRE-BPa will be useful to clarify the mechanism of
CRE-mediated transcriptional activation by E1A or c-Jun.

PMID: 8440710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Biol Chem. 1992 Oct 5;267(28):20181-7.

Transcriptional regulation by a point mutant of adenovirus-2 E1a product lacking 
DNA binding activity.

Zu YL(1), Takamatsu Y, Zhao MJ, Maekawa T, Handa H, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Ibaraki, Japan.

The adenovirus E1a protein (E1A) regulates transcription through interaction with
transcription factors bound to DNA, like cAMP response element BP1/ATF2, or
through dissociating E2F transcription factor complex. However, it was also
reported that E1A can bind to DNA (Chatterjee, P. K., Bruner, M., Flint, S. J.,
and Harter, M. L. (1988) EMBO J. 7, 835-841), and it is not clear whether DNA
binding of E1A is involved in a part of the process of transcriptional regulation
by E1A. In this paper, the small region of E1A that is responsible for DNA
binding was identified and a point mutant lacking DNA binding activity was
constructed. Analysis of deletion mutants of E1A proteins expressed in bacteria
showed that a basic region between amino acids 201 and 216 of E1A is essential
for DNA binding. Point mutation of arginines at amino acid numbers 205 and 206 to
aspartic acids completely abolished the DNA binding activity of E1A. Using this
mutant, the requirement of the E1A DNA binding for E1A-dependent transcriptional 
regulation was examined. trans-Activation of the adenovirus E4 promoter and
trans-repression of the human c-erbB-2 promoter by this point mutant were
examined by cotransfection experiments. Mutations of the E1A DNA-binding domain
affected neither the E1A-induced trans-activation nor trans-repression at all.
These results give complete proof that the DNA binding activity of E1A is not
required for transcriptional regulation by E1A.

PMID: 1356975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Nature. 1992 Jul 23;358(6384):331-4.

Retinoblastoma gene product activates expression of the human TGF-beta 2 gene
through transcription factor ATF-2.

Kim SJ(1), Wagner S, Liu F, O'Reilly MA, Robbins PD, Green MR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemoprevention, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
20892.

The retinoblastoma susceptibility gene product (pRb) plays an important role in
constraining cellular proliferation and in regulating the cell cycle. The pRb
inhibits transcription of genes involved in growth control (reviewed in ref. 3)
and can regulate transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-beta 1) gene expression. 
TGF-beta isoforms also down-regulate cellular proliferation. To determine whether
pRb also regulates expression of other TGF-beta isoforms, we examined the effect 
of pRb on the expression of the human TGF-beta 2 gene. The human TGF-beta 2
promoter contains multiple elements including an ATF site, which is essential for
basal promoter activity. Here we report that pRb activates transcription of the
human TGF-beta 2 gene. The promoter element responsible for pRb-mediated
transcriptional regulation is a binding site for ATF proteins, an extensive
transcription factor family. We provide evidence that implicates ATF-2 in
pRb-responsiveness. First, the ATF promoter element in the TGF-beta 2 gene is a
high-affinity ATF-2-binding site. Second, a GAL4-ATF2 fusion protein can support 
pRb-mediated transcriptional activation of a promoter containing GAL4-binding
sites. Third, ATF-2 in nuclear extracts can interact with pRb. Our results reveal
a new mechanism by which pRb constrains cellular proliferation: by activating
expression of the inhibitory growth factor, TGF-beta 2.

PMID: 1641004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Immunol. 1992 Mar 15;148(6):1906-12.

Isolation and characterization of nuclear proteins that bind to T cell receptor V
beta decamer motif.

Lee MR(1), Chung CS, Liou ML, Wu M, Li WF, Hsueh YP, Lai MZ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.

TCR V beta promoter contains a highly conserved decamer homologous to cAMP
response element (CRE). Recent studies have identified this CRE decamer as the
dominant transcription-activating element within the TCR V beta promoter. We have
isolated cDNA clones, TCR-ATF1 and TCR-ATF2, encoding DNA-binding proteins that
recognize this CRE motif. The nucleotide sequence of TCR-ATF1 has not previously 
been reported, whereas that of TCR-ATF2 was homologous to CRE-BP1, ATF-2, and
mXBP. Both TCR-ATF1 and TCR-ATF2 shared a conserved leucine zipper and DNA
binding motif with other CRE-binding proteins. TCR-ATF1 and TCR-ATF2 were
expressed in all cell lines examined and in mouse embryos as early as 12.5 days. 
Despite binding to the same CRE motif, TCR-ATF1 and TCR-ATF2 were different from 
CREB in the fine nucleotide specificity. TCR-ATF bound methylated CRE and CRE
mutant M4 (4C----G) that were not recognized by CREB. Additionally, TCR-ATF1
weakly recognized two other single nucleotide mutants of V beta-CRE that were not
bound by TCR-ATF2 and CREB. We have further demonstrated that TCR beta-chain
expression was immediately activated by cAMP. Such induction is likely mediated
through V beta-CRE sequence, because the inclusion of V beta-CRE in a vector with
minimum promoter (pBLCAT2) conferred the cAMP inducibility of CAT activity.

PMID: 1531847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Feb;12(2):747-57.

Functionally distinct isoforms of the CRE-BP DNA-binding protein mediate activity
of a T-cell-specific enhancer.

Georgopoulos K(1), Morgan BA, Moore DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114.

Expression of the CD3 delta gene of the T-cell receptor (TCR) complex is
regulated by a T-cell-specific enhancer. A highly conserved 40-bp motif (element 
delta A) within the CD3 delta enhancer is responsible for mediating its activity 
and specificity. Element delta A exhibits sequence similarities to the cyclic AMP
response element (CRE) but does not respond to changes in the level of cyclic
AMP. Using the delta A element as a probe, we have isolated three cDNA clones
encoding three distinct protein isoforms, products of differential splicing and
alternate promoter usage of the CRE-BP gene. These isoforms share the DNA binding
and dimerization domains at the C terminus of the protein but differ at their N
termini. In transfection assays, their activities as transcription regulators
differ: CRE-BP2 is a potent activator, CRE-BP3 is a weak activator, and CRE-BP1
is transcriptionally inert. Mutations in the basic region of the CRE-BP1 protein 
which abrogate its ability to bind DNA render this protein a dominant repressor
of the delta A enhancer. Antibodies to the CRE-BP protein interact specifically
with the ubiquitous and predominantly T-cell-restricted nuclear complexes that
bind to the delta A element and suggest the presence of this protein in homo- and
heterodimeric complexes. Since the delta A motif is also present in the enhancer 
and promoter of the TCR alpha and beta genes, the CRE-BP isoforms may mediate
expression of other members of the CD3/TCR complex during T-cell development.

PMCID: PMC364292
PMID: 1531087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Genomics. 1991 Dec;11(4):1161-3.

Assignment of the gene for cyclic AMP-response element binding protein 2 (CREB2) 
to human chromosome 2q24.1-q32.

Diep A(1), Li C, Klisak I, Mohandas T, Sparkes RS, Gaynor R, Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles 90024.

The regulatory element TGACGTCA is found upstream of a number of viral and
cellular genes. This element has been demonstrated to mediate cyclic AMP
induction of cellular genes and activation of viral genes. A group of closely
related cellular genes known as cyclic AMP-response element binding proteins
(CREB) or activating transcription factor (ATF) have been found to bind to this
motif and mediate activation by cyclic AMP and the adenovirus E1A protein. One of
these genes, CREB1, was previously mapped to human chromosome 2q32.3-q34.
Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA from a panel of mouse-human somatic cell
hybrids indicated that the CREB2 gene, another member of this family, also
resides on human chromosome 2. In situ hybridization further regionalized this
gene to 2q24.1-q32. Thus, the genes for CREB1 and CREB2 that have only limited
DNA sequence homology map to a similar region of the long arm of chromosome 2,
though whether they are part of a gene cluster is unclear.

PMID: 1838349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Oncogene. 1991 Nov;6(11):2019-26.

Differential regulation of three members of the ATF/CREB family of DNA-binding
proteins.

Flint KJ(1), Jones NC.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

The ATF/CRE binding site can mediate transcriptional activation by cAMP, the
adenovirus E1A protein and the human T-cell leukaemia virus 1 (HTLV1) tax
protein. A large number of different proteins bind specifically to this element
either as homodimers or as heterodimers. Using GAL4-ATF/CREB fusions, we have
investigated the regulatory functions of three members of this family. CREB1
(CREB) is strongly activated by cAMP and weakly activated by the E1A protein. In 
contrast, CREB2 (CRE-BP1, ATF2) is strongly activated by E1A but is insensitive
to cAMP stimulation. ATF1 is weakly activated by cAMP but is not activated by
E1A. All three proteins are insensitive to activation by the HTLV1 tax protein.
The N-terminal region of CREB2, from amino acid residues 19 to 112, is both
necessary and sufficient for E1A activation. This region contains a putative C2H2
metal-binding finger, and single amino acid substitutions of the cysteine
residues severely decreased CREB2 activity. In contrast, mutations affecting a
potential protein kinase A and casein kinase II phosphorylation site within this 
region had little effect.

PMID: 1658708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Biol Chem. 1991 Aug 15;266(23):15525-31.

Molecular characterization of transcription factors that bind to the cAMP
responsive region of the substance P precursor gene. cDNA cloning of a novel
C/EBP-related factor.

Kageyama R(1), Sasai Y, Nakanishi S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Kyoto University Faculty of Medicine, Japan.

A cAMP response element (CRE) plays an important role in the cAMP-mediated gene
regulation. Several factors that recognize a CRE have been characterized, and it 
has been shown that they need either covalent modification by protein kinase A or
a cofactor such as the adenovirus Ela to function as an activator. In this study 
we show that the substance P precursor gene expression is regulated by protein
kinase A and identify the CRE sequence in its promoter region. We find that a
novel factor and ATF2 bind to the region containing the CRE of the substance P
precursor gene. The sequence analysis indicates that the novel protein,
designated CELF, has a significant homology to C/EBP gene family proteins in the 
carboxyl-terminal part containing the basic region and the leucine zipper motif. 
Ubiquitous expression of CELF suggests that this factor is utilized by various
genes. Cell-free transcription analyses indicate that CELF is a constitutive
transcriptional activator without apparent phosphorylation by protein kinase A.
These results demonstrate that multiple factors are responsible for
transcriptional control of the substance P precursor gene through the CRE region.

PMID: 1714459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Genomics. 1991 Aug;10(4):1103-4.

Assignment of the human CREB2 (CRE-BP1) gene to 2q32.

Ozawa K(1), Sudo T, Soeda E, Yoshida MC, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), Japan.

PMID: 1833307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 May 1;88(9):3720-4.

Cross-family dimerization of transcription factors Fos/Jun and ATF/CREB alters
DNA binding specificity.

Hai T(1), Curran T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Ohio State University, Columbus 43210.

The Fos/Jun and ATF/CREB families of transcription factors function in coupling
extracellular signals to alterations in expression of specific target genes. Like
many eukaryotic transcription factors, these proteins bind to DNA as dimers.
Dimerization is mediated by a structure known as the "leucine-zipper" motif.
Although Fos/Jun and ATF/CREB were previously thought to interact preferentially 
with different DNA regulatory elements (the AP-1/TRE and ATF/CRE sites,
respectively), we find that members of these two families form selective
cross-family heterodimers. The resulting heterodimers display distinguishable DNA
binding specificities from each other and from their parental homodimers. These
findings indicate that the Fos/Jun and ATF/CREB families of transcription factors
are not as distinct as was previously thought. We suggest that they can be
grouped into a superfamily of transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC51524
PMID: 1827203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Mol Endocrinol. 1991 Feb;5(2):256-66.

Identification of multiple nuclear factors that interact with cyclic adenosine
3',5'-monophosphate response element-binding protein and activating transcription
factor-2 by protein-protein interactions.

Hoeffler JP(1), Lustbader JW, Chen CY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado Cancer Center, Denver
80262.

Understanding the nature and importance of protein-protein interactions in the
mechanisms of eukaryotic gene expression is essential to understanding the normal
and aberrant regulation of gene transcription. Using 125I-labeled cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) and activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2)
recombinant peptides to probe Western blots of HeLa nuclear extracts, we have
identified multiple separate nuclear factors that form specific protein-protein
interactions with these leucine zipper-containing transcriptional regulatory
proteins. The interaction is specific because preincubation of blots with cold
homologous protein blocks the binding of labeled protein, whereas preincubation
of blots with cold heterologous protein has no effect on labeled protein
interactions. Although these studies focus on two specific transactivators, CREB 
and ATF-2, the approach is of general use for the study of other leucine
zipper-containing mammalian transcription factors. Furthermore, in addition to
allowing the detection of protein-protein interactions of CREB and ATF-2 with
nuclear factors, we have used this strategy to isolate cDNA clones expressing
these nuclear proteins. We demonstrate that CREB will form heterodimers with
ATF-1, but not ATF-2, Jun, Fos, or C/EBP whereas, ATF-2 will form heterodimers
with Jun and Fos, but not with C/EBP or ATF-1. This strategy, therefore, allows a
systematic approach to identifying, characterizing, and cloning proteins involved
in the control of eukaryotic transcriptional regulation. The identification and
characterization of the components of eukaryotic transcription complexes will
allow studies that address the molecular mechanisms of normal and abnormal
control of cellular gene expression.

PMID: 1828107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Apr;10(4):1347-57.

A cDNA for a human cyclic AMP response element-binding protein which is distinct 
from CREB and expressed preferentially in brain.

Kara CJ(1), Liou HC, Ivashkiv LB, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts.

The cyclic AMP response element (CRE) is found in many cellular genes regulated
by cyclic AMP, and similar elements are present in the early genes of adenovirus 
that are activated by E1A. The transcription factor CREB has previously been
shown to bind this site, and cDNAs for CREB have recently been characterized. We 
report here the isolation of a cDNA encoding a human DNA-binding protein that
also recognizes this motif in cellular and viral promoters. This protein, HB16,
displays structural similarity to CREB and to c-Jun and c-Fos, which bind the
related 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate response element (TRE). HB16
contains a highly basic, putative DNA-binding domain and a leucine zipper
structure thought to be involved in dimerization. Deletional analysis of HB16
demonstrated that the leucine zipper is required for its interaction with DNA. In
addition, HB16 could form a complex with c-Jun but not with c-Fos. Despite its
structural similarity to c-Jun and c-Fos and its interaction with c-Jun, HB16 had
approximately a 10-fold-lower affinity for the TRE sequence than for the CRE
sequence. Although HB16 and CREB both recognized the CRE motif, an extensive
binding analysis of HB16 revealed differences in the fine specificity of binding 
of the two proteins. HB16 mRNA was found at various levels in many human tissues 
but was most abundant in brain, where its expression was widespread. The
existence of more than one CRE-binding protein suggests that the CRE motif could 
serve multiple regulatory functions.

PMCID: PMC362236
PMID: 2320002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Apr;10(4):1609-21.

mXBP/CRE-BP2 and c-Jun form a complex which binds to the cyclic AMP, but not to
the 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, response element.

Ivashkiv LB(1), Liou HC, Kara CJ, Lamph WW, Verma IM, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts.

Proto-oncogene products c-Fos and c-Jun form a complex which binds with high
affinity to the 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) response DNA element
and which stimulates transcription of phorbol ester- inducible genes. We have
previously identified, by screening a lambda gt11 expression library, murine
protein mXBP, which binds to a sequence which overlaps the 3' end of the murine
class II major histocompatibility complex A alpha gene X box, a conserved
transcription element found upstream of all class II genes. Here, we demonstrate 
that the target sequence for mXBP is a consensus cyclic AMP response element
(CRE). mXBP is a member of the leucine zipper family of DNA-binding proteins and 
has significant homology to oncoproteins c-Fos and c-Jun. The inferred amino acid
sequence of mXBP shows near identity to human CRE-BP1, except it does not contain
an internal proline-rich domain. Immunoprecipitation and glutaraldehyde
cross-linking studies show that mXBP/CRE-BP2 can form a complex with c-Jun.
Complex formation is dependent on intact leucine zipper domains in both proteins.
mXBP-c-Jun complexes can coexist with c-Fos-c-Jun complexes and can bind with
high affinity to CRE, but not to TPA response DNA element, sequences. These
results suggest that changes in the expression of mXBP/CRE-BP2, c-Fos, and c-Jun,
which alter the ratio of mXBP-c-Jun to c-Fos-c-Jun complexes, would affect the
relative expression of cyclic AMP and phorbol ester-responsive genes. This
provides support for a combinatorial model of gene regulation, whereby
protein-protein interactions which alter the DNA binding specificity of protein
complexes can expand the flexibility of cellular transcriptional responses.

PMCID: PMC362266
PMID: 2138707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. EMBO J. 1989 Jul;8(7):2023-8.

Leucine zipper structure of the protein CRE-BP1 binding to the cyclic AMP
response element in brain.

Maekawa T(1), Sakura H, Kanei-Ishii C, Sudo T, Yoshimura T, Fujisawa J, Yoshida
M, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Ibaraki, Japan.

By screening a lambda gt11 library with the multimerized sequence of the cAMP
response element (CRE), we isolated human clones encoding the CRE binding
protein, CRE-BP1, from a human brain cDNA library. CRE-BP1 expressed in
Escherichia coli bound not only to the CRE element of the somatostatin and
fibronectin genes, but also to the CRE element of the adenovirus E4 gene,
suggesting that the protein was not distinguishable from the adenovirus
transcription factor, ATF. The human CRE-BP1 clone encoded a 54.5 kd protein
similar at its carboxy terminus to the leucine zipper motifs found in other
enhancer binding proteins such as C/EBP and c-jun/AP-1. CRE-BP1 mRNA was
expressed in all of the cells examined and was abundant in brain. The structure
of CRE-BP1 and its recognition elements suggest that cellular response to
extracellular stimuli is controlled by a family of transcription factors that
bind to related cis-active elements and that contain several highly conserved
domains.

PMCID: PMC401081
PMID: 2529117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Nature. 1989 Feb 23;337(6209):749-52.

A cluster of phosphorylation sites on the cyclic AMP-regulated nuclear factor
CREB predicted by its sequence.

Gonzalez GA(1), Yamamoto KK, Fischer WH, Karr D, Menzel P, Biggs W 3rd, Vale WW, 
Montminy MR.

Author information: 
(1)Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037.

Cyclic AMP regulates the expression of a number of genes through a conserved
promoter element, the CRE1. Moreover, transcriptional induction by cAMP requires 
the activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase A). We have
previously characterized the cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) in PC12
cells and brain tissue as a nuclear factor, of relative molecular mass 43,000,
whose transcriptional efficacy is regulated by protein kinase A phosphorylation. 
CREB stimulates transcription on binding to the CRE as a dimer. Experiments
suggesting that the dimerization and transcriptional efficacy of CREB are each
stimulated by phosphorylation at distinct sites prompted us to suggest that CREB 
is regulated by multiple kinases in vivo. We now report the isolation of a cDNA
clone for rat CREB using amino-acid sequence information from purified CREB
protein. Sequence analysis of this CREB cDNA predicts a cluster of protein kinase
A, protein kinase C and casein kinase II consensus recognition sites near the N
terminus of the protein. The proximity of these potential phosphorylation sites
to one another indicates that they may interact either positively or negatively
to regulate CREB bioactivity.

PMID: 2521922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


