
1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 18. pii: jbc.M115.713099. [Epub ahead of print]

The Stress Responsive Gene ATF3 Mediates Dichotomous UV Responses by Regulating
Tip60 and p53.

Cui H(1), Li X(1), Han C(2), Wang QE(2), Wang H(3), Ding HF(1), Zhang J(4), Yan
C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Augusta University, United States; (2)Ohio State University, United States;
(3)Yantai University, China; (4)Case Western Reserve University, United States.
(5)Augusta University, United States; cyan@gru.edu.

The response to UV irradiation is important for a cell to maintain its genetic
integrity when challenged by environmental genotoxicins. An immediate early
response to UV is the rapid induction of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3)
expression. Although emerging evidence has linked ATF3 to stress pathways
regulated by the tumor suppressor p53 and the histone acetyltransferase Tip60,
the role of ATF3 in the UV response remains largely unclear. Here, we report that
ATF3 mediated dichotomous UV responses. While UV enhanced the binding of ATF3 to 
Tip60, knockdown of ATF3 expression decreased the Tip60 stability thereby
impairing Tip60 induction by UV. In line with the role of Tip60 in mediating
UV-induced apoptosis, ATF3 promoted the death of p53-defective cells in response 
to UV irradiation. However, ATF3 could also activate p53, and promote
p53-mediated DNA repair mainly through altering histone modifications that could 
facilitate recruitment of DNA repair proteins (such as DDB2) to damaged DNA
sites. As a result, ATF3 rather protected p53-wildtype cells from UV-induced
apoptosis. Our results thus indicate that ATF3 regulates cell fates upon UV
irradiation in a p53-dependent manner.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26994140  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2016 Mar 16. pii: fnw062. [Epub ahead of print]

ATF3 provides protection from Staphylococcus aureus and Listeria monocytogenes
infections.

Nguyen CT(1), Luong TT(1), Lee SY(1), Kim GL(1), Pyo S(1), Rhee DK(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Su-Won 440-746, South Korea.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Su-Won 440-746, South Korea
dkrhee@skku.edu.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a stress-induced transcriptional
regulator in eukaryote. The role of ATF3 in cancer has been well defined, but how
ATF3 functions in bacterial infection is not well understood. Pneumococcal
infection has been shown to induce ATF3 expression, which subsequently enhances
cytokine production and provides protection from lethal Streptococcus pneumoniae 
infection, but the role of ATF3 in other Gram-positive (G(+)) infections remains 
unclear. Here, we report that infection with other G(+) bacteria (Staphylococcus 
aureus and Listeria monocytogenes) and with G(-) bacteria (uropathogenic
Escherichia coli) also significantly induced ATF3 expression. Moreover, the
production of cytokines (tumor necrosis factor alpha [TNF]-a, interleukin
[IL]-1ß, IL-6, and interferon [IFN]-<U+03B3>) was enhanced by ATF3 in S. aureus and L.
monocytogenes infection, but decreased in uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC) infection.
In addition, in S. aureus and L. monocytogenes infections, ATF3 WT mice cleared
bacteria more efficiently and had higher survival rates than ATF3 knockout (KO)
mice. However, in UPEC infection, no significant difference was found in survival
rate. Taken together, these data suggest that ATF3 provides protection from S.
aureus and L. monocytogenes infections; however, the role of ATF3 in UPEC
infection is more complicated and should be further elucidated.

© FEMS 2016. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26989156  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2016 Mar 11:ajpgi.00052.2016. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00052.2016. [Epub ahead of print]

General control nonderepressible kinase 2 (GCN2) deletion predisposes to
asparaginase-associated pancreatitis in mice.

Phillipson-Weiner L(1), Mirek ET(2), Wang Y(1), McAuliffe WG(1), Wek RC(3),
Anthony TG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Rutgers University. (2)Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey. (3)Indiana
University School of Medicine. (4)Rutgers University tracy.anthony@rutgers.edu.

Treatment with the anti-leukemic agent asparaginase can induce acute pancreatitis
but the pathophysiology remains obscure. In the liver of mice, the eIF2 kinase
GCN2 is essential for mitigating metabolic stress caused by asparaginase. Herein 
we determined the consequences of asparaginase treatment on the pancreata of mice
with GCN2 intact (WT) or deleted (<U+0394>Gcn2). Mean pancreas weights in <U+0394>Gcn2 mice
treated with asparaginase for 8 d were increased (P<0.05) above all other groups.
Histological examination revealed acinar cell swelling and altered staining of
zymogen granules in <U+0394>Gcn2 but not WT mice. Oil red O staining and measurement of 
pancreas triglycerides excluded lipid accumulation as contributing to acini
appearance. Instead, transmission electron microscopy revealed dilatation of the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and accumulation of autophagic vacuoles in the
pancreas of <U+0394>Gcn2 mice treated with asparaginase. Consistent with the idea that
loss of GCN2 in pancreas exposed to asparaginase induced ER stress, there was
increased phosphorylation of PERK and its substrate eIF2 in the pancreas of
asparaginase-treated <U+0394>Gcn2 mice. In addition, mRNA expression of PERK-target
genes, Atf4, Atf3, Atf6, Fgf21, Hspa5 and sXbp1, were elevated in the pancreas of
asparaginase-treated <U+0394>Gcn2 mice accompanied by increased pancreas mass.
Furthermore, genetic markers of oxidative stress (Sirt1), inflammation (Tnfa) and
pancreatic injury (Pap) were elevated in asparaginase-treated <U+0394>Gcn2 but not WT
mice. These data indicate that loss of GCN2 predisposes the exocrine pancreas
toward a maladaptive ER stress response and autophagy during asparaginase
treatment, and represent a genetic basis for development of
asparaginase-associated pancreatitis.

Copyright © 2016, American Journal of Physiology- Gastrointestinal and Liver
Physiology.

PMID: 26968207  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2016 Mar 10. [Epub ahead of print]

Identifying candidate genes involved in osteoarthritis through bioinformatics
analysis.

Zhang X(1), Yuan Z(1), Cui S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microsurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of the Henan
University of Science and Technology, Luoyang, Henan Province, China.

OBJECTIVES: This study aims to identify candidate genes and critical pathways
involved in osteoarthritis (OA).
METHODS: Gene expression data of synovial membrane from OA patients and normal
controls (NCs) were downloaded from database. Totally, 15 OA and 14 NC chips were
available. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified through limma
package (log2 fold change >0.585, false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05), and
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed using STRING. Moreover,
perturbation and pathway enrichment analyses were performed through
PerturbationAnalyzer in Cytoscape (iterative criteria <1×e-10) and
clusterProfiler package (FDR <0.05), respectively.
RESULTS: Totally, 236 up-regulated and 290 down-regulated DEGs were identified.
In PPI network, 10 hub genes were found, including VEGFA, IL6, JUN, IL1B, ICAM1, 
ATF3, IL8, EGR1, CDKN1A, and JUNB. After perturbation analysis, 32 DEGs were
passively and significantly changed, like PISD, RARRES3, EIF4G1, and EPHA3.
Furthermore, 526 DEGs were enriched in 176 pathways, and pathway cross-talk
network was constructed, involving 12 pathways and 66 cross-talks.
CONCLUSIONS: Pathways like rheumatoid arthritis, osteoclast differentiation, and 
cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction might play critical roles in OA, and
previously unreported genes VEGFA, JUN, JUNB, PISD, RARRES3, EIF4G1, and EPHA3
might participate in OA, providing novel directions for drug targeting.

PMID: 26968041  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2016;38(3):1129-37. doi: 10.1159/000443063. Epub 2016 Mar
11.

Ryanodine Receptor 2 Plays a Critical Role in Spinal Cord Injury via Induction of
Oxidative Stress.

Liao B, Zhang Y, Sun H, Ma B, Qian J.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a severe health problem worldwide.
Ryanodine receptors (RyRs) are a class of intracellular calcium channels in
various excitable tissues such as muscles and nervous tissues. The current study 
was designed to investigate the possible role of RyR2 upregulation in SCI and to 
elucidate the possible molecular mechanisms.
METHODS: Rats were injected with LVshRNAi- RyR2 and then exposed to spinal cord
contusion injury.
RESULTS: The results showed that knockdown of RyR2 significantly promoted the
recovery of structural and functional injury in spinal cord, as evidenced by
reduction of lesion volume and increase of Basso, Beattie and Bresnahan (BBB) and
combined behavioral score (CBS) scores. Knockdown of RyR2 inhibited the increase 
of proinflammatory cytokines, including IL-1ß and TNFa. Moreover, downregulation 
of RyR2 increased oxygen consumption rate and decreased the expression of
glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3)
and ATF6, indicating the improvement of mitochondrial dysfunction and endoplasmic
reticulum stress after SCI. Furthermore, silence of RyR2 reduced oxidative
stress, as reflected by decrease of TBARS and GSSG content and increase of GSH
level. The expression of NADPH oxidase 2 (NOX2), NOX4 and p66shc were increased
in SCI rats. Knockdown of RyR2 significantly decreased NOX2 expression, but had
no evident effect on NOX4 and p66shc expression. These results indicated NOX2 may
be involved in RyR2-induced ROS generation which mediated contusion-induced
spinal cord injury.
CONCLUSION: The data provide novel insights into the mechanism of RyR2-mediated
injury and the potential therapeutic targets for injury in spinal cord.

© 2016 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26963898  [PubMed - in process]


6. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 9. pii: jbc.M115.696609. [Epub ahead of print]

Acquisition of Chemoresistance and other Malignancy-related Features of
Colorectal Cancer Cells are incremented by Ribosome-Inactivating Stress.

Oh CK(1), Lee SJ(1), Park SH(2), Moon Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pusan National University School of Medicine, Korea, Republic of; (2)usan
National University School of Medicine, Korea, Republic of. (3)Pusan National
University School of Medicine, Korea, Republic of; moon@pnu.edu.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) as an environmental disease is largely influenced by
accumulated epithelial stress from diverse environmental causes. We are exposed
to ribosome-related insults including ribosome-inactivating stress (RIS) from the
environment, dietary factors, and medicines, but their physiological impacts on
the chemotherapy of CRC are not yet understood. Here, we revealed the effects of 
RIS on chemosensitivity and other malignancy-related properties of CRC cells.
First, RIS led to bidirectional inhibition of p53-macrophage inhibitory cytokine 
1 (MIC-1)-mediated death responses in response to anticancer drugs by either
enhancing ATF3-linked antiapoptotic signaling or intrinsically inhibiting MIC-1
and p53 expressions, regardless of ATF3. Second, RIS enhanced epithelial
mesenchymal transition (EMT) and biogenesis of cancer stem-like cells (CSC) in an
ATF3-dependent manner. These findings indicated that gastrointestinal exposure to
RIS interferes with the efficacy of chemotherapeutics, mechanistically
implicating that ATF3-linked malignancy and chemoresistance can be novel
therapeutic targets for treatment of environmentally aggravated cancers.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26961878  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Neuropharmacology. 2016 Mar 3;107:89-99. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2016.02.037.
[Epub ahead of print]

Differential regulation of the phosphorylation of Trimethyl-lysine27 histone H3
at serine 28 in distinct populations of striatal projection neurons.

Bonito-Oliva A(1), Södersten E(1), Spigolon G(1), Hu X(1), Hellysaz A(1), Falconi
A(1), Gomes AL(2), Broberger C(1), Hansen K(2), Fisone G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC) and Centre for Epigenetics,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Phosphorylation of histone H3 (H3) on serine 28 (S28) at genomic regions marked
by trimethylation of lysine 27 (H3K27me3) often correlates with increased
expression of genes normally repressed by Polycomb group proteins (PcG). We show 
that amphetamine, an addictive psychostimulant, and haloperidol, a typical
antipsychotic drug, increase the phosphorylation of H3 at S28 and that this
effect occurs in the context of H3K27me3. The increases in H3K27me3S28p occur in 
distinct populations of projection neurons located in the striatum, the major
component of the basal ganglia. Genetic inactivation of the protein phosphatase-1
inhibitor, dopamine- and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein of 32 kDa (DARPP-32),
reduces the phosphorylation of H3K27me3S28 produced by amphetamine and
haloperidol. In contrast, knockout of the mitogen- and stress activated kinase 1 
(MSK1), which is implicated in the phosphorylation of histone H3, decreases the
effect of amphetamine, but not that of haloperidol. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis shows that amphetamine and haloperidol increase the phosphorylation of
H3K27me3S28 at the promoter regions of Atf3, Npas4 and Lipg, three genes
repressed by PcG. These results identify H3K27me3S28p as a potential mediator of 
the effects exerted by amphetamine and haloperidol, and suggest that these drugs 
may act by re-activating PcG repressed target genes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26947946  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Mar 4. pii: molcanther.0332.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Edelfosine Promotes Apoptosis in Androgen Deprived Prostate Tumors by Increasing 
ATF3 and Inhibiting Androgen Receptor Activity.

Udayakumar TS(1), Stoyanova R(1), Shareef MM(1), Mu Z(2), Philip S(1), Burnstein 
KL(3), Pollack A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Sylvester Cancer Center, Miller School of
Medicine, University of Miami. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Thomas
Jefferson University. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology,
University of Miami. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Sylvester Cancer
Center, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami apollack@med.miami.edu.

Edelfosine is a synthetic alkyl-lysophospholipid (ALP) that possesses significant
antitumor activity in several human tumor models. Here, we investigated the
effects of edelfosine combined with androgen deprivation (AD) in LNCaP and VCaP
human prostate cancer cells. This treatment regimen greatly decreased cell
proliferation compared to single agent or AD alone resulting in higher levels of 
apoptosis in LNCaP compared to VCaP cells. Edelfosine caused a dose-dependent
decrease in AKT activity, but did not affect the expression of total AKT in
either cell line. Furthermore, edelfosine treatment inhibited the expression of
androgen receptor (AR) and was associated with an increase in activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) expression levels, a stress response gene and a
negative regulator of AR transactivation. ATF3 binds to AR after edelfosine + AD 
and represses the transcriptional activation of AR as demonstrated by prostate
specific antigen (PSA) promoter studies. Knockdown of ATF3 using siRNA-ATF3
reversed the inhibition of PSA promoter activity, suggesting that the growth
inhibition effect of edelfosine was ATF3 dependent. Moreover, expression of AR
variant 7 (ARv7) and TMPRSS2-ERG fusion gene were greatly inhibited after
combined treatment with AD and edelfosine in VCaP cells. In vivo experiments
using an orthotopic LNCaP model confirmed the anti-tumor effects of edelfosine + 
AD over the individual treatments. A significant decrease in tumor volume and PSA
levels were observed when edelfosine and AD were combined, compared to edelfosine
alone. Edelfosine shows promise in combination with AD for the treatment of
prostate cancer patients.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26944919  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 23. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7646. [Epub ahead of print]

A small molecule induces integrin ß4 nuclear translocation and apoptosis
selectively in cancer cells with high expression of integrin ß4.

Liu S(1), Ge D(2,)(3), Chen L(1), Zhao J(1), Su L(1), Zhang S(1), Miao J(1,)(4), 
Zhao B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Cells and Developmental Biology, 
School of Life Science, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, China. (2)School of
Biological Science and Technology, University of Jinan, Jinan 250022, China.
(3)Institute of Organic Chemistry, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, 
Shandong University, Jinan 250100, China. (4)The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular
Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese Ministry of Education and Chinese
Ministry of Health, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan 250012, China.

Increased integrin ß4 (ITGB4) level is accompanied by malignant progression of
multiple carcinomas. However, selective therapeutic strategies against cancer
cells expressing a high level of ITGB4 have not been reported. Here, for the
first time, we report that a chiral small molecule, SEC, selectively promotes
apoptosis in cancer cells expressing a high level of ITGB4 by inducing ITGB4
nuclear translocation. Nuclear ITGB4 can bind to the ATF3 promoter region and
activate the expression of ATF3, then upregulate the downstream pro-apoptosis
genes. Furthermore, SEC promoted the binding of annexin A7 (ANXA7) to ITGB4 and
increased ANXA7 GTPase activity. Activated ANXA7 promoted ITGB4 nuclear
translocation by triggering ITGB4 phosphorylation at Y1494. SEC also inhibited
the growth of xenograft tumors in the avian embryo model. We identified a small
molecule, SEC, with selective pro-apoptosis effects on cancer cells with high
expression of ITGB4, both in vitro and in vivo, by triggering the binding of
ITGB4 and ANXA7, ITGB4 nuclear trafficking, and pro-apoptosis gene expression.

PMID: 26918348  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. BMC Gastroenterol. 2016 Feb 25;16(1):25. doi: 10.1186/s12876-016-0442-3.

Niclosamide induced cell apoptosis via upregulation of ATF3 and activation of
PERK in Hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Weng S(1,)(2,)(3), Zhou L(4), Deng Q(5), Wang J(6), Yu Y(7), Zhu J(8), Yuan
Y(9,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Engineering Research Center of Cell and Therapeutic Antibody, Ministry of
Education, School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Rd,
Biology and Pharmacy Building, suite 6-208, Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic
of China. wengshunyan@hotmail.com. (2)The Shanghai Municipality Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Biotechnology, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, 800 Dongchuan Rd, Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China.
wengshunyan@hotmail.com. (3)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Rd, Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of
China. wengshunyan@hotmail.com. (4)The Shanghai Municipality Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Biotechnology, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, 800 Dongchuan Rd, Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China.
Abang1212@sjtu.edu.cn. (5)The Shanghai Municipality Key Laboratory of Veterinary 
Biotechnology, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
800 Dongchuan Rd, Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China.
dengqingemma@sjtu.edu.cn. (6)Engineering Research Center of Cell and Therapeutic 
Antibody, Ministry of Education, School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, 800 Dongchuan Rd, Biology and Pharmacy Building, suite 6-208,
Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China. Wangjiaxian1993@foxmail.com. (7)The
Shanghai Municipality Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, School of
Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Rd,
Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China. Yanyu@sjtu.edu.cn. (8)Engineering
Research Center of Cell and Therapeutic Antibody, Ministry of Education, School
of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Rd, Biology and
Pharmacy Building, suite 6-208, Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China.
JianweiZ@SJTU.EDU.CN. (9)Engineering Research Center of Cell and Therapeutic
Antibody, Ministry of Education, School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, 800 Dongchuan Rd, Biology and Pharmacy Building, suite 6-208,
Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China. yunsheng@sjtu.edu.cn. (10)The
Shanghai Municipality Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, School of
Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Rd,
Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China. yunsheng@sjtu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of most common and aggressive
human malignancies in the world, especially, in eastern Asia, and its mortality
is very high at any phase. We want to investigate mechanism of niclosamide
inducing cell apoptosis in HCC.
METHODS: Two hepatoma cell lines were used to evaluate activity of niclosamide
inducing cell apoptosis and study its mechanism. Quantitative real-time PCR and
western blotting were used in analysis of genes expression or protein active
regulated by niclosamide.
RESULTS: Niclosamide remarkably induced cell apoptosis in hepatoma cells.
Furthermore, our study revealed that RNA-dependent protein kinase-like kinase
(PERK) is activated and its expression is up-regulated in HCC cells which are
exposed to niclosamide. niclosamide also significantly increase activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3), activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein (CHOP) expression in HCC cells.
It's suggested that the function of niclosamide was abrogated by PERK inhibitor
or absent ATF3. Expression of PERK and CHOP is correlated with ATF3 level in the 
cells.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our results indicate that ATF3 plays an integral role
in ER stress activated and cell apoptosis induced by niclosamide in HCC cells. In
this study, the new mechanism of niclosamide as anti-cancer we investigated, too.

PMCID: PMC4766699
PMID: 26917416  [PubMed - in process]


11. J Neurosci Res. 2016 May;94(5):378-88. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23723. Epub 2016 Feb 22.

Protective upregulation of activating transcription factor-3 against glutamate
neurotoxicity in neuronal cells under ischemia.

Takarada T(1), Kou M(1), Hida M(1), Fukumori R(1), Nakamura S(1), Kutsukake T(1),
Kuramoto N(2), Hinoi E(1), Yoneda Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical, Pharmaceutical, and Health
Sciences, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan. (2)Department of Toxicology, Setsunan
University, Hirakata, Osaka, Japan.

This study evaluates the pathological role of the stress sensor activating
transcription factor-3 (ATF3) in ischemic neurotoxicity. Upregulation of the
transcript and protein for ATF3 was seen 2-10 hr after reperfusion in the
ipsilateral cerebral hemisphere of mice with transient middle cerebral artery
occlusion for 2 hr. Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed the expression of ATF3
by cells immunoreactive for a neuronal marker in neocortex, hippocampus, and
striatum within 2 hr after reperfusion. In murine neocortical neurons previously 
cultured under ischemic conditions for 2 hr, transient upregulation of both Atf3 
and ATF3 expression was similarly found during subsequent culture for 2-24 hr
under normoxia. Lentiviral overexpression of ATF3 ameliorated the neurotoxicity
of glutamate (Glu) in cultured murine neurons along with a slight but
statistically significant inhibition of both Fluo-3 and rhodamine-2 fluorescence 
increases by N-methyl-D-aspartate. Similarly, transient upregulation was seen in 
Atf3 and ATF3 expression during the culture for 48 hr in neuronal Neuro2A cells
previously cultured under ischemic conditions for 2 hr. Luciferase reporter
analysis with ATF3 promoter together with immunoblotting revealed the possible
involvement of several transcription factors responsive to extracellular and
intracellular stressors in the transactivation of the Atf3 gene in Neuro2A cells.
ATF3 could be upregulated to play a role in mechanisms underlying mitigation of
the neurotoxicity mediated by the endogenous neurotoxin Glu at an early stage
after ischemic signal inputs. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26900013  [PubMed - in process]


12. Neuropharmacology. 2016 Feb 17;105:543-552. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2016.02.016. [Epub ahead of print]

Blockade of the spinal BDNF-activated JNK pathway prevents the development of
antiretroviral-induced neuropathic pain.

Sanna MD(1), Ghelardini C(1), Galeotti N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuropsychopharmacology, Department of Neurosciences,
Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health (NEUROFARBA), Section of Pharmacology,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy. (2)Laboratory of
Neuropsychopharmacology, Department of Neurosciences, Psychology, Drug Research
and Child Health (NEUROFARBA), Section of Pharmacology, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy. Electronic address: nicoletta.galeotti@unifi.it.

Although antiretroviral agents have been used successfully in suppressing viral
production, they have also been associated with a number of side effects. The
antiretroviral toxic neuropathy induces debilitating and extremely difficult to
treat pain syndromes that often lead to discontinuation of antiretroviral
therapy. Due to the critical need for the identification of novel therapeutic
targets to improve antiretroviral neuropathic pain management, we investigated
the role of the JNK signalling pathway in the mechanism of antiretroviral painful
neuropathy. Mice were exposed to zalcitabine (2',3'-dideoxycytidine, ddC) and
stavudine (2',3'-didehydro-3'-deoxythymidine, d4T) that induced a persistent
mechanical allodynia and a transient cold allodynia. Treatment with the JNK
blocker SP600125 before antiretroviral administration abolished mechanical
hypersensitivity with no effect on thermal response. A robust spinal JNK
overphosphorylation was observed on post-injection day 1 and 3, along with a
JNK-dependent increase in p-c-Jun and ATF3 protein levels. Co-immunoprecipitation
experiments showed the presence of a heterodimeric complex between ATF3 and c-Jun
indicating that these transcription factors can act together to regulate
transcription through heterodimerization. A rise in BDNF and caspase-3 protein
levels was detected on day 1 and BDNF sequestration prevented both caspase-3 and 
p-JNK increase. These data suggest that BDNF plays a role in the early stages of 
ddC-induced allodynia by promoting apoptotic events and the activation of a
hypernociceptive JNK-mediated pathway. We illustrated the activation of a
BDNF-mediated JNK pathway involved in the early events responsible for the
promotion of neuropathic pain, leading to a better knowledge of the mechanisms
involved in the antiretroviral neuropathy.SUMMARY: JNK blockade prevents
antiretroviral-induced pain hypersensitivity. This may represent a potential
prophylactic treatment of neuropathic pain to improve antiretroviral
tolerability.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26898292  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Cancer Biol Ther. 2016 Mar 3;17(3):291-9. doi: 10.1080/15384047.2016.1139245.
Epub 2016 Jan 30.

Rapid induction of apoptosis in chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells by the
microtubule disrupting agent BNC105.

Bates D(1,)(2), Feris EJ(3,)(2), Danilov AV(1,)(2), Eastman A(3,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medicine , Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth , Lebanon , 
NH , USA. (2)c Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth , Lebanon , NH , USA. (3)b Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology , 
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth , Lebanon , NH , USA.

Microtubule targeting agents, such as vinblastine, are usually thought to arrest 
cells in mitosis and subsequently induce apoptosis. However, they can also cause 
rapid induction of apoptosis in a cell-cycle phase independent manner. BNC105 is 
a novel vascular and microtubule disrupting drug that also induces apoptosis
rapidly but with markedly increased potency compared to vinca alkaloids and
combretastatin A4. BNC105 binds to the colchicine-binding site on tubulin
resulting in activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), phosphorylation of
ATF2, and induction of ATF3 and Noxa leading to acute apoptosis in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells. Apoptosis induced by BNC105 is dependent upon
both JNK activation and Noxa induction. Normal leukocytes and one CLL sample also
exhibited JNK activation but not Noxa induction and were resistant to BNC105.
This study emphasizes the importance of Noxa and JNK for induction of apoptosis
in CLL cells by microtubule targeting drugs, and highlights the potential of
BNC105 as a potent therapeutic to treat haematopoietic malignancies.

PMID: 26891146  [PubMed - in process]


14. Bone. 2016 Apr;85:91-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2016.01.024. Epub 2016 Feb 2.

Successful induction of sclerostin in human-derived fibroblasts by 4
transcription factors and its regulation by parathyroid hormone, hypoxia, and
prostaglandin E2.

Fujiwara M(1), Kubota T(2), Wang W(2), Ohata Y(2), Miura K(2), Kitaoka T(2),
Okuzaki D(3), Namba N(4), Michigami T(5), Kitabatake Y(2), Ozono K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
565-0871, Japan; First Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Osaka
University Graduate School of Dentistry, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (2)Department of 
Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. 
(3)DNA-chip Development Center for Infectious Diseases, Research Institute for
Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (4)Department of
Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; 
Department of Pediatrics, JCHO Osaka Hospital, Osaka 553-0003, Japan.
(5)Department of Bone and Mineral Research, Osaka Medical Center and Research
Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Osaka 594-1101, Japan. (6)Department of 
Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. 
Electronic address: keioz@ped.med.osaka-u.ac.jp.

Sclerostin, coded by SOST, is a secretory protein that is specifically expressed 
in osteocytes and suppresses osteogenesis by inhibiting WNT signaling. The
regulatory mechanism underlying SOST expression remains unclear mainly due to the
absence of an adequate human cell model. Thus, we herein attempted to establish a
cell model of human dermal fibroblasts in order to investigate the functions of
sclerostin. We selected 20 candidate transcription factors (TFs) that induce SOST
expression by analyzing gene expression patterns in the human sarcoma cell line, 
SaOS-2, between differentiation and maintenance cultures using microarrays. An
effective set of TFs to induce SOST expression was sought by their viral
transduction into fibroblasts, and a combination of four TFs: ATF3, KLF4, PAX4,
and SP7, was identified as the most effective inducer of SOST expression.
Quantitative PCR demonstrated that the expression levels of SOST in fibroblasts
treated with the 4 TFs were 199- and 1439-fold higher than those of the control
after 1-week and 4-week cultures, respectively. The level of sclerostin in the
conditioned medium, as determined by ELISA, was 21.2pmol/l 4weeks after the
transduction of the 4 TFs. Interestingly, the production of Dickkopf1 (DKK1),
another secreted inhibitor of WNT signaling, was also increased by transduction
of these 4 TFs. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) significantly suppressed the induced
SOST by 38% and sclerostin by 82% that of the vehicle. Hypoxia increased the
induced SOST by 62% that of normoxia. Furthermore, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)
increased SOST expression levels to 16-fold those of the vehicle. In conclusion, 
the efficient induction of SOST expression and sclerostin production was achieved
in human dermal fibroblasts by the transduction of ATF3, KLF4, PAX4, and SP7, and
the induced SOST and sclerostin were regulated by PTH, hypoxia, and PGE2. This
model may contribute to elucidating the regulatory mechanisms underlying SOST
expression and advancing drug development for metabolic bone diseases.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26851122  [PubMed - in process]


15. Anticancer Res. 2016 Feb;36(2):509-16.

Potential Dual Role of Activating Transcription Factor 3 in Colorectal Cancer.

Jiang X(1), Kim KJ(1), Ha T(1), Lee SH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, College of Agriculture and Natural
Resources, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, U.S.A. (2)Department of
Nutrition and Food Science, College of Agriculture and Natural Resources,
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, U.S.A. slee2000@umd.edu.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a member of the
ATF/CREB transcription factor family and has been proposed as a molecular target 
for cancer therapy. The present study was undertaken in order to investigate
whether ATF3 influences cancer-related phenotypes in colorectal cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: ATF3 was overexpressed in human colorectal cancer cells
and the effects of ATF3 on apoptosis, cell cycle, cell migration and epithelial
mesenchymal transition (EMT) were investigated. B-cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2)
promoter was cloned and used for luciferase assay in cells transfected with
control or ATF3 expression vector.
RESULTS: ATF3 down-regulated the expression of Bcl-2 and promoter activity of the
Bcl-2 gene. ATF3 increased collective cell migration and expression of cluster of
differentiation 44 (CD44) and decreased retinoblastoma (Rb) expression. In
addition, ATF3 down-regulated EMT-inducing transcription factors and ß-catenin.
CONCLUSION: ATF3 may play a dichotomous role in apoptosis and metastasis in human
colorectal cancer cells.

Copyright© 2016 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26851004  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2016 Mar;92:149-57. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2016.02.001. Epub
2016 Feb 2.

Activating transcription factor 3 SUMOylation is involved in angiotensin
II-induced endothelial cell inflammation and dysfunction.

Zhang ZB(1), Ruan CC(2), Chen DR(2), Zhang K(1), Yan C(2), Gao PJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Vascular Biology and Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology,
Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences & Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China. (2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Hypertension, Department of
Hypertension, Ruijin Hospital and Shanghai Institute of Hypertension, Shanghai
JiaoTong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (3)Laboratory of
Vascular Biology and Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences & Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China;
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Hypertension, Department of Hypertension, Ruijin
Hospital and Shanghai Institute of Hypertension, Shanghai JiaoTong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: gaopingjin@sibs.ac.cn.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is an adaptive-response protein induced 
by various environmental stresses and is implicated in the pathogenesis of many
disease states. However, the role of ATF3 SUMOylation in hypertension-induced
vascular injury remains poorly understood. Here we investigated the function of
ATF3 SUMOylation in vascular endothelial cells (ECs). The expression of ATF3 and 
small ubiquitin-like modifier 1 (SUMO1) was increased in angiotensin II (Ang
II)-induced human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Microscopic analyses
further revealed that the expression of ATF3 and SUMO1 is upregulated and
colocalized in the endothelium of thoracic aortas from Ang II-induced
hypertensive mice. However, Ang II-induced upregulation of ATF3 and SUMO1 in
vitro and in vivo was blocked by Ang II type I receptor antagonist olmesartan.
Moreover, Ang II induced ATF3 SUMOylation at lysine 42, which is SUMO1 dependent.
ATF3 SUMOylation attenuated ATF3 ubiquitination and in turn promoted ATF3 protein
stability. ATF3 or SUMO1 knockdown inhibited Ang II-induced expression of
inflammatory molecules such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a, interleukin (IL)-6 
and IL-8. Wild type ATF3 but not ATF3-K42R (SUMOylation defective mutant) reduced
the production of nitric oxide (NO), a key indicator of EC function.
Consistently, ginkgolic acid, an inhibitor of SUMOylation, increased NO
production in HUVECs and significantly improved vasodilatation of aorta from Ang 
II-induced hypertensive mice. Our findings demonstrated that ATF3 SUMOylation is 
involved in Ang II-induced EC inflammation and dysfunction in vitro and in vivo
through inhibiting ATF3 ubiquitination and increasing ATF3 protein stability.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26850942  [PubMed - in process]


17. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 5;6:20109. doi: 10.1038/srep20109.

An accelerated miRNA-based screen implicates Atf-3 in Drosophila odorant receptor
expression.

Bhat S(1), Jones WD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lab for Behavioral Neurobiology, KAIST Biological Sciences, 291 Daehak-ro,
Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea.

The Drosophila olfactory system is highly stereotyped in form and function;
olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) expressing a specific odorant receptor (OR)
always appear in the same antennal location and the axons of OSNs expressing the 
same OR converge on the same antennal lobe glomeruli. Although some transcription
factors have been implicated in a combinatorial code specifying OR expression and
OSN identity, it is clear other players remain unidentified. In hopes of
mitigating the challenges of genome-wide screening, we examined the feasibility
of a two-tiered approach comprising a primary "pooling" screen for miRNAs whose
tissue-specific over-expression causes a phenotype of interest followed by a
focused secondary screen using gene-specific RNAi. Since miRNAs down-regulate
their targets, miRNA over-expression phenotypes should be attributable to target 
loss-of-function. It is the sequence-dependence of miRNA-target pairing that
suggests candidates for the secondary screen. Since miRNAs are short, however,
miRNA misexpression will likely uncover non-biological miRNA-target
relationships. Rather than focusing on miRNA function itself where these
non-biological relationships could be misleading, we propose using miRNAs as
tools to focus a more traditional RNAi-based screen. Here we describe such a
screen that uncovers a role for Atf3 in the expression of the odorant receptor
Or47b.

PMCID: PMC4742857
PMID: 26848073  [PubMed - in process]


18. Neural Plast. 2016;2016:2130901. doi: 10.1155/2016/2130901. Epub 2015 Dec 27.

Bilateral Neuropathy of Primary Sensory Neurons by the Chronic Compression of
Multiple Unilateral DRGs.

Xie YB(1), Zhao H(1), Wang Y(2), Song K(2), Zhang M(2), Meng FC(2), Yang YJ(2),
He YS(2), Kuang F(2), You SW(2), You HJ(3), Xu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain
Science, School of Basic Medicine, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an
710032, China; Center for Neuron and Disease, Frontier Institutes of Life Science
and of Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China.
(2)Department of Neurobiology and Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain
Science, School of Basic Medicine, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an
710032, China. (3)Center for Biomedical Research on Pain (CBRP), College of
Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China.

To mimic multilevel nerve root compression and intervertebral foramina stenosis
in human, we established a new animal model of the chronic compression of
unilateral multiple lumbar DRGs (mCCD) in the rat. A higher occurrence of signs
of spontaneous pain behaviors, such as wet-dog shaking and spontaneous hind paw
shrinking behaviors, was firstly observed from day 1 onward. In the meantime, the
unilateral mCCD rat exhibited significant bilateral hind paw mechanical and cold 
allodynia and hyperalgesia, as well as a thermal preference to 30°C plate between
30 and 35°C. The expression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) was
significantly increased in the ipsilateral and contralateral all-sized DRG
neurons after the mCCD. And the expression of CGRP was significantly increased in
the ipsilateral and contralateral large- and medium-sized DRG neurons. ATF3 and
CGRP expressions correlated to evoked pain hypersensitivities such as mechanical 
and cold allodynia on postoperative day 1. The results suggested that bilateral
neuropathy of primary sensory neurons might contribute to bilateral
hypersensitivity in the mCCD rat.

PMCID: PMC4706945
PMID: 26819761  [PubMed - in process]


19. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Feb 19;470(4):851-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.134. Epub 2016 Jan 22.

Resveratrol-induced transcriptional up-regulation of ASMase (SMPD1) of human
leukemia and cancer cells.

Mizutani N(1), Omori Y(2), Kawamoto Y(3), Sobue S(3), Ichihara M(3), Suzuki M(4),
Kyogashima M(5), Nakamura M(6), Tamiya-Koizumi K(3), Nozawa Y(7), Murate T(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiological Laboratory Science, Nagoya University
Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan; College of Life and Health Sciences, 
Chubu University, Kasugai, Japan. (2)Department of Pathophysiological Laboratory 
Science, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. (3)College
of Life and Health Sciences, Chubu University, Kasugai, Japan. (4)Division of
Molecular Carcinogenesis, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, 
Japan. (5)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Nihon Pharmaceutical 
University, Saitama, Japan. (6)Department of Drug Information, Gifu
Pharmaceutical University, Gifu, Japan. (7)Tokai Gakuin University, Kakamigahara,
Japan. (8)College of Life and Health Sciences, Chubu University, Kasugai, Japan. 
Electronic address: murate@isc.chubu.ac.jp.

Resveratrol (RSV) is a plant-derived phytoalexin present in plants, whose
pleiotropic effects for health benefits have been previously reported. Its
anti-cancer activity is among the current topics for novel cancer treatment.
Here, effects of RSV on cell proliferation and the sphingolipid metabolism of
K562, a human leukemia cell line, were analyzed. Some experiments were also
performed in HCT116, a human colon cancer cell line. RSV inhibited cell
proliferation of both cell lines. Increased cellular ceramide and decreased
sphingomyelin and S1P by RSV were observed in RSV-treated K562 cells. Further
analysis revealed that acid sphingomyelinase mRNA and enzyme activity levels were
increased by RSV. Desipramine, a functional ASMase inhibitor, prevented
RSV-induced ceramide increase. RSV increased ATF3, EGR1, EGR3 proteins and
phosphorylated c-Jun and FOXO3. However, co-transfection using these
transcription factor expression vectors and ASMase promoter reporter vector
revealed positive effects of EGR1 and EGR3 but not others. Electrophoresis
mobility shift assay (EMSA) and Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay
demonstrated the direct binding of EGR1/3 transcription factors with ASMase
5'-promoter. These results indicate that increased EGR1/3 and ASMase expression
play an important role in cellular ceramide increase by RSV treatment.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26809095  [PubMed - in process]


20. Food Funct. 2016 Feb 17;7(2):1147-54. doi: 10.1039/c5fo01036e.

Rutin protects against aging-related metabolic dysfunction.

Li T(1), Chen S(1), Feng T(1), Dong J(1), Li Y(1), Li H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450000, Henan Province, China. hua_li15@126.com.

Aging is a complex process which is accompanied by multiple related chronic
diseases. Among them, metabolic dysfunction is one of the most important
aging-related disorders. In the present study, we aimed to investigate the effect
of rutin on aging-related metabolic dysfunction. We found that the increase of
fasting blood glucose, insulin levels, blood pressure and HOMA-IR in aged rats
was significantly inhibited by rutin. In addition, rutin improved glucose and
insulin tolerance in aged rats, as reflected by decreased glucose level in IPGTT 
and IPITT test. Rutin treatment notably increased Akt and IRS-1 phosphorylation
in the livers of old rats. The increase of inflammatory markers, such as IL-1ß
and TNFa, was prevented by the rutin administration. Moreover, in circulation and
livers of old rats, rutin treatment significantly decreased the content of TG.
Rutin also inhibited the increase of serum AST and ALT levels. Furthermore, rutin
treatment markedly inhibited aging-related mitochondrial dysfunction, ER stress, 
and oxidative stress, as evidenced by increased oxygen consumption rate and
activities of Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase and Ca2(+)-ATPase, decreased expression of ATF3
and GRP78, decreased level of MDA, increased content of GSH and enhanced activity
of SOD in aged rats. We show that the administration of rutin could effectively
improve aging-related metabolic dysfunction. The amelioration of inflammation,
lipid accumulation, mitochondrial dysfunction, ER stress, and oxidative stress
may be involved in the effect of rutin on aging-related metabolic dysfunction.
These findings provide novel insights into the potential use of rutin in the
intervention of aging and its related metabolic diseases.

PMID: 26804783  [PubMed - in process]


21. Biomol Ther (Seoul). 2016 Mar 1;24(2):140-6. doi: 10.4062/biomolther.2015.109.

Naringenin-Mediated ATF3 Expression Contributes to Apoptosis in Human Colon
Cancer.

Song HM(1), Park GH(1), Eo HJ(1), Jeong JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioresource Sciences, Andong National University, Andong 760749,
Republic of Korea.

Naringenin (NAR) as one of the flavonoidsobserved in grapefruit has been reported
to exhibit an anti-cancer activity. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is
associated with apoptosis in human colon cancer cells. This study was performed
to investigate the molecular mechanism by which NAR stimulates ATF3 expression
and apoptosis in human colon cancer cells. NAR reduced the cell viability and
induced an apoptosis in human colon cancer cells. ATF3 overexpression increased
NAR-mediated cleaved PARP, while ATF3 knockdown attenuated the cleavage of PARP
by NAR. NAR increased ATF3 expression in both protein and mRNA level, and
increased the luciferase activity of ATF3 promoter in a dose-dependent manner.
The responsible region for ATF3 transcriptional activation by NAR is located
between -317 and -148 of ATF3 promoter. p38 inhibition blocked NAR-mediated ATF3 
expression, its promoter activation and apoptosis. The results suggest that NAR
induces apoptosis through p38-dependent ATF3 activation in human colon cancer
cells.

PMCID: PMC4774494
PMID: 26797111  [PubMed]


22. Int J Cardiol. 2016 Mar 1;206:87-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2016.01.143. Epub 2016 
Jan 8.

Pleiotropic and puzzling effects of ATF3 in maladaptive cardiac remodeling.

Zhou H(1), Yuan Y(1), Ni J(1), Guo H(2), Deng W(1), Bian ZY(1), Tang QZ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060,
China; Cardiovascular Research Institute of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060,
China. (2)The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, 
Chinese Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Health, Qilu Hospital of
Shandong University, Jinan 250012, China. (3)Department of Cardiology, Renmin
Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060, China; Cardiovascular Research
Institute of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060, China. Electronic address:
qztang@whu.edu.cn.

PMID: 26780683  [PubMed - in process]


23. Blood. 2016 Jan 8. pii: blood-2015-07-655647. [Epub ahead of print]

CARMA1- and MyD88-dependent activation of Jun/ATF-type AP-1 complexes is a
hallmark of ABC diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

Juilland M(1), Gonzalez M(1), Erdmann T(2), Banz Y(3), Jevnikar Z(1), Hailfinger 
S(1), Tzankov A(4), Grau M(5), Lenz G(6), Novak U(7), Thome M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland;
(2)Translational Oncology, Department of Medicine A, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, 
University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany; (3)Institute of Pathology,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; (4)Institute of Pathology, University
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland; (5)Department of Physics, Philipps-University
Marburg, Marburg, Germany; (6)Cluster of Excellence EXC 1003, Cells in Motion,
Muenster, Germany; (7)Department of Medical Oncology, Inselspital, Bern
University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland. (8)Department of Biochemistry, University
of Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland; margot.thomemiazza@unil.ch.

A hallmark of the diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) of the activated B-cell
(ABC) type, a molecular subtype characterized by adverse outcome, is constitutive
activation of the transcription factor NF-<U+03BA>B, which controls expression of genes 
promoting cellular survival and proliferation. Much less, however, is known about
the role of the transcription factor AP-1 in ABC DLBCL. Here we show that AP-1,
like NF-<U+03BA>B, was controlled by constitutive activation of the B-cell receptor
and/or toll-like receptor signaling pathways in ABC DLBCL cell lines. In contrast
to germinal center B-cell (GCB) DLBCL, ABC DLBCL cell lines expressed high levels
of the AP-1 family members c-Jun, JunB and JunD, which formed heterodimeric
complexes with the AP-1 family members ATF2, ATF3 and ATF7. Inhibition of these
complexes by a dominant negative approach led to impaired growth of a majority of
ABC DLBCL cell lines. Individual silencing of c-Jun, ATF2 or ATF3 decreased
cellular survival, and revealed a c-Jun/ATF2-dependent control of ATF3
expression. As a consequence, ATF3 expression was much higher in ABC versus GCB
DLBCL cell lines. Samples derived from DLBCL patients showed a clear trend
towards high and nuclear ATF3 expression in nodal DLBCL of the non-GC, or ABC
subtype. These findings identify the activation of AP-1 complexes of the
Jun/ATF-type as an important element controlling the growth of ABC DLBCL.

Copyright © 2016 American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26747248  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Neurobiol Dis. 2016 Apr;88:16-28. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.12.017. Epub 2015 Dec
30.

Ocular inflammation induces trigeminal pain, peripheral and central
neuroinflammatory mechanisms.

Launay PS(1), Reboussin E(1), Liang H(2), Kessal K(1), Godefroy D(1), Rostene
W(1), Sahel JA(2), Baudouin C(2), Melik Parsadaniantz S(1), Reaux Le Goazigo
A(3).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U968, Paris, F-75012, France; Sorbonne Universités, Université UPMC,
Paris 06, UM 80, Institut de la Vision, 75012 Paris, France; CNRS, UMR 7210,
Paris F-75012, France. (2)INSERM, U968, Paris, F-75012, France; Sorbonne
Universités, Université UPMC, Paris 06, UM 80, Institut de la Vision, 75012
Paris, France; CNRS, UMR 7210, Paris F-75012, France; Centre Hospitalier National
d'Ophtalmologie des Quinze-Vingts, Paris F-75012, France. (3)INSERM, U968, Paris,
F-75012, France; Sorbonne Universités, Université UPMC, Paris 06, UM 80, Institut
de la Vision, 75012 Paris, France; CNRS, UMR 7210, Paris F-75012, France.
Electronic address: annabelle.reaux@inserm.fr.

Ocular surface diseases are among the most frequent ocular pathologies, with
prevalence ranging from 20% of the general population. In addition, ocular pain
following corneal injury is frequently observed in clinic. The aim of the study
was to characterize the peripheral and central neuroinflammatory process in the
trigeminal pathways in response to cornea alteration induced by chronic topical
instillations of 0.2% benzalkonium chloride (BAC) in male C57BL/6J mice. In vitro
BAC induced neurotoxicity and increases neuronal (FOS, ATF3) and pro-inflammatory
(IL-6) markers in primary mouse trigeminal ganglion culture. BAC-treated mice
exhibited 7days after the treatment reduced aqueous tear production and increased
inflammatory cell infiltration in the cornea. Hypertonic saline-evoked eye wipe
behavior was enhanced in BAC-treated animals that exhibited increased FOS, ATF3
and Iba1 immunoreactivity in the trigeminal ganglion. Ocular inflammation is
associated with a significant increase in IL-6 and TNF-a mRNA expression in the
trigeminal ganglion. We reported a strong increase in FOS and Iba1 positive cells
in particular in the sensory trigeminal complex at the ipsilateral
interpolaris/caudalis (Vi/Vc) transition and Vc/upper cervical cord (Vc/C1)
regions. In addition, activated microglial cells were tightly wrapped around
activated FOS neurons in both regions and phosphorylated p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase was markedly enhanced specifically in microglial cells during
ocular inflammation. Similar data were obtained in the facial motor nucleus.
These neuroanatomical data correlated with the increase in mRNA expression of
pro-inflammatory (TNF-a, IL-6, CCL2) and neuronal (FOS and ATF3) markers.
Interestingly, the suppression of corneal inflammation 10days following the end
of BAC treatment resulted in a marked attenuation of peripheral and central
changes observed in pathological conditions. This study provides the first
demonstration that corneal inflammation induces activation of neurons and
microglial p38 MAPK pathway within sensory trigeminal complex. These results
suggest that this altered activity in intracellular signaling caused by ocular
inflammation might play a priming role in the central sensitization of ocular
related brainstem circuits, which represents a significant factor in ocular pain 
development.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26747211  [PubMed - in process]


25. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2016 Mar;43(3):312-8. doi: 10.1111/1440-1681.12537.

PFKFB3 modulates glycolytic metabolism and alleviates endoplasmic reticulum
stress in human osteoarthritis cartilage.

Qu J(1), Lu D(2), Guo H(1,)(3), Miao W(1), Wu G(1), Zhou M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Orthopaedics, Honghui Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xian, China. (2)Department of Trauma, Honghui Hospital, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xian, China. (3)Department of Emergency, Honghui Hospital,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xian, China.

Glycolytic disorder has been demonstrated to be a major cause of osteoarthritis
(OA) and chondrocyte dysfunction. The present work aimed to investigate the
expression and role of the glycolytic regulator
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase 3 (PFKFB3) in OA cartilage. 
It was found that PFKFB3 expression was down-regulated in human OA cartilage
tissues and in tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-a- or interleukin (IL)-1ß-stimulated 
human chondrocytes. The glycolytic metabolism appeared as glucose utilization and
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) generation, and lactate production was stunted in OA
cartilage. However, the impaired glycolytic process in OA cartilage was improved 
by PFKFB3 overexpression, which was confirmed in TNF-a- or IL-1ß-treated
chondrocytes. Furthermore, the expressions of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-associated genes including PERK, ATF3, IRE1, phosphorylated eIF2a
(p-eIF2a) and MMP13 were enhanced in OA cartilage explants, while they were
decreased by AdPFKFB3 transfection. PFKFB3 also modulated the expressions of
PERK, ATF3, IRE1, p-eIF2a and MMP13 in tunicamycin-exposed chondrocytes.
Additionally, PFKFB3 improved the cell viability of OA cartilage explants and
chondrocytes through the PI3K/Akt/C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) signalling
pathway. The transfection of AdPFKFB3 also significantly reduced caspase 3
activation and promoted aggrecan and type II collagen expressions in OA cartilage
explants and chondrocytes. In all, this study characterizes a novel role of
PFKFB3 in glycolytic metabolism and ER stress of OA cartilage explants and
chondrocytes. The study might provide a potential target for OA prevention or
therapy.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

PMID: 26718307  [PubMed - in process]


26. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 28;10(12):e0145523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145523.
eCollection 2015.

TGRL Lipolysis Products Induce Stress Protein ATF3 via the TGF-ß Receptor Pathway
in Human Aortic Endothelial Cells.

Eiselein L(1), Nyunt T(1), Lamé MW(2), Ng KF(1), Wilson DW(3), Rutledge JC(1),
Aung HH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, School
of Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, California, 95616, United
States of America. (2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, California, 95616, United States
of America. (3)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, School of
Veterinary Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, California, 95616,
United States of America.

Studies have suggested a link between the transforming growth factor beta 1
(TGF-ß1) signaling cascade and the stress-inducible activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3). We have demonstrated that triglyceride-rich lipoproteins (TGRL) 
lipolysis products activate MAP kinase stress associated JNK/c-Jun pathways
resulting in up-regulation of ATF3, pro-inflammatory genes and induction of
apoptosis in human aortic endothelial cells. Here we demonstrate increased
release of active TGF-ß at 15 min, phosphorylation of Smad2 and translocation of 
co-Smad4 from cytosol to nucleus after a 1.5 h treatment with lipolysis products.
Activation and translocation of Smad2 and 4 was blocked by addition of SB431542
(10 µM), a specific inhibitor of TGF-ß-activin receptor ALKs 4, 5, 7. Both ALK
receptor inhibition and anti TGF-ß1 antibody prevented lipolysis product induced 
up-regulation of ATF3 mRNA and protein. ALK inhibition prevented lipolysis
product-induced nuclear accumulation of ATF3. ALKs 4, 5, 7 inhibition also
prevented phosphorylation of c-Jun and TGRL lipolysis product-induced p53 and
caspase-3 protein expression. These findings demonstrate that TGRL lipolysis
products cause release of active TGF-ß and lipolysis product-induced apoptosis is
dependent on TGF-ß signaling. Furthermore, signaling through the stress
associated JNK/c-Jun pathway is dependent on TGF-ß signaling suggesting that
TGF-ß signaling is necessary for nuclear accumulation of the ATF3/cJun
transcription complex and induction of pro-inflammatory responses.

PMCID: PMC4699200
PMID: 26709509  [PubMed - in process]


27. BMC Neurosci. 2015 Dec 16;16:93. doi: 10.1186/s12868-015-0232-9.

Effects of peripheral nerve injury on parvalbumin expression in adult rat dorsal 
root ganglion neurons.

Medici T(1,)(2), Shortland PJ(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuroscience and Trauma, Blizard Institute, Barts and The London
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, Newark Street,
London, E1 2AT, UK. Tommedici@doctors.org.uk. (2)Queens Hospital, Romford, Essex,
RM7 0AG, UK. Tommedici@doctors.org.uk. (3)School of Science and Health, Western
Sydney University, Narellen Road, Campbelltown, NSW, 2560, Australia.
p.shortland@uws.edu.au. (4)Centre for Neuroscience and Trauma, Blizard Institute,
Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of
London, Newark Street, London, E1 2AT, UK. p.shortland@uws.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Parvalbumin (PV) is a calcium binding protein that identifies a
subpopulation of proprioceptive dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons. Calcitonin
gene-related peptide (CGRP) is also expressed in a high proportion of muscle
afferents but its relationship to PV is unclear. Little is known of the
phenotypic responses of muscle afferents to nerve injury. Sciatic nerve axotomy
or L5 spinal nerve ligation and section (SNL) lesions were used to explore these 
issues in adult rats using immunocytochemistry.
RESULTS: In naive animals, the mean PV expression was 25 % of L4 or L5 dorsal
root ganglion (DRG) neurons, and this was unchanged 2 weeks after sciatic nerve
axotomy. Colocalization studies with the injury marker activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3) showed that approximately 24 % of PV neurons expressed ATF3 after
sciatic nerve axotomy suggesting that PV may show a phenotypic switch from
injured to uninjured neurons. This possibility was further assessed using the
spinal nerve ligation (SNL) injury model where injured and uninjured neurons are 
located in different DRGs. Two weeks after L5 SNL there was no change in total PV
staining and essentially all L5 PV neurons expressed ATF3. Additionally, there
was no increase in PV-ir in the adjacent uninjured L4 DRG cells. Co-labelling of 
DRG neurons revealed that less than 2 % of PV neurons normally expressed CGRP and
no colocalization was seen after injury.
CONCLUSION: These experiments clearly show that axotomy does not produce down
regulation of PV protein in the DRG. Moreover, this lack of change is not due to 
a phenotypic switch in PV immunoreactive (ir) neurons, or de novo expression of
PV-ir in uninjured neurons after nerve injury. These results further illustrate
differences that occur when muscle afferents are injured as compared to cutaneous
afferents.

PMCID: PMC4681077
PMID: 26674138  [PubMed - in process]


28. BBA Clin. 2014 Sep 3;2:31-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbacli.2014.08.003. eCollection 2014.

S-glutathionylation of buccal cell proteins as biomarkers of exposure to hydrogen
peroxide.

Grek CL(1), Reyes L(1), Townsend DM(2), Tew KD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics,
Medical University of South Carolina, 70 President St., DD410, Charleston, SC
29425, USA. (2)Department of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, Medical
University of SC, 274 Calhoun Street MSC 141, Charleston, SC 29425-1410, USA.

BACKGROUND: Exogenous or endogenous hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is a reactive oxygen
species (ROS) that can lead to oxidation of cellular nucleophiles, particularly
cysteines in proteins. Commercial mouthwashes containing H2O2 provide the
opportunity to determine clinically whether changes in S-glutathionylation of
susceptible proteins in buccal mucosa cells can be used as biomarkers of ROS
exposure.
METHODS: Using an exploratory clinical protocol, 18 disease-free volunteers
rinsed with a mouthwash containing 1.5% H2O2 (442 mM) over four consecutive days.
Exfoliated buccal cell samples were collected prior and post-treatment and
proteomics were used to identify S-glutathionylated proteins.
RESULTS: Four consecutive daily treatments with the H2O2-containing mouthwash
induced significant dose and time-dependent increases in S-glutathionylation of
buccal cell proteins, stable for at least 30 min following treatments. Elevated
levels of S-glutathionylation were maintained with subsequent daily exposure.
Increased S-glutathionylation preceded and correlated with transcriptional
activation of ROS sensitive genes, such as ATF3, and with the presence of
8-hydroxy deoxyguanosine. Data from a human buccal cell line TR146 were
consistent with the trial results. We identified twelve proteins that were
S-glutathionylated following H2O2 exposure.
CONCLUSIONS: Buccal cells can predict exposure to ROS through increased levels of
S-glutathionylation of proteins. These post-translationally modified proteins
serve as biomarkers for the effects of H2O2 in the oral cavity and in the future,
may be adaptable as extrapolated pharmacodynamic biomarkers for assessing the
impact of other systemic drugs that cause ROS and/or impact redox homeostasis.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: S-glutathionylation of buccal cell proteins can be used as 
a quantitative measure of exposure to ROS.

PMCID: PMC4633976
PMID: 26673080  [PubMed]


29. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:724876. doi: 10.1155/2015/724876. Epub 2015 Nov 12.

Protective Effect of Enalapril against Methionine-Enriched Diet-Induced
Hypertension: Role of Endoplasmic Reticulum and Oxidative Stress.

Zhou Y(1), Zhao L(2), Zhang Z(2), Lu X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an 710038, China ; Intervention Therapy Department of Vascular Disease,
Chinese Medicine Hospital of Shaanxi Province, Xi'an 710003, China. (2)Department
of Cardiology, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710038,
China.

In the present study, we investigated the effect of methionine-enriched diet
(MED) on blood pressure in rats and examined the protective effect of enalapril, 
a widely used angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) class
antihypertensive drug. The results showed that MED induced significant increase
of SBP and Ang II-induced contractile response in aortae of rats. MED
significantly increased plasma levels of homocysteine (Hcy) and ACE. In addition,
MED increased the phosphorylation of protein kinase R-like endoplasmic reticulum 
kinase (PERK) and eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2a) and expression of
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and ATF6 in aortae of rats, indicating
the occurrence of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Moreover, MED resulted in
oxidative stress as evidenced by significant increase of TBARS level and decrease
of superoxide dismutase and catalase activities. Administration of enalapril
could effectively inhibit these pathological changes induced by MED in rats.
These results demonstrated that ACE-mediated ER stress and oxidative stress
played an important role in high Hcy-induced hypertension and MED may exert a
positive loop between the activation of ACE and accumulation of Hcy, aggravating 
the pathological condition of hypertension. The data provide novel insights into 
the mechanism of high Hcy-associated hypertension and the therapeutic efficiency 
of enalapril.

PMCID: PMC4660008
PMID: 26640794  [PubMed - in process]


30. Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 1;76(3):724-35. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0701-T. Epub
2015 Dec 4.

Recurrent MLK4 Loss-of-Function Mutations Suppress JNK Signaling to Promote Colon
Tumorigenesis.

Marusiak AA(1), Stephenson NL(1), Baik H(1), Trotter EW(1), Li Y(2), Blyth K(3), 
Mason S(3), Chapman P(2), Puto LA(4), Read JA(5), Brassington C(6), Pollard
HK(6), Phillips C(5), Green I(6), Overman R(6), Collier M(6), Testoni E(1),
Miller CJ(7), Hunter T(4), Sansom OJ(3), Brognard J(8).

Author information: 
(1)Signalling Networks in Cancer Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, 
The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. (2)Computational
Biology Support, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. (3)Colorectal Cancer and Wnt Signalling
Group, The Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(4)Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California. (5)Discovery
Sciences, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (6)Discovery Sciences,
AstraZeneca, Cheshire, United Kingdom. (7)Computational Biology Support, Cancer
Research UK Manchester Institute, The University of Manchester, Manchester,
United Kingdom. RNA Biology Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. (8)Signalling Networks in
Cancer Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. John.Brognard@cruk.manchester.ac.uk.

MLK4 is a member of the mixed-lineage family of kinases that regulate the JNK,
p38, and ERK kinase signaling pathways. MLK4 mutations have been identified in
various human cancers, including frequently in colorectal cancer, where their
function and pathobiological importance have been uncertain. In this study, we
assessed the functional consequences of MLK4 mutations in colon tumorigenesis.
Biochemical data indicated that a majority of MLK4 mutations are loss-of-function
(LOF) mutations that can exert dominant-negative effects. In seeking to
understand the abrogated activity of these mutants, we elucidated a new MLK4
catalytic domain structure. To determine whether MLK4 is required to maintain
tumorigenic phenotypes, we reconstituted its signaling axis in colon cancer cells
harboring MLK4-inactivating mutations. We found that restoring MLK4 activity
reduced cell viability, proliferation, and colony formation in vitro and delayed 
tumor growth in vivo. Mechanistic investigations established that restoring the
function of MLK4 selectively induced the JNK pathway and its downstream targets, 
cJUN, ATF3, and the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors CDKN1A and CDKN2B. Our
work indicates that MLK4 is a novel tumor-suppressing kinase harboring frequent
LOF mutations that lead to diminished signaling in the JNK pathway and enhanced
proliferation in colon cancer. Cancer Res; 76(3); 724-35. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4740929 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26637668  [PubMed - in process]


31. Blood Cancer J. 2015 Dec 4;5:e373. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2015.98.

Lower expression of activating transcription factors 3 and 4 correlates with
shorter progression-free survival in multiple myeloma patients receiving
bortezomib plus dexamethasone therapy.

Narita T(1), Ri M(1), Masaki A(1), Mori F(1), Ito A(1), Kusumoto S(1), Ishida
T(1), Komatsu H(1), Iida S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Nagoya City University Graduate School 
of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.

Bortezomib (BTZ), a proteasome inhibitor, is widely used in the treatment of
multiple myeloma (MM), but a fraction of patients respond poorly to this agent.
To identify factors predicting the duration of progression-free survival (PFS) of
MM patients on BTZ treatment, the expression of proteasome and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress-related genes was quantified in primary samples from
patients receiving a combination of BTZ and dexamethasone (BD). Fifty-six MM
patients were stratified into a group with PFS<6 months (n=33) and a second group
with PFS<U+2A7E>6 months (n=23). Of the 15 genes analyzed, the expression of activating 
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and ATF4 was significantly lower in patients with
shorter PFS (P=0.0157 and P=0.0085, respectively). Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
analysis showed that these ATFs bind each other and transactivate genes encoding 
the pro-apoptotic transcription factors, CHOP and Noxa, which promote ER
stress-associated apoptosis. When either ATF3 or ATF4 expression was silenced, MM
cells partially lost sensitivity to BTZ treatment. This was accompanied by lower 
levels of Noxa, CHOP and DR5. Thus low basal expression of ATF3 and ATF4 may
attenuate BTZ-induced apoptosis. Hence, ATF3 and ATF4 could potentially be used
as biomarkers to predict efficacy of BD therapy in patients with MM.

PMCID: PMC4735074
PMID: 26636288  [PubMed - in process]


32. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Dec 3. pii: gkv1327. [Epub ahead of print]

Integrated microfluidic approach for quantitative high-throughput measurements of
transcription factor binding affinities.

Glick Y(1), Orenstein Y(2), Chen D(1), Avrahami D(1), Zor T(3), Shamir R(2),
Gerber D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Mina and Evrard Goodman life science faculty, Bar Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, 
5290002, Israel. (2)Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel-Aviv University,
Tel-Aviv, 69978, Israel. (3)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Life 
Sciences Institute, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, 69978, Israel. (4)Mina and
Evrard Goodman life science faculty, Bar Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, 5290002,
Israel Doron.Gerber@biu.ac.il.

Protein binding to DNA is a fundamental process in gene regulation. Methodologies
such as ChIP-Seq and mapping of DNase I hypersensitive sites provide global
information on this regulation in vivo. In vitro methodologies provide valuable
complementary information on protein-DNA specificities. However, current methods 
still do not measure absolute binding affinities. There is a real need for
large-scale quantitative protein-DNA affinity measurements. We developed QPID, a 
microfluidic application for measuring protein-DNA affinities. A single run is
equivalent to 4096 gel-shift experiments. Using QPID, we characterized the
different affinities of ATF1, c-Jun, c-Fos and AP-1 to the CRE consensus motif
and CRE half-site in two different genomic sequences on a single device. We
discovered that binding of ATF1, but not of AP-1, to the CRE half-site is highly 
affected by its genomic context. This effect was highly correlated with ATF1
ChIP-seq and PBM experiments. Next, we characterized the affinities of ATF1 and
ATF3 to 128 genomic CRE and CRE half-site sequences. Our affinity measurements
explained that in vivo binding differences between ATF1 and ATF3 to CRE and CRE
half-sites are partially mediated by differences in the minor groove width. We
believe that QPID would become a central tool for quantitative characterization
of biophysical aspects affecting protein-DNA binding.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26635393  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


33. Eur J Neurosci. 2016 Feb;43(4):548-60. doi: 10.1111/ejn.13139.

Role of c-Jun N-terminal kinase in late nerve regeneration monitored by in vivo
imaging of thy1-yellow fluorescent protein transgenic mice.

Tu NH(1), Katano T(1), Matsumura S(1), Pham VM(1), Muratani T(2), Minami T(2),
Ito S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry, Kansai Medical University, 2-5-1 Shin-machi, 
Hirakata, 573-1010, Japan. (2)Department of Anesthesiology, Osaka Medical
College, Takatsuki, Japan.

The restoration of function to injured peripheral nerves separated by a gap
requires regeneration across it and reinnervation to target organs. To elucidate 
these processes, we have established an in vivo monitoring system of nerve
regeneration in thy1-yellow fluorescent protein transgenic mice expressing a
fluorescent protein in their nervous system. Here we demonstrated that motor and 
sensory nerves were regenerated in a coordinated fashion across the gap and that 
the functional recovery of the response to mechanical stimuli correlated well
with sensory innervation to the foot. Among the mitogen-activated protein kinase 
inhibitors examined, only the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitors delayed
functional recovery. Although it did not affect the reinnervation of the muscle, 
the JNK inhibitor delayed sensory nerve innervation to the skin for over 8 weeks 
and increased the expression of activatng transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a
neuronal injury marker, in the dorsal root ganglion over the same time period.
Antibodies against nerve growth factor, glia-derived neurotrophic factor, and
brain-derived neurotrophic factor applied to the transection site delayed the
functional recovery in this order of potency. These neurotrophic factors enhanced
neurite outgrowth from cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons, and the JNK
inhibitor reversed their stimulatory effects. These results suggest that JNK
played roles in nerve regeneration at both early and late phases. Taken together,
the present study demonstrated that neurotrophic factors released from the distal
nerve may accelerate motor and sensory nerve regeneration across the gap in a
coordinated fashion and reinnervation of the target organs independently. The
model characterized here has the advantage of in vivo monitoring of the
evaluation of morphological and functional recovery in the same mice for a long
period of time.

© 2015 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26613205  [PubMed - in process]


34. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2015 Nov 26;3(1):74. doi: 10.1186/s40478-015-0255-6.

Tamoxifen induces cellular stress in the nervous system by inhibiting cholesterol
synthesis.

Denk F(1), Ramer LM(1,)(2), Erskine EL(3), Nassar MA(4), Bogdanov Y(5), Signore
M(6), Wood JN(5), McMahon SB(1), Ramer MS(7).

Author information: 
(1)Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, King's College London, Guy's Campus, 
London, SE1 1UL, UK. (2)Djavad Mowafaghian Centre for Brain Health, University of
British Columbia, 2215 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, V6T 1Z3, BC, Canada.
(3)International Collaboration On Repair Discoveries, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, V5Z 1 M9, BC, Canada. (4)Department of Biomedical Science,
The University of Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TN, UK. (5)Wolfson
Institute for Biomedical Research (WIBR), University College London (UCL),
Cruciform Building, London, WC1E 6BT, UK. (6)Institute of Child Health, London,
WC1N 1EH, UK. (7)International Collaboration On Repair Discoveries, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, V5Z 1 M9, BC, Canada. ramer@icord.org.

BACKGROUND: Tamoxifen (TAM) is an important cancer therapeutic and an
experimental tool for effecting genetic recombination using the inducible Cre-Lox
technique. Despite its widespread use in the clinic and laboratory, we know
little about its effects on the nervous system. This is of significant concern
because TAM, via unknown mechanisms, induces cognitive impairment in humans. A
hallmark of cellular stress is induction of Activating Transcription Factor 3
(Atf3), and so to determine whether TAM induces cellular stress in the adult
nervous system, we generated a knock-in mouse in which Atf3 promoter activity
drives transcription of TAM-dependent Cre recombinase (Cre-ERT2); when crossed
with tdtomato reporter mice, Atf3 induction results in robust and permanent
genetic labeling of cells in which it is up-regulated even transiently.
RESULTS: We found that granular neurons of the olfactory bulb and dentate gyrus, 
vascular cells and ependymal cells throughout the brain, and peripheral sensory
neurons expressed tdtomato in response to TAM treatment. We also show that TAM
induced Atf3 up-regulation through inhibition of cholesterol epoxide hydrolase
(ChEH): reporter expression was mitigated by delivery in vitamin E-rich wheat
germ oil (vitamin E depletes ChEH substrates), and was partially mimicked by a
ChEH-specific inhibitor.
CONCLUSIONS: This work demonstrates that TAM stresses cells of the adult central 
and peripheral nervous systems and highlights concerns about clinical and
experimental use of TAM. We propose TAM administration in vitamin E-rich vehicles
such as wheat germ oil as a simple remedy.

PMCID: PMC4660723
PMID: 26610346  [PubMed - in process]


35. Brain Behav Immun. 2016 Mar;53:96-104. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2015.11.004. Epub 2015 
Nov 10.

Upregulation of CCL2 via ATF3/c-Jun interaction mediated the Bortezomib-induced
peripheral neuropathy.

Liu C(1), Luan S(1), OuYang H(2), Huang Z(3), Wu S(1), Ma C(4), Wei J(3), Xin
W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun
Yet-Sen University, Guangzhou 510120, China. (2)Department of Anesthesiology,
State Key Laboratory of Oncology in Southern China, Sun Yat-Sen Universtiy Cancer
Center, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou 510060,
China. (3)Department of Physiology and Pain Research Center, Guangdong Province
Key Laboratory of Brain Function and Disease, Zhongshan Medical School, Sun
Yet-Sen University, 74 Zhongshan Rd. 2, Guangzhou 510080, China. (4)Department of
Rehabilitation Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yet-Sen University,
Guangzhou 510120, China. Electronic address: ma_chao99@126.com. (5)Department of 
Physiology and Pain Research Center, Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Brain
Function and Disease, Zhongshan Medical School, Sun Yet-Sen University, 74
Zhongshan Rd. 2, Guangzhou 510080, China. Electronic address:
xinwj@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Bortezomib (BTZ) is a frequently used chemotherapeutic drug for the treatment of 
refractory multiple myeloma and hematological neoplasms. The mechanism by which
the administration of BTZ leads to painful peripheral neuropathy remains unclear.
In present study, we found that application of BTZ at 0.4mg/kg for consecutive
5days significantly increased the expression of CCL2 in DRG, and intrathecal
administration of neutralizing antibody against CCL2 inhibited the mechanical
allodynia induced by BTZ. We also found an increased expression of c-Jun in DRG, 
and that inhibition of c-Jun signaling prevented the CCL2 upregulation and
mechanical allodynia in the rats treated with BTZ. Furthermore, the results with 
luciferase assay in vitro and ChIP assay in vivo showed that c-Jun might be
essential for BTZ-induced CCL2 upregulation via binding directly to the specific 
position of the ccl2 promoter. In addition, the present results showed that an
upregulated expression of ATF3 was co-expressed with c-Jun in the DRG neurons,
and the enhanced interaction between c-Jun and ATF3 was observed in DRG in the
rats treated with BTZ. Importantly, pretreatment with ATF3 siRNA significantly
inhibited the recruitment of c-Jun to the ccl2 promoter in the rats treated with 
BTZ. Taken together, these findings suggested that upregulation of CCL2 resulting
from the enhanced interaction between c-Jun and ATF3 in DRG contributed to
BTZ-induced mechanical allodynia.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26554515  [PubMed - in process]


36. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Jan;13(1):9-12. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4529. Epub 2015 Nov 6.

Activating transcription factor 3 - an endogenous inhibitor of myocardial
ischemia-reperfusion injury (Review).

Yang CJ(1), Yang J(1), Fan ZX(1), Yang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First College of Clinical Medical Sciences,
Yichang, Hubei 443000, P.R. China.

Coronary heart diseases, particularly acute coronary syndrome, have increased in 
morbidity and mortality in recent decades. Percutaneous coronary intervention,
coronary artery bypass grafting and thrombolytic agents are effective strategies 
to rescue the infarcted myocardium. In addition to acute myocardial infarction,
the resulting myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury (MIRI) leads to serious
secondary injury of the heart. Studies have demonstrated that activating
transcription factor (ATF)/cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element
binding family member ATF3 had a negative regulatory role in IRI, particularly in
the kidney, cerebrum and liver. The present review expounded the expression
characteristics of ATF3 and its protective effects against MIRI, providing a
theoretical basis for the overexpression of ATF3 in the myocardium as a promising
gene-therapeutic strategy for MIRI.

PMID: 26548643  [PubMed - in process]


37. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015 Nov 4;16:366. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0768-9.

Iterative sub-network component analysis enables reconstruction of large scale
genetic networks.

Jayavelu ND(1), Aasgaard LS(2), Bar N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU), Sem Salandsvei 4, Trondheim, Norway. nareshd@ntnu.no.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU), Sem Salandsvei 4, Trondheim, Norway. lsaas@statoil.com.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU), Sem Salandsvei 4, Trondheim, Norway. nadi.bar@ntnu.no.

BACKGROUND: Network component analysis (NCA) became a popular tool to understand 
complex regulatory networks. The method uses high-throughput gene expression data
and a priori topology to reconstruct transcription factor activity profiles.
Current NCA algorithms are constrained by several conditions posed on the network
topology, to guarantee unique reconstruction (termed compliancy). However, the
restrictions these conditions pose are not necessarily true from biological
perspective and they force network size reduction, pruning potentially important 
components.
RESULTS: To address this, we developed a novel, Iterative Sub-Network Component
Analysis (ISNCA) for reconstructing networks at any size. By dividing the initial
network into smaller, compliant subnetworks, the algorithm first predicts the
reconstruction of each subnetwork using standard NCA algorithms. It then
subtracts from the reconstruction the contribution of the shared components from 
the other subnetwork. We tested the ISNCA on real, large datasets using various
NCA algorithms. The size of the networks we tested and the accuracy of the
reconstruction increased significantly. Importantly, FOXA1, ATF2, ATF3 and many
other known key regulators in breast cancer could not be incorporated by any NCA 
algorithm because of the necessary conditions. However, their temporal activities
could be reconstructed by our algorithm, and therefore their involvement in
breast cancer could be analyzed.
CONCLUSIONS: Our framework enables reconstruction of large gene expression data
networks, without reducing their size or pruning potentially important
components, and at the same time rendering the results more biological plausible.
Our ISNCA method is not only suitable for prediction of key regulators in cancer 
studies, but it can be applied to any high-throughput gene expression data.

PMCID: PMC4634733
PMID: 26537518  [PubMed - in process]


38. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 2. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.417. [Epub ahead of print]

Loss of ATF3 promotes hormone-induced prostate carcinogenesis and the emergence
of CK5(+)CK8(+) epithelial cells.

Wang Z(1,)(2), Kim J(3), Teng Y(1), Ding HF(1,)(4), Zhang J(5), Hai T(6), Cowell 
JK(1), Yan C(1,)(2,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)GRU Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA. (2)Center for
Cell Biology and Cancer Research, Albany Medical College, Albany, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Statistics, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, South Korea.
(4)Department of Pathology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, GA, USA. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, School of
Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA. (6)Department of
Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. 
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, 
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA.

Steroid sex hormones can induce prostate carcinogenesis, and are thought to
contribute to the development of prostate cancer during aging. However, the
mechanism for hormone-induced prostate carcinogenesis remains elusive. Here, we
report that activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3)-a broad stress
sensor-suppressed hormone-induced prostate carcinogenesis in mice. Although
implantation of testosterone and estradiol (T+E2) pellets for 2 months in
wild-type mice rarely induced prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) in dorsal
prostates (one out of eight mice), the loss of ATF3 led to the appearance of not 
only PIN but also invasive lesions in almost all examined animals. The enhanced
carcinogenic effects of hormones on ATF3-deficient prostates did not appear to be
caused by a change in estrogen signaling, but were more likely a consequence of
elevated androgen signaling that stimulated differentiation of prostatic basal
cells into transformation-preferable luminal cells. Indeed, we found that
hormone-induced lesions in ATF3-knockout mice often contained cells with both
basal and luminal characteristics, such as p63(+) cells (a basal-cell marker)
showing luminal-like morphology, or cells double-stained with basal (CK5(+)) and 
luminal (CK8(+)) markers. Consistent with these findings, low ATF3 expression was
found to be a poor prognostic marker for prostate cancer in a cohort of 245
patients. Our results thus support that ATF3 is a tumor suppressor in prostate
cancer.Oncogene advance online publication, 2 November 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.417.

PMID: 26522727  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


39. J Hepatol. 2016 Mar;64(3):691-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2015.10.020. Epub 2015 Oct
28.

Cerium oxide nanoparticles reduce steatosis, portal hypertension and display
anti-inflammatory properties in rats with liver fibrosis.

Oró D(1), Yudina T(2), Fernández-Varo G(3), Casals E(2), Reichenbach V(1), Casals
G(1), González de la Presa B(1), Sandalinas S(1), Carvajal S(1), Puntes V(4),
Jiménez W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Service, Hospital Clínic Universitari,
IDIBAPS, CIBERehd, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Institut Català de Nanociència i
Nanotecnologia (ICN2), Bellaterra, Spain. (3)Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics 
Service, Hospital Clínic Universitari, IDIBAPS, CIBERehd, Barcelona, Spain;
Department Ciencies Fisiologiques I, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Institut Català de Nanociència i Nanotecnologia (ICN2), Bellaterra, Spain;
Institut Català de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain; Vall
d'Hebron Insitute of Research (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address:
victor.puntes@icn.cat. (5)Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Service, Hospital
Clínic Universitari, IDIBAPS, CIBERehd, Barcelona, Spain; Department Ciencies
Fisiologiques I, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address:
wjimenez@clinic.ub.es.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Cerium oxide nanoparticles (CeO2NPs) have proven to behave as 
free radical scavengers and/or anti-inflammatory agents. The aim of the study was
to determine whether CeO2NPs display hepatoprotective properties in experimental 
chronic liver disease.
METHODS: Systemic and hepatic effects of nanoparticles were assessed in
CCl4-treated rats receiving CeO2NPs or vehicle twice weekly for two weeks and
CCl4 treatment was continued for 8 additional weeks. Thereafter, mean arterial
pressure and portal pressure (PP) were assessed and serum samples obtained to
measure standard hepatic and renal function tests. Organ and subcellular
distribution of NPs were assessed using mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) and
transmission electron microscopy. Liver samples were obtained to evaluate
steatosis, a-SMA expression, macrophage infiltration, apoptosis and mRNA
expression of oxidative stress, inflammatory or vasoactive related genes.
RESULTS: Most CeO2NPs were located in the liver and it reduced hepatic steatosis,
ameliorated systemic inflammatory biomarkers and improved PP without affecting
mean arterial pressure. In addition, a marked reduction in mRNA expression of
inflammatory cytokines (TNFa, IL1ß, COX-2, iNOS), ET-1 and messengers related to 
oxidative (Epx, Ncf1, Ncf2) or endoplasmic reticulum (Atf3, Hspa5) stress
signaling pathways was observed in the liver of rats receiving CeO2NPs. This was 
associated with reduced macrophage infiltration and reduced abundance of
caspase-3, a-SMA and inflammatory cytokines.
CONCLUSIONS: CeO2NPs administration to CCl4-treated rats protects against chronic
liver injury by reducing liver steatosis and portal hypertension and markedly
attenuating the intensity of the inflammatory response, thereby suggesting that
CeO2NPs may be of therapeutic value in chronic liver disease.

Copyright © 2015 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26519601  [PubMed - in process]


40. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Dec;12(6):7851-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4442. Epub 2015 Oct 14.

Further insight into molecular mechanism underlying thoracic spinal cord injury
using bioinformatics methods.

Wang W(1), Liu R(2), Xu Z(3), Niu X(4), Mao Z(5), Meng Q(5), Cao X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, General Hospital of Jinan Military Command,
Jinan, Shandong 250031, P.R. China. (2)Department of Emergency Surgery, General
Hospital of Jinan Military Command, Jinan, Shandong 250031, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, First Affiliated Hospital of Shandong University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250014, P.R. China. (4)Department
of Hepatobiliary Surgery, General Hospital of Jinan Military Command, Jinan,
Shandong 250031, P.R. China. (5)Department of Spinal Cord Injury, General
Hospital of Jinan Military Command, Jinan, Shandong 250031, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to explore the molecular mechanisms underlying the
development of thoracic spinal cord injury (SCI). The gene expression profile of 
GSE20907, which included 12 thoracic non-injured spinal cord control samples and 
12 thoracic transected spinal cord samples at different stages of SCI, was
obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. Differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) were identified using the limma package in R/Bioconductor.
DEG-associated pathways were analyzed using the Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and
genomes database. A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed and
transcription factors (TFs) were predicted using cytoscape. Compared with the
control samples, there were 1,942, 396, 188 and 396 DEGs identified at day 3
(d3), week 1 (wk1), wk2 and month 1 (m1), respectively. Cluster analysis
indicated that the DEGs at m1 were similar to those in the control group.
Downregulated DEGs were enriched in nervous system disease pathways, such as
Parkinson's disease. Upregulated DEGs were enriched in immune response-associated
pathways, such as Fc <U+03B3> R-mediated phagocytosis at early stages (d3 and wk1).
Upregulated DEGs were enriched in pathways associated with cancer and pyrimidine 
metabolism at wk2 and m1, respectively. In the PPI network, nodes including RAC2,
CD4, STAT3 and JUN were identified. Furthermore, ATF3, JUN and EGR1 were
identified as TFs associated with SCI. In conclusion, the results of the present 
study showed that the number of DEGs decreased in a time-dependent manner
following SCI. OLIG1, ATF3 and JUN may represent SCI regeneration-associated
genes. Immune-associated inflammation was shown to be important in SCI, and SCI
exhibits causal associations with other diseases, including cardiovascular
disease and cancers. The present study provided novel insight into the molecular 
mechanisms of SCI regeneration, which may aid in the development of strategies to
enhance recovery following SCI.

PMCID: PMC4758289
PMID: 26497545  [PubMed - in process]


41. Dis Model Mech. 2015 Dec;8(12):1543-53. doi: 10.1242/dmm.023077. Epub 2015 Oct
23.

MAP3K1 function is essential for cytoarchitecture of the mouse organ of Corti and
survival of auditory hair cells.

Yousaf R(1), Meng Q(2), Hufnagel RB(3), Xia Y(2), Puligilla C(4), Ahmed ZM(1),
Riazuddin S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, School of Medicine,
University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. (2)Department of Environmental 
Health, University of Cincinnati, College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.
(3)Divisions of Pediatric Ophthalmology and Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. (5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head & 
Neck Surgery, School of Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201,
USA sriazuddin@smail.umaryland.edu.

MAP3K1 is a serine/threonine kinase that is activated by a diverse set of stimuli
and exerts its effect through various downstream effecter molecules, including
JNK, ERK1/2 and p38. In humans, mutant alleles of MAP3K1 are associated with
46,XY sex reversal. Until recently, the only phenotype observed in
Map3k1(tm1Yxia) mutant mice was open eyelids at birth. Here, we report that
homozygous Map3k1(tm1Yxia) mice have early-onset profound hearing loss
accompanied by the progressive degeneration of cochlear outer hair cells. In the 
mouse inner ear, MAP3K1 has punctate localization at the apical surface of the
supporting cells in close proximity to basal bodies. Although the
cytoarchitecture, neuronal wiring and synaptic junctions in the organ of Corti
are grossly preserved, Map3k1(tm1Yxia) mutant mice have supernumerary functional 
outer hair cells (OHCs) and Deiters' cells. Loss of MAP3K1 function resulted in
the downregulation of Fgfr3, Fgf8, Fgf10 and Atf3 expression in the inner ear.
Fgfr3, Fgf8 and Fgf10 have a role in induction of the otic placode or in otic
epithelium development in mice, and their functional deficits cause defects in
cochlear morphogenesis and hearing loss. Our studies suggest that MAP3K1 has an
essential role in the regulation of these key cochlear morphogenesis genes.
Collectively, our data highlight the crucial role of MAP3K1 in the development
and function of the mouse inner ear and hearing.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4728323
PMID: 26496772  [PubMed - in process]


42. FEBS Open Bio. 2015 Aug 31;5:733-40. doi: 10.1016/j.fob.2015.08.010. eCollection 
2015.

MicroRNAs downregulated in neuropathic pain regulate MeCP2 and BDNF related to
pain sensitivity.

Manners MT(1), Tian Y(1), Zhou Z(2), Ajit SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology & Physiology, Drexel University College of Medicine,
Philadelphia, USA. (2)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, USA.

Nerve injury induces chronic pain and dysregulation of microRNAs in dorsal root
ganglia (DRG). Several downregulated microRNAs are predicted to target Mecp2.
MECP2 mutations cause Rett syndrome and these patients report decreased pain
perception. We confirmed MeCP2 upregulation in DRG following nerve injury and
repression of MeCP2 by miRNAs in vitro. MeCP2 regulates brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and downregulation of MeCP2 by microRNAs decreased
Bdnf in vitro. MeCP2 T158A mice exhibited reduced mechanical sensitivity and
Mecp2-null and MeCP2 T158A mice have decreased Bdnf in DRG. MeCP2-mediated
regulation of Bdnf in the DRG could contribute to altered pain sensitivity.

PMCID: PMC4571540
PMID: 26448907  [PubMed]


43. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 29;10(9):e0139489. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139489.
eCollection 2015.

Lysophosphatidic Acid Mediates Activating Transcription Factor 3 Expression Which
Is a Target for Post-Transcriptional Silencing by miR-30c-2-3p.

Nguyen HT(1), Jia W(1), Beedle AM(1), Kennedy EJ(1), Murph MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, The University of
Georgia, College of Pharmacy, 240 W. Green Street, Athens, Georgia 30602, United 
States of America.

Although microRNAs (miRNAs) are small, non-protein-coding entities, they have
important roles in post-transcriptional regulation of most of the human genome.
These small entities generate fine-tuning adjustments in the expression of mRNA, 
which can mildly or massively affect the abundance of proteins. Previously, we
found that the expression of miR-30c-2-3p is induced by lysophosphatidic acid and
has an important role in the regulation of cell proliferation in ovarian cancer
cells. The goal here is to confirm that ATF3 mRNA is a target of miR-30c-2-3p
silencing, thereby further establishing the functional role of miR-30c-2-3p.
Using a combination of bioinformatics, qRT-PCR, immunoblotting and luciferase
assays, we uncovered a regulatory pathway between miR-30c-2-3p and the expression
of the transcription factor, ATF3. Lysophosphatidic acids triggers the expression
of both miR-30c-2-3p and ATF3, which peak at 1 h and are absent 8 h post
stimulation in SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3 serous ovarian cancer cells. The
3´-untranslated region (3´-UTR) of ATF3 was a predicted, putative target for
miR-30c-2-3p, which we confirmed as a bona-fide interaction using a luciferase
reporter assay. Specific mutations introduced into the predicted site of
interaction between miR-30c-2-3p and the 3´-UTR of ATF3 alleviated the
suppression of the luciferase signal. Furthermore, the presence of
anti-miR-30c-2-3p enhanced ATF3 mRNA and protein after lysophosphatidic acid
stimulation. Thus, the data suggest that after the expression of ATF3 and
miR-30c-2-3p are elicited by lysophosphatidic acid, subsequently miR-30c-2-3p
negatively regulates the expression of ATF3 through post-transcriptional
silencing, which prevents further ATF3-related outcomes as a consequence of
lysophosphatidic acid signaling.

PMCID: PMC4587950
PMID: 26418018  [PubMed - in process]


44. J Immunol. 2015 Nov 1;195(9):4446-55. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500204. Epub 2015
Sep 28.

ATF3 Is a Key Regulator of Macrophage IFN Responses.

Labzin LI(1), Schmidt SV(2), Masters SL(3), Beyer M(2), Krebs W(2), Klee K(2),
Stahl R(1), Lütjohann D(4), Schultze JL(2), Latz E(5), De Nardo D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Innate Immunity, University Hospital, University of Bonn, 53127
Bonn, Germany; (2)Life and Medical Sciences Institute, University of Bonn, 53115 
Bonn, Germany; (3)Inflammation Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Department of Medical
Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia;
(4)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University
Hospital, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany; (5)Institute of Innate
Immunity, University Hospital, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany;
Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605; and German Center for Neurodegenerative
Diseases, 53175 Bonn, Germany eicke.latz@uni-bonn.de denardo.d@wehi.edu.au.
(6)Institute of Innate Immunity, University Hospital, University of Bonn, 53127
Bonn, Germany; Inflammation Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Department of Medical Biology,
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia;
eicke.latz@uni-bonn.de denardo.d@wehi.edu.au.

Cytokines and IFNs downstream of innate immune pathways are critical for mounting
an appropriate immune response to microbial infection. However, the expression of
these inflammatory mediators is tightly regulated, as uncontrolled production can
result in tissue damage and lead to chronic inflammatory conditions and
autoimmune diseases. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is an important
transcriptional modulator that limits the inflammatory response by controlling
the expression of a number of cytokines and chemokines. However, its role in
modulating IFN responses remains poorly defined. In this study, we demonstrate
that ATF3 expression in macrophages is necessary for governing basal IFN-ß
expression, as well as the magnitude of IFN-ß cytokine production following
activation of innate immune receptors. We found that ATF3 acted as a
transcriptional repressor and regulated IFN-ß via direct binding to a previously 
unidentified specific regulatory site distal to the Ifnb1 promoter. Additionally,
we observed that ATF3 itself is a type I IFN-inducible gene, and that ATF3
further modulates the expression of a subset of inflammatory genes downstream of 
IFN signaling, suggesting it constitutes a key component of an IFN negative
feedback loop. Consistent with this, macrophages deficient in Atf3 showed
enhanced viral clearance in lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus and vesicular
stomatitis virus infection models. Our study therefore demonstrates an important 
role for ATF3 in modulating IFN responses in macrophages by controlling basal and
inducible levels of IFNß, as well as the expression of genes downstream of IFN
signaling.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26416280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Sci Rep. 2015 Sep 28;5:14470. doi: 10.1038/srep14470.

Activating transcription factor 3 represses inflammatory responses by binding to 
the p65 subunit of NF-<U+03BA>B.

Kwon JW(1), Kwon HK(1), Shin HJ(1), Choi YM(1), Anwar MA(1), Choi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou University, Suwon,
443-749, Korea.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is induced by inflammatory responses,
cell death, cytokines, and oxidative stress conditions. ATF3 is a negative
regulator in the Toll-like receptor 4 signalling pathway. The principal molecule 
in this pathway is nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) that translocates into the nucleus
to initiate the transcription of inflammatory mediators. However, scarce data are
available regarding the interaction of ATF3 and p65, a part of the NF-<U+03BA>B dimer.
Therefore, we studied the mechanism of regulation of p65 by ATF3 in RAW 264.7
cells. First, LPS-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B activation was confirmed, and then the direct
interaction of ATF3 and p65 was observed through immunoprecipitation (IP). The
presence of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) was also detected in the complex. In
ATF3 deficient cells, NF-<U+03BA>B activity was up-regulated and HDAC1 was not detected 
by IP. These observations suggest that p65 is attenuated by ATF3 such that ATF3
recruits HDAC1 to the ATF3/p65 complex and facilitates the deacetylation of p65. 
Likewise, inflammatory response genes were induced by translocated NF-<U+03BA>B in
ATF3-deficient cells. Cumulatively, we uncovered a novel mechanism for the
negative regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B by ATF3 via direct interaction with p65.

PMCID: PMC4585983
PMID: 26412238  [PubMed - in process]


46. J Chem Phys. 2015 Sep 21;143(11):114306. doi: 10.1063/1.4930609.

Electronic structures and geometries of the XF3 (X = Cl, Br, I, At) fluorides.

Sergentu DC(1), Amaouch M(2), Pilmé J(2), Galland N(3), Maurice R(1).

Author information: 
(1)SUBATECH, UMR CNRS 6457, IN2P3/EMN Nantes/Université de Nantes, 4 Rue A.
Kastler, BP 20722, 44307 Nantes Cedex 3, France. (2)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC
Univ Paris 06, UMR 7616, Laboratoire de Chimie Théorique, Case Courier 137, 4
Place Jussieu, 75252 Paris Cedex 05, France. (3)CEISAM, UMR CNRS 6230, Université
de Nantes, 2 Rue de la Houssinière, BP 92208, 44322 Nantes Cedex 3, France.

The potential energy surfaces of the group 17 XF3 (X = Cl, Br, I, At) fluorides
have been investigated for the first time with multiconfigurational wave function
theory approaches. In agreement with experiment, bent T-shaped C(2v) structures
are computed for ClF3, BrF3, and IF3, while we predict that an average D(3h)
structure would be experimentally observed for AtF3. Electron correlation and
scalar relativistic effects strongly reduce the energy difference between the
D(3h) geometry and the C(2v) one, along the XF3 series, and in the X = At case,
spin-orbit coupling also slightly reduces this energy difference. AtF3 is a
borderline system where the D(3h) structure becomes a minimum, i.e., the
pseudo-Jahn-Teller effect is inhibited since electron correlation and
scalar-relativistic effects create small energy barriers leading to the global
C(2v) minima, although both types of effects interfere.

PMID: 26395704  [PubMed]


47. Int J Cardiol. 2016 Jan 1;202:50-1. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.08.179. Epub 2015 
Aug 28.

ATF3: A potential target for cardiac maladaptive remodeling.

Ma ZG(1), Wei WY(1), Xu SC(1), Zhang WB(1), Dai J(1), Tang QZ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China;
Cardiovascular Research Institute of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China;
Cardiovascular Research Institute of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. Electronic
address: qztang@whu.edu.cn.

Comment on
    Int J Cardiol. 2015 Nov 1;198:232-40.

PMID: 26386920  [PubMed - in process]


48. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Dec 1;24(23):6788-800. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv383. Epub 2015 Sep
18.

Overexpression of ATF3 or the combination of ATF3, c-Jun, STAT3 and Smad1
promotes regeneration of the central axon branch of sensory neurons but without
synergistic effects.

Fagoe ND(1), Attwell CL(1), Kouwenhoven D(1), Verhaagen J(2), Mason MR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Neuroregeneration, Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, an
Institute of the Royal Academy of Arts and Sciences, Meibergdreef 47, Amsterdam
1105BA, The Netherlands and. (2)Laboratory for Neuroregeneration, Netherlands
Institute for Neuroscience, an Institute of the Royal Academy of Arts and
Sciences, Meibergdreef 47, Amsterdam 1105BA, The Netherlands and Center for
Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU
University, De Boelelaan 1085, Amsterdam 1081HV, The Netherlands. (3)Laboratory
for Neuroregeneration, Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, an Institute of
the Royal Academy of Arts and Sciences, Meibergdreef 47, Amsterdam 1105BA, The
Netherlands and m.mason@nin.knaw.nl.

Peripheral nerve injury results in the activation of a number of transcription
factors (TFs) in injured neurons, some of which may be key regulators of the
regeneration-associated gene (RAG) programme. Among known RAG TFs, ATF3, Smad1,
STAT3 and c-Jun have all been linked to successful axonal regeneration and have
known functional and physical interactions. We hypothesised that TF expression
would promote regeneration of the central axon branch of DRG neurons in the
absence of a peripheral nerve lesion and that simultaneous overexpression of
multiple RAG TFs would lead to greater effects than delivery of a single TF.
Using adeno-associated viral vectors, we overexpressed either the combination of 
ATF3, Smad1, STAT3 and c-Jun with farnesylated GFP (fGFP), ATF3 only with fGFP,
or fGFP only, in DRG neurons and assessed axonal regeneration after dorsal root
transection or dorsal column injury and functional improvement after dorsal root 
injury. ATF3 alone and the combination of TFs promoted faster regeneration in the
injured dorsal root. Surprisingly, however, the combination did not perform
better than ATF3 alone. Neither treatment was able to induce functional
improvement on sensory tests after dorsal root injury or promote regeneration in 
a dorsal column injury model. The lack of synergistic effects among these factors
indicates that while they do increase the speed of axon growth, there may be
functional redundancy between these TFs. Because axon growth is considerably less
than that seen after a conditioning lesion, it appears these TFs do not induce
the full regeneration programme.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26385639  [PubMed - in process]


49. Int J Cardiol. 2015 Dec 15;201:692. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.08.169. Epub 2015 
Aug 28.

Response letter: "ATF3: A promoter or inhibitor of cardiac maladaptive
remodeling".

Koren L(1), Shaked Y(2), Aronheim A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine,
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. (2)Department of Cell
Biology and Cancer Science, The B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. (3)Department of Molecular Genetics, The 
B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel. Electronic address: aronheim@tx.technion.ac.il.

Comment on
    Int J Cardiol. 2015 Nov 1;198:232-40.

PMID: 26374759  [PubMed - in process]


50. Eur J Neurosci. 2016 Feb;43(3):463-73. doi: 10.1111/ejn.13068. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

Nerve regeneration in chitosan conduits and in autologous nerve grafts in healthy
and in type 2 diabetic Goto-Kakizaki rats.

Stenberg L(1,)(2), Kodama A(3), Lindwall-Blom C(4), Dahlin LB(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Medicine - Hand Surgery, Lund University, Jan
Waldenströms gata 5, 205 02, Malmö, Sweden. (2)Department of Hand Surgery, Skåne 
University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden. (3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Integrated Health Sciences, Institute of Biomedical and Health Science, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan. (4)Cellectricon AB, Mölndal, Sweden.

Knowledge about nerve regeneration after nerve injury and reconstruction in
appropriate diabetic animal models is incomplete. Short-term nerve regeneration
after reconstruction of a 10-mm sciatic nerve defect with either a hollow
chitosan conduit or an autologous nerve graft was investigated in healthy Wistar 
and diabetic Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats. After 21 days, axonal outgrowth, the
presence of activated and apoptotic Schwann cells and the thickness of the formed
matrix in the conduits were measured. In general, nerve regeneration was superior
in autologous nerve grafts. In chitosan conduits, a matrix, which was thicker in 
diabetic rats, was formed and was positively correlated with length of axonal
outgrowth. Axonal outgrowth in conduits and in nerve grafts extended further in
diabetic rats than in healthy rats. There was a higher percentage of activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3)-immunostained cells in nerve segments from healthy 
rats than in diabetic rats after autologous nerve graft reconstruction. In
chitosan conduits, more cleaved caspase 3-stained Schwann cells were generally
observed in the matrix from the diabetic rats than in healthy rats. However,
there were fewer apoptotic cells in the distal segment in diabetic rats
reconstructed with a chitosan conduit. Preoperative glucose levels were
positively correlated with axonal outgrowth after both reconstruction methods.
Axonal regeneration was better in autologous nerve grafts than in hollow chitosan
conduits and was enhanced in diabetic GK rats compared to healthy rats after
reconstruction. This study provides insights into the nerve regeneration process 
in a clinically relevant diabetic animal model.

© 2015 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26355640  [PubMed - in process]


51. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 10;10(9):e0136340. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136340.
eCollection 2015.

A Novel Microtubule-Disrupting Agent Induces Endoplasmic Reticular
Stress-Mediated Cell Death in Human Hepatocellular Carcinoma Cells.

Ho CT(1), Chang YJ(2), Yang LX(3), Wei PL(2), Liu TZ(4), Liu JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan; School of Medical Laboratory Science and
Biotechnology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Translational
Research Laboratory, Cancer Center, Taipei Medical University and Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Surgery, Taipei Medical University and Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Radiobiology Laboratory, California Pacific Medical Center
Research Institute, San Francisco, CA, United States of America; St. Mary's
Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, United States of America. (4)Translational
Research Laboratory, Cancer Center, Taipei Medical University and Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Here, we present evidence of a novel microtubule-disrupting agent,
N-deacetyl-N-(chromone-2-carbonyl)-thiocolchicine (TCD), exhibiting potent
antitumor activity (with IC50 values in the nanomolar range) against
hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines. Cell cycle analysis revealed that TCD
induced G2/M cell-cycle arrest in a dose- and time-dependent manner in both
Hep-J5 and Mahlavu HCC cell lines. TCD also induced a decrease in mitochondrial
membrane potential (<U+0394><U+03A8>m) and caused DNA damage. Mechanistically, TCD activated
protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticular kinase and several transcription
factors, including activating transcription factor (ATF) 6, ATF4, ATF3, and the
CCAAT-enhancer binding protein homologous protein. These data clearly demonstrate
that the antitumor activity of TCD is mechanistically linked to its capacity to
trigger both intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic cell death via endoplasmic
reticular stress pathway. The potent antitumor activity of TCD was similarly
demonstrated in a hepatocellular carcinoma xenograft model, where 5 and 10 mg/kg 
doses of TCD significantly arrested Hep-J5 and Mahlavu tumor growth. Our finding 
suggests that TCD is a promising therapeutic agent against hepatocellular
carcinoma; further translational assessment of its clinical usage is warranted.

PMCID: PMC4565632
PMID: 26355599  [PubMed - in process]


52. Apoptosis. 2015 Nov;20(11):1499-507. doi: 10.1007/s10495-015-1167-4.

Chaetocin induces endoplasmic reticulum stress response and leads to death
receptor 5-dependent apoptosis in human non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Liu X(1,)(2), Guo S(1), Liu X(1), Su L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong University School of Life Sciences, Rm103, South Bldg, 27 Shanda
South RD, Jinan, 250100, China. (2)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck
Surgery, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(3)Shandong University School of Life Sciences, Rm103, South Bldg, 27 Shanda
South RD, Jinan, 250100, China. suling@sdu.edu.cn.

Epigenetic abnormalities are associated with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
initiation and progression. Epigenetic drugs are being studied and in clinical
trials. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the apoptosis by the
epigenetic agents remains unclear. SUV39H1 is an important methyl-transferase for
lysine 9 on histone H3 and usually related to gene transcriptional suppression,
and chaetocin acts as the inhibitor of SUV39H1. We demonstrated here that
chaetocin effectively suppressed the growth of multiple lung cancer cells through
inducing apoptosis in a death receptor 5 (DR5)-dependent manner. Chaetocin
treatment activated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress which gave rise to the
up-regulation of ATF3 and CHOP. Furthermore, ATF3 and CHOP contributed to the
induction of DR5 and subsequent apoptosis. When SUV39H1 was silenced with siRNA, 
the expression of ATF3, CHOP and DR5 was elevated. Thereafter, knockdown of
SUV39H1 induced apoptosis in NSCLC cells. In summary, chaetocin pharmacologically
inhibits the activity of SUV39H1 which provokes ER stress and results in
up-regulation of ATF3 and CHOP, leading to DR5-dependent apoptosis eventually.
These findings provide a novel interpretation on the anti-neoplastic activity of 
epigenetic drugs as a new therapeutic approach in NSCLC.

PMID: 26349783  [PubMed - in process]


53. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2015 Oct;309(8):H1326-35. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00513.2015. Epub 2015 Sep 4.

Induction of activating transcription factor 3 limits survival following
infarct-induced heart failure in mice.

Brooks AC(1), DeMartino AM(1), Brainard RE(1), Brittian KR(1), Bhatnagar A(1),
Jones SP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Cardiology and Diabetes and Obesity Center, Department 
of Medicine - Cardiovascular Division, University of Louisville School of
Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky. (2)Institute of Molecular Cardiology and Diabetes
and Obesity Center, Department of Medicine - Cardiovascular Division, University 
of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky
steven.p.jones@Louisville.edu.

Numerous fibrotic and inflammatory changes occur in the failing heart. Recent
evidence indicates that certain transcription factors, such as activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3), are activated during heart failure. Because ATF3
may be upregulated in the failing heart and affect inflammation, we focused on
the potential role of ATF3 on postinfarct heart failure. We subjected
anesthetized, wild-type mice to nonreperfused myocardial infarction and observed 
a significant induction in ATF3 expression and nuclear translocation. To test
whether the induction of ATF3 affected the severity of heart failure, we
subjected wild-type and ATF3-null mice to nonreperfused infarct-induced heart
failure. There were no differences in cardiac function between the two genotypes,
except at the 2-wk time point; however, ATF3-null mice survived the heart failure
protocol at a significantly higher rate than the wild-type mice. Similar to the
slight favorable improvements in chamber dimensions at 2 wk, we also observed
greater cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and more fibrosis in the noninfarcted regions
of the ATF3-null hearts compared with the wild-type. Nevertheless, there were no 
significant group differences at 4 wk. Furthermore, we found no significant
differences in markers of inflammation between the wild-type and ATF3-null
hearts. Our data suggest that ATF3 suppresses fibrosis early but not late during 
infarct-induced heart failure. Although ATF3 deficiency was associated with more 
fibrosis, this did not occur at the expense of survival, which was higher in the 
ATF3-null mice. Overall, ATF3 may serve a largely maladaptive role during heart
failure.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4666961 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26342068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Sep 29;112(39):E5420-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1515369112. Epub 2015 Aug 24.

Role of activating transcription factor 3 in the synthesis of latency-associated 
transcript and maintenance of herpes simplex virus 1 in latent state in ganglia.

Shu M(1), Du T(1), Zhou G(1), Roizman B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago IL 60637. (2)Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The
University of Chicago, Chicago IL 60637 bernard.roizman@bsd.uchicago.edu.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Sep 29;112(39):11993-4.

A key property of herpes simplex viruses (HSVs) is their ability to establish
latent infection in sensory or autonomic ganglia and to reactivate on physical,
hormonal, or emotional stress. In latently infected ganglia, HSVs express a long 
noncoding RNA, a latency-associated transcript (LAT), which plays a key role in
maintaining latently infected neurons, but not viral proteins. To investigate the
events leading to reactivation, we examined the use of ganglionic organ cultures 
that enable rapid reactivation in medium containing antibody to nerve growth
factor (NGF) or delayed reactivation in medium containing NGF and epidermal
growth factor (EGF). Here we report the discovery that activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3), a stress response protein, profoundly affects the interaction of
HSV with its host. Specifically, (i) ATF3 is induced by stress, such as
inhibition of protein synthesis or infection; (ii) in infected cells, ATF3
enhances the accumulation of LAT by acting on the response elements in the
promoter of the LAT precursor RNA; (iii) ATF3 is induced nearly 100-fold in
ganglionic organ cultures; and (iv) ATF3 plays a key role in the maintenance of
the latent state, inasmuch as expression of ATF3 bereft of the C-terminal
activation domain acts as a dominant negative factor, inducing HSV gene
expression in ganglionic organ cultures harboring latent virus and incubated in
medium containing NGF and EGF. Thus, ATF3 is a component of a cluster of cellular
proteins that together with LAT maintain the integrity of the neurons harboring
latent virus.

PMCID: PMC4593112
PMID: 26305977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 29;6(29):27023-36. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4809.

Targeting activating mutations of EZH2 leads to potent cell growth inhibition in 
human melanoma by derepression of tumor suppressor genes.

Tiffen JC(1,)(2,)(3), Gunatilake D(1,)(2,)(3), Gallagher SJ(1,)(2,)(3),
Gowrishankar K(1,)(2,)(3), Heinemann A(1,)(2,)(3), Cullinane C(4),
Dutton-Regester K(5), Pupo GM(6), Strbenac D(7), Yang JY(7), Madore J(8,)(3),
Mann GJ(6,)(7,)(3), Hayward NK(5), McArthur GA(4,)(9), Filipp FV(10), Hersey
P(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Melanoma Immunology and Oncology Group, Centenary Institute, University of
Sydney, NSW, Australia. (2)Melanoma Research Group, Kolling Institute of Medical 
Research, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia. (3)Melanoma Institute Australia, 
Crows Nest, Sydney, NSW, Australia. (4)Translational Research Laboratory, Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. (5)Oncogenomics Laboratory,
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. (6)Center
for Cancer Research, University of Sydney at Westmead Millennium Institute,
Westmead, NSW, Australia. (7)School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of 
Sydney, NSW, Australia. (8)Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, NSW,
Australia. (9)Oncogenic Signalling and Growth Control Program, Peter MacCallum
Cancer Centre, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. (10)Systems Biology and Cancer
Metabolism, Program for Quantitative Systems Biology, University of California
Merced, Merced, CA, USA.

The epigenetic modifier EZH2 is part of the polycomb repressive complex that
suppresses gene expression via histone methylation. Activating mutations in EZH2 
are found in a subset of melanoma that contributes to disease progression by
inactivating tumor suppressor genes. In this study we have targeted EZH2 with a
specific inhibitor (GSK126) or depleted EZH2 protein by stable shRNA knockdown.
We show that inhibition of EZH2 has potent effects on the growth of both
wild-type and EZH2 mutant human melanoma in vitro particularly in cell lines
harboring the EZH2Y646 activating mutation. This was associated with cell cycle
arrest, reduced proliferative capacity in both 2D and 3D culture systems, and
induction of apoptosis. The latter was caspase independent and mediated by the
release of apoptosis inducing factor (AIFM1) from mitochondria. Gene expression
arrays showed that several well characterized tumor suppressor genes were
reactivated by EZH2 inhibition. This included activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) that was validated as an EZH2 target gene by ChIP-qPCR. These results
emphasize a critical role for EZH2 in the proliferation and viability of melanoma
and highlight the potential for targeted therapy against EZH2 in treatment of
patients with melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4694971
PMID: 26304929  [PubMed - in process]


56. Int J Cardiol. 2015 Dec 15;201:245-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.08.079. Epub
2015 Aug 11.

ATF3: A promotion effect or a inhibition effect in cardiac maladaptive
remodeling.

Yang J(1), Yang CJ(2), Yang J(2), Fan ZX(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First College of Clinical Medical Sciences,
China Three Gorges University, Yichang 443000, Hubei Province, China; Institute
of Cardiovascular Diseases, China Three Gorges University, Yichang 443000, Hubei 
Province, China. Electronic address: yangjun@ctgu.edu.cn. (2)Department of
Cardiology, The First College of Clinical Medical Sciences, China Three Gorges
University, Yichang 443000, Hubei Province, China; Institute of Cardiovascular
Diseases, China Three Gorges University, Yichang 443000, Hubei Province, China.

Comment on
    Int J Cardiol. 2015 Nov 1;198:232-40.

PMID: 26301647  [PubMed - in process]


57. Stem Cells. 2016 Jan;34(1):233-45. doi: 10.1002/stem.2187. Epub 2015 Sep 29.

DOT1L Activity Promotes Proliferation and Protects Cortical Neural Stem Cells
from Activation of ATF4-DDIT3-Mediated ER Stress In Vitro.

Roidl D(1,)(2), Hellbach N(1), Bovio PP(1,)(3), Villarreal A(1), Heidrich S(1),
Nestel S(4), Grüning BA(5,)(6), Boenisch U(7), Vogel T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (2)Hermann Staudinger
Graduate School, Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Faculty of Biology, Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Neuroanatomy, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (5)Bioinformatics Group, 
Department of Computer Science, Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany. (6)Pharmaceutical Bioinformatics, Institute of Pharmaceutical Science,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (7)Deep Sequencing
Facility, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg,
Germany.

Growing evidence suggests that the lysine methyltransferase DOT1L/KMT4 has
important roles in proliferation, survival, and differentiation of stem cells in 
development and in disease. We investigated the function of DOT1L in neural stem 
cells (NSCs) of the cerebral cortex. The pharmacological inhibition and
shRNA-mediated knockdown of DOT1L impaired proliferation and survival of NSCs.
DOT1L inhibition specifically induced genes that are activated during the
unfolded protein response (UPR) in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
Chromatin-immunoprecipitation analyses revealed that two genes encoding for
central molecules involved in the ER stress response, Atf4 and Ddit3 (Chop), are 
marked with H3K79 methylation. Interference with DOT1L activity resulted in
transcriptional activation of both genes accompanied by decreased levels of H3K79
dimethylation. Although downstream effectors of the UPR, such as Ppp1r15a/Gadd34,
Atf3, and Tnfrsf10b/Dr5 were also transcriptionally activated, this most likely
occurred in response to increased ATF4 expression rather than as a direct
consequence of altered H3K79 methylation. While stem cells are particularly
vulnerable to stress, the UPR and ER stress have not been extensively studied in 
these cells yet. Since activation of the ER stress program is also implicated in 
directing stem cells into differentiation or to maintain a proliferative status, 
the UPR must be tightly regulated. Our and published data suggest that histone
modifications, including H3K4me3, H3K14ac, and H3K79me2, are implicated in the
control of transcriptional activation of ER stress genes. In this context, the
loss of H3K79me2 at the Atf4- and Ddit3-promoters appears to mark a
point-of-no-return that activates the death program in NSCs. Stem Cells
2016;34:233-245.

© 2015 The Authors STEM CELLS published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of
AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26299268  [PubMed - in process]


58. Lung. 2015 Oct;193(5):871. doi: 10.1007/s00408-015-9787-6.

Retraction Note to: ATF3 and Extracellular Matrix-Related Genes Associated with
the Process of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary.

Ye J(1), Wen L(2), Liu DL(1), Lai GX(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Fuzhou General Hospital 
of Nanjing Command, PLA, 156 Xihuan Bei Road, Fuzhou, 350025, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, The People's Hospital of Fujian Province, Fujian
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, 350004, China. (3)Department 
of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Fuzhou General Hospital of Nanjing
Command, PLA, 156 Xihuan Bei Road, Fuzhou, 350025, China.
laiguoxiang2007@163.com.

Retraction of
    Ye J, Wen L, Liu DL, Lai GX. Lung. 2014 Dec;192(6):881-8.

PMID: 26283030  [PubMed - in process]


59. Biochem Pharmacol. 2015 Oct 1;97(3):256-68. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2015.08.086. Epub 
2015 Aug 11.

Farnesol activates the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis and the ATF4-ATF3-CHOP
cascade of ER stress in human T lymphoblastic leukemia Molt4 cells.

Joo JH(1), Ueda E(1), Bortner CD(2), Yang XP(1), Liao G(1), Jetten AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Immunity, Inflammation and Disease Laboratory, National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, 111
T.W. Alexander Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. (2)Molecular
Endocrinology Section, Laboratory of Signal Transduction Division of Intramural
Research, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, 111 T.W. Alexander Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,
USA. (3)Cell Biology Section, Immunity, Inflammation and Disease Laboratory,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, 111 T.W. Alexander Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
Electronic address: jetten@niehs.nih.gov.

In this study, we demonstrate that treatment of T lymphoblastic leukemic Molt4
cells with farnesol activates the apoptosome via the intrinsic pathway of
apoptosis. This induction was associated with changes in the level of
intracellular potassium and calcium, the dissipation of the mitochondrial and
plasma membrane potential, release of cytochrome c, activation of several
caspases, and PARP cleavage. The induction of apoptosis by farnesol was inhibited
by the addition of the pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-fmk and by the exogenous
expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl2. Analysis of the gene expression
profiles by microarray analysis revealed that farnesol increased the expression
of several genes related to the unfolded protein response (UPR), including CHOP
and CHAC1. This induction was associated with the activation of the
PERK-eIF2a-ATF3/4 cascade, but not the XBP-1 branch of the UPR. Although farnesol
induced activation of the ERK1/2, p38, and JNK pathways, inhibition of these
MAPKs had little effect on farnesol-induced apoptosis or the induction of
UPR-related genes. Our data indicate that the induction of apoptosis in leukemic 
cells by farnesol is mediated through a pathway that involves activation of the
apoptosome via the intrinsic pathway and induction of the PERK-eIF2a-ATF3/4
cascade in a manner that is independent of the farnesol-induced activation of
MAPKs.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4618488 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26275811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Ukr Biochem J. 2015 Mar-Apr;87(2):76-87.

INHIBITION OF ERN1 SIGNALING ENZYME AFFECTS HYPOXIC REGULATION OF THE EXPRESSION 
OF E2F8, EPAS1, HOXC6, ATF3, TBX3 AND FOXF1 GENES IN U87 GLIOMA CELLS.

Minchenko OH, Tsymbal DO, Minchenko DO, Kovalevska OV, Karbovskyi LL, Bikfalvi A.

Hypoxia as well as the endoplasmic reticulum stress are important factors of
malignant tumor growth and control of the expression of genes, which regulate
numerous metabolic processes and cell proliferation. Furthermore, blockade of
ERN1 (endoplasmic reticulum to nucleus 1) suppresses cell proliferation and tumor
growth. We studied the effect of hypoxia on the expression of genes encoding the 
transcription factors such as E2F8 (E2F transcription factor 8), EPAS1
(endothelial PAS domain protein 1), TBX3 (T-box 3), ATF3 (activating
transcription factor 3), FOXF1 (forkhead box F), and HOXC6 (homeobox C6) in U87
glioma cells with and without ERN1 signaling enzyme function. We have established
that hypoxia enhances the expression of HOXC6, E2F8, ATF3, and EPAS1 genes but
does not change TBX3 and FOXF1 gene expression in glioma cells with ERNI
function. At the same time, the expression level of all studied genes is strongly
decreased, except for TBX3 gene, in glioma cells without ERN1 function. Moreover,
the inhibition of ERN1 signaling enzyme function significantly modifies the
effect of hypoxia on the expression of these transcription factor genes. removes 
or introduces this regulation as well as changes a direction or magnitude of
hypoxic regulation. Present study demonstrates that fine-tuning of the expression
of proliferation related genes depends upon hypoxia and ERN1-mediated endoplasmic
reticulum stress signaling and correlates with slower proliferation rate of
glioma cells without ERN1 function.

PMID: 26255341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 4;10(8):e0134394. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134394.
eCollection 2015.

Neuroimmune and Neuropathic Responses of Spinal Cord and Dorsal Root Ganglia in
Middle Age.

Galbavy W(1), Kaczocha M(1), Puopolo M(1), Liu L(1), Rebecchi MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York,
United States of America.

Prior studies of aging and neuropathic injury have focused on senescent animals
compared to young adults, while changes in middle age, particularly in the dorsal
root ganglia (DRG), have remained largely unexplored. 14 neuroimmune mRNA
markers, previously associated with peripheral nerve injury, were measured in
multiplex assays of lumbar spinal cord (LSC), and DRG from young and middle-aged 
(3, 17 month) naïve rats, or from rats subjected to chronic constriction injury
(CCI) of the sciatic nerve (after 7 days), or from aged-matched sham controls.
Results showed that CD2, CD3e, CD68, CD45, TNF-a, IL6, CCL2, ATF3 and TGFß1 mRNA 
levels were substantially elevated in LSC from naïve middle-aged animals compared
to young adults. Similarly, LSC samples from older sham animals showed increased 
levels of T-cell and microglial/macrophage markers. CCI induced further increases
in CCL2, and IL6, and elevated ATF3 mRNA levels in LSC of young and middle-aged
adults. Immunofluorescence images of dorsal horn microglia from middle-aged naïve
or sham rats were typically hypertrophic with mostly thickened, de-ramified
processes, similar to microglia following CCI. Unlike the spinal cord, marker
expression profiles in naïve DRG were unchanged across age (except increased
ATF3); whereas, levels of GFAP protein, localized to satellite glia, were highly 
elevated in middle age, but independent of nerve injury. Most neuroimmune markers
were elevated in DRG following CCI in young adults, yet middle-aged animals
showed little response to injury. No age-related changes in nociception (heat,
cold, mechanical) were observed in naïve adults, or at days 3 or 7 post-CCI. The 
patterns of marker expression and microglial morphologies in healthy middle age
are consistent with development of a para-inflammatory state involving microglial
activation and T-cell marker elevation in the dorsal horn, and neuronal stress
and satellite cell activation in the DRG. These changes, however, did not affect 
the establishment of neuropathic pain.

PMCID: PMC4524632
PMID: 26241743  [PubMed - in process]


62. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Jul 20;8:1795-803. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S80075. eCollection
2015.

Identification of the key genes connected with plasma cells of multiple myeloma
using expression profiles.

Zhang K(1), Xu Z(1), Sun Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Spinal Surgery, Jining No 1 People's Hospital, Jining, People's Republic of
China. (2)Department of Orthopedics, The People's Hospital of Laiwu City, Laiwu, 
Shandong Province, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To uncover the potential regulatory mechanisms of the relevant genes
that contribute to the prognosis and prevention of multiple myeloma (MM).
METHODS: Microarray data (GSE13591) were downloaded, including five plasma cell
samples from normal donors and 133 plasma cell samples from MM patients.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified by Student's t-test.
Functional enrichment analysis was performed for DEGs using the Gene Ontology
(GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) databases. Transcription 
factors and tumor-associated genes were also explored by mapping genes in the
TRANSFAC, the tumor suppressor gene (TSGene), and tumor-associated gene (TAG)
databases. A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network and PPI subnetworks were
constructed by Cytoscape software using the Search Tool for the Retrieval of
Interacting Genes (STRING) database.
RESULTS: A total of 63 DEGs (42 downregulated, 21 upregulated) were identified.
Functional enrichment analysis showed that HLA-DRB1 and VCAM1 might be involved
in the positive regulation of immune system processes, and HLA-DRB1 might be
related to the intestinal immune network for IgA production pathway. The genes
CEBPD, JUND, and ATF3 were identified as transcription factors. The top ten nodal
genes in the PPI network were revealed including HLA-DRB1, VCAM1, and TFRC. In
addition, genes in the PPI subnetwork, such as HLA-DRB1 and VCAM1, were enriched 
in the cell adhesion molecules pathway, whereas CD4 and TFRC were both enriched
in the hematopoietic cell pathway.
CONCLUSION: Several crucial genes correlated to MM were identified, including
CD4, HLA-DRB1, TFRC, and VCAM1, which might exert their roles in MM progression
via immune-mediated pathways. There might be certain regulatory correlations
between HLA-DRB1, CD4, and TFRC.

PMCID: PMC4516193
PMID: 26229487  [PubMed]


63. J Neurosci. 2015 Jul 29;35(30):10762-72. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4796-14.2015.

The Stress-Induced Atf3-Gelsolin Cascade Underlies Dendritic Spine Deficits in
Neuronal Models of Tuberous Sclerosis Complex.

Nie D(1), Chen Z(2), Ebrahimi-Fakhari D(1), Di Nardo A(1), Julich K(1), Robson
VK(1), Cheng YC(1), Woolf CJ(1), Heiman M(3), Sahin M(4).

Author information: 
(1)F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital
Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115. (2)Broad Institute
of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02142, and. (3)Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, and Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences and the Picower Institute
for Learning and Memory, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139. (4)F.M. Kirby
Neurobiology Center, Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, mustafa.sahin@childrens.harvard.edu.

Hyperactivation of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) kinase, as a result
of loss-of-function mutations in tuberous sclerosis complex 1 (TSC1) or TSC2
genes, causes protein synthesis dysregulation, increased cell size, and aberrant 
neuronal connectivity. Dysregulated synthesis of synaptic proteins has been
implicated in the pathophysiology of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) associated
with TSC and fragile X syndrome. However, cell type-specific translational
profiles in these disease models remain to be investigated. Here, we used
high-fidelity and unbiased Translating Ribosome Affinity Purification (TRAP)
methodology to purify ribosome-associated mRNAs and identified translational
alterations in a rat neuronal culture model of TSC. We find that expression of
many stress and/or activity-dependent proteins is highly induced while some
synaptic proteins are repressed. Importantly, transcripts for the activating
transcription factor-3 (Atf3) and mitochondrial uncoupling protein-2 (Ucp2) are
highly induced in Tsc2-deficient neurons, as well as in a neuron-specific Tsc1
conditional knock-out mouse model, and show differential responses to the mTOR
inhibitor rapamycin. Gelsolin, a known target of Atf3 transcriptional activity,
is also upregulated. shRNA-mediated block of Atf3 induction suppresses expression
of gelsolin, an actin-severing protein, and rescues spine deficits found in
Tsc2-deficient neurons. Together, our data demonstrate that a cell-autonomous
program consisting of a stress-induced Atf3-gelsolin cascade affects the change
in dendritic spine morphology following mTOR hyperactivation. This previously
unidentified molecular cascade could be a therapeutic target for treating
mTORopathies.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a
genetic disease associated with epilepsy and autism. Dysregulated protein
synthesis has been implicated as a cause of this disease. However, cell
type-specific translational profiles that are aberrant in this disease are
unknown. Here we show that expression of many stress and/or activity-dependent
proteins is highly induced while some synaptic proteins are repressed in neurons 
missing the Tsc2 gene expression. Identification of genes whose translation is
abnormal in TSC may provide insights to previously unidentified therapeutic
targets.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3510763-11$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4518051
PMID: 26224859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Oct;46(2):493-500. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.07.010.
Epub 2015 Jul 21.

Expression of virus-responsive genes and their response to challenge with
poly(I:C) at different stages of the annual fish Nothobranchius guentheri:
Implications for an asymmetric decrease in immunity.

Liu S(1), Jiang C(2), Duan C(1), Hu L(1), Zhang S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Evolution & Development, Institute of Evolution & Marine
Biodiversity and Department of Marine Biology, Ocean University of China, Qingdao
266003, China. (2)Laboratory for Evolution & Development, Institute of Evolution 
& Marine Biodiversity and Department of Marine Biology, Ocean University of
China, Qingdao 266003, China; College of Life Science and Technology, Hong He
University, Mengzi, Yunnan 661100, China. (3)Laboratory for Evolution &
Development, Institute of Evolution & Marine Biodiversity and Department of
Marine Biology, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, China. Electronic
address: sczhang@ouc.edu.cn.

Aging deteriorates immunity. However, if aging affects immunity in an asymmetric 
or symmetric way remains largely unknown. In this study we clearly demonstrate
that compared with adult fish, the anti-viral responses of aged annual fish
Nothobranchius guentheri, as reflected by the expression levels of
virus-responsive genes, including lgp2 and mda5 encoding sensor molecules, ifn-i 
and viperin encoding the effector molecules and irf1, irf7, stat1 and atf3
encoding the regulation elements, are either reduced remarkably or elevated
markedly or show little difference depending upon the different tissues.
Moreover, although challenge with poly(I:C) results in a significant decrease in 
the expression of virus-responsive genes in most tissues of aged N. guentheri, it
also causes a considerable increase in the expression of the genes in other
tissues of aged fish. Collectively, these data suggest that the anti-viral
responses of the annual fish N. guentheri generally reduces with age in an
asymmetric way among the most tissues.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26206608  [PubMed - in process]


65. Int J Cardiol. 2015 Nov 1;198:232-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.06.099. Epub
2015 Jul 9.

ATF3-dependent cross-talk between cardiomyocytes and macrophages promotes cardiac
maladaptive remodeling.

Koren L(1), Alishekevitz D(2), Elhanani O(1), Nevelsky A(3), Hai T(4), Kehat
I(5), Shaked Y(2), Aronheim A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine,
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. (2)Department of Cell
Biology and Cancer Science, The B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. (3)Radiotherapy Department, Rambam Health
Care Campus, Haifa, Israel. (4)Department of Biological Chemistry and
Pharmacology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio USA. (5)Department of
Physiology, Biophysics and Systems Biology, The B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine,
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. (6)Department of
Molecular Genetics, The B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Electronic address:
aronheim@tx.technion.ac.il.

Comment in
    Int J Cardiol. 2015 Dec 15;201:245-6.
    Int J Cardiol. 2016 Jan 1;202:50-1.
    Int J Cardiol. 2015 Dec 15;201:692.

RATIONALE: Pressure overload induces adaptive remodeling processes in the heart. 
However, when pressure overload persists, adaptive changes turn into maladaptive 
alterations leading to cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure. ATF3 is a stress
inducible transcription factor that is transiently expressed following
neuroendocrine stimulation. However, its role in chronic pressure overload
dependent cardiac hypertrophy is currently unknown.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to study the role of ATF3 in chronic
pressure overload dependent cardiac remodeling processes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Pressure overload was induced by phenylephrine (PE)
mini-osmotic pumps in various mice models of whole body, cardiac specific, bone
marrow (BM) specific and macrophage specific ATF3 ablations. We show that ATF3-KO
mice exhibit a significantly reduced expression of cardiac remodeling markers
following chronic pressure overload. Consistently, the lack of ATF3 specifically 
in either cardiomyocytes or BM derived cells blunts the hypertrophic response to 
PE infusion. A unique cross-talk between cardiomyocytes and macrophages was
identified. Cardiomyocytes induce an ATF3 dependent induction of an inflammatory 
response leading to macrophage recruitment to the heart. Adoptive transfer of
wild type macrophages, but not ATF3-KO derived macrophages, into wild type mice
potentiates maladaptive response to PE infusion.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, this study places ATF3 as a key regulator in promoting
pressure overload induced cardiac hypertrophy through a cross-talk between
cardiomyocytes and macrophages. Inhibiting this cross-talk may serve as a useful 
approach to blunt maladaptive remodeling processes in the heart.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26201690  [PubMed - in process]


66. Cell Calcium. 2015 Sep;58(3):317-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2015.06.009. Epub 2015
Jun 30.

Transcriptomic changes in Ca²<U+207A>-depleted cells: Role of elevated intracellular
[Na<U+207A>]/[K<U+207A>] ratio.

Koltsova SV(1), Tremblay J(2), Hamet P(2), Orlov SN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology, M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Centre de recherche, Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal (CRCHUM) -
Technopôle Angus, Montreal, PQ, Canada. (3)Faculty of Biology, M.V. Lomonosov
Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia; Centre de recherche, Centre hospitalier 
de l'Université de Montréal (CRCHUM) - Technopôle Angus, Montreal, PQ, Canada;
Tomsk National Research University, Tomsk, Russia. Electronic address:
sergeinorlov@yandex.ru.

Previously, we reported that Ca(2+) depletion increased permeability of the
plasma membrane for Na(+). This study examined the relative impact of
[Na(+)]i/[K(+)]i-mediated signaling on transcriptomic changes in cultured
vascular smooth muscle cells from rat aorta (VSMC) subjected to Ca(2+)-depletion 
by extra-(EGTA) and intracellular (BAPTA-AM) Ca(2+) chelators. Na(+),K(+)-ATPase 
inhibition in K(+)-free medium during 3 h led to elevation of [Na(+)]i and
attenuation of [K(+)]i by ~7- and 10-fold, whereas Ca(2+)-depletion resulted in
alteration of these parameters by ~3- and 2-fold, respectively. Augmented VSMC
permeability for Na(+) and elevation of the [Na(+)]i/[K(+)]i ratio was triggered 
by addition to Ca(2+)-free medium 50 µM EGTA and was not affected by 10 µM
BAPTA-AM. Na(+),K(+)-ATPase inhibition and Ca(2+)-depletion changed expression of
3677 and 4610 mRNA transcripts, respectively. We found highly significant
(p<10(-12)) positive (R(2)>0.51) correlation between levels of expression of 2071
transcripts whose expression was affected by both stimuli. Among genes whose
expression in Ca(2+)-depleted cells was augmented by more than 7-fold we noted
cyclic AMP-dependent transcription factor Atf3, early growth response protein
Egr1 and nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group A member Nr4a1. Dissipation of
transmembrane gradients of monovalent cations in high-K(+), low-Na(+)-medium
abolished the increments of the [Na(+)]i/[K(+)]i ratio as well as the augmented
expression of these genes triggered by incubation of VSMC in EGTA containing
medium. Thus, our results demonstrate, for the first time, that robust
transcriptomic changes triggered by Ca(2+)-depletion in the presence of
extracellular Ca(2+)-chelators are at least partially mediated by elevation of
the [Na(+)]i/[K(+)]i ratio and activation of Ca(2+)i-independent,
[Na(+)]i/[K(+)]i-mediated mechanism of excitation-transcription coupling. These
results shad a new light on analysis of data obtained in cells subjected to
long-term exposure to Ca(2+) chelators.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26183762  [PubMed - in process]


67. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2015 Jun;19(12):2246-53.

Predicting transcription factors in human alcoholic hepatitis from gene
regulatory network.

Mohammadnia A(1), Yaqubi M, Fallahi H.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran,
Iran. h.fallahi@razi.ac.ir.

OBJECTIVE: Alcoholic hepatitis (AH) is a type of alcoholic liver disorder caused 
by overconsumption of alcohol. The involvement of several transcription factors
(TF), as the main regulators of disease related gene expression has been
documented previously. However, despite the importance of analysis of gene
regulatory network for understanding the molecular basis in any disease, so far, 
there is no report on construction of such network for AH in human.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Here, we used microarray analysis to construct a rather
complete gene regulatory network and used it to predict TFs and pathways that
affected by this disease.
RESULTS: Ten TFs were shown to undergo significant alteration in AH. These TFs
are AR, EGR1, MYC, TCF4, ATF3, JUN, FOXO3, STAT1, HIF1A and EOMES, where ATF3,
TCF4 and MYC are the new TFs with a role in AH. Comparisons of gene expression
profile of patients with those of healthy persons indicates 820 differentially
expressed (DE) genes. Network analysis indicates that, these ten TFs regulate
expression of 516 DE genes (out of 820 genes), by 1057 interactions. Furthermore,
we report pathways that significantly affected by these ten TFs.
CONCLUSIONS: These results may contribute to our limited understanding of the
molecular basis of AH.

PMID: 26166650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Chem Biol Interact. 2015 Aug 5;238:170-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2015.06.040. Epub
2015 Jul 3.

Arsenic-induced S phase cell cycle lengthening is associated with ROS generation,
p53 signaling and CDC25A expression.

Pozo-Molina G(1), Ponciano-Gómez A(2), Rivera-González GC(3), Hernández-Zavala
A(4), Garrido E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, CINVESTAV-IPN, Mexico City,
Mexico; Facultad de Estudios Superiores Iztacala, UNAM, Tlalnepantla, Edo. de
México, Mexico. Electronic address: jpozo@cinvestav.mx. (2)Department of Genetics
and Molecular Biology, CINVESTAV-IPN, Mexico City, Mexico. Electronic address:
jponciano@cinvestav.mx. (3)Department of Molecular Cellular and Developmental
Biology, Yale University, United States. Electronic address:
guillermo.gonzalez@yale.edu. (4)Sección de Investigación y Posgrado, Escuela
Superior de Medicina, IPN, Mexico City, Mexico. Electronic address:
arhernanadez@ipn.mx. (5)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology,
CINVESTAV-IPN, Mexico City, Mexico. Electronic address: egarrido@cinvestav.mx.

Cellular response to arsenic is strongly dependent on p53 functional status.
Primarily arresting the cell cycle in G1 or G2/M phases, arsenic treatment also
induces an increase in the S-phase time in wild-type p53 cells. In contrast,
cells with a non-functional p53 display only a subtle increase in the S phase,
indicating arsenic differentially affects the cell cycle depending on p53 status.
Importantly, it has been reported that arsenic induces reactive oxygen species
(ROS), a process counteracted by p53. To evaluate the participation of p53 in the
lengthening of the S phase and the connection between the transient cell cycle
arrest and oxidative stress, we evaluated the cell response to arsenic in MCF-7
and H1299 cells, and analyzed p53's role as a transcription factor in regulating 
genes involved in ROS reduction and S phase transition. Herein, we discovered
that arsenic induced an increase in the population of S phase cells that was
dependent on the presence and transcriptional activity of p53. Furthermore, for
the first time, we demonstrate that arsenic activates p53-dependent transcription
of ROS detoxification genes, such as SESN1, and by an indirect mechanism
involving ATF3, genes that could be responsible for the S phase cell cycle
arrest, such as CDC25A.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26148435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Oncol Lett. 2015 Jun;9(6):2560-2566. Epub 2015 Apr 23.

Integrated analysis of differentially expressed genes in breast cancer
pathogenesis.

Chen D(1), Yang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang
310022, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to detect the differences between breast cancer cells and
normal breast cells, and investigate the potential pathogenetic mechanisms of
breast cancer. The sample GSE9574 series was downloaded, and the microarray data 
was analyzed to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Gene Ontology
(GO) cluster analysis using the GO Enrichment Analysis Software Toolkit platform 
and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis for DEGs was 
conducted using the Gene Set Analysis Toolkit V2. In addition, a protein-protein 
interaction (PPI) network was constructed, and target sites of potential
transcription factors and potential microRNA (miRNA) molecules were screened. A
total of 106 DEGs were identified in the current study. Based on these DEGs, a
number of bio-pathways appear to be altered in breast cancer, including a number 
of signaling pathways and other disease-associated pathways, as indicated by KEGG
pathway clustering analysis. ATF3, JUND, FOSB and JUNB were detected in the PPI
network. Finally, the most significant potential target sites of transcription
factors and miRNAs in breast cancer, which are important in the regulation of
gene expression, were identified. The results indicated that miR-93, miR-302A,
miR-302B, miR-302C, miR-302D, miR-372, miR-373, miR-520E and miR-520A were
closely associated with the occurrence and development of breast cancer.
Therefore, changes in the expression of these miRNAs may alter cell metabolism
and trigger the development of breast cancer and its complications.

PMCID: PMC4473354
PMID: 26137106  [PubMed]


70. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 21;290(34):20904-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.659466. Epub
2015 Jul 1.

Intracellular Bacterial Pathogens Trigger the Formation of U Small Nuclear RNA
Bodies (U Bodies) through Metabolic Stress Induction.

Tsalikis J(1), Tattoli I(2), Ling A(1), Sorbara MT(3), Croitoru DO(1), Philpott
DJ(3), Girardin SE(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology and. (2)From the 
Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology and Immunology, University of
Toronto, Toronto M6G 2T6, Canada. (3)Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto
M6G 2T6, Canada. (4)From the Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology 
and stephen.girardin@utoronto.ca.

Invasive bacterial pathogens induce an amino acid starvation (AAS) response in
infected host cells that controls host defense in part by promoting autophagy.
However, whether AAS has additional significant effects on the host response to
intracellular bacteria remains poorly characterized. Here we showed that
Shigella, Salmonella, and Listeria interfere with spliceosomal U snRNA maturation
in the cytosol. Bacterial infection resulted in the rerouting of U snRNAs and
their cytoplasmic escort, the survival motor neuron (SMN) complex, to processing 
bodies, thus forming U snRNA bodies (U bodies). This process likely contributes
to the decline in the cytosolic levels of U snRNAs and of the SMN complex
proteins SMN and DDX20 that we observed in infected cells. U body formation was
triggered by membrane damage in infected cells and was associated with the
induction of metabolic stresses, such as AAS or endoplasmic reticulum stress.
Mechanistically, targeting of U snRNAs to U bodies was regulated by translation
initiation inhibition and the ATF4/ATF3 pathway, and U bodies rapidly disappeared
upon removal of the stress, suggesting that their accumulation represented an
adaptive response to metabolic stress. Importantly, this process likely
contributed to shape the host response to invasive bacteria because
down-regulation of DDX20 expression using short hairpin RNA (shRNA) amplified
ATF3- and NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent signaling. Together, these results identify a critical 
role for metabolic stress and invasive bacterial pathogens in U body formation
and suggest that this process contributes to host defense.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4543651 [Available on 2016-08-21]
PMID: 26134566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2015;22(11):1214-23. doi: 10.5551/jat.28415. Epub 2015 Jun 
30.

ATF3 Inhibits Tenascin-C-induced Foam Cell Formation in LPS-Stimulated THP-1
Macrophages by Suppressing TLR-4.

Luo H(1), Wang J, Qiao C, Zhang X, Zhang W, Ma N.

Author information: 
(1)Key Disciplines Laboratory Clinical-Medicine Henan, Department of
Cardiovascular Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University.

AIM: Efficiently inhibiting the formation of macrophage foam cells is
indispensable for mitigating and treating atherosclerosis. Tenascin-C (TN-C)
plays an important role in promoting atherosclerosis; therefore, it is essential 
to inhibit foam cell formation associated with TN-C for controlling
atherosclerosis. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is one of the factors
involved in regulating the complex process of foam cell formation. This study
aimed to explore the role of TN-C and ATF3 in LPS-stimulated THP-1-derived
macrophages.
METHODS: RT-PCR was used for evaluating the expression of TN-C in LPS-stimulated 
THP-1 macrophages. Further, exogenous TN-C was introduced and incubated with
cultured THP-1 macrophages to confirm the effect of TN-C on LPS-stimulated THP-1 
macrophages. ATF3-modified THP-1 macrophages were constructed and verified by
western blot. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) assay and Oil red O
staining were applied for detecting cholesteryl ester/total cholesterol (CE/TC)
and lipid formation in THP-1 macrophages.
RESULTS: The expression of TN-C was determined to be upregulated in
LPS-stimulated THP-1 macrophages in a dose- and time-dependent manner. HPLC assay
and Oil red O staining confirmed that TN-C can enhance LPS-induced THP-1
macrophage foam cell formation. Moreover, ATF3 can act as a negative regulatory
factor for inhibiting TN-C-induced foam cell formation by suppressing TLR-4 in
LPS-stimulated THP-1 macrophages.
CONCLUSION: ATF3 can inhibit TN-C-induced foam cell formation in LPS-stimulated
THP-1 macrophages by suppressing TLR-4. It may be a useful molecular target to
control TN-C-induced foam cell formation in atherosclerosis.

PMID: 26133317  [PubMed - in process]


72. Neural Regen Res. 2015 May;10(5):713-4. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.156961.

Dynamic expression of ATF3 as a novel tool to study activation and migration of
endogenous spinal stem cells and their role in neural repair.

Mladinic M(1), Nistri A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Rijeka, 51000 Rijeka, Croatia.
(2)Neuroscience Department, International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA),
34136 Trieste, Italy.

PMCID: PMC4468759
PMID: 26109942  [PubMed]


73. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 17;10(6):e0129421. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129421.
eCollection 2015.

Type 2 Diabetes Monocyte MicroRNA and mRNA Expression: Dyslipidemia Associates
with Increased Differentiation-Related Genes but Not Inflammatory Activation.

Baldeón R L(1), Weigelt K(2), de Wit H(2), Ozcan B(3), van Oudenaren A(2),
Sempértegui F(4), Sijbrands E(3), Grosse L(5), van Zonneveld AJ(6), Drexhage
HA(7), Leenen PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Department
of Immunology, Central University of Ecuador, Quito, Ecuador. (2)Department of
Immunology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Immunology,
Central University of Ecuador, Quito, Ecuador. (5)Department of Psychiatry,
University of Münster, Münster, Germany. (6)Department of Nephrology, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (7)Department of Immunology, 
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Prometeo Program SENESCYT, Central
University of Ecuador and Universidad de las Fuerzas Armadas, Quito, Ecuador.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression pattern of microRNAs and mRNAs related to
inflammation in T2D monocytes.
DESIGN: A microRNA finding study on monocytes of T2D patients and controls using 
array profiling was followed by a quantitative Real Time PCR (qPCR) study on
monocytes of an Ecuadorian validation cohort testing the top over/under-expressed
microRNAs. In addition, monocytes of the validation cohort were tested for 24
inflammation-related mRNAs and 2 microRNAs previously found deregulated in
(auto)-inflammatory monocytes.
RESULTS: In the finding study, 142 significantly differentially expressed
microRNAs were identified, 15 having the strongest power to discriminate T2D
patients from controls (sensitivity 66%, specificity 90%). However, differences
in expression of these microRNAs between patients and controls were small. On the
basis of >1.4 or <0.6-fold change expression 5 microRNAs were selected for
further validation. One microRNA (miR-34c-5p) was validated as significantly
over-expressed in T2D monocytes. In addition, we found over expression of 3 mRNAs
(CD9, DHRS3 and PTPN7) in the validation cohort. These mRNAs are important for
cell morphology, adhesion, shape change, and cell differentiation. Classical
inflammatory genes (e.g. TNFAIP3) were only over-expressed in monocytes of
patients with normal serum lipids. Remarkably, in dyslipidemia, there was a
reduction in the expression of inflammatory genes (e.g. ATF3, DUSP2 and PTGS2).
CONCLUSIONS: The expression profile of microRNAs/mRNAs in monocytes of T2D
patients indicates an altered adhesion, differentiation, and shape change
potential. Monocyte inflammatory activation was only found in patients with
normal serum lipids. Abnormal lipid values coincided with a reduced monocyte
inflammatory state.

PMCID: PMC4471054
PMID: 26083362  [PubMed - in process]


74. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2015 May;28(3 Suppl):1059-63.

The expression of ATF3, MMP-2 and maspin in tissue chip of glioma.

Ma S(1), Pang C(1), Song L(1), Guo F(1), Sun H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.

This paper tested and analyzed the expression of ATF3 (activating transcription
factor), MMP-2 (matrix metalloprotease) and maspin in tissue chip of glioma and
its correlation with glioma advancement. Based on immunohistochemical staining,
this paper selected 100 patients with glioma and 13 healthy persons to test the
relative expression of ATF3, MMP-2 and maspin. The result witnessed 72.0% of ATF3
expression in glioma and 15.4% in healthy brain tissues with P<0.05; glioma had
76.0% of MMP-2 expression while healthy brain tissues only had 7.7% (P<0.05); but
maspin expression with 53.0% in glioma was much lower than that with 100% in
healthy tissues with P<0.05. If the pathological stage of glioma rose up, the
expression of ATF3 and MMP-2 accordingly increased while maspin expression
decreased. The correlation between ATF3 expression and MMP-2 expression was
positive with r=0.553 and p<0.01; negative correlation between ATF3 expression
and maspin expression was found with r=-0.457 and p<0.01; and the expression of
MMP-2 and maspin were negatively related with r=-0.551 and p<0.01. According to
the above results, it could be concluded that the expression of ATF3, MMP-2 and
maspin did relate with each other. Besides, the high expression of ATF3 and MMP-2
as well as the low expression of maspin had great influence on glioma, playing a 
key role in glioma's occurrence, advancement, invasion and metastasis.

PMID: 26051724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Anesth Analg. 2015 Jul;121(1):229-38. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000000777.

The effects of intraplantar and intrathecal botulinum toxin type B on tactile
allodynia in mono and polyneuropathy in the mouse.

Park HJ(1), Marino MJ, Rondon ES, Xu Q, Yaksh TL.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, College of Medicine,
The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea; Department of Anesthesiology,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California; and Departamento de
Medicina Veterinária, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul Faculdade de
Medicina Veterinária e Zootecnia, Vila Ipiranga - Campo Grande, Brazil.

Comment in
    Anesth Analg. 2015 Jul;121(1):20-1.

BACKGROUND: Mononeuropathies (MNs: nerve ligation) and polyneuropathies (PNs:
cisplatin) produce unilateral and bilateral tactile allodynia, respectively. We
examined the effects of intraplantar (IPLT) and intrathecal (IT) botulinum toxin 
B (BoNT-B) on this allodynia.
METHODS: Mice (male c57Bl/6) were prepared with an L5 nerve ligation. Others
received cisplatin (IP 2.3 mg/kg/d, every other day for 6 injections). Saline and
BoNT-B were administered through the IPLT or IT route. We examined mechanical
allodynia (von Frey hairs) before and at intervals after BoNT. As a control, we
injected IPLT BoNT-B treated with dithiothreitol to cleave heavy chain from light
chain. We measured motor function using acute thermal escape and sensorimotor
tests.
RESULTS: MN and PN mice showed a persistent ipsilateral and bilateral allodynia, 
respectively. IPLT BoNT-B resulted in an ipsilateral dorsal horn reduction in the
synaptic protein target of BoNT-B (vesicle-associated membrane protein) and a
long-lasting (up to approximately 17 days) reversal of allodynia in PN and MN
models. The predominant effect after IPLT delivery was ipsilateral to IPLT BoNT. 
The effects of IPLT BoNT-B in MN mice were blocked by prior reduction of BoNT-B
with dithiothreitol. IT BoNT-B in mice with PN resulted in a bilateral reversal
of allodynia. With these dosing parameters, hind paw placing and stepping
reflexes were unaltered, and there were no changes in thermal escape latencies.
After cisplatin, dorsal root ganglions displayed increases in activation
transcription factor 3, which were reduced by IT, but not IPLT BoNT-B.
CONCLUSIONS: BoNT-B given IPLT and IT yields a long-lasting attenuation of the
allodynia in mice displaying MN and PN allodynia.

PMID: 26039418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Clin Exp Nephrol. 2016 Feb;20(1):30-8. doi: 10.1007/s10157-015-1128-9. Epub 2015 
May 28.

High glucose promotes TGF-ß1 production by inducing FOS expression in human
peritoneal mesothelial cells.

Kokoroishi K(1), Nakashima A(2,)(3), Doi S(4,)(5), Ueno T(1), Doi T(1), Yokoyama 
Y(1), Honda K(6), Kanawa M(7), Kato Y(6), Kohno N(8), Masaki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
ayumu@hiroshima-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Regeneration and Medicine, Medical
Center for Translational and Clinical Research, Hiroshima University Hospital,
1-2-3 Kasumi Minami-Ku, Hiroshima, 734-8553, Japan. ayumu@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
sdoi@hiroshima-u.ac.jp. (5)Department of Blood Purification, Hiroshima University
Hospital, 1-2-3 Kasumi Minami-Ku, Hiroshima, 734-8553, Japan.
sdoi@hiroshima-u.ac.jp. (6)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry,
Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University,
Hiroshima, Japan. (7)Natural Science Center for Basic Research and Development,
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. (8)Department of Molecular and Internal
Medicine, Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan.

BACKGROUND: High glucose (HG) induces production of transforming growth
factor-beta1 (TGF-ß1), but the mechanism remains elusive. The aim of this study
was to determine the gene(s) involved in HG-induced TGF-ß1 production in human
peritoneal mesothelial cells (HPMCs).
METHODS: Microarray analysis was performed following a 3-h preincubation of HPMCs
in 4 or 0.1 % glucose medium. Transcriptional genes were selected using Gene
Ontology analysis for biological processes, including regulation of transcription
and DNA-dependent. The effects of small interfering RNA (siRNA) treatments on the
up-regulation of TGF-ß1 mRNA were assessed by quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR). Finally, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was
performed to determine which gene(s) contribute to the production of TGF-ß1
protein in the medium.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis revealed that the expression of 51 genes increased
by more than 3-fold. Gene ontology analysis identified 13 genes for further
study. qPCR confirmed mRNA amplification for 9 of the 13 genes. Furthermore,
HG-induced up-regulation of TGF-ß1 mRNA was attenuated by the siRNA of 4 genes:
MDS1 and EVI1 complex locus (MECOM), FBJ murine osteosarcoma viral oncogene
homolog B (FOSB), FBJ murine osteosarcoma viral oncogene homolog (FOS) and
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3). ELISA showed that siRNA treatment of
FOS, but not MECOM, FOSB or ATF3, suppressed the increase of TGF-ß1 protein in
the medium.
CONCLUSIONS: FOS is a downstream effector of HG stimulation in HPMCs that
contributes to TGF-ß1 production, suggesting that blocking FOS expression may be 
a therapeutic target for peritoneal fibrosis.

PMID: 26018137  [PubMed - in process]


77. PLoS One. 2015 May 20;10(5):e0127768. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127768.
eCollection 2015.

The longitudinal transcriptomic response of the substantia nigra to intrastriatal
6-hydroxydopamine reveals significant upregulation of regeneration-associated
genes.

Kanaan NM(1), Collier TJ(1), Cole-Strauss A(2), Grabinski T(3), Mattingly ZR(3), 
Winn ME(4), Steece-Collier K(1), Sortwell CE(1), Manfredsson FP(3), Lipton JW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Science & Molecular Medicine, College of Human
Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, United States of America; 
Morris. K. Udall Center of Excellence in Parkinson's Disease Research, Michigan
State University, Grand Rapids, MI, United States of America; Hauenstein
Neuroscience Center, Mercy Health Saint Mary's, Grand Rapids, Michigan, United
States of America. (2)Department of Translational Science & Molecular Medicine,
College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, United
States of America; Morris. K. Udall Center of Excellence in Parkinson's Disease
Research, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, United States of America. 
(3)Department of Translational Science & Molecular Medicine, College of Human
Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, United States of America. 
(4)Bioinformatics & Biostatistics Core, Van Andel Research Institute, Grand
Rapids, MI, United States of America.

We hypothesized that the study of gene expression at 1, 2, 4, 6 and 16 weeks in
the substantia nigra (SN) after intrastriatal 6-OHDA in the Sprague-Dawley rat
(rattus norvegicus) would identify cellular responses during the degenerative
process that could be axoprotective. Specifically, we hypothesized that genes
expressed within the SN that followed a profile of being highly upregulated early
after the lesion (during active axonal degeneration) and then progressively
declined to baseline over 16 weeks as DA neurons died are indicative of potential
protective responses to the striatal 6-OHDA insult. Utilizing a <U+03BA>-means cluster
analysis strategy, we demonstrated that one such cluster followed this
hypothesized expression pattern over time, and that this cluster contained
several interrelated transcripts that are classified as regeneration-associated
genes (RAGs) including Atf3, Sprr1a, Ecel1, Gadd45a, Gpnmb, Sox11, Mmp19, Srgap1,
Rab15,Lifr, Trib3, Tgfb1, and Sema3c. All exemplar transcripts tested from this
cluster (Sprr1a, Ecel1, Gadd45a, Atf3 and Sox11) were validated by qPCR and a
smaller subset (Sprr1a, Gadd45a and Sox11) were shown to be exclusively localized
to SN DA neurons using a dual label approach with RNAScope in situ hybridization 
and immunohistochemistry. Upregulation of RAGs is typically associated with the
response to axonal injury in the peripheral nerves and was not previously
reported as part of the axodegenerative process for DA neurons of the SN.
Interestingly, as part of this cluster, other transcripts were identified based
on their expression pattern but without a RAG provenance in the literature. These
"RAG-like" transcripts need further characterization to determine if they possess
similar functions to or interact with known RAG transcripts. Ultimately, it is
hoped that some of the newly identified axodegeneration-reactive transcripts
could be exploited as axoprotective therapies in PD and other neurodegenerative
diseases.

PMCID: PMC4439078
PMID: 25992874  [PubMed - in process]


78. J Neuroinflammation. 2015 May 20;12:96. doi: 10.1186/s12974-015-0318-4.

Evidence for a distinct neuro-immune signature in rats that develop behavioural
disability after nerve injury.

Austin PJ(1), Berglund AM(2), Siu S(3), Fiore NT(4), Gerke-Duncan MB(5),
Ollerenshaw SL(6), Leigh SJ(7), Kunjan PA(8), Kang JW(9), Keay KA(10).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Anatomy and Histology, School of Medical Sciences, The
University of Sydney, Room E511, Anderson Stuart Building F13, Sydney, NSW, 2006,
Australia. paustin@anatomy.usyd.edu.au. (2)Discipline of Anatomy and Histology,
School of Medical Sciences, The University of Sydney, Room E511, Anderson Stuart 
Building F13, Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia. aber4607@uni.sydney.edu.au.
(3)Discipline of Anatomy and Histology, School of Medical Sciences, The
University of Sydney, Room E511, Anderson Stuart Building F13, Sydney, NSW, 2006,
Australia. ssiu5308@uni.sydney.edu.au. (4)Discipline of Anatomy and Histology,
School of Medical Sciences, The University of Sydney, Room E511, Anderson Stuart 
Building F13, Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia. nfio4364@uni.sydney.edu.au.
(5)Discipline of Anatomy and Histology, School of Medical Sciences, The
University of Sydney, Room E511, Anderson Stuart Building F13, Sydney, NSW, 2006,
Australia. mbg@anatomy.usyd.edu.au. (6)Discipline of Anatomy and Histology,
School of Medical Sciences, The University of Sydney, Room E511, Anderson Stuart 
Building F13, Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia. slo@anatomy.usyd.edu.au.
(7)Discipline of Anatomy and Histology, School of Medical Sciences, The
University of Sydney, Room E511, Anderson Stuart Building F13, Sydney, NSW, 2006,
Australia. slei3376@uni.sydney.edu.au. (8)Discipline of Anatomy and Histology,
School of Medical Sciences, The University of Sydney, Room E511, Anderson Stuart 
Building F13, Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia. priya.kunjan@gmail.com. (9)Discipline
of Anatomy and Histology, School of Medical Sciences, The University of Sydney,
Room E511, Anderson Stuart Building F13, Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia.
jkan5634@uni.sydney.edu.au. (10)Discipline of Anatomy and Histology, School of
Medical Sciences, The University of Sydney, Room E511, Anderson Stuart Building
F13, Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia. keay@anatomy.usyd.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Chronic neuropathic pain is a neuro-immune disorder, characterised by
allodynia, hyperalgesia and spontaneous pain, as well as debilitating
affective-motivational disturbances (e.g., reduced social interactions,
sleep-wake cycle disruption, anhedonia, and depression). The role of the immune
system in altered sensation following nerve injury is well documented. However,
its role in the development of affective-motivational disturbances remains
largely unknown. Here, we aimed to characterise changes in the immune response at
peripheral and spinal sites in a rat model of neuropathic pain and disability.
METHODS: Sixty-two rats underwent sciatic nerve chronic constriction injury (CCI)
and were characterised as either Pain and disability, Pain and transient
disability or Pain alone on the basis of sensory threshold testing and changes in
post-CCI dominance behaviour in resident-intruder interactions. Nerve
ultrastructure was assessed and the number of T lymphocytes and macrophages were 
quantified at the site of injury on day six post-CCI. ATF3 expression was
quantified in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG). Using a multiplex assay, eight
cytokines were quantified in the sciatic nerve, DRG and spinal cord.
RESULTS: All CCI rats displayed equal levels of mechanical allodynia, structural 
nerve damage, and reorganisation. All CCI rats had significant infiltration of
macrophages and T lymphocytes to both the injury site and the DRG. Pain and
disability rats had significantly greater numbers of T lymphocytes. CCI increased
IL-6 and MCP-1 in the sciatic nerve. Examination of disability subgroups revealed
increases in IL-6 and MCP-1 were restricted to Pain and disability rats.
Conversely, CCI led to a decrease in IL-17, which was restricted to Pain and
transient disability and Pain alone rats. CCI significantly increased IL-6 and
MCP-1 in the DRG, with IL-6 restricted to Pain and disability rats. CCI rats had 
increased IL-1ß, IL-6 and MCP-1 in the spinal cord. Amongst subgroups, only Pain 
and disability rats had increased IL-1ß.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has defined individual differences in the immune response
at peripheral and spinal sites following CCI in rats. These changes correlated
with the degree of disability. Our data suggest that individual immune signatures
play a significant role in the different behavioural trajectories following nerve
injury, and in some cases may lead to persistent affective-motivational
disturbances.

PMCID: PMC4506439
PMID: 25986444  [PubMed - in process]


79. PLoS One. 2015 May 18;10(5):e0127089. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127089.
eCollection 2015.

Gene and MicroRNA Expression Responses to Exercise; Relationship with Insulin
Sensitivity.

McLean CS(1), Mielke C(1), Cordova JM(1), Langlais PR(2), Bowen B(1), Miranda
D(2), Coletta DK(1), Mandarino LJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United
States of America. (2)Mayo Clinic in Arizona, Scottsdale, Arizona, United States 
of America. (3)School for the Science of Health Care Delivery, Arizona State
University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America; Mayo Clinic in Arizona,
Scottsdale, Arizona, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Healthy individuals on the lower end of the insulin sensitivity
spectrum also have a reduced gene expression response to exercise for specific
genes. The goal of this study was to determine the relationship between insulin
sensitivity and exercise-induced gene expression in an unbiased, global manner.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Euglycemic clamps were used to measure insulin sensitivity 
and muscle biopsies were done at rest and 30 minutes after a single acute
exercise bout in 14 healthy participants. Changes in mRNA expression were
assessed using microarrays, and miRNA analysis was performed in a subset of 6 of 
the participants using sequencing techniques. Following exercise, 215 mRNAs were 
changed at the probe level (Bonferroni-corrected P<0.00000115). Pathway and Gene 
Ontology analysis showed enrichment in MAP kinase signaling, transcriptional
regulation and DNA binding. Changes in several transcription factor mRNAs were
correlated with insulin sensitivity, including MYC, r=0.71; SNF1LK, r=0.69; and
ATF3, r= 0.61 (5 corrected for false discovery rate). Enrichment in the 5'-UTRs
of exercise-responsive genes suggested regulation by common transcription
factors, especially EGR1. miRNA species of interest that changed after exercise
included miR-378, which is located in an intron of the PPARGC1B gene.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that transcription factor gene expression
responses to exercise depend highly on insulin sensitivity in healthy people. The
overall pattern suggests a coordinated cycle by which exercise and insulin
sensitivity regulate gene expression in muscle.

PMCID: PMC4436215
PMID: 25984722  [PubMed - in process]


80. Radiat Environ Biophys. 2015 Aug;54(3):353-63. doi: 10.1007/s00411-015-0603-8.
Epub 2015 May 14.

Toward the development of transcriptional biodosimetry for the identification of 
irradiated individuals and assessment of absorbed radiation dose.

Brzóska K(1), Kruszewski M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Radiobiology and Biological Dosimetry, Institute of Nuclear
Chemistry and Technology, Dorodna 16, 03-195, Warsaw, Poland,
k.brzoska@ichtj.waw.pl.

The most frequently used and the best established method of biological dosimetry 
at present is the dicentric chromosome assay, which is poorly suitable for a mass
casualties scenario. This gives rise to the need for the development of new,
high-throughput assays for rapid identification of the subjects exposed to
ionizing radiation. In the present study, we tested the usefulness of gene
expression analysis in blood cells for biological dosimetry. Human peripheral
blood from three healthy donors was X-irradiated with doses of 0 (control), 0.6, 
and 2 Gy. The mRNA level of 16 genes (ATF3, BAX, BBC3, BCL2, CDKN1A, DDB2, FDXR, 
GADD45A, GDF15, MDM2, PLK3, SERPINE1, SESN2, TNFRSF10B, TNFSF4, and VWCE) was
assessed by reverse transcription quantitative PCR 6, 12, 24, and 48 h after
exposure with ITFG1 and DPM1 used as a reference genes. The panel of
radiation-responsive genes was selected comprising GADD45A, CDKN1A, BAX, BBC3,
DDB2, TNFSF4, GDF15, and FDXR. Cluster analysis showed that <U+0394>C t values of the
selected genes contained sufficient information to allow discrimination between
irradiated and non-irradiated blood samples. The samples were clearly grouped
according to the absorbed doses of radiation and not to the time interval after
irradiation or to the blood donor.

PMCID: PMC4510913
PMID: 25972268  [PubMed - in process]


81. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jun 19;290(25):15878-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.635144. Epub
2015 Apr 30.

Human CHAC1 Protein Degrades Glutathione, and mRNA Induction Is Regulated by the 
Transcription Factors ATF4 and ATF3 and a Bipartite ATF/CRE Regulatory Element.

Crawford RR(1), Prescott ET(1), Sylvester CF(1), Higdon AN(1), Shan J(2), Kilberg
MS(2), Mungrue IN(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Louisiana
State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112 and. (2)the
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shands Cancer Center and Center
for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville,
Florida 32610. (3)From the Department of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans,
Louisiana 70112 and imungr@lsuhsc.edu.

Using an unbiased systems genetics approach, we previously predicted a role for
CHAC1 in the endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway, linked functionally to
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) following treatment with oxidized
phospholipids, a model for atherosclerosis. Mouse and yeast CHAC1 homologs have
been shown to degrade glutathione in yeast and a cell-free system. In this
report, we further defined the ATF4-CHAC1 interaction by cloning the human CHAC1 
promoter upstream of a luciferase reporter system for in vitro assays in HEK293
and U2OS cells. Mutation and deletion analyses defined two major cis DNA elements
necessary and sufficient for CHAC1 promoter-driven luciferase transcription under
conditions of ER stress or ATF4 coexpression: the -267 ATF/cAMP response element 
(CRE) site and a novel -248 ATF/CRE modifier (ACM) element. We also examined the 
ability of the CHAC1 ATF/CRE and ACM sequences to bind ATF4 and ATF3 using
immunoblot-EMSA and confirmed ATF4, ATF3, and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß
binding at the human CHAC1 promoter in the proximity of the ATF/CRE and ACM using
ChIP. To further validate the function of CHAC1 in a human cell model, we
measured glutathione levels in HEK293 cells with enhanced CHAC1 expression.
Overexpression of CHAC1 led to a robust depletion of glutathione, which was
alleviated in a CHAC1 catalytic mutant. These results suggest an important role
for CHAC1 in oxidative stress and apoptosis with implications for human health
and disease.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4505494 [Available on 2016-06-19]
PMID: 25931127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cancer Cell. 2015 Apr 13;27(4):516-32. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.03.006.

Convergent mutations and kinase fusions lead to oncogenic STAT3 activation in
anaplastic large cell lymphoma.

Crescenzo R(1), Abate F(2), Lasorsa E(3), Tabbo' F(1), Gaudiano M(1), Chiesa
N(3), Di Giacomo F(3), Spaccarotella E(3), Barbarossa L(3), Ercole E(3), Todaro
M(1), Boi M(1), Acquaviva A(4), Ficarra E(4), Novero D(5), Rinaldi A(6), Tousseyn
T(7), Rosenwald A(8), Kenner L(9), Cerroni L(10), Tzankov A(11), Ponzoni M(12),
Paulli M(13), Weisenburger D(14), Chan WC(14), Iqbal J(15), Piris MA(16), Zamo'
A(17), Ciardullo C(18), Rossi D(18), Gaidano G(18), Pileri S(19), Tiacci E(20),
Falini B(20), Shultz LD(21), Mevellec L(22), Vialard JE(23), Piva R(24), Bertoni 
F(25), Rabadan R(26), Inghirami G(27); European T-Cell Lymphoma Study Group,
T-Cell Project: Prospective Collection of Data in Patients with Peripheral T-Cell
Lymphoma and the AIRC 5xMille Consortium Genetics-Driven Targeted Management of 
Lymphoid Malignancies.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Science and Center for
Experimental Research and Medical Studies, University of Torino, 10126 Torino,
Italy; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10021, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and
Health Science and Center for Experimental Research and Medical Studies,
University of Torino, 10126 Torino, Italy; Department of Control and Computer
Engineering, Politecnico di Torino, 10129 Torino, Italy; Department of Biomedical
Informatics and Department of Systems Biology, Center for Computational Biology
and Bioinformatics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA. (3)Department
of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Science and Center for Experimental
Research and Medical Studies, University of Torino, 10126 Torino, Italy.
(4)Department of Control and Computer Engineering, Politecnico di Torino, 10129
Torino, Italy. (5)Department of Pathology, A.O. Città della Salute e della
Scienza (Molinette), 10126 Torino, Italy. (6)Lymphoma and Genomics Research
Program, Institute of Oncology Research, 6500 Bellinzona, Switzerland.
(7)Translational Cell and Tissue Research Lab, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(8)Institute of Pathology, University of Würzburg and Comprehensive Cancer Center
Mainfranken, 97080 Würzburg, Germany. (9)Ludwing Boltzmann Institute for Cancer
Research, 1090 Vienna, Austria. (10)Research Unit Dermatopathology of the Medical
University of Graz, 8036 Graz, Austria. (11)Institute of Pathology, University
Hospital Basel, 4031 Basel, Switzerland. (12)Pathology & Lymphoid Malignancies
Units, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy. (13)Department of
Human Pathology, University of Pavia and Scientific Institute Fondazione
Policlinico San Matteo, 27100 Pavia, Italy. (14)Department of Pathology, City of 
Hope Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA. (15)Department of Pathology and
Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.
(16)Cancer Genomics, Instituto de Formación e Investigación Marqués de Valdecilla
and Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla, 39008 
Santander, Spain. (17)Department of Pathology and Diagnostics, University of
Verona, 37134 Verona, Italy. (18)Division of Hematology, Department of
Translational Medicine, Amedeo Avogadro University of Eastern Piedmont, 28100
Novara, Italy. (19)European Institute of Oncology, 20141 Milano, Italy; Bologna
University School of Medicine, 40126 Bologna, Italy. (20)Institute of
Hematology-Centro di Ricerche Onco-Ematologiche (CREO), Ospedale S. Maria della
Misericordia, University of Perugia, 06100 Perugia, Italy. (21)The Jackson
Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA. (22)Janssen Research & Development, a
Division of Janssen-Cilag, Campus de Maigremont, CS10615, 27106 Val-de-Reuil
Cedex, France. (23)Janssen Research & Development, a Division of Janssen
Pharmaceutica NV, Turnhoutseweg 30, 2340 Beerse, Belgium. (24)Department of
Molecular Biotechnology and Health Science and Center for Experimental Research
and Medical Studies, University of Torino, 10126 Torino, Italy; Department of
Pathology and NYU Cancer Center, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10016, USA. (25)Lymphoma and Genomics Research Program, Institute of
Oncology Research, 6500 Bellinzona, Switzerland; Oncology Institute of Southern
Switzerland, 6500 Bellinzona, Switzerland. (26)Department of Biomedical
Informatics and Department of Systems Biology, Center for Computational Biology
and Bioinformatics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA. Electronic
address: rr2579@cumc.columbia.edu. (27)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and 
Health Science and Center for Experimental Research and Medical Studies,
University of Torino, 10126 Torino, Italy; Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10021, USA; Department of
Pathology and NYU Cancer Center, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10016, USA. Electronic address: ggi9001@med.cornell.edu.

Erratum in
    Cancer Cell. 2015 May 11;27(5):744.

A systematic characterization of the genetic alterations driving ALCLs has not
been performed. By integrating massive sequencing strategies, we provide a
comprehensive characterization of driver genetic alterations (somatic point
mutations, copy number alterations, and gene fusions) in ALK(-) ALCLs. We
identified activating mutations of JAK1 and/or STAT3 genes in ~20% of 88
[corrected] ALK(-) ALCLs and demonstrated that 38% of systemic ALK(-) ALCLs
displayed double lesions. Recurrent chimeras combining a transcription factor
(NFkB2 or NCOR2) with a tyrosine kinase (ROS1 or TYK2) were also discovered in WT
JAK1/STAT3 ALK(-) ALCL. All these aberrations lead to the constitutive activation
of the JAK/STAT3 pathway, which was proved oncogenic. Consistently, JAK/STAT3
pathway inhibition impaired cell growth in vitro and in vivo.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25873174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Jun;35(6):1561-73. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2173. Epub 2015 Apr
7.

Activating transcription factor 3 is overexpressed in human glioma and its
knockdown in glioblastoma cells causes growth inhibition both in vitro and in
vivo.

Ma S(1), Pang C(1), Song L(1), Guo F(1), Sun H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, P.R. China.

Glioblastomas are highly malignant gliomas that are extremely invasive with high 
rates of recurrence and mortality. It has been reported that activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is expressed in elevated levels in multiple
malignant tumors. The purpose of this study was to investigate the function of
ATF3 in the development of glioma and its clinical significance.
Immunohistochemical staining, western blot analysis and RT-qPCR revealed that the
mRNA and protein levels of ATF3 and matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2) were higher
in the glioma than in the normal human brain tissues, and that their levels were 
proportional to the pathological grades. By contrast, the mRNA and protein levels
of mammary serine protease inhibitor (maspin; SERPINB5) were significantly lower 
in the glioma than in the normal brain tissue, and maspin expression was
inversely proportional to the glioma pathological grade. The transfection of
U373MG glioblastoma cells with ATF3-siRNA induced a number of changes in cell
behavior; the cell proliferative activity was decreased and flow cytometry
revealed an increased proportion of cells arrested in the G0/G1 phase of the cell
cycle. In addition, TUNEL staining indicated an increased proportion of cells
undergoing apoptosis and Transwell assays revealed impaired cell mobility. The
sizes of the tumors grown as xenografts in nude mice were also significantly
reduced by treatment of host mice with ATF3-siRNA. Taken together, these results 
suggest that ATF3 promotes the progression of human gliomas.

PMCID: PMC4432930
PMID: 25872784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 13;6:6752. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7752.

The stress-responsive gene ATF3 regulates the histone acetyltransferase Tip60.

Cui H(1), Guo M(2), Xu D(2), Ding ZC(3), Zhou G(4), Ding HF(5), Zhang J(6), Tang 
Y(2), Yan C(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] GRU Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, 1120 15th Street, Augusta,
Georgia 30912, USA [2] Center for Cell Biology and Cancer Research, Albany
Medical College, 47 New Scotland Avenue, Albany, New York 12208, USA. (2)Center
for Cell Biology and Cancer Research, Albany Medical College, 47 New Scotland
Avenue, Albany, New York 12208, USA. (3)GRU Cancer Center, Georgia Regents
University, 1120 15th Street, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA. (4)1] GRU Cancer
Center, Georgia Regents University, 1120 15th Street, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA
[2] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, 1120 15th Street, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA. (5)1] 
GRU Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, 1120 15th Street, Augusta, Georgia
30912, USA [2] Department of Pathology, Georgia Regents University, 1120 15th
Street, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA. (6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Case
Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.
(7)1] GRU Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, 1120 15th Street, Augusta,
Georgia 30912, USA [2] Center for Cell Biology and Cancer Research, Albany
Medical College, 47 New Scotland Avenue, Albany, New York 12208, USA [3]
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, 1120 15th Street, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

Tat-interactive protein 60 (Tip60) is a MYST histone acetyltransferase that
catalyses acetylation of the major DNA damage kinase Ataxia telangiectasia
mutated (ATM), thereby triggering cellular signalling required for the
maintenance of genomic stability on genotoxic insults. The Tip60 activity is
modulated by post-translational modifications that alter its stability and its
interactions with substrates. Here we report that activating transcription factor
3 (ATF3), a common stress mediator and a p53 activator, is a regulator of Tip60. 
ATF3 directly binds Tip60 at a region adjacent to the catalytic domain to promote
the protein acetyltransferase activity. Moreover, the ATF3-Tip60 interaction
increases the Tip60 stability by promoting USP7-mediated deubiquitination of
Tip60. Consequently, knockdown of ATF3 expression leads to decreased Tip60
expression and suppression of ATM signalling as evidenced by accumulated DNA
lesions and increased cell sensitivity to irradiation. Our findings thus reveal a
previously unknown function of a common stress mediator in regulating Tip60
function.

PMCID: PMC4407828
PMID: 25865756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Med Sci Monit Basic Res. 2015 Apr 7;21:53-62. doi: 10.12659/MSMBR.893827.

Heroin activates ATF3 and CytC via c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathways to mediate
neuronal apoptosis.

Pu H(1), Wang X(2), Su L(3), Ma C(4), Zhang Y(5), Zhang L(3), Chen X(3), Li X(2),
Wang H(3), Liu X(6), Zhang J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Science and Research Education Center, First Affiliated Hospital
of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Sinciang, China (mainland). (2)Xinjiang
Key Laboratory of Medical Animal Model Research, First Affiliated Hospital of
Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Sinciang, China (mainland). (3)College of
Basic Medicine, Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Sinciang, China (mainland). 
(4)Department of Micro-Reconstructive Surgery of Orthopedics Center, First
Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Sinciang, China
(mainland). (5)College of International Education, Xinjiang Medical University,
Urumqi, Sinciang, China (mainland). (6)Department of Forensic Science, Zhongshan 
School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
(mainland).

BACKGROUND Drug abuse and addiction has become a major public health problem that
impacts all societies. The use of heroin may cause spongiform leukoencephalopathy
(SLE). MATERIAL AND METHODS Cerebellar granule cells were derived from 7-day-old 
Sprague-Dawley rat pups. Neurons were dissociated from freshly dissected
cerebella by mechanical disruption in the presence of 0.125% trypsin and DNaseI
and then seeded at a density of 4×10^6 cells/ml in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's
medium/nutrient mixture F-12 ham's containing 10% fetal bovine serum and
Arc-C(sigma) at concentrations to inhibit glial cell growth inoculated into
6-well plates and a small dish. RESULTS We found that heroin induces the
apoptosis of primary cultured cerebellar granule cells (CGCS) and that the c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway was activated under heroin treatment and
stimulated obvious increases in the levels of C-jun, Cytc, and ATF3mRNA. CYTC and
ATF3 were identified as candidate targets of the JNK/c-Jun pathway in this
process because the specificity inhibitors SP600125 of JNK/C-jun pathways reduced
the levels of C-jun, Cytc, and ATF3mRNA. The results suggested that SP600125 of
JNK/C-jun can inhibit heroin-induced apoptosis of neurons. CONCLUSIONS The
present study analyzes our understanding of the critical role of the JNK pathway 
in the process of neuronal apoptosis induced by heroin, and suggests a new and
effective strategy to treat SLE.

PMCID: PMC4400970
PMID: 25848832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cytokine. 2015 Aug;74(2):181-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.02.025. Epub 2015 Apr 3.

Toll-like receptors: Activation, signalling and transcriptional modulation.

De Nardo D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Inflammation Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, 1G Royal Parade, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Department of
Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3050,
Australia. Electronic address: denardo.d@wehi.edu.au.

Families of innate immune receptors serve as the bodies primary defence system by
recognising and rapidly responding to infection by microorganisms or to
endogenous danger signals and initiating inflammatory processes. Whilst Toll-like
receptors (TLRs) were the first family to be discovered, important and exciting
discoveries continue to emerge into the molecular mechanisms that control their
activation and regulation. Herein, I will provide an overview of TLR activation
and their downstream signalling cascades, and discuss some of the recent findings
concerning the assembly of a TLR oligomeric signalling platform, known as the
Myddosome. Further, a brief examination of the importance of crosstalk between
multiple TLRs or between TLRs and other innate immune receptors for appropriate
and coordinated immune responses will be presented. Finally, I will discuss the
importance of mechanisms that regulate TLRs with a focus on the role of
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in modulating transcriptional responses 
downstream of TLRs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25846205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Nutrition. 2015 May;31(5):757-65. doi: 10.1016/j.nut.2014.11.014. Epub 2014 Dec
19.

Refeeding with glucose rather than fructose elicits greater hepatic inflammatory 
gene expression in mice.

Oarada M(1), Takahashi-Nakaguchi A(2), Abe T(3), Nikawa T(3), Miki T(4), Gonoi
T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Mycology Research Center, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan. Electronic
address: Motoko.o@faculty.chiba-u.jp. (2)Medical Mycology Research Center, Chiba 
University, Chiba, Japan. (3)Department of Nutrition, Tokushima University School
of Medicine, Tokushima, Japan. (4)Department of Medical Physiology, Graduate
School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: We previously reported that refeeding after a 48-h fast, used as a
study model of starvation and refeeding, promotes acute liver inflammatory gene
expression, which is at least partly mediated by toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2). We 
also previously demonstrated that dietary carbohydrates play critical roles in
this process. The aim of this study was to compare the outcomes of refeeding with
different carbohydrate sources.
METHODS: Mice were fasted for 46 h and then refed with 1.5% (w/w) agar gel
containing 19% carbohydrate (sources: a-cornstarch, glucose, sucrose, or
fructose). The liver expression of inflammatory and other specific genes was then
sequentially measured for the first 14 h after refeeding initiation.
RESULTS: Fasting for 46 h up-regulated the liver expression of endogenous ligands
for TLRs (HspA5, Hsp90 aa1, and Hspd1). Refeeding with agar gel containing
a-cornstarch or glucose increased the liver expression of Tlr2, proinflammatory
genes (Cxcl2, Cxcl10, Cxcl1, Nfkb1, Nfkb2, RelB, Sectm1a, Il1ß), stress response 
genes (Atf3, Asns, Gadd45 a, Perk, Inhbe), detoxification genes (Hmox1, Gsta1,
Abca8b), genes involved in tissue regeneration (Gdf15, Krt23, Myc, Tnfrsf12a,
Mthfd2), and genes involved in tumor suppression (p53, Txnrd1, Btg2). This
refeeding also moderately but significantly elevated the serum levels of alanine 
aminotransferase. These effects were attenuated in mice refed with agar gel
containing sucrose or fructose.
CONCLUSION: Dietary glucose, rather than fructose, plays a critical role in
refeeding-induced acute liver inflammatory gene expression and moderate
hepatocyte destruction. Further studies are recommended regarding the role of
these effects in liver inflammation and, consequently, liver dysfunction.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25837224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):1239-46. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3548. Epub 2015 Mar
26.

Computational networks of activating transcription factor 3 gene in Huh7 cell
lines and hepatitis C virus-infected Huh7 cell lines.

Liu J(1), Wang B(2), Wang W(1), Sun M(1), Li Y(1), Jia X(1), Zhai S(1), Dang
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Medical
School of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710004, P.R. China.
(2)Department of the Laboratory, Shaanxi Province Health Inspection Institution, 
Xi'an, Shaanxi 710077, P.R. China.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is an adaptive-response gene of the ATF 
family. ATF3 activity may be induced in response to a number of different
stress-associated signals and ATF3 is involved in a variety of cellular
processes. However, the functions of ATF3 and its molecular networks in human
hepatoma cells lines and hepatitis C virus-infected Huh7 (HCV-Huh7) cells are not
well understood. In the present study, ATF3 regulatory networks in Huh7 and
HCV-Huh7 cell lines were established using the linear programming-based GRNinfer 
software and molecule annotation system 3.0 software. The gene expression omnibus
dataset, GSE20948, was analyzed. The resulting network consisted of clusters
located upstream and downstream of ATF3 in Huh7 and HCV-Huh7 cell lines. Using
the annotation, visualization and integrated discovery (DAVID) software, 10
activation and 2 inhibition enriched functional annotation clusters were
identified downstream of ATF3 in HCV-Huh7 cells. However, there were no enriched 
functional annotation clusters identified upstream of ATF3 in HCV-Huh7 cells.
Furthermore, no clusters were identified downstream nor upstream of ATF3 in Huh7 
cells. Gene ontology term and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes pathway
analyses demonstrated that ATF3 may be involved in a number of biological
processes, in particular, in metabolism regulation in HCV-Huh7 cells. It is
hypothesized that the ATF3 pathway may be activated in Huh7 cells following HCV
infection and that it is a potential 'hub' in the network of HCV-Huh7 cells.

PMID: 25816118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Anticancer Drugs. 2015 Jul;26(6):667-77. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000232.

Derivatives containing both coumarin and benzimidazole potently induce
caspase-dependent apoptosis of cancer cells through inhibition of PI3K-AKT-mTOR
signaling.

Liu H(1), Wang Y, Sharma A, Mao R, Jiang N, Dun B, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)aCenter for Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia, USA bInstitute of Translational
Medicine, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nanjing University of Technology,
Nanjing, China.

Coumarins are a large family of compounds derived from a wide range of plants,
fungi, and bacteria, and coumarin derivatives can have extremely variable
structures and consequently diverse biological properties including antitumor
activity. Compounds that bear a benzimidazole moiety are known to possess
antitumor activity and a variety of other biological activities. High-throughput 
screening of a compound library identified a coumarin-containing and a
benzimidazole-containing compound [#32,
7-(diethylamino)-3-(1-methyl-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl)-2H-chromen-2-one] that has
potent anticancer activity. Evaluation of 17 additional analogs further
identified three compounds with anticancer activity in 14 different human cancer 
cell lines. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting and western blotting analyses
suggested that these compounds can induce caspase-dependent apoptosis. Real-time 
reverse transcriptase PCR analyses of 26 cancer-related genes revealed that seven
genes (NPPB, ATF3, DDIT4, CDH10, TSPAN14, TXNIP, and AXL) were significantly
upregulated and nine genes (PAGE4, LRP8, SNCAIP, IGFBP5, SLCO2A1, CLDN2, ESRRG,
D2HGDH, and PDGFRA) were significantly downregulated. The most upregulated gene
is natriuretic peptide precursor B (NPPB) or brain natriuretic peptide, which is 
increased by 7-, 27-, and 197-fold at 12, 24, and 48 h, respectively. The second 
most upregulated gene is ATF3, which is increased by 23-fold at the 48 h
timepoint. PAGE4 and IGFBP5 are the two most downregulated genes, with a 17-fold 
reduction in both genes. The expression of several genes (DDIT4, PDGFRA, LRP8,
IGFBP5) and western blotting data on key signaling proteins indicate that
compound #32 significantly inhibits the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway, an intracellular
signaling pathway critical in cell proliferation and apoptosis.

PMID: 25811964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Biomol Ther (Seoul). 2015 Mar;23(2):134-40. doi: 10.4062/biomolther.2014.107.
Epub 2015 Mar 1.

ATF3 Mediates Anti-Cancer Activity of Trans-10, cis-12-Conjugated Linoleic Acid
in Human Colon Cancer Cells.

Kim KJ(1), Lee J(1), Park Y(2), Lee SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, College of Agriculture and Natural
Resources, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742, USA. (2)Department of
Food Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, 01003, USA.

Conjugated linoleic acids (CLA) are a family of isomers of linoleic acid. CLA
increases growth arrest and apoptosis of human colorectal cancer cells through an
isomer-specific manner. ATF3 belongs to the ATF/CREB family of transcription
factors and is associated with apoptosis in colorectal cancer. The present study 
was performed to investigate the molecular mechanism by which t10, c12-CLA
stimulates ATF3 expression and apoptosis in human colorectal cancer cells. t10,
c12-CLA increased an apoptosis in human colorectal cancer cells in dose dependent
manner. t10, c12-CLA induced ATF3 mRNA and luciferase activity of ATF3 promoter
in a dose-dependent manner. The responsible region for ATF3 transcriptional
activation by t10, c12-CLA is located between -147 and -1850 of ATF3 promoter.
mRNA stability of ATF3 was not affected by t10, c12-CLA treatment. t10, c12-CLA
increases GSK3ß expression and suppresses IGF-1-stimulated phosphorylation of
Akt. The knockdown of ATF3 suppressed expression of GSK3ß and NAG-1 and PARP
cleavage. The results suggest that t10, c12-CLA induces apoptosis through
ATF3-mediated pathway in human colorectal cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4354314
PMID: 25767681  [PubMed]


91. Pain. 2015 Jun;156(6):1084-91. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000152.

Transplant-mediated enhancement of spinal cord GABAergic inhibition reverses
paclitaxel-induced mechanical and heat hypersensitivity.

Bráz JM(1), Wang X, Guan Z, Rubenstein JL, Basbaum AI.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of aAnatomy bAnesthesia and Critical Care cDepartment of
Psychiatry, The Nina Ireland Laboratory Developmental Neurobiology, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Decreased spinal cord GABAergic inhibition is a major contributor to the
persistent neuropathic pain that can follow peripheral nerve injury. Recently, we
reported that restoring spinal cord GABAergic signaling by intraspinal
transplantation of cortical precursors of GABAergic interneurons from the
embryonic medial ganglionic eminence (MGE) can reverse the mechanical
hypersensitivity (allodynia) that characterizes a neuropathic pain model in the
mouse. We show that MGE cell transplants are also effective against both the
mechanical allodynia and the heat hyperalgesia produced in a paclitaxel-induced
chemotherapy model of neuropathic pain. To test the necessity of GABA release by 
the transplants, we also studied the utility of transplanting MGE cells from mice
with a deletion of VGAT, the vesicular GABA transporter. Transplants from these
mice, in which GABA is synthesized but cannot be stored or released, had no
effect on mechanical hypersensitivity or heat hyperalgesia in the paclitaxel
model. Taken together, these results demonstrate the therapeutic potential of
GABAergic precursor cell transplantation in diverse neuropathic pain models and
support our contention that restoration of inhibitory controls through release of
GABA from the transplants is their mode of action.

PMCID: PMC4431911 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25760475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Steroids. 2015 Jul;99(Pt B):219-29. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2015.02.022. Epub
2015 Mar 7.

Rapid proteasomal elimination of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase by
interferon-<U+03B3> in primary macrophages requires endogenous 25-hydroxycholesterol
synthesis.

Lu H(1), Talbot S(1), Robertson KA(2), Watterson S(3), Forster T(2), Roy D(1),
Ghazal P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Pathway Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh
EH16 4SB, United Kingdom. (2)Division of Infection and Pathway Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4SB, United Kingdom; SynthSys at
Edinburgh University, The Kings Buildings, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. (3)Northern
Ireland Centre for Stratified Medicine, University of Ulster, Altnagelvin
Hospital Campus, Derry, Co Londonderry, Northern Ireland BT47 6SB, United
Kingdom. (4)Division of Infection and Pathway Medicine, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh EH16 4SB, United Kingdom; SynthSys at Edinburgh University, The Kings
Buildings, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Electronic address: p.ghazal@ed.ac.uk.

Interferons (IFNs) play a central role in immunity and emerging evidence suggests
that IFN-signalling coordinately regulates sterol biosynthesis in macrophages,
via Sterol Regulatory Element-Binding Protein (SREBP) dependent and independent
pathways. However, the precise mechanisms and kinetic steps by which IFN controls
sterol biosynthesis are as yet not fully understood. Here, we elucidate the
molecular circuitry governing how IFN controls the first regulated step in the
mevalonate-sterol pathway, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (HMGCR),
through the synthesis of 25-Hydroxycholesterol (25-HC) from cholesterol by the
IFN-inducible Cholesterol-25-Hydroxylase (CH25H). We show for the first 30-min of
IFN stimulation of macrophages the rate of de novo synthesis of the Ch25h
transcript is markedly increased but by 120-min becomes transcriptionally
curtailed, coincident with induction of the Activating Transcription Factor 3
(ATF3) repressor. We demonstrate ATF3 induction by Toll-like receptors is
strictly dependent on IFN-signalling. While the SREBP-pathway dependent rates of 
de novo transcription of Hmgcr are relatively unchanged in the first 90-min of
IFN treatment, we find HMGCR enzyme levels undergo a rapid proteasomal-mediated
degradation, defining a previously unappreciated SREBP-independent mechanism for 
IFN-action. These events precede a sustained marked reduction in Hmgcr RNA levels
involving SREBP-dependent mechanisms. We demonstrate that HMGCR
proteasomal-degradation by IFN strictly requires the synthesis of endogenous
25-HC and functionally couples HMGCR to CH25H to coordinately suppress sterol
biosynthesis. In conclusion, we quantitatively delineate proteomic and
transcriptional levels of IFN-mediated control of HMGCR, the primary enzymatic
step of the mevalonate-sterol biosynthesis pathway, providing a foundational
framework for mathematically modelling the therapeutic outcome of
immune-metabolic pathways.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4503878
PMID: 25759117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Aug;116(8):1540-52. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25095.

Differential Susceptibility of Human Pleural and Peritoneal Mesothelial Cells to 
Asbestos Exposure.

Dragon J(1), Thompson J(2), MacPherson M(2), Shukla A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine,
University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont, 05405. (2)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Vermont, Burlington,
Vermont, 05405.

Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is an aggressive cancer of mesothelial cells of
pleural and peritoneal cavities. In 85% of cases both pleural and peritoneal MM
is caused by asbestos exposure. Although both are asbestos-induced cancers, the
incidence of pleural MM is significantly higher (85%) than peritoneal MM (15%).
It has been proposed that carcinogenesis is a result of asbestos-induced
inflammation but it is not clear what contributes to the differences observed
between incidences of these two cancers. We hypothesize that the observed
differences in incidences of pleural and peritoneal MM are the result of
differences in the direct response of these cell types to asbestos rather than to
differences mediated by the in vivo microenvironment. To test this hypothesis we 
characterized cellular responses to asbestos in a controlled environment. We
found significantly greater changes in genome-wide expression in response to
asbestos exposure in pleural mesothelial cells as compared to peritoneal
mesothelial cells. In particular, a greater response in many common genes (IL-8, 
ATF3, CXCL2, CXCL3, IL-6, GOS2) was seen in pleural mesothelial cells as compared
to peritoneal mesothelial cells. Unique genes expressed in pleural mesothelial
cells were mainly pro-inflammatory (G-CSF, IL-1ß, IL-1a, GREM1) and have
previously been shown to be involved in development of MM. Our results are
consistent with the hypothesis that differences in incidences of pleural and
peritoneal MM upon exposure to asbestos are the result of differences in
mesothelial cell physiology that lead to differences in the inflammatory
response, which leads to cancer.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4698803
PMID: 25757056  [PubMed - in process]


94. Immunol Res. 2015 May;62(1):35-45. doi: 10.1007/s12026-015-8633-5.

Involvement of ATF3 in the negative regulation of iNOS expression and NO
production in activated macrophages.

Jung da H(1), Kim KH, Byeon HE, Park HJ, Park B, Rhee DK, Um SH, Pyo S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Gyeong gi-do, 440-746,
Korea.

Macrophage-associated nitric oxide (NO) production plays a crucial role in the
pathogenesis of tissue damage. However, negative factors that regulate NO
production remains poorly understood despite its significance of NO homeostasis. 
Here, we show that activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a transcriptional
regulator of cellular stress responses, was strongly induced in activated
macrophages and its depletion resulted in pronounced enhancement of inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) gene expression and subsequently the induction of
high levels of NO production. In response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and IFN-<U+03B3>, 
ATF3 inhibited transcriptional activity of NF-<U+03BA>B by interacting with the
N-terminal (1-200 amino acids) of p65 and was bound to the NF-<U+03BA>B promoter,
leading to suppression of iNOS gene expression. In addition, inhibitory effects
of ATF3 on iNOS and NO secretion were suppressed by inhibitor of casein kinase II
(CK2) activity or its knockdown. Moreover, the levels of ATF3 were highly
elevated in established cecal ligation and puncture or LPS-injected mice, a model
of endotoxemia. ATF3 is also elevated in peritoneal macrophages. Collectively,
our findings suggest that ATF3 regulates NO homeostasis by associating with NF-<U+03BA>B
component, leading to the repression of its transcriptional activity upon
inflammatory signals and points to its potential relevance for the control of
cell injuries mediated by NO during macrophage activation.

PMID: 25752455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Brain Struct Funct. 2015 Mar 7. [Epub ahead of print]

Axotomy of tributaries of the pelvic and pudendal nerves induces changes in the
neurochemistry of mouse dorsal root ganglion neurons and the spinal cord.

McCarthy CJ(1), Tomasella E, Malet M, Seroogy KB, Hökfelt T, Villar MJ, Gebhart
GF, Brumovsky PR.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, School of Biomedical Sciences, Austral
University, Av. Juan D. Perón 1500, Pilar, B1629AHJ, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Using immunohistochemical techniques, we characterized changes in the expression 
of several neurochemical markers in lumbar 4-sacral 2 (L4-S2) dorsal root
ganglion (DRG) neuron profiles (NPs) and the spinal cord of BALB/c mice after
axotomy of the L6 and S1 spinal nerves, major tributaries of the pelvic
(targeting pelvic visceral organs) and pudendal (targeting perineum and
genitalia) nerves. Sham animals were included. Expression of cyclic AMP-dependent
transcription factor 3 (ATF3), calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), transient 
receptor potential cation channel subfamily V, member 1 (TRPV1), tyrosine
hydroxylase (TH) and vesicular glutamate transporters (VGLUT) types 1 and -2 was 
analysed seven days after injury. L6-S1 axotomy induced dramatic de novo
expression of ATF3 in many L6-S1 DRG NPs, and parallel significant
downregulations in the percentage of CGRP-, TRPV1-, TH- and VGLUT2-immunoreactive
(IR) DRG NPs, as compared to their expression in uninjured DRGs (contralateral
L6-S1-AXO; sham mice); VGLUT1 expression remained unaltered. Sham L6-S1 DRGs only
showed a small ipsilateral increase in ATF3-IR NPs (other markers were
unchanged). L6-S1-AXO induced de novo expression of ATF3 in several lumbosacral
spinal cord motoneurons and parasympathetic preganglionic neurons; in sham mice
the effect was limited to a few motoneurons. Finally, a moderate decrease in
CGRP- and TRPV1-like-immunoreactivities was observed in the ipsilateral
superficial dorsal horn neuropil. In conclusion, injury of a mixed
visceral/non-visceral nerve leads to considerable neurochemical alterations in
DRGs matched, to some extent, in the spinal cord. Changes in these and
potentially other nociception-related molecules could contribute to pain due to
injury of nerves in the abdominopelvic cavity.

PMID: 25749859  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


96. Radiat Res. 2015 Mar;183(3):325-37. doi: 10.1667/RR13876.1. Epub 2015 Mar 4.

Time, dose and ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) status dependency of coding
and noncoding RNA expression after ionizing radiation exposure.

Kabacik S(1), Manning G, Raffy C, Bouffler S, Badie C.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health England, Centre for Radiation, Chemical and Environmental
Hazards, OX11 0RQ, United Kingdom.

Studies of gene expression have proved important in defining the molecular
mechanisms of radiation action and identifying biomarkers of ionizing radiation
exposure and susceptibility. The full transcriptional response to radiation is
very complex since it also involves epigenetic mechanisms triggered by radiation 
exposure such as modifications of expression of noncoding RNA such as microRNAs
(miRNAs) and long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) that have not been fully
characterized. To improve our understanding of the transcriptional response to
radiation, we simultaneously monitored the expression of ten protein-coding
genes, as well as 19 miRNAs and 3 lncRNAs in a time- and dose-dependent manner in
stimulated human T lymphocytes obtained from two healthy donors (C1 and C2) and
one patient with ataxia telangiectasia (AT), which is a well characterized
radiosensitivity disorder. After 2 Gy X irradiation, expression levels were
monitored at time points ranging from 15 min up to 24 h postirradiation. The
majority of genes investigated responded rapidly to radiation exposure, with the 
peak up-regulation (CDKN1A, SESN1, ATF3, MDM2, PUMA and GADD45A) or
down-regulation (CCNB1) occurring 2-3 h postirradiation, while DDB2, FDXR and
CCNG1 responded with slower kinetics reaching a peak of expression between 5 and 
24 h. A significant modification of expression after radiation exposure was
observed for miR-34a-5p and miR-182-5p, with an up-regulation occurring at late
time points reaching two to threefold at 24 h. Differences between two donors in 
miR-182-5p response to radiation were detected: for C2, up-regulation reached a
plateau-phase around 5 Gy, while for C1, up-regulation was at its maximum around 
3 Gy and then decreased at higher doses. Among the three lncRNAs studied, TP53TG1
demonstrated a weak up-regulation, reaching a maximum of 1.5-fold at 24 h after
radiation exposure. Conversely, FAS-AS1 was up-regulated up to fivefold by 5 Gy
irradiation. Our results indicate that expression of the majority of
protein-coding genes allows discrimination of the AT from healthy donors when
analyzed at 2 h. However, differences in expression between AT and healthy donors
are no longer detectable 24 h postirradiation although, interestingly, linear
dose responses for some of the genes studied are obtained at this time point.
Furthermore, our study shows that miRNAs miR-34a-5p and miR-182-5p are responsive
to radiation exposure in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Additionally, to the 
best of our knowledge, this is the first study to report that FAS-AS1 lncRNA is
up-regulated by radiation exposure in an ATM-dependent fashion in human T
lymphocytes.

PMID: 25738893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2015 Jul;56(6):505-19. doi: 10.1002/em.21941. Epub 2015 Mar 
2.

Development of a toxicogenomics signature for genotoxicity using a
dose-optimization and informatics strategy in human cells.

Li HH(1,)(2), Hyduke DR(1,)(2,)(3), Chen R(1,)(2), Heard P(4), Yauk CL(5),
Aubrecht J(4), Fornace AJ Jr(1,)(2,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Cellular Biology, Georgetown
University Medical Center, Washington, DC. (2)Department of Oncology, Georgetown 
University Medical Center, Washington, DC. (3)Biological Engineering Department, 
Utah State University, Logan, Utah. (4)Pfizer Global Research and Development,
Drug Safety Research and Development, Groton, Connecticut, 06340.
(5)Environmental Health Science and Research Bureau, Health Canada, Ottawa,
Ontario, K1A 0K9, Canada. (6)Center of Excellence In Genomic Medicine Research
(CEGMR), King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

The development of in vitro molecular biomarkers to accurately predict
toxicological effects has become a priority to advance testing strategies for
human health risk assessment. The application of in vitro transcriptomic
biomarkers promises increased throughput as well as a reduction in animal use.
However, the existing protocols for predictive transcriptional signatures do not 
establish appropriate guidelines for dose selection or account for the fact that 
toxic agents may have pleiotropic effects. Therefore, comparison of transcriptome
profiles across agents and studies has been difficult. Here we present a dataset 
of transcriptional profiles for TK6 cells exposed to a battery of
well-characterized genotoxic and nongenotoxic chemicals. The experimental
conditions applied a new dose optimization protocol that was based on evaluating 
expression changes in several well-characterized stress-response genes using
quantitative real-time PCR in preliminary dose-finding studies. The subsequent
microarray-based transcriptomic analyses at the optimized dose revealed responses
to the test chemicals that were typically complex, often exhibiting substantial
overlap in the transcriptional responses between a variety of the agents making
analysis challenging. Using the nearest shrunken centroids method we identified a
panel of 65 genes that could accurately classify toxicants as genotoxic or
nongenotoxic. To validate the 65-gene panel as a genomic biomarker of
genotoxicity, the gene expression profiles of an additional three
well-characterized model agents were analyzed and a case study demonstrating the 
practical application of this genomic biomarker-based approach in risk assessment
was performed to demonstrate its utility in genotoxicity risk assessment.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4506269 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25733355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 3;112(9):2699-704. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1424641112. Epub 2015 Feb 17.

ATF3 mediates inhibitory effects of ethanol on hepatic gluconeogenesis.

Tsai WW(1), Matsumura S(1), Liu W(1), Phillips NG(1), Sonntag T(1), Hao E(1), Lee
S(2), Hai T(3), Montminy M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology and. (2)Laboratory of
Neuronal Structure and Function, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, CA 92037; and. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH 43210. (4)Clayton Foundation Laboratories for
Peptide Biology and montminy@salk.edu.

Increases in circulating glucagon during fasting maintain glucose balance by
stimulating hepatic gluconeogenesis. Acute ethanol intoxication promotes fasting 
hypoglycemia through an increase in hepatic NADH, which inhibits hepatic
gluconeogenesis by reducing the conversion of lactate to pyruvate. Here we show
that acute ethanol exposure also lowers fasting blood glucose concentrations by
inhibiting the CREB-mediated activation of the gluconeogenic program in response 
to glucagon. Ethanol exposure blocked the recruitment of CREB and its coactivator
CRTC2 to gluconeogenic promoters by up-regulating ATF3, a transcriptional
repressor that also binds to cAMP-responsive elements and thereby down-regulates 
gluconeogenic genes. Targeted disruption of ATF3 decreased the effects of ethanol
in fasted mice and in cultured hepatocytes. These results illustrate how the
induction of transcription factors with overlapping specificity can lead to
cross-coupling between stress and hormone-sensitive pathways.

PMCID: PMC4352786
PMID: 25730876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Exp Neurol. 2015 Apr;266:127-42. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.02.026. Epub 2015 
Feb 26.

Regeneration of sensory but not motor axons following visceral nerve injury.

Payne SC(1), Belleville PJ(2), Keast JR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, The University of Melbourne, Victoria 
3010, Australia. Electronic address: sophie.payne@unimelb.edu.au. (2)Department
of Anatomy and Neuroscience, The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010,
Australia.

Following peripheral nerve injury, restoration of function may occur via the
regeneration of injured axons or compensatory sprouting of spared axons. Injury
to visceral nerves that control urogenital organs is a common consequence of
pelvic surgery, however their capacity to reinnervate organs is poorly
understood. To determine if and how sensory and motor connections to the bladder 
are re-established, a novel surgical model of visceral nerve injury was performed
unilaterally in adult male Wistar rats. Bladder-projecting motor and sensory
neurons in pelvic ganglia and lumbosacral dorsal root ganglia, respectively, were
identified and characterised by retrograde tracing and immunofluorescence.
Application of tracers ipsi- and contralateral to injury distinguished the
projection pathways of new connections in the bladder. In naive animals, the
majority of sensory and motor neurons project ipsilaterally to the bladder, while
~20 % project contralaterally and ~5 % bilaterally. Injured axons of motor
neurons were unable to regenerate by 4weeks after transection. In contrast, by
this time many injured sensory neurons regrew axons to reform a substantial
plexus within the detrusor and suburothelial tissues. These regeneration
responses were also indicated by upregulation of activating transcription
factor-3 (ATF-3), which was sustained in motor neurons but transient in sensory
bladder-projecting neurons. Axotomy had little or no effect on the survival of
bladder-projecting sensory and motor neurons. We also found evidence that
uninjured motor and sensory neurons develop additional projections to the
denervated bladder tissue and return connectivity, likely by undergoing
compensatory growth. In conclusion, our results show that visceral sensory and
motor neurons have a different capacity to regenerate axons following axotomy,
however in both components of the circuit uninjured bladder neurons spontaneously
grow new axon collaterals to replace the lost terminal field within the organ.
For a full functional recovery, understanding the environmental and cellular
mechanisms that reduce the ability of pelvic ganglion cells to undergo axonal
regeneration is needed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25725351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Pain. 2015 May;156(5):890-903. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000132.

A multi-target approach for pain treatment: dual inhibition of fatty acid amide
hydrolase and TRPV1 in a rat model of osteoarthritis.

Malek N(1), Mrugala M, Makuch W, Kolosowska N, Przewlocka B, Binkowski M, Czaja
M, Morera E, Di Marzo V, Starowicz K.

Author information: 
(1)aLaboratory of Pain Pathophysiology, Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy
of Sciences, Krakow, Poland bDepartment of Pain Pharmacology, Institute of
Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Krakow, Poland cX-ray Microtomography
Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Computer Systems, Institute of Computer
Science, Faculty of Computer and Material Science, University of Silesia,
Chorzów, Poland dDepartment of Chemistry and Technology of Pharmacology, Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy eEndocannabinoid Research Group, Institute of
Biomolecular Chemistry-C.N.R., Pozzuoli, Italy.

Erratum in
    Pain. 2015 Jul;156(7):1370.

The pharmacological inhibition of anandamide (AEA) hydrolysis by fatty acid amide
hydrolase (FAAH) attenuates pain in animal models of osteoarthritis (OA) but has 
failed in clinical trials. This may have occurred because AEA also activates
transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 (TRPV1), which contributes to pain 
development. Therefore, we investigated the effectiveness of the dual FAAH-TRPV1 
blocker OMDM-198 in an MIA-model of osteoarthritic pain. We first investigated
the MIA-induced model of OA by (1) characterizing the pain phenotype and
degenerative changes within the joint using X-ray microtomography and (2)
evaluating nerve injury and inflammation marker (ATF-3 and IL-6) expression in
the lumbar dorsal root ganglia of osteoarthritic rats and differences in gene and
protein expression of the cannabinoid CB1 receptors FAAH and TRPV1. Furthermore, 
we compared OMDM-198 with compounds acting exclusively on FAAH or TRPV1.
Osteoarthritis was accompanied by the fragmentation of bone microstructure and
destroyed cartilage. An increase of the mRNA levels of ATF3 and IL-6 and an
upregulation of AEA receptors and FAAH in the dorsal root ganglia were observed. 
OMDM-198 showed antihyperalgesic effects in the OA model, which were comparable
with those of a selective TRPV1 antagonist, SB-366,791, and a selective FAAH
inhibitor, URB-597. The effect of OMDM-198 was attenuated by the CB1 receptor
antagonist, AM-251, and by the nonpungent TRPV1 agonist, olvanil, suggesting its 
action as an "indirect" CB1 agonist and TRPV1 antagonist. These results suggest
an innovative strategy for the treatment of OA, which may yield more satisfactory
results than those obtained so far with selective FAAH inhibitors in human OA.

PMID: 25719612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Clin Kidney J. 2015 Feb;8(1):23-30. doi: 10.1093/ckj/sfu136. Epub 2014 Dec 30.

Extracellular vesicles in the urine: markers and mediators of tissue damage and
regeneration.

Ranghino A(1), Dimuccio V(2), Papadimitriou E(2), Bussolati B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences , University of
Torino , Torino , Italy ; Department of Medical Sciences , University of Torino ,
Torino , Italy. (2)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences ,
University of Torino , Torino , Italy.

As in several body fluids, urine is a rich reservoir of extracellular vesicles
(EVs) directly originating from cells facing the urinary lumen, including
differentiated tubular cells, progenitor cells and infiltrating inflammatory
cells. Several markers of glomerular and tubular damage, such as WT-1, ATF3 and
NGAL, as well as of renal regeneration, such as CD133, have been identified
representing an incredible source of information for diagnostic purposes. In
addition, urinary extracellular vesicles (uEVs) appear to be involved in the
cell-to-cell communication along the nephron, although this aspect needs further 
elucidation. Finally, uEVs emerge as potential amplifying or limiting factors in 
renal damage. Vesicles from injured cells may favour fibrosis and disease
progression whereas those from cells with regenerative potential appear to
promote cell survival. Here, we will discuss the most recent findings of the
literature, on the light of the role of EVs in diagnosis and therapy for damage
and repair of the renal tissue.

PMCID: PMC4310438
PMID: 25713706  [PubMed]


102. J Comp Neurol. 2015 Aug 1;523(11):1664-82. doi: 10.1002/cne.23763. Epub 2015 Apr 
30.

Characterization and changes in neurotrophin receptor p75-Expressing motor
neurons in SOD1(G93A) G1H mice [corrected].

Smith KS(1), Rush RA(1), Rogers ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuroscience, Department of Human Physiology, Flinders University, 
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia, 5001.

Erratum in
    J Comp Neurol. 2015 Nov 1;523(16):2476.

Mice with high numbers of the Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase-1 G93A transgene
(SOD1(G93A) G1H) have become the most commonly used animal model to study
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. This study investigated changes in size, numbers, 
and cell stress/death markers of motor neuron numbers in G1H mice that re-express
the common p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR). SOD1(G93A) G1H mice and
age-matched C57BL/6J controls at 60, 80, 100, 120 days and end stage/140 days
were analyzed for p75NTR, choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3), and cleaved caspase-3. In addition, motor neuron
counts and soma sizes were recorded. Motor neurons re-expressing p75NTR in
SOD1(G93A) G1H mice were first observed at 80 days, and this continued to 140
days, peaking at 100-120 days at ~5%. The soma area of motor neurons
re-expressing p75NTR was always 600-800 µm(2) , suggesting that these are alpha
motor neurons, which was confirmed after examination of somas post injection of a
retrogradely transported antibody to p75NTR in 110-day-old SOD1(G93A) G1H mice.
In motor neurons not re-expressing p75NTR, the frequency of small soma 200-400
µm2 motor neurons increased, whereas the larger 600-900 µm2 motor neurons
decreased with progression, indicating that large motor neurons were dying off
and shrinking in the process. There was minimal coexpression of p75NTR with ATF3,
a marker for cell stress, but 85% coexpressed the apoptotic marker cleaved
caspase-3. These findings indicate that in SOD1(G93A) G1H mice, p75NTR
re-expression is detectable from 80 days in a small population of large motor
neurons that represent 5% of the total motor neurons. Furthermore, p75NTR
re-expression occurs in larger alpha motor neurons that express cleaved
caspsase-3 and are destined to die.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25711805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Mar 20;458(4):796-801. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.028. Epub 2015 Feb 14.

Berberine improves endothelial function by inhibiting endoplasmic reticulum
stress in the carotid arteries of spontaneously hypertensive rats.

Liu L(1), Liu J(2), Huang Z(3), Yu X(3), Zhang X(3), Dou D(3), Huang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Peking University Health Science
Center, Peking, China. Electronic address: liu_limei@126.com. (2)Institute of
Vascular Medicine and Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (3)Department of Physiology and
Pathophysiology, Peking University Health Science Center, Peking, China.
(4)Institute of Vascular Medicine and Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences,
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. Electronic address:
yu-huang@cuhk.edu.hk.

Activation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in endothelial cells leads to
increased oxidative stress and often results in cell death, which has been
implicated in hypertension. The present study investigated the effects of
berberine, a botanical alkaloid purified from Coptidis rhizoma, on ER stress in
spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs) and the underling mechanism. Isolated
carotid arteries from normotensive WKYs and SHRs were suspended in myograph for
isometric force measurement. Protein phosphorylations and expressions were
determined by Western blotting. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) level was measured 
by DHE staining. SHR carotid arteries exhibited exaggerated
acetylcholine-triggered endothelium-dependent contractions (EDCs) and elevated
ROS accumulation compared with WKY arteries. Moreover, Western blot analysis
revealed the reduced AMPK phosphorylation, increased eIF2a phosphorylation, and
elevated levels of ATF3, ATF6, XBP1 and COX-2 in SHR carotid arteries while these
pathological alterations were reversed by 12 h-incubation with berberine.
Furthermore, AMPK inhibitor compound C or dominant negative AMPK adenovirus
inhibited the effects of berberine on above-mentioned marker proteins and EDCs.
More importantly, ROS scavengers, tempol and tiron plus DETCA, or ER stress
inhibitors, 4-PBA and TUCDA normalized the elevated levels of ROS and COX-2
expression, and attenuated EDCs in SHR arteries. Taken together, the present
results suggest that berberine reduces EDCs likely through activating AMPK, thus 
inhibiting ER stress and subsequently scavenging ROS leading to COX-2
down-regulation in SHR carotid arteries. The present study thus provides
additional insights into the vascular beneficial effects of berberine in
hypertension.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25686503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cell Signal. 2015 May;27(5):889-98. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.02.007. Epub 2015
Feb 12.

Cellular processes involved in human epidermal cells exposed to extremely low
frequency electric fields.

Collard JF(1), Hinsenkamp M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Recherche en Orthopédie Traumatologie (LROT), Hôpital Erasme - 
Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address:
jcollard@ulb.ac.be. (2)Laboratoire de Recherche en Orthopédie Traumatologie
(LROT), Hôpital Erasme - Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium.

We observed on different tissues and organisms a biological response after
exposure to pulsed low frequency and low amplitude electric or electromagnetic
fields but the precise mechanism of cell response remains unknown. The aim of
this publication is to understand, using bioinformatics, the biological relevance
of processes involved in the modification of gene expression. The list of genes
analyzed was obtained after microarray protocol realized on cultures of human
epidermal explants growing on deepidermized human skin exposed to a pulsed low
frequency electric field. The directed acyclic graph on a WebGestalt Gene
Ontology module shows six categories under the biological process root:
"biological regulation", "cellular process", "cell proliferation", "death",
"metabolic process" and "response to stimulus". Enriched derived categories are
coherent with the type of in vitro culture, the stimulation protocol or with the 
previous results showing a decrease of cell proliferation and an increase of
differentiation. The Kegg module on WebGestalt has highlighted "cell cycle" and
"p53 signaling pathway" as significantly involved. The Kegg website brings out
interactions between FoxO, MAPK, JNK, p53, p38, PI3K/Akt, Wnt, mTor or NF-KappaB.
Some genes expressed by the stimulation are known to have an exclusive function
on these pathways. Analyses performed with Pathway Studio linked cell
proliferation, cell differentiation, apoptosis, cell cycle, mitosis, cell death
etc. with our microarrays results. Medline citation generated by the software and
the fold change variation confirms a diminution of the proliferation, activation 
of the differentiation and a less well-defined role of apoptosis or wound
healing. Wnt and DKK functional classes, DKK1, MACF1, ATF3, MME, TXNRD1, and
BMP-2 genes proposed in previous publications after a manual analysis are also
highlighted with other genes after Pathway Studio automatic procedure. Finally,
an analysis conducted on a list of genes characterized by an accelerated
regulation after extremely low frequency pulsed stimulation also confirms their
role in the processes of cell proliferation and differentiation. Bioinformatics
approach allows in-depth research, without the bias of pre-selection, on cellular
processes involved in a huge gene list.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25683910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Gene Med. 2015 Jan-Feb;17(1-2):33-53. doi: 10.1002/jgm.2822.

Temporal endogenous gene expression profiles in response to polymer-mediated
transfection and profile comparison to lipid-mediated transfection.

Martin TM(1), Plautz SA, Pannier AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Durham Research Center II, University
of Nebraska-Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

BACKGROUND: Design of efficient nonviral gene delivery systems is limited by the 
rudimentary understanding of specific molecules that facilitate transfection.
METHODS: Polyplexes using 25-kDa polyethylenimine (PEI) and plasmid-encoding
green fluorescent protein (GFP) were delivered to HEK 293T cells. After treating 
cells with polyplexes, microarrays were used to identify endogenous genes
differentially expressed between treated and untreated cells (2 h of exposure) or
between flow-separated transfected cells (GFP+) and treated, untransfected cells 
(GFP-) at 8, 16 and 24 h after lipoplex treatment. Cell priming studies were
conducted using pharmacologic agents to alter endogenous levels of the identified
differentially expressed genes to determine effect on transfection levels.
Differentially expressed genes in polyplex-mediated transfection were compared
with those differentially expressed in lipoplex transfection to identify DNA
carrier-dependent molecular factors.
RESULTS: Differentially expressed genes were RGS1, ARHGAP24, PDZD2, SNX24, GSN
and IGF2BP1 after 2<U+2009>h; RAP1A and ACTA1 after 8<U+2009>h; RAP1A, WDR78 and ACTA1 after
16<U+2009>h; and RAP1A, SCG5, ATF3, IREB2 and ACTA1 after 24<U+2009>h. Pharmacologic studies
altering endogenous levels for ARHGAP24, GSN, IGF2BP1, PDZD2 and RGS1 were able
to increase or decrease transgene production. Comparing differentially expressed 
genes for polyplexes and lipoplexes, no common genes were identified at the 2-h
time point, whereas, after the 8-h time point, RAP1A, ATF3 and HSPA6 were
similarly expressed. SCG5 and PGAP1 were only upregulated in polyplex-transfected
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The identified genes and pharmacologic agents provide targets for
improving transfection systems, although polyplex or lipoplex dependencies must
be considered.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25663627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 17;112(7):2163-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1416922112. Epub 2015 Feb 2.

IL-4 abrogates T(H)17 cell-mediated inflammation by selective silencing of IL-23 
in antigen-presenting cells.

Guenova E(1), Skabytska Y(2), Hoetzenecker W(3), Weindl G(4), Sauer K(2), Tham
M(2), Kim KW(5), Park JH(5), Seo JH(6), Ignatova D(7), Cozzio A(7), Levesque
MP(7), Volz T(8), Köberle M(8), Kaesler S(2), Thomas P(9), Mailhammer R(10),
Ghoreschi K(2), Schäkel K(11), Amarov B(12), Eichner M(13), Schaller M(2), Clark 
RA(14), Röcken M(15), Biedermann T(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Eberhard Karls University, 72076 Tübingen, Germany;
Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115; and Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Zürich,
8091 Zürich, Switzerland; emmanuella.guenova@gmail.com
mrocken@med.uni-tuebingen.de tilo.biedermann@tum.de. (2)Department of
Dermatology, Eberhard Karls University, 72076 Tübingen, Germany; (3)Department of
Dermatology, Eberhard Karls University, 72076 Tübingen, Germany; Department of
Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115; and Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Zürich, 8091 Zürich,
Switzerland; (4)Department of Dermatology, Eberhard Karls University, 72076
Tübingen, Germany; Institute of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, Freie Universität, 14195 Berlin, Germany; (5)NeuroVascular
Coordination Research Center, College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of
Korea; (6)NeuroVascular Coordination Research Center, College of Pharmacy and
Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Republic of Korea; Department of Molecular Medicine and
Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science and
Technology, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea;
(7)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Zürich, 8091 Zürich,
Switzerland; (8)Department of Dermatology, Eberhard Karls University, 72076
Tübingen, Germany; Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Technische Universität 
München, Munich, Germany. (9)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Ludwig
Maximilians University, 80337 Munich, Germany; (10)Institute of Clinical
Molecular Biology and Tumor Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research 
Center for Environmental Health, 81377 Munich, Germany; (11)Department of
Dermatology, Heidelberg University Hospital, 69115 Heidelberg, Germany;
(12)Institute of Statistics and Econometrics, Freie Universität, 14195 Berlin,
Germany; (13)Department of Medical Biometry, Eberhard Karls University, 72076
Tübingen, Germany; (14)Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; and. (15)Department of Dermatology,
Eberhard Karls University, 72076 Tübingen, Germany; emmanuella.guenova@gmail.com 
mrocken@med.uni-tuebingen.de tilo.biedermann@tum.de. (16)Department of
Dermatology, Eberhard Karls University, 72076 Tübingen, Germany; Department of
Dermatology and Allergy, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany
emmanuella.guenova@gmail.com mrocken@med.uni-tuebingen.de tilo.biedermann@tum.de.

Interleukin 4 (IL-4) can suppress delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions
(DTHRs), including organ-specific autoimmune diseases in mice and humans. Despite
the broadly documented antiinflammatory effect of IL-4, the underlying mode of
action remains incompletely understood, as IL-4 also promotes IL-12 production by
dendritic cells (DCs) and IFN-<U+03B3>-producing T(H)1 cells in vivo. Studying the
impact of IL-4 on the polarization of human and mouse DCs, we found that IL-4
exerts opposing effects on the production of either IL-12 or IL-23. While
promoting IL-12-producing capacity of DCs, IL-4 completely abrogates IL-23. Bone 
marrow chimeras proved that IL-4-mediated suppression of DTHRs relies on the
signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6)-dependent abrogation
of IL-23 in antigen-presenting cells. Moreover, IL-4 therapy attenuated DTHRs by 
STAT6- and activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3)-dependent suppression of the 
IL-23/T(H)17 responses despite simultaneous enhancement of IL-12/TH1 responses.
As IL-4 therapy also improves psoriasis in humans and suppresses IL-23/T(H)17
responses without blocking IL-12/T(H)1, selective IL-4-mediated IL-23/T(H)17
silencing is promising as treatment against harmful inflammation, while sparing
the IL-12-dependent T(H)1 responses.

PMCID: PMC4343151
PMID: 25646481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Neurosci Res. 2015 Jun;93(6):954-63. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23553. Epub 2015 Jan 19.

Temporal changes in neurotrophic factors and neurite outgrowth in the major
pelvic ganglion following cavernous nerve injury.

Hannan JL(1), Albersen M, Stopak BL, Liu X, Burnett AL, Hoke A, Bivalacqua TJ.

Author information: 
(1)The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute and Department of Urology, Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

Despite nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy, nerve damage and erectile
dysfunction (ED) prevail, and preventing neurodegeneration is of great
importance. Neurotrophic factors and neurite outgrowth were characterized in
major pelvic ganglia (MPG) following bilateral cavernous nerve injury (BCNI).
Young male Sprague-Dawley rats underwent sham or BCNI surgery, and the
intracavernosal pressure to mean arterial pressure ratio was measured 2, 7, 14,
21, 30, and 60 days following injury (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>8/group). MPG gene expression (qPCR)
and Western blot were performed for glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor
(GDNF), nerve growth factor (NGF), neurturin, neurotrophin (NT)-3, NT4,
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), vascular endothelial growth factor, and
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3). Additional rats were injured, and MPGs 
were removed 24 hr, 48 hr, 3 days, and 7 days following BCNI (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>3/group). MPGs 
were cultured in Matrigel, and neurite outgrowth was measured. Erections were
impaired early and improved by 60 days in BCNI rats. GDNF, NGF, BDNF, and ATF3
gene expression was significantly increased and NT3 was decreased in MPGs
following BCNI (48 hr to 21 days, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). GDNF and NGF protein levels were
elevated in 48-hr BCNI rats. MPG neurite outgrowth from 24-hr and 48-hr BCNI was 
higher than sham (658<U+2009>±<U+2009>19 µm, 607<U+2009>±<U+2009>24 µm, 393<U+2009>±<U+2009>23 µm, respectively, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
Further studies examining the roles of neurotrophic factors in modulating
signaling pathways may provide therapeutic avenues for neurogenically mediated
ED.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4397125 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25644064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Comp Neurol. 2015 Jul 1;523(10):1505-28. doi: 10.1002/cne.23749. Epub 2015 Mar 
26.

Phenotypic changes in dorsal root ganglion and spinal cord in the collagen
antibody-induced arthritis mouse model.

Su J(1), Gao T(1), Shi T(2), Xiang Q(2), Xu X(1), Wiesenfeld-Hallin Z(1), Hökfelt
T(2), Svensson CI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
171 77, Sweden. (2)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
171 77, Sweden.

The mechanisms underlying rheumatoid arthritis (RA)-induced pain are still not
fully elucidated, and accumulating data indicate that peripheral inflammation is 
not the only factor driving pain in these patients. The focus of our work is to
investigate the molecular basis for long-term alterations in nociceptive pathways
induced by polyarthritis using the collagen antibody-induced arthritis (CAIA)
mouse model. In this model, mechanical hypersensitivity outlasts the joint
inflammation by weeks. Here we examined expression levels of neuropeptides, ion
channels, and nerve injury markers associated with neuropathic and/or
inflammatory pain in dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) and spinal cord both during the
peak of inflammation (day 15) and when the inflammation has resolved but the
hypersensitivity persists (days 45-47). No apparent differences were observed in 
substance P, calcitonin gene-related peptide, or neuropeptide Y protein
expression in DRGs and spinal cord of CAIA mice. However, the neuropeptide
galanin, the ATP-gated ion channel P2X3, and calcium channel subunit a2d1 were
significantly increased in the CAIA DRGs as compared to controls, both 15 and 47 
days after induction of arthritis. On day 15 there was an increase in expression 
of two factors associated with nerve injury and cell stress, activating
transcription factor 3 and growth-associated protein 43 in DRGs, whereby the
latter was still dramatically upregulated after 47 days. In conclusion, this
study suggests that long-term joint inflammation has an impact on DRG neurons
that resembles both inflammation and nerve injury-induced pain states. Thus,
antibody-driven inflammation generates a pain state with a unique neurochemical
profile.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25631752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat. 2015 Jan-Mar;116-117:49-56. doi:
10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2015.01.001. Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Atf3 negatively regulates Ptgs2/Cox2 expression during acute inflammation.

Hellmann J(1), Tang Y(2), Zhang MJ(2), Hai T(3), Bhatnagar A(2), Srivastava S(2),
Spite M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Therapeutics and Reperfusion Injury, Department of
Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Boston, MA 02115, United 
States. (2)Institute of Molecular Cardiology and Diabetes and Obesity Center,
University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY 40202, United States.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, United States. (4)Center for Experimental Therapeutics and
Reperfusion Injury, Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Harvard
Institutes of Medicine, Boston, MA 02115, United States. Electronic address:
mspite@partners.org.

By generating prostaglandins, cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2/Ptgs2) plays a critical
role in regulating inflammatory responses. While several inflammatory stimuli
have been shown to increase Ptgs2 expression, less is known about how the
transcription of this gene is terminated. Here we show that stimulation of
macrophages with yeast zymosan, a TLR2/6 and dectin-1 agonist, causes a transient
increase in the expression of Ptgs2 accompanied by a simultaneous increase in the
expression of the transcriptional repressor, activating transcription factor-3
(Atf3). The expression of Ptgs2 was significantly higher in resident peritoneal
macrophages isolated from Atf3(-/-) mice than that from Atf3(+/+) mice and was
associated with higher prostaglandin production upon stimulation with zymosan. In
activated macrophages, Atf3 accumulated in the nucleus and
chromatin-immunoprecipitation analysis showed that Atf3 is recruited to the Ptgs2
promoter region. In acute peritonitis and in cutaneous wounds, there was
increased leukocyte accumulation and higher levels of prostaglandins (PGE2/PGD2) 
in inflammatory exudates of Atf3(-/-) mice compared with WT mice. Collectively,
these results demonstrate that during acute inflammation Atf3 negatively
regulates Ptgs2 and therefore dysregulation of this axis could potentially
contribute to aberrant Ptgs2 expression in chronic inflammatory diseases.
Moreover, this axis could be a new therapeutic target for suppressing Ptgs2
expression and the resultant inflammatory responses.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4386069
PMID: 25619459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Acta Histochem. 2015 Mar;117(2):211-8. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2014.12.008. Epub
2015 Jan 19.

Prostaglandin F2a induces expression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) 
and activates MAPK signaling in the rat corpus luteum.

Guo N(1), Meng C(1), Bai W(1), Wei Q(1), Shi F(1), Davis JS(2), Mao D(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210095, China. (2)VA Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System
and Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA. (3)College of Animal Science and Technology,
Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210095, China. Electronic
address: maodagan@njau.edu.cn.

The current study was conducted to evaluate the expression of ATF3, in
association with the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK)
during prostaglandin F2a analog (PGF)-induced luteal regression in rats. A
sequential PMSG/hCG treatment paradigm was used to obtain a single, well-defined 
generation of corpora lutea (CL) in rats. Rats were treated with PGF for 0-4h on 
day 7 of pseudopregnancy. Results showed that serum progesterone (P4)
concentrations declined in a time dependent manner. Western blot results revealed
that ATF3 increased within 2h post-PGF injection. Phosphorylated ERK1/2 (p-ERK)
and JNK (p-JNK) increased within 30min and then were gradually reduced in
response to PGF. In contrast, the levels of phosphorylated p38 MAPK (p-p38) were 
not significantly altered. The immunostaining density for p-ERK decreased from
the periphery to the center of the corpus luteum following treatment with PGF,
while ATF3 was expressed uniformly in the nuclei of luteal steroidogenic cells.
These results indicated that treatment with PGF in vivo could induce increases in
MAPK phosphorylation, especially in p-ERK, which might be correlated with the
increases in ATF3 expression and the decline in P4 concentrations. To our
knowledge, this is the first study to provide evidence for temporal relationships
between MAPK activation and ATF3 expression during PGF-induced luteal regression 
in the rat.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25614048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Diabetes Res. 2014;2014:195739. doi: 10.1155/2014/195739. Epub 2014 Dec 31.

The class I histone deacetylase inhibitor MS-275 prevents pancreatic beta cell
death induced by palmitate.

Plaisance V(1), Rolland L(1), Gmyr V(2), Annicotte JS(1), Kerr-Conte J(2), Pattou
F(2), Abderrahmani A(1).

Author information: 
(1)European Genomic Institute for Diabetes (EGID) FR 3508, University of Lille,
CNRS UMR 8199, and Faculty of Medicine West, 1 Place de Verdun, 59045 Lille,
France. (2)Department of Endocrine Surgery, Lille University Hospital, INSERM UMR
859, University of Lille, EGID FR 3508, Biotherapies for Diabetes, Lille, France.

Elevation of the dietary saturated fatty acid palmitate contributes to the
reduction of functional beta cell mass in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes.
The diabetogenic effect of palmitate is achieved by increasing beta cell death
through induction of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress markers including
activating transcription factor 3 (Atf3) and CAAT/enhancer-binding protein
homologous protein-10 (Chop). In this study, we investigated whether treatment of
beta cells with the MS-275, a HDAC1 and HDAC3 activity inhibitor which prevents
beta cell death elicited by cytokines, is beneficial for combating beta cell
dysfunction caused by palmitate. We show that culture of isolated human islets
and MIN6 cells with MS-275 reduced apoptosis evoked by palmitate. The protective 
effect of MS-275 was associated with the attenuation of the expression of Atf3
and Chop. Silencing of HDAC3, but not of HDAC1, mimicked the effects of MS-275 on
the expression of the two ER stress markers and apoptosis. These data point to
HDAC3 as a potential drug target for preserving beta cells against lipotoxicity
in diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4294305
PMID: 25610877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Med Rep. 2015 May;11(5):3786-93. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3235. Epub 2015 Jan
21.

Genome-wide gene expression profiling of ischemia-reperfusion injury in rat
kidney, intestine and skeletal muscle implicate a common involvement of MAPK
signaling pathway.

Chang NJ(1), Weng WH(2), Chang KH(3), Liu EK(1), Chuang CK(3), Luo CC(4), Lin
CH(1), Wei FC(1), Pang ST(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Linkou Medical Center, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, R.O.C. (2)Department of
Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, and Graduate Institute of Biotechnology, 
National Taipei University of Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C. (3)College of
Medicine, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, R.O.C. (4)Department of
Pediatric Surgery, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.

The mechanisms of ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury have not been fully
elucidated to date. In order to determine the genetic involvement across
different organs during I/R injury, a DNA microarray approach was used to analyze
the gene expression profiles of the kidney, intestine, and skeletal muscle in a
rat model of I/R injury. Fifteen male Lewis rats were divided randomly into three
different organ groups; a sham operation (control group), 60-min-ischemia (Is
group) only, and 60-min-ischemia plus 60-min-reperfusion (I/R group),
respectively. The target genes were identified by DNA microarray and studied by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). By comparing the I/R group with
the control group, a 2-fold upregulation of 467, 172, and 3932 and a 2-fold
downregulation of 437, 416, and 4203 genes were identified in the kidney, small
intestine, and skeletal muscle, respectively. Several commonly upregulated genes 
associated with mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways, including Jun, 
Atf3, junB, Fos, Adm and Dusp 1, were differentially expressed in the I/R group. 
The mRNA expression levels of the target genes were confirmed by qPCR. The
present study hypothesized that the MAPK pathway may function in a common pathway
of I/R injury and regulate the pathogenesis through activator protein 1. The
findings of the present study contributed to the understanding of the molecular
pathways associated with I/R injury.

PMID: 25606982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 15;10(1):e0115372. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115372.
eCollection 2015.

Growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF-15) plasma levels increase during
bleomycin- and cisplatin-based treatment of testicular cancer patients and relate
to endothelial damage.

Altena R(1), Fehrmann RS(2), Boer H(1), de Vries EG(1), Meijer C(1), Gietema
JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University of Groningen, University Medical
Centre Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, 
University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, the
Netherlands; Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Centre Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: Chemotherapy-related endothelial damage contributes to the early
development of cardiovascular morbidity in testicular cancer patients. We aimed
to identify relevant mechanisms of and search for candidate biomarkers for this
endothelial damage.
METHODS: Human micro-vascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1) were exposed to
bleomycin or cisplatin with untreated samples as control. 18k cDNA microarrays
were used. Gene expression differences were analysed at single gene level and in 
gene sets clustered in biological pathways and validated by qRT-PCR. Protein
levels of a candidate biomarker were measured in testicular cancer patient plasma
before, during and after bleomycin-etoposide-cisplatin chemotherapy, and related 
to endothelial damage biomarkers (von Willebrand Factor (vWF), high-sensitivity
C-Reactive Protein (hsCRP)).
RESULTS: Microarray data identified several genes with highly differential
expression; e.g. Growth Differentiation Factor 15 (GDF-15), Activating
Transcription Factor 3 (ATF3) and Amphiregulin (AREG). Pathway analysis revealed 
strong associations with 'p53' and 'Diabetes Mellitus' gene sets. Based on known 
function, we measured GDF-15 protein levels in 41 testicular patients during
clinical follow-up. Pre-chemotherapy GDF-15 levels equalled controls. Throughout 
chemotherapy GDF-15, vWF and hsCRP levels increased, and were correlated at
different time-points.
CONCLUSION: An unbiased approach in a preclinical model revealed genes related to
chemotherapy-induced endothelial damage, like GDF-15. The increases in plasma
GDF-15 levels in testicular cancer patients during chemotherapy and its
association with vWF and hsCRP suggest that GDF-15 is a potentially useful
biomarker related to endothelial damage.

PMCID: PMC4295859
PMID: 25590623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Ann Rheum Dis. 2016 Mar;75(3):586-92. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2014-206214. Epub 
2015 Jan 14.

Activating transcription factor 3 regulates canonical TGFß signalling in systemic
sclerosis.

Mallano T(1), Palumbo-Zerr K(1), Zerr P(1), Ramming A(1), Zeller B(1), Beyer
C(1), Dees C(1), Huang J(1), Hai T(2), Distler O(3), Schett G(1), Distler JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 3, Institute for Clinical Immunology,
University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. (2)Department of Molecular
and Cellular Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(3)Rheumaklinik, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a member of the
ATF/cAMP-responsive element binding (CREB) family of transcription factors,
regulates cellular response to stress including oxidative stress. The aim of this
study was to analyse the role of ATF3 in fibroblast activation in systemic
sclerosis (SSc).
METHODS: ATF3 was analysed by reverse transcription quantitative PCR, western
blot and immunohistochemistry. ATF3 knockout fibroblasts and mice were used to
study the functional role of ATF3. Knockdown experiments, reporter assays and
coimmunoprecipitation were performed to study the effects of ATF3 on Smad and
activation protein 1 (AP-1) signalling. The role of c-Jun was analysed by
costaining, specific inactivation and coimmunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: Transforming growth factor-ß (TGFß) upregulates the expression of ATF3
in SSc fibroblasts. ATF3-deficient fibroblasts were less sensitive to TGFß,
whereas ectopic expression of ATF3 enhanced the profibrotic effects of TGFß.
Mechanistically, ATF3 interacts with Smad3 directly on stimulation with TGFß and 
regulates Smad activity in a c-Jun-dependent manner. Knockout of ATF3 protected
mice from bleomycin-induced fibrosis and fibrosis induced by overexpression of a 
constitutively active TGFß receptor I. Reporter assays and analyses of the
expression of Smad target genes demonstrated that binding of ATF3 regulates the
transcriptional activity of Smad3.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate for the first time a key role for ATF3 in fibrosis.
Knockout of the ATF3 gene reduced the stimulatory effect of TGFß on fibroblasts
by interfering with canonical Smad signalling and protected the mice from
experimental fibrosis in two different models. ATF3 might thus be a candidate for
molecular targeted therapies for SSc.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 25589515  [PubMed - in process]


115. BMC Genomics. 2014;15 Suppl 10:S4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-S10-S4. Epub 2014
Dec 12.

Dynamics of enhancers in myeloid antigen presenting cells upon LPS stimulation.

Vandenbon A, Teraguchi S, Takeuchi O, Suzuki Y, Standley DM.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have underscored the role of enhancers in defining
cell type-specific transcriptomes. Cell type-specific enhancers are bound by
combinations of shared and cell type-specific transcription factors (TFs).
However, little is known about combinatorial binding of TFs to enhancers,
dynamics of TF binding following stimulation, or the downstream effects on gene
expression. Here, we address these questions in two types of myeloid antigen
presenting cells (APCs), macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs), before and after 
stimulation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a potent stimulator of the innate
immune response.
RESULTS: We classified enhancers according to the combination of TFs binding
them. There were significant correlations between the sets of TFs bound to
enhancers prior to stimulation and expression changes of nearby genes after
stimulation. Importantly, a set of enhancers pre-bound by PU.1, C/EBPß, ATF3,
IRF4, and JunB was strongly associated with induced genes and binding by
stimulus-activated regulators. Our classification suggests that transient loss of
ATF3 binding to a subset of these enhancers is important for regulation of
early-induced genes. Changes in TF-enhancer binding after stimulation were
correlated with binding by additional activated TFs and with the presence of
proximally located enhancers.
CONCLUSIONS: The results presented in this study reveal the complexity and
dynamics of TF- enhancer binding before and after stimulation in myeloid APCs.

PMCID: PMC4304210
PMID: 25560382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;7(1):73-87. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mju049. Epub 2014 Dec 29.

Cigarette smoke-induced cell cycle arrest in spermatocytes [GC-2spd(ts)] is
mediated through crosstalk between Ahr-Nrf2 pathway and MAPK signaling.

Esakky P(1), Hansen DA(2), Drury AM(1), Moley KH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, St. Louis, MO 63106, 
USA Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Research, Department of Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, St. Louis, MO 63106, USA. (3)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA
moleyk@wustl.edu.

Our earlier studies have demonstrated that the cigarette smoke in the form of
cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) causes growth arrest of a mouse spermatocyte
cell line [GC-2spd(ts)] through activation of the AHR-NRF2 pathway. The present
study demonstrates the CSC-activated p38 and ERK MAPK signaling in GC-2spd(ts)
via arylhydrocarbon receptor (AHR). Pharmacological inhibition by using
AHR-antagonist, or p38 MAPK and ERK (MEK1) inhibitors significantly abrogates
CSC-induced growth arrest by AHR and MAPK inactivation. QRT-PCR, western blot,
and immunofluorescence of Ahr-target of Nrf2, and stress-inducible growth
suppressive Atf3 and E2f4 following treatments indicate a crosstalk among these
pathways. Regulation of Atf3 by Nrf2 and Ahr through RNA interference suggests
the existence of a cross-regulatory loop between the targets. CSC induction of
E2f4 via Atf3 and its regulation by pharmacological inhibitors reveal a possible 
regulatory mechanism of growth inhibitory CSC. SiRNA silencing of Ahr, Nrf2,
Atf3, and E2f4 genes and downregulation of cyclins by CSC corroborate the growth 
inhibitory effect of cigarette smoke. Thus, the data obtained suggest that the
CSC-mediated MAPKs and AHR-NRF2 crosstalks lay the molecular basis for the growth
arrest and cell death of spermatocytes.

© The Author (2014). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of
Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25548370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Theriogenology. 2015 Mar 15;83(5):862-73. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2014.11.023. Epub 2014 Nov 26.

Pifithrin-a ameliorates resveratrol-induced two-cell block in mouse
preimplantation embryos in vitro.

Jeong JK(1), Kang MH(1), Gurunathan S(1), Cho SG(1), Park C(1), Park JK(2), Kim
JH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology, KonKuk University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (2)Animal Biotechnology Division, National Institute of Animal Science,
RDA, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Animal Biotechnology,
KonKuk University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
jhkim541@konkuk.ac.kr.

Treatment with resveratrol at concentrations greater than 0.5 µmol/L resulted in 
the arrest of mouse embryo development at the two-cell stage. Resveratrol-induced
cytotoxicity was investigated in embryos by evaluating morphologic features by
using the bromodeoxyuridine assay and acridine orange and ethidium bromide double
staining. Resveratrol was found to significantly increase the expressions of p53,
p21, Atf3, smac/Diablo, Bax, Bak1, Bok, and Noxa mRNA in the embryos, whereas
Cullin 3 and Cdk1 expressions were decreased. Furthermore, active p53 positive
signal in embryos arrested at the two-cell stage was localized in the nucleus,
whereas no active p53 signal was observed in control embryos. Pretreatment with
pifithrin-a, a p53 inhibitor, downregulated active p53 in two-cell embryo nuclei 
and ameliorated approximately 50% of the embryonic developmental defect caused by
resveratrol. The findings of the present study, therefore, suggest that
pifithrin-a could be used as an effective cytoprotective agent against a
reproductive toxin such as resveratrol.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25542456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Oncogene. 2015 Sep 17;34(38):4975-84. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.426. Epub 2014 Dec
22.

Loss of ATF3 promotes Akt activation and prostate cancer development in a Pten
knockout mouse model.

Wang Z(1,)(2), Xu D(2), Ding HF(1,)(3), Kim J(4), Zhang J(5), Hai T(6), Yan
C(1,)(2,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)GRU Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA. (2)Center for
Cell Biology and Cancer Research, Albany Medical College, Albany, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics & Epidemiology, Georgia Regents University,
Augusta, GA, USA. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, School of Medicine, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA. (6)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Biochemistry, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (7)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) responds to diverse cellular stresses,
and regulates oncogenic activities (for example, proliferation, survival and
migration) through direct transcriptional regulation or protein-protein
interactions. Although aberrant ATF3 expression is frequently found in human
cancers, the role of ATF3 in tumorigenesis is poorly understood. Here, we
demonstrate that ATF3 suppresses the development of prostate cancer induced by
knockout of the tumor suppressor Pten in mouse prostates. Whereas the oncogenic
stress elicited by Pten loss induced ATF3 expression in prostate epithelium, we
found that ATF3 deficiency increased cell proliferation and promoted cell
survival, leading to early onset of mouse prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and
the progression of prostate lesions to invasive adenocarcinoma. Importantly, the 
loss of ATF3 promoted activation of the oncogenic AKT signaling evidenced by high
levels of phosphorylated AKT and S6 proteins in ATF3-null prostate lesions. In
line with these in vivo results, knockdown of ATF3 expression in human prostate
cancer cells by single guided RNA-mediated targeting activated AKT and increased 
matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression. Our results thus link ATF3 to the AKT
signaling, and suggest that ATF3 is a tumor suppressor for the major subset of
prostate cancers harboring dysfunctional Pten.

PMCID: PMC4476969
PMID: 25531328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Chem Res Toxicol. 2015 Jan 20;28(1):71-86. doi: 10.1021/tx500341z. Epub 2015 Jan 
8.

Acrylamide Induces Senescence in Macrophages through a Process Involving ATF3,
ROS, p38/JNK, and a Telomerase-Independent Pathway.

Kim KH(1), Park B(1), Rhee DK(1), Pyo S(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University , Suwon, Kyunggi-do, 440-746,
Republic of Korea.

Senescence, which is irreversible cell cycle arrest, is induced by various types 
of DNA damage, including genotoxic stress. Senescent cells show dysregulation of 
tumor suppressor genes and other regulators of cellular proliferation. Activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) plays a pleiotropic role in biological processes
through genotoxic stress. In this study, we examined the effects of acrylamide
(ACR), a genotoxic carcinogen, on cellular senescence and the molecular
mechanisms of ATF3 function in macrophages. Treatment of macrophages with ACR at 
low concentrations (<1.0 mM) resulted in senescence-like morphology and an
increase in senescence-associated ß-galactosidase (SA-ß-gal) activity. Exposure
of macrophages to ACR led to stress-induced, telomerase-independent senescence.
In addition, ACR treatment for 1, 3, or 5 days showed a concentration-dependent
increase in ATF3 expression and G0/G1 phase arrest. To better understand the role
of ATF3 in controlling the senescence response to ACR, SA-ß-gal activity was
examined using ATF3 knockdown and overexpression. ACR-mediated senescence was
significantly decreased by knockdown of ATF3, whereas it was increased with ATF3 
overexpression. We found that ATF3 regulated p53 and p21 levels. ATF3 also played
an important role in regulating intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production in response to ACR treatment. Moreover, phosphorylation of p38 and JNK
kinases, which were activated during ATF3-mediated senescence, was observed in
ACR-treated macrophages. Taken together, these results suggest that ATF3
contributes to ACR-induced senescence by enhancing ROS production, activating p38
and JNK kinases, and promoting the ATF3-dependent expression of p53, resulting in
regulation of cellular senescence in macrophages.

PMID: 25531190  [PubMed - in process]


120. Br J Pharmacol. 2015 May;172(9):2246-57. doi: 10.1111/bph.13046. Epub 2015 Feb
27.

The catalytic topoisomerase II inhibitor dexrazoxane induces DNA breaks, ATF3 and
the DNA damage response in cancer cells.

Deng S(1), Yan T, Nikolova T, Fuhrmann D, Nemecek A, Gödtel-Armbrust U, Kaina B, 
Wojnowski L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Medical Center of the University Mainz, Mainz,
Germany.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The catalytic topoisomerase II inhibitor dexrazoxane has 
been associated not only with improved cancer patient survival but also with
secondary malignancies and reduced tumour response.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: We investigated the DNA damage response and the role of
the activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) accumulation in tumour cells exposed
to dexrazoxane.
KEY RESULTS: Dexrazoxane exposure induced topoisomerase IIa (TOP2A)-dependent
cell death, <U+03B3>-H2AX accumulation and increased tail moment in neutral comet
assays. Dexrazoxane induced DNA damage responses, shown by enhanced levels of
<U+03B3>-H2AX/53BP1 foci, ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated), ATR (ATM and
Rad3-related), Chk1 and Chk2 phosphorylation, and by p53 accumulation.
Dexrazoxane-induced <U+03B3>-H2AX accumulation was dependent on ATM. ATF3 protein was
induced by dexrazoxane in a concentration- and time-dependent manner, which was
abolished in TOP2A-depleted cells and in cells pre-incubated with ATM inhibitor. 
Knockdown of ATF3 gene expression by siRNA triggered apoptosis in control cells
and diminished the p53 protein level in both control and dexrazoxane -treated
cells. This was accompanied by increased <U+03B3>-H2AX accumulation. ATF3 knockdown also
delayed the repair of dexrazoxane -induced DNA double-strand breaks.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: As with other TOP2A poisons, dexrazoxane induced
DNA double-strand breaks followed by activation of the DNA damage response. The
DNA damage-triggered ATF3 controlled p53 accumulation and generation of
double-strand breaks and is proposed to serve as a switch between DNA damage and 
cell death following dexrazoxane treatment. These findings suggest a mechanistic 
explanation for the diverse clinical observations associated with dexrazoxane.

© 2014 The British Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC4403091 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25521189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mol Cells. 2015 Jan 31;38(1):58-64. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2015.2231. Epub 2014
Dec 16.

TLR4 mediates pneumolysin-induced ATF3 expression through the JNK/p38 pathway in 
Streptococcus pneumoniae-infected RAW 264.7 cells.

Nguyen CT(1), Kim EH(1), Luong TT(1), Pyo S(1), Rhee DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Korea.

Activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3) acts as a negative regulator of cytokine
production during Gram-negative bacterial infection. A recent study reported that
ATF3 provides protection from Streptococcus pneumoniae infection by activating
cytokines. However, the mechanism by which S. pneumoniae induces ATF3 after
infection is still unknown. In this study, we show that ATF3 was upregulated via 
Toll-like receptor (TLR) pathways in response to S. pneumoniae infection in
vitro. Induction was mediated by TLR4 and TLR2, which are in the TLR family. The 
expression of ATF3 was induced by pneumolysin (PLY), a potent pneumococcal
virulence factor, via the TLR4 pathway. Furthermore, ATF3 induction is mediated
by p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK).
Thus, this study reveals a potential role of PLY in modulating ATF3 expression,
which is required for the regulation of immune responses against pneumococcal
infection in macrophages.

PMCID: PMC4314132
PMID: 25518930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2014 Dec 15;14:487. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-14-487.

The induction of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) contributes to
anti-cancer activity of Abeliophyllum distichum Nakai in human colorectal cancer 
cells.

Park GH, Park JH, Eo HJ, Song HM, Woo SH, Kim MK, Lee JW, Lee MH, Lee JR, Koo JS,
Jeong JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioresource Sciences, Andong National University, Andong 760749,
Korea. jjb0403@anu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Recently, Abeliophyllum distichum Nakai (A. distichum) has been
reported to exert the inhibitory effect on angiotensin converting enzyme.
However, no specific pharmacological effects from A. distichum have been
described. We performed in vitro study to evaluate anti-cancer properties of A.
distichum and then elucidate the potential mechanisms.
METHODS: Cell viability was measured by MTT assay. ATF3 expression level was
evaluated by Western blot or RT-PCR and ATF3 transcriptional activity was
determined using a dual-luciferase assay kit after the transfection of ATF3
promoter constructs. In addition, ATF3-dependent apoptosis was evaluated by
Western blot after ATF3 knockdown using ATF3 siRNA.
RESULTS: Exposure of ethyl acetate fraction from the parts of A. distichum
including flower, leaf and branch to human colorectal cancer cells, breast cancer
cells and hepatocellular carcinoma reduced the cell viability. The branch
extracts from A. distichum (EAFAD-B) increased the expression of activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and promoter activity, indicating transcriptional
activation of ATF3 gene by EAFAD-B. In addition, our data showed that
EAFAD-B-responsible sites might be between -147 and -85 region of the ATF3
promoter. EAFAD-B-induced ATF3 promoter activity was significantly decreased when
the CREB site was deleted. However, the deletion of Ftz sites did not affect ATF3
promoter activity by EAFAD-B. We also observed that inhibition of p38MAPK and
GSK3ß attenuated EAFAD-B-mediated ATF3 promoter activation. Also, EAFAD-B
contributes at least in part to increase of ATF3 accumulation.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that the anti-cancer activity of EAFAD-B may
be a result of ATF3 promoter activation and subsequent increase of ATF3
expression.

PMCID: PMC4302050
PMID: 25494848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 8;9(12):e114888. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114888.
eCollection 2014.

Molecular and cellular characterization of a zebrafish optic pathway tumor line
implicates glia-derived progenitors in tumorigenesis.

Solin SL(1), Wang Y(1), Mauldin J(1), Schultz LE(1), Lincow DE(1), Brodskiy
PA(1), Jones CA(1), Syrkin-Nikolau J(1), Linn JM(1), Essner JJ(1), Hostetter
JM(2), Whitley EM(2), Cameron JD(3), Chou HH(1), Severin AJ(4), Sakaguchi DS(1), 
McGrail M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Development and Cell Biology, Iowa State University,
Ames, Iowa, United States of America. (2)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Iowa
State University, Ames, Iowa, United States of America. (3)Department of
Ophthalmology and Visual Neurosciences, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, United States of America. (4)Genome Informatics Facility, Office of
Biotechnology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, United States of America.

In this study we describe the molecular and cellular characterization of a
zebrafish mutant that develops tumors in the optic pathway. Heterozygous
Tg(flk1:RFP)is18 transgenic adults develop tumors of the retina, optic nerve and 
optic tract. Molecular and genetic mapping demonstrate the tumor phenotype is
linked to a high copy number transgene array integrated in the lincRNA gene
lincRNAis18/Zv9_00007276 on chromosome 3. TALENs were used to isolate a 147 kb
deletion allele that removes exons 2-5 of the lincRNAis18 gene. Deletion allele
homozygotes are viable and do not develop tumors, indicating loss of function of 
the lincRNAis18 locus is not the trigger for tumor onset. Optic pathway tumors in
the Tg(flk1:RFP)is18 mutant occur with a penetrance of 80-100% by 1 year of age. 
The retinal tumors are highly vascularized and composed of rosettes of various
sizes embedded in a fibrous matrix. Immunohistochemical analysis showed increased
expression of the glial markers GFAP and BLBP throughout retinal tumors and in
dysplastic optic nerve. We performed transcriptome analysis of pre-tumorous
retina and retinal tumor tissue and found changes in gene expression signatures
of radial glia and astrocytes (slc1a3), activated glia (atf3, blbp, apoeb),
proliferating neural progenitors (foxd3, nestin, cdh2, her9/hes1), and glioma
markers (S100ß, vim). The transcriptome also revealed activation of cAMP, Stat3
and Wnt signal transduction pathways. qRT-PCR confirmed >10-fold overexpression
of the Wnt pathway components hbegfa, ascl1a, and insm1a. Together the data
indicate Müller glia and/or astrocyte-derived progenitors could contribute to the
zebrafish Tg(flk1:RFP)is18 optic pathway tumors.

PMCID: PMC4259487
PMID: 25485542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Transcription. 2014;5(4):e964559. doi: 10.4161/21541264.2014.964559. Epub 2014
Oct 31.

Regulatory SNPs and transcriptional factor binding sites in ADRBK1, AKT3, ATF3,
DIO2, TBXA2R and VEGFA.

Buroker NE(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pediatrics , University of Washington , Seattle , WA USA.

Abstract Regulatory single nucleotide polymorphisms (rSNPs) which change the
transcriptional factor binding sites (TFBS) for transcriptional factors (TFs) to 
bind DNA were reviewed for the ADRBK1 (GRK2), AKT3, ATF3, DIO2, TBXA2R and VEGFA 
genes. Changes in the TFBS where TFs attach to regulate these genes may result in
human sickness and disease. The highlights of this previous work were reviewed
for these genes.

PMCID: PMC4581348
PMID: 25483406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Atherosclerosis. 2014 Dec;237(2):623-31. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2014.10.009. Epub 2014 Oct 18.

Conventional therapies fail to target inflammation and immune imbalance in
subjects with stable coronary artery disease: a system-based approach.

Kapoor D(1), Trikha D(1), Vijayvergiya R(2), Kaul D(1), Dhawan V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biotechnology, Postgraduate Institute 
of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh 160012, India. (2)Department of
Cardiology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh 
160012, India. (3)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biotechnology,
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh 160012,
India. Electronic address: veena447@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of morbidity and
mortality. In spite of improved pharmacological interventions, the clinical
outcome or response to therapy is poorly linked with the reversal of signs and
symptoms of the disease.
MATERIAL AND RESULTS: Keeping this in view, we evaluated the post-treatment
effect of standard therapies on traditional risk factors as well as inflammatory 
markers in 116 non-diabetic subjects with stable CAD undergoing treatment with
conventional drugs for >3 months (Group-II) and 50 normal healthy controls
(Group-I). We employed a top-down approach through Microarray and bioinformatics 
analysis to evaluate the distinct molecular signatures that remain unresponsive
to the current therapies employed in clinics. Despite potent effects of therapy
on serum cholesterol and LDL-C, triglycerides, VLDL-C and inflammatory markers
such as hsCRP, Ox-LDL, IL-18, TNF-a and IL-6 remained high in these subjects
versus controls. Microarray analysis revealed that despite treatment 513 genes
were differentially expressed that play important role in various biological
processes such as, i.e. inflammation (CXCR4, CXCL2, PTGS2), immune imbalance
(IL-8, IL-Iß, CCL3), and active atherosclerosis (DUSP-1, OSM, ATF3). A positive
correlation between hsCRP, IL-18, IL-8, PTGS2 and IL-Iß genes points these as
candidate genes and therapeutic targets.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results clearly demonstrate that standard therapies for
treatment and prevention of CAD fail to protect these subjects from ongoing
inflammation and immune imbalance. Using a systems-based approach we propose a
list of "Core-Genes" as probable candidate genes for therapeutic targeting.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2014 Dec 15;564:203-10. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2014.10.005.
Epub 2014 Oct 22.

The contribution of activating transcription factor 3 to apoptosis of human
colorectal cancer cells by protocatechualdehyde, a naturally occurring phenolic
compound.

Lee JR(1), Lee MH(1), Eo HJ(2), Park GH(2), Song HM(2), Kim MK(2), Lee JW(2),
Jeong JB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Gyeongbuk Institute for Bio-industry, Andong 760380, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Bioresource Sciences, Andong National University, Andong 760749,
Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Bioresource Sciences, Andong National
University, Andong 760749, Republic of Korea; Institute of Agricultural Science
and Technology, Andong National University, Andong 760749, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: jjb0403@anu.ac.kr.

Protocatechualdehyde (PCA) is one of the important compounds found in barley,
green cavendish bananas and grapevine leaves. PCA shows anti-cancer activities in
breast, leukemia and colorectal cancer cells. Previous study reported that PCA
exerts anti-cancer activity through down-regulating cyclin D1 and HDAC2 in human 
colorectal cancer cells. However, the underlying mechanisms for the expression of
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) by PCA has not been studied. Thus, we
performed in vitro study to investigate if treatment of PCA affects ATF3
expression and ATF3-mediated apoptosis in human colorectal cancer cells. PCA
decreased cell viability in a dose-dependent manner in HCT116 and SW480 cells. In
addition, PCA reduced cell viability in MCF-7, MDA-MB-231 and HepG-2 cells.
Exposure of PCA activated the levels of ATF3 protein and mRNA in HCT116 and SW480
cells. Inhibition of ERK1/2/ by PD98059 and p38 by SB203580 inhibited PCA-induced
ATF3 expression and transcriptional activation. ATF3-knockdown inhibited
PCA-induced apoptosis and cell viability. In addition, ATF3 overexpression
enhanced PCA-mediated cleavage of PARP. These findings suggest that inhibition of
cell viability and apoptosis by PCA may be result of ATF3 expression through
ERK1/2 and p38-mediated transcriptional activation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25447816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jan 2;456(1):80-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.11.037. Epub 2014 Nov 21.

ATF3 inhibits PPAR<U+03B3>-stimulated transactivation in adipocyte cells.

Jang MK(1), Jung MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Korean Medicine, Pusan National University, #49 Busandae hak-ro,
Mulguem-eup, Yangsan-si, Gyeongnam 609-735, South Korea. (2)School of Korean
Medicine, Pusan National University, #49 Busandae hak-ro, Mulguem-eup,
Yangsan-si, Gyeongnam 609-735, South Korea. Electronic address:
jung0603@pusan.ac.kr.

Previously, we reported that activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3)
downregulates peroxisome proliferator activated receptor (PPAR<U+03B3>) gene expression 
and inhibits adipocyte differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells. Here, we investigated
another role of ATF3 on the regulation of PPAR<U+03B3> activity. ATF3 inhibited
PPAR<U+03B3>-stimulated transactivation of PPAR<U+03B3> responsive element (PPRE)-containing
reporter or GAL4/PPAR<U+03B3> chimeric reporter. Thus, ATF3 effectively repressed
rosiglitazone-stimulated expression of adipocyte fatty acid binding protein
(aP2), PPAR<U+03B3> target gene, in 3T3-L1 cells. Coimmunoprecipitation and GST pulldown
assay demonstrated that ATF3 interacted with PPAR<U+03B3>. Accordingly, ATF3 prevented
PPAR<U+03B3> from binding to PPRE on the aP2 promoter. Furthermore, ATF3 suppressed
p300-mediated transcriptional coactivation of PPRE-containing reporter. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay showed that overexpression of ATF3 blocked both binding
of PPAR<U+03B3> and recruitment of p300 to PPRE on aP2 promoter induced by rosiglitazone
treatment in 3T3-L1 cells. Taken together, these results suggest that ATF3
interacts with PPAR<U+03B3> and represses PPAR<U+03B3>-mediated transactivation through
suppression of p300-stimulated coactivation in 3T3-L1 cells, which may play a
role in inhibition of adipocyte differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Nov 7;454(1):58-64. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.10.028. Epub 2014 Oct 14.

ATF3 represses PPAR<U+03B3> expression and inhibits adipocyte differentiation.

Jang MK(1), Jung MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Korean Medicine, Pusan National University, #49 Busandae hak-ro,
Mulguem-eup, Yangsan-si, Gyeongnam 609-735, South Korea. (2)School of Korean
Medicine, Pusan National University, #49 Busandae hak-ro, Mulguem-eup,
Yangsan-si, Gyeongnam 609-735, South Korea. Electronic address:
jung0603@pusan.ac.kr.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a stress-adaptive transcription
factor that mediates cellular stress response signaling. We previously reported
that ATF3 represses CCAAT/enhancer binding protein a (C/EBPa) expression and
inhibits 3T3-L1 adipocyte differentiation. In this study, we explored potential
role of ATF3 in negatively regulating peroxisome proliferator activated
receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>). ATF3 decreased the expression of PPAR<U+03B3> and its target gene in
3T3-L1 adipocytes. ATF3 also repressed the activity of -2.6Kb promoter of mouse
PPAR<U+03B3>2. Overexpression of PPAR<U+03B3> significantly prevented the ATF3-mediated
inhibition of 3T3-L1 differentiation. Transfection studies with 5'
deleted-reporters showed that ATF3 repressed the activity of -2037bp promoter,
whereas it did not affect the activity of -1458bp promoter, suggesting that ATF3 
responsive element is located between the -2037 and -1458. An electrophoretic
mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated that
ATF3 binds to ATF/CRE site (5'-TGACGTTT-3') between -1537 and -1530. Mutation of 
the ATF/CRE site abrogated ATF3-mediated transrepression of the PPAR<U+03B3>2 promoter. 
Treatment with thapsigargin, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress inducer, increased
ATF3 expression, whereas it decreased PPAR<U+03B3> expression. ATF3 knockdown
significantly blocked the thapsigargin-mediated downregulation of PPAR<U+03B3>
expression. Furthermore, overexpression of PPAR<U+03B3> prevented inhibition of 3T3-L1
differentiation by thapsigargin. Collectively, these results suggest that
ATF3-mediated inhibition of PPAR<U+03B3> expression may contribute to inhibition of
adipocyte differentiation during cellular stress including ER stress.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Front Oncol. 2014 Nov 4;4:308. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00308. eCollection 2014.

The Activation of the Sox2 RR2 Pluripotency Transcriptional Reporter in Human
Breast Cancer Cell Lines is Dynamic and Labels Cells with Higher Tumorigenic
Potential.

Iglesias JM(1), Leis O(2), Pérez Ruiz E(3), Gumuzio Barrie J(2), Garcia-Garcia
F(4), Aduriz A(3), Beloqui I(3), Hernandez-Garcia S(5), Lopez-Mato MP(3), Dopazo 
J(6), Pandiella A(5), Menendez JA(7), Martin AG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Regulation of Cell Growth Laboratory, Fundacion Inbiomed , San Sebastian ,
Spain ; Synpromics Ltd , Edinburgh , UK. (2)Regulation of Cell Growth Laboratory,
Fundacion Inbiomed , San Sebastian , Spain ; StemTek Therapeutics , Bilbao ,
Spain. (3)Regulation of Cell Growth Laboratory, Fundacion Inbiomed , San
Sebastian , Spain. (4)Computational Genomics Institute, Centro de Investigación
Principe Felipe (CIPF) , Valencia , Spain ; Functional Genomics Node, Centro de
Investigación Principe Felipe (CIPF), Spanish National Institute of
Bioinformatics (INB) , Valencia , Spain. (5)Instituto de Biología Molecular y
Celular del Cancer , Salamanca , Spain. (6)Computational Genomics Institute,
Centro de Investigación Principe Felipe (CIPF) , Valencia , Spain ; Functional
Genomics Node, Centro de Investigación Principe Felipe (CIPF), Spanish National
Institute of Bioinformatics (INB) , Valencia , Spain ; Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) , Valencia , Spain.
(7)Translational Research Laboratory, Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO) ,
Girona , Spain ; Girona Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBGi) , Girona , Spain.

The striking similarity displayed at the mechanistic level between tumorigenesis 
and the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells and the fact that genes and 
pathways relevant for embryonic development are reactivated during tumor
progression highlights the link between pluripotency and cancer. Based on these
observations, we tested whether it is possible to use a pluripotency-associated
transcriptional reporter, whose activation is driven by the SRR2 enhancer from
the Sox2 gene promoter (named S4+ reporter), to isolate cancer stem cells (CSCs) 
from breast cancer cell lines. The S4+ pluripotency transcriptional reporter
allows the isolation of cells with enhanced tumorigenic potential and its
activation was switched on and off in the cell lines studied, reflecting a
plastic cellular process. Microarray analysis comparing the populations in which 
the reporter construct is active versus inactive showed that positive cells
expressed higher mRNA levels of cytokines (IL-8, IL-6, TNF) and genes (such as
ATF3, SNAI2, and KLF6) previously related with the CSC phenotype in breast
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4220105
PMID: 25414831  [PubMed]


130. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2015 Mar 10;22(8):651-68. doi: 10.1089/ars.2014.5987. Epub
2015 Jan 19.

ATF3 protects pulmonary resident cells from acute and ventilator-induced lung
injury by preventing Nrf2 degradation.

Shan Y(1), Akram A, Amatullah H, Zhou DY, Gali PL, Maron-Gutierrez T,
González-López A, Zhou L, Rocco PR, Hwang D, Albaiceta GM, Haitsma JJ, dos Santos
CC.

Author information: 
(1)1 Interdepartmental Division of Critical Care, The Keenan Research Centre of
the Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute of St. Michael's Hospital, University of
Toronto , Toronto, Canada .

AIMS: Ventilator-induced lung injury (VILI) contributes to mortality in patients 
with acute respiratory distress syndrome, the most severe form of acute lung
injury (ALI). Absence of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) confers
susceptibility to ALI/VILI. To identify cell-specific ATF3-dependent mechanisms
of susceptibility to ALI/VILI, we generated ATF3 chimera by adoptive bone marrow 
(BM) transfer and randomized to inhaled saline or lipopolysacharide (LPS) in the 
presence of mechanical ventilation (MV). Adenovirus vectors to silence or
overexpress ATF3 were used in primary human bronchial epithelial cells and murine
BM-derived macrophages from wild-type or ATF3-deficient mice.
RESULTS: Absence of ATF3 in myeloid-derived cells caused increased pulmonary
cellular infiltration. In contrast, absence of ATF3 in parenchymal cells resulted
in loss of alveolar-capillary membrane integrity and increased exudative edema.
ATF3-deficient macrophages were unable to limit the expression of
pro-inflammatory mediators. Knockdown of ATF3 in resident cells resulted in
decreased junctional protein expression and increased paracellular leak. ATF3
overexpression abrogated LPS induced membrane permeability. Despite release of
ATF3-dependent Nrf2 transcriptional inhibition, mice that lacked ATF3 expression 
in resident cells had increased Nrf2 protein degradation.
INNOVATION: In our model, in the absence of ATF3 in parenchymal cells increased
Nrf2 degradation is the result of increased Keap-1 expression and loss of DJ-1
(Parkinson disease [autosomal recessive, early onset] 7), previously not known to
play a role in lung injury.
CONCLUSION: Results suggest that ATF3 confers protection to lung injury by
preventing inflammatory cell recruitment and barrier disruption in a
cell-specific manner, opening novel opportunities for cell specific therapy for
ALI/VILI.

PMCID: PMC4346377
PMID: 25401197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2014;234(4):249-54.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in the human adrenal cortex: its
possible involvement in aldosterone biosynthesis.

Felizola SJ(1), Nakamura Y, Ozawa Y, Ono Y, Morimoto R, Midorikawa S, Suzuki S,
Satoh F, Sasano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine.

The activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a member of the cAMP-responsive
element-binding (CREB) protein family of transcription factors. ATF3 is expressed
in H295R human adrenocortical carcinoma cells and considered a rapid-responder
gene to angiotensin-II stimulation. However, the functions of ATF3 in human
adrenocortical tissues have remained unknown. In this study, we analyzed the
localization and possible regulatory mechanisms of ATF3 in human adrenocortical
cells and tissues. The expression levels of ATF3 mRNA were analyzed in 66
aldosterone-producing adenomas (APA) and 14 cortisol-producing adenomas (CPA)
using real-time RT-PCR. To localize the ATF3 protein, we performed
immunohistochemical analysis in 20 non-pathological adrenal glands, 9 adrenal
glands with idiopathic hyperaldosteronism (IHA), 20 APA, and 5 CPA using a mouse 
monoclonal antibody against human ATF3. We showed that ATF3 mRNA levels were
higher in APA compared to CPA (P = 0.0053). ATF3 was immunolocalized to the zona 
glomerulosa of non-pathological adrenal glands and adrenal glands with IHA, and
diffusely detected in the tumor cells of APA and CPA. Subsequently, H295R cells
were treated for 6 h with each inhibitor of Src kinase (SRC), PKC, JAK2, and
calcium-dependent calmodulin kinase-II (CaMKII) in the presence or absence of
angiotensin-II. The expression levels of ATF3 mRNA were increased by
angiotensin-II (about 3.5-fold induction), but the magnitude of the induction was
significantly decreased in the presence of an inhibitor for SRC (PP2) or CaMKII
(KN93). These results suggest that ATF3 is a downstream target of SRC and CaMKII 
signaling, and may be involved in adrenocortical aldosterone synthesis.

PMID: 25400120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Ann Neurol. 2015 Jan;77(1):75-99. doi: 10.1002/ana.24304. Epub 2014 Nov 27.

Targeting miR-155 restores abnormal microglia and attenuates disease in SOD1
mice.

Butovsky O(1), Jedrychowski MP, Cialic R, Krasemann S, Murugaiyan G, Fanek Z,
Greco DJ, Wu PM, Doykan CE, Kiner O, Lawson RJ, Frosch MP, Pochet N, Fatimy RE,
Krichevsky AM, Gygi SP, Lassmann H, Berry J, Cudkowicz ME, Weiner HL.

Author information: 
(1)Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases, Department of Neurology, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; Evergrande Center for
Immunologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02112.

Erratum in
    Ann Neurol. 2015 Jun;77(6):1085.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate miR-155 in the SOD1 mouse model and human sporadic and 
familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
METHODS: NanoString microRNA, microglia and immune gene profiles, protein mass
spectrometry, and RNA-seq analyses were measured in spinal cord microglia,
splenic monocytes, and spinal cord tissue from SOD1 mice and in spinal cord
tissue of familial and sporadic ALS. miR-155 was targeted by genetic ablation or 
by peripheral or centrally administered anti-miR-155 inhibitor in SOD1 mice.
RESULTS: In SOD1 mice, we found loss of the molecular signature that
characterizes homeostatic microglia and increased expression of miR-155. There
was loss of the microglial molecules P2ry12, Tmem119, Olfml3, transcription
factors Egr1, Atf3, Jun, Fos, and Mafb, and the upstream regulators Csf1r, Tgfb1,
and Tgfbr1, which are essential for microglial survival. Microglia biological
functions were suppressed including phagocytosis. Genetic ablation of miR-155
increased survival in SOD1 mice by 51 days in females and 27 days in males and
restored the abnormal microglia and monocyte molecular signatures. Disease
severity in SOD1 males was associated with early upregulation of inflammatory
genes, including Apoe in microglia. Treatment of adult microglia with
apolipoprotein E suppressed the M0-homeostatic unique microglia signature and
induced an M1-like phenotype. miR-155 expression was increased in the spinal cord
of both familial and sporadic ALS. Dysregulated proteins that we identified in
human ALS spinal cord were restored in SOD1(G93A) /miR-155(-/-) mice.
Intraventricular anti-miR-155 treatment derepressed microglial miR-155 targeted
genes, and peripheral anti-miR-155 treatment prolonged survival.
INTERPRETATION: We found overexpression of miR-155 in the SOD1 mouse and in both 
sporadic and familial human ALS. Targeting miR-155 in SOD1 mice restores
dysfunctional microglia and ameliorates disease. These findings identify miR-155 
as a therapeutic target for the treatment of ALS.

© 2014 American Neurological Association.

PMCID: PMC4432483
PMID: 25381879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Tumour Biol. 2015 Mar;36(3):1923-31. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2796-x. Epub 2014
Nov 8.

Runx2, a target gene for activating transcription factor-3 in human breast cancer
cells.

Gokulnath M(1), Partridge NC, Selvamurugan N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Bioengineering, SRM University,
Kattankulathur, 603203, Tamil Nadu, India.

Activating transcription factor (ATF-3) is a stress response gene and is induced 
by transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-ß1) in breast cancer cells. In this
study, we dissected the functional role of ATF-3 gene in vitro by knocking down
its expression stably in human bone metastatic breast cancer cells (MDA-MB231).
Knockdown of ATF-3 expression in these cells decreased cell number, altered cell 
cycle phase transition, and decreased mRNA expression of cell cycle genes.
Knockdown of ATF-3 expression in MDA-MB231 cells also decreased cell migration,
and the expression levels of invasive and metastatic genes such as MMP-13 and
Runx2 were found to be decreased in these cells. Most importantly, ATF-3 was
associated with Runx2 promoter in MDA-MB231 cells and knockdown of ATF-3
expression decreased its association with Runx2 promoter. Hence, our results
suggested that ATF-3 plays a role in proliferation and invasion of bone
metastatic breast cancer cells in vitro and we identified for the first time that
Runx2 is a target gene of ATF-3 in MDA-MB231 cell line.

PMID: 25380580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 6;9(11):e110597. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110597.
eCollection 2014.

Transcriptomic changes triggered by hypoxia: evidence for HIF-1a-independent,
[Na+]i/[K+]i-mediated, excitation-transcription coupling.

Koltsova SV(1), Shilov B(2), Birulina JG(3), Akimova OA(4), Haloui M(5),
Kapilevich LV(6), Gusakova SV(3), Tremblay J(5), Hamet P(5), Orlov SN(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia; Department of 
Medicine, Centre de recherche, Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (2)Department of Physiology, Pirogov Russian National
Research Medical University, Moscow, Russia. (3)Department of Medical Biology,
Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russia. (4)Department of Biology,
Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia. (5)Department of Medicine, Centre de
recherche, Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada. (6)Department of Medical Biology, Siberian State Medical University,
Tomsk, Russia; Department of Physical Education, Tomsk State University, Tomsk,
Russia. (7)Department of Biology, Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia;
Department of Medicine, Centre de recherche, Centre hospitalier de l'Université
de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Medical Biology, Siberian
State Medical University, Tomsk, Russia.

This study examines the relative impact of canonical hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha- (HIF-1a and Na+i/K+i-mediated signaling on transcriptomic changes 
evoked by hypoxia and glucose deprivation. Incubation of RASMC in ischemic
conditions resulted in ~3-fold elevation of [Na+]i and 2-fold reduction of [K+]i.
Using global gene expression profiling we found that Na+,K+-ATPase inhibition by 
ouabain or K+-free medium in rat aortic vascular smooth muscle cells (RASMC) led 
to the differential expression of dozens of genes whose altered expression was
previously detected in cells subjected to hypoxia and ischemia/reperfusion. For
further investigations, we selected Cyp1a1, Fos, Atf3, Klf10, Ptgs2, Nr4a1, Per2 
and Hes1, i.e. genes possessing the highest increments of expression under
sustained Na+,K+-ATPase inhibition and whose implication in the pathogenesis of
hypoxia was proved in previous studies. In ouabain-treated RASMC, low-Na+,
high-K+ medium abolished amplification of the [Na+]i/[K+]i ratio as well as the
increased expression of all tested genes. In cells subjected to hypoxia and
glucose deprivation, dissipation of the transmembrane gradient of Na+ and K+
completely eliminated increment of Fos, Atf3, Ptgs2 and Per2 mRNAs and sharply
diminished augmentation expression of Klf10, Edn1, Nr4a1 and Hes1. In contrast to
low-Na+, high-K+ medium, RASMC transfection with Hif-1a siRNA attenuated
increments of Vegfa, Edn1, Klf10 and Nr4a1 mRNAs triggered by hypoxia but did not
impact Fos, Atf3, Ptgs2 and Per2 expression. Thus, our investigation
demonstrates, for the first time, that Na+i/K+i-mediated, Hif-1a- -independent
excitation-transcription coupling contributes to transcriptomic changes evoked in
RASMC by hypoxia and glucose deprivation.

PMCID: PMC4222758
PMID: 25375852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Tumour Biol. 2015 Mar;36(3):1471-6. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2618-1. Epub 2014 Nov
5.

Activating transcription factor 3 interferes with p21 activation in histone
deacetylase inhibitor-induced growth inhibition of epidermoid carcinoma cells.

Hao ZF(1), Su YM, Wang CM, Yang RY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Skin Damage and Repair, General Hospital of Beijing Region of
PLA, Beijing, 100700, China.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity by HDAC inhibitors (HDACis)
results in cancer cell growth inhibition, and HDACis have been revealed as
potential anti-skin cancer agents. p21 is a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor and
an essential regulator of growth inhibition. Recently, we reported that
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) could significantly promote skin cancer 
cell growth. This study explored the relationship between ATF3 and HDACi-induced 
growth inhibition of epidermoid carcinoma cells. We found that trichostatin A
(TSA) treatment inhibited cell growth in A431 epidermoid carcinoma cells in a
dose-dependent manner. Simultaneously, p21 and ATF3 expression levels were
upregulated and downregulated upon TSA stimulation, respectively. ATF3
overexpression promoted cell growth and downregulated p21 expression. In
contrast, ATF3 depletion resulted in cell growth reduction and p21
transcriptional upregulation. More importantly, ATF3 overexpression partially
antagonized TSA-induced growth inhibition and p21 activation. Collectively, these
data demonstrate that ATF3 acts as an essential negative regulator of TSA-induced
cell growth inhibition through interfering with TSA-induced p21 activation.

PMID: 25371069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Eur J Pain. 2015 Feb;19(2):281-90. doi: 10.1002/ejp.616. Epub 2014 Nov 5.

CGRP receptor blockade by MK-8825 alleviates allodynia in infraorbital
nerve-ligated rats.

Michot B(1), Kayser V, Hamon M, Bourgoin S.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U894, CPN, Paris, France; Neuropsychopharmacology, Faculty of Medicine 
Pierre & Marie Curie, University Pierre et Marie Curie (UPMC), Paris, France.

Comment in
    Eur J Pain. 2015 Feb;19(2):150-1.

BACKGROUND: Previous data showed that, in rats, anti-migraine drugs (triptans,
olcegepant) significantly reduced mechanical allodynia induced by infraorbital
nerve (ION) ligation but not that evoked by sciatic nerve (SN) ligation. Whether 
this also occurs with MK-8825, a novel anti-migraine drug also acting through
CGRP receptor blockade (but chemically unrelated to olcegepant) was tested in the
present study, which also investigated possible anti-neuroinflammatory effects of
this drug.
METHODS: Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats underwent unilateral chronic constriction
injury (CCI) to either the ION or the SN, and mechanical allodynia was assessed 2
weeks later within the ipsilateral vibrissae territory or hindpaw, respectively. 
Transcripts of neuroinflammatory markers were quantified by real-time
quantitative RT-PCR in ipsilateral trigeminal ganglion and spinal trigeminal
nucleus in CCI-ION rats.
RESULTS: Acute as well as repeated (for 4 days) administration of MK-8825 (30-100
mg/kg, i.p.) significantly reduced CCI-ION-induced mechanical allodynia but was
ineffective in CCI-SN rats. CCI-ION was associated with marked up-regulation of
neuronal and glial inflammatory markers (ATF3, IL6, iNOS, COX2) in ipsilateral
trigeminal ganglion but not spinal trigeminal nucleus. MK-8825-induced inhibition
of iNOS mRNA up-regulation probably underlay its anti-allodynic effect because
pharmacological blockade of iNOS by AMT (6 mg/kg, s.c.) mimicked this effect.
CONCLUSIONS: These data further support the idea that CGRP receptor blockade
might be a valuable approach to alleviate trigeminal, but not spinal, neuropathic
pain through, at least partly, an inhibitory effect on neuropathic
pain-associated increase in NO production in trigeminal ganglion.

© 2014 European Pain Federation - EFIC®

PMID: 25370954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Am J Transplant. 2015 Jan;15(1):76-87. doi: 10.1111/ajt.12954. Epub 2014 Oct 30.

ATF3-mediated NRF2/HO-1 signaling regulates TLR4 innate immune responses in mouse
liver ischemia/reperfusion injury.

Rao J(1), Qian X, Li G, Pan X, Zhang C, Zhang F, Zhai Y, Wang X, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Transplantation Center of First Affiliated Hospital and Translational
Medicine Research Center of Jiangning Hospital, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, P. R. China; Key Laboratory of Living Donor Liver Transplantation of
Ministry of Public Health, Nanjing, P. R. China; Division of Liver and Pancreas
Transplantation, Department of Surgery, Dumont-UCLA Transplant Center, David
Geffen School of Medicine at University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a stress-induced transcription factor
that has been shown to repress inflammatory gene expression in multiple cell
types and diseases. However, little is known about the roles and mechanisms of
ATF3 in liver ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI). In warm and cold liver IRI
models, we showed that ATF3 deficiency significantly increased
ischemia/reperfusion (IR)-stressed liver injury, as evidenced by increased serum 
alanine aminotransferase levels, histological liver damage, and hepatocellular
apoptosis. These may correlate with inhibition of the intrahepatic nuclear factor
erythroid-derived 2-related factor 2/heme oxygenase-1 (NRF2/HO-1) signaling
pathway leading to enhancing Toll-like receptor 4/nuclear factor kappa beta
(TLR4/NF-<U+03BA>B) activation, pro-inflammatory programs and macrophage/neutrophil
trafficking, while simultaneously repressing anti-apoptotic molecules in ischemic
liver. Interestingly, activation of NRF2/HO-1 signaling using an NRF2 activator, 
oltipraz (M2), during hepatic IRI-rescued ATF3 anti-inflammatory functions in
ATF3-deficient mice. For in vitro studies, ATF3 ablation in lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-stimulated bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs) depressed levels of
NRF2/HO-1 and PI3K/AKT, resulting in enhanced TLR4/NF-<U+03BA>B activation. Pretreatment
of LPS-stimulated BMMs with M2 increased NRF2/HO-1 expression, promoted PI3K/AKT,
which in turn suppressed TLR4/NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated proinflammatory mediators. Thus, our
results first demonstrate ATF3-mediated NRF2/HO-1 signaling in the regulation of 
TLR4-driven inflammatory responses in IR-stressed livers. Our findings provide a 
rationale for a novel therapeutic strategy for managing IR-induced liver injury.

© Copyright 2014 The American Society of Transplantation and the American Society
of Transplant Surgeons.

PMID: 25359217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2014 Oct 23;14:408. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-14-408.

Anti-cancer activity of Ginger (Zingiber officinale) leaf through the expression 
of activating transcription factor 3 in human colorectal cancer cells.

Park GH, Park JH, Song HM, Eo HJ, Kim MK, Lee JW, Lee MH, Cho KH, Lee JR, Cho HJ,
Jeong JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioresource Sciences, Andong National University, Andong 760749,
South Korea. jjb0403@anu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Ginger leaf (GL) has long been used as a vegetable, tea and herbal
medicine. However, its pharmacological properties are still poorly understood.
Thus, we performed in vitro studies to evaluate anti-cancer properties of ginger 
leaf and then elucidate the potential mechanisms involved.
METHODS: Cell viability was measured by MTT assay. ATF3 expression level was
evaluated by Western blot or RT-PCR and ATF3 transcriptional activity was
determined using a dual-luciferase assay kit after the transfection of ATF3
promoter constructs. In addition, ATF3-dependent apoptosis was evaluated by
Western blot after ATF3 knockdown using ATF3 siRNA.
RESULTS: Exposure of GL to human colorectal cancer cells (HCT116, SW480 and LoVo 
cells) reduced the cell viability and induced apoptosis in a dose-dependent
manner. In addition, GL reduced cell viability in MCF-7, MDA-MB-231 and HepG-2
cells. ATF3 knockdown attenuated GL-mediated apoptosis. GL increased activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) expressions in both protein and mRNA level and
activated ATF3 promoter activity, indicating transcriptional activation of ATF3
gene by GL. In addition, our data showed that GL-responsible sites might be
between -318 and -85 region of the ATF3 promoter. We also observed that ERK1/2
inhibition by PD98059 attenuated GL-mediated ATF3 expression but not p38
inhibition by SB203580, indicating ERK1/2 pathway implicated in GL-induced ATF3
activation.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the reduction of cell viability and
apoptosis by GL may be a result of ATF3 promoter activation and subsequent
increase of ATF3 expression through ERK1/2 activation in human colorectal cancer 
cells.

PMCID: PMC4210498
PMID: 25338635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014 Oct 10;3(5):e001309. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001309.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 protects against vascular smooth muscle cell
proliferation and neointima formation.

Huang L(1), Zhang SM(1), Zhang P(1), Zhang XJ(2), Zhu LH(1), Chen K(3), Gao L(4),
Zhang Y(1), Kong XJ(1), Tian S(1), Zhang XD(3), Li H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
(L.H., S.M.Z., P.Z., L.H.Z., Y.Z., X.J.K., S.T., H.L.) Cardiovascular Research
Institute of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China (L.H., S.M.Z., P.Z., L.H.Z., Y.Z.,
X.J.K., S.T., H.L.). (2)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese
Medicine, Institute of Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Macao,
China (X.J.Z.). (3)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
(K.C., X.D.Z.). (4)Department of Cardiology, Institute of Cardiovascular Disease,
Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China (L.G.).

BACKGROUND: Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), a member of the interferon
regulatory factor family, plays important roles in innate immunity and immune
cell differentiation. However, the role of IRF7 in neointima formation is
currently unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Significant decreases in IRF7 expression were observed in
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) following carotid artery injury in vivo and 
platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB) stimulation in vitro. Compared with
non-transgenic (NTG) controls, SMC-specific IRF7 transgenic (IRF7-TG) mice
displayed reduced neointima formation and VSMC proliferation in response to
carotid injury, whereas a global knockout of IRF7 (IRF7-KO) resulted in the
opposite effect. Notably, a novel IRF7-KO rat strain was successfully generated
and used to further confirm the effects of IRF7 deletion on the acceleration of
intimal hyperplasia based on a balloon injury-induced vascular lesion model.
Mechanistically, IRF7's inhibition of carotid thickening and the expression of
VSMC proliferation markers was dependent on the interaction of IRF7 with
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and its downstream target, proliferating
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). The evidence that IRF7/ATF3-double-TG (DTG) and
IRF7/ATF3-double-KO (DKO) mice abolished the regulatory effects exhibited by the 
IRF7-TG and IRF7-KO mice, respectively, validated the underlying molecular events
of IRF7-ATF3 interaction.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrated that IRF7 modulated VSMC proliferation
and neointima formation by interacting with ATF3, thereby inhibiting the
ATF3-mediated induction of PCNA transcription. The results of this study indicate
that IRF7 is a novel modulator of neointima formation and VSMC proliferation and 
may represent a promising target for vascular disease therapy.

© 2014 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., 
by Wiley Blackwell.

PMCID: PMC4323813
PMID: 25304854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Nutr Biochem. 2014 Dec;25(12):1275-81. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2014.07.006. Epub
2014 Sep 16.

Anti-inflammatory and joint protective effects of extra-virgin olive-oil
polyphenol extract in experimental arthritis.

Rosillo MÁ(1), Alcaraz MJ(2), Sánchez-Hidalgo M(1), Fernández-Bolaños JG(3),
Alarcón-de-la-Lastra C(1), Ferrándiz ML(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Seville, 41012 
Seville, Spain. (2)Department of Pharmacology and IDM, University of Valencia,
46100 Burjasot, Valencia, Spain. (3)Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of
Chemistry, University of Seville, 41012 Seville, Spain. (4)Department of
Pharmacology and IDM, University of Valencia, 46100 Burjasot, Valencia, Spain.
Electronic address: luisa.ferrandiz@uv.es.

The consumption of extra virgin olive oil (EVOO) in Mediterranean countries has
shown beneficial effects. A wide range of evidence indicates that phenolic
compounds present in EVOO are endowed with anti-inflammatory properties. In this 
work, we evaluated the effects of EVOO-polyphenol extract (PE) in a model of
rheumatoid arthritis, the collagen-induced arthritis model in mice. On day 0,
DBA-1/J mice were immunized with bovine type II collagen. On day 21, mice
received a booster injection. PE (100 and 200 mg/kg) was orally administered once
a day from days 29 to 41 to arthritic mice. We have demonstrated that PE
decreases joint edema, cell migration, cartilage degradation and bone erosion. PE
significantly reduced the levels of proinflammatory cytokines and prostaglandin
E2 in the joint as well as the expression of cyclooxygenase-2 and microsomal
prostaglandin E synthase-1. Our data indicate that PE inhibits c-Jun N-terminal
kinase, p38 and signal transducer and activator of transcription-3. In addition, 
PE decreases nuclear factor <U+03BA>B translocation leading to the down-regulation of
the arthritic process. These results support the interest of natural diet
components in the development of therapeutic products for arthritic conditions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25294776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 30;9(9):e106812. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106812.
eCollection 2014.

Urotensin II inhibits doxorubicin-induced human umbilical vein endothelial cell
death by modulating ATF expression and via the ERK and Akt pathway.

Chen YL(1), Tsai YT(2), Lee CY(3), Lee CH(4), Chen CY(5), Liu CM(5), Chen JJ(6), 
Loh SH(7), Tsai CS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, National Defense Medical Center,
Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China. (2)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China; Division of
Cardiovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tri-Service General Hospital,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China. (3)Division
of Cardiovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tri-Service General Hospital,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China. (4)Department
of Nursing, Min-Hwei College of Health Care Management, Tainan, Taiwan, Republic 
of China. (5)School of Medical and Health Sciences, Fooyin University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan, Republic of China. (6)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal
Medicine and Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Science, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China; Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China; Division of
Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, China Medical University Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China. (7)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China; Department of
Pharmacology, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0118879.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Regulation of the homeostasis of vascular endothelium is 
critical for the processes of vascular remodeling and angiogenesis under
physiological and pathological conditions. Urotensin II (U-II), a potent
vasoactive peptide, participates in vascular and myocardial remodeling after
injury. We investigated the protective effect of U-II on doxorubicin
(DOX)-induced apoptosis in cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs) and the potential mechanisms involved in this process.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Cultured HUVECs were treated with vehicle, DOX (1 µM),
U-II, or U-II plus DOX. Apoptosis was evaluated by DNA strand break level with
TdT-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) staining. Western blot analysis was
employed to determine the related protein expression and flow cytometry assay was
used to determine the TUNEL positive cells.
KEY RESULTS: U-II reduced the quantity of cleaved caspase-3 and cytosol
cytochrome c and increased Bcl-2 expression, which results in protecting HUVECs
from DOX-induced apoptosis. U-II induced Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3)
at both mRNA and protein levels in U-II-treated cells. Knockdown of ATF3 with
ATF3 siRNA significantly reduced ATF3 protein levels and U-II protective effect
under DOX-treated condition. U-II downregulated p53 expression in DOX-induced
HUVECs apoptosis, and it rapidly activated extracellular signal-regulated protein
kinase (ERK) and Akt. The DOX induced change of p53 was not affected by U-II
antagonist (urantide) under ATF-3 knockdown. The inhibitory effect of U-II on
DOX-increased apoptosis was attenuated by inhibitors of ERK (U0126) and PI3K/Akt 
(LY294002).
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: Our observations provide evidence that U-II protects
HUVECs from DOX-induced apoptosis. ERK-Akt phosphorylation, ATF3 activation, and 
p53 downregulation may play a signal-transduction role in this process.

PMCID: PMC4182104
PMID: 25268131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS Genet. 2014 Sep 25;10(9):e1004659. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004659.
eCollection 2014.

The Drosophila MAPK p38c regulates oxidative stress and lipid homeostasis in the 
intestine.

Chakrabarti S(1), Poidevin M(2), Lemaitre B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Global Health Institute, Station 19, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. (2)Centre de
Génétique Moléculaire (CGM), CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

The p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signaling cassette has been
implicated in stress and immunity in evolutionarily diverse species. In response 
to a wide variety of physical, chemical and biological stresses p38 kinases
phosphorylate various substrates, transcription factors of the ATF family and
other protein kinases, regulating cellular adaptation to stress. The Drosophila
genome encodes three p38 kinases named p38a, p38b and p38c. In this study, we
have analyzed the role of p38c in the Drosophila intestine. The p38c gene is
expressed in the midgut and upregulated upon intestinal infection. We showed that
p38c mutant flies are more resistant to infection with the lethal pathogen
Pseudomonas entomophila but are more susceptible to the non-pathogenic bacterium 
Erwinia carotovora 15. This phenotype was linked to a lower production of
Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) in the gut of p38c mutants, whereby the
transcription of the ROS-producing enzyme Duox is reduced in p38c mutant flies.
Our genetic analysis shows that p38c functions in a pathway with Mekk1 and Mkk3
to induce the phosphorylation of Atf-2, a transcription factor that controls Duox
expression. Interestingly, p38c deficient flies accumulate lipids in the
intestine while expressing higher levels of antimicrobial peptide and metabolic
genes. The role of p38c in lipid metabolism is mediated by the Atf3 transcription
factor. This observation suggests that p38c and Atf3 function in a common pathway
in the intestine to regulate lipid metabolism and immune homeostasis.
Collectively, our study demonstrates that p38c plays a central role in the
intestine of Drosophila. It also reveals that many roles initially attributed to 
p38a are in fact mediated by p38c.

PMCID: PMC4177744
PMID: 25254641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 23;9(9):e108152. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108152.
eCollection 2014.

Satellite glial cells surrounding primary afferent neurons are activated and
proliferate during monoarthritis in rats: is there a role for ATF3?

Nascimento DS(1), Castro-Lopes JM(1), Moreira Neto FL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Experimental, Centro de Investigação Médica (CIM),
Faculdade de Medicina do Porto, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal;
Morphophysiology of the Somatosensory System Group, Instituto de Biologia
Molecular e Celular (IBMC), Porto, Portugal.

Joint inflammatory diseases are debilitating and very painful conditions that
still lack effective treatments. Recently, glial cells were shown to be crucial
for the development and maintenance of chronic pain, constituting novel targets
for therapeutic approaches. At the periphery, the satellite glial cells (SGCs)
that surround the cell bodies of primary afferents neurons in the dorsal root
ganglia (DRG) display hypertrophy, proliferation, and activation following injury
and/or inflammation. It has been suggested that the expression of neuronal injury
factors might initially trigger these SGCs-related events. We then aimed at
evaluating if SGCs are involved in the establishment/maintenance of articular
inflammatory pain, by using the monoarthritis (MA) model, and if the neuronal
injury marker activating transcriptional factor 3 (ATF3) is associated with these
SGCs' reactive changes. Western Blot (WB) analysis of the glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP) expression was performed in L4-L5 DRGs from control non-inflamed
rats and MA animals at different time-points of disease (4, 7, and 14d, induced
by complete Freund's adjuvant injection into the left hind paw ankle joint). Data
indicate that SGCs activation is occurring in MA animals, particularly after day 
7 of disease evolution. Additionally, double-immunostaining for ATF3 and GFAP in 
L5 DRG sections shows that SGCs's activation significantly increases around
stressed neurons at 7d of disease, when compared with control animals. The
specific labelling of GFAP in SGCs rather than in other cell types was also
confirmed by immunohistochemical labeling. Finally, BrdU incorporation indicates 
that proliferation of SGCs is also significantly increased after 7 days of MA.
Data indicate that SGCs play an important role in the mechanisms of articular
inflammation, with 7 days of disease being a critical time-point in the MA model,
and suggest that ATF3 might be involved in SGCs' reactive changes such as
activation.

PMCID: PMC4172763
PMID: 25247596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. BMC Neurosci. 2014 Sep 13;15:107. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-15-107.

Gender differences in nerve regeneration after sciatic nerve injury and repair in
healthy and in type 2 diabetic Goto-Kakizaki rats.

Stenberg L(1), Dahlin LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences - Hand Surgery, Lund University, Skane
University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden. Lena.Stenberg@med.lu.se.

BACKGROUND: In view of the global increase in diabetes, and the fact that recent 
findings indicate that diabetic neuropathy is more frequently seen in males, it
is crucial to evaluate any gender differences in nerve regeneration in diabetes. 
Our aim was to evaluate in short-term experiments gender dissimilarities in
axonal outgrowth in healthy and in genetically developed type 2 diabetic
Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats, and also to investigate the connection between activated
(i.e. ATF-3, Activating Transcription Factor 3) and apoptotic (cleaved caspase 3)
Schwann cells after sciatic nerve injury and repair. Female and male diabetic GK 
rats, spontaneously developing type 2 diabetes, were compared with corresponding 
healthy Wistar rats. The sciatic nerve was transected and instantly repaired.
After six days the nerve was harvested to measure axonal outgrowth (i.e.
neurofilament staining), and to quantify the number of ATF-3 (i.e. activated) and
cleaved caspase 3 (i.e. apoptotic) stained Schwann cells using
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Axonal outgrowth was generally longer in male than in female rats and
also longer in healthy than in diabetic rats. Differences were observed in the
number of activated Schwann cells both in the distal nerve segment and close to
the lesion site. In particular the female diabetic rats had a lower number. There
were no gender differences in number of cleaved caspase 3 stained Schwann cells, 
but rats with diabetes exhibited more (such cleaved caspase 3 stained Schwann)
cells both at the lesion site and in the distal part of the sciatic nerve. Axonal
outgrowth correlated with the number of ATF3 stained Schwann cells, but not with 
blood glucose levels or the cleaved caspase 3 stained Schwann cells. However, the
number of cleaved caspase 3 stained Schwann cells correlated with the blood
glucose level.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that there are gender differences in nerve regeneration 
in healthy rats and in type 2 diabetic GK rats.

PMCID: PMC4169809
PMID: 25216784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2014 Oct 21;16(39):21595-601. doi: 10.1039/c4cp03260h. Epub 
2014 Sep 5.

Single-molecule quantification of lipotoxic expression of activating
transcription factor 3.

Yahiatène I(1), Aung HH, Wilson DW, Rutledge JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, School
of Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a member of the mammalian activation 
transcription factor/cAMP, physiologically important in the regulation of pro-
and anti-inflammatory target genes. We compared the induction of ATF3 protein as 
measured by Western blot analysis with single-molecule localization microscopy
dSTORM to quantify the dynamics of accumulation of intranuclear ATF3 of
triglyceride-rich (TGRL) lipolysis product-treated HAEC (Human Aortic Endothelial
Cells). The ATF3 expression rate within the first three hours after treatment
with TGRL lipolysis products is about 3500 h(-1). After three hours we detected
33,090 ± 3491 single-molecule localizations of ATF3. This was accompanied by
significant structural changes in the F-actin network of the cells at ~3-fold
increased localization precision compared to widefield microscopy after
treatment. Additionally, we discovered a cluster size of approximately 384
nanometers of ATF3 molecules. We show for the first time the time course of ATF3 
accumulation in the nucleus undergoing lipotoxic injury. Furthermore, we
demonstrate ATF3 accumulation associated with increased concentrations of TGRL
lipolysis products occurs in large aggregates.

PMCID: PMC4242794
PMID: 25189785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Nov;13(11):2559-71. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-1086.
Epub 2014 Sep 4.

Monensin inhibits epidermal growth factor receptor trafficking and activation:
synergistic cytotoxicity in combination with EGFR inhibitors.

Dayekh K(1), Johnson-Obaseki S(2), Corsten M(2), Villeneuve PJ(3), Sekhon HS(4), 
Weberpals JI(5), Dimitroulakos J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, The
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Faculty of Medicine and the
Department of Biochemistry, The University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, The
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Department of Thoracic Surgery,
The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. (4)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. (5)Centre for 
Cancer Therapeutics, the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, The University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Department of Gynaecologic Oncology, The Ottawa 
Hospital, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. (6)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, the Ottawa 
Hospital Research Institute, The University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
Faculty of Medicine and the Department of Biochemistry, The University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. jdimitroulakos@ohri.ca.

Targeting the EGFR, with inhibitors such as erlotinib, represents a promising
therapeutic option in advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC).
However, they lack significant efficacy as single agents. Recently, we identified
the ability of statins to induce synergistic cytotoxicity in HNSCC cells through 
targeting the activation and trafficking of the EGFR. However, in a phase I trial
of rosuvastatin and erlotinib, statin-induced muscle pathology limited the
usefulness of this approach. To overcome these toxicity limitations, we sought to
uncover other potential combinations using a 1,200 compound screen of
FDA-approved drugs. We identified monensin, a coccidial antibiotic, as
synergistically enhancing the cytotoxicity of erlotinib in two cell line models
of HNSCC, SCC9 and SCC25. Monensin treatment mimicked the inhibitory effects of
statins on EGFR activation and downstream signaling. RNA-seq analysis of
monensin-treated SCC25 cells demonstrated a wide array of cholesterol and lipid
synthesis genes upregulated by this treatment similar to statin treatment.
However, this pattern was not recapitulated in SCC9 cells as monensin
specifically induced the expression of activation of transcription factor (ATF)
3, a key regulator of statin-induced apoptosis. This differential response was
also demonstrated in monensin-treated ex vivo surgical tissues in which HMG-CoA
reductase expression and ATF3 were either not induced, induced singly, or both
induced together in a cohort of 10 patient samples, including four HNSCC. These
results suggest the potential clinical utility of combining monensin with
erlotinib in patients with HNSCC.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25189541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Sci Signal. 2014 Sep 2;7(341):ra84. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2004592.

Oxidative DNA damage induces the ATM-mediated transcriptional suppression of the 
Wnt inhibitor WIF-1 in systemic sclerosis and fibrosis.

Svegliati S(1), Marrone G(2), Pezone A(2), Spadoni T(1), Grieco A(1), Moroncini
G(3), Grieco D(2), Vinciguerra M(4), Agnese S(2), Jüngel A(5), Distler O(5),
Musti AM(6), Gabrielli A(7), Avvedimento EV(8).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e Molecolari, Clinica Medica, Università
Politecnica delle Marche, 60126 Ancona, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Medicina
Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli Studi di napoli Federico II,
80132 Naples, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e Molecolari, Clinica
Medica, Università Politecnica delle Marche, 60126 Ancona, Italy. Dipartimento di
Medicina Interna, Ospedali Riuniti, 60126 Ancona, Italy. (4)Cancer Research UK,
Clare Hall, London EN6 3LD, UK. (5)Center of Experimental Rheumatology,
Department of Rheumatology, University Hospital Zurich, 8091 Zurich, Switzerland.
(6)Dipartimento di Farmacia e Scienze della Salute e della Nutrizione, Università
della Calabria, Arcavacata di Rende (CS) 87036, Italy. (7)Dipartimento di Scienze
Cliniche e Molecolari, Clinica Medica, Università Politecnica delle Marche, 60126
Ancona, Italy. Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, Ospedali Riuniti, 60126 Ancona, 
Italy. avvedim@unina.it a.gabrielli@univpm.it. (8)Dipartimento di Medicina
Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli Studi di napoli Federico II,
80132 Naples, Italy. avvedim@unina.it a.gabrielli@univpm.it.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is an autoimmune disease characterized by extensive
visceral organ and skin fibrosis. SSc patients have increased production of
autoreactive antibodies and Wnt signaling activity. We found that expression of
the gene encoding Wnt inhibitor factor 1 (WIF-1) was decreased in fibroblasts
from SSc patient biopsies. WIF-1 deficiency in SSc patient cells correlated with 
increased abundance of the Wnt effector ß-catenin and the production of collagen.
Knocking down WIF-1 in normal fibroblasts increased Wnt signaling and collagen
production. WIF-1 loss and DNA damage were induced in normal fibroblasts by
either SSc patient immunoglobulins or oxidative DNA-damaging agents, such as
ultraviolet light, hydrogen peroxide, or bleomycin. The DNA damage checkpoint
kinase ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) mediated WIF-1 silencing through the
phosphorylation of the transcription factor c-Jun, which in turn activated the
expression of the gene encoding activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3). ATF3
and c-Jun were recruited together with histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) to the WIF-1
promoter and inhibited WIF-1 expression. Preventing the accumulation of reactive 
oxygen species or inhibiting the activation of ATM, c-Jun, or HDACs restored
WIF-1 expression in cultured SSc patient cells. Trichostatin A, an HDAC
inhibitor, prevented WIF-1 loss, ß-catenin induction, and collagen accumulation
in an experimental fibrosis model. Our findings suggest that oxidative DNA damage
induced by SSc autoreactive antibodies enables Wnt activation that contributes to
fibrosis.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 25185156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Nov 18;231(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.08.022. Epub
2014 Aug 30.

Pro-apoptotic action of macrophage inhibitory cytokine 1 and counteraction of
activating transcription factor 3 in carrageenan-exposed enterocytes.

Choi HJ(1), Kim HG(2), Kim J(1), Park SH(1), Park J(1), Oh CG(1), Do KH(1), Lee
SJ(1), Park YC(3), Ahn SC(3), Kim YS(4), Moon Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mucosal Exposome and Biomodulation, Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Pusan National University School of Medicine, Yangsan, South Korea.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical Research Institute, Pusan
National University, Pusan, South Korea. (3)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology and Medical Research Institute, Pusan National University, Pusan,
South Korea. (4)Department of Pharmacology, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (5)Laboratory of Mucosal Exposome and
Biomodulation, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Pusan National University
School of Medicine, Yangsan, South Korea; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology and Medical Research Institute, Pusan National University, Pusan,
South Korea; Immunoregulatory Therapeutics Group in Brain Busan 21 Project,
Busan, South Korea. Electronic address: moon@pnu.edu.

Carrageenan (CGN), a widely used food additive, has been shown to injure the
epithelial barrier in animal models. This type of damage is a clinical feature of
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in humans. In the present study, the effects of 
CGN on pro-apoptotic responses associated with macrophage inhibitory cytokine 1
(MIC-1) regulation in human enterocytes were evaluated. CGN up-regulated the
expression of MIC-1 that promoted epithelial cell apoptosis. Although MIC-1
induction was dependent on pro-apoptotic p53 protein, the pro-survival protein
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) was negatively regulated by p53
expression. However, MIC-1 enhanced the expression of the pro-survival protein
ATF3 in enterocytes exposed to CGN. Functionally, MIC-1-mediated epithelial cell 
apoptosis was counteracted by the pro-survival action of ATF3 in response to CGN 
exposure. These findings demonstrated that the counterbalance between MIC-1 and
ATF3 is critical for deciding the fate of enterocytes under the food chemical
stress.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25180886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 26;9(8):e105764. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105764.
eCollection 2014.

Whole genome expression profiling shows that BRG1 transcriptionally regulates UV 
inducible genes and other novel targets in human cells.

Zhang L(1), Nemzow L(1), Chen H(1), Hu JJ(1), Gong F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of America.

UV irradiation is known to cause cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) and
pyrimidine (6-4) pyrimidone photoproducts (6-4PPs), and plays a large role in the
development of cancer. Tumor suppression, through DNA repair and proper cell
cycle regulation, is an integral factor in maintaining healthy cells and
preventing development of cancer. Transcriptional regulation of the genes
involved in the various tumor suppression pathways is essential for them to be
expressed when needed and to function properly. BRG1, an ATPase catalytic subunit
of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex, has been identified as a tumor
suppressor protein, as it has been shown to play a role in Nucleotide Excision
Repair (NER) of CPDs, suppress apoptosis, and restore checkpoint deficiency, in
response to UV exposure. Although BRG1 has been shown to regulate transcription
of some genes that are instrumental in proper DNA damage repair and cell cycle
maintenance in response to UV, its role in transcriptional regulation of the
whole genome in response to UV has not yet been elucidated. With whole genome
expression profiling in SW13 cells, we show that upon UV induction, BRG1
regulates transcriptional expression of many genes involved in cell stress
response. Additionally, our results also highlight BRG1's general role as a
master regulator of the genome, as it transcriptionally regulates approximately
4.8% of the human genome, including expression of genes involved in many
pathways. RT-PCR and ChIP were used to validate our genome expression analysis.
Importantly, our study identifies several novel transcriptional targets of BRG1, 
such as ATF3. Thus, BRG1 has a larger impact on human genome expression than
previously thought, and our studies will provide inroads for future analysis of
BRG1's role in gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC4144907
PMID: 25157878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Aging Cell. 2014 Dec;13(6):1012-8. doi: 10.1111/acel.12264. Epub 2014 Aug 26.

ATF4 activity: a common feature shared by many kinds of slow-aging mice.

Li W(1), Li X, Miller RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.

ATF4, a DNA-binding factor that modulates responses to amino acid availability
and ribosomal function, has been shown to be altered in both liver and
fibroblasts from two strains of long-lived mice, i.e. Snell dwarf and PAPP-A
knockout mice. New data now show elevated ATF4 levels, and elevation of
ATF4-dependent proteins and mRNAs, in liver of mice treated with acarbose or
rapamycin, calorically restricted mice, methionine-restricted mice, and mice
subjected to litter crowding. Elevation of ATF4, at least in liver, thus seems to
be a shared feature of diets, drugs, genes, and developmental alterations that
extend maximum lifespan in mice.

© 2014 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley
& Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4326926
PMID: 25156122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Nov;76:138-47. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2014.08.011. Epub
2014 Aug 23.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress-dependent activation of ATF3 mediates the late phase
of ischemic preconditioning.

Brooks AC(1), Guo Y(1), Singh M(1), McCracken J(1), Xuan YT(2), Srivastava S(1), 
Bolli R(1), Bhatnagar A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Cardiology, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY
40202, USA. (2)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. (3)Institute of Molecular Cardiology,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40202, USA. Electronic address:
aruni@louisville.edu.

Ischemic preconditioning (PC) is an adaptive response to transient myocardial
ischemia that protects the heart from subsequent ischemia/reperfusion (I/R)
injury. However, the mechanisms underlying its cardioprotective effects remain
unclear. Myocardium of adult male C57/BL6 mice, preconditioned by 6 cycles of 4
minute coronary occlusion and reperfusion, showed nuclear translocation of ATF3
and ATF6 and PERK phosphorylation 30 min after PC. The abundance of ER proteins, 
ATF3 and ATF4 was increased 24h after PC; however, there was no evidence of IRE-1
activation in WT or ER-stress activated indicator (ERAI) mice expressing
XBP-1-Venus fusion protein. PC-induced nuclear translocation of ATF3 was
attenuated in transgenic mice with cardiac-restricted overexpression of inducible
ATF6. Ischemic PC increased the abundance of inducible nitric oxide synthase,
cyclooxygenase-2, heme oxygenase-1 and aldose reductase to levels similar between
WT and ATF3-null hearts; however, the increase in IL-6 and ICAM-1 was exaggerated
in ATF3-null hearts. Genetic deletion of ATF3 did not increase infarct size in
non-preconditioned hearts but abolished the cardioprotective effects of PC.
Larger infarct size in preconditioned ATF3-null hearts was associated with
greater neutrophil infiltration in the myocardium, but no ATF3-dependent changes 
in the total or relative abundance of inflammatory monocytes were observed.
Ischemic PC activates the unfolded protein response (UPR) and the activation of
ATF3 by ER stress is essential for the cardioprotective effects of late PC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4336548
PMID: 25151953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Oncotarget. 2014 Sep 30;5(18):8569-82.

ATF3 functions as a novel tumor suppressor with prognostic significance in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Xie JJ(1), Xie YM(2), Chen B(3), Pan F(1), Guo JC(1), Zhao Q(3), Shen JH(4), Wu
ZY(5), Wu JY(1), Xu LY(3), Li EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology in High Cancer Incidence Coastal Chaoshan 
Area of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Medical College of Shantou
University, Shantou 515041, P. R. China. Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Medical College of Shantou University, Shantou 515041, P. R. China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology in High Cancer Incidence Coastal Chaoshan 
Area of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Medical College of Shantou
University, Shantou 515041, P. R. China. Department of Experimental Animal
Center, Medical College of Shantou University, Shantou 515041, P. R. China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology in High Cancer Incidence Coastal Chaoshan 
Area of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Medical College of Shantou
University, Shantou 515041, P. R. China. Institute of Oncologic Pathology,
Medical College of Shantou University, Shantou 515041, P. R. China. (4)Department
of Pathology, Shantou Central Hospital, Affiliated Shantou Hospital of Sun
Yat-Sen University, Shantou 515041, P. R. China. (5)Key Laboratory of Molecular
Biology in High Cancer Incidence Coastal Chaoshan Area of Guangdong Higher
Education Institutes, Medical College of Shantou University, Shantou 515041, P.
R. China. Department of Oncologic Surgery, Shantou Central Hospital, Affiliated
Shantou Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Shantou 515041, P. R. China.

ATF3 was a transcription factor involved in the progression of certain cancers.
Here, we sought to explore the expression and biological function of ATF3 in
esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCC). The prognostic significance of ATF3
expression was evaluated in 150 ESCC samples and 21 normal squamous cell
epithelium tissues. Results showed that ATF3 was down-regulated in ESCC lesions
compared with paired non-cancerous tissues and low tumorous ATF3 expression
significantly correlated with shorter overall survival (OS) and disease-free
survival (DFS). Cox regression analysis confirmed that ATF3 expression was an
independent prognostic factor. Experimentally, forced expression of ATF3 led to
decreased growth and invasion properties of ESCC cells in vitro and in vivo,
whereas knockdown of ATF3 did the opposite. Furthermore, ATF3 upregulated the
expression of MDM2 by increasing the nuclear translocation of P53 and formed an
ATF3/MDM2/MMP-2 complex that facilitated MMP-2 degradation, which subsequently
led to inhibition of cell invasion. Finally, we showed that Cisplatin could
restrain the invasion of ESCC cells by inducing the expression of ATF3 via P53
signaling. Combined, our findings highlight a suppressed role for ATF3 in ESCC
and targeting ATF3 might be a potential therapeutic strategy.

PMCID: PMC4226705
PMID: 25149542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 19;9(8):e105168. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105168.
eCollection 2014.

Characterization of the regulatory mechanisms of activating transcription factor 
3 by hypertrophic stimuli in rat cardiomyocytes.

Koivisto E(1), Jurado Acosta A(1), Moilanen AM(2), Tokola H(2), Aro J(1),
Pennanen H(1), Säkkinen H(1), Kaikkonen L(1), Ruskoaho H(3), Rysä J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, 
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Department of
Pathology, Institute of Diagnostics, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Division of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapy, 
Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (4)Department of 
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, 
Finland; School of Pharmacy, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.

AIMS: Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a stress-activated immediate
early gene suggested to have both detrimental and cardioprotective role in the
heart. Here we studied the mechanisms of ATF3 activation by hypertrophic stimuli 
and ATF3 downstream targets in rat cardiomyocytes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: When neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were exposed to
endothelin-1 (ET-1, 100 nM) and mechanical stretching in vitro, maximal increase 
in ATF3 expression occurred at 1 hour. Inhibition of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) by PD98059 decreased ET-1- and stretch-induced
increase of ATF3 protein but not ATF3 mRNA levels, whereas protein kinase A (PKA)
inhibitor H89 attenuated both ATF3 mRNA transcription and protein expression in
response to ET-1 and stretch. To characterize further the regulatory mechanisms
upstream of ATF3, p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling was
investigated using a gain-of-function approach. Adenoviral overexpression of
p38a, but not p38ß, increased ATF3 mRNA and protein levels as well as DNA binding
activity. To investigate the role of ATF3 in hypertrophic process, we
overexpressed ATF3 by adenovirus-mediated gene transfer. In vitro, ATF3 gene
delivery attenuated the mRNA transcription of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), and enhanced nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B)
and Nkx-2.5 DNA binding activities. Reduced PAI-1 expression was also detected in
vivo in adult rat heart by direct intramyocardial adenovirus-mediated ATF3 gene
delivery.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that ATF3 activation by ET-1 and mechanical
stretch is partly mediated through ERK and cAMP-PKA pathways, whereas p38 MAPK
pathway is involved in ATF3 activation exclusively through p38a isoform. ATF3
activation caused induction of modulators of the inflammatory response NF-<U+03BA>B and 
Nkx-2.5, as well as attenuation of pro-fibrotic and pro-inflammatory proteins
IL-6 and PAI-1, suggesting cardioprotective role for ATF3 in the heart.

PMCID: PMC4138181
PMID: 25136830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 26;289(39):27118-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.568717. Epub
2014 Aug 13.

Activating transcription factor 3-mediated chemo-intervention with cancer
chemokines in a noncanonical pathway under endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Park SH(1), Kim J(2), Do KH(2), Park J(2), Oh CG(2), Choi HJ(2), Song BG(2), Lee 
SJ(2), Kim YS(3), Moon Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratory of Mucosal Exposome and Biomodulation, Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Pusan National University School of Medicine, Yangsan
626-870, Korea, the Research Institute for Basic Sciences and Medical Research
Institute, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735, Korea. (2)From the
Laboratory of Mucosal Exposome and Biomodulation, Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Pusan National University School of Medicine, Yangsan 626-870, Korea.
(3)the Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Seoul National
University, Seoul 110-799, Korea, and. (4)From the Laboratory of Mucosal Exposome
and Biomodulation, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Pusan National University
School of Medicine, Yangsan 626-870, Korea, the Research Institute for Basic
Sciences and Medical Research Institute, Pusan National University, Busan
609-735, Korea, the Immunoregulatory Therapeutics Group in Brain Busan 21
Project, Busan 609-735, South Korea moon@pnu.edu.

The cell-protective features of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response
are chronically activated in vigorously growing malignant tumor cells, which
provide cellular growth advantages over the adverse microenvironment including
chemotherapy. As an intervention with ER stress responses in the intestinal
cancer cells, preventive exposure to flavone apigenin potentiated superinduction 
of a regulatory transcription factor, activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3),
which is also known to be an integral player coordinating ER stress
response-related gene expression. ATF3 superinduction was due to increased
turnover of ATF3 transcript via stabilization with HuR protein in the cancer
cells under ER stress. Moreover, enhanced ATF3 caused inhibitory action against
ER stress-induced cancer chemokines that are potent mediators determining the
survival and metastatic potential of epithelial cancer cells. Although enhanced
ATF3 was a negative regulator of the well known proinflammatory transcription
factor NF-<U+03BA>B, blocking of NF-<U+03BA>B signaling did not affect ER stress-induced
chemokine expression. Instead, immediately expressed transcription factor early
growth response protein 1 (EGR-1) was positively involved in cancer chemokine
induction by ER stressors. ER stress-induced EGR-1 and subsequent chemokine
production were repressed by ATF3. Mechanistically, ATF3 directly interacted with
and recruited HDAC1 protein, which led to epigenetic suppression of EGR-1
expression and subsequent chemokine production. Conclusively, superinduced ATF3
attenuated ER stress-induced cancer chemokine expression by epigenetically
interfering with induction of EGR-1, a transcriptional modulator crucial to
cancer chemokine production. Thus, these results suggest a potent therapeutic
intervention of ER stress response-related cancer-favoring events by ATF3.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4175348
PMID: 25122760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Korean Med Sci. 2014 Aug;29(8):1138-44. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2014.29.8.1138. Epub 
2014 Jul 30.

Neuropathic pain model of peripheral neuropathies mediated by mutations of
glycyl-tRNA synthetase.

Lee SJ(1), Seo AJ(1), Park BS(1), Jo HW(1), Huh Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul, Korea.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common inherited motor and sensory 
neuropathy. Previous studies have found that, according to CMT patients,
neuropathic pain is an occasional symptom of CMT. However, neuropathic pain is
not considered to be a significant symptom associated with CMT and, as a result, 
no studies have investigated the pathophysiology underlying neuropathic pain in
this disorder. Thus, the first animal model of neuropathic pain was developed by 
our laboratory using an adenovirus vector system to study neuropathic pain in
CMT. To this end, glycyl-tRNA synthetase (GARS) fusion proteins with a FLAG-tag
(wild type [WT], L129P and G240R mutants) were expressed in spinal cord and
dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons using adenovirus vectors. It is known that
GARS mutants induce GARS axonopathies, including CMT type 2D (CMT2D) and distal
spinal muscular atrophy type V (dSMA-V). Additionally, the morphological
phenotypes of neuropathic pain in this animal model of GARS-induced pain were
assessed using several possible markers of pain (Iba1, pERK1/2) or a marker of
injured neurons (ATF3). These results suggest that this animal model of CMT using
an adenovirus may provide information regarding CMT as well as a useful strategy 
for the treatment of neuropathic pain.

PMCID: PMC4129208
PMID: 25120326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Lung. 2014 Dec;192(6):881-8. doi: 10.1007/s00408-014-9631-4. Epub 2014 Aug 14.

ATF3 and extracellular matrix-related genes associated with the process of
chronic obstructive pulmonary.

Ye J(1), Wen L, Liu DL, Lai GX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Fuzhou General Hospital 
of Nanjing Command, PLA, 156 Xihuan Bei Road, Fuzhou, 350025, China.

Retraction in
    Ye J, Wen L, Liu DL, Lai GX. Lung. 2015 Oct;193(5):871.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major public
health problem worldwide and is proved to be the number three cause of death in
globally. The objective of this study was to explore the molecular mechanism of
the progression of COPD.
METHODS: Using the GSE1650 affymetrix microarray data accessible from Gene
Expression Omnibus database, we first identified the differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) between 18 COPD samples and 12 normal samples, followed by the GO / 
KEGG pathway analysis and gene interaction networks analysis of the DEGs. Our
study identified 134 DEGs which involved in regulation of immune response,
vesicle transport system, growth regulator and extracellular matrix (ECM)-related
pathways.
RESULTS: Gene interaction networks analysis showed that the sub-network involved 
by activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3) was the most significant sub-network 
in gene interaction networks. Furthermore, the investigation of extracellular
matrix-related genes showed that genes like collagen and insulin-like growth
factor binding protein could clearly distinguish the COPD and normal control.
CONCLUSIONS: The genes regulated by ATF3 transcriptional activator as well as
ECM-related genes may play an important role in the process of COPD. Our study
provides a comprehensive bioinformatics analysis of genes and pathways which may 
be involved in the progression of COPD.

PMID: 25119290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Nov;35(11):2393-403. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu163. Epub 2014
Aug 5.

Transcriptional regulation of STAT3 by SPTBN1 and SMAD3 in HCC through
cAMP-response element-binding proteins ATF3 and CREB2.

Lin L(1), Yao Z(1), Bhuvaneshwar K(2), Gusev Y(2), Kallakury B(1), Yang S(1),
Shetty K(1), He AR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Oncology and Innovation Center for Biomedical
Informatics, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC 20007, USA. (2)Innovation Center for Biomedical Informatics,
Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC
20007, USA. (3)Department of Medicine and Oncology and Innovation Center for
Biomedical Informatics, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC 20007, USA aiwu.r.he@gunet.georgetown.edu.

The cytoskeletal protein Spectrin, beta, non-erythrocytic 1 (SPTBN1), an adapter 
protein to SMAD3 in TGF-ß signaling, may prevent hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
development by downregulating the expression of signal transducer and activator
of transcription 3 (STAT3). To elucidate the as yet undefined mechanisms that
regulate this process, we demonstrate that higher levels of STAT3 transcription
are found in livers of heterozygous SPTBN1(+/-) mice as compared to that of wild 
type mice. We also found increased levels of STAT3 mRNA, STAT3 protein, and
p-STAT3 in human HCC cell-lines after knockdown of SPTBN1 or SMAD3, which
promoted cell colony formation. Inhibition of STAT3 overrode the increase in cell
colony formation due to knockdown of SPTBN1 or SMAD3. We also found that
inhibition of SPTBN1 or SMAD3 upregulated STAT3 promoter activity in HCC
cell-lines, which is dependent upon the cAMP-response element (CRE) and
STAT-binding element (SBE) sites of the STAT3 promoter. Mechanistically,
suppression of SPTBN1 and SMAD3 augmented the transcription of STAT3 by
upregulating the CRE-binding proteins ATF3 and CREB2 and augmented the binding of
those proteins to the regions within or upstream of the CRE site of the STAT3
promoter. Finally, in human HCC tissues, SPTBN1 expression correlated negatively 
with expression levels of STAT3, ATF3, and CREB2; SMAD3 expression correlated
negatively with STAT3 expression; and the level of phosphorylated SMAD3 (p-SMAD3)
correlated negatively with ATF3 and CREB2 protein levels. SPTBN1 and SMAD3
collaborate with CRE-binding transcription factors to inhibit STAT3, thereby
preventing HCC development.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25096061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 26;289(39):27065-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.585653. Epub
2014 Jul 29.

Chronic ethanol consumption inhibits glucokinase transcriptional activity by Atf3
and triggers metabolic syndrome in vivo.

Kim JY(1), Hwang JY(2), Lee DY(3), Song EH(1), Park KJ(4), Kim GH(1), Jeong
EA(1), Lee YJ(1), Go MJ(2), Kim DJ(5), Lee SS(6), Kim BJ(2), Song J(1), Roh
GS(7), Gao B(8), Kim WH(9).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Metabolic Disease, Center for Biomedical Science.
(2)Division of Structural and Functional Genomics, Center for Genomic Science,
National Institutes of Health, Osong-eup, Cheongwon-gun, Chungbuk 363-951, Korea.
(3)From the Division of Metabolic Disease, Center for Biomedical Science, the
Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul 136-701, Korea. (4)From the Division of Metabolic Disease,
Center for Biomedical Science, the Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Chungbuk National University School of Medicine, Cheongju 361-763,
Korea, and. (5)the Departments of Psychiatry and. (6)Endocrinology, College of
Medicine, Catholic University, Bucheon 420-743, Korea. (7)the Department of
Anatomy and Neurobiology, Institute of Health Sciences, Gyeongsang National
University, Jinju, Gyeongnam 660-751, Korea. (8)the Laboratory of Liver Diseases,
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.
(9)From the Division of Metabolic Disease, Center for Biomedical Science,
jhkwh@nih.go.kr.

Chronic ethanol consumption induces pancreatic ß-cell dysfunction through
glucokinase (Gck) nitration and down-regulation, leading to impaired glucose
tolerance and insulin resistance, but the underlying mechanism remains largely
unknown. Here, we demonstrate that Gck gene expression and promoter activity in
pancreatic ß-cells were suppressed by chronic ethanol exposure in vivo and in
vitro, whereas expression of activating transcription factor 3 (Atf3) and its
binding to the putative Atf/Creb site (from -287 to -158 bp) on the Gck promoter 
were up-regulated. Furthermore, in vitro ethanol-induced Atf3 inhibited the
positive effect of Pdx-1 on Gck transcriptional regulation, enhanced recruitment 
of Hdac1/2 and histone H3 deacetylation, and subsequently augmented the
interaction of Hdac1/Pdx-1 on the Gck promoter, which were diminished by Atf3
siRNA. In vivo Atf3-silencing reversed ethanol-mediated Gck down-regulation and
ß-cell dysfunction, followed by the amelioration of impaired glucose tolerance
and insulin resistance. Together, we identified that ethanol-induced Atf3 fosters
ß-cell dysfunction via Gck down-regulation and that its loss ameliorates
metabolic syndrome and could be a potential therapeutic target in treating type 2
diabetes. The Atf3 gene is associated with the induction of type 2 diabetes and
alcohol consumption-induced metabolic impairment and thus may be the major
negative regulator for glucose homeostasis.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4175344
PMID: 25074928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2014 Sep;48(3):248-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ejvs.2014.06.038.
Epub 2014 Jul 22.

Activation of the proapoptotic unfolded protein response in plaques of the human 
carotid artery.

Dorweiler B(1), Grechowa I(2), Wallrath A(2), Vahl CF(2), Horke S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular
Surgery, University Medical Center, Johannes-Gutenberg University, Mainz,
Germany. Electronic address: bernhard.dorweiler@unimedizin-mainz.de. (2)Division 
of Vascular Surgery, Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery,
University Medical Center, Johannes-Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.
(3)Center for Thrombosis and Hemostasis, University Medical Center,
Johannes-Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze expression of keystone markers of apoptosis and the
proapoptotic signaling pathway "unfolded protein response" (UPR) in rupture-prone
plaques of the human carotid artery.
METHODS: Plaque specimens were obtained during endarterectomy for high-grade
carotid stenosis, and were formalin-fixed. Ten specimens were identified that
exhibited criteria of advanced rupture-prone atherosclerotic plaques, and
histological and immunohistological analysis of markers of apoptosis (cleaved
Caspase-3, TUNEL) and UPR (KDEL, ATF3, CHOP, CHAC-1) was performed. In addition, 
co-localization of apoptosis and UPR-activation was assessed by
double-immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The mean size of the necrotic core was 44 ± 7% and the mean
minimum/representative thicknesses of the fibrous cap were 129 ± 39 µm/280 ± 60
µm, respectively. Each specimen fulfilled at least two of the criteria for
rupture-prone plaques. Semi-quantitative analysis of immunohistochemistry showed 
a significant increase in cleaved Caspase-3-positive (1923 ± 93 cells/mm(2)) and 
TUNEL-positive cells (1387 ± 66 cells/mm(2)) when compared with control tissue.
Furthermore, expression of UPR-markers KDEL, AFT3 and CHOP was significantly
increased (1175 ± 40 cells/mm(2), 1971 ± 69 cells/mm(2) and 2173 ± 120
cells/mm(2), respectively). Co-localization of UPR-activation with apoptosis was 
confirmed by double-immunohistochemistry, and lesional macrophages were
identified as the primary cell-type involved.
CONCLUSION: For the first time, activation of the proapoptotic signaling pathway 
UPR has been identified in advanced rupture-prone plaques of the human carotid
artery. This provides additional evidence for adding UPR to the potential targets
for controlling plaque apoptosis and thereby preventing plaque
progression/rupture.

Copyright © 2014 European Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25060744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Exp Dermatol. 2014 Oct;23(10):718-24. doi: 10.1111/exd.12515.

Activation of autophagic pathways is related to growth inhibition and senescence 
in cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma.

Choi SR(1), Chung BY, Kim SW, Kim CD, Yun WJ, Lee MW, Choi JH, Chang SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is a very common resectable cancer;
however, cutaneous SCC is highly resistant to chemotherapy if metastasis
develops. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) has been suggested as a marker
of advanced or metastatic cutaneous SCC. Autophagy is one of the most important
mechanisms in cancer biology and commonly induced by in vitro serum starvation.
To investigate the role of autophagy activation in cutaneous SCC, we activated
autophagic pathways by serum starvation in SCC13 and ATF3-overexpressing SCC13
(ATF3-SCC13) cell lines. ATF3-SCC13 cells demonstrated high proliferative
capacity and low p53 and autophagy levels in comparison with control SCC13 cells 
under basal conditions. Intriguingly, autophagic stimulation via serum starvation
resulted in growth inhibition and senescence in both cells, while ATF3-SCC13
cells further demonstrated growth inhibition and senescence. Apoptosis was not
significantly induced by autophagy activation. Taken together, autophagy
activation may be a promising antitumor approach for advanced cutaneous SCC.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25046976  [PubMed - in process]


161. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 15;9(7):e102401. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102401.
eCollection 2014.

Genetic targets of hydrogen sulfide in ventilator-induced lung injury--a
microarray study.

Spassov S(1), Pfeifer D(2), Strosing K(1), Ryter S(3), Hummel M(1), Faller S(1), 
Hoetzel A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, University Medical 
Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (2)Genomics Core Lab, Dept. Hematology,
Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, University Medical Center Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany. (3)Joan and Sanford I. Weill Department of Medicine, New
York-Presbyterian Hospital, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York,
United States of America.

Recently, we have shown that inhalation of hydrogen sulfide (H2S) protects
against ventilator-induced lung injury (VILI). In the present study, we aimed to 
determine the underlying molecular mechanisms of H2S-dependent lung protection by
analyzing gene expression profiles in mice. C57BL/6 mice were subjected to
spontaneous breathing or mechanical ventilation in the absence or presence of H2S
(80 parts per million). Gene expression profiles were determined by microarray,
sqRT-PCR and Western Blot analyses. The association of Atf3 in protection against
VILI was confirmed with a Vivo-Morpholino knockout model. Mechanical ventilation 
caused a significant lung inflammation and damage that was prevented in the
presence of H2S. Mechanical ventilation favoured the expression of genes involved
in inflammation, leukocyte activation and chemotaxis. In contrast, ventilation
with H2S activated genes involved in extracellular matrix remodelling,
angiogenesis, inhibition of apoptosis, and inflammation. Amongst others, H2S
administration induced Atf3, an anti-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic regulator.
Morpholino mediated reduction of Atf3 resulted in elevated lung injury despite
the presence of H2S. In conclusion, lung protection by H2S during mechanical
ventilation is associated with down-regulation of genes related to oxidative
stress and inflammation and up-regulation of anti-apoptotic and anti-inflammatory
genes. Here we show that Atf3 is clearly involved in H2S mediated protection.

PMCID: PMC4099342
PMID: 25025333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 14;9(7):e102027. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102027.
eCollection 2014.

Spinal cord transection-induced allodynia in rats--behavioral, physiopathological
and pharmacological characterization.

M'Dahoma S(1), Bourgoin S(1), Kayser V(1), Barthélémy S(1), Chevarin C(1), Chali 
F(2), Orsal D(2), Hamon M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale, INSERM U894, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France;
Neuropsychopharmacologie, Faculté de Médecine Pierre et Marie Curie, site
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France. (2)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie des Signaux
Intercellulaires, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, CNRS UMR 7101,
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0117868.

In humans, spinal cord lesions induce not only major motor and neurovegetative
deficits but also severe neuropathic pain which is mostly resistant to classical 
analgesics. Better treatments can be expected from precise characterization of
underlying physiopathological mechanisms. This led us to thoroughly investigate
(i) mechanical and thermal sensory alterations, (ii) responses to acute
treatments with drugs having patent or potential anti-allodynic properties and
(iii) the spinal/ganglion expression of transcripts encoding markers of neuronal 
injury, microglia and astrocyte activation in rats that underwent complete spinal
cord transection (SCT). SCT was performed at thoracic T8-T9 level under deep
isoflurane anaesthesia, and SCT rats were examined for up to two months post
surgery. SCT induced a marked hyper-reflexia at hindpaws and strong mechanical
and cold allodynia in a limited (6 cm2) cutaneous territory just rostral to the
lesion site. At this level, pressure threshold value to trigger nocifensive
reactions to locally applied von Frey filaments was 100-fold lower in SCT- versus
sham-operated rats. A marked up-regulation of mRNAs encoding ATF3 (neuronal
injury) and glial activation markers (OX-42, GFAP, P2×4, P2×7, TLR4) was observed
in spinal cord and/or dorsal root ganglia at T6-T11 levels from day 2 up to day
60 post surgery. Transcripts encoding the proinflammatory cytokines IL-1ß, IL-6
and TNF-a were also markedly but differentially up-regulated at T6-T11 levels in 
SCT rats. Acute treatment with ketamine (50 mg/kg i.p.), morphine (3-10 mg/kg
s.c.) and tapentadol (10-20 mg/kg i.p.) significantly increased pressure
threshold to trigger nocifensive reaction in the von Frey filaments test, whereas
amitriptyline, pregabalin, gabapentin and clonazepam were ineffective. Because
all SCT rats developed long lasting, reproducible and stable allodynia, which
could be alleviated by drugs effective in humans, thoracic cord transection might
be a reliable model for testing innovative therapies aimed at reducing spinal
cord lesion-induced central neuropathic pain.

PMCID: PMC4096923
PMID: 25019623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Hand Surg Am. 2014 Sep;39(9):1714-21. doi: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2014.05.026. Epub
2014 Jul 11.

The effects of locally injected triamcinolone on entrapment neuropathy in a rat
chronic constriction injury model.

Shibayama M(1), Kuniyoshi K(2), Suzuki T(2), Yamauchi K(2), Ohtori S(2),
Takahashi K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan. Electronic address: aohigesensei@yahoo.co.jp.
(2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan.

PURPOSE: Patients with idiopathic carpal tunnel syndrome are commonly treated by 
steroid injections into the carpal tunnel. We administered triamcinolone (Tr) to 
chronic constriction injury model rats. We hypothesized that Tr administration
would have both favorable behavioral effects and quantifiable immunohistological 
effects on compressed nerves.
METHODS: Thirty-six male Wister rats were used. For rats to be treated with Tr,
we loosely ligated their right sciatic nerves at 4 sites. Sham rats had their
nerves exposed without ligation. On postoperative day 7, we reexposed their
ligated nerves, after which we delivered either 0.1 mg of Tr (0.1-mg group), 0.5 
mg of Tr (0.5-mg group), or normal saline (saline group) around the nerve fibers 
at the injured sites. Gait was analyzed, and allodynia was assessed with von Frey
hairs, before surgery and on postoperative days 3, 7, 10, 14, and 21. The right
sciatic nerve was resected and stained using hematoxylin-eosin, and the fourth
and fifth lumbar dorsal root ganglia (DRG) were removed and assessed by
immunohistochemistry for calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) on postoperative day 21. In addition,
interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) in sciatic nerve was quantified using enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays.
RESULTS: Mechanical allodynia was significantly decreased in the 0.5-mg group
compared with the saline group. In hematoxylin-eosin sections, the extent of
inflammation-induced edema between the nerve fibers and infiltration of
inflammatory cells was significantly reduced in the 0.5-mg group compared with
the saline group. IL-1ß levels at the sciatic nerve in the 0.5-mg group were
significantly lower than those in the saline group.
CONCLUSIONS: Tr-treated chronic constriction injury rats exhibited significant
alleviation of sensory disturbance, edema, inflammation, and pain-related peptide
upregulation. These phenomena suggest the validity of Tr administration as a
treatment affecting the nerve itself.
TYPE OF STUDY/LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Therapeutic I.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Surgery of the Hand. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25017582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. BMC Syst Biol. 2014 Jul 4;8:80. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-8-80.

A systems biology analysis of brain microvascular endothelial cell lipotoxicity.

Aung HH, Tsoukalas A, Rutledge JC, Tagkopoulos I(1).

Author information: 
(1)UC Davis Genome Center, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
iliast@ucdavis.edu.

BACKGROUND: Neurovascular inflammation is associated with a number of
neurological diseases including vascular dementia and Alzheimer's disease, which 
are increasingly important causes of morbidity and mortality around the world.
Lipotoxicity is a metabolic disorder that results from accumulation of lipids,
particularly fatty acids, in non-adipose tissue leading to cellular dysfunction, 
lipid droplet formation, and cell death.
RESULTS: Our studies indicate for the first time that the neurovascular
circulation also can manifest lipotoxicity, which could have major effects on
cognitive function. The penetration of integrative systems biology approaches is 
limited in this area of research, which reduces our capacity to gain an objective
insight into the signal transduction and regulation dynamics at a systems level. 
To address this question, we treated human microvascular endothelial cells with
triglyceride-rich lipoprotein (TGRL) lipolysis products and then we used
genome-wide transcriptional profiling to obtain transcript abundances over four
conditions. We then identified regulatory genes and their targets that have been 
differentially expressed through analysis of the datasets with various
statistical methods. We created a functional gene network by exploiting
co-expression observations through a guilt-by-association assumption.
Concomitantly, we used various network inference algorithms to identify putative 
regulatory interactions and we integrated all predictions to construct a
consensus gene regulatory network that is TGRL lipolysis product specific.
CONCLUSION: System biology analysis has led to the validation of putative
lipid-related targets and the discovery of several genes that may be implicated
in lipotoxic-related brain microvascular endothelial cell responses. Here, we
report that activating transcription factors 3 (ATF3) is a principal regulator of
TGRL lipolysis products-induced gene expression in human brain microvascular
endothelial cell.

PMCID: PMC4112729
PMID: 24993133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Jul 3;5:e1316. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.281.

Usp9x- and Noxa-mediated Mcl-1 downregulation contributes to pemetrexed-induced
apoptosis in human non-small-cell lung cancer cells.

Yan J(1), Zhong N(2), Liu G(1), Chen K(3), Liu X(1), Su L(1), Singhal S(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan, China. (2)School of
Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, China. (3)Central Hospital of Xinwen Mining
Group, Xintai, China. (4)Department of Surgery, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Pemetrexed, a folate antimetabolite, combined with cisplatin is used as a
first-line therapy for malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) and locally advanced 
or metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Pemetrexed arrests cell cycle
by inhibiting three enzymes in purine and pyrimidine synthesis that are necessary
for DNA synthesis. Pemetrexed also promotes apoptosis in target cells, but little
is known about its mechanism in cancer cells. We have previously shown that
pemetrexed can result in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and it can lead to
downstream apoptosis. In this study, we further elucidate this mechanism. Our
data show that pemetrexed increases Noxa expression through activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3)
upregulation. Furthermore, pemetrexed induces apoptosis by activating the
Noxa-Usp9x-Mcl-1 pathway. Inhibition of Noxa by small interfering RNA (siRNA)
promotes Usp9x (ubiquitin-specific peptidase 9, X-linked) expression. Moreover,
downregulation of the deubiquitinase Usp9x by pemetrexed results in downstream
reduction of myeloid cell leukemia 1 (Mcl-1) expression. Mechanistically, Noxa
upregulation likely reduces the availability of Usp9x to Mcl-1, thereby promoting
its ubiquitination and degradation, leading to the apoptosis of neoplastic cells.
Thus, our findings demonstrate that Noxa-Usp9x-Mcl-1 axis may contribute to
pemetrexed-induced apoptosis in human lung cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4123075
PMID: 24991768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Immunotoxicol. 2015 Jul-Sep;12(3):206-16. doi: 10.3109/1547691X.2014.925995.
Epub 2014 Jul 2.

Characterization of the modes of action of deoxynivalenol (DON) in the human
Jurkat T-cell line.

Katika MR(1), Hendriksen PJ, van Loveren H, A C M Peijnenburg A.

Author information: 
(1)RIKILT-Institute of Food Safety, Wageningen University and Research Centre ,
Wageningen , the Netherlands .

Deoxynivalenol (DON) is one of the most abundant mycotoxins worldwide and mostly 
detected in cereals and grains. As such, DON poses a risk for many adverse health
effects to human and animals. In particular, immune cells are very sensitive to
DON, with the initiating step leading to toxicity being a binding to the
eukaryotic 60S ribosomal subunit and induction of ribotoxic stress. The present
study aimed to: (1) extend insight into the mechanism of action (MOA) of DON in
immune cells; and (2) understand why immune cells are more sensitive to DON than 
most other cell types. Previously published microarray studies have described the
effects of DON on immune cells. To build upon these findings, here,
immunocytological and biochemical studies were performed using human T-lymphocyte
Jurkat cells that were exposed for 3 h to 0.5 µM DON. Induction of ER stress by
DON was confirmed by immunocytology demonstrating increased protein expression of
two major ER stress markers ATF3 and DDIT3. T-cell activation was confirmed by
induction of phosphorylation of protein kinases JNK and AKT, activation of NF-<U+03BA>B 
(p65), and increased expression of NFAT target gene NUR77; each of these are
known inducers of the T-cell activation response. Induction of an oxidative
stress response was also confirmed by monitoring the nuclear translocation of
major oxidative stress markers NRF2 and KEAP1, as well as by changes (i.e.
decreases) in cell levels of reduced glutathione. Lastly, this study showed that 
DON induced cleavage of caspase-3, an event known to mediate apoptosis. Taken
together, these results allowed us to formulate a potential mechanism of action
of DON in immune cells, i.e. binding to eukaryotic 60S ribosomal
subunit<U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>ribotoxic stress<U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>ER stress<U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>calcium release from the ER into
cytoplasm<U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>T-cell activation and oxidative stress<U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>apoptosis. It is proposed
that immune cells are more sensitive to DON than other cell types due to the
induction of a T-cell activation response by increased intracellular calcium
levels.

PMID: 24988111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Oncotarget. 2014 Jul 30;5(14):5510-22.

Sustained conditional knockdown reveals intracellular bone sialoprotein as
essential for breast cancer skeletal metastasis.

Kovacheva M(1), Zepp M(1), Berger SM(2), Berger MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Toxicology and Chemotherapy Unit,
Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Central Institute of Mental Health, Department of
Molecular Biology, Mannheim, Germany.

Increased bone sialoprotein (BSP) serum levels are related to breast cancer
skeletal metastasis, but their relevance is unknown. We elucidated novel
intracellular BSP functions by a conditional knockdown of BSP. Conditional
MDA-MB-231 subclones were equipped with a novel gene expression cassette
containing a tet-reg-ulated miRNA providing knockdown of BSP production. These
clones were used to assess the effect of BSP on morphology, proliferation,
migration, colony formation and gene expression in vitro, and on soft tissue and 
osteolytic le-sions in a xenograft model by three imaging methods. BSP knockdown 
caused significant anti-proliferative, anti-migratory and anti-clonogenic effects
in vitro (p<0.001). In vivo, significant de-creases of soft tissue and osteolytic
lesions (p<0.03) were recorded after 3 weeks of miRNA treatment, leading to
complete remission within 6 weeks. Microarray data revealed that 0.3% of genes
were modulated in response to BSP knockdown. Upregulated genes included the
endoplasmic reticulum stress genes ATF3 and DDIT3, the tumor suppressor gene
EGR1, ID2 (related to breast epithelial differentiation), c-FOS and SERPINB2,
whereas the metastasis associated genes CD44 and IL11 were downregulated. Also,
activation of apoptotic pathways was demonstrated. These results implicate that
intracellular BSP is essential for breast cancer skeletal metastasis and a target
for treating these lesions.

PMCID: PMC4170606
PMID: 24980816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 15;289(33):23246-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.577908. Epub
2014 Jun 27.

Metformin suppresses lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammatory response in
murine macrophages via activating transcription factor-3 (ATF-3) induction.

Kim J(1), Kwak HJ(1), Cha JY(2), Jeong YS(2), Rhee SD(3), Kim KR(3), Cheon HG(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences and.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Lee Gil Ya Cancer and Diabetes Institute,
Gachon University, Incheon 406-799, Republic of Korea. (3)Bioorganic Science
Division, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology, Taejeon, 305-343,
Republic of Korea, and. (4)From the Department of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical
Sciences and Gachon Medical Research Institute, Gil Medical Center, Incheon
405-760, Republic of Korea hgcheon@gachon.ac.kr.

Metformin, a well known antidiabetic agent that improves peripheral insulin
sensitivity, also elicits anti-inflammatory actions, but its mechanism is
unclear. Here, we investigated the mechanism responsible for the
anti-inflammatory effect of metformin action in lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-stimulated murine macrophages. Metformin inhibited LPS-induced production
of tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in a
concentration-dependent manner and in parallel induction of activating
transcription factor-3 (ATF-3), a transcription factor and member of the
cAMP-responsive element-binding protein family. ATF-3 knockdown abolished the
inhibitory effects of metformin on LPS-induced proinflammatory cytokine
production accompanied with reversal of metformin-induced suppression of
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation. Conversely,
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) phosphorylation and NF-<U+03BA>B suppression by
metformin were unaffected by ATF-3 knockdown. ChIP-PCR analysis revealed that
LPS-induced NF-<U+03BA>B enrichments on the promoters of IL-6 and TNF-a were replaced by
ATF-3 upon metformin treatment. AMPK knockdown blunted all the effects of
metformin (ATF-3 induction, proinflammatory cytokine inhibition, and MAPK
inactivation), suggesting that AMPK activation by metformin is required for and
precedes ATF-3 induction. Oral administration of metformin to either mice with
LPS-induced endotoxemia or ob/ob mice lowered the plasma and tissue levels of
TNF-a and IL-6 and increased ATF-3 expression in spleen and lungs. These results 
suggest that metformin exhibits anti-inflammatory action in macrophages at least 
in part via pathways involving AMPK activation and ATF-3 induction.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4132821
PMID: 24973221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Int J Oncol. 2014 Sep;45(3):995-1010. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2513. Epub 2014 Jun
23.

Enhanced anti-colorectal cancer effects of carfilzomib combined with CPT-11 via
downregulation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B in vitro and in vivo.

Tang W(1), Su G(1), Li J(1), Liao J(1), Chen S(2), Huang C(2), Liu F(2), Chen
Q(1), Ye Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Education, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, P.R. China.
(2)Laboratory of Immuno-Oncology, Fujian Provincial Cancer Hospital, Fuzhou, P.R.
China.

Upregulation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) in colorectal carcinoma (CRC)
accelerates tumor growth, whereas, irinotecan (CPT-11)-induced NF-<U+03BA>B activation
reduces chemosensitivity and weakens the anti-colorectal cancer function itself, 
while proteasome inhibitors can inhibit NF-<U+03BA>B and improve the effect of
chemotherapy. Carfilzomib (CFZ) is a novel proteasome inhibitor that has been
recently approved by the FDA and is in clinical use for the treatment of multiple
myeloma, but little is known about its activity against CRC. The aim of the
present study was to explore whether CFZ alone or in combination with CPT-11 is
effective in CRC treatment. We evaluated the novel therapeutic ability and
mechanism of action of CFZ in CRC in vitro and in vivo. SW620 cells were
incubated with CFZ alone or in combination with CPT-11. Cell proliferation was
assessed by WST-1 and clonogenic assays, the cytotoxic interaction was assessed
with a combination index (CI). Cell cycle progression was analysed with flow
cytometry. Cell apoptosis was evaluated by detecting the Annexin V/propidium
iodide (PI) ratio, caspase 3 and CD95 expression, and with TUNEL staining. Cell
migration and invasion was determined with a wound-healing assay and a Transwell 
matrix penetration assay. A CRC xenograft model was established to monitor tumor 
growth. EMSA was used to analyse NF-<U+03BA>B activation and western blot analysis was
used to detect the protein levels of related signaling factors. CFZ significantly
inhibited the growth of SW620 cells, and had synergistic inhibitory effects with 
CPT-11 on survival and colony formation; possibly by inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B
activation, MEK/ERK and PI3K/AKT pathway factor dephosphorylation and survivin
downregulation. Co-administration of CFZ and CPT-11 induced G2/M arrest,
increased p21WAF1/CIP, and decreased mutant p53 and cdc25c expression. Induction 
of apoptosis was accompanied by marked increases in PARP cleavage, caspase 3
activation, an increase of CD95 and p-p38, and ATF3 activation. Combination
treatment lowered the invasive and migration ability of SW620 cells, reduced MMP 
and increased TIMP protein expression. Finally, co-administration of CFZ and
CPT-11 suppressed tumor growth and increased apoptosis compared with single-agent
treatment in SW620 xenograft models correlated with NF-<U+03BA>B downregulation.
Carfilzomib alone or in combination with CPT-11 is effective against colorectal
cancer through inhibition of multiple mechanisms related to NF-<U+03BA>B, and could be a
potential novel therapy for CRC.

PMCID: PMC4121410
PMID: 24968890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2014 Jun 25;14:200. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-14-200.

Anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer activity of mulberry (Morus alba L.) root bark.

Eo HJ, Park JH, Park GH, Lee MH, Lee JR, Koo JS, Jeong JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioresource Sciences, Andong National University, Andong 760749,
South Korea. jjb0403@anu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Root bark of mulberry (Morus alba L.) has been used in herbal
medicine as anti-phlogistic, liver protective, kidney protective, hypotensive,
diuretic, anti-cough and analgesic agent. However, the anti-cancer activity and
the potential anti-cancer mechanisms of mulberry root bark have not been
elucidated. We performed in vitro study to investigate whether mulberry root bark
extract (MRBE) shows anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer activity.
METHODS: In anti-inflammatory activity, NO was measured using the griess method. 
iNOS and proteins regulating NF-<U+03BA>B and ERK1/2 signaling were analyzed by Western 
blot. In anti-cancer activity, cell growth was measured by MTT assay. Cleaved
PARP, ATF3 and cyclin D1 were analyzed by Western blot.
RESULTS: In anti-inflammatory effect, MRBE blocked NO production via suppressing 
iNOS over-expression in LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells. In addition, MRBE
inhibited NF-<U+03BA>B activation through p65 nuclear translocation via blocking I<U+03BA>B-a
degradation and ERK1/2 activation via its hyper-phosphorylation. In anti-cancer
activity, MRBE deos-dependently induced cell growth arrest and apoptosis in human
colorectal cancer cells, SW480. MRBE treatment to SW480 cells activated ATF3
expression and down-regulated cyclin D1 level. We also observed that MRBE-induced
ATF3 expression was dependent on ROS and GSK3ß. Moreover, MRBE-induced cyclin D1 
down-regulation was mediated from cyclin D1 proteasomal degradation, which was
dependent on ROS.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that mulberry root bark exerts
anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer activity.

PMCID: PMC4074313
PMID: 24962785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Biochimie. 2014 Sep;104:36-49. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2014.05.005. Epub 2014 Jun
18.

DNMT3L interacts with transcription factors to target DNMT3L/DNMT3B to specific
DNA sequences: role of the DNMT3L/DNMT3B/p65-NF<U+03BA>B complex in the (de-)methylation
of TRAF1.

Pacaud R(1), Sery Q(1), Oliver L(1), Vallette FM(2), Tost J(3), Cartron PF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie Nantes-Angers, INSERM, U892, Equipe
Apoptose et Progression Tumorale, 8 Quai Moncousu, BP7021, 44007 Nantes, France; 
Université de Nantes, Faculté de Médecine, Département de Recherche en
Cancérologie, IFR26, F-44000 Nantes, France. (2)Centre de Recherche en
Cancérologie Nantes-Angers, INSERM, U892, Equipe Apoptose et Progression
Tumorale, 8 Quai Moncousu, BP7021, 44007 Nantes, France; Université de Nantes,
Faculté de Médecine, Département de Recherche en Cancérologie, IFR26, F-44000
Nantes, France; Institut de Cancérologie de l'Ouest - LaBCT, René Gauducheau,
Boulevard J. Monod, F-44805 St Herblain, France. (3)Laboratory for Epigenetics
and Environnement, Centre National de Génotypage, CEA - Institut de Génomique,
F-91000 Evry, France. (4)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie Nantes-Angers,
INSERM, U892, Equipe Apoptose et Progression Tumorale, 8 Quai Moncousu, BP7021,
44007 Nantes, France; Université de Nantes, Faculté de Médecine, Département de
Recherche en Cancérologie, IFR26, F-44000 Nantes, France; Institut de
Cancérologie de l'Ouest - LaBCT, René Gauducheau, Boulevard J. Monod, F-44805 St 
Herblain, France; Membre du réseau Epigénétique du Cancéropole Grand Ouest,
France. Electronic address: pierre-francois.cartron@univ-nantes.fr.

DNMT3L i.e. DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase 3-like protein, is devoid of
cytosine methyltransferase activity, despite clear homology to DNMT3A and DNMT3B,
due to the mutation of key catalytic residues. However, DNMT3L participates in de
novo methylation reactions through its direct interaction with DNMT3A and DNMT3B.
In the present study, we investigated if DNMT3L interacts also directly with
transcription factors (TFs). Using TF arrays, we identified 73 TFs that
interacted with DNMT3L, 13 of which (ASH2L, ATF1, ATF3, BLZF1, CDX2, CERM, E2F3, 
E2F4, GCNF, GTF2I, GTF3C5, NFkB-p65 and RXRa) interacted only with DNMT3L, but
not with DNMT3A/B. By focusing on the interaction with NFkB-p65, we demonstrate
that DNMT3L forms a complex with DNMT3B and NFkB-p65 and that this complex is
required for the control of DNA methylation at the TRAF1 promoter in the T98G
glioma cell line. In addition, our experiments describe the DNA methylation at
TRAF1 as being dynamic with a demethylation phase involving TET3. Thus, our data 
suggests that DNMT3L can address DNMT3A/B to specific sites by directly
interacting with TFs that do not directly interact with DNMT3A/B. In summary, our
data provide a new avenue for the direction of site-specific de novo DNA
methylation catalyzed by DNMT3A/B.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24952347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Infect Dis. 2014 Dec 1;210(11):1745-54. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu352. Epub 2014
Jun 20.

ATF3 confers resistance to pneumococcal infection through positive regulation of 
cytokine production.

Nguyen CT(1), Kim EH(1), Luong TT(1), Pyo S(1), Rhee DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Su-Won, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3) is known as a suppressor of 
cytokine production after exposure to lipopolysaccharide or during gram-negative 
bacterial infection. However, the mechanism by which ATF3 regulates innate
immunity against gram-positive bacterial infection, particularly Streptococcus
pneumoniae, remains unknown.
METHODS: The wild-type and ATF3 knock-out (KO) mice were infected intranasally
(i.n) or intraperitoneally with S. pneumoniae, and bacterial colonization or
survival rate was determined. Pneumococcal pneumonia was induced by i.n
infection, and ATF3 level was determined by Western blot. ATF3 KO cells or ATF3
siRNA transfection were used to determine expression of ATF3 downstream genes.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was used to examine cytokines levels.
RESULTS: ATF3 was highly expressed in various cell lines in vitro and in many
organs in vivo. Pneumolysin was a novel inducer of ATF3. Pneumococcal infection
induced ATF3, which subsequently stimulated production of cytokines (tumor
necrosis factor [TNF]-a, interleukin [IL]-1ß, and interferon [IFN]-<U+03B3>).
ATF3-mediated cytokine induction protected the host from pneumococcal infection. 
In the pneumonia infection model, the bacterial clearance of wild-type mice was
more efficient than those of ATF3 KO mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, we can conclude that ATF3 regulates innate immunity 
positively upon pneumococcus infection by enhancing TNF-a, IL-1ß, and IFN-<U+03B3>
expression and modulating bacterial clearance.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24951825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Int J Cancer. 2015 Feb 1;136(3):678-87. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29035. Epub 2014 Jun 27.

HLA-A SNPs and amino acid variants are associated with nasopharyngeal carcinoma
in Malaysian Chinese.

Chin YM(1), Mushiroda T, Takahashi A, Kubo M, Krishnan G, Yap LF, Teo SH, Lim PV,
Yap YY, Pua KC, Kamatani N, Nakamura Y, Sam CK, Khoo AS; Malaysian NPC Study
Group, Ng CC.

Collaborators: Pua KC, Subathra S, Punithavati N, Tan BS, Ee YS, Ong LM, Hamid
RA, Goh M, Quah JC, Lim J, Yap YY, Dipak BD, Deepak R, Lau FN, Kam PV, Shri Devi 
S, Ong CA, Lum CL, Ahmad NA, Halimuddin S, Somasundran M, Kam A, Wodjin M,
Subramaniam SK, Tiong TS, Tan TY, Sim UH, Tharumalingam TW, Norlida D, Zulkarnaen
M, Lai WH, Gopala Krishnan G, Ng CC, Bustam AZ, Marniza S, Shahfinaz P, Hashim O,
Shamshinder S, Prepageran N, Looi LM, Rahmat O, Amin J, Maznan J, Hassan S,
Biswal B, Teo SH, Yap LF, Khoo AS, Munirah A, Subasri A, Tan LP, Kumaran NM,
Nurul Ashikin MS, Nursyazwani MS, Norhasimah B, Sasela Devi R, Shri Devi S, Koh
CY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for International Alliance, RIKEN Center for Genomic Medicine,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan; Institute of Biological
Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, 50603,
Malaysia.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) arises from the mucosal epithelium of the
nasopharynx and is constantly associated with Epstein-Barr virus type 1 (EBV-1)
infection. We carried out a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 575,247
autosomal SNPs in 184 NPC patients and 236 healthy controls of Malaysian Chinese 
ethnicity. Potential association signals were replicated in a separate cohort of 
260 NPC patients and 245 healthy controls. We confirmed the association of HLA-A 
to NPC with the strongest signal detected in rs3869062 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.73 × 10(-9)). HLA-A
fine mapping revealed associations in the amino acid variants as well as its
corresponding SNPs in the antigen peptide binding groove
(p(HLA-A-aa-site-99)<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.79 × 10(-8), p(rs1136697)<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.79 × 10(-8)) and T-cell
receptor binding site (p(HLA-A-aa-site-145)<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.41 × 10(-4), p(rs1059520)<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.41 
× 10(-4)) of the HLA-A. We also detected strong association signals in the 5'-UTR
region with predicted active promoter states (p(rs41545520)<U+2009>=<U+2009>7.91 × 10(-8)). SNP
rs41545520 is a potential binding site for repressor ATF3, with increased binding
affinity for rs41545520-G correlated with reduced HLA-A expression. Multivariate 
logistic regression diminished the effects of HLA-A amino acid variants and SNPs,
indicating a correlation with the effects of HLA-A*11:01, and to a lesser extent 
HLA-A*02:07. We report the strong genetic influence of HLA-A on NPC
susceptibility in the Malaysian Chinese.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24947555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Mol Hum Reprod. 2014 Sep;20(9):885-904. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gau046. Epub 2014 Jun
18.

Genome-wide hypermethylation coupled with promoter hypomethylation in the
chorioamniotic membranes of early onset pre-eclampsia.

Ching T(1), Song MA(2), Tiirikainen M(3), Molnar J(3), Berry M(4), Towner D(5),
Garmire LX(6).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Bioscience and Bioengineering Graduate Program, University of Hawaii
at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA Epidemiology Program, University of Hawaii
Cancer Center, Honolulu, HI 96813, USA. (2)Molecular Bioscience and
Bioengineering Graduate Program, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI
96822, USA Genomics Shared Resources Core, University of Hawaii Cancer Center,
Honolulu, HI 96813, USA. (3)Genomics Shared Resources Core, University of Hawaii 
Cancer Center, Honolulu, HI 96813, USA. (4)Department of Cell and Molecular
Biology, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI
96813, USA mberry@hawaii.edu towner@hawaii.edu lgarmire@cc.hawaii.edu.
(5)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Women's Health, John A. Burns School 
of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96826, USA mberry@hawaii.edu
towner@hawaii.edu lgarmire@cc.hawaii.edu. (6)Molecular Bioscience and
Bioengineering Graduate Program, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI
96822, USA Epidemiology Program, University of Hawaii Cancer Center, Honolulu, HI
96813, USA mberry@hawaii.edu towner@hawaii.edu lgarmire@cc.hawaii.edu.

Pre-eclampsia is the leading cause of fetal and maternal morbidity and mortality.
Early onset pre-eclampsia (EOPE) is a disorder that has severe maternal and fetal
outcomes, whilst its etiology is poorly understood. We hypothesize that
epigenetics plays an important role to mediate the development of EOPE and
conducted a case-control study to compare the genome-wide methylome difference
between chorioamniotic membranes from 30 EOPE and 17 full-term pregnancies using 
the Infinium Human Methylation 450 BeadChip arrays. Bioinformatics analysis
tested differential methylation (DM) at CpG site level, gene level, and pathway
and network level. A striking genome-wide hypermethylation pattern coupled with
hypomethylation in promoters was observed. Out of 385 184 CpG sites, 9995 showed 
DM (2.6%). Of those DM sites, 91.9% showed hypermethylation (9186 of 9995). Over 
900 genes had DM associated with promoters. Promoter-based DM analysis revealed
that genes in canonical cancer-related pathways such as Rac, Ras, PI3K/Akt, NF<U+03BA>B 
and ErBB4 were enriched, and represented biological functional alterations that
involve cell cycle, apoptosis, cancer signaling and inflammation. A group of
genes previously found to be up-regulated in pre-eclampsia, including GRB2, ATF3,
NFKB2, as well as genes in proteasome subunits (PSMA1, PMSE1, PSMD1 and PMSD8),
harbored hypomethylated promoters. Contrarily, a cluster of microRNAs, including 
mir-519a1, mir-301a, mir-487a, mir-185, mir-329, mir-194, mir-376a1, mir-486 and 
mir-744 were all hypermethylated in their promoters in the EOPE samples. These
findings collectively reveal new avenues of research regarding the vast
epigenetic modifications in EOPE.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4131767
PMID: 24944161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 1;289(31):21544-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.558890. Epub 2014
Jun 17.

Role of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-induced sensitization of p53-deficient human colon cancer cells to tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)-mediated
apoptosis through up-regulation of death receptor 5 (DR5) by zerumbone and
celecoxib.

Edagawa M(1), Kawauchi J(2), Hirata M(2), Goshima H(2), Inoue M(2), Okamoto T(3),
Murakami A(4), Maehara Y(3), Kitajima S(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, 113-8510, Japan, the Department of Surgery 
and Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
812-8582, Japan, and. (2)From the Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical
Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, 113-8510, Japan. 
(3)the Department of Surgery and Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan, and. (4)the Division of Food Science
and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8502, Japan. (5)From the Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research
Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, 113-8510, Japan,
kita.bgen@mri.tmd.ac.jp.

Death receptor 5 (DR5) is a death domain-containing transmembrane receptor that
triggers cell death upon binding to its ligand, TNF-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand (TRAIL), and a combination of TRAIL and agents that increase the
expression of DR5 is expected to be a novel anticancer therapy. In this report,
we demonstrate that the stress response gene ATF3 is required for endoplasmic
reticulum stress-mediated DR5 induction upon zerumbone (ZER) and celecoxib (CCB) 
in human p53-deficient colorectal cancer cells. Both agents activated PERK-eIF2a 
kinases and induced the expression of activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4)-CCAAT enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) homologous protein, which were
remarkably suppressed by reactive oxygen species scavengers. In the absence of
ATF3, the induction of DR5 mRNA and protein was abrogated significantly, and this
was associated with reduced cell death by cotreatment of TRAIL with ZER or CCB.
By contrast, exogenous expression of ATF3 caused a more rapid and elevated
expression of DR5, resulting in enhanced sensitivity to apoptotic cell death by
TRAIL/ZER or TRAIL/CCB. A reporter assay demonstrated that at least two ATF/cAMP 
response element motifs as well as C/EBP homologous protein motif at the proximal
region of the human DR5 gene promoter were required for ZER-induced DR5 gene
transcription. Taken together, our results provide novel insights into the role
of ATF3 as an essential transcription factor for p53-independent DR5 induction
upon both ZER and CCB treatment, and this may be a useful biomarker for
TRAIL-based anticancer therapy.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4118115
PMID: 24939851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014 Sep 1;279(2):211-9. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2014.06.001.
Epub 2014 Jun 10.

Regulation of gene expression by tobacco product preparations in cultured human
dermal fibroblasts.

Malpass GE(1), Arimilli S(2), Prasad GL(3), Howlett AC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Wake Forest University Health
Sciences, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. Electronic address:
gloria.malpass@gmail.com. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Wake
Forest University Health Sciences, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. Electronic
address: sarimill@wakehealth.edu. (3)R&D Department, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
Company, Winston-Salem, NC 27102, USA. Electronic address: prasadg@rjrt.com.
(4)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Wake Forest University Health
Sciences, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. Electronic address:
ahowlett@wakehealth.edu.

Skin fibroblasts comprise the first barrier of defense against wounds, and
tobacco products directly contact the oral cavity. Cultured human dermal
fibroblasts were exposed to smokeless tobacco extract (STE), total particulate
matter (TPM) from tobacco smoke, or nicotine at concentrations comparable to
those found in these extracts for 1h or 5h. Differences were identified in
pathway-specific genes between treatments and vehicle using qRT-PCR. At 1h, IL1a 
was suppressed significantly by TPM and less significantly by STE. Neither FOS
nor JUN was suppressed at 1h by tobacco products. IL8, TNFa, VCAM1, and NF<U+03BA>B1
were suppressed after 5h with STE, whereas only TNFa and NF<U+03BA>B1 were suppressed by
TPM. At 1h with TPM, secreted levels of IL10 and TNFa were increased. Potentially
confounding effects of nicotine were exemplified by genes such as ATF3 (5h),
which was increased by nicotine but suppressed by other components of STE. Within
2h, TPM stimulated nitric oxide production, and both STE and TPM increased
reactive oxygen species. The biological significance of these findings and
utilization of the gene expression changes reported herein regarding effects of
the tobacco product preparations on dermal fibroblasts will require additional
research.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4537293
PMID: 24927667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;53:361-71. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.06.002.
Epub 2014 Jun 6.

Resveratrol increases anti-aging Klotho gene expression via the activating
transcription factor 3/c-Jun complex-mediated signaling pathway.

Hsu SC(1), Huang SM(2), Chen A(3), Sun CY(4), Lin SH(5), Chen JS(5), Liu ST(6),
Hsu YJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, National Defense Medical Center,
Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, National Defense
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Biochemistry, National Defense
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Pathology,
Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan; School 
of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (5)Graduate Institute of
Medical Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan; Division of
Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital, National
Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Department of Biochemistry, National
Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Graduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan; Division of
Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital, National
Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
yujuei@mail2000.com.tw.

The Klotho gene functions as an aging suppressor gene. Evidence from animal
models suggests that induction of Klotho expression may be a potential treatment 
for age-associated diseases. However, the molecular mechanism involved in
regulating renal Klotho gene expression remains unclear. In this study, we
determined that resveratrol, a natural polyphenol, induced renal Klotho
expression both in vivo and in vitro. In the mouse kidney, resveratrol
administration markedly increased both Klotho mRNA and protein expression. In
resveratrol-treated NRK-52E cells, increased Klotho expression was accompanied by
the upregulation and nuclear translocation of activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) and c-Jun. ATF3 or c-Jun overexpression enhanced the transcriptional
activation of Klotho. Conversely, resveratrol-induced Klotho expression was
attenuated in the presence of dominant-negative ATF3 or c-Jun.
Coimmunoprecipitation and a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that
ATF3 physically interacted with c-Jun and that the ATF3/c-Jun complex directly
bound to the Klotho promoter through ATF3- and AP-1-binding elements. c-Jun
cotransfection augmented the effects of ATF3 on Klotho transcription in vitro.
Although Sirtuin 1 mRNA expression was induced by resveratrol and involved in
regulating Klotho mRNA expression, it was not the primary cause for the
aforementioned ATF3/c-Jun pathway. In summary, resveratrol enhances the renal
expression of the anti-aging Klotho gene, and the transcriptional factors ATF3
and c-Jun functionally interact and coordinately regulate the
resveratrol-mediated transcriptional activation of Klotho.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24911970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Pathol Res Pract. 2014 Aug;210(8):477-81. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2014.03.013. Epub
2014 Apr 18.

Low expression of activating transcription factor 3 in human hepatocellular
carcinoma and its clinicopathological significance.

Xiaoyan L(1), Shengbing Z(1), Yu Z(1), Lin Z(1), Chengjie L(2), Jingfeng L(3),
Aimin H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Institute of Oncology, Fujian Medical University, 
Fuzhou 350004, PR China. (2)Liver Center, the First Affiliated Hospital of Fujian
Medical University, Fuzhou 350005, PR China. (3)Liver Center, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou 350005, PR China.
Electronic address: drjingfeng@126.com. (4)Department of Pathology and Institute 
of Oncology, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou 350004, PR China. Electronic
address: draimin@163.com.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: To explore the expression and role of activating
transcription factor 3 in human hepatocellular carcinoma.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry, Western blot assay and Real-time PCR were used to 
evaluate activating transcription factor 3 protein and gene level in HCC clinical
samples.
RESULTS: Activating transcription factor 3 expression is lowest in HCC, and the
protein level is lower in patients with capsule invasion, while there is no
association with other main clinical pathological features.
CONCLUSIONS: Low expression of ATF3 may function as a tumor suppressor during
human hepatocellular oncogenesis and targeting ATF3 pathway might be beneficial
for anti-HCC therapy.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier GmbH.

PMID: 24906227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Nat Med. 2014 Jul;20(7):715-24. doi: 10.1038/nm.3580. Epub 2014 Jun 1.

Increased gene copy number of VAMP7 disrupts human male urogenital development
through altered estrogen action.

Tannour-Louet M(1), Han S(2), Louet JF(3), Zhang B(4), Romero K(5), Addai J(5),
Sahin A(5), Cheung SW(6), Lamb DJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] Scott Department of Urology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas,
USA. [2] Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS, Sophia
Antipolis, France. (2)1] Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. [2]. (3)1] Department of Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. [2] Centre
Méditerranéen de Médecine Moléculaire, INSERM U1065, Nice, France. [3].
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA. (5)Scott Department of Urology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA. (6)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. (7)1] Scott Department of Urology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. [2] Department of Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. [3] Center for
Reproductive Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

Despite the fact that genitourinary defects are among the most common birth
defects in newborns, little is known about their etiology. Here we analyzed
children born with congenital genitourinary tract masculinization disorders by
array-comparative genomic hybridization, which revealed in 1.35% of cases the
presence of de novo copy number gains at Xq28 encompassing the VAMP7 gene, which 
encodes a vesicle-trafficking protein that is part of the SNARE complex.
Transgenic mice carrying a bacterial artificial chromosome encoding human VAMP7
mimicked the defective urogenital traits observed in boys with masculinization
disorders such as cryptorchidism, urethral defects and hypospadias. Transgenic
mice also exhibited reduced penile length, focal spermatogenic anomalies,
diminished sperm motility and subfertility. VAMP7 colocalized with estrogen
receptor a (ESR1) in the presence of its cognate ligand, 17ß-estradiol. Elevated 
levels of VAMP7 markedly intensified ESR1-potentiated transcriptional activity by
increasing ESR1 protein cellular content upon ligand stimulation and upregulated 
the expression of estrogen-responsive genes including ATF3, CYR61 and CTGF, all
of which have been implicated in human hypospadias. Hence, increased gene dosage 
of VAMP7, and thus higher expression levels of its protein product, enhances
estrogen receptor action in male genitourinary tissues, affects the virilization 
of the reproductive tract and results in genitourinary birth defects in humans.

PMCID: PMC4283218
PMID: 24880616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:392971. doi: 10.1155/2014/392971. Epub 2014 Apr 28.

Nerve injury-induced c-Jun activation in Schwann cells is JNK independent.

Blom CL(1), Mårtensson LB(2), Dahlin LB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cellectricon AB, Flöjelbergsgatan 8C, 431 37 Mölndal, Sweden. (2)Department of
Biology/Functional Zoology, Lund University, Sölvegatan 35, 223 62 Lund, Sweden. 
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences in Malmö/Hand Surgery, Lund University, Skåne 
University Hospital, Jan Waldenströms Gata 5, 205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

We investigated (a) if activation of the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) 
pathway was linked to the stress activated protein kinase (SAPK) pathway and (b) 
if JNK was required for activation of c-Jun in Schwann cells of rat sciatic nerve
following injury. To this aim, ERK1/2 and the transcription factors c-Jun and
ATF-3 were studied by immunohistochemistry in segments of transected nerves. We
utilized pharmacological inhibitors of both signal transduction pathways in vitro
to determine the effects on downstream signalling events, such as c-Jun
activation, and on Schwann cell survival and proliferation. A transection induces
c-Jun and ATF-3 transcription in Schwann cells. These events are followed by
Schwann cell activation of c-Jun in the injured nerve. The MAPK inhibitor U0126
blocked ERK1/2 activation and reduced Schwann cell proliferation as well as
induction of c-Jun transcription. The JNK inhibitor SP600125 reduced Schwann cell
proliferation, but did not affect the expression of ERK1/2 or injury-induced
increases in c-Jun or ATF-3 levels. Importantly, nerve injury induces Schwann
cell activation of c-Jun by phosphorylation, which, in contrast to in sensory
neurons, is JNK independent. MAP kinases, other than JNK, can potentially
activate c-Jun in Schwann cells following injury; information that is crucial to 
create new nerve reconstruction strategies.

PMCID: PMC4022193
PMID: 24877090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jul;42(12):7625-41. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku467. Epub 2014
May 29.

Genomic and proteomic analysis of transcription factor TFII-I reveals insight
into the response to cellular stress.

Fan AX(1), Papadopoulos GL(2), Hossain MA(1), Lin IJ(1), Hu J(3), Tang TM(1),
Kilberg MS(1), Renne R(4), Strouboulis J(5), Bungert J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Epigenetics,
Genetics Institute, Powell Gene Therapy Center, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)Departmentof Biology, University of Crete, GR1409 Heraklion, Greece Divisionof
Molecular Oncology, Biomedical Sciences Research Center "Alexander Fleming", Vari
GR 16672, Greece. (3)Departmentof Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, College of
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, 32610, USA. (4)Divisionof 
Molecular Oncology, Biomedical Sciences Research Center "Alexander Fleming", Vari
GR 16672, Greece. (5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for
Epigenetics, Genetics Institute, Powell Gene Therapy Center, Gainesville,
Florida, USA Departmentof Biology, University of Crete, GR1409 Heraklion, Greece 
Divisionof Molecular Oncology, Biomedical Sciences Research Center "Alexander
Fleming", Vari GR 16672, Greece Departmentof Molecular Genetics and Microbiology,
College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, 32610, USA
strouboulis@fleming.gr. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Center for Epigenetics, Genetics Institute, Powell Gene Therapy Center,
Gainesville, Florida, USA jbungert@ufl.edu.

The ubiquitously expressed transcription factor TFII-I exerts both positive and
negative effects on transcription. Using biotinylation tagging technology and
high-throughput sequencing, we determined sites of chromatin interactions for
TFII-I in the human erythroleukemia cell line K562. This analysis revealed that
TFII-I binds upstream of the transcription start site of expressed genes, both
upstream and downstream of the transcription start site of repressed genes, and
downstream of RNA polymerase II peaks at the ATF3 and other stress responsive
genes. At the ATF3 gene, TFII-I binds immediately downstream of a Pol II peak
located 5 kb upstream of exon 1. Induction of ATF3 expression increases
transcription throughout the ATF3 gene locus which requires TFII-I and correlates
with increased association of Pol II and Elongin A. Pull-down assays demonstrated
that TFII-I interacts with Elongin A. Partial depletion of TFII-I expression
caused a reduction in the association of Elongin A with and transcription of the 
DNMT1 and EFR3A genes without a decrease in Pol II recruitment. The data reveal
different interaction patterns of TFII-I at active, repressed, or inducible
genes, identify novel TFII-I interacting proteins, implicate TFII-I in the
regulation of transcription elongation and provide insight into the role of
TFII-I during the response to cellular stress.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4081084
PMID: 24875474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2014 May 21;96(10):859-67. doi: 10.2106/JBJS.L.01790.

Vein wrapping for chronic nerve constriction injury in a rat model: study showing
increases in VEGF and HGF production and prevention of pain-associated behaviors 
and nerve damage.

Murakami K(1), Kuniyoshi K(1), Iwakura N(2), Matsuura Y(1), Suzuki T(1),
Takahashi K(1), Ohtori S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery (K.M., K.K., Y.M., K.T., and S.O.) and
Department of Bioenvironmental Medicine (T.S.), Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan. E-mail address
for K. Murakami: srdioz@gm. (2)Department of Orthopedics, Tokyo Women's Medical
University, 8-1 Kawadacho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Although efficacious clinical results have been reported after vein
wrapping for the treatment of recurrent compressive neuropathy, the mechanism of 
nerve protection remains uncertain.
METHODS: Eight-week-old male Wistar rats (n = 90) were randomly divided into
three groups: sham procedure, chronic constriction injury, and chronic
constriction injury plus vein wrapping. Mechanical withdrawal thresholds and
walking patterns were measured with use of von Frey filaments and the CatWalk
system, respectively. We investigated L4-L5 dorsal root ganglia
immunohistochemically at fourteen days postsurgery and sciatic nerves
histologically at fourteen days and again five months postsurgery. Concentrations
of several sciatic neurotrophic factors in the ligated sciatic nerves were
quantified with use of ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay).
RESULTS: In behavioral tests, the rats in which the chronic constriction injury
had been followed by vein wrapping displayed significantly greater pain responses
than the sham group, and the group with untreated chronic constriction injury
showed greater pain responses than the vein-wrapping group (both p &lt; 0.05).
Immunoreactive markers of inflammation and nerve damage, calcitonin gene-related 
peptide (CGRP) and activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3), were upregulated in 
dorsal root ganglion neurons in the constriction-injury and vein-wrapping groups 
compared with those in the sham group, with greater upregulation in the
constriction-injury group than in the vein-wrapping group (both p &lt; 0.01).
Histologic observation showed marked nerve degeneration and scar tissue formation
around the sciatic nerve in the constriction-injury group, but these effects were
prevented to some extent in the vein-wrapping group. Vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF) levels at one and three days postsurgery and hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF) levels at three, seven, fourteen, and twenty-eight days postsurgery 
were significantly higher in the vein-wrapping group than in the other groups (p 
&lt; 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Vein wrapping decreased pain-associated behavior and nerve damage
caused by chronic constriction injury. VEGF and HGF produced in response to vein 
grafts may play a mechanistic role.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: These findings may lead to development of new therapies
employing growth factors, with or without other materials, that simulate vein
wrapping.

PMID: 24875027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Br J Nutr. 2014 Aug 28;112(4):573-82. doi: 10.1017/S0007114514001093. Epub 2014
May 28.

Postprandial inflammation is not associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress in 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy lean men.

Kracmerová J(1), Czudková E(1), Koc M(1), Maliová L(1), iklová M(1), tich
V(1), Rossmeislová L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sport Medicine,Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in 
Prague, Ruská 87,100 00,Prague 10,Czech Republic.

The consumption of lipids and simple sugars induces an inflammatory response
whose exact molecular trigger remains elusive. The aims of the present study were
to investigate (1) whether inflammation induced by a single high-energy, high-fat
meal (HFM) is associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and (2) whether these inflammatory and ERS
responses could be prevented by the chemical chaperone ursodeoxycholic acid
(UDCA). A total of ten healthy lean men were recruited to a randomised, blind,
cross-over trial. Subjects were given two doses of placebo (lactose) or UDCA
before the consumption of a HFM (6151 kJ; 47·4 % lipids). Blood was collected at 
baseline and 4 h after the HFM challenge. Cell populations and their activation
were analysed using flow cytometry, and plasma levels of inflammatory cytokines
were assessed by ELISA and Luminex technology. Gene expression levels of
inflammatory and ERS markers were analysed in CD14<U+207A> and CD14<U+207B> PBMC using
quantitative RT-PCR. The HFM induced an increase in the mRNA expression levels of
pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1ß, 2·1-fold; IL-8, 2·4-fold; TNF-a, 1·4-fold;
monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, 2·1-fold) and a decrease in the expression
levels of miR181 (0·8-fold) in CD14<U+207A> monocytes. The HFM challenge did not
up-regulate the expression of ERS markers (XBP1, HSPA5, EDEM1, DNAJC3 and ATF4)
in either CD14<U+207A> or CD14<U+207B> cell populations, except for ATF3 (2·3-fold). The
administration of UDCA before the consumption of the HFM did not alter the
HFM-induced change in the expression levels of ERS or inflammatory markers. In
conclusion, HFM-induced inflammation detectable on the level of gene expression
in PBMC was not associated with the concomitant increase in the expression levels
of ERS markers and could not be prevented by UDCA.

PMID: 24870697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Tumour Biol. 2014 Aug;35(8):8329-34. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2044-4. Epub 2014
May 24.

Activating transcription factor 3 promotes colon cancer metastasis.

Wu ZY(1), Wei ZM, Sun SJ, Yuan J, Jiao SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.

Colorectal cancer is one of the commonest of solid malignancy in the world.
Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a homolog of the mouse TI-241 and rat
LFR-1, is a stress responsive gene that has been widely indicated in different
malignancies. However, the role of ATF3 in colon cancer is paradoxical with both 
a suggested pro- and anti-tumorigenic role. The objective of the current study
was to investigate the role of ATF3 in colon cancer metastasis using HT29 and
CaCO2 colon cancer cell lines. Expression of ATF3 was initially evaluated in five
pairs of colon cancer and matched noncancerous colon tissues. The role of ATF3 in
promoting in vitro migration and invasion were evaluated by siRNA-mediated
knockdown and adenovirus-mediated overexpression of ATF3. In addition, the role
of ATF3 in promoting in vivo tumor growth and hepatic metastasis was investigated
by shRNA-mediated knockdown of ATF3. Expression of ATF3 was more in the colon
cancer tissues as compared with the pooled noncancerous control colon tissue. Our
results showed that in both HT29 and CaCO2 cells, ATF3 promoted in vitro motility
and invasion. Furthermore, knockdown of ATF3 attenuated subcutaneous tumor growth
and CD31(+) neovasculature in xenograft assays with HT29 and CaCO2 cells and
inhibited hepatic metastasis. Cumulatively, our results unequivocally show that
ATF3 promotes colon cancer metastasis.

PMID: 24859834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Aug;10(2):645-51. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2256. Epub 2014 May 21.

Dynamic expression patterns of ATF3 and p53 in the hippocampus of a
pentylenetetrazole-induced kindling model.

Ding DX(1), Tian FF(1), Guo JL(1), Li K(1), He JX(2), Song MY(1), Li L(3), Huang 
X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha,
Hunan 410008, P.R. China. (2)Science Research Center, Xiangya Hospital, Changsha,
Hunan 410008, P.R. China. (3)Department of Neurology, Wangwang Hospital,
Changsha, Hunan 410016, P.R. China.

Epilepsy is a common and often deleterious neurological condition. Emerging
evidence has demonstrated the roles of innate immunity and the associated
inflammatory processes in epilepsy. In a previous study, we found that Toll-like 
receptors (TLRs) are upregulated and promote mossy fiber sprouting (MFS) in an
epileptic model. As downstream effectors of TLRs, the activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3) and p53 proteins were shown to be involved in neurite outgrowth. 
In the present study, we hypothesized that ATF3 and p53 participate in the
process of epilepsy and can affect MFS. To investigate this hypothesis, we
examined the expression of ATF3 and p53 in hippocampal tissues of rats kindled by
pentylenetetrazole (PTZ) using immunofluorescence, immunohistochemistry and
western blotting. MFS was evaluated by Timm staining in the hippocampus. Results 
from these experiments revealed that expression of ATF3 and p53 is significantly 
higher (p<0.05) in the CA3 area of the hippocampus in the PTZ-treated group
compared to the control group. ATF3 expression gradually increased from
3 days to 4 weeks, peaked at 4 weeks and decreased slightly at 6 weeks in the PTZ
group, while the expression of p53 was maintained at similar levels at different 
time-points following PTZ treatment. No obvious difference in the expression of
these proteins was observed between the PTZ and the control group in the dentate 
gyrus (DG) area (p>0.05). The degree of MFS in the PTZ group peaked at 4 weeks
and was maintained at a high level until 6 weeks post-PTZ treatment. In
conclusion, ATF3 and p53 may be involved in the occurrence of seizure and play
critical roles in MFS in the PTZ kindling model.

PMCID: PMC4094765
PMID: 24859284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Immunity. 2014 Jun 19;40(6):865-79. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.03.014. Epub 2014 
May 22.

miR-155 activates cytokine gene expression in Th17 cells by regulating the
DNA-binding protein Jarid2 to relieve polycomb-mediated repression.

Escobar TM(1), Kanellopoulou C(1), Kugler DG(2), Kilaru G(1), Nguyen CK(1),
Nagarajan V(3), Bhairavabhotla RK(1), Northrup D(4), Zahr R(1), Burr P(1), Liu
X(1), Zhao K(4), Sher A(2), Jankovic D(2), Zhu J(1), Muljo SA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. (2)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (3)Bioinformatics and Computational Biosciences Branch, 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)Systems Biology Center, 
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, 9000
Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (5)Laboratory of Immunology, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 9000
Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address:
stefan.muljo@nih.gov.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2014 Jun 19;40(6):855-6.

Specification of the T helper 17 (Th17) cell lineage requires a well-defined set 
of transcription factors, but how these integrate with posttranscriptional and
epigenetic programs to regulate gene expression is poorly understood. Here we
found defective Th17 cell cytokine expression in miR-155-deficient CD4+ T cells
in vitro and in vivo. Mir155 was bound by Th17 cell transcription factors and was
highly expressed during Th17 cell differentiation. miR-155-deficient Th17 and T
regulatory (Treg) cells expressed increased amounts of Jarid2, a DNA-binding
protein that recruits the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) to chromatin. PRC2
binding to chromatin and H3K27 histone methylation was increased in
miR-155-deficient cells, coinciding with failure to express Il22, Il10, Il9, and 
Atf3. Defects in Th17 cell cytokine expression and Treg cell homeostasis in the
absence of Mir155 could be partially suppressed by Jarid2 deletion. Thus, miR-155
contributes to Th17 cell function by suppressing the inhibitory effects of
Jarid2.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4092165
PMID: 24856900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 May 20;15(5):8959-78. doi: 10.3390/ijms15058959.

Genes and gene networks involved in sodium fluoride-elicited cell death
accompanying endoplasmic reticulum stress in oral epithelial cells.

Tabuchi Y(1), Yunoki T(2), Hoshi N(3), Suzuki N(4), Kondo T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics Research, Life Science Research Center,
University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.
ytabu@cts.u-toyama.ac.jp. (2)Department of Radiological Sciences, Graduate School
of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani,
Toyama 930-0194, Japan. yunokiki@med.u-toyama.ac.jp. (3)Department of Animal
Science, Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai, 
Kobe 657-8501, Japan. nobhoshi@kobe-u.ac.jp. (4)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute
of Nature and Environmental Technology, Kanazawa University, Housu-gun, Ishikawa 
927-0553, Japan. nobuos@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (5)Department of Radiological
Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of 
Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan. kondot@med.u-toyama.ac.jp.

Here, to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying cell death induced by
sodium fluoride (NaF), we analyzed gene expression patterns in rat oral
epithelial ROE2 cells exposed to NaF using global-scale microarrays and
bioinformatics tools. A relatively high concentration of NaF (2 mM) induced cell 
death concomitant with decreases in mitochondrial membrane potential, chromatin
condensation and caspase-3 activation. Using 980 probe sets, we identified 432
up-regulated and 548 down-regulated genes, that were differentially expressed by 
>2.5-fold in the cells treated with 2 mM of NaF and categorized them into 4
groups by K-means clustering. Ingenuity® pathway analysis revealed several gene
networks from gene clusters. The gene networks Up-I and Up-II included many
up-regulated genes that were mainly associated with the biological function of
induction or prevention of cell death, respectively, such as Atf3, Ddit3 and Fos 
(for Up-I) and Atf4 and Hspa5 (for Up-II). Interestingly, knockdown of Ddit3 and 
Hspa5 significantly increased and decreased the number of viable cells,
respectively. Moreover, several endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-related genes
including, Ddit3, Atf4 and Hapa5, were observed in these gene networks. These
findings will provide further insight into the molecular mechanisms of
NaF-induced cell death accompanying ER stress in oral epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4057769
PMID: 24853129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 May 8;10(5):e1003597. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003597.
eCollection 2014.

Modelling negative feedback networks for activating transcription factor 3
predicts a dominant role for miRNAs in immediate early gene regulation.

Tindall MJ(1), Clerk A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics & Statistics, University of Reading, Reading,
Berkshire, United Kingdom; School of Biological Sciences, University of Reading, 
Reading, Berkshire, United Kingdom. (2)School of Biological Sciences, University 
of Reading, Reading, Berkshire, United Kingdom.

Activating transcription factor 3 (Atf3) is rapidly and transiently upregulated
in numerous systems, and is associated with various disease states. Atf3 is
required for negative feedback regulation of other genes, but is itself subject
to negative feedback regulation possibly by autorepression. In cardiomyocytes,
Atf3 and Egr1 mRNAs are upregulated via ERK1/2 signalling and Atf3 suppresses
Egr1 expression. We previously developed a mathematical model for the Atf3-Egr1
system. Here, we adjusted and extended the model to explore mechanisms of Atf3
feedback regulation. Introduction of an autorepressive loop for Atf3 tuned down
its expression and inhibition of Egr1 was lost, demonstrating that negative
feedback regulation of Atf3 by Atf3 itself is implausible in this context.
Experimentally, signals downstream from ERK1/2 suppress Atf3 expression.
Mathematical modelling indicated that this cannot occur by phosphorylation of
pre-existing inhibitory transcriptional regulators because the time delay is too 
short. De novo synthesis of an inhibitory transcription factor (ITF) with a high 
affinity for the Atf3 promoter could suppress Atf3 expression, but (as with the
Atf3 autorepression loop) inhibition of Egr1 was lost. Developing the model to
include newly-synthesised miRNAs very efficiently terminated Atf3 protein
expression and, with a 4-fold increase in the rate of degradation of mRNA from
the mRNA/miRNA complex, profiles for Atf3 mRNA, Atf3 protein and Egr1 mRNA
approximated to the experimental data. Combining the ITF model with that of the
miRNA did not improve the profiles suggesting that miRNAs are likely to play a
dominant role in switching off Atf3 expression post-induction.

PMCID: PMC4014390
PMID: 24811474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Stem Cell Res. 2014 May;12(3):815-27. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2014.03.006. Epub 2014
Mar 30.

ATF3 is a novel nuclear marker for migrating ependymal stem cells in the rat
spinal cord.

Mladinic M(1), Bianchetti E(2), Dekanic A(3), Mazzone GL(2), Nistri A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Dept., International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA),
Trieste, Italy; SPINAL (Spinal Person Injury Neurorehabilitation Applied
Laboratory), Istituto di Medicina Fisica e Riabilitazione, Udine, Italy;
Department of Biotechnology, University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia. Electronic
address: mirandamp@uniri.hr. (2)Neuroscience Dept., International School for
Advanced Studies (SISSA), Trieste, Italy. (3)Neuroscience Dept., International
School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Trieste, Italy; Department of Biotechnology,
University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia. (4)Neuroscience Dept., International
School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Trieste, Italy; SPINAL (Spinal Person Injury
Neurorehabilitation Applied Laboratory), Istituto di Medicina Fisica e
Riabilitazione, Udine, Italy.

The present study identified ATF3 as a novel dynamic marker for ependymal
stem/progenitor cells (nestin, vimentin and SOX2 positive) around the central
canal of the neonatal or adult rat spinal cord. While quiescent ependymal cells
showed cytoplasmic ATF3 expression, during 6-24h in vitro these cells mobilized
and acquired intense nuclear ATF3 staining. Their migratory pattern followed a
centrifugal pathway toward the dorsal and ventral funiculi, reminiscent of the
rostral migratory stream of the brain subventricular stem cells. Thus, the chain 
cell formation was, by analogy, termed funicular migratory stream (FMS). The FMS 
process preceded the strong proliferation of ependymal cells occurring only after
24h in vitro. Pharmacological inhibition of MAPK-p38 and JNK/c-Jun (upstream
effectors of ATF3 activation) prevented the FMS mobilization of ATF3
nuclear-positive cells. Excitotoxicity or ischemia-like conditions, reported to
evoke neuronal and glial injury, did not further enhance migration of ependymal
cells at 24h, suggesting that, at this early stage of damage, the FMS phenomenon 
had peaked and that more extensive repair processes are delayed beyond this time 
point. ATF3 is, therefore, useful to identify activation and migration of
endogenous stem cells of the rat spinal cord in vitro.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24801224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. PLoS One. 2014 May 5;9(5):e96168. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096168. eCollection 
2014.

Glucose deprivation induces G2/M transition-arrest and cell death in
N-GlcNAc2-modified protein-producing renal carcinoma cells.

Isono T(1), Chano T(2), Kitamura A(1), Yuasa T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Central Reseach Laboratory, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga, 
Japan. (2)Departments of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shiga University of
Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga, Japan. (3)Departments of Urology, Cancer Institute 
Hospital, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.

Some cancer cells can survive under glucose deprivation within the
microenvironment of a tumor. Recently, we reported that N-linked
(ß-N-acetylglucosamine)2 [N-GlcNAc2]-modified proteins induce G2/M arrest and
cell death under glucose deprivation. Here, we investigated whether such a
response to glucose deprivation contributes to the survival of renal cell
carcinomas, which are sensitive to nutritional stress. Specifically, we analyzed 
seven renal carcinoma cell lines. Four of these cell lines produced
N-GlcNAc2-modified proteins and led G2/M-phase arrest under glucose deprivation, 
leading to cell death. The remaining three cell lines did not produce
N-GlcNAc2-modified proteins and undergo G1/S-phase arrest under glucose
deprivation, leading to survival. The four dead cell lines displayed significant 
up-regulation in the UDP-GlcNAc biosynthesis pathway as well as increased
phosphorylation of p53, which was not observed in the surviving three cell lines.
In addition, the four dead cell lines showed prolonged up-regulated expression of
ATF3, which is related to unfolded protein response (UPR), while the surviving
three cell lines showed only transient up-regulation of ATF3. In this study, we
demonstrated that the renal carcinoma cells which accumulate N-GlcNAc2-modified
proteins under glucose deprivation do not survive with abnormaly prolonged UPR
pathway. By contrast, renal carcinoma cells that do not accumulate
N-GlcNAc2-modified proteins under these conditions survive. Morover, we
demonstrated that buformin, a UPR inhibitor, efficiently reduced cell survival
under conditions of glucose deprivation for both sensitive and resistant
phenotypes. Further studies to clarify these findings will lead to the
development of novel chemotherapeutic treatments for renal cancer.

PMCID: PMC4010426
PMID: 24796485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Int J Cardiol. 2014 Jul 1;174(3):838-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.04.160. Epub
2014 Apr 21.

ATF3 regulates multiple targets and may play a dual role in cardiac hypertrophy
and injury.

Zhou H(1), Guo H(2), Zong J(3), Dai J(1), Yuan Y(1), Bian ZY(1), Tang QZ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060,
China; Cardiovascular Research Institute of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060,
China. (2)The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, 
Chinese Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Health, Qilu Hospital of
Shandong University, Jinan 250012, China. (3)Department of Cardiology, The
affiliated hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou 221000, China.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060,
China; Cardiovascular Research Institute of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060,
China. Electronic address: qztang@whu.edu.cn.

PMID: 24794959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Balkan J Med Genet. 2013 Dec;16(2):39-44. doi: 10.2478/bjmg-2013-0030.

Twenty-Four Genes are Upregulated in Patients with Hypospadias.

Karabulut R(1), Turkyilmaz Z(1), Sonmez K(1), Kumas G(2), Ergun S(2), Ergun M(2),
Basaklar A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, 
Turkey. (2)Department of Medical Genetics, Gazi University Faculty of Medicine,
Ankara, Turkey.

Hypospadias is a congenital hypoplasia of the penis, with displacement of the
urethral opening along the ventral surface, and has been reported to be one of
the most common congenital anomalies, occurring in approximately 1:250 to 1:300
live births. As hypospadias is reported to be an easily diagnosed malformation at
the crossroads of genetics and environment, it is important to study the genetic 
component in order to elucidate its etiology. In this study, the gene expression 
profiles both in human hypospadias tissues and normal penile tissues were studied
by Human Gene Expression Array. Twenty-four genes were found to be upregulated.
Among these, ATF3 and CYR61 have been reported previously. Other genes that have 
not been previously reported were also found to be upregulated: BTG2, CD69, CD9, 
DUSP1, EGR1, EIF4A1, FOS, FOSB, HBEGF, HNRNPUL1, IER2, JUN, JUNB, KLF2, NR4A1,
NR4A2, PTGS2, RGS1, RTN4, SLC25A25, SOCS3 and ZFP36 (p <0.05). Further studies
including genome-wide association studies (GWAS) with expression studies in a
large patient group will help us for identifiying the candidate gene(s) in the
etiology of hypospadias.

PMCID: PMC4001414
PMID: 24778562  [PubMed]


193. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Apr;51(2):543-57. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8710-0. Epub 2014
Apr 26.

Novel link of anti-apoptotic ATF3 with pro-apoptotic CTMP in the ischemic brain.

Huang CY(1), Chen JJ, Wu JS, Tsai HD, Lin H, Yan YT, Hsu CY, Ho YS, Lin TN.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a stress-induced transcription factor
with diverse functions under disease states in multiple cell types. ATF3 has
neuroprotective action against cerebral ischemia, which may involve caspase 3.
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying ATF3 regulation of apoptosis are
largely unknown. Here, we used gain- and loss-of-function and rescue approaches
to demonstrate ATF3 attenuating hypoxic neuronal apoptosis. As well, the
protective effect of ATF3 was mediated by downregulation of carboxyl-terminal
modulator protein (CTMP), a pro-apoptotic factor that inhibits the anti-apoptotic
Akt/PKB cascade. ATF3 (1) downregulated the mRNA and protein levels of CTMP; (2) 
its temporal expression pattern was reciprocal to that of CTMP; and (3) nuclear
localization suggested that ATF3 may regulate CTMP transcription following
hypoxic insult. Reporter assays demonstrated that ATF3 suppressed CTMP
transcription, whereas ATF3 fusion with VP16, converting ATF3 to transcriptional 
activator, boosted CTMP transcription. By contrast, NF-<U+03BA>B increased CTMP
transcription, and degradation-resistant I<U+03BA>Ba decreased CTMP transcription. ChIP 
assays further confirmed that binding of ATF3 to the ATF/CREB site hindered NF-<U+03BA>B
binding to the CTMP promoter, which repressed CTMP expression. Furthermore, CTMP 
siRNA treatment reduced hypoxic neuronal apoptosis by increasing p-Akt (Ser473)
levels and leaving the upstream ATF3 level unchanged. We have identified an
endogenous neuroprotective ATF3<U+2192>CTMP signal cascade that may be a therapeutic
target for reducing ischemic brain injury.

PMID: 24771044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 May 30;448(2):182-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.04.083. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

ATF3 attenuates cyclosporin A-induced nephrotoxicity by downregulating CHOP in
HK-2 cells.

Choi YM(1), Cho HY(1), Anwar MA(1), Kim HK(1), Kwon JW(1), Choi S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou University, Suwon
443-749, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Molecular Science and Technology,
Ajou University, Suwon 443-749, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
sangdunchoi@ajou.ac.kr.

Calcineurin inhibitors such as cyclosporin A (CsA) are widely used to treat organ
transplantation-associated complications. However, CsA use is limited due to
renal dysfunction. This study attempts to characterize the mechanism of
CsA-induced nephrotoxicity using a human embryonic kidney cell line (HK-2). We
performed microarray-based whole-genome expression analysis in HK-2 cells. CsA
treatment induced the expression of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-related and
apoptosis-inducing genes at 6 and 24h, respectively, indicating that ER-stress
predisposed the cells to apoptosis. G1 phase cell-cycle arrest was also observed 
via ER stress in CsA-treated cells. Furthermore, we found an inverse relationship
between activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a stress-inducible protein, and
C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), an apoptosis-inducing protein. Moreover, when
ATF3 knockdown cells were exposed to CsA, a prompt induction of CHOP was
observed, which stimulated ROS production and induced cell death-related genes as
compared to wild type. Taken together, our data demonstrate that ATF3 plays a
pivotal role in the attenuation of CsA-induced nephrotoxicity by downregulating
CHOP and ROS production mediated by ER stress.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24768635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Clin Investig Arterioscler. 2014 Nov-Dec;26(6):255-67. doi:
10.1016/j.arteri.2014.02.003. Epub 2014 Apr 5.

[PPARa attenuates palmitate-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress in human cardiac
cells by enhancing AMPK activity].

[Article in Spanish]

Palomer X(1), Capdevila-Busquets E(1), Garreta G(1), Davidson MM(2),
Vázquez-Carrera M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Farmacología y Química Terapéutica, IBUB (Institut de
Biomedicina de la Universitat de Barcelona) y CIBER de Diabetes y Enfermedades
Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), Facultad de Farmacia, Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona, España. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Columbia University, New 
York, Estados Unidos. (3)Departamento de Farmacología y Química Terapéutica, IBUB
(Institut de Biomedicina de la Universitat de Barcelona) y CIBER de Diabetes y
Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), Facultad de Farmacia, Universitat 
de Barcelona, Barcelona, España. Electronic address: mvazquezcarrera@ub.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been linked to several
cardiovascular diseases, such as atherosclerosis, heart failure and cardiac
hypertrophy. ER stress impairs insulin signalling, thus contributing to the
development of insulin resistance and diabetes. Since several studies have
reported that PPARa may inhibit ER stress, the main aim of this study consisted
in investigating whether activation of this nuclear receptor is able to prevent
lipid-induced ER stress in cardiac cells, as well as studying the mechanisms
involved.
METHODS: A cardiomyocyte cell line of human origin, AC16, was treated with
palmitate in the presence or absence of several AMPK and PPARa pharmacological
agonists and antagonists. For the in vivo studies, wild-type male mice were fed a
standard diet, or a high-fat diet (HFD), for two months. At the end of the
experiments, several ER stress markers were assessed in cardiac cells or in the
mice hearts, using real-time RT-PCR and Western-blot analyses.
RESULTS: The results demonstrate that both palmitate and the HFD induced ER
stress in cardiac cells, since they upregulated the expression (ATF3, BiP/GRP78
and CHOP), splicing (sXBP1), and phosphorylation (IRE-1a and eIF2a) of several ER
stress markers. Interestingly, treatment with the PPARa agonist Wy-14,643
prevented an increase in the majority of these ER stress markers in human cardiac
cells by means of AMPK activation.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that PPARa activation by Wy-14,643 might be
useful to prevent the harmful effects of ER stress and associated cardiovascular 
diseases in obese patients, and even during diabetic cardiomyopathy, by enhancing
AMPK activity.

Copyright © 2013 Sociedad Española de Arteriosclerosis. Published by Elsevier
España. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24709376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2014 Apr 7;2:38. doi: 10.1186/2051-5960-2-38.

Golgi fragmentation precedes neuromuscular denervation and is associated with
endosome abnormalities in SOD1-ALS mouse motor neurons.

van Dis V, Kuijpers M, Haasdijk ED, Teuling E, Oakes SA, Hoogenraad CC, Jaarsma
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus Medical Center, P,O,Box 2040, 3000 CA
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. d.jaarsma@erasmusmc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Fragmentation of stacked cisterns of the Golgi apparatus into
dispersed smaller elements is a feature associated with degeneration of neurons
in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and some other neurodegenerative
disorders. However, the role of Golgi fragmentation in motor neuron degeneration 
is not well understood.
RESULTS: Here we use a SOD1-ALS mouse model (low-copy Gurney G93A-SOD1 mouse) to 
show that motor neurons with Golgi fragmentation are retrogradely labeled by
intramuscularly injected CTB (beta subunit of cholera toxin), indicating that
Golgi fragmentation precedes neuromuscular denervation and axon retraction. We
further show that Golgi fragmentation may occur in the absence of and precede two
other pathological markers, i.e. somatodendritic SOD1 inclusions, and the
induction of ATF3 expression. In addition, we show that Golgi fragmentation is
associated with an altered dendritic organization of the Golgi apparatus, does
not depend on intact apoptotic machinery, and is facilitated in transgenic mice
with impaired retrograde dynein-dependent transport (BICD2-N mice). A connection 
to altered dynein-dependent transport also is suggested by reduced expression of 
endosomal markers in neurons with Golgi fragmentation, which also occurs in
neurons with impaired dynein function.
CONCLUSIONS: Together the data indicate that Golgi fragmentation is a very early 
event in the pathological cascade in ALS that is associated with altered
organization of intracellular trafficking.

PMCID: PMC4023628
PMID: 24708899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Gene. 2014 Jun 15;543(2):259-67. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.04.002. Epub 2014 Apr
1.

Bioinformatics analysis of time series gene expression in left ventricle (LV)
with acute myocardial infarction (AMI).

Zhang T(1), Zhao LL(2), Cao X(1), Qi LC(1), Wei GQ(1), Liu JY(1), Yan SJ(1), Liu 
JG(3), Li XQ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin 150001, Heilongjiang Province, China. (2)Department of
Gastroenterology, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University,
Harbin 150001, Heilongjiang Province, China. (3)The Central Hospital of the
Heilongjiang Prison Administrative Bureau, Harbin 150001, Heilongjiang Province, 
China. (4)Department of Cardiology, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin 150001, Heilongjiang Province, China. Electronic
address: xueqili89856@hotmail.com.

This study is to investigate the key genes and their possible function in acute
myocardial infarction (AMI). The data of GSE4648 downloaded from the Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) database include 6 time points (15 min, 60 min, 4h, 12h,
24h and 48 h) of 12 left ventricle (LV) samples, 12 surviving LV free wall (FW)
samples, 12 inter-ventricular septum (IVS) samples after AMI operation and
corresponding sham-operated samples. The data of each sample were analyzed with
Affy and Bioconductor packages, and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were
screened out using BETR package with false discovery rate (FDR)<0.01. Then,
functional enrichment analysis for DEGs was conducted with Database for
Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID). Totally 194 DEGs were
identified in LV, and only the gene tubulin beta 2a (Tubb2a) and natriuretic
peptide B (Nppb) were respectively up-regulated in surviving FW tissue and IVS
tissue. The biological process response to wounding and inflammatory response
were significantly enriched, as well as leukocyte transendothelial migration
pathway. Besides, the expression pattern analysis showed the DEGs mostly
up-regulated at 4h after AMI, and these genes were mainly associated with
immunity. Additionally, in transcriptional regulatory network, early growth
response 1 (Egr1), activating transcription factor 3 (Atf3), Atf4, Myc and Fos
were considered as the key transcription factors related to immune response. The 
key transcription factors and potential target genes might provide new
information for the development of AMI, and leukocyte transendothelial migration 
pathway might play a vital role in AMI.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24704022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 1;9(4):e93265. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093265. eCollection 
2014.

Inhibitory role of the KEAP1-NRF2 pathway in TGFß1-stimulated renal epithelial
transition to fibroblastic cells: a modulatory effect on SMAD signaling.

Ryoo IG(1), Ha H(2), Kwak MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, The Catholic University of Korea, Bucheon, Gyeonggi-do,
Republic of Korea. (2)College of Pharmacy, Ewha Womans University, Seodaemun-gu, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Transforming growth factor ß1 (TGFß1) is a potent stimulator of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and has been associated with chronic
kidney diseases by activating profibrotic gene expression. In this study, we
investigated the role of the KEAP1-NRF2 pathway, which is a master regulator of
the cellular antioxidant system, in TGFß1-stimulated EMT gene changes using human
renal tubular epithelial HK2. Treatment with TGFß1 enhanced the levels of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and TGFß1-stimulated EMT gene changes, including an
increase in profibrotic fibronectin-1 and collagen 1A1, were diminished by the
antioxidant N-acetylcysteine. In HK2, TGFß1 suppressed NRF2 activity and thereby 
reduced the expression of GSH synthesizing enzyme through the elevation of ATF3
level. Therefore, the activation of NRF2 signaling with sulforaphane effectively 
attenuated the TGFß1-stimulated increase in fibronectin-1 and collagen 1A1.
Conversely, the TGFß1-EMT gene changes were further enhanced by NRF2 knockdown
compared to the control cells. The relationship of NRF2 signaling and TGFß1-EMT
changes was further confirmed in a stable KEAP1-knockdown HK2, which is a model
of pure activation of NRF2. The TGFß1-mediated increase of collagen 1A1 and
fibronectin-1 in KEAP1 knockdown HK2 was suppressed. In particular, TGFß1-SMAD
signaling was modulated in KEAP1 knockdown HK2: the TGFß1-stimulated SMAD2/3
phosphorylation and SMAD transcriptional activity were repressed. Additionally,
the protein level of SMAD7, an inhibitor of SMAD signaling, was elevated and the 
level of SMURF1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase for SMAD7 protein, was diminished in
KEAP1 knockdown HK2. Finally, the inhibition of SMAD7 expression in KEAP1
knockdown HK2 restored TGFß1 response, indicating that SMURF1-SMAD7 may be a
molecular signaling linking the NRF2-GSH pathway to TGFß1-EMT changes.
Collectively, these results indicate that the KEAP1-NRF2 antioxidant system can
be an effective modulator of TGFß1-stimulated renal epithelial transition to
fibroblastic cells through the SMUR1-SMAD7 signaling, and further implies the
beneficial role of NRF2 in chronic renal diseases.

PMCID: PMC3972195
PMID: 24691097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2014 Mar;55(3):304-10.

[Determinants of sensitivity to proteasome inhibitors and strategies to overcome 
acquired resistance to bortezomib in multiple myeloma].

Iida S, Ri M.

PMID: 24681933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Blood. 2014 Mar 27;123(13):1983-5. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-02-554774.

A dual regulator of neutrophil recruitment.

Luo HR(1).

Author information: 
(1)CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL BOSTON.

Comment on
    Blood. 2014 Mar 27;123(13):2084-93.

In this issue of Blood, Boespflug et al report that activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3), a member of the ATF/cyclic AMP response element-binding
(ATF/CREB) family of transcription factors, plays a crucial role in regulating
neutrophil recruitment during lung inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3968383
PMID: 24677403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Int J Oncol. 2014 Jun;44(6):1904-14. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2359. Epub 2014 Mar
27.

The expression of miR-30a* and miR-30e* is associated with a dualistic model for 
grading ovarian papillary serious carcinoma.

Wang Y(1), Li L(2), Qu Z(3), Li R(4), Bi T(5), Jiang J(5), Zhao H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Center, Second Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University,
Dalian, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pathology, Second Affiliated Hospital of
Dalian Medical University, Dalian, P.R. China. (3)Department of Pathophysiology, 
Dalian Medical University, Dalian, P.R. China. (4)Department of Anesthesiology,
Second Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, P.R. China.
(5)Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Dalian, P.R. China.

Histological grade has already been recognized as a very important prognostic
factor for ovarian papillary serous carcinoma (OPSC). On the basis of
pathogenetic mechanisms, recent findings suggest a dualistic model of OPSC
consisting of types I (low-grade) and II (high-grade) cancers. High-grade OPSC is
responsible for most ovarian cancer deaths. The goal of our investigation was to 
identify the differences in key miRNAs and possible regulators through miRNA
microarray chip analysis, as well as functional target prediction and clinical
outcome between the low and high-grade OPSC patients. The pathogenic basis in
differentiation of ovarian cancer subtypes was studied to provide insight into
diagnosis and therapy for high-grade cases. Through microarray analysis, we found
that miR-30a* and miR-30e* were the top 2 significantly different miRNAs between 
type I and type II OPSC patients, and both were remarkably downregulated in the
latter type. ATF3 and MYC were indicated as potential co-targets of miR-30a* and 
miR-30e*, and showed a significant upregulation in type II patients. As ATF3 and 
MYC are often associated with aggressive behavior and poor differentiation,
especially in human cancers, these results are in good agreement with our
findings and point toward a regulating differentiation function of the miR-30a*
and miR-30e* genes. Further analysis using leave-one-out cross predictions and
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis strongly suggested that miR-30a* and miR-30e* can 
be used as biomarkers to tailor histological grade before starting the regimen,
and they showed important roles in ovarian cancer differentiation resulting in
poorer prognosis. In general, miR-30a* and miR-30e* coupled with expression data 
that reveal pathogenic regulation to predict histological differentiation, may
operate to direct the formation of early detection and therapeutic approaches to 
individual OPSC patients, especially differentiation therapy to high-grade cases.

PMID: 24676806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 27;9(3):e93258. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093258. eCollection
2014.

RNA sequence reveals mouse retinal transcriptome changes early after axonal
injury.

Yasuda M(1), Tanaka Y(1), Ryu M(1), Tsuda S(1), Nakazawa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan.

Glaucoma is an ocular disease characterized by progressive retinal ganglion cell 
(RGC) death caused by axonal injury. However, the underlying mechanisms involved 
in RGC death remain unclear. In this study, we investigated changes in the
transcriptome profile following axonal injury in mice (C57BL/6) with RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) technology. The experiment group underwent an optic nerve
crush (ONC) procedure to induce axonal injury in the right eye, and the control
group underwent a sham procedure. Two days later, we extracted the retinas and
performed RNA-seq and a pathway analysis. We identified 177 differentially
expressed genes with RNA-seq, notably the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-related genes Atf3, Atf4, Atf5, Chac1, Chop, Egr1 and Trb3, which were
significantly upregulated. The pathway analysis revealed that ATF4 was the most
significant upstream regulator. The antioxidative response-related genes Hmox1
and Srxn1, as well as the immune response-related genes C1qa, C1qb and C1qc, were
also significantly upregulated. To our knowledge, this is the first reported
RNA-seq investigation of the retinal transcriptome and molecular pathways in the 
early stages after axonal injury. Our results indicated that ER stress plays a
key role under these conditions. Furthermore, the antioxidative defense and
immune responses occurred concurrently in the early stages after axonal injury.
We believe that our study will lead to a better understanding of and insight into
the molecular mechanisms underlying RGC death after axonal injury.

PMCID: PMC3968129
PMID: 24676137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 18;9(3):e92073. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092073. eCollection
2014.

Gene therapy for neuropathic pain by silencing of TNF-a expression with
lentiviral vectors targeting the dorsal root ganglion in mice.

Ogawa N(1), Kawai H(1), Terashima T(1), Kojima H(2), Oka K(3), Chan L(3), Maegawa
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Molecular Genetics in Medicine, Shiga University of
Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular Genetics in
Medicine, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga, Japan. (3)Departments
of Medicine and Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Neuropathic pain can be a debilitating condition. Many types of drugs that have
been used to treat neuropathic pain have only limited efficacy. Recent studies
indicate that pro-inflammatory mediators including tumor necrosis factor a
(TNF-a) are involved in the pathogenesis of neuropathic pain. In the present
study, we engineered a gene therapy strategy to relieve neuropathic pain by
silencing TNF-a expression in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) using lentiviral
vectors expressing TNF short hairpin RNA1-4 (LV-TNF-shRNA1-4) in mice. First,
based on its efficacy in silencing TNF-a in vitro, we selected shRNA3 to
construct LV-TNF-shRNA3 for in vivo study. We used L5 spinal nerve transection
(SNT) mice as a neuropathic pain model. These animals were found to display
up-regulated mRNA expression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and
neuropeptide Y (NPY), injury markers, and interleukin (IL)-6, an inflammatory
cytokine in the ipsilateral L5 DRG. Injection of LV-TNF-shRNA3 onto the proximal 
transected site suppressed significantly the mRNA levels of ATF3, NPY and IL-6,
reduced mechanical allodynia and neuronal cell death of DRG neurons. These
results suggest that lentiviral-mediated silencing of TNF-a in DRG relieves
neuropathic pain and reduces neuronal cell death, and may constitute a novel
therapeutic option for neuropathic pain.

PMCID: PMC3958473
PMID: 24642694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Aug;29(8):1645-53. doi: 10.1111/jgh.12573.

Gene profile in the spleen under massive partial hepatectomy using complementary 
DNA microarray and pathway analysis.

Arakawa Y(1), Shimada M, Utsunomiya T, Imura S, Morine Y, Ikemoto T, Mori H,
Kanamoto M, Iwahashi S, Saito Y, Takasu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of
Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: In general, the spleen is one of the abdominal organs
connected by the portal system, and a splenectomy improves hepatic functions in
the settings of partial hepatectomy (Hx) for portal hypertensive cases or living 
donor liver transplantation with excessive portal vein flow. Those precise
mechanisms remain still unclear; therefore, we investigated the DNA expression
profile in the spleen after 90% Hx in rats using complementary DNA microarray and
pathway analysis.
METHODS: Messenger RNAs (mRNAs) were prepared from three rat spleens at each time
point (0, 3, and 6 h after 90% Hx). Using the gene chip, mRNA was hybridized to
Affymetrix GeneChip Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array (Affymetrix®) and pathway analysis
was done with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA®).
RESULTS: We determined the 3-h or 6-h/0-h ratio to assess the influence of Hx,
and cut-off values were set at more than 2.0-fold or less than 1/2 (0.5)-fold.
Chemokine activity-related genes including Cxcl1 (GRO1) and Cxcl2 (MIP-2) related
pathway were upregulated in the spleen. Also, immediate early response genes
including early growth response-1 (EGR1), FBJ murine osteosarcoma (FOS) and
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) related pathway were upregulated in the 
spleen.
CONCLUSIONS: We concluded that in the spleen the expression of numerous
inflammatory-related genes would occur after 90% Hx. The spleen could take a
harmful role and provide a negative impact during post Hx phase due to the
induction of chemokine and transcription factors including GRO1 and EGR1.

© 2014 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley Publishing
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24628570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Pain. 2014 Mar 11;10:19. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-10-19.

Voltage-gated sodium channel expression in mouse DRG after SNI leads to
re-evaluation of projections of injured fibers.

Laedermann CJ(1), Pertin M, Suter MR, Decosterd I.

Author information: 
(1)Pain Center, Department of Anesthesiology, University Hospital Center and
University of Lausanne, Lausanne 1011, Switzerland. cedric.laedermann@unil.ch.

BACKGROUND: Dysregulation of voltage-gated sodium channels (Na(v)s) is believed
to play a major role in nerve fiber hyperexcitability associated with neuropathic
pain. A complete transcriptional characterization of the different isoforms of
Na(v)s under normal and pathological conditions had never been performed on mice,
despite their widespread use in pain research. Na(v)s mRNA levels in mouse dorsal
root ganglia (DRG) were studied in the spared nerve injury (SNI) and spinal nerve
ligation (SNL) models of neuropathic pain. In the SNI model, injured and
non-injured neurons were intermingled in lumbar DRG, which were pooled to
increase the tissue available for experiments.
RESULTS: A strong downregulation was observed for every Na(v)s isoform expressed 
except for Na(v)1.2; even Na(v)1.3, known to be upregulated in rat neuropathic
pain models, was lower in the SNI mouse model. This suggests differences between 
these two species. In the SNL model, where the cell bodies of injured and
non-injured fibers are anatomically separated between different DRG, most Na(v)s 
were observed to be downregulated in the L5 DRG receiving axotomized fibers.
Transcription was then investigated independently in the L3, L4 and L5 DRG in the
SNI model, and an important downregulation of many Na(v)s isoforms was observed
in the L3 DRG, suggesting the presence of numerous injured neurons there after
SNI. Consequently, the proportion of axotomized neurons in the L3, L4 and L5 DRG 
after SNI was characterized by studying the expression of activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3). Using this marker of nerve injury confirmed that
most injured fibers find their cell bodies in the L3 and L4 DRG after SNI in
C57BL/6 J mice; this contrasts with their L4 and L5 DRG localization in rats. The
spared sural nerve, through which pain hypersensitivity is measured in behavioral
studies, mostly projects into the L4 and L5 DRG.
CONCLUSIONS: The complex regulation of Na(v)s, together with the anatomical
rostral shift of the DRG harboring injured fibers in C57BL/6 J mice, emphasize
that caution is necessary and preliminary anatomical experiments should be
carried out for gene and protein expression studies after SNI in mouse strains.

PMCID: PMC4007621
PMID: 24618114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2014 Apr;73(4):362-74. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0000000000000060.

Age-related brain expression and regulation of the chemokine CCL4/MIP-1ß in
APP/PS1 double-transgenic mice.

Zhu M(1), Allard JS, Zhang Y, Perez E, Spangler EL, Becker KG, Rapp PR.

Author information: 
(1)From the Neurocognitive Aging Section (MZ, EP, ELS, PRR), and Gene Expression 
and Genomics Unit (YZ, KGB), National Institutes of Health, National Institute on
Aging, Intramural Research Program, Biomedical Research Center, Baltimore,
Maryland; and Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Howard University College 
of Medicine, Washington, DC (JSA).

The detrimental effect of activation of the chemokine CCL4/MIP-1ß on neuronal
integrity in patients with HIV-associated dementia has directed attention to the 
potential role of CCL4 expression and regulation in Alzheimer disease. Here, we
show that CCL4 mRNA and protein are overexpressed in the brains of APPswe/PS1<U+0394>E9 
(APP/PS1) double-transgenic mice, a model of cerebral amyloid deposition;
expression was minimal in brains from nontransgenic littermates or single-mutant 
controls. Increased levels of CCL4 mRNA and protein directly correlated with the 
age-related progression of cerebral amyloid-ß (Aß) levels in APP/PS1 mice. We
also found significantly increased expression of activating transcription factor 
3 (ATF3), which was positively correlated with age-related Aß deposition and CCL4
in the brains of APP/PS1 mice. Results from chromatin
immunoprecipitation-quantitative polymerase chain reaction confirmed that ATF3
binds to the promoter region of the CCL4 gene, consistent with a potential role
in regulating CCL4 transcription. Finally, elevated ATF3 mRNA expression in
APP/PS1 brains was associated with hypomethylation of the ATF3 gene promoter
region. These observations prompt the testable hypothesis for future study that
CCL4 overexpression, regulated in part by hypomethylation of the ATF3 gene, may
contribute to neuropathologic progression associated with amyloid deposition in
Alzheimer disease.

PMCID: PMC3977177
PMID: 24607962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Immunol. 2014 Apr 1;192(7):3383-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302411. Epub 2014 Mar
5.

PIKfyve, a class III lipid kinase, is required for TLR-induced type I IFN
production via modulation of ATF3.

Cai X(1), Xu Y, Kim YM, Loureiro J, Huang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02139.

Type I IFN plays a key role in antiviral responses. It also has been shown that
deregulation of type I IFN expression following abnormal activation of TLRs
contributes to the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus. In this study,
we find that PIKfyve, a class III lipid kinase, is required for endolysosomal
TLR-induced expression of type I IFN in mouse and human cells. PIKfyve binds to
phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate and synthesizes phosphatidylinositol
3,5-bisphosphate, and plays a critical role in endolysosomal trafficking.
However, PIKfyve modulates type I IFN production via mechanisms independent of
receptor and ligand trafficking in endolysosomes. Instead, pharmacological or
genetic inactivation of PIKfyve rapidly induces expression of the transcription
repressor ATF3, which is necessary and sufficient for suppression of type I IFN
expression by binding to its promoter and blocking its transcription. Thus, we
have uncovered a novel phosphoinositide-mediated regulatory mechanism that
controls TLR-mediated induction of type I IFN, which may provide a new
therapeutic indication for the PIKfyve inhibitor.

PMID: 24600036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Br J Cancer. 2014 Apr 15;110(8):2109-15. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.101. Epub 2014 Feb
25.

A novel staging model to classify oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma patients in
China.

Tan H(1), Zhang H(2), Xie J(3), Chen B(3), Wen C(4), Guo X(4), Zhao Q(5), Wu
Z(5), Shen J(5), Wu J(3), Xu X(3), Li E(3), Xu L(3), Wang X(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biomedical Engineering, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun
Yat-Sen University, 135 Xin Gang W. Road, Guangzhou, China [2] The Key Laboratory
of Molecular Biology for High Cancer Incidence Coastal Chaoshan Area, Shantou
University Medical College, Shantou, China [3] Southern China Research Center of 
Statistical Science, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China. (2)1]
Southern China Research Center of Statistical Science, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou 510275, China [2] Yale University School of Public Health, New Haven,
CT, USA [3] Department of Statistical Science, School of Mathematics and
Computational Science, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China. (3)The Key
Laboratory of Molecular Biology for High Cancer Incidence Coastal Chaoshan Area, 
Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, China. (4)1] Southern China Research
Center of Statistical Science, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China
[2] Department of Statistical Science, School of Mathematics and Computational
Science, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China. (5)Department of Pathology,
Shantou Central Hospital, Affiliated Shantou Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, 
Shantou, China. (6)1] Department of Biomedical Engineering, Zhongshan School of
Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University, 135 Xin Gang W. Road, Guangzhou, China [2]
Southern China Research Center of Statistical Science, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou 510275, China [3] Department of Statistical Science, School of
Mathematics and Computational Science, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is the predominant subtype
of oesophageal carcinoma in China, with the overall 5-year survival rate of <10%.
The current tumour-node-metastasis (TNM) staging system has become so complex
that it is not easy to use in the life expectancy assessment. We aim to combine
clinical variables and biomarkers to develop and validate a relative simple and
reliable model, named the FENSAM, for ESCC prognosis.
METHODS: To build the FENSAM, we analysed 22 potential prognostic factors from
461 patients, including 9 biomarkers (Ezrin, Fascin, desmocollin 2 (DSC2),
pFascin, activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), connective-tissue growth
factor (CTGF), neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), NGAL receptor
(NGALR), and cysteine-rich angiogenic protein 61 (CYR61)) and other 13 clinical
variables. We selected significant factors associated with survival of ESCC
patients, and used them to build our FENSAM model. We then obtained the hazard
risk score of the model to classify ESCC patients. In addition, we validated the 
model in an independent cohort of 290 patients from the same hospital. The
predictive performance of the model was assessed by the Area under the Receiver
Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC) and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis.
RESULTS: We found six markers significantly associated with survival of ESCC
patients (Ezrin, Fascin, ATF3, surgery extent, N-stage, and M-stage). They were
combined to create a novel four-stage FENSAM model for patients' classification. 
FENSAM possessed a high classification precision similar to the TNM staging
system, but with a much simpler model. The efficiency of FENSAM was evaluated by 
different quantiles of AUC and the results of survival analysis. The validation
result demonstrated the potential of the FENSAM model to improve classification
accuracy for ESCC patients.
CONCLUSIONS: FENSAM provides an alternative classifier for ESCC patients with a
high classification precision using a simple model.

PMCID: PMC3992487
PMID: 24569468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Pharmacol Res. 2014 Mar;81:44-53. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2014.02.004. Epub 2014 Feb 
22.

PKC-mediated HuD-GAP43 pathway activation in a mouse model of antiretroviral
painful neuropathy.

Sanna MD(1), Quattrone A(2), Ghelardini C(1), Galeotti N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuropsychopharmacology, Department of, Psychology, Drug, Child 
Health (NEUROFARBA), Section of Pharmacology, University of Florence, Florence,
Italy. (2)Laboratory of Translational Genomics, Centre for Integrative Biology,
University of Trento, Trento, Italy. (3)Laboratory of Neuropsychopharmacology,
Department of, Psychology, Drug, Child Health (NEUROFARBA), Section of
Pharmacology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. Electronic address:
nicoletta.galeotti@unifi.it.

Patients treated with nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) develop
painful neuropathies that lead to discontinuation of antiretroviral therapy thus 
limiting viral suppression strategies. The mechanisms by which NRTIs contribute
to the development of neuropathy are not known. In order to elucidate the
mechanisms underlying this drug-induced neuropathy, we have characterized
cellular events in the central nervous system following antiretroviral treatment.
Systemic administration of the antiretroviral agent, 2',3'-dideoxycytidine (ddC) 
considerably increased the expression and phosphorylation of protein kinase C
(PKC) <U+03B3> and <U+025B>, enzymes highly involved in pain processes, within periaqueductal
grey matter (PAG), and, to a lesser extent, within thalamus and prefrontal
cortex. These events appeared in coincidence with thermal and mechanical
allodynia, but PKC blockade did not prevent the antiretroviral-induced pain
hypersensitivity, ruling out a major involvement of PKC in the ddC-induced
nociceptive behaviour. An increased expression of GAP43, a marker of
neuroregeneration, and decreased levels of ATF3, a marker of neuroregeneration,
were detected in all brain areas. ddC treatment also increased the expression of 
HuD, a RNA-binding protein target of PKC known to stabilize GAP43 mRNA.
Pharmacological blockade of PKC prevented HuD and GAP43 overexpression. Silencing
of both PKC<U+03B3> and HuD reduced GAP43 levels in control mice and prevented the
ddC-induced GAP43 enhanced expression. Present findings illustrate the presence
of a supraspinal PKC-mediated HuD-GAP43 pathway activated by ddC. Based on our
results, we speculate that antiretroviral drugs may recruit the HuD-GAP43
pathway, potentially contributing to a response to the antiretroviral neuronal
toxicity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24565699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 28;289(13):8947-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.503755. Epub 2014
Feb 19.

The activating transcription factor 3 protein suppresses the oncogenic function
of mutant p53 proteins.

Wei S(1), Wang H, Lu C, Malmut S, Zhang J, Ren S, Yu G, Wang W, Tang DD, Yan C.

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Cell Biology and Cancer Research and.

Mutant p53 proteins (mutp53) often acquire oncogenic activities, conferring drug 
resistance and/or promoting cancer cell migration and invasion. Although it has
been well established that such a gain of function is mainly achieved through
interaction with transcriptional regulators, thereby modulating cancer-associated
gene expression, how the mutp53 function is regulated remains elusive. Here we
report that activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) bound common mutp53 (e.g.
R175H and R273H) and, subsequently, suppressed their oncogenic activities. ATF3
repressed mutp53-induced NFKB2 expression and sensitized R175H-expressing cancer 
cells to cisplatin and etoposide treatments. Moreover, ATF3 appeared to suppress 
R175H- and R273H-mediated cancer cell migration and invasion as a consequence of 
preventing the transcription factor p63 from inactivation by mutp53. Accordingly,
ATF3 promoted the expression of the metastasis suppressor SHARP1 in
mutp53-expressing cells. An ATF3 mutant devoid of the mutp53-binding domain
failed to disrupt the mutp53-p63 binding and, thus, lost the activity to suppress
mutp53-mediated migration, suggesting that ATF3 binds to mutp53 to suppress its
oncogenic function. In line with these results, we found that down-regulation of 
ATF3 expression correlated with lymph node metastasis in TP53-mutated human lung 
cancer. We conclude that ATF3 can suppress mutp53 oncogenic function, thereby
contributing to tumor suppression in TP53-mutated cancer.

PMCID: PMC3979409
PMID: 24554706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Pharmacol. 2014 May;85(5):682-91. doi: 10.1124/mol.113.090092. Epub 2014 Feb 
18.

Activating transcription factor 3 protects against pressure-overload heart
failure via the autophagy molecule Beclin-1 pathway.

Lin H(1), Li HF, Chen HH, Lai PF, Juan SH, Chen JJ, Cheng CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (H.L., H.-F.L., S.-H.J.); Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan (C.-F.C.); Division of
Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Taipei Medical University Hospital, 
Taipei, Taiwan (H.-H.C.); Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine,
College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (H.-H.C.);
Department of Emergency Medicine, Tzu Chi General Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan
(P.-F.L.); Department of Internal Medicine and Graduate Institute of Clinical
Medical Science, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan (J.-J.C.); and
Department of Medical Research, Tzu Chi General Hospital and Department of
Pediatrics, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan (C.-F.C.).

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a cAMP response element-binding
protein/ATF family transcription factors member, has been implicated in the
cardiovascular and inflammatory system and is rapidly induced by
ischemic-reperfusion injuries. We performed transverse aortic banding (TAB)
experiments using ATF3 gene-deleted mice (ATF3(-/-)) and wild-type (WT) mice to
determine what effect it might have on heart failure induced by pressure
overloading. Compared with the WT mice, ATF3(-/-) mice were found by
echocardiography to have decreased left ventricular contractility with loss of
normal cardiac hypertrophic remodeling. The ATF3(-/-) mice had greater numbers of
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated digoxigenin-deoxyuridine nick-end 
labeling-positive cells and higher levels of activated caspase-3, as well as more
apoptosis. Restoration of ATF3 expression in the heart of ATF3(-/-) mice by
adenovirus-induced ATF3 treatment significantly improved cardiac contractility
after TAB. The results from molecular and biochemical analyses, including
chromatin immune-precipitation and in vitro /in vivo promoter assays, showed that
ATF3 bound to the ATF/cAMP response element of the Beclin-1 promoter and that
ATF3 reduced autophagy via suppression of the Beclin-1-dependent pathway.
Furthermore, infusion of tert-butylhydroquinone (tBHQ), a selective ATF3 inducer,
increased the expression of ATF3 via the nuclear factor erythroid 2-related
transcriptional factor, inhibited TAB-induced cardiac dilatation, and increased
left ventricular contractility, thereby rescuing heart failure. Our study
identified a new epigenetic regulation mediated by the stress-inducible gene ATF3
on TAB-induced cardiac dysfunction. These findings suggest that the ATF3
activator tBHQ may have therapeutic potential for the treatment of
pressure-overload heart failure induced by chronic hypertension or other pressure
overload mechanisms.

PMID: 24550138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Mol Med (Berl). 2014 Jun;92(6):665-76. doi: 10.1007/s00109-014-1132-7. Epub
2014 Feb 19.

Defective autophagy impairs ATF3 activity and worsens lung injury during
endotoxemia.

Aguirre A(1), López-Alonso I, González-López A, Amado-Rodríguez L, Batalla-Solís 
E, Astudillo A, Blázquez-Prieto J, Fernández AF, Galván JA, dos Santos CC,
Albaiceta GM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Funcional, Área de Fisiología, IUOPA, Universidad de 
Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain.

Autophagy has emerged as a key regulator of the inflammatory response. To examine
the role of autophagy in the development of organ dysfunction during endotoxemia,
wild-type and autophagy-deficient (Atg4b-null) mice were challenged with
lipopolysaccharide. Animals lacking Atg4b showed increased mortality after
endotoxemia. Among the different organs studied, only the lungs showed
significant differences between genotypes, with increased damage in mutant
animals. Autophagy was activated in lungs from wild-type, LPS-treated mice.
Similarly, human bronchial cells show an increased autophagy when exposed to
serum from septic patients. We found an increased inflammatory response
(increased neutrophilic infiltration, higher levels of Il6, Il12p40, and Cxcl2)
in the lungs from knockout mice and identified perinuclear sequestration of the
anti-inflammatory transcription factor ATF3 as the putative mechanism responsible
for the differences between genotypes. Finally, induction of autophagy by
starvation before LPS exposure resulted in a dampened pulmonary response to LPS
in wild-type, but not knockout, mice. Similar results were found in human
bronchial cells exposed to LPS. Our results demonstrate the central role of
autophagy in the regulation of the lung response to endotoxemia and sepsis and
its potential modulation by nutrition.KEY MESSAGES: Endotoxemia and sepsis
trigger autophagy in lung tissue. Defective autophagy increases mortality and
lung inflammation after endotoxemia. Impairment of autophagy results is
perinuclear ATF3 sequestration. Starvation ameliorates lung injury by an
autophagy-dependent mechanism.

PMID: 24535031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Mar 7;445(2):320-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.01.184. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Role of ATF3 in synergistic cancer cell killing by a combination of HDAC
inhibitors and agonistic anti-DR5 antibody through ER stress in human colon
cancer cells.

Liu J(1), Edagawa M(2), Goshima H(2), Inoue M(2), Yagita H(3), Liu Z(4), Kitajima
S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan; Department of Immunology, Norman
Bethune College of Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, China;
Department of Thyroid Surgery, First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun,
Jilin 130021, China. (2)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research
Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.
(3)Department of Immunology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo
113-8421, Japan. (4)Department of Immunology, Norman Bethune College of Medicine,
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, China. Electronic address:
liuzh@jlu.edu.cn. (5)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research
Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan. Electronic
address: kita.bgen@mri.tmd.ac.jp.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) are promising agents for cancer therapy. 
However, the mechanism(s) responsible for the efficacy of HDACIs have not yet to 
be fully elucidated. Death receptor 5 (DR5) is a transmembrane receptor
containing death domain that triggers cell death upon binding to TRAIL (tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand) or agonistic anti-DR5
monoclonal antibody, and the combination of TRAIL/agonistic anti-DR5 monoclonal
antibody and agents that increase the expression of DR5 is expected as a novel
anticancer therapeutic strategy. Here we report that six different HDACIs
activated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress sensor PERK and eIF2a and induced the
ATF4/ATF3/CHOP pathway in p53-deficient human colon cancer cells. This resulted
in an increased expression of DR5 on the cell surface and sensitized cells to
apoptosis by agonistic anti-DR5 monoclonal antibody. Stress response gene ATF3
was required for efficient DR5 induction by HDACIs, and DR5 reporter assay showed
that ATF3 play crucial role for the HDACIs-induced activation of DR5 gene
transcription. These provide important mechanistic insight into how HDACIs
exhibit pro-apoptotic activity in clinical anti-cancer treatments when they are
used in combination with other therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24530917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. FEBS J. 2014 Apr;281(7):1892-900. doi: 10.1111/febs.12752. Epub 2014 Mar 6.

Role of activating transcription factor 3 protein ATF3 in necrosis and apoptosis 
induced by 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine.

Sato A(1), Nakama K, Watanabe H, Satake A, Yamamoto A, Omi T, Hiramoto A,
Masutani M, Wataya Y, Kim HS.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama University, Kita-ku, Japan;
Division of Genome Stability Research, National Cancer Center Research Institute,
Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Necrosis and apoptosis are the two major forms of cell death. We have studied the
mechanisms that regulate the cell death observed during treatment of mouse cancer
cell line FM3A with the anticancer drug 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine (FUdR). To
detect causal differences between necrosis and apoptosis, we exploited the
necrosis in original clone F28-7 and the apoptosis in its variant F28-7-A that
occur on treatment with FUdR. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) was
strongly induced during necrosis but not apoptosis. In addition, we found that
ATF3 expression is regulated by heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) at the mRNA stage. 
Knockdown of Atf3 by siRNA in the F28-7 cells resulted in apoptotic morphology
rather than necrotic morphology. These results suggest that ATF3 is a cell-death 
regulator in necrosis and apoptosis.

© 2014 FEBS.

PMID: 24529083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 4;289(14):9970-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.502914. Epub 2014 
Feb 10.

The nuclear calcium signaling target, activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3),
protects against dendrotoxicity and facilitates the recovery of synaptic
transmission after an excitotoxic insult.

Ahlgren H(1), Bas-Orth C, Freitag HE, Hellwig A, Ottersen OP, Bading H.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Neurobiology, Interdisciplinary Center for
Neurosciences, University of Heidelberg, INF 364, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany and.

The focal swellings of dendrites ("dendritic beading") are an early morphological
hallmark of neuronal injury and dendrotoxicity. They are associated with a
variety of pathological conditions, including brain ischemia, and cause an acute 
disruption of synaptic transmission and neuronal network function, which
contribute to subsequent neuronal death. Here, we show that increased synaptic
activity prior to excitotoxic injury protects, in a transcription-dependent
manner, against dendritic beading. Expression of activating transcription factor 
3 (ATF3), a nuclear calcium-regulated gene and member of the core gene program
for acquired neuroprotection, can protect against dendritic beading. Conversely, 
knockdown of ATF3 exacerbates dendritic beading. Assessment of neuronal network
functions using microelectrode array recordings revealed that hippocampal neurons
expressing ATF3 were able to regain their ability for functional synaptic
transmission and to participate in coherent neuronal network activity within 48 h
after exposure to toxic concentrations of NMDA. Thus, in addition to attenuating 
cell death, synaptic activity and expression of ATF3 render hippocampal neurons
more resistant to acute dendrotoxicity and loss of synapses. Dendroprotection can
enhance recovery of neuronal network functions after excitotoxic insults.

PMCID: PMC3975041
PMID: 24515113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Peptides. 2013 Oct 25. pii: S0196-9781(13)00346-X. doi:
10.1016/j.peptides.2013.10.014. [Epub ahead of print]

Modulatory effects of NDP-MSH in the regenerating liver after partial hepatectomy
in rats.

Lonati C(1), Carlin A(2), Leonardi P(2), Valenza F(3), Bosari S(4), Catania A(5),
Gatti S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Ricerche Chirurgiche Precliniche, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda -
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico. (2)Centro di Ricerche Chirurgiche Precliniche,
Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda - Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico; Dipartimento di
Fisiopatologia Medico-Chirurgica e dei Trapianti, Università degli Studi di
Milano, 20122 Milano, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Anestesia, Rianimazione ed
Emergenza Urgenza, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda - Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico;
Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia Medico-Chirurgica e dei Trapianti, Università
degli Studi di Milano, 20122 Milano, Italy. (4)Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia
Medico-Chirurgica e dei Trapianti, Università degli Studi di Milano, 20122
Milano, Italy. (5)Centro di Ricerche Chirurgiche Precliniche, Fondazione IRCCS
Ca' Granda - Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico; Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia
Medico-Chirurgica e dei Trapianti, Università degli Studi di Milano, 20122
Milano, Italy. Electronic address: anna.catania@guest.unimi.it.

Melanocortins are endogenous peptides that exert protective actions on the host
physiology. The broad modulatory effects of these molecules suggest that they
might influence the mediator network induced during liver regeneration. The
research aim was to determine if melanocortin treatment alters liver molecular
changes induced by partial hepatectomy (PH). Rats under isoflurane anesthesia
were subjected to standard 70% PH or sham surgery. Animals received a single i.v.
injection of Nle4,DPhe7-a-melanocyte stimulating hormone (NDP-MSH) or saline
30min before surgery. Sacrifice was performed at time intervals between 4 and
72h. A preliminary screening based on TaqMan Low-Density Array (TLDA) identified 
71 transcripts altered by PH. Real-time PCR analysis revealed that NDP-MSH
modulated the expression of a substantial proportion of these transcripts
including several chemokines and their receptors. The critical signaling pathway 
interleukin-6 (IL-6)/signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT)/suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) was significantly enhanced by
NDP-MSH. Further, peptide treatment considerably reduced the decline of I<U+03BA>Ba
protein caused by PH. Although the final organ regeneration was not substantially
affected, NDP-MSH modulated expression of cell cycle mediators and exerted subtle
influences on hepatocyte replication. Most of the changes brought about by
NDP-MSH, a peptide approved for clinical use, should be salutary during liver
regeneration.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24512945  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


217. J Invest Dermatol. 2014 Jul;134(7):1998-2004. doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.77. Epub 2014
Feb 7.

The oncogene ATF3 is potentiated by cyclosporine A and ultraviolet light A.

Dziunycz PJ(1), Lefort K(2), Wu X(3), Freiberger SN(1), Neu J(1), Djerbi N(1),
Iotzowa-Weiss G(1), French LE(1), Dotto GP(4), Hofbauer GF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland.
(3)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
University, Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA. (4)1] Department of Biochemistry,
University of Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland [2] Cutaneous Biology Research
Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard University, Charlestown,
Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2014 Sep;12(9):833.

Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) represents the most important cutaneous
complication following organ transplantation. It develops mostly on sun-exposed
areas. A recent study showed the role of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3)
in SCC development following treatment with calcineurin inhibitors. It has been
reported that ATF3, which may act as an oncogene, is under negative
calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) control and is upregulated
by calcineurin inhibitors. Still, these findings do not fully explain the
preferential appearance of SCC on chronically sun-damaged skin. We analyzed the
influence of UV radiation on ATF3 expression and its potential role in SCC
development. We found that ATF3 is a specifically induced AP1 member in SCC of
transplanted patients. Its expression was strongly potentiated by combination of 
cyclosporine A and UVA treatment. UVA induced ATF3 expression through reactive
oxygen species-mediated nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2)
activation independently of calcineurin/NFAT inhibition. Activated NRF2 directly 
binds to ATF3 promoter, thus inducing its expression. These results demonstrate
two mechanisms that independently induce and, when combined together, potentiate 
the expression of ATF3, which may then force SCC development. Taking into account
the previously defined role of ATF3 in the SCC development, these findings may
provide an explanation and a mechanism for the frequently observed burden on SCCs
on sun-exposed areas of the skin in organ transplant recipients treated by
calcineurin inhibitors.

PMID: 24509533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Cell Metab. 2014 Feb 4;19(2):175-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2014.01.009.

High-density lipoproteins put out the fire.

Moore KJ(1), Fisher EA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Marc and Ruti Bell Vascular Biology and Disease Program, Leon H. Charney
Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. (2)Marc and Ruti Bell Vascular Biology and
Disease Program, Leon H. Charney Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, 
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. Electronic
address: edward.fisher@nyumc.org.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Feb;15(2):152-60.

Macrophages in atherosclerotic plaques are activated, inflammatory cells that
directly contribute to the disease process. De Nardo et al. (2013), now report
that high-density lipoproteins (HDL) can reprogram macrophages to be less
inflammatory through an ATF3-dependent pathway, providing another mechanistic
basis for the atheroprotective properties of HDL.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3962668
PMID: 24506861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 3;9(2):e87768. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087768. eCollection 
2014.

High degree of overlap between responses to a virus and to the house dust mite
allergen in airway epithelial cells.

Golebski K(1), Luiten S(1), van Egmond D(1), de Groot E(1), Röschmann KI(1),
Fokkens WJ(1), van Drunen CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Airway epithelium is widely considered to play an active role in
immune responses through its ability to detect changes in the environment and to 
generate a microenvironment for immune competent cells. Therefore, besides its
role as a physical barrier, epithelium affects the outcome of the immune response
by the production of various pro-inflammatory mediators.
METHODS: We stimulated airway epithelial cells with viral double stranded RNA
analogue poly(I:C) or with house dust mite in a time course of 24 hours. In order
to determine cytokines production by stimulated cells, we performed multiplex
enzyme linked immunosorbant assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: We demonstrate that the temporal pattern of the genes that respond to
virus exposure in airway epithelium resembles to a significant degree their
pattern of response to HDM. The gene expression pattern of EGR1, DUSP1, FOSL1,
JUN, MYC, and IL6 is rather similar after viral (poly(I:C)) and HDM exposure.
However, both triggers also induce a specific response (e.g. ATF3, FOS, and
NFKB1). We confirmed these data by showing that epithelial cells produce a
variety of similar mediators in response to both poly(I:C) and HDM challenge
(IL1-RA, IL-17, IFN-a and MIP1-a), sometimes with a quantitative difference in
response (IL2-R, IL-6, IL-8, MCP-1, MIG, and HGF). Interestingly, only four
mediators (IL-12, IP-10, RANTES and VEGF) where up-regulated specifically by
poly(I:C) and not by HDM. Additionally, we report that pre-exposure to HDM
deregulates production of cytokines and mediators in response to poly(I:C).
CONCLUSIONS: Epithelial cells responses to the HDM-allergen and a virus strongly 
resemble both in gene expression and in protein level explaining why these two
responses may affect each other.

PMCID: PMC3912021
PMID: 24498371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Iran J Basic Med Sci. 2013 Nov;16(11):1151-4.

Expression and clinical significance of activating transcription factor 3 in
human breast cancer.

Cao H(1), Yang ZX(1), Jiang GQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.

OBJECTIVE(S): Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer among women
worldwide. This study investigated the expression and clinical significance of
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in human breast cancer and its
relationship with the clinical outcome of breast cancer. Materials and Methods : 
ATF3 expressions were detected in 114 primary breast cancer tissues and 114
adjacent normal tissues using immunohistochemistry (IHC) assay. Categorical
variables were statistically compared by chi-square or Fisher's exact test.
Survival curves were evaluated using the Kaplan-Meier method and comparisons of
survival rates were tested using a Log-rank test. Results : IHC analysis showed
that the positive expression of ATF3 protein was detected in breast cancer tissue
with a positive ratio of 76.3%, and the positive ATF3 expression in adjacent
normal breast tissue was 13.2%, which is lower than that in breast cancer tissue 
samples (P<0.01). Furthermore, ATF3 expression showed significant correlation
with TNM stage, invasion, lymph node metastasis and number of metastatic lymph
nodes (P=0.038, P=0.029, P=0.026, and P=0.039 respectively), and did not
correlate with patients' age and tumor size (P>0.05). A significant difference in
overall survival rate was found between the patients with positive expression of 
ATF3 protein and those with negative expression (P=0.041). Conclusion : Increased
ATF3 expression participate in the tumorigenesis, invasion and metastasis of
breast cancer, and ATF3 may be useful as a new prognostic indicator for breast
cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC3909626
PMID: 24494067  [PubMed]


221. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 28;111(4):1622-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1314826111. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

ATF3 expression improves motor function in the ALS mouse model by promoting motor
neuron survival and retaining muscle innervation.

Seijffers R(1), Zhang J, Matthews JC, Chen A, Tamrazian E, Babaniyi O, Selig M,
Hynynen M, Woolf CJ, Brown RH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)F. M. Kirby Neurobiology Center and Department of Neurology, Children's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115.

ALS is a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by a progressive loss of
motor neurons and atrophy of distal axon terminals in muscle, resulting in loss
of motor function. Motor end plates denervated by axonal retraction of dying
motor neurons are partially reinnervated by remaining viable motor neurons;
however, this axonal sprouting is insufficient to compensate for motor neuron
loss. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) promotes neuronal survival and
axonal growth. Here, we reveal that forced expression of ATF3 in motor neurons of
transgenic SOD1(G93A) ALS mice delays neuromuscular junction denervation by
inducing axonal sprouting and enhancing motor neuron viability. Maintenance of
neuromuscular junction innervation during the course of the disease in
ATF3/SOD1(G93A) mice is associated with a substantial delay in muscle atrophy and
improved motor performance. Although disease onset and mortality are delayed,
disease duration is not affected. This study shows that adaptive axonal
growth-promoting mechanisms can substantially improve motor function in ALS and
importantly, that augmenting viability of the motor neuron soma and maintaining
functional neuromuscular junction connections are both essential elements in
therapy for motor neuron disease in the SOD1(G93A) mice. Accordingly, effective
protection of optimal motor neuron function requires restitution of multiple
dysregulated cellular pathways.

PMCID: PMC3910594
PMID: 24474789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Blood. 2014 Mar 27;123(13):2084-93. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-06-510909. Epub 2014 
Jan 27.

ATF3 is a novel regulator of mouse neutrophil migration.

Boespflug ND(1), Kumar S, McAlees JW, Phelan JD, Grimes HL, Hoebe K, Hai T,
Filippi MD, Karp CL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, and.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Mar 27;123(13):1983-5.

Expression of the activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) gene is induced by
Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling. In turn, ATF3 protein inhibits the expression
of various TLR-driven proinflammatory genes. Given its counter-regulatory role in
diverse innate immune responses, we defined the effects of ATF3 on neutrophilic
airway inflammation in mice. ATF3 deletion was associated with increased
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-driven airway epithelia production of CXCL1, but not
CXCL2, findings concordant with a consensus ATF3-binding site identified solely
in the Cxcl1 promoter. Unexpectedly, ATF3-deficient mice did not exhibit
increased airway neutrophilia after LPS challenge. Bone marrow chimeras revealed 
a specific reduction in ATF3(-/-) neutrophil recruitment to wild-type lungs. In
vitro, ATF3(-/-) neutrophils exhibited a profound chemotaxis defect. Global gene 
expression analysis identified ablated Tiam2 expression in ATF3(-/-) neutrophils.
TIAM2 regulates cellular motility by activating Rac1-mediated focal adhesion
disassembly. Notably, ATF3(-/-) and ATF3-sufficient TIAM2 knockdown neutrophils, 
both lacking TIAM2, exhibited increased focal complex area, along with excessive 
CD11b-mediated F-actin polymerization. Together, our data describe a dichotomous 
role for ATF3-mediated regulation of neutrophilic responses: inhibition of
neutrophil chemokine production but promotion of neutrophil chemotaxis.

PMCID: PMC3968391
PMID: 24470589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Afr J Paediatr Surg. 2013 Oct-Dec;10(4):371-3. doi: 10.4103/0189-6725.125451.

Activating transcription factor 3 is not up-regulated in hypospadias patients in 
Japan.

Takahashi T(1), Shimotakahara A, Miyahara K, Lane GJ, Yamataka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric General and Urogenital Surgery, Juntendo University
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The aetiology of hypospadias is largely uncharacterized. Some of the 
researchers have advocated that activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), an
oestrogen-responsive transcription factor, is up-regulated in patients with
hypospadias. The purpose is to evaluate the universality of this fact; we studied
the expression of ATF3 protein in prepuce tissue obtained from hypospadias and
phimosis patients living in metropolitan Tokyo.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Prepuce tissue was obtained from outer foreskin at the
time of surgery, quickly prepared for paraffin-embedded sectioning and stained
immunohistochemically for ATF3. Two researchers blindly evaluated
immunoreactivity and scored it semi-quantitatively as nil = 0, weak = 1, or
strong = 2, to give a final staining intensity score (SIS). Subjects were 18
hypospadias patients and 17 phimosis patients (as controls) who had surgery
between January, 2009 and March, 2010.
RESULTS: All subjects lived in metropolitan Tokyo, Japan. Mean ages at surgery
were 2.9 ± 1.0 and 3.9 ± 2.4 years, respectively (P > 0.05). SIS was not
statistically different between hypospadias patients (1.4 ± 0.5) and controls
(1.5 ± 0.5), (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that ATF3 is not highly associated with hypospadias
in metropolitan Tokyo. Differences in ethnicity might have influenced our
results.

PMID: 24469490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 20;9(1):e84212. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084212. eCollection
2014.

Genome wide expression profiling during spinal cord regeneration identifies
comprehensive cellular responses in zebrafish.

Hui SP(1), Sengupta D(1), Lee SG(2), Sen T(3), Kundu S(1), Mathavan S(2), Ghosh
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Molecular Biology and Bioinformatics, University of 
Calcutta, Kolkata, India. (2)Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Chittaranjan National Cancer Research Institute, Kolkata, India.

BACKGROUND: Among the vertebrates, teleost and urodele amphibians are capable of 
regenerating their central nervous system. We have used zebrafish as a model to
study spinal cord injury and regeneration. Relatively little is known about the
molecular mechanisms underlying spinal cord regeneration and information based on
high density oligonucleotide microarray was not available. We have used a high
density microarray to profile the temporal transcriptome dynamics during the
entire phenomenon.
RESULTS: A total of 3842 genes expressed differentially with significant fold
changes during spinal cord regeneration. Cluster analysis revealed event specific
dynamic expression of genes related to inflammation, cell death, cell migration, 
cell proliferation, neurogenesis, neural patterning and axonal regrowth.
Spatio-temporal analysis of stat3 expression suggested its possible function in
controlling inflammation and cell proliferation. Genes involved in neurogenesis
and their dorso-ventral patterning (sox2 and dbx2) are differentially expressed. 
Injury induced cell proliferation is controlled by many cell cycle regulators and
some are commonly expressed in regenerating fin, heart and retina. Expression
pattern of certain pathway genes are identified for the first time during
regeneration of spinal cord. Several genes involved in PNS regeneration in
mammals like stat3, socs3, atf3, mmp9 and sox11 are upregulated in zebrafish SCI 
thus creating PNS like environment after injury.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides a comprehensive genetic blue print of diverse
cellular response(s) during regeneration of zebrafish spinal cord. The data
highlights the importance of different event specific gene expression that could 
be better understood and manipulated further to induce successful regeneration in
mammals.

PMCID: PMC3896338
PMID: 24465396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(12):7439-44.

ATF3 activates Stat3 phosphorylation through inhibition of p53 expression in skin
cancer cells.

Hao ZF(1), Ao JH, Zhang J, Su YM, Yang RY.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Management Brigade, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing,
China E-mail : yangrya@sina.com.

AIM: ATF3, a member of the ATF/CREB family of transcription factors, has been
found to be selectively induced by calcineurin/NFAT inhibition and to enhance
keratinocyte tumor formation, although the precise role of ATF3 in human skin
cancer and possible mechanisms remain unknown.
METHODS: In this study, clinical analysis of 30 skin cancer patients and 30
normal donors revealed that ATF3 was accumulated in skin cancer tissues.
Functional assays demonstrated that ATF3 significantly promoted skin cancer cell 
proliferation.
RESULTS: Mechanically, ATF3 activated Stat3 phosphorylation in skin cancer cell
through regulation of p53 expression. Moreover, the promotion effect of ATF3 on
skin cancer cell proliferation was dependent on the p53-Stat3 signaling cascade.
CONCLUSION: Together, the results indicate that ATF3 might promote skin cancer
cell proliferation and enhance skin keratinocyte tumor development through
inhibiting p53 expression and then activating Stat3 phosphorylation.

PMID: 24460316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Mol Pain. 2014 Jan 24;10:6. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-10-6.

Activated spinal astrocytes are involved in the maintenance of chronic widespread
mechanical hyperalgesia after cast immobilization.

Ohmichi M, Ohmichi Y, Ohishi H, Yoshimoto T, Morimoto A, Li Y, Sakurai H, Nakano 
T, Sato J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Environmental Medicine, Nagoya University, Aichi
464-8601, Japan. jsato@nagoya-u.jp.

BACKGROUND: In the present study, we examined spinal glial cell activation as a
central nervous system mechanism of widespread mechanical hyperalgesia in rats
that experienced chronic post-cast pain (CPCP) 2 weeks after cast immobilization.
Activated spinal microglia and astrocytes were investigated immunohistologically 
in lumbar and coccygeal spinal cord segments 1 day, 5 weeks, and 13 weeks
following cast removal.
RESULTS: In the lumbar cord, astrocytes were activated after microglia.
Astrocytes also were activated after microglia in the coccygeal cord, but with a 
delay that was longer than that observed in the lumbar cord. This activation
pattern paralleled the observation that mechanical hyperalgesia occurred in the
hindleg or the hindpaw before the tail. The activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) immune response in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) on the last day of cast
immobilization suggested that nerve damage might not occur in CPCP rats. The
neural activation assessed by the phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (pERK) immune response in DRG arose 1 day after cast removal. In addition,
L-a-aminoadipate (L-a-AA), an inhibitor of astrocyte activation administered
intrathecally 5 weeks after cast removal, inhibited mechanical hyperalgesia in
several body parts including the lower leg skin and muscles bilaterally,
hindpaws, and tail.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that activation of lumbar cord astrocytes is 
an important factor in widespread mechanical hyperalgesia in CPCP.

PMCID: PMC3907371
PMID: 24456903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Nat Immunol. 2014 Feb;15(2):138-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.2798.

Old HDL learns a new (anti-inflammatory) trick.

Odegaard JI(1), Chawla A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco,
California, USA. (2)Cardiovascular Research Institute, the Department of
Physiology and the Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, California, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Feb;15(2):152-60.

PMID: 24448572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Sep;229(9):1202-11. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24554.

Exosomal ATF3 RNA attenuates pro-inflammatory gene MCP-1 transcription in renal
ischemia-reperfusion.

Chen HH(1), Lai PF, Lan YF, Cheng CF, Zhong WB, Lin YF, Chen TW, Lin H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Taipei Medical
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine, School of
Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Transcriptional repressor activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is induced by 
various stress stimuli, including inflammation-induced renal injury. In addition,
ATF3 also down-regulates adhesion molecules like intercellular adhesion molecule 
(ICAM), vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM), and monocyte chemotactic
protein-1 (MCP-1). However, the relation between up-regulated ATF3 after renal
ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury and MCP-1 is not completely understood. In this
study, we demonstrated that, in renal I/R induced inflammation, induction of
adhesion molecules (interleukin-6, P-selectin, E-selectin, ICAM, VCAM, and MCP-1)
was higher in ATF3-knockout mice than in wild-type animals. Molecular and
biochemical analyses revealed that ATF3 binds to the ATF/CRE sites in the MCP-1
promoter and inhibits the secretion of MCP-1 from renal epithelial cells after
I/R injury. Urinary exosome containing ATF3 RNA was 60-fold higher in patients
with acute kidney injury than in normal controls, but no difference in total
urinary ATF3 RNA levels was found. In addition, in vitro study showed that
exosome containing ATF3 RNA derived from epithelial cells also inhibits MCP-1
expression in the epithelial cells and macrophage migration. Furthermore, direct 
administration of the epithelium-derived exosomal ATF3 RNA attenuates I/R induced
kidney injury. Together, our studies reveal a novel regulatory mechanism of MCP-1
expression mediated by the exosomal ATF3 RNA under renal I/R insult and suggest a
potential targeted therapy for I/R induced acute kidney injury.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24420912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2014 Apr 15;116(8):1033-47. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01234.2013. Epub 2014 Jan 9.

Transcriptome-wide RNA sequencing analysis of rat skeletal muscle feed arteries. 
II. Impact of exercise training in obesity.

Padilla J(1), Jenkins NT, Thorne PK, Martin JS, Rector RS, Davis JW, Laughlin MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Exercise Physiology, University of Missouri,
Columbia, Missouri;

We employed next-generation RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) technology to determine the 
extent to which exercise training alters global gene expression in skeletal
muscle feed arteries and aortic endothelial cells of obese Otsuka Long-Evans
Tokushima Fatty (OLETF) rats. Transcriptional profiles of the soleus and
gastrocnemius muscle feed arteries (SFA and GFA, respectively) and aortic
endothelial cell-enriched samples from rats that underwent an endurance exercise 
training program (EndEx; n = 12) or a interval sprint training program (IST; n = 
12) or remained sedentary (Sed; n = 12) were examined. In response to EndEx,
there were 39 upregulated (e.g., MANF) and 20 downregulated (e.g., ALOX15) genes 
in SFA and 1 upregulated (i.e., Wisp2) and 1 downregulated (i.e., Crem) gene in
GFA [false discovery rate (FDR) < 10%]. In response to IST, there were 305
upregulated (e.g., MANF, HSPA12B) and 324 downregulated genes in SFA and 101
upregulated and 66 downregulated genes in GFA, with an overlap of 32 genes
between arteries. Furthermore, in aortic endothelial cells, there were 183
upregulated (e.g., eNOS, SOD-3) and 141 downregulated (e.g., ATF3, Clec1b, npy,
leptin) genes with EndEx and 71 upregulated and 69 downregulated genes with IST, 
with an overlap of 35 between exercise programs. Expression of only two genes
(Tubb2b and Slc9a3r2) was altered (i.e., increased) by exercise in all three
arteries. The finding that both EndEx and IST produced greater transcriptional
changes in the SFA compared with the GFA is intriguing when considering the fact 
that treadmill bouts of exercise are associated with greater relative increases
in blood flow to the gastrocnemius muscle compared with the soleus muscle.

PMCID: PMC4035783
PMID: 24408995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Neuroscience. 2014 Feb 28;260:185-94. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.12.028.
Epub 2013 Dec 18.

Spinal gene expression profiling and pathways analysis of a CB2 agonist
(MDA7)-targeted prevention of paclitaxel-induced neuropathy.

Xu JJ(1), Diaz P(2), Bie B(3), Astruc-Diaz F(4), Wu J(5), Yang H(6), Brown DL(7),
Naguib M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Anesthesiology Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue - E-31,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. Electronic address: xuj3@ccf.org. (2)The Department of 
Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Core Laboratory for Neuromolecular
Production, The University of Montana, Missoula, MT 59812, USA. Electronic
address: philippe.diaz@mso.umt.edu. (3)Anesthesiology Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue - E-31, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. Electronic address: 
bieb@ccf.org. (4)The Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Core
Laboratory for Neuromolecular Production, The University of Montana, Missoula, MT
59812, USA. Electronic address: fanny.diaz@umontana.edu. (5)Anesthesiology
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue - E-31, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
Electronic address: wuj3@ccf.org. (6)Anesthesiology Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
9500 Euclid Avenue - E-31, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. Electronic address:
yangh@ccf.org. (7)Anesthesiology Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue 
- E-31, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. Electronic address: browndl@ccf.org.
(8)Anesthesiology Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue - E-31,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. Electronic address: naguibm@ccf.org.

AIMS: Patients receiving paclitaxel often develop peripheral neuropathies. We
found that a novel selective cannabinoid CB2 receptor agonist (MDA7) prevents
paclitaxel-induced mechanical allodynia in rats and mice. Here we investigated
gene expression profiling in the lumbar spinal cord after 14-day treatment of
MDA7 in paclitaxel animals and analyzed possible signaling pathways underlying
the preventive effect of MDA7 on paclitaxel-induced neuropathy.
METHODS: Peripheral mechanical allodynia was induced in rats or mice receiving
intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of paclitaxel at a dose of 1mg/kg daily for four
consecutive days. MDA7 was administered at a dose of 15mg/kg 15min before
paclitaxel and then continued daily for another 10days. Whole-genome gene
expression profiling in the lumbar spinal cord of MDA7 and paclitaxel-treated
rats was investigated using microarray analysis. The Ingenuity pathway analysis
was performed to determine the potential relevant canonical pathways responsible 
for the effect of MDA7 on paclitaxel-induced peripheral neuropathy.
RESULTS: We observed that the inflammatory molecular networks including tumor
necrosis factor (TNF), nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B
cells (NF-<U+03BA>B), transforming growth factor beta (TGFß), and mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPK) signaling are most relevant to the preventive effect of
MDA7 on paclitaxel-induced peripheral neuropathy. In addition, genes encoding
molecules that are important in central sensitization such as glutamate
transporters and N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor 2B (NMDAR2B), and
neuro-immune-related genes such as neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS1),
chemokine CX3CL1 (a mediator for microglial activation), toll-like receptor 2
(TLR2), and leptin were differentially modulated by MDA7.
CONCLUSION: The preventive effect of MDA7 on paclitaxel-induced peripheral
allodynia in rats may be associated with genes involved in signal pathways in
central sensitization, microglial activation, and neuroinflammation in the spinal
cord.

Copyright © 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24361916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Nat Immunol. 2014 Feb;15(2):152-60. doi: 10.1038/ni.2784. Epub 2013 Dec 8.

High-density lipoprotein mediates anti-inflammatory reprogramming of macrophages 
via the transcriptional regulator ATF3.

De Nardo D(1), Labzin LI(1), Kono H(2), Seki R(3), Schmidt SV(4), Beyer M(4), Xu 
D(5), Zimmer S(6), Lahrmann C(6), Schildberg FA(7), Vogelhuber J(8), Kraut M(4), 
Ulas T(4), Kerksiek A(9), Krebs W(4), Bode N(6), Grebe A(8), Fitzgerald ML(10),
Hernandez NJ(10), Williams BR(11), Knolle P(12), Kneilling M(13), Röcken M(14),
Lütjohann D(9), Wright SD(15), Schultze JL(16), Latz E(17).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute of Innate Immunity, University Hospitals, Biomedical Centre,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. [2]. (2)Department of Internal Medicine,
Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Clinical
Laboratory Science, Teikyo University Faculty of Medical Technology, Tokyo,
Japan. (4)Life and Medical Sciences Institute, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(5)1] Monash Institute of Medical Research, Monash University, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia. [2] Institute of Ageing Research, Hangzhou Normal University
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China. (6)Department of Medicine/Cardiology,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (7)Institutes of Molecular Medicine and
Experimental Immunology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (8)Institute of
Innate Immunity, University Hospitals, Biomedical Centre, University of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany. (9)Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (10)Lipid Metabolism Unit, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (11)Monash 
Institute of Medical Research, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(12)1] Institutes of Molecular Medicine and Experimental Immunology, University
of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. [2] Institute of Molecular Immunology, Technical
University of Munich, Munich, Germany. (13)1] Department of Dermatology, Eberhard
Karls University, Tuebingen, Germany. [2] Werner Siemens Imaging Center,
Department of Preclinical Imaging and Radiopharmacy, Eberhard Karls University,
Tuebingen, Germany. (14)Department of Dermatology, Eberhard Karls University,
Tuebingen, Germany. (15)Cardiovascular Therapeutics, CSL Limited, Parkville,
Australia. (16)1] Life and Medical Sciences Institute, University of Bonn, Bonn, 
Germany. [2]. (17)1] Institute of Innate Immunity, University Hospitals,
Biomedical Centre, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. [2] Division of Infectious 
Diseases and Immunology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts, USA. [3] German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Bonn,
Germany. [4].

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Jun;34(6):e11-2.
    Cell Metab. 2014 Feb 4;19(2):175-6.
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Feb;15(2):138-9.

High-density lipoprotein (HDL) mediates reverse cholesterol transport and is
known to be protective against atherosclerosis. In addition, HDL has potent
anti-inflammatory properties that may be critical for protection against other
inflammatory diseases. The molecular mechanisms of how HDL can modulate
inflammation, particularly in immune cells such as macrophages, remain poorly
understood. Here we identify the transcriptional regulator ATF3, as an
HDL-inducible target gene in macrophages that downregulates the expression of
Toll-like receptor (TLR)-induced proinflammatory cytokines. The protective
effects of HDL against TLR-induced inflammation were fully dependent on ATF3 in
vitro and in vivo. Our findings may explain the broad anti-inflammatory and
metabolic actions of HDL and provide the basis for predicting the success of new 
HDL-based therapies.

PMCID: PMC4009731
PMID: 24317040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jan 3;443(1):333-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.11.121. Epub 2013 Dec 6.

ER stress-inducible ATF3 suppresses BMP2-induced ALP expression and activation in
MC3T3-E1 cells.

Park JK(1), Jang H(2), Hwang S(3), Kim EJ(4), Kim DE(5), Oh KB(6), Kwon DJ(7),
Koh JT(8), Kimura K(9), Inoue H(10), Jang WG(11), Lee JW(12).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Integrative Cellulomics, Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: myfreeJK@kribb.re.kr. (2)Research Center of Integrative Cellulomics,
Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-806,
Republic of Korea; Functional Genomics, School of Engineering, University of
Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: Janghoon@kribb.re.kr. (3)Animal Biotechnology Division, National
Institute of Animal Science, Rural Development Administration, Suwon, Republic of
Korea. Electronic address: hwangss@korea.kr. (4)Research Center of Integrative
Cellulomics, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon
305-806, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: eunjungk@paran.com. (5)Research
Center of Integrative Cellulomics, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
pawust86@kribb.re.kr. (6)Animal Biotechnology Division, National Institute of
Animal Science, Rural Development Administration, Suwon, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: keonoh@korea.kr. (7)Animal Biotechnology Division, National
Institute of Animal Science, Rural Development Administration, Suwon, Republic of
Korea. Electronic address: daejinkwon@gmail.com. (8)Dental Science Research
Institute and BK21, School of Dentistry, Chonnam National University, Gwangju
500-757, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jtkoh@chonnam.ac.kr.
(9)Department of Physiology and Metabolism, Brain/Liver Interface Medicine
Research Center, College of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, Kanazawa
University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8641, Japan. (10)Department
of Physiology and Metabolism, Brain/Liver Interface Medicine Research Center,
College of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, Kanazawa University, 13-1
Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8641, Japan. Electronic address:
inoue-h@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.kr. (11)Department of Biotechnology, School of
Engineering, Daegu University, Gyeongbuk 712-714, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: jangwg@daegu.ac.kr. (12)Research Center of Integrative Cellulomics,
Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-806,
Republic of Korea; Functional Genomics, School of Engineering, University of
Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: jwlee@kribb.re.kr.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress suppresses osteoblast differentiation.
Activating transcription factor (ATF) 3, a member of the ATF/cAMP response
element-binding protein family of transcription factors, is induced by various
stimuli including cytokines, hormones, DNA damage, and ER stress. However, the
role of ATF3 in osteoblast differentiation has not been elucidated. Treatment
with tunicamycin (TM), an ER stress inducer, increased ATF3 expression in the
preosteoblast cell line, MC3T3-E1. Overexpression of ATF3 inhibited bone
morphogenetic protein 2-stimulated expression and activation of alkaline
phosphatase (ALP), an osteogenic marker. In addition, suppression of ALP
expression by TM treatment was rescued by silencing of ATF3 using shRNA. Taken
together, these data indicate that ATF3 is a novel negative regulator of
osteoblast differentiation by specifically suppressing ALP gene expression in
preosteoblasts.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24315873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Cell Signal. 2014 Mar;26(3):512-20. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.11.029. Epub 2013
Dec 2.

Bilirubin mediated oxidative stress involves antioxidant response activation via 
Nrf2 pathway.

Qaisiya M(1), Coda Zabetta CD(2), Bellarosa C(3), Tiribelli C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione Italiana Fegato ONLUS, Italian Liver Foundation ONLUS, Bldg Q AREA 
Science Park - Basovizza Campus, 34149 Trieste, Italy. Electronic address:
m.qaisiya@csf.units.it. (2)Fondazione Italiana Fegato ONLUS, Italian Liver
Foundation ONLUS, Bldg Q AREA Science Park - Basovizza Campus, 34149 Trieste,
Italy. Electronic address: carlos.zabetta@csf.units.it. (3)Fondazione Italiana
Fegato ONLUS, Italian Liver Foundation ONLUS, Bldg Q AREA Science Park -
Basovizza Campus, 34149 Trieste, Italy. Electronic address:
cristina.bellarosa@csf.units.it. (4)Fondazione Italiana Fegato ONLUS, Italian
Liver Foundation ONLUS, Bldg Q AREA Science Park - Basovizza Campus, 34149
Trieste, Italy; Department of Medical Sciences, University of Trieste, 34100
Trieste, Italy. Electronic address: ctliver@csf.units.it.

Unconjugated bilirubin (UCB) is responsible for neonatal jaundice and high level 
of free bilirubin (Bf) can lead to kernicterus. Previous studies suggest that
oxidative stress is a critical component of UCB-induced neurotoxicity. The Nrf2
pathway is a powerful sensor for cellular redox state and is activated directly
by oxidative stress and/or indirectly by stress response protein kinases.
Activated Nrf2 translocates to nucleus, binds to Antioxidant Response Element
(ARE), and enhances the up-regulation of cytoprotective genes that mediate cell
survival. The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of Nrf2
pathway in cell response to bilirubin mediated oxidative stress in the
neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cell line. Cells exposed to a toxic concentration of UCB
(140 nM Bf) showed an increased intracellular ROS levels and enhanced nuclear
accumulation of Nrf2 protein. UCB stimulated transcriptional induction of ARE-GFP
reporter gene and induced mRNA expression of multiple antioxidant response genes 
as: xCT, Gly1, <U+03B3>GCL-m, <U+03B3>GCL-c, HO-1, NQO1, FTH, ME1, and ATF3. Nrf2 siRNA
decreased UCB induced mRNA expression of HO1 (75%), NQO1 (54%), and FTH (40%).
The Nrf2-related HO-1 induction was reduced to 60% in cells pre-treated with
antioxidant (NAC) or specific signaling pathway inhibitors for PKC, P38a and
MEK1/2 (80, 40 and 25%, respectively). In conclusion, we demonstrated that
SH-SY5Y cells undergo an adaptive response against UCB-mediated oxidative stress 
by activation of multiple antioxidant response, in part through Nrf2 pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24308969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Carcinog. 2015 May;54(5):393-404. doi: 10.1002/mc.22109. Epub 2013 Nov 30.

PPAR<U+03B3>-inactive <U+0394>2-troglitazone independently triggers ER stress and apoptosis in 
breast cancer cells.

Colin-Cassin C(1), Yao X, Cerella C, Chbicheb S, Kuntz S, Mazerbourg S, Boisbrun 
M, Chapleur Y, Diederich M, Flament S, Grillier-Vuissoz I.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lorraine, CRAN, UMR 7039, Vanduvre-lès-Nancy, France; CNRS,
CRAN, UMR 7039, Vanduvre-lès-Nancy, France.

Our aim was to better understand peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPAR<U+03B3>)-independent pathways involved in anti-cancer effects of
thiazolidinediones (TZDs). We focused on <U+0394>2-troglitazone (<U+0394>2-TGZ), a PPAR<U+03B3>
inactive TZD that affects breast cancer cell viability. Appearance of TUNEL
positive cells, changes in mitochondrial membrane potential, cleavage of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)-1 and caspase-7 revealed that apoptosis
occurred in both hormone-dependent MCF7 and hormone-independent MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells after 24 and 48 h of treatment. A microarray study identified
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress as an essential cellular function since many
genes involved in ER stress were upregulated in MCF7 cells following <U+0394>2-TGZ
treatment. <U+0394>2-TGZ-induced ER stress was further confirmed in MCF7 cells by
phosphorylation of pancreatic endoplasmic reticulum kinase-like endoplasmic
reticulum kinase (PERK) and its target eIF2a after 1.5 h, rapid increase in
activating transcription factor (ATF) 3 mRNA levels, splicing of X-box binding
protein 1 (XBP1) after 3 h, accumulation of binding immunogloblulin protein (BiP)
and CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) after 6 h.
Immunofluorescence microscopy indicated that CHOP was relocalized to the nucleus 
of treated cells. Similarly, in MDA-MB-231 cells, overexpression of ATF3,
splicing of XBP1, and accumulation of BiP and CHOP were observed following <U+0394>2-TGZ
treatment. In MCF7 cells, knock-down of CHOP or the inhibition of c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK) did not impair cleavage of PARP-1 and caspase-7.
Altogether, our results show that ER stress is an early response of major types
of breast cancer cells to <U+0394>2-TGZ, prior to, but not causative of apoptosis.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24293218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Nov 28;4:e933. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.453.

Choline kinase inhibition induces exacerbated endoplasmic reticulum stress and
triggers apoptosis via CHOP in cancer cells.

Sanchez-Lopez E(1), Zimmerman T, Gomez del Pulgar T, Moyer MP, Lacal Sanjuan JC, 
Cebrian A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, UCSD, San Diego, CA, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a central organelle in eukaryotic cells that
regulates protein synthesis and maturation. Perturbation of ER functions leads to
ER stress, which has been previously associated with a broad variety of diseases.
ER stress is generally regarded as compensatory, but prolonged ER stress has been
involved in apoptosis induced by several cytotoxic agents. Choline kinase a
(ChoKa), the first enzyme in the Kennedy pathway, is responsible for the
generation of phosphorylcholine (PCho) that ultimately renders
phosphatidylcholine. ChoKa overexpression and high PCho levels have been detected
in several cancer types. Inhibition of ChoKa has demonstrated antiproliferative
and antitumor properties; however, the mechanisms underlying these activities
remain poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that ChoKa inhibitors (ChoKIs),
MN58b and RSM932A, induce cell death in cancer cells (T47D, MCF7, MDA-MB231,
SW620 and H460), through the prolonged activation of ER stress response. Evidence
of ChoKIs-induced ER stress includes enhanced production of glucose-regulated
protein, 78<U+2009>kDa (GRP78), protein disulfide isomerase, IRE1a, CHOP,
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBPß) and TRB3. Although partial reduction
of ChoKa levels by small interfering RNA was not sufficient to increase the
production of ER stress proteins, silencing of ChoKa levels also show a decrease 
in CHOP overproduction induced by ChoKIs, which suggests that ER stress induction
is due to a change in ChoKa protein folding after binding to ChoKIs. Silencing of
CHOP expression leads to a reduction in C/EBPß, ATF3 and GRP78 protein levels and
abrogates apoptosis in tumor cells after treatment with ChoKIs, suggesting that
CHOP maintains ER stress responses and triggers the pro-apoptotic signal.
Consistent with the differential effect of ChoKIs in cancer and primary cells
previously described, ChoKIs only promoted a transient and moderated ER stress
response in the non-tumorogenic cells MCF10A. In conclusion, pharmacological
inhibition of ChoKa induces cancer cell death through a mechanism that involves
the activation of exaggerated and persistent ER stress supported by CHOP
overproduction.

PMCID: PMC3847329
PMID: 24287694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Jan 15;320(2):281-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.11.012. Epub
2013 Nov 23.

Tetracyclines cause cell stress-dependent ATF4 activation and mTOR inhibition.

Brüning A(1), Brem GJ(2), Vogel M(2), Mylonas I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich, Germany. Electronic address: ansgar.bruening@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich, Germany.

Tetracyclines have long been used as valuable broad-spectrum antibiotics. The
high antibacterial activity of tetracyclines, combined with their good
tolerability, has led to their widespread use in treating various infectious
diseases. However, similar to other antibiotics, tetracyclines are also known for
their adverse effects on different human tissues, including hepatic steatosis. We
observed that tetracyclines, including doxycycline and minocycline, caused
enhanced expression of the liver chalone inhibin ßE in HepG2 cells, mediated by
the cell stress-regulated transcription factor ATF4. ATF4 and its target genes
ATF3, CHOP, and inhibin ßE are involved in cell cycle control, cell survival,
cell metabolism, and modulation of cytokine expression. Furthermore, we observed 
that long term tetracycline incubation also caused inhibition of the mTOR
complex, a central regulator of cell metabolism, further contributing to the
observed cell-cycle arrest and autophagy in doxycycline- and minocycline-treated 
cell lines. ATF4 activation and mTOR inhibition link two crucial regulators of
the cellular stress response and cell metabolism to the effects of tetracyclines 
on eukaryotic cell metabolism, and may help to understand the
antibiotic-independent influence of these drugs on human tissues. Since the
observed effects of tetracyclines on human cells were also found to be dependent 
on the magnesium ion concentrations supplied, the data further indicate the
importance of magnesium supplementation to reduce or prevent side effects of long
term treatment with tetracyclines.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24280420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Pain. 2014 Mar;155(3):476-84. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2013.11.007. Epub 2013 Nov 21.

Artemin induced functional recovery and reinnervation after partial nerve injury.

Wang R(1), Rossomando A(2), Sah DW(2), Ossipov MH(1), King T(1), Porreca F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson,
AZ 85724, USA. (2)BiogenIdec Inc, 14 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. 
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson,
AZ 85724, USA. Electronic address: frankp@u.arizona.edu.

Systemic artemin promotes regeneration of dorsal roots to the spinal cord after
crush injury. However, it is unclear whether systemic artemin can also promote
peripheral nerve regeneration, and functional recovery after partial lesions
distal to the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) remains unknown. In the present
investigation, male Sprague Dawley rats received axotomy, ligation, or crush of
the L5 spinal nerve or sham surgery. Starting the day of injury, animals received
intermittent subcutaneous artemin or vehicle across 2weeks. Sensory thresholds to
tactile or thermal stimuli were monitored for 6weeks after injury.
Immunohistochemical analyses of the DRG and nerve regeneration were performed at 
the 6-week time point. Artemin transiently reversed tactile and thermal
hypersensitivity after axotomy, ligation, or crush injury. Thermal and tactile
hypersensitivity reemerged within 1week of treatment termination. However,
artemin-treated rats with nerve crush, but not axotomy or ligation, subsequently 
showed gradual return of sensory thresholds to preinjury baseline levels by
6weeks after injury. Artemin normalized labeling for NF200, IB4, and CGRP in
nerve fibers distal to the crush injury, suggesting persistent normalization of
nerve crush-induced neurochemical changes. Sciatic and intradermal administration
of dextran or cholera toxin B distal to the crush injury site resulted in
labeling of neuronal profiles in the L5 DRG, suggesting regeneration functional
restoration of nonmyelinated and myelinated fibers across the injury site into
cutaneous tissue. Artemin also diminished ATF3 and caspase 3 expression in the L5
DRG, suggesting persistent neuroprotective actions. A limited period of artemin
treatment elicits disease modification by promoting sensory reinnervation of
distal territories and restoring preinjury sensory thresholds.

Copyright © 2013 International Association for the Study of Pain. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3936608
PMID: 24269493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 15;8(11):e81702. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081702.
eCollection 2013.

Mycophenolic acid inhibits migration and invasion of gastric cancer cells via
multiple molecular pathways.

Dun B(1), Sharma A, Teng Y, Liu H, Purohit S, Xu H, Zeng L, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Guangzhou, China ; Institute of Translational Medicine, School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Nanjing University of Technology, Nanjing, China ; Center for
Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia, United States of America.

Mycophenolic acid (MPA) is the metabolized product and active element of
mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) that has been widely used for the prevention of acute
graft rejection. MPA potently inhibits inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase
(IMPDH) that is up-regulated in many tumors and MPA is known to inhibit cancer
cell proliferation as well as fibroblast and endothelial cell migration. In this 
study, we demonstrated for the first time MPA's antimigratory and anti-invasion
abilities of MPA-sensitive AGS (gastric cancer) cells. Genome-wide expression
analyses using Illumina whole genome microarrays identified 50 genes with =2 fold
changes and 15 genes with > 4 fold alterations and multiple molecular pathways
implicated in cell migration. Real-time RT-PCR analyses of selected genes also
confirmed the expression differences. Furthermore, targeted proteomic analyses
identified several proteins altered by MPA treatment. Our results indicate that
MPA modulates gastric cancer cell migration through down-regulation of a large
number of genes (PRKCA, DOCK1, INF2, HSPA5, LRP8 and PDGFRA) and proteins (PRKCA,
AKT, SRC, CD147 and MMP1) with promigratory functions as well as up-regulation of
a number of genes with antimigratory functions (ATF3, SMAD3, CITED2 and
CEAMCAM1). However, a few genes that may promote migration (CYR61 and NOS3) were 
up-regulated. Therefore, MPA's overall antimigratory role on cancer cells
reflects a balance between promigratory and antimigratory signals influenced by
MPA treatment.

PMCID: PMC3829969
PMID: 24260584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Exp Neurol. 2014 Jan;251:115-26. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2013.11.011. Epub 2013 
Nov 16.

Kv2 dysfunction after peripheral axotomy enhances sensory neuron responsiveness
to sustained input.

Tsantoulas C(1), Zhu L(2), Yip P(3), Grist J(4), Michael GJ(3), McMahon SB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Neurorestoration Group, Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, King's
College London, London SE1 1UL, UK. Electronic address: c.tsantoulas@gmail.com.
(2)Neurorestoration Group, Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, King's
College London, London SE1 1UL, UK. Electronic address: lan.zhu@kcl.ac.uk.
(3)Centre for Neuroscience & Trauma, Blizard Institute, Bart's and The London
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London E1 2AT,
UK. (4)Neurorestoration Group, Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, King's
College London, London SE1 1UL, UK.

Comment in
    Exp Neurol. 2014 Apr;254:190-4.

Peripheral nerve injuries caused by trauma are associated with increased sensory 
neuron excitability and debilitating chronic pain symptoms. Axotomy-induced
alterations in the function of ion channels are thought to largely underlie the
pathophysiology of these phenotypes. Here, we characterise the mRNA distribution 
of Kv2 family members in rat dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and describe a link
between Kv2 function and modulation of sensory neuron excitability. Kv2.1 and
Kv2.2 were amply expressed in cells of all sizes, being particularly abundant in 
medium-large neurons also immunoreactive for neurofilament-200. Peripheral
axotomy led to a rapid, robust and long-lasting transcriptional Kv2
downregulation in the DRG, correlated with the onset of mechanical and thermal
hypersensitivity. The consequences of Kv2 loss-of-function were subsequently
investigated in myelinated neurons using intracellular recordings on ex vivo DRG 
preparations. In naïve neurons, pharmacological Kv2.1/Kv2.2 inhibition by
stromatoxin-1 (ScTx) resulted in shortening of action potential (AP)
after-hyperpolarization (AHP). In contrast, ScTx application on axotomized
neurons did not alter AHP duration, consistent with the injury-induced Kv2
downregulation. In accordance with a shortened AHP, ScTx treatment also reduced
the refractory period and improved AP conduction to the cell soma during high
frequency stimulation. These results suggest that Kv2 downregulation following
traumatic nerve lesion facilitates greater fidelity of repetitive firing during
prolonged input and thus normal Kv2 function is postulated to limit neuronal
excitability. In summary, we have profiled Kv2 expression in sensory neurons and 
provide evidence for the contribution of Kv2 dysfunction in the generation of
hyperexcitable phenotypes encountered in chronic pain states.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3898477
PMID: 24252178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Pharmacogenomics J. 2014 Jun;14(3):208-16. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2013.39. Epub 2013
Nov 12.

Data mining reveals a network of early-response genes as a consensus signature of
drug-induced in vitro and in vivo toxicity.

Zhang JD(1), Berntenis N(1), Roth A(1), Ebeling M(1).

Author information: 
(1)pRED Pharma Research and Development, F. Hoffmann-La Roche AG,
Grenzacherstrasse 124, Basel, Switzerland.

Gene signatures of drug-induced toxicity are of broad interest, but they are
often identified from small-scale, single-time point experiments, and are
therefore of limited applicability. To address this issue, we performed
multivariate analysis of gene expression, cell-based assays, and
histopathological data in the TG-GATEs (Toxicogenomics Project-Genomics Assisted 
Toxicity Evaluation system) database. Data mining highlights four genes-EGR1,
ATF3, GDF15 and FGF21-that are induced 2<U+2009>h after drug administration in human and
rat primary hepatocytes poised to eventually undergo cytotoxicity-induced cell
death. Modelling and simulation reveals that these early stress-response genes
form a functional network with evolutionarily conserved structure and intrinsic
dynamics. This is underlined by the fact that early induction of this network in 
vivo predicts drug-induced liver and kidney pathology with high accuracy. Our
findings demonstrate the value of early gene-expression signatures in predicting 
and understanding compound-induced toxicity. The identified network can empower
first-line tests that reduce animal use and costs of safety evaluation.

PMCID: PMC4034126
PMID: 24217556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Dec;27(12):2066-79. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1274. Epub 2013 Nov
6.

ATF3 expression in the corpus luteum: possible role in luteal regression.

Mao D(1), Hou X, Talbott H, Cushman R, Cupp A, Davis JS.

Author information: 
(1)Olson Center for Women's Health, Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology, Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198. jsdavis@unmc.edu.

The present study investigated the induction and possible role of activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in the corpus luteum. Postpubertal cattle were
treated at midcycle with prostaglandin F2a(PGF) for 0-4 hours. Luteal tissue was 
processed for immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization, and isolation of
protein and RNA. Ovaries were also collected from midluteal phase and
first-trimester pregnant cows. Luteal cells were prepared and sorted by
centrifugal elutriation to obtain purified small (SLCs) and large luteal cells
(LLCs). Real-time PCR and in situ hybridization showed that ATF3 mRNA increased
within 1 hour of PGF treatment in vivo. Western blot and immunohistochemistry
demonstrated that ATF3 protein was expressed in the nuclei of LLC within 1 hour
and was maintained for at least 4 hours. PGF treatment in vitro increased ATF3
expression only in LLC, whereas TNF induced ATF3 in both SLCs and LLCs. PGF
stimulated concentration- and time-dependent increases in ATF3 and
phosphorylation of MAPKs in LLCs. Combinations of MAPK inhibitors suppressed ATF3
expression in LLCs. Adenoviral-mediated expression of ATF3 inhibited
LH-stimulated cAMP response element reporter luciferase activity and progesterone
production in LLCs and SLCs but did not alter cell viability or change the
expression or activity of key regulators of progesterone synthesis. In
conclusion, the action of PGF in LLCs is associated with the rapid activation of 
stress-activated protein kinases and the induction of ATF3, which may contribute 
to the reduction in steroid synthesis during luteal regression. ATF3 appears to
affect gonadotropin-stimulated progesterone secretion at a step or steps
downstream of PKA signaling and before cholesterol conversion to progesterone.

PMCID: PMC3857195
PMID: 24196350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 22;8(10):e77788. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077788.
eCollection 2013.

Heat shock transcription factor 1-deficiency attenuates overloading-associated
hypertrophy of mouse soleus muscle.

Koya T(1), Nishizawa S, Ohno Y, Goto A, Ikuta A, Suzuki M, Ohira T, Egawa T,
Nakai A, Sugiura T, Ohira Y, Yoshioka T, Beppu M, Goto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, St. Marianna University School of Medicine,
Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.

Hypertrophic stimuli, such as mechanical stress and overloading, induce stress
response, which is mediated by heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), and
up-regulate heat shock proteins (HSPs) in mammalian skeletal muscles. Therefore, 
HSF1-associated stress response may play a key role in loading-associated
skeletal muscle hypertrophy. The purpose of this study was to investigate the
effects of HSF1-deficiency on skeletal muscle hypertrophy caused by overloading. 
Functional overloading on the left soleus was performed by cutting the distal
tendons of gastrocnemius and plantaris muscles for 4 weeks. The right muscle
served as the control. Soleus muscles from both hindlimbs were dissected 2 and 4 
weeks after the operation. Hypertrophy of soleus muscle in HSF1-null mice was
partially inhibited, compared with that in wild-type (C57BL/6J) mice. Absence of 
HSF1 partially attenuated the increase of muscle wet weight and fiber
cross-sectional area of overloaded soleus muscle. Population of Pax7-positive
muscle satellite cells in HSF1-null mice was significantly less than that in
wild-type mice following 2 weeks of overloading (p<0.05). Significant
up-regulations of interleukin (IL)-1ß and tumor necrosis factor mRNAs were
observed in HSF1-null, but not in wild-type, mice following 2 weeks of
overloading. Overloading-related increases of IL-6 and AFT3 mRNA expressions seen
after 2 weeks of overloading tended to decrease after 4 weeks in both types of
mice. In HSF1-null mice, however, the significant overloading-related increase in
the expression of IL-6, not ATF3, mRNA was noted even at 4th week. Inhibition of 
muscle hypertrophy might be attributed to the greater and prolonged enhancement
of IL-6 expression. HSF1 and/or HSF1-mediated stress response may, in part, play 
a key role in loading-induced skeletal muscle hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC3805596
PMID: 24167582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. EMBO J. 2013 Nov 27;32(23):3066-78. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.234. Epub 2013 Oct
25.

Listeria phospholipases subvert host autophagic defenses by stalling
pre-autophagosomal structures.

Tattoli I(1), Sorbara MT, Yang C, Tooze SA, Philpott DJ, Girardin SE.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada [2] Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada.

Listeria can escape host autophagy defense pathways through mechanisms that
remain poorly understood. We show here that in epithelial cells, Listeriolysin
(LLO)-dependent cytosolic escape of Listeria triggered a transient amino-acid
starvation host response characterized by GCN2 phosphorylation, ATF3 induction
and mTOR inhibition, the latter favouring a pro-autophagic cellular environment. 
Surprisingly, rapid recovery of mTOR signalling was neither sufficient nor
necessary for Listeria avoidance of autophagic targeting. Instead, we observed
that Listeria phospholipases PlcA and PlcB reduced autophagic flux and
phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P) levels, causing pre-autophagosomal
structure stalling and preventing efficient targeting of cytosolic bacteria. In
co-infection experiments, wild-type Listeria protected PlcA/B-deficient bacteria 
from autophagy-mediated clearance. Thus, our results uncover a critical role for 
Listeria phospholipases C in the inhibition of autophagic flux, favouring
bacterial escape from host autophagic defense.

PMCID: PMC3844955
PMID: 24162724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014 Jan;73(1):25-34. doi: 10.1007/s00280-013-2304-9.
Epub 2013 Oct 27.

Toll-like receptor signaling regulates cisplatin-induced mechanical allodynia in 
mice.

Park HJ(1), Stokes JA, Corr M, Yaksh TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, College of Medicine, The
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: Cisplatin-treated mice develop a persistent pain state and a condition
wherein otherwise innocuous tactile stimuli evoke pain behavior, e.g., tactile
allodynia. The allodynia is associated with an up-regulation of activation
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG), a factor, which
is activated by Toll-like receptors (TLRs). Accordingly, we sought to examine the
role of the TLR signaling cascade on allodynia, weight, and changes in DRG ATF3
in cisplatin-treated mice.
METHODS: Cisplatin (2.3 mg/kg/day × 6 injections every other day) or vehicle was 
administered to male wild-type (WT) C57BL/6, Tlr3 (-/-), Tlr4 (-/-), Myd88 (-/-),
Trif (lps2) and Myd88/Trif (lps2) mice. We examined allodynia and body weight at 
intervals over 30 days, when we measured DRG ATF3 by immunostaining.
RESULTS: (1) WT cisplatin-treated mice showed tactile allodynia from day 3
through day 30. (2) The Myd88/Trif (lps2) mice did not show allodynia. (3) In
Tlr3 (-/-), Tlr4 (-/-), and Myd88 (-/-) mice, withdrawal thresholds were elevated
toward normal versus WT cisplatin-treated mice, but remained decreased as
compared to vehicle mice. (4) In Trif (lps2) mice, cisplatin allodynia showed a
delayed onset, but persisted. (5) In Tlr3 (-/-), Tlr4 (-/-), Myd88 (-/-), and
Myd88/Trif (lps2) mice, the increase in DRG ATF3 was abolished. (6) Weight loss
occurred during cisplatin administration, which was exacerbated in mutant as
compared to WT mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Cisplatin evoked a persistent allodynia and DRG ATF3 expression in
WT mice, but these effects were reduced in mice with TLR signaling deficiency.
TLR signaling may thus be involved in the mechanisms leading to the cisplatin
polyneuropathy.

PMCID: PMC3917999
PMID: 24162377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Endocr J. 2014;61(1):85-90. Epub 2013 Oct 20.

ATF3 expression is induced by low glucose in pancreatic a and ß cells and
regulates glucagon but not insulin gene transcription.

Lee YS(1), Kobayashi M, Kikuchi O, Sasaki T, Yokota-Hashimoto H, Susanti VY, Ido 
Kitamura Y, Kitamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Signal Research Center, Institute for Molecular and Cellular
Regulation, Gunma University, Maebashi, Gunma, Japan.

The pancreas is critical for maintaining glucose homeostasis. Activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is an adaptive response transcription factor. There
are major discrepancies in previous reports on pancreatic ATF3; therefore, its
role in the pancreas is unclear. To better elucidate the role of ATF3 in the
pancreas, we conducted in vitro studies using pancreatic a and ß cell lines, and 
also evaluated the use of ATF3 antibodies for immunohistochemistry. We determined
ATF3 expression was increased by low glucose and decreased by high glucose in
both aTC-1.6 and ßTC3 cells. We also showed that adenovirus-mediated ATF3
overexpression increased glucagon promoter activity and glucagon mRNA levels in
aTC-1.6 cells; whereas, it had no effect on insulin promoter activity and insulin
mRNA levels in ßTC3 cells. Although immunostaining with the C-19 ATF3 antibody
demonstrated predominant expression in a cells rather than ß cells, ATF3 staining
was still detected in ATF3 knockout mice as clearly as in control mice. On the
other hand, another ATF3 antibody (H-90) detected ATF3 in both a cells and ß
cells, and was clearly diminished in ATF3 knockout mice. These results indicate
that previous discrepancies in ATF3 expression patterns in the pancreas were
caused by the varying specificities of the ATF3 antibodies used, and that ATF3 is
actually expressed in both a cells and ß cells.

PMID: 24140652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Pain. 2013 Dec;14(12):1585-600. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2013.08.002. Epub 2013 Oct
14.

Morphologic features and glial activation in rat oxaliplatin-dependent
neuropathic pain.

Di Cesare Mannelli L(1), Pacini A, Bonaccini L, Zanardelli M, Mello T, Ghelardini
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health
(Neurofarba), Pharmacology and Toxicology Section, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy.

Neurotoxicity is the limiting side effect of the anticancer agent oxaliplatin. A 
tangled panel of symptoms, sensory loss, paresthesia, dysesthesia, and pain may
be disabling for patients and adversely affect their quality of life. To
elucidate the morphologic and molecular alterations that occur in the nervous
system during neuropathy, rats were daily injected with 2.4 mg kg(-1) oxaliplatin
intraperitoneally. A progressive decrease in the pain threshold and
hypersensitivity to noxious and nonnoxious stimuli were evidenced during the
treatment (7, 14, 21 days). On day 21, morphometric alterations were detectable
exclusively in the dorsal root ganglia, whereas the activating transcription
factor 3 and neurofilament (heavy-chain) expression changed dramatically in both 
the nerves and ganglia. Inflammatory features were not highlighted.
Interestingly, satellite cells exhibited signs of activation. Glial modulation
was characterized in the spinal cord and brain areas involved in pain signaling. 
On the 21st day, spinal astrocytes increased numerically whereas the microglial
population was unaltered. The number of glial cells in the brain differed
according to the zone and treatment time points. In particular, on day 21, a
significant astrocyte increase was measured in the anterior cingulate cortex,
somatosensory area 1, neostriatum, ventrolateral periaqueductal gray, and nucleus
raphe magnus.PERSPECTIVES: These data highlight the relevance of glial cells in
chemotherapy-induced neurotoxicity as part of the investigation of the role that 
specific brain areas play in neuropathy.

Copyright © 2013 American Pain Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 24135431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2013 Sep 15;6(10):2064-70. eCollection 2013.

Upregulation of ATF-3 is correlated with prognosis and proliferation of laryngeal
cancer by regulating Cyclin D1 expression.

Feng J(1), Sun Q, Wu T, Lu J, Qu L, Sun Y, Tian L, Zhang B, Li D, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, The Second
Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical University Harbin, China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the expression and significance of
ATF-3 in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC).
METHODS: Expression of ATF-3 was examined using immunohistochemistry methods in
samples from 83 cases of LSCC carcinoma. MTT assay was used to detect
proliferation of Hep-2 cells after ATF-3 knocked down by siRNA lentivirus. A
mouse model was used to investigate the inhibitive role of ATF-3 siRNA in LSCC
xenografts. Realtime RCR was used to detect Cyclin D1 expression after ATF-3
downregulation in Hep-2 cells.
RESULTS: The expression of ATF-3 was positively detected in all the 83 cases of
LSCC cancer tissues while Only 4 cases of adjacent non-neoplastic tissues were
detected with positive ATF-3 expression. The ATF-3 expression was statistically
related with T stage, neck nodal metastasis, clinical stage and prognosis of
LSCC. Both cell proliferation in vitro and tumor growth in vivo were suppressed
after ATF-3 knockdown. Furthermore, the expression of Cyclin D1 was decreased
after ATF-3 downregulation in Hep-2 cells.
CONCLUSION: ATF-3 is involved in the progress of LSCC, and may provide clinical
information for evaluation of prognosis of LSCC. The oncologic role of ATF-3 may 
be correlated with Cyclin D1 regulation.

PMCID: PMC3796228
PMID: 24133584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Apr 1;23(7):741-54. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0396. Epub 2013
Nov 22.

Stimulating the neurotrophic and angiogenic properties of human adipose-derived
stem cells enhances nerve repair.

Kingham PJ(1), Kolar MK, Novikova LN, Novikov LN, Wiberg M.

Author information: 
(1)1 Section for Anatomy, Department of Integrative Medical Biology, Umeå
University , Umeå, Sweden .

In future, adipose-derived stem cells (ASC) might be used to treat neurological
disorders. In this study, the neurotrophic and angiogenic properties of human ASC
were evaluated, and their effects in a peripheral nerve injury model were
determined. In vitro growth factor stimulation of the cells resulted in increased
secretion of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), glial cell-derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF), vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A), and
angiopoietin-1 proteins. Conditioned medium from stimulated cells increased
neurite outgrowth of dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons. Similarly, stimulated
cells showed an enhanced ability to induce capillary-like tube formation in an in
vitro angiogenesis assay. ASC were seeded into a fibrin conduit that was used to 
bridge a 10<U+2009>mm rat nerve gap. After 2 weeks, the animals treated with control or 
stimulated ASC showed an enhanced axon regeneration distance. Stimulated cells
evoked more total axon growth. Analysis of regeneration and apoptosis-related
gene expression showed that both ASC and stimulated ASC enhanced GAP-43 and
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF-3) expression in the spinal cord and
reduced c-jun expression in the DRG. Caspase-3 expression in the DRG was reduced 
by stimulated ASC. Both ASC and stimulated ASC also increased the vascularity of 
the fibrin nerve conduits. Thus, ASC produce functional neurotrophic and
angiogenic factors, creating a more desirable microenvironment for nerve
regeneration.

PMID: 24124760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Dec;33(24):4857-71. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00797-13. Epub 2013 Oct 
7.

NF-<U+03BA>B1 inhibits NOD2-induced cytokine secretion through ATF3-dependent
mechanisms.

Zheng S(1), Abraham C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Regulation of microbially induced cytokine secretion is critical in intestinal
immune homeostasis. NOD2, the Crohn's disease-associated bacterial peptidoglycan 
sensor, activates the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. After chronic NOD2 stimulation in human
macrophages, cytokine secretion is significantly attenuated, similar to the
situation in the intestinal environment. We find that NF-<U+03BA>B1 (p105/p50)
expression is upregulated with chronic NOD2 stimulation and is required for
attenuation of cytokine secretion in vitro in human macrophages and in vivo in
mice. Upon chronic NOD2 stimulation, regulation of both activating (H3K4Me2 and
H4Ac) and inhibitory (H3K27Me3) histone modifications was observed within
cytokine gene promoters; these outcomes were NF-<U+03BA>B1 dependent. In addition to
enhanced binding to cytokine gene promoters with chronic NOD2 stimulation, NF-<U+03BA>B1
bound to the promoter of the transcriptional repressor, ATF3. ATF3 was then
induced and bound to cytokine gene promoters; both features were impaired upon
NF-<U+03BA>B1 knockdown. Restoring ATF3 expression under NF-<U+03BA>B1 knockdown conditions
restored NOD2-mediated cytokine downregulation. Finally, NF-<U+03BA>B1 and ATF3
cooperate with other inhibitory pathways, including IRAKM and secreted mediators,
to downregulate cytokine secretion after chronic NOD2 stimulation. Therefore, we 
identify NF-<U+03BA>B1 and ATF3 as critical mechanisms through which NOD2 downregulates 
cytokines and contributes to intestinal immune homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3889551
PMID: 24100018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Immunol. 2013 Nov 15;191(10):5170-81. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301145. Epub 2013 
Oct 4.

Novel regulatory action of ribosomal inactivation on epithelial Nod2-linked
proinflammatory signals in two convergent ATF3-associated pathways.

Park SH(1), Do KH, Choi HJ, Kim J, Kim KH, Park J, Oh CG, Moon Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mucosal Exposome and Biomodulation, Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, Medical Research Institute, Pusan National University School of
Medicine, Yangsan 626-870, Korea;

In response to excessive nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing
protein 2 (Nod2) stimulation caused by mucosal bacterial components, gut
epithelia need to activate regulatory machinery to maintain epithelial
homeostasis. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a representative
regulator in the negative feedback loop that modulates TLR-associated
inflammatory responses. In the current study, the regulatory effects of ribosomal
stress-induced ATF3 on Nod2-stimulated proinflammatory signals were assessed.
Ribosomal inactivation caused persistent ATF3 expression that in turn suppressed 
proinflammatory chemokine production facilitated by Nod2. Decreased chemokine
production was due to attenuation of Nod2-activated NF-<U+03BA>B and early growth
response protein 1 (EGR-1) signals by ATF3. However, the underlying molecular
mechanisms involve two convergent regulatory pathways. Although ATF3 induced by
ribosomal inactivation regulated Nod2-induced EGR-1 expression epigenetically
through the recruitment of histone deacetylase 1, NF-<U+03BA>B regulation was associated
with posttranscriptional regulation by ATF3 rather than epigenetic modification. 
ATF3 induced by ribosomal inactivation led to the destabilization of p65 mRNA
caused by nuclear entrapment of transcript-stabilizing human Ag R protein via
direct interaction with ATF3. These findings demonstrate that ribosomal
stress-induced ATF3 is a critical regulator in the convergent pathways between
EGR-1 and NF-<U+03BA>B, which contributes to the suppression of Nod2-activated
proinflammatory gene expression.

PMID: 24098051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2014 Jan;34(1):95-100.

Prednisolone induces microglial activation in the subnucleus caudalis of the rat 
trigeminal sensory complex.

Endo Y, Shoji N, Shimada Y, Kasahara E, Iikubo M, Sato T, Sasano T, Ichikawa H.

Prednisolone is a member of synthetic glucocorticoids which are widely used to
treat chronic inflammatory diseases. In this study, neuronal degeneration and
cell death, and glial reaction were investigated in the rat trigeminal ganglion
(TG) and brainstem after subcutaneous injection of prednisolone for 7 days.
Expression of c-Jun activating transcription factor 3 and caspase-3 was absent or
infrequent in the TG, and cranial sensory and motor nuclei of saline- and
prednisolone-treated animals. In these animals, distribution of calcitonin
gene-related peptide-immunoreactive (-IR) neurons and nerve fibers was similar in
the brainstem. In addition, the number of Iba1- and glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP)-IR cells with some processes in the brainstem was barely affected 
by prednisolone treatment. However, the treatment increased ramification of
Iba1-IR processes in the subnucleus caudalis of the trigeminal sensory complex.
Prednisolone scarcely influenced the morphology of GFAP-IR cells in the
brainstem. Expression of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase was very rare in
the brainstem of saline- and prednisolone-treated animals. The present study
suggests that microglia are activated by prednisolone in the subnucleus caudalis 
of the trigeminal sensory complex. The glucocorticoid may affect nociceptive
transmission in the brainstem.

PMID: 24077857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 12;8(9):e72995. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072995. eCollection
2013.

Bortezomib-induced painful peripheral neuropathy: an electrophysiological,
behavioral, morphological and mechanistic study in the mouse.

Carozzi VA(1), Renn CL, Bardini M, Fazio G, Chiorazzi A, Meregalli C, Oggioni N, 
Shanks K, Quartu M, Serra MP, Sala B, Cavaletti G, Dorsey SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Translational Medicine, University of Milan Bicocca,
Monza, Italy.

Bortezomib is the first proteasome inhibitor with significant antineoplastic
activity for the treatment of relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma as well as
other hematological and solid neoplasms. Peripheral neurological complications
manifesting with paresthesias, burning sensations, dysesthesias, numbness,
sensory loss, reduced proprioception and vibratory sensitivity are among the
major limiting side effects associated with bortezomib therapy. Although
bortezomib-induced painful peripheral neuropathy is clinically easy to diagnose
and reliable models are available, its pathophysiology remains partly unclear. In
this study we used well-characterized immune-competent and immune-compromised
mouse models of bortezomib-induced painful peripheral neuropathy. To characterize
the drug-induced pathological changes in the peripheral nervous system, we
examined the involvement of spinal cord neuronal function in the development of
neuropathic pain and investigated the relevance of the immune response in painful
peripheral neuropathy induced by bortezomib. We found that bortezomib treatment
induced morphological changes in the spinal cord, dorsal roots, dorsal root
ganglia (DRG) and peripheral nerves. Neurophysiological abnormalities and
specific functional alterations in Ad and C fibers were also observed in
peripheral nerve fibers. Mice developed mechanical allodynia and functional
abnormalities of wide dynamic range neurons in the dorsal horn of spinal cord.
Bortezomib induced increased expression of the neuronal stress marker activating 
transcription factor-3 in most DRG. Moreover, the immunodeficient animals treated
with bortezomib developed a painful peripheral neuropathy with the same features 
observed in the immunocompetent mice. In conclusion, this study extends the
knowledge of the sites of damage induced in the nervous system by bortezomib
administration. Moreover, a selective functional vulnerability of peripheral
nerve fiber subpopulations was found as well as a change in the electrical
activity of wide dynamic range neurons of dorsal horn of spinal cord. Finally,
the immune response is not a key factor in the development of morphological and
functional damage induced by bortezomib in the peripheral nervous system.

PMCID: PMC3772181
PMID: 24069168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:716481. doi: 10.1155/2013/716481.
Epub 2013 Aug 26.

ATF3 Protects against LPS-Induced Inflammation in Mice via Inhibiting HMGB1
Expression.

Lai PF(1), Cheng CF, Lin H, Tseng TL, Chen HH, Chen SH.

Author information: 
(1)PhD Program in Pharmacology and Toxicology, Tzu-Chi University, No. 701, Chung
Yang Road, Section 3, Hualien 97004, Taiwan ; Department of Emergency Medicine,
Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital, No. 707, Section 3, Chung Yang Road, Hualien
97004, Taiwan.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) triggers innate immunity mainly via TLR4 signaling. ATF3
is a negative regulator of TLR4 signaling. HMGB1 plays a critical role in the
final step of sepsis. However, the mechanisms of ATF3 and the role of HMGB1 in
regulating innate immunity-induced sepsis are incompletely understood. In this
study, we found that serum HMGB1 levels were 10-fold higher in patients with
sepsis than normal controls. We further demonstrated that ATF3 gene knockout in
mice subjected to LPS-induced endotoxemia correlates with an increase in the
mortality rate and the elevated expression of IL-6, TNF- a , NO, MCP-1, and HMGB1
in the lung tissues or serum. The biochemical effects of ATF3 were observed in in
vitro macrophages and blocked by ATF3 siRNA treatment. We have also shown that
adeno-associated virus-mediated ATF3 gene transfer protected ATF3 knockout mice
from LPS-induced mortality. In addition, ATF3 knockdown increased LPS-induced
release of HMGB1. In conclusion, upregulation of ATF3 contributes to the reduced 
release of inflammatory molecules, especially HMGB1, which induced lung injury
and increased the survival rate of mice after LPS challenge. Therefore,
suppressing LPS-induced inflammation with ATF3 induction or ATF3 mimetics may be 
an important strategy for sepsis therapy.

PMCID: PMC3770047
PMID: 24062788  [PubMed]


254. FEBS Lett. 2013 Nov 1;587(21):3541-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.09.012. Epub
2013 Sep 18.

Chicken IL-6 is a heat-shock gene.

Prakasam R(1), Fujimoto M, Takii R, Hayashida N, Takaki E, Tan K, Wu F, Inouye S,
Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

The febrile response is elicited by pyrogenic cytokines including IL-6 in
response to microorganism infections and diseases in vertebrates. Mammalian HSF1,
which senses elevations in temperature, negatively regulates the response by
suppressing pyrogenic cytokine expression. We here showed that HSF3, an avian
ortholog of mammalian HSF1, directly binds to and activates IL-6 during heat
shock in chicken cells. Other components of the febrile response mechanism, such 
as IL-1ß and ATF3, were also differently regulated in mammalian and chicken
cells. These results suggest that the febrile response is exacerbated by a
feed-forward circuit composed of the HSF3-IL-6 pathway in birds.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24055475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Burn Care Res. 2014 Jan-Feb;35(1):11-20. doi: 10.1097/BCR.0b013e3182a2accd.

Regional neurovascular inflammation and apoptosis are detected after electrical
contact injury.

Prindeze NJ(1), Jo DY, Paul DW, Ortiz RT, Carney BC, Bullock RM, Moffatt LT,
Shupp JW.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Surgery, The Burn Center, MedStar Washington Hospital
Center, MedStar Health Research Institute, District of Columbia.

High-voltage electrical injuries are a devastating form of trauma often treated
in burn centers. Examining superficial wounds alone may lead to an inaccurate
assessment of local, regional, and systemic severity of injury. In this work, the
neurovasculature at sites regionally distinct from the contact wound were
assessed for cellular pathology. Nine male Sprague-Dawley rats subjected to
1000<U+2009>V direct-current shocks were separated into three groups: high-shock
(>10-second contact), low-shock (<4-second contact), and control. Injury video
was captured with a forward-looking infrared camera, and a thermal excitation
analysis was performed. The neurovascular bundles from the iliofemoral region to 
the distal posterior tibial region were dissected from the hind limbs of the
shocked animals and stained by immunohistochemistry for antibodies specific to
apoptosis (APO) 1, caspase-3, activating transcription factor 3, high-mobility
group box-1, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and interleukin-6. 
Real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction was used to quantify
differential transcript levels of superoxide dismutases 1, 2, and 3 and
heat-shock protein 70 from peripheral blood mononuclear cells and liver tissue.
Finally, a protein array was used to identify key inflammatory cytokines in blood
plasma. Significant dose-dependent trends were identified in apoptotic markers as
well as inflammatory markers in both arterial and nerve tissues. Although
arterial tissue exhibited a gradual decline in these markers proximally from the 
wound site, nerve tissue maintained a constant level at every location.
Transcript analysis revealed an up-regulation of extracellular superoxide
dismutase, and down-regulation of heat-shock protein 70, whereas plasma
inflammatory cytokine levels indicated no significant changes. Thermal excitation
analysis revealed a linear temperature increase, with a dose-dependent thermal
maximum. In this study the authors have shown that neurovascular APO and
inflammation are present at locations extremely proximal to electrical injury
contact sites and this appears to be dose-dependent. Nerve tissue APO and
inflammation may extend farther proximally than the iliofemoral region, and
multiple proapoptotic mechanisms may be activated. No systemic inflammatory
response was indicated in this study.

PMID: 24043235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2013 Sep 10. [Epub ahead of print]

Vertebral Compression Exacerbates Osteoporotic Pain in an Ovariectomy-Induced
Osteoporosis Rat Model.

Suzuki M(1), Orita S, Miyagi M, Ishikawa T, Kamoda H, Eguchi Y, Arai G, Yamauchi 
K, Sakuma Y, Oikawa Y, Kubota G, Inage K, Sainoh T, Kawarai Y, Yoshino K, Ozawa
T, Aoki Y, Toyone T, Takahashi K, Kawakami M, Ohtori S, Inoue G.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University 2Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Teikyo University Chiba Medical
Center 3Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Toho University Sakura Medical Center 
4Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Wakayama Medical University Kihoku hospital
5Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kitasato University School of Medicine.

Study Design. Basic pain study using osteoporotic rodent models.Objective. To
examine alterations in distribution of pain-related neuropeptides following
compressive force on osteoporotic vertebrae and their chronic pain-related
properties.Summary of Background Data. We previously reported significantly
increased production of calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), a marker of
inflammatory pain, in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) of vertebrae in
osteoporosis-model ovariectomized (OVX) rats. Here, we hypothesized that
longitudinal compressive force on vertebrae can affect osteoporotic pain
properties, which has not been examined yet.Methods. OVX rats were used as the
osteoporosis model. Female Sprague Dawley rats were prepared and Fluoro-Gold (FG)
neurotracer was applied to the periosteal surface of the Co5 vertebra. After
FG-labeling, the animals were divided into 4 groups: Control, Control +
compression, OVX, and OVX + compression. The Control groups were not
ovariectomized. In the compression groups, K-wires were stabbed transversely
through Co4 and Co6 with Co5 compressed longitudinally by rubber bands bridged
between the two. One, 2, 4, and 8 weeks after surgery, bilateral S1 to S3 DRGs
were excised for immunofluorescence assays. Expression of CGRP and activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF-3), a marker of neuronal injury, were compared among 
the 4 groups.Results. Sustained upregulation of CGRP in DRG neurons was observed 
following compression of the Co5 vertebra, and Co5 compression caused significant
increase in CGRP production in DRG neurons, while a greater level of ATF-3
upregulation was observed in DRGs in OVX rats following dynamic vertebral
compression 8 weeks after surgery, implying potential neuropathic
pain.Conclusion: There was sustained upregulation of CGRP and ATF3 in DRGs in
osteoporotic model rats compared with controls, and levels were further enhanced 
by dynamic vertebral compression. These findings imply that dynamic compression
stress on vertebrae can exacerbate osteoporotic pain by inducing both
inflammatory and neuropathic pain mediators.

PMID: 24026152  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


257. Toxicol In Vitro. 2013 Dec;27(8):2213-24. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2013.08.007. Epub
2013 Aug 30.

Development of a new in vitro skin sensitization assay (Epidermal Sensitization
Assay; EpiSensA) using reconstructed human epidermis.

Saito K(1), Nukada Y, Takenouchi O, Miyazawa M, Sakaguchi H, Nishiyama N.

Author information: 
(1)Kao Corporation, Safety Science Research Laboratories, 2606 Akabane,
Ichikai-Machi, Haga-Gun, Tochigi 321-3497, Japan.

Recent changes in regulatory requirements and social views on animal testing have
accelerated the development of reliable alternative tests for predicting skin
sensitizing potential of chemicals. In this study, we aimed to develop a new in
vitro skin sensitization assay using reconstructed human epidermis, RhE model,
which is expected to have broader applicability domain rather than existing in
vitro assays. Microarray analysis revealed that the expression of five genes
(ATF3, DNAJB4, GCLM, HSPA6 and HSPH1) related to cellular stress response were
significantly up-regulated in RhE model after 6h treatment with representative
skin sensitizers, 1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene and oxazolone, but not a
non-sensitizer, benzalkonium chloride. The predictive performance of five genes
was examined with eight skin sensitizers (e.g., cinnamic aldehyde), four
non-sensitizers (e.g., sodium lauryl sulfate) and four pre-/pro-haptens (e.g.,
p-phenylenediamine, isoeugenol). When the positive criteria were set to obtain
the highest accuracy with the animal testing (LLNA), ATF3, DNAJB4 and GCLM
exhibited a high predictive accuracy (100%, 93.8% and 87.5%, respectively). All
tested pre-/pro-haptens were correctly predicted by both ATF3 and DNAJB4. These
results suggested that the RhE-based assay, termed epidermal sensitization assay 
(EpiSensA), could be an useful skin sensitization assay with a broad
applicability domain including pre-/pro-haptens.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23999411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Radiat Environ Biophys. 2013 Nov;52(4):523-30. doi: 10.1007/s00411-013-0488-3.
Epub 2013 Aug 31.

Single-cell responses to ionizing radiation.

Ponnaiya B(1), Amundson SA, Ghandhi SA, Smilenov LB, Geard CR, Buonanno M,
Brenner DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Radiological Research, Columbia University, 630 West 168th Street, 
VC11-240, New York, NY, 10032, USA, bp156@columbia.edu.

While gene expression studies have proved extremely important in understanding
cellular processes, it is becoming more apparent that there may be differences in
individual cells that are missed by studying the population as a whole. We have
developed a qRT-PCR protocol that allows us to assay multiple gene products in
small samples, starting at 100 cells and going down to a single cell, and have
used it to study radiation responses at the single-cell level. Since the accuracy
of qRT-PCR depends greatly on the choice of "housekeeping" genes used for
normalization, initial studies concentrated on determining the optimal panel of
such genes. Using an endogenous control array, it was found that for IMR90 cells,
common housekeeping genes tend to fall into one of two categories-those that are 
relatively stably expressed regardless of the number of cells in the sample,
e.g., B2M, PPIA, and GAPDH, and those that are more variable (again regardless of
the size of the population), e.g., YWHAZ, 18S, TBP, and HPRT1. Further,
expression levels in commonly studied radiation-response genes, such as ATF3,
CDKN1A, GADD45A, and MDM2, were assayed in 100, 10, and single-cell samples. It
is here that the value of single-cell analyses becomes apparent. It was observed 
that the expression of some genes such as FGF2 and MDM2 was relatively constant
over all irradiated cells, while that of others such as FAS was considerably more
variable. It was clear that almost all cells respond to ionizing radiation but
the individual responses were considerably varied. The analyses of single cells
indicate that responses in individual cells are not uniform and suggest that
responses observed in populations are not indicative of identical patterns in all
cells. This in turn points to the value of single-cell analyses.

PMCID: PMC3812812
PMID: 23995963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Chem Biol Interact. 2013 Oct 25;206(1):100-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2013.08.008.
Epub 2013 Aug 27.

Chrysin enhances sensitivity of BEL-7402/ADM cells to doxorubicin by suppressing 
PI3K/Akt/Nrf2 and ERK/Nrf2 pathway.

Gao AM(1), Ke ZP, Shi F, Sun GC, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China; Department of Pharmacology, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

Nuclear factor-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is an important cytoprotective
transcription factor which plays a key role in antioxidant and detoxification
processes. Recent studies have reported that development of chemoresistance is
associated with the constitutive activation of the Nrf2-mediated signaling
pathway in many types of cancer cells. Here, we investigated whether Nrf2 was
associated with drug resistant in doxorubicin resistant BEL-7402 (BEL-7402/ADM)
cells, and if chrysin could reverse drug resistance in BEL-7402/ADM cells. We
found that remarkable higher level of Nrf2 and its target proteins in
BEL-7402/ADM cells compared to BEL-7402 cells. Similarly, intracellular Nrf2
protein level was significantly decreased and ADM resistance was partially
reversed by Nrf2 siRNA in BEL-7402/ADM cells. chrysin is a potent Nrf2 inhibitor 
which sensitizes BEL-7402/ADM cells to ADM and increases intracellular
concentration of ADM. Mechanistically, chrysin significantly reduced Nrf2
expression at both the mRNA and protein levels through down-regulating PI3K-Akt
and ERK pathway. Consequently, expression of Nrf2-downstream genes HO-1, AKR1B10,
and MRP5 were reduced and the Nrf2-dependent chemoresistance was suppressed. In
conclusion, these results clearly indicate that activation of Nrf2 is associated 
with drug resistance in BEL-7402/ADM cells and chrysin may be an effective
adjuvant sensitizer to reduce anticancer drug resistance by down-regulating Nrf2 
signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23994249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Sci Rep. 2013;3:2407. doi: 10.1038/srep02407.

Integrative transcriptome analysis reveals dysregulation of canonical cancer
molecular pathways in placenta leading to preeclampsia.

Moslehi R(1), Mills JL, Signore C, Kumar A, Ambroggio X, Dzutsev A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health,
University at Albany, NY 12144, USA. rmoslehi@albany.edu

We previously suggested links between specific XPD mutations in the fetal genome 
and the risk of placental maldevelopment and preeclampsia, possibly due to
impairment of Transcription Factor (TF)IIH-mediated functions in placenta. To
identify the underlying mechanisms, we conducted the current integrative analysis
of several relevant transcriptome data sources. Our meta-analysis revealed
downregulation of TFIIH subunits in preeclamptic placentas. Our overall
integrative analysis suggested that, in the presence of hypoxia and oxidative
stress, EGFR signaling deficiency, which can be caused by TFIIH impairment as
well as by other mechanisms, results in ATF3 upregulation, inducing mediators of 
clinical symptoms of preeclampsia such as FLT1 and ENG. EGFR- and ATF3-dependent 
pathways play prominent roles in cancer development. We propose that
dysregulation of these canonical cancer molecular pathways occurs in preeclampsia
and delineate the relevance of TFIIH, providing etiologic clues which could
eventually translate into a therapeutic approach.

PMCID: PMC3757356
PMID: 23989136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2013 Nov;33(8):1087-98. doi: 10.1007/s10571-013-9975-y. Epub 
2013 Aug 25.

Short-term cuprizone feeding induces selective amino acid deprivation with
concomitant activation of an integrated stress response in oligodendrocytes.

Goldberg J(1), Daniel M, van Heuvel Y, Victor M, Beyer C, Clarner T, Kipp M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Neuroanatomy, RWTH Aachen University,
Wendlingweg 2, 52074, Aachen, Germany.

Cuprizone [bis(cyclohexylidenehydrazide)]-induced toxic demyelination is an
experimental approach frequently used to study de- and re-myelination in the
central nervous system. In this model, mice are fed with the copper chelator
cuprizone which leads to oligodendrocyte apoptosis and subsequent microgliosis,
astrocytosis, and demyelination. The underlying mechanisms of cuprizone-induced
oligodendrocyte death are still unknown. We analysed differences in amino acid
levels after short-term cuprizone exposure (i.e., 4 days). Furthermore, an amino 
acid response (AAR) pathway activated in oligodendrocytes after cuprizone
intoxication was evaluated. Short-term cuprizone exposure resulted in a selective
decrease of alanine, glycine, and proline plasma levels, which was paralleled by 
an increase of apoptotic cells in the liver and a decrease of alanine
aminotransferase in the serum. These parameters were paralleled by
oligodendrocyte apoptosis and the induction of an AAR with increased expression
of the transcription factors ATF-3 and ATF-4 (activating transcription factor-3
and -4). Immunohistochemistry revealed that ATF-3 is exclusively expressed by
oligodendrocytes and localized to the nuclear compartment. Our results suggest
that cuprizone-induced liver dysfunction results in amino acid starvation and in 
consequence to the activation of an AAR. We propose that this stress response
modulates oligodendrocyte viability in the cuprizone animal model.

PMID: 23979168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Clin Invest. 2013 Jul;123(7):2893-906. doi: 10.1172/JCI64410. Epub 2013 Jun 10.

Transcription factor ATF3 links host adaptive response to breast cancer
metastasis.

Wolford CC(1), McConoughey SJ, Jalgaonkar SP, Leon M, Merchant AS, Dominick JL,
Yin X, Chang Y, Zmuda EJ, O'Toole SA, Millar EK, Roller SL, Shapiro CL, Ostrowski
MC, Sutherland RL, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Host response to cancer signals has emerged as a key factor in cancer
development; however, the underlying molecular mechanism is not well understood. 
In this report, we demonstrate that activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a
hub of the cellular adaptive response network, plays an important role in host
cells to enhance breast cancer metastasis. Immunohistochemical analysis of
patient tumor samples revealed that expression of ATF3 in stromal mononuclear
cells, but not cancer epithelial cells, is correlated with worse clinical
outcomes and is an independent predictor for breast cancer death. This finding
was corroborated by data from mouse models showing less efficient breast cancer
metastasis in Atf3-deficient mice than in WT mice. Further, mice with myeloid
cell-selective KO of Atf3 showed fewer lung metastases, indicating that host ATF3
facilitates metastasis, at least in part, by its function in macrophage/myeloid
cells. Gene profiling analyses of macrophages from mouse tumors identified an
ATF3-regulated gene signature that could distinguish human tumor stroma from
distant stroma and could predict clinical outcomes, lending credence to our mouse
models. In conclusion, we identified ATF3 as a regulator in myeloid cells that
enhances breast cancer metastasis and has predictive value for clinical outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3696548
PMID: 23921126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cell Signal. 2013 Dec;25(12):2348-61. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.07.028. Epub
2013 Aug 2.

In vivo activating transcription factor 3 silencing ameliorates the AMPK
compensatory effects for ER stress-mediated ß-cell dysfunction during the
progression of type-2 diabetes.

Kim JY(1), Park KJ, Kim GH, Jeong EA, Lee DY, Lee SS, Kim DJ, Roh GS, Song J, Ki 
SH, Kim WH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolic Disease, Center for Biomedical Science, National
Institutes of Health, #187 Osong Saengmyeong2-ro, Osong-eup, Cheongwon-gun,
Chungbuk, Republic of Korea.

In obese Zucker diabetic fatty (ZDF) rats, ER stress is associated with insulin
resistance and pancreatic ß-cell dysfunction; however the exact mechanisms by
which ER stress drives type-2 diabetes remain uncertain. Here, we investigated
the role of ATF3 on the preventive regulation of AMPK against ER stress-mediated 
ß-cell dysfunction during the end-stage progression of hyperglycemia in ZDF rats.
The impaired glucose metabolism and ß-cell dysfunction were significantly
increased in late-diabetic phase 19-week-old ZDF rats. Although AMPK
phosphorylation reduced in 6- and 12-week-old ZDF rats was remarkably increased
at 19weeks, the increases of lipogenice genes, ATF3, and ER stress or
ROS-mediated ß-cell dysfunction were still remained, which were attenuated by in 
vivo-injection of chemical chaperon tauroursodeoxycholate (TUDCA), chronic AICAR,
or antioxidants. ATF3 did not directly affect AMPK phosphorylation, but
counteracts the preventive effects of AMPK for high glucose-induced ß-cell
dysfunction. Moreover, knockdown of ATF3 by delivery of in vivo-jetPEI ATF3 siRNA
attenuated ER stress-mediated ß-cell dysfunction and enhanced the beneficial
effect of AICAR. Our data suggest that ATF3 may play as a counteracting regulator
of AMPK and thus promote ß-cell dysfunction and the development of type-2
diabetes and could be a potential therapeutic target in treating type-2 diabetes.

© 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23916985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mol Oncol. 2013 Dec;7(6):1012-8. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2013.07.010. Epub 2013 Jul
20.

Nelfinavir and bortezomib inhibit mTOR activity via ATF4-mediated sestrin-2
regulation.

Brüning A(1), Rahmeh M, Friese K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich, Germany. Electronic address: ansgar.bruening@med.uni-muenchen.de.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and autophagy are two basic cell survival
mechanisms often occurring in concert. Extensive ER stress in cancer cells
deliberately induced by chemotherapeutic drugs may lead to growth arrest and cell
death. However, the link between ER stress and autophagy is not well understood. 
In this study, the treatment of cancer cells with ER stress-inducing drug
nelfinavir resulted in the expression of endogenous mTOR inhibitor sestrin-2
(SESN2). Upregulation of SESN2 expression was associated with expression of ER
stress markers ATF4, ATF3, and CHOP. SESN2 upregulation also occurred in cells
treated with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib. Ectopic expression of ATF4, but
not of ATF3 or CHOP, caused transcriptional upregulation of SESN2 expression,
indicating expressional regulation of SESN2 by ATF4. Transient overexpression of 
ectopic SESN2 resulted in mTOR inhibition and autophagy, confirming a link
between ER stress, SESN2 upregulation, and mTOR inhibition. Accordingly, cancer
cells treated with the ER stress-inducing agent nelfinavir showed reduced mTOR
activity and associated increases in the expression levels of ATF4 and SESN2.
These results show that ATF4-regulated SESN2 expression presents a new link
between ER stress and mTOR inhibition and autophagy. mTOR inhibition by
nelfinavir, which is currently in clinical trials for cancer patients, may also
explain its observed ability to induce autophagy, growth arrest, and
radiosensitization in cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23916134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Anticancer Res. 2013 Aug;33(8):3225-31.

15,16-Dihydrotanshinone I-induced apoptosis in human colorectal cancer cells:
involvement of ATF3.

Suk FM(1), Jou WJ, Lin RJ, Lin SY, Tzeng FY, Liang YC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of Medical
Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, 250 Wuxing St., Taipei 11031, 
Taiwan, ROC.

15,16-Dihydrotanshinone I (DHTS) is a component of the traditional Chinese
medicinal plant Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge. In this study, DHTS at as low as 2.5
µg/ml concentration significantly inhibited proliferation of human benign (SW480)
and malignant (SW620) colorectal cancer cells, as shown by
3-(4,5)-dimethylthiahiazo (-z-y1)-3,5-diphenytetrazoliumromide (MTT) and flow
cytometric analysis. Activating transcription factor (ATF)-3, a basic leucine
zipper-type transcription factor, was found to be predominantly up-regulated in
DHTS-treated SW480 and SW620 cells. The up-regulation of ATF3 was blocked by a
c-JUN N-terminal kinase (JNK) or p38 inhibitor. Overexpression of ATF3 resulted
in a significant augmentation of DHTS-induced apoptosis of SW480 cells, but
resistance to DHTS-induced apoptosis of SW620 cells. These results suggest that
DHTS has a strong therapeutic or preventive potential against cancer. In
addition, ATF3 has a dual role in DHTS-induced apoptosis, depending on the degree
of malignancy of colorectal cancer.

PMID: 23898083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2013 Sep 15;537(2):168-75. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2013.07.016. 
Epub 2013 Jul 26.

Reactive oxygen species mediate tolfenamic acid-induced apoptosis in human
colorectal cancer cells.

Jeong JB(1), Choi J, Baek SJ, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, College of Agriculture and Natural
Resources, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA.

Several studies have shown substantial evidences that non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) exert anticancer effects by generating reactive 
oxygen species (ROS). Tolfenamic acid (TA) is one of the traditional NSAIDs
widely used for treatment of migraine. TA has anti-cancer activities in several
human cancer models. In this study, we report that generation of ROS by TA leads 
to apoptosis through modulation of several pathways in human colorectal cancer
cells. TA induced rapid generation of intracellular ROS and led to an increase of
phosphorylation of H2AX, a tail moment of comet and distribution of fragmented
genomic DNA traces. Treatment of N-acetyl-l-cysteine (NAC) abolished TA-induced
phosphorylation of H2AX and apoptosis. Treatment of TA resulted in an increase of
nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-<U+03BA>B) transcriptional activity through inhibitor of kappa
B (I<U+03BA>B-a) degradation and subsequent p65 nuclear translocation. In addition, TA
increased apoptosis-inducing activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) expression.
However, the treatment of NAC abolished TA-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B activation and ATF3
expression and chemical inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B or knockdown of p65 significantly
attenuated TA-induced ATF3 expression. Our finding indicates that ROS-mediated
DNA damage and subsequent activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and ATF3 expression plays a
significant role in TA-induced apoptosis in human colorectal cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23896517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Auton Neurosci. 2013 Dec;179(1-2):49-59. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2013.07.002. Epub 
2013 Jul 24.

Transection of preganglionic axons leads to CNS neuronal plasticity followed by
survival and target reinnervation.

Coulibaly AP(1), Gannon SM, Hawk K, Walsh BF, Isaacson LG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience and Behavior, Miami University, Oxford, OH 45056,
United States; Graduate Program in Cell, Molecular, and Structural Biology, Miami
University, Oxford, OH 45056, United States.

The goals of the present study were to investigate the changes in sympathetic
preganglionic neurons following transection of distal axons in the cervical
sympathetic trunk (CST) that innervate the superior cervical ganglion (SCG) and
to assess changes in the protein expression of brain derived neurotrophic factor 
(BDNF) and its receptor TrkB in the thoracic spinal cord. At 1 week, a
significant decrease in soma volume and reduced soma expression of choline
acetyltransferase (ChAT) in the intermediolateral cell column (IML) of T1 spinal 
cord were observed, with both ChAT-ir and non-immunoreactive neurons expressing
the injury marker activating transcription factor 3. These changes were
transient, and at later time points, ChAT expression and soma volume returned to 
control values and the number of ATF3 neurons declined. No evidence for cell loss
or neuronal apoptosis was detected at any time point. Protein levels of BDNF
and/or full length TrkB in the spinal cord were increased throughout the survival
period. In the SCG, both ChAT-ir axons and ChAT protein remained decreased at 16 
weeks, but were increased compared to the 10 week time point. These results
suggest that though IML neurons show reduced ChAT expression and cell volume at 1
week following CST transection, at later time points, the neurons recovered and
exhibited no significant signs of neurodegeneration. The alterations in BDNF
and/or TrkB may have contributed to the survival of the IML neurons and the
recovery of ChAT expression, as well as to the reinnervation of the SCG.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC3843981
PMID: 23891533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2013;17(15):2097-102.

Expression profiling based on graph-clustering approach to determine
osteoarthritis related pathway.

Zhang B(1), Xie QG, Quan Y, Pan XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Chengdu Military General Hospital, Chengdu,
Republic of China. zhangbodr@gmail.com  

BACKGROUND: Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common disease of joints in adults
around the world. Current available drugs to treat osteoarthritis are
predominantly directed towards the symptomatic relief of pain and inflammation
but they do little to reduce joint destruction. Effective prevention of the
structural damage must be a key objective of new therapeutic approaches.
Therefore, it is worthwhile to search for important molecular markers that hold
great promise for further treatment of patients with osteoarthritis.
AIM: In this study, we used a graph-clustering approach to identify gene
expression profiles that distinguish OA patients from normal samples.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed a comprehensive gene level assessment of
osteoarthritis using five osteoarthritis samples and five normal samples
graph-clustering approach.
RESULTS: The results showed that TNFAIP3, ATF3, PPARG, etc, have related with
osteoarthritis. Besides, we further mined the underlying molecular mechanism
within these differently genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicated tyrosine metabolism pathway and cell cycle
pathway were two significant pathways, and there was evident to demonstrate them 
based on previous reports. We hope to provide insights into the development of
novel therapeutic targets and pathways.

PMID: 23884832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 3;8(7):e68396. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068396. Print 2013.

Adult cardiac expression of the activating transcription factor 3, ATF3, promotes
ventricular hypertrophy.

Koren L(1), Elhanani O, Kehat I, Hai T, Aronheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, the Rappaport Family Institute for Research 
in the Medical Sciences, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.

Cardiac hypertrophy is an adaptive response to various mechanophysical and
pathophysiological stresses. However, when chronic stress is sustained, the
beneficial response turns into a maladaptive process that eventually leads to
heart failure. Although major advances in the treatment of patients have reduced 
mortality, there is a dire need for novel treatments for cardiac hypertrophy.
Accordingly, considerable efforts are being directed towards developing mice
models and understanding the processes that lead to cardiac hypertrophy. A case
in point is ATF3, an immediate early transcription factor whose expression is
induced in various cardiac stress models but has been reported to have
conflicting functional significance in hypertrophy. To address this issue, we
generated a transgenic mouse line with tetracycline-regulated ATF3 cardiac
expression. These mice allowed us to study the consequence of ATF3 expression in 
the embryo or during the adult period, thus distinguishing the effect of ATF3 on 
development versus pathogenesis of cardiac dysfunction. Importantly, ATF3
expression in adult mice resulted in rapid ventricles hypertrophy, heart
dysfunction, and fibrosis. When combined with a phenylephrine-infusion pressure
overload model, the ATF3 expressing mice displayed a severe outcome and heart
dysfunction. In a complementary approach, ATF3 KO mice displayed a lower level of
heart hypertrophy in the same pressure overload model. In summary, ectopic
expression of ATF3 is sufficient to promote cardiac hypertrophy and exacerbates
the deleterious effect of chronic pressure overload; conversely, ATF3 deletion
protects the heart. Therefore, ATF3 may serve as an important drug target to
reduce the detrimental consequences of heart hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC3707568
PMID: 23874609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Sep;33(9):2088-96. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.301375. Epub 2013 Jul 18.

Induction of ATF3 gene network by triglyceride-rich lipoprotein lipolysis
products increases vascular apoptosis and inflammation.

Aung HH(1), Lame MW, Gohil K, An CI, Wilson DW, Rutledge JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, School
of Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Elevation of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins (TGRLs) contributes to the
risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Our work has shown that TGRL
lipolysis products in high physiological to pathophysiological concentrations
cause endothelial cell injury; however, the mechanisms remain to be delineated.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: We analyzed the transcriptional signaling networks in
arterial endothelial cells exposed to TGRL lipolysis products. When human aortic 
endothelial cells in culture were exposed to TGRL lipolysis products, activating 
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) was identified as a principal response gene.
Induction of ATF3 mRNA and protein was confirmed by quantitative
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction and Western blot respectively.
Immunofluorescence analysis showed that ATF3 accumulated in the nuclei of cells
treated with lipolysis products. Nuclear expression of phosphorylated c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK), previously shown to be an initiator of the ATF3
signaling cascade, also was demonstrated. Small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated 
inhibition of ATF3 blocked lipolysis products-induced transcription of E-selectin
and interleukin-8, but not interleukin-6 or nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B. c-Jun, a
downstream protein in the JNK pathway, was phosphorylated, whereas expression of 
nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B-dependent JunB was downregulated. Additionally, JNK siRNA
suppressed ATF3 and p-c-Jun protein expression, suggesting that JNK is upstream
of the ATF3 signaling pathway. In vivo studies demonstrated that infusion of TGRL
lipolysis products into wild-type mice induced nuclear ATF3 accumulation in
carotid artery endothelium. ATF3(-/-) mice were resistant to vascular apoptosis
precipitated by treatment with TGRL lipolysis products. Also peripheral blood
monocytes isolated from postprandial humans had increased ATF3 expression as
compared with fasting monocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that TGRL lipolysis products activate
ATF3-JNK transcription factor networks and induce endothelial cells inflammatory 
response.

PMCID: PMC3921073
PMID: 23868936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 23;288(34):24302-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.496703. Epub
2013 Jul 3.

Transcriptional properties of mammalian elongin A and its role in stress
response.

Kawauchi J(1), Inoue M, Fukuda M, Uchida Y, Yasukawa T, Conaway RC, Conaway JW,
Aso T, Kitajima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

Elongin A was shown previously to be capable of potently activating the rate of
RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) transcription elongation in vitro by suppressing
transient pausing by the enzyme at many sites along DNA templates. The role of
Elongin A in RNAPII transcription in mammalian cells, however, has not been
clearly established. In this report, we investigate the function of Elongin A in 
RNAPII transcription. We present evidence that Elongin A associates with the IIO 
form of RNAPII at sites of newly transcribed RNA and is relocated to dotlike
domains distinct from those containing RNAPII when cells are treated with the
kinase inhibitor 5,6-dichloro-1-ß-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole. Significantly,
Elongin A is required for maximal induction of transcription of the stress
response genes ATF3 and p21 in response to several stimuli. Evidence from
structure-function studies argues that Elongin A transcription elongation
activity, but not its ubiquitination activity, is most important for its function
in induction of transcription of ATF3 and p21. Taken together, our data provide
new insights into the function of Elongin A in RNAPII transcription and bring to 
light a previously unrecognized role for Elongin A in the regulation of stress
response genes.

PMCID: PMC3750133
PMID: 23828199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Int J Cancer. 2014 Jan 15;134(2):268-79. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28369. Epub 2013 Aug 1.

Lovastatin-induced apoptosis is mediated by activating transcription factor 3 and
enhanced in combination with salubrinal.

Niknejad N(1), Gorn-Hondermann I, Ma L, Zahr S, Johnson-Obeseki S, Corsten M,
Dimitroulakos J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
ON, Canada; Faculty of Medicine and the Department of Biochemistry, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.

We have previously demonstrated the ability of lovastatin, a potent inhibitor of 
mevalonate synthesis, to induce tumor-specific apoptosis. The apoptotic effects
of lovastatin were regulated in part by the integrated stress response (ISR) that
regulates cellular responses to a wide variety of stress inducers. A key
regulator of the ISR apoptotic response is activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) and its target gene CHOP/GADD153. In our study, we demonstrate that in
multiple lovastatin-resistant clones of the squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cell
line SCC9, lovastatin treatment (1-25 µM, 24 hr) in contrast to the parental line
failed to significantly induce ATF3 expression. Furthermore, the SCC-derived cell
lines SCC25 and HeLa that are sensitive to lovastatin-induced apoptosis also
preferentially induce ATF3 expression compared to resistant breast (MCF-7) and
prostate carcinoma (PC3)-derived cell lines. In HeLa cells shRNA targeting ATF3
expression as well as in ATF3-deficient murine embryonic fibroblasts,
lovastatin-induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis were attenuated. In ex vivo HNSCC
tumors, lovastatin also induced ATF3 mRNA expression in two of four tumors
evaluated. Salubrinal, an agent that can sustain the activity of a key regulator 
of the ISR eIF2a, further increased the expression of ATF3 and demonstrated
synergistic cytotoxicity in combination with lovastatin in SCC cells. Taken
together, our results demonstrate preferential induction of ATF3 in
lovastatin-sensitive tumor-derived cell lines that regulate lovastatin-induced
apoptosis. Importantly, combining lovastatin with salubrinal enhanced ATF3
expression and induced synergistic cytotoxicity in SCC cells.

© 2013 UICC.

PMID: 23824972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Chem Biol Interact. 2013 Sep 25;205(2):119-27. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2013.06.011.
Epub 2013 Jun 26.

The molecular mechanisms and gene expression profiling for shikonin-induced
apoptotic and necroptotic cell death in U937 cells.

Piao JL(1), Cui ZG, Furusawa Y, Ahmed K, Rehman MU, Tabuchi Y, Kadowaki M, Kondo 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiological Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194,
Japan.

Shikonin (SHK), a natural naphthoquinone derived from the Chinese medical herb
Lithospermum erythrorhizon, induces both apoptosis and necroptosis in several
cancer cell lines. However, the detailed molecular mechanisms involved in the
initiation of cell death are still unclear. In the present study,
caspase-dependent apoptosis was induced by SHK treatment at 1µM after 6h in U937 
cells, with increase in DNA fragmentation, generation of intracellular reactive
oxygen species (ROS), fraction of cells with low mitochondrial membrane potential
(MMP), and in the expression of BH3 only proteins Noxa and tBid. Interestingly,
caspase-independent cell death was also detected with SHK treatment at 10µM,
observed as increase in SYTOX® Green staining and release of lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH). Necrostatin-1 (Nec-1) completely inhibited the SHK-induced
leakage of LDH and SYTOX® Green staining. Cell permeable exogenous glutathione
(GSH) completely inhibited 1µM SHK-induced apoptosis and converted 10µM
SHK-induced necroptosis to apoptosis. Gene expression profiling revealed that 353
genes were found to be significantly regulated by 1µM and 85 genes by 10µM of SHK
treatment, respectively. Among these genes, the transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and
DNA-damage-inducible transcript 3 (DDIT3) were highly expressed at 1µM of SHK
treatment, while tumor necrosis factor (TNF) expression mainly increased at 10µM 
treatment. These findings provide novel information for the molecular mechanism
of SHK-induced apoptosis and necroptosis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23811387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Int J Oncol. 2013 Sep;43(3):839-49. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1988. Epub 2013 Jun 20.

miRNA expression pattern associated with prognosis in elderly patients with
advanced OPSC and OCC.

Zhao H(1), Ding Y, Tie B, Sun ZF, Jiang JY, Zhao J, Lin X, Cui S.

Author information: 
(1)Dalian Medical University, Dalian, P.R. China.

The long-term survival for elderly patients with advanced ovarian papillary
serous carcinoma (OPSC) does not exceed 30%, and the incidence and prognosis rise
continuously after menopause. The aim of this study was to identify the
differences in key miRNAs and their potential regulators through miRNA microarray
analysis, functional target prediction, and clinical outcome between the elderly 
patients with advanced OPSC and ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCC) who all
suffered poor prognosis, to identify the pathogenetic basis, and to improve the
understanding of the molecular basis of advanced OPCS in elderly patients.
Through microarray analysis, we found 52 unique miRNAs with significant
fold-change in expression levels, of which 9 were upregulated, whereas 43 were
downregulated in OCC patients compared to elderly OPSC patients with advanced
stage. Among these prediction miRNAs, miR-30a, miR-30e and miR-505 were found to 
have some common cancer-related targets. Lower expression of these three miRNAs
of advanced OPSC in elderly patients, all associated with significantly poorer
survival rate, strongly suggesting that they could be critical oncogenes and take
important roles in OPSC etiology in elderly patients with advantaged stage.
Functional analyses support the above hypothesis. Their targets, ATF3, STMN1 and 
MYC suggest that OPSC also has aggressive biological behavior when presented with
advanced stage, and support the epidemiology results that incidence and mortality
of advanced OPSC increases continuously. miR-30a, miR-30e and miR-505 may be
important pathogenetic factors for OPSC in elderly patients with advanced stage. 
Age could be regarded as a continuous covariate in this process. This may improve
the understanding of molecular underpinnings of advanced OPSC in elderly
patients, and provide improved diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 23787480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Arch Dermatol Res. 2014 Jan;306(1):81-91. doi: 10.1007/s00403-013-1378-x. Epub
2013 Jun 20.

Photodynamic therapy suppresses tumor growth in an in vivo model of human
hemangioma.

Choi J(1), Kim WJ, Park SW, Xu L, Kim SH, Min HS, Kwon GY, Cho CH, Kim S, Choi
TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Institute of Health
Sciences, Gyeongsang National University Hospital, Gyeongsang National University
School of Medicine, Jinju, Republic of Korea.

The authors investigated the efficacy of photodynamic therapy against infantile
hemangioma using a hemangioma animal model. Eighty-three hemangioma specimens
from five children were implanted into nude mice. The gross and volume changes of
the implants were evaluated for up to 13 weeks. The histological change of the
implant was evaluated at 5 weeks after transplantation. Photodynamic therapy was 
performed between 6 and 10 weeks after transplantation. The photosensitizer
uptake of the implant was evaluated at 24 h after photosensitizer administration.
The implant response was evaluated at 0, 12, and 24 h after light delivery. The
change in ATF3 levels, a transcription factor induced under severe hypoxic
conditions, was investigated immediately after treatment. The implant volume
increased slowly during the first 4 weeks and then involuted. At 5 weeks after
transplantation, plump endothelial cells formed tightly packed sinusoidal
channels, and the endothelial cells were positive for CD31 and GLUT1 expression. 
At 24 h after photosensitizer administration, confocal analysis showed that the
photosensitizer was present within CD31-positive cells. The implant volume was
significantly decreased in the treated implants compared with the untreated
implants (p < 0.0001). At 24 h after light delivery, most cells had collapsed.
ATF3 expression increased gradually and then reached a maximum level at 4 h after
treatment. Photodynamic therapy was effective in the treatment of infantile
hemangioma. Apoptosis, a major mechanism of hemangioma destruction in the early
phase, might be caused by ischemic injury as well as direct effects of
photodynamic therapy.

PMID: 23784382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Neuromolecular Med. 2013 Sep;15(3):504-14. doi: 10.1007/s12017-013-8236-z. Epub
2013 Jun 14.

Mechanism of action for NNZ-2566 anti-inflammatory effects following PBBI
involves upregulation of immunomodulator ATF3.

Cartagena CM(1), Phillips KL, Williams GL, Konopko M, Tortella FC, Dave JR,
Schmid KE.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Trauma Neuroprotection and Neurorestoration Branch, Center for Military 
Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, 503 Robert
Grant Avenue, Silver Spring, MD 20910, USA. casandra.cartagena@us.army.mil

The tripeptide glycine-proline-glutamate analogue NNZ-2566 (Neuren
Pharmaceuticals) demonstrates neuroprotective efficacy in models of traumatic
brain injury. In penetrating ballistic-like brain injury (PBBI), it significantly
decreases injury-induced upregulation of inflammatory cytokines including TNF-a, 
IFN-<U+03B3>, and IL-6. However, the mechanism by which NNZ-2566 acts has yet to be
determined. The activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3) is known to repress
expression of these inflammatory cytokines and was increased at the mRNA and
protein level 24-h post-PBBI. This study investigated whether 12 h of NNZ-2566
treatment following PBBI alters atf3 expression. PBBI alone significantly
increased atf3 mRNA levels by 13-fold at 12 h and these levels were increased by 
an additional fourfold with NNZ-2566 treatment. To confirm that changes in mRNA
translated to changes in protein expression, ATF3 expression levels were
determined in vivo in microglia/macrophages, T cells, natural killer cells
(NKCs), astrocytes, and neurons. PBBI alone significantly increased ATF3 in
microglia/macrophages (820%), NKCs (58%), and astrocytes (51%), but decreased
levels in T cells (48%). NNZ-2566 treatment further increased ATF3 protein
expression in microglia/macrophages (102%), NKCs (308%), and astrocytes (13%),
while reversing ATF3 decreases in T cells. Finally, PBBI increased ATF3 levels by
55% in neurons and NNZ-2566 treatment further increased these levels an
additional 33%. Since increased ATF3 may be an innate protective mechanism to
limit inflammation following injury, these results demonstrating that the
anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective drug NNZ-2566 increase both mRNA and
protein levels of ATF3 in multiple cell types provide a cellular mechanism for
NNZ-2566 modulation of neuroinflammation following PBBI.

PMID: 23765588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Jun 6;12(6):639-41. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.05.020.

Unraveling tumor suppressor networks with in vivo RNAi.

Braun CJ(1), Hemann MT.

Author information: 
(1)Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2013 May 13;23(5):660-76.

BMI1 is a known oncogenic transcriptional repressor in glioblastoma stem-like
cells, but its downstream mediators are poorly understood. Recently, in Cancer
Cell, Gargiulo et al. (2013) designed a rational in vivo RNAi screen based on
BMI1 ChIP-seq from neural progenitors and identified functional tumor suppressor 
targets, including Atf3 and Cbx7.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23746971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. PLoS One. 2013 May 31;8(5):e65058. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065058. Print 2013.

Retinoic acid-activated Ndrg1a represses Wnt/ß-catenin signaling to allow Xenopus
pancreas, oesophagus, stomach, and duodenum specification.

Zhang T(1), Guo X, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine
and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China.

How cells integrate multiple patterning signals to achieve early endoderm
regionalization remains largely unknown. Between gastrulation and neurulation,
retinoic acid (RA) signaling is required, while Wnt/ß-catenin signaling has to be
repressed for the specification of the pancreas, oesophagus, stomach, and
duodenum primordia in Xenopus embryos. In attempt to screen for RA regulated
genes in Xenopus endoderm, we identified a direct RA target gene, N-myc
downstream regulated gene 1a (ndrg1a) that showed expression early in the
archenteron roof endoderm and late in the developing pancreas, oesophagus,
stomach, and duodenum. Both antisense morpholino oligonucleotide mediated
knockdown of ndrg1a in Xenopus laevis and the transcription activator-like
effector nucleases (TALEN) mediated disruption of ndrg1 in Xenopus tropicalis
demonstrate that like RA signaling, Ndrg1a is specifically required for the
specification of Xenopus pancreas, oesophagus, stomach, and duodenum primordia.
Immunofluorescence data suggest that RA-activated Ndrg1a suppresses Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling in Xenopus archenteron roof endoderm cells. Blocking Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling rescued Ndrg1a knockdown phenotype. Furthermore, overexpression of the 
putative Wnt/ß-catenin target gene Atf3 phenocopied knockdown of Ndrg1a or
inhibition of RA signaling, while Atf3 knockdown can rescue Ndrg1a knockdown
phenotype. Lastly, the pancreas/stomach/duodenum transcription factor Pdx1 was
able to rescue Atf3 overexpression or Ndrg1a knockdown phenotype. Together, we
conclude that RA activated Ndrg1a represses Wnt/ß-catenin signaling to allow the 
specification of pancreas, oesophagus, stomach, and duodenum progenitor cells in 
Xenopus embryos.

PMCID: PMC3669096
PMID: 23741453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 18;110(25):E2261-70. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1220071110. Epub 2013 Jun 3.

Regulatory interplay of Cockayne syndrome B ATPase and stress-response gene ATF3 
following genotoxic stress.

Kristensen U(1), Epanchintsev A, Rauschendorf MA, Laugel V, Stevnsner T, Bohr VA,
Coin F, Egly JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics and Cancer Biology, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique/Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University of Strasbourg, 67404 Illkirch Cedex,
France.

Cockayne syndrome type B ATPase (CSB) belongs to the SwItch/Sucrose
nonfermentable family. Its mutations are linked to Cockayne syndrome phenotypes
and classically are thought to be caused by defects in transcription-coupled
repair, a subtype of DNA repair. Here we show that after UV-C irradiation,
immediate early genes such as activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) are
overexpressed. Although the ATF3 target genes, including dihydrofolate reductase 
(DHFR), were unable to recover RNA synthesis in CSB-deficient cells,
transcription was restored rapidly in normal cells. There the synthesis of DHFR
mRNA restarts on the arrival of RNA polymerase II and CSB and the subsequent
release of ATF3 from its cAMP response element/ATF target site. In CSB-deficient 
cells ATF3 remains bound to the promoter, thereby preventing the arrival of
polymerase II and the restart of transcription. Silencing of ATF3, as well as
stable introduction of wild-type CSB, restores RNA synthesis in UV-irradiated CSB
cells, suggesting that, in addition to its role in DNA repair, CSB activity
likely is involved in the reversal of inhibitory properties on a gene-promoter
region. We present strong experimental data supporting our view that the
transcriptional defects observed in UV-irradiated CSB cells are largely the
result of a permanent transcriptional repression of a certain set of genes in
addition to some defect in DNA repair.

PMCID: PMC3690876
PMID: 23733932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. PLoS One. 2013 May 27;8(5):e63467. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063467. Print 2013.

Gene expression changes under cyclic mechanical stretching in rat retinal glial
(Müller) cells.

Wang X(1), Fan J, Zhang M, Sun Z, Xu G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, Eye and ENT Hospital,
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: The retina is subjected to tractional forces in various conditions. As
the predominant glial element in the retina, Müller cells are active players in
all forms of retinal injury and disease. In this study, we aim to identify
patterns of gene expression changes induced by cyclic mechanical stretching in
Müller cells.
METHODS: Rat Müller cells were seeded onto flexible bottom culture plates and
subjected to a cyclic stretching regimen of 15% equibiaxial stretching for 1 and 
24 h. RNA was extracted and amplified, labeled, and hybridized to rat genome
microarrays. The expression profiles were analyzed using GeneSpring software, and
gene ontology analysis and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
were used to select, annotate, and visualize genes by function and pathway. The
selected genes of interest were further validated by Quantitative Real-time PCR
(qPCR).
RESULTS: Microarray data analysis showed that at 1 and 24 h, the expression of
532 and 991 genes in the Müller cells significantly (t-test, p<0.05) differed
between the mechanically stretched and unstretched groups. Of these genes, 56
genes at 1 h and 62 genes at 24 h showed more than a twofold change in
expression. Several genes related to response to stimulus (e.g., Egr2, IL6), cell
proliferation (e.g., Areg, Atf3), tissue remodeling (e.g., PVR, Loxl2), and
vasculogenesis (e.g., Epha2, Nrn1) were selected and validated by qPCR. KEGG
pathway analysis showed significant changes in MAPK signaling at both time
points.
CONCLUSIONS: Cyclic mechanical strain induces extensive changes in the gene
expression in Müller cells through multiple molecular pathways. These results
indicate the complex mechanoresponsive nature of Müller cells, and they provide
novel insights into possible molecular mechanisms that would account for many
retinal diseases in which the retina is often subjected to mechanical forces,
such as pathological myopia and proliferative vitreoretinopathy.

PMCID: PMC3664568
PMID: 23723984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013 Apr;21(4):731-6. doi: 10.1002/oby.20274.

Expression of activating transcription factor 2 in inflammatory macrophages in
obese adipose tissue.

Miyata Y(1), Fukuhara A, Otsuki M, Shimomura I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: White adipose tissue (WAT) of obesity is in the state of inflammation 
with progressive infiltration by macrophages and overproduction of reactive
oxygen species (ROS), which can induce WAT dysfunction, including insulin
resistance and adipocytokine dysregulation. Activating transcription factor 2
(ATF2) is a member of the ATF/cAMP response element binding family of
transcription factors and known to be activated by cellular stressors, such as
inflammatory cytokines, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and ROS. DESIGN AND METHODS,
RESULTS: Here, we show that ATF2 protein was significantly more induced in WAT of
ob/ob mice compared with C57BL/6J mice. Total and phosphorylated ATF2 were highly
expressed in infiltrated macrophages. Furthermore, flow cytometry analysis
demonstrated that ATF2 expression was high in CD11c-positive/CD301-negative M1
macrophages. Phosphorylation of ATF2 was induced by treatment with either H2 O2
or LPS in RAW264.7 macrophage cells, and suppression of ATF2 expression by
small-interfering RNA induced mRNA levels of ATF3, an anti-inflammatory molecule 
in macrophages in WAT.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that ATF2 is an important transcriptional
factor relating to inflammation through the suppression of ATF3 in M1 macrophages
of WAT.

Copyright © 2012 The Obesity Society.

PMID: 23712976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Seizure. 2013 Oct;22(8):675-8. doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2013.04.023. Epub 2013 May 
22.

TLR4, ATF-3 and IL8 inflammation mediator expression correlates with seizure
frequency in human epileptic brain tissue.

Pernhorst K(1), Herms S, Hoffmann P, Cichon S, Schulz H, Sander T, Schoch S,
Becker AJ, Grote A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn Medical Center, Bonn,
Germany. kpernhor@uni-bonn.de

PURPOSE: Data from animal models has nicely shown that inflammatory processes in 
the central nervous system (CNS) can modulate seizure frequency. However, a
potential relationship between the modulation of seizure frequency and gene
expression of key inflammatory factors in human epileptic tissue is still
unresolved. Brain tissue from pharmacoresistant patients with mesial temporal
lobe epilepsy (mTLE) provides a unique prerequisite for clinico-neuropathological
correlations. Here, we have concentrated on gene expression of the human key
inflammatory mediators, TLR4, ATF-3 and IL8, in correlation to seizure frequency 
and additional clinical parameters in human epileptic brain tissue of
pharmacoresistant mTLE patients. Furthermore, we characterized the cell types
expressing the respective proteins in epileptic hippocampi.
METHODS: Total RNAs were isolated from n=26 hippocampi of pharmacoresistant mTLE 
patients using AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini Kit. cRNA was used for hybridization on Human
HT-12 v3 Expression BeadChips with Illumina Direct Hybridization Assay Kit and
resulting gene expression data was normalized based on the Illumina BeadStudio
software suite by means of quantile normalization with background subtraction.
Corresponding human hippocampal sections for immunohistochemistry were probed
with antibodies against TLR4, ATF-3, IL8 and glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP), neuronal nuclear protein (NeuN) and the microglial marker HLA-DR.
RESULTS: We observed abundant TLR4 gene expression to relate to seizure frequency
per month. For ATF-3, we found an inverse correlation of expression to seizure
frequency. Lower expression of IL8 was significantly associated with high seizure
frequency. Further, we detected TLR4 expression in neurons and GFAP-positive
astrocytes of pharmacoresistant mTLE patients. Only neurons of human epileptic
hippocampi express ATF-3. IL8 was expressed in microglia and reactive astrocytes.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest a differential correlation of key inflammatory
factor expression in epileptic hippocampi and seizure frequency in patients. The 
modulation of such processes may open new therapeutic perspectives for treating
seizures.

Copyright © 2013 British Epilepsy Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 23706953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2013 Nov;33(11):682-93. doi: 10.1089/jir.2013.0007.
Epub 2013 May 22.

Activating transcription factor 3 contributes to Toll-like receptor-mediated
macrophage survival via repression of Bax and Bak.

Thompson MR(1), Xu D, Williams BR.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Institute of Medical Research, Monash University , Clayton, Victoria,
Australia .

Macrophages play an essential role in the innate immune response to infection and
tissue injury. However, excessive macrophage activation may also significantly
contribute to chronic inflammatory diseases. The Toll-like receptor (TLR) family 
are key regulators of innate immune responses in macrophages, and they are able
to promote their survival and resistance against apoptosis. We, and others, have 
shown that the adaptive response gene, activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), 
acts as a negative regulator of TLR signaling by repressing transcription of
pro-inflammatory cytokines in primary mouse macrophages. Here, we describe a
novel role for ATF3 as a component of TLR-mediated survival in macrophages.
ATF3-deficient bone marrow macrophages show reduced survival in response to a
range of TLR ligands and significantly higher apoptotic rates were observed in
response to lipopolysaccharide, indicating that ATF3 is required to suppress
apoptosis in macrophages. Furthermore, we show that ATF3 lies downstream of JNK
signaling after TLR engagement, resulting in repression of pro-apoptotic Bak and 
Bax transcription.

PMID: 23697557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Cancer Lett. 2013 Aug 28;337(1):66-76. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.05.022. Epub
2013 May 18.

Induction of DNA damage and ATF3 by retigeric acid B, a novel topoisomerase II
inhibitor, promotes apoptosis in prostate cancer cells.

Liu Y(1), Gao F, Jiang H, Niu L, Bi Y, Young CY, Yuan H, Lou H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shandong University School
of Medicine, Jinan 250012, China.

Retigeric acid B (RB) has been reported to exhibit its anti-tumor activity in
vitro and in vivo. Here, we found that RB significantly inhibited activity of
topoisomerase IIa (Topo IIa), leading to remarkable DNA damage in prostate cancer
(PCa) cells as evidenced by a strong induction of <U+03B3>H2AX and DNA fragmentation.
Activation of ATM and ATR sequentially led to induction of phospho-Chk1/2 and
phospho-Cdc25 in response to RB. Blockade of ATM/ATR signaling resulted in the
attenuation of RB-induced <U+03B3>H2AX, and partially rescued RB-mediated cell death. RB
treatment also resulted in inactivation of DNA repair proteins such as
phospho-BRCA1, impairment of HR, and NHEJ repair as indicated by DNA end-joining 
assays. Meanwhile, a stress-responsive gene activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) was noted for its predominant expression in response to RB-induced DNA
damage. Knockdown of ATF3 inhibited the RB-induced expression changes of cell
cycle- and apoptosis-related genes such as DR5, DDIT4, CDC25A, GADD45A, and
partially blocked RB-mediated inhibition on cell proliferation and induction of
apoptosis, suggesting the crucial involvement of ATF3 in this event. Microarray
data displayed that RB caused changes of genes required for damaged-DNA binding
and repair, as well as ATF3 and its target genes. Our data firstly demonstrated
that RB was a novel DNA Topo II inhibitor and triggered cell death by inducing
DNA damage and stress-response, suggesting a promising anticancer agent.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23693077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Cancer Cell. 2013 May 13;23(5):660-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.03.030.

In vivo RNAi screen for BMI1 targets identifies TGF-ß/BMP-ER stress pathways as
key regulators of neural- and malignant glioma-stem cell homeostasis.

Gargiulo G(1), Cesaroni M, Serresi M, de Vries N, Hulsman D, Bruggeman SW,
Lancini C, van Lohuizen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics and Centre for Biomedical Genetics, The
Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Jun 6;12(6):639-41.

In mouse and human neural progenitor and glioblastoma "stem-like" cells, we
identified key targets of the Polycomb-group protein BMI1 by combining ChIP-seq
with in vivo RNAi screening. We discovered that Bmi1 is important in the cellular
response to the transforming growth factor-ß/bone morphogenetic protein
(TGF-ß/BMP) and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress pathways, in part converging on
the Atf3 transcriptional repressor. We show that Atf3 is a tumor-suppressor gene 
inactivated in human glioblastoma multiforme together with Cbx7 and a few other
candidates. Acting downstream of the ER stress and BMP pathways, ATF3 binds to
cell-type-specific accessible chromatin preloaded with AP1 and participates in
the inhibition of critical oncogenic networks. Our data support the feasibility
of combining ChIP-seq and RNAi screens in solid tumors and highlight multiple
p16(INK4a)/p19(ARF)-independent functions for Bmi1 in development and cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23680149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Virol. 2013 Jul;87(14):8124-34. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00626-13. Epub 2013 May 15.

Upregulation of CHOP/GADD153 during coronavirus infectious bronchitis virus
infection modulates apoptosis by restricting activation of the extracellular
signal-regulated kinase pathway.

Liao Y(1), Fung TS, Huang M, Fang SG, Zhong Y, Liu DX.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
Singapore.

Induction of the unfolded protein response (UPR) is an adaptive cellular response
to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress that allows a cell to reestablish ER
homeostasis. However, under severe and persistent ER stress, prolonged UPR may
activate unique pathways that lead to cell death. In this study, we investigated 
the activation of the protein kinase R-like ER kinase (PERK) pathway of UPR in
cells infected with the coronavirus infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) and its
relationship with IBV-induced apoptosis. The results showed moderate induction of
PERK phosphorylation in IBV-infected cells. Meanwhile, activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4) was upregulated at the protein level in the infected cells,
resulting in the induction in trans of the transcription factor ATF3 and the
proapoptotic growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible protein GADD153. Knockdown of
PERK by small interfering RNA (siRNA) suppressed the activation of GADD153 and
the IBV-induced apoptosis. Interestingly, knockdown of protein kinase R (PKR) by 
siRNA and inhibition of the PKR kinase activity by 2-aminopurine (2-AP) also
reduced the IBV-induced upregulation of GADD153 and apoptosis induction. In
GADD153-knockdown cells, IBV-induced apoptosis was suppressed and virus
replication inhibited, revealing a key role of GADD153 in IBV-induced cell death 
and virus replication. Analysis of the pathways downstream of GADD153 revealed
much more activation of the extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) pathway in 
GADD153-knockdown cells during IBV infection, indicating that GADD153 may
modulate apoptosis through suppression of the pathway. This study provides solid 
evidence that induction of GADD153 by PERK and PKR plays an important regulatory 
role in the apoptotic process triggered by IBV infection.

PMCID: PMC3700216
PMID: 23678184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 28;288(26):18975-86. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.427062. Epub
2013 May 15.

Cardiomyocyte ATP production, metabolic flexibility, and survival require calcium
flux through cardiac ryanodine receptors in vivo.

Bround MJ(1), Wambolt R, Luciani DS, Kulpa JE, Rodrigues B, Brownsey RW, Allard
MF, Johnson JD.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Group, Life Sciences Institute, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver V6T 1Z3, Canada.

Ca(2+) fluxes between adjacent organelles are thought to control many cellular
processes, including metabolism and cell survival. In vitro evidence has been
presented that constitutive Ca(2+) flux from intracellular stores into
mitochondria is required for basal cellular metabolism, but these observations
have not been made in vivo. We report that controlled in vivo depletion of
cardiac RYR2, using a conditional gene knock-out strategy (cRyr2KO mice), is
sufficient to reduce mitochondrial Ca(2+) and oxidative metabolism, and to
establish a pseudohypoxic state with increased autophagy. Dramatic metabolic
reprogramming was evident at the transcriptional level via Sirt1/Foxo1/Pgc1a,
Atf3, and Klf15 gene networks. Ryr2 loss also induced a non-apoptotic form of
programmed cell death associated with increased calpain-10 but not caspase-3
activation or endoplasmic reticulum stress. Remarkably, cRyr2KO mice rapidly
exhibited many of the structural, metabolic, and molecular characteristics of
heart failure at a time when RYR2 protein was reduced 50%, a similar degree to
that which has been reported in heart failure. RYR2-mediated Ca(2+) fluxes are
therefore proximal controllers of mitochondrial Ca(2+), ATP levels, and a cascade
of transcription factors controlling metabolism and survival.

PMCID: PMC3696672
PMID: 23678000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Apoptosis. 2013 Sep;18(9):1120-31. doi: 10.1007/s10495-013-0860-4.

Phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of integrin ß4 induced by a chemical
small molecule contribute to apoptosis in vascular endothelial cells.

Ge D(1), Kong X, Liu W, Zhao J, Su L, Zhang S, Zhang Y, Zhao B, Miao J.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Cells and Developmental Biology, 
School of Life Science, Shandong University, Jinan, 250100, China.

Integrin ß4 and its Y-1494 phosphorylation play an important role in cell
signaling. We found a small molecule,
ethyl1-(3-(4-chlorophenoxy)-2-hydroxypropyl)-3-(4-chlorophenyl)-1H-pyrazole-5-car
boxylate (ECPC), that could elevate the levels of KIT ligand (KITLG), interleukin
8 (IL-8), prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2) and activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and promote apoptosis in vascular endothelial cells
(VECs) through integrin ß4. We investigated the underlying mechanism of integrin 
ß4 participating in this process. ECPC treatment increased the phosphorylation of
Y-1494 in the integrin ß4 cytoplasmic domain via a well-known receptor tyrosine
kinase, fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1), and integrin ß4 translocated
from the cytoplasm to nucleus. With suppression of Y-1494 phosphorylation by
FGF-2 or siRNA of FGFR1, ECPC failed to promote integrin ß4 nuclear translocation
and could not increase the expression of KITLG, IL-8, PTGS2 or ATF3. Y-1494
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of integrin ß4 may be important during 
ECPC-induced apoptosis in VECs.

PMID: 23677256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Exp Eye Res. 2013 Jul;112:106-17. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2013.04.021. Epub 2013 May 
3.

JUN regulates early transcriptional responses to axonal injury in retinal
ganglion cells.

Fernandes KA(1), Harder JM, Kim J, Libby RT.

Author information: 
(1)Flaum Eye Institute, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY,
USA.

The AP1 family transcription factor JUN is an important molecule in the neuronal 
response to injury. In retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), JUN is upregulated soon
after axonal injury and disrupting JUN activity delays RGC death. JUN is known to
participate in the control of many different injury response pathways in neurons,
including pathways controlling cell death and axonal regeneration. The role of
JUN in regulating genes involved in cell death, ER stress, and regeneration was
tested to determine the overall importance of JUN in regulating RGC response to
axonal injury. Genes from each of these pathways were transcriptionally
controlled following axonal injury and Jun deficiency altered the expression of
many of these genes. The differentially expressed genes included, Atf3, Ddit3,
Ecel1, Gadd45a, Gal, Hrk, Pten, Socs3, and Sprr1a. Two of these genes, Hrk and
Atf3, were tested for importance in RGC death using null alleles of each gene.
Disruption of the prodeath Bcl2 family member Hrk did not affect the rate or
amount of RGC death after axonal trauma. Deficiency in the ATF/CREB family
transcription factor Atf3 did lessen the amount of RGC death after injury, though
it did not provide long term protection to RGCs. Since JUN's dimerization partner
determines its transcriptional targets, the expression of several candidate AP1
family members were examined. Multiple AP1 family members were induced by axonal 
injury and had a different expression profile in Jun deficient retinas compared
to wildtype retinas (Fosl1, Fosl2 and Jund). Overall, JUN appears to play a
multifaceted role in regulating RGC response to axonal injury.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3700614
PMID: 23648575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Cell Microbiol. 2013 Nov;15(11):1837-50. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12153. Epub 2013 May
23.

Upregulation of ATF3 inhibits expression of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6
during Neisseria gonorrhoeae infection.

Calton CM(1), Wade LK, So M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, L220, Oregon Health and
Science University, Portland, OR, 97239, USA; The BIO5 Institute, University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 85721, USA; Department of Immunobiology, University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 85721, USA.

Neisseria gonorrhoeae regulates the expression of epithelial cell genes,
activates cytoprotective pathways in the infected cell and protects it from
apoptosis. Many of these responses are enhanced by the Type IV pilus (Tfp). We
tested the hypothesis that N.<U+2009>gonorrhoeae modulates the innate immune response by
inducing expression of ATF3, a transcription factor that negatively regulates the
expression of many cytokine genes. We further determined whether Tfp are involved
in these events. We found that N.<U+2009>gonorrhoeae induces ATF3 expression in mucosal 
epithelial cells through activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases. Maximal
ATF3 expression requires Tfp retraction. Knocking down endogenous levels of ATF3 
results in higher levels of IL-6 transcript. Our findings strongly suggest that
ATF3 is involved in suppressing cytokine expression during gonococcal infection. 
We propose a model for the role of ATF3 in the context of N.<U+2009>gonorrhoeae
infection.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3796059
PMID: 23648135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Neuroscience. 2013 Aug 29;246:160-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.04.057.
Epub 2013 May 2.

Psychological stress, cocaine and natural reward each induce endoplasmic
reticulum stress genes in rat brain.

Pavlovsky AA(1), Boehning D, Li D, Zhang Y, Fan X, Green TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX 77555, USA.

Our prior research has shown that the transcription of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress transcription factors activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and ATF4
are induced by amphetamine and restraint stress in rat striatum. However,
presently the full extent of ER stress responses to psychological stress or
cocaine, and which of the three ER stress pathways is activated is unknown. The
current study examines transcriptional responses of key ER stress target genes
subsequent to psychological stress or cocaine. Rats were subjected to acute or
repeated restraint stress or cocaine treatment and mRNA was isolated from dorsal 
striatum, medial prefrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens brain tissue. ER stress 
gene mRNA expression was measured using quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and RNA sequencing. Restraint stress and cocaine-induced transcription of
the classic ER stress-induced genes (BIP, CHOP, ATF3 and GADD34) and of two other
ER stress components x-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) and ATF6. In addition, rats
living in an enriched environment (large group cage with novel toys changed
daily) exhibited rapid induction of GADD34 and ATF3 after 30 min of exploring
novel toys, suggesting these genes are also involved in normal non-pathological
signaling. However, environmental enrichment, a paradigm that produces protective
addiction and depression phenotypes in rats, attenuated the rapid induction of
ATF3 and GADD34 after restraint stress. These experiments provide a sensitive
measure of ER stress and, more importantly, these results offer good evidence of 
the activation of ER stress mechanisms from psychological stress, cocaine and
natural reward. Thus, ER stress genes may be targets for novel therapeutic
targets for depression and addiction.

Copyright © 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3691328
PMID: 23644055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Cell Tissue Res. 2013 Jul;353(1):1-8. doi: 10.1007/s00441-013-1634-6. Epub 2013
May 3.

Regulation and effects of GDF-15 in the retina following optic nerve crush.

Charalambous P(1), Wang X, Thanos S, Schober A, Unsicker K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, University of Freiburg, Albertstrasse 17, 
79104, Freiburg, Germany.

Growth/differentiation factor-15 (GDF-15) is a distant member of the transforming
growth factor-ß superfamily and is ubiquitously expressed in the central nervous 
system. It is prominently upregulated in cerebral cortical and ischemic lesion
paradigms. GDF-15 robustly promotes the survival of lesioned nigrostriatal
dopaminergic neurons in vivo; GDF-15-deficient mice exhibit progressive postnatal
motor and sensory neuron losses implying essential functions of GDF-15 in
neuronal survival. We show that GDF-15 mRNA and protein are, respectively,
six-fold and three-fold upregulated in the murine retina at 1 day after optic
nerve crush, slightly elevated mRNA levels being maintained until day 28.
However, the magnitude and time course of retinal ganglion cell (RGC) death are
indistinguishable in knockout and control mice. Selected mRNAs implicated in the 
regulation of the death vs. survival of RGCs, including ATF3, Bad, Bcl-2 and
caspase-8, were similarly regulated in both knockout and control retinae.
Immunohistochemistry for tyrosine hydroxylase and choline acetyltransferase
revealed no differences in staining patterns in the two genotypes. mRNA and
protein levels of galanin, a putative neuroprotective factor and positive
regulator of neuron survival and axonal regeneration, were prominently
upregulated after crush in knockout retinae at day 3, as compared with control
retinae, suggesting that GDF-15 acts as a physiological regulator of galanin.
GDF-15 is therefore prominently upregulated in the retina after optic nerve crush
but does not directly interfere with the magnitude and temporal progression of
RGC death.

PMID: 23640134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jul 1;305(1):E1-14. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00076.2013. Epub 2013 Apr 30.

Early growth response protein-1 mediates lipotoxicity-associated placental
inflammation: role in maternal obesity.

Saben J(1), Zhong Y, Gomez-Acevedo H, Thakali KM, Borengasser SJ, Andres A,
Shankar K.

Author information: 
(1)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA.

Obesity is associated with low-grade chronic inflammation, which contributes to
cellular dysfunction promoting metabolic disease. Obesity during pregnancy leads 
to a proinflammatory milieu in the placenta; however, the underlying causes for
obesity-induced placental inflammation remain unclear. Here, we examine the
mechanisms by which saturated fatty acids and inflammatory cytokines induce
inflammation in placental trophoblasts. We conducted global transcriptomic
profiling in BeWo cells following palmitate and/or TNFa treatment and
gene/protein expression analyses of MAPK pathways and characterized downstream
transcription factors directly regulating inflammatory cytokines. Microarray
analysis revealed increased expression of genes regulating inflammation, stress
response, and immediate early response in cytotrophoblasts in response to
palmitic acid (PA), TNFa, or a combination of both (PA + TNFa). Both gene
ontology and gene set enrichment analysis revealed MAPK and EGR-1 signaling to be
upregulated in BeWo cells, which was confirmed via immunoblotting. Importantly,
activation of JNK signaling was necessary for increased proinflammatory cytokine 
(IL-6, TNFa, and IL-8) and EGR1 mRNA. Consistent with the requirement of JNK
signaling, ChIP analysis confirmed the recruitment of c-Jun and other
MAPK-responsive immediate early factors on the EGR1 promoter. Moreover,
recruitment of EGR-1 on cytokine promoters (IL-6, TNFa, and IL-8) and an impaired
proinflammatory response following knockdown of EGR-1 suggested it as a central
component of the mechanism facilitating inflammatory gene expression. Finally,
akin to in vitro findings, term placenta from obese women also had both increased
JNK and p38 signaling and greater EGR-1 protein relative to lean women. Our
results demonstrate that lipotoxic insults induce inflammation in placental cells
via activation of JNK/EGR-1 signaling.

PMCID: PMC4116409
PMID: 23632636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 16;8(4):e61991. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061991. Print 2013.

Acidosis activation of the proton-sensing GPR4 receptor stimulates vascular
endothelial cell inflammatory responses revealed by transcriptome analysis.

Dong L(1), Li Z, Leffler NR, Asch AS, Chi JT, Yang LV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina University,
Greenville, North Carolina, United States of America.

Acidic tissue microenvironment commonly exists in inflammatory diseases, tumors, 
ischemic organs, sickle cell disease, and many other pathological conditions due 
to hypoxia, glycolytic cell metabolism and deficient blood perfusion. However,
the molecular mechanisms by which cells sense and respond to the acidic
microenvironment are not well understood. GPR4 is a proton-sensing receptor
expressed in endothelial cells and other cell types. The receptor is fully
activated by acidic extracellular pH but exhibits lesser activity at the
physiological pH 7.4 and minimal activity at more alkaline pH. To delineate the
function and signaling pathways of GPR4 activation by acidosis in endothelial
cells, we compared the global gene expression of the acidosis response in primary
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) with varying level of GPR4. The
results demonstrated that acidosis activation of GPR4 in HUVEC substantially
increased the expression of a number of inflammatory genes such as chemokines,
cytokines, adhesion molecules, NF-<U+03BA>B pathway genes, and
prostaglandin-endoperoxidase synthase 2 (PTGS2 or COX-2) and stress response
genes such as ATF3 and DDIT3 (CHOP). Similar GPR4-mediated acidosis induction of 
the inflammatory genes was also noted in other types of endothelial cells
including human lung microvascular endothelial cells and pulmonary artery
endothelial cells. Further analyses indicated that the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway was
important for the acidosis/GPR4-induced inflammatory gene expression. Moreover,
acidosis activation of GPR4 increased the adhesion of HUVEC to U937 monocytic
cells under a flow condition. Importantly, treatment with a recently identified
GPR4 antagonist significantly reduced the acidosis/GPR4-mediated endothelial cell
inflammatory response. Taken together, these results show that activation of GPR4
by acidosis stimulates the expression of a wide range of inflammatory genes in
endothelial cells. Such inflammatory response can be suppressed by GPR4 small
molecule inhibitors and hold potential therapeutic value.

PMCID: PMC3628782
PMID: 23613998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Toxicon. 2013 Jul;69:160-7. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2013.03.018. Epub 2013 Apr 18.

Connectivity maps for biosimilar drug discovery in venoms: the case of Gila
monster venom and the anti-diabetes drug Byetta®.

Aramadhaka LR(1), Prorock A, Dragulev B, Bao Y, Fox JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology, University of
Virginia, School of Medicine, PO Box 800734, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Like most natural product libraries animal venoms have long been recognized as
potentially rich source of biologically active molecules with the potential to be
mined for the discovery of drugs, drug leads and/or biosimilars. In this work we 
demonstrate as a proof of concept a novel approach to explore venoms for
potential biosimilarity to other drugs based on their ability to alter the
transcriptomes of test cell lines followed by informatic searches and
Connectivity Mapping to match the action of the venom on the cell gene expression
to that of other drugs in the Connectivity Map (C-Map) database. As our test
animal venom we chose Heloderma suspectum venom (Gila monster) since exendin-4, a
glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist, isolated from the venom is currently on
the market to treat type 2 diabetes. The action of Byetta(®) (exentide, synthetic
exendin-4), was also used in transcriptome studies. Analysis of transcriptomes
from cells treated with the venom or the drug showed similarities as well as
differences. The former case was primarily attributed to the fact that Gila
monster venom likely contains a variety of biologically active molecules that
could alter the MCF7 cell transcriptome compared to that of the single perturbant
Byetta(®). Using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software, insulin-like growth factor 
1 signaling was identified in the category of "Top Canonical Pathways" for both
the venom and Byetta(®). In the category of "Top Molecules" up-regulated, both
venom and Byetta(®) shared IL-8, cyclic AMP-dependent transcription factor 3
(ATF-3), neuron-derived orphan receptor 1 (NR4A3), dexamethasone-induced
Ras-related protein 1 (RASD1) and early growth response protein 1, (EGR-1) all
with potential relevance in diabetes. Using Connectivity Mapping, Gila monster
venom showed positive correlation with 1732 instances and negative correlation
with 793 instances in the Connectivity database whereas Byetta(®) showed positive
correlation with 1692 instances and negative correlation with 868 instances.
Interestingly, the Gila monster venom and Byetta(®) both showed positive
correlation with the anti-diabetic drugs troglitazone, of the thiazolidinedione
class, and metformin, of the biguanide class, although Byetta(®) as a
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) agonist functions in a different manner than
either of these two classes of anti-diabetic drugs. In summary, despite the fact 
that Gila monster venom contains a mixture of biologically active molecules,
similarities in terms of perturbation of gene expression profiles on MCF7 cells
were observed between the venom and the drug Byetta(®). Furthermore, using
Connectivity Mapping the Gila monster venom was demonstrated to have nodes of
positive correlation to several anti-diabetic drugs two of which were the same as
observed with Byetta(®). Therefore, this study suggests that by using this
approach novel drug activities heretofore unconsidered may be discovered in
venoms using informatic tools and Connectivity Mapping.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23602926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 11;8(4):e61438. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061438. Print 2013.

Oppositional regulation of Noxa by JNK1 and JNK2 during apoptosis induced by
proteasomal inhibitors.

Pietkiewicz S(1), Sohn D, Piekorz RP, Grether-Beck S, Budach W, Sabapathy K,
Jänicke RU.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Radiooncology, Clinic and Policlinic for Radiation
Therapy and Radiooncology, University of Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Proteasome inhibitors (PIs) potently induce apoptosis in a variety of tumor
cells, but the underlying mechanisms are not fully elucidated. Comparing
PI-induced apoptosis susceptibilities of various mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF)
lines differing in their c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) 1 and 2 status, we show
that several hallmarks of apoptosis were most rapidly detectable in JNK2-/-
cells, whereas they appeared only delayed and severely reduced in their
intensities in cells expressing JNK2. Consistent with our finding that PI-induced
apoptosis requires de novo protein synthesis, the proteasomal inhibitor MG-132
induced expression of the BH3-only protein Noxa at the transcriptional level in a
JNK1-dependent, but JNK2-opposing manner. As the knockdown of Noxa blocked only
the rapid PI-induced apoptosis of JNK2-/- cells, but not the delayed death
occurring in JNK1-/- and JNK1+/+ cells, our data uncover a novel PI-induced
apoptosis pathway that is regulated by the JNK1/2-dependent expression of Noxa.
Furthermore, several transcription factors known to modulate Noxa expression
including ATF3, ATF4, c-Jun, c-Myc, HIF1a, and p53 were found upregulated
following MG-132 exposure. From those, only knockdown of c-Myc rescued JNK2-/-
cells from PI-induced apoptosis, however, without affecting expression of Noxa.
Together, our data not only show that a rapid execution of PI-induced apoptosis
requires JNK1 for upregulation of Noxa via an as yet unknown transcription
factor, but also that JNK2 controls this event in an oppositional manner.

PMCID: PMC3623862
PMID: 23593480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Apr 16;14(4):8367-80. doi: 10.3390/ijms14048367.

Loss of SUMOylation on ATF3 inhibits proliferation of prostate cancer cells by
modulating CCND1/2 activity.

Wang CM(1), Yang WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Mercer University School of Medicine,
Savannah, GA 31404, USA. yang_w@mercer.edu.

SUMOylation plays an important role in regulating a wide range of cellular
processes. Previously, we showed that ATF3, a stress response mediator, can be
SUMOylated and lysine 42 is the major SUMO site. However, the significance of
ATF3 SUMOylation in biological processes is still poorly understood. In the
present study, we investigated the role of ATF3 SUMOylation on CCND activity and 
cellular proliferation in human prostate cancer cells. First, we showed that ATF3
can be SUMOylated endogenously in the overexpression system, and lysine 42 is the
major SUMO site. Unlike normal prostate tissue and androgen-responsive LNCaP
cancer cells, androgen-independent PC3 and DU145 cancer cells did not express
ATF3 endogenously. Overexpression of ATF3 increased CCND1/2 expression in PC3 and
DU145 cancer cells. Interestingly, we observed that SUMOylation is essential for 
ATF3-mediated CCND1/2 activation. Finally, we observed that SUMOylation plays a
functional role in ATF3-mediated cellular proliferation in PC3 and DU145 cells.
Taken together, our results demonstrate that SUMO modification of ATF3 influences
CCND1/2 activity and cellular proliferation of prostate cancer PC3 and DU145
cells and explains at least in part how ATF3 functions to regulate cancer
development.

PMCID: PMC3645748
PMID: 23591848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Neuroscience. 2013 Aug 6;244:77-89. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.03.050. Epub
2013 Apr 11.

Therapeutic potential of VEGF and VEGF-derived peptide in peripheral
neuropathies.

Verheyen A(1), Peeraer E, Lambrechts D, Poesen K, Carmeliet P, Shibuya M,
Pintelon I, Timmermans JP, Nuydens R, Meert T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Janssen Research & Development, A Division of
Janssen Pharmaceutica NV, B-2340 Beerse, Belgium.

Besides its prominent role in angiogenesis, the vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) also exerts important protective effects on neurons. In particular,
mice expressing reduced levels of VEGF suffer from late-onset motor neuron
degeneration, whereas VEGF delivery significantly delays motor neuron death in
ALS mouse models, at least partly through neuroprotective effects. Additionally, 
VEGF protects dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons against paclitaxel-induced
neurotoxicity. Here, we demonstrate that VEGF also protects DRG neurons against
hyperglycemia-induced neuronal stress as a model of diabetes-induced peripheral
neuropathy. Specifically, VEGF decreased expression of the stress-related gene
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in DRG neurons isolated from
streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice (ex vivo) and in isolated DRG neurons
exposed to high glucose concentrations (in vitro). In vivo, local VEGF
application also protected against paclitaxel- and diabetes-induced neuropathies 
without causing side effects. A small synthetic VEGF mimicking pentadecapeptide
(QK) exerted similar effects on DRG cultures: the peptide reduced ATF3 expression
in vitro and ex vivo in paclitaxel- and hyperglycemia-induced models of
neuropathy to a similar extent as the full-length recombinant VEGF protein. By
using transgenic mice selectively overexpressing the VEGF receptor 2 in postnatal
neurons, these neuroprotective effects were shown to be mediated through VEGF
receptor 2. Overall, these results underscore the potential of VEGF and
VEGF-derived peptides for the treatment of peripheral neuropathies.

Copyright © 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23583762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Endocrinology. 2013 Jun;154(6):2208-21. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-2096. Epub 2013 Apr 
8.

cAMP-responsive element binding protein: a vital link in embryonic hormonal
adaptation.

Schindler M(1), Fischer S, Thieme R, Fischer B, Santos AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Martin Luther University Faculty of
Medicine, Grosse Steinstrasse 52, D-06097 Halle (Saale), Germany.
maria.schindler@medizin.uni-halle.de

The transcription factor cAMP responsive element-binding protein (CREB) and
activating transcription factors (ATFs) are downstream components of the
insulin/IGF cascade, playing crucial roles in maintaining cell viability and
embryo survival. One of the CREB target genes is adiponectin, which acts
synergistically with insulin. We have studied the CREB-ATF-adiponectin network in
rabbit preimplantation development in vivo and in vitro. From the blastocyst
stage onwards, CREB and ATF1, ATF3, and ATF4 are present with increasing
expression for CREB, ATF1, and ATF3 during gastrulation and with a dominant
expression in the embryoblast (EB). In vitro stimulation with insulin and IGF-I
reduced CREB and ATF1 transcripts by approximately 50%, whereas CREB
phosphorylation was increased. Activation of CREB was accompanied by subsequent
reduction in adiponectin and adiponectin receptor (adipoR)1 expression. Under in 
vivo conditions of diabetes type 1, maternal adiponectin levels were up-regulated
in serum and endometrium. Embryonic CREB expression was altered in a cell
lineage-specific pattern. Although in EB cells CREB localization did not change, 
it was translocated from the nucleus into the cytosol in trophoblast (TB) cells. 
In TB, adiponectin expression was increased (diabetic 427.8 ± 59.3 pg/mL vs
normoinsulinaemic 143.9 ± 26.5 pg/mL), whereas it was no longer measureable in
the EB. Analysis of embryonic adipoRs showed an increased expression of adipoR1
and no changes in adipoR2 transcription. We conclude that the transcription
factors CREB and ATFs vitally participate in embryo-maternal cross talk before
implantation in a cell lineage-specific manner. Embryonic CREB/ATFs act as
insulin/IGF sensors. Lack of insulin is compensated by a CREB-mediated
adiponectin expression, which may maintain glucose uptake in blastocysts grown in
diabetic mothers.

PMID: 23568554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2013 Jul;33(5):681-8. doi: 10.1007/s10571-013-9934-7. Epub
2013 Apr 7.

Effect of subpressor dose of angiotensin II on pain-related behavior in relation 
with neuronal injury and activation of satellite glial cells in the rat dorsal
root ganglia.

Pavel J(1), Oroszova Z, Hricova L, Lukacova N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurobiology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Kosice, Slovak
Republic. pavel@saske.sk

To clarify the role of angiotensin II (Ang II) in the regulation of sensory
signaling, we studied the effect of subpressor dose (150 ng/kg/min) of Ang II on 
pain-related behavior in relation with neuronal injury and activation of
satellite glial cells (SGCs) in the dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) after chronic
constriction injury (CCI). Systemic continuous delivery of Ang II induced the
tactile, heat and cold hyperlagesia, when measured at 7 days ofpost-injury.
Blockade of the AT1 receptor with losartan (2.5 mg/kg/day) prevented tactile
hyperalgesia and attenuated cold hyperalgesia, but did not affect the response to
noxious heat stimulus. A marked increase of large-sized injured primary afferent 
neurons, detected by ATF3 immunolabeling, was seen in lower lumbar DRGs on
ipsilateral side after Ang II treatment. Subpressor dose of Ang II induced an
increase of activated SGCs (detected by GFAP immunolabeling) enveloping
large-diameter neurons. Our results suggested that Ang II through the AT1
receptor activation is an important regulatory factor in neuropathic pain
perception and plays an important role in the injury of large-sized primary
afferent neurons and activation of SGCs elicited by the CCI.

PMID: 23564180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Ren Fail. 2013;35(5):624-32. doi: 10.3109/0886022X.2013.780619. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

Microarray analysis of altered gene expression and the role of ATF3 in HK-2 cells
treated with hemin.

Wang J(1), Wang D, Li Y, Gao Y, Wang S, Zuo H, Xu X, Wang S, Peng R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Radiation Medicine, Academy
of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify gene expression changes and the role of activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in hemin toxicity in renal tubular epithelial
cells, then elucidate molecular mechanisms of hemin toxicity on renal tubular
epithelial cells.
METHODS: An oligo array comprising 35,035 genes was used to compare differential 
gene expression in hemin-treated and non-treated HK-2 cells (human renal proximal
tubular epithelial cells), and the role of ATF3 in hemin toxicity was assessed
using siRNA technique.
RESULTS: A total of 128 mRNAs were at least twofold up-regulated and 101 mRNAs
were at least twofold down-regulated after hemin treatment. Expression levels of 
ATF3, heat shock protein 70, c-fos, and c-jun were remarkably increased. Hemin
also suppressed nuclear factor-kappa B inhibitor a, ß-2 adrenergic receptor, and 
interleukin-6 mRNA amounts more than twofold. We further demonstrated the
protective role of ATF3 in hemin cytotoxicity.
CONCLUSIONS: The data suggest that hemin caused multiple changes of gene
expression in HK-2 cells, and ATF3 protects against hemin cytotoxicity.

PMID: 23560949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Sci Rep. 2013;3:1588. doi: 10.1038/srep01588.

The interactomes of POU5F1 and SOX2 enhancers in human embryonic stem cells.

Gao F(1), Wei Z, An W, Wang K, Lu W.

Author information: 
(1)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California, 1425 San Pablo Street, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

The genes POU5F1 and SOX2 are critical for pluripotency and reprogramming, yet
the chromosomal organization around these genes remains poorly understood. We
assayed long-range chromosomal interactions on putative enhancers of POU5F1 and
SOX2 genes in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) using 4C-Seq technique. We
discovered that their frequent interacting regions mainly overlap with early DNA 
replication domains. The interactomes are associated with active histone marks
and enriched with 5-hydroxymethylcytosine sites. In hESCs, genes within the
interactomes have elevated expression. Additionally, some genes associated with
the POU5F1 enhancer contribute to pluripotency. Binding sites for multiple DNA
binding proteins, including ATF3, CTCF, GABPA, JUND, NANOG, RAD21 and YY1, are
enriched in both interactomes. The RARG locus, frequently interacting with the
POU5F1 locus, has abundant RAD21 binding sites co-localized with other protein
binding sites. Thus the interactomes of these two pluripotency genes could be an 
important part of the regulatory network in hESCs.

PMCID: PMC4070749
PMID: 23549118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 15;73(12):3625-37. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3879. Epub 
2013 Mar 27.

ATF3 suppresses metastasis of bladder cancer by regulating gelsolin-mediated
remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton.

Yuan X(1), Yu L, Li J, Xie G, Rong T, Zhang L, Chen J, Meng Q, Irving AT, Wang D,
Williams ED, Liu JP, Sadler AJ, Williams BR, Shen L, Xu D.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Clinical Laboratory and Urology, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Bladder cancer is associated with high recurrence and mortality rates due to
metastasis. The elucidation of metastasis suppressors may offer therapeutic
opportunities if their mechanisms of action can be elucidated and tractably
exploited. In this study, we investigated the clinical and functional
significance of the transcription factor activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3)
in bladder cancer metastasis. Gene expression analysis revealed that decreased
ATF3 was associated with bladder cancer progression and reduced survival of
patients with bladder cancer. Correspondingly, ATF3 overexpression in highly
metastatic bladder cancer cells decreased migration in vitro and experimental
metastasis in vivo. Conversely, ATF3 silencing increased the migration of bladder
cancer cells with limited metastatic capability in the absence of any effect on
proliferation. In keeping with their increased motility, metastatic bladder
cancer cells had increased numbers of actin filaments. Moreover, ATF3 expression 
correlated with expression of the actin filament severing protein gelsolin (GSN).
Mechanistic studies revealed that ATF3 upregulated GSN, whereas ATF3 silencing
reduced GSN levels, concomitant with alterations in the actin cytoskeleton. We
identified six ATF3 regulatory elements in the first intron of the GSN gene
confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis. Critically, GSN expression
reversed the metastatic capacity of bladder cancer cells with diminished levels
of ATF3. Taken together, our results indicate that ATF3 suppresses metastasis of 
bladder cancer cells, at least in part through the upregulation of GSN-mediated
actin remodeling. These findings suggest ATF3 coupled with GSN as prognostic
markers for bladder cancer metastasis.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23536558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:828143. doi: 10.1155/2013/828143.
Epub 2013 Feb 24.

Subamolide a induces mitotic catastrophe accompanied by apoptosis in human lung
cancer cells.

Hung JY(1), Wen CW, Hsu YL, Lin ES, Huang MS, Chen CY, Kuo PL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan ; Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung
Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital, Kaohsiung 801, Taiwan.

Erratum in
    Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:687142.

This study investigated the anticancer effects of subamolide A (Sub-A), isolated 
from Cinnamomum subavenium, on human nonsmall cell lung cancer cell lines A549
and NCI-H460. Treatment of cancer cells with Sub-A resulted in decreased cell
viability of both lung cancer cell lines. Sub-A induced lung cancer cell death by
triggering mitotic catastrophe with apoptosis. It triggered oxidant stress,
indicated by increased cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and
decreased glutathione level. The elevated ROS triggered the activation of
ataxia-telangiectasia mutation (ATM), which further enhanced the ATF3
upregulation and subsequently enhanced p53 function by phosphorylation at Serine 
15 and Serine 392. The antioxidant, EUK8, significantly decreased mitotic
catastrophe by inhibiting ATM activation, ATF3 expression, and p53
phosphorylation. The reduction of ATM and ATF3 expression by shRNA decreased
Sub-A-mediated p53 phosphorylation and mitotic catastrophe. Sub-A also caused a
dramatic 70% reduction in tumor size in an animal model. Taken together, cell
death of lung cancer cells in response to Sub-A is dependent on ROS generation,
which triggers mitotic catastrophe followed by apoptosis. Therefore, Sub-A may be
a novel anticancer agent for the treatment of nonsmall cell lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC3595678
PMID: 23533526  [PubMed]


305. Brain Behav. 2013 Mar;3(2):145-58. doi: 10.1002/brb3.104. Epub 2013 Feb 17.

Early presymptomatic cholinergic dysfunction in a murine model of amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis.

Casas C(1), Herrando-Grabulosa M, Manzano R, Mancuso R, Osta R, Navarro X.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Neuroplasticity and Regeneration Department of Cell Biology,
Physiology and Immunology Institute of Neurosciences, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades
Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED) Bellaterra, Spain.

Erratum in
    Brain Behav. 2013 May;3(3):328.

Sporadic and familiar amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) cases presented lower
cholinergic activity than in healthy individuals in their still preserved spinal 
motoneurons (MNs) suggesting that cholinergic reduction might occur before MN
death. To unravel how and when cholinergic function is compromised, we have
analyzed the spatiotemporal expression of choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) from
early presymptomatic stages of the SOD1(G93A) ALS mouse model by confocal
immunohistochemistry. The analysis showed an early reduction in ChAT content in
soma and presynaptic boutons apposed onto MNs (to 76%) as well as in cholinergic 
interneurons in the lumbar spinal cord of the 30-day-old SOD1(G93A) mice.
Cholinergic synaptic stripping occurred simultaneously to the presence of
abundant surrounding major histocompatibility complex II (MHC-II)-positive
microglia and the accumulation of nuclear Tdp-43 and the appearance of mild
oxidative stress within MNs. Besides, there was a loss of neuronal MHC-I
expression, which is necessary for balanced synaptic stripping after axotomy.
These events occurred before the selective raise of markers of denervation such
as ATF3. By the same time, alterations in postsynaptic cholinergic-related
structures were also revealed with a loss of the presence of sigma-1 receptor, a 
Ca2+ buffering chaperone in the postsynaptic cisternae. By 2 months of age, ChAT 
seemed to accumulate in the soma of MNs, and thus efferences toward Renshaw
interneurons were drastically diminished. In conclusion, cholinergic dysfunction 
in the local circuitry of the spinal cord may be one of the earliest events in
ALS etiopathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3607155
PMID: 23531559  [PubMed]


306. J Gene Med. 2013 Mar-Apr;15(3-4):142-54. doi: 10.1002/jgm.2704.

Network analysis of endogenous gene expression profiles after
polyethyleneimine-mediated DNA delivery.

Martin TM(1), Plautz SA, Pannier AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Systems Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 
Lincoln, NE, USA.

BACKGROUND: DNA delivery systems, which transport exogenous DNA to cells, have
applications that include gene therapy, tissue engineering and medical devices.
Although the cationic nonviral DNA carrier polyethyleneimine (PEI) has been
widely studied, the molecular factors and pathways underlying PEI-mediated DNA
transfer remain largely unknown, preventing the design of more efficient delivery
systems.
METHODS: HEK 293<U+2009>T cells were treated with polyplexes formed with PEI and
pEGFPLuc encoding for green fluorescent protein (GFP). Transfected cells
expressing GFP were flow-separated from treated, untransfected cells. Gene
expression profiles were obtained using Affymetrix HG-U133 2.0 microarrays and
differentially expressed genes were identified using R/Bioconductor. Gene network
analysis using EGAN (exploratory gene association network) bioinformatics tools
was then used to find interaction among genes and enriched gene ontology (GO)
terms related to transfection. Genes identified by this method were perturbed
using pharmacologic activators or inhibitors to assess their effect on DNA
transfer.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis comparing transfected cells to untransfected cells
revealed 215 genes to be differentially expressed, with the majority enriched to 
GO processes including metabolism, response to stimulus, cell cycle, biological
regulation and cellular component organization or biogenesis pathways. Gene
network analysis revealed a coordinated induction of RAP1A, SCG5, PGAP1, ATF3 and
NEB genes implicated in cell stress, cell cycle and cytoskeletal processes.
Altering pathways with pharmacologic agents confirmed the potential role of
RAP1A, SCG5 and ATF3 in transfection.
CONCLUSIONS: Microarray and gene network analyses of the sorted, transfected cell
population can identify potential mediators of transfection, providing a basis
for the design of improved delivery systems.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4115370
PMID: 23526566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Toxicol Lett. 2013 May 23;219(2):93-8. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2013.03.003. Epub
2013 Mar 14.

MPP+-induces PUMA- and p53-dependent, but ATF3-independent cell death.

Bernstein AI(1), O'Malley KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. abernstein@emory.edu

Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by the progressive loss of dopaminergic
neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) and depletion of striatal dopamine (DA),
leading to a range of motor symptoms, including resting tremor, rigidity,
bradykinesia and postural abnormalities. The neurotoxin (MPTP) and its active
metabolite, 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+)), cause dopaminergic cell loss in
a variety of animal species and produce symptoms similar to those seen in PD. Our
lab has shown that MPP(+) activates cell stress pathways, including the unfolded 
protein response (UPR) in mouse primary mesencephalic cultures. The BH3-only
protein, PUMA (p53 upregulated mediator of apoptosis), has been shown to be
activated in response to many cellular stresses, including endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) stress and UPR, and to induce cell death. Therefore, we hypothesized that
PUMA may mediate MPP(+) toxicity. To test this hypothesis, we compared the
response of primary mesencephalic cultures from wild-type and PUMA deficient
(-/-) mice to MPP(+). We also utilized cultures from p53 -/- and activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) -/- mice to further elucidate the pathways
involved. These studies revealed that PUMA and p53, but not ATF3, are required
for MPP(+)-induced cell death, suggesting that UPR activation is parallel to the 
induction of MPP(+)-induced cell death.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3652523
PMID: 23500530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2013 Dec 10;19(17):2013-23. doi: 10.1089/ars.2012.4958.
Epub 2013 Apr 19.

Antioxidant activity of sestrin 2 controls neuropathic pain after peripheral
nerve injury.

Kallenborn-Gerhardt W(1), Lu R, Syhr KM, Heidler J, von Melchner H, Geisslinger
G, Bangsow T, Schmidtko A.

Author information: 
(1)1 Pharmazentrum Frankfurt/ZAFES, Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Goethe
University Medical School , Frankfurt am Main, Germany .

AIMS: Neuropathic pain is a chronic debilitating disease that is often
unresponsive to currently available treatments. Emerging lines of evidence
indicate that reactive oxygen species (ROS) are required for the development and 
maintenance of neuropathic pain. However, little is known about endogenous
mechanisms that neutralize the pain-relevant effects of ROS. In the present
study, we tested whether the stress-responsive antioxidant protein Sestrin 2
(Sesn2) blocks the ROS-induced neuropathic pain processing in vivo.
RESULTS: We observed that Sesn2 mRNA and protein expression was up-regulated in
peripheral nerves after spared nerve injury, a well-characterized model of
neuropathic pain. Sesn2 knockout (Sesn2(-/-)) mice exhibited considerably
increased late-phase neuropathic pain behavior, while their behavior in acute
nociceptive and in inflammatory pain models remained unaffected. The exacerbated 
neuropathic pain behavior of Sesn2(-/-) mice was associated with elevated ROS
levels and an enhanced activating transcription factor 3 up-regulation in sensory
neurons, and it was reversed by the ROS scavenger N-tert-Butyl-a-phenylnitrone.
In contrast, administration of the ROS donor tert-butyl hydroperoxide induced a
prolonged pain behavior in naive Sesn2(-/-) mice.
INNOVATION: We show that the antioxidant function of Sesn2 limits neuropathic
pain processing in vivo.
CONCLUSION: Sesn2 controls ROS-dependent neuropathic pain signaling after
peripheral nerve injury and may, thus, provide a potential new target for the
clinical management of chronic neuropathic pain conditions.

PMCID: PMC3869453
PMID: 23495831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Eur Spine J. 2013 Aug;22(8):1794-9. doi: 10.1007/s00586-013-2733-5. Epub 2013 Mar
8.

Expression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in uninjured dorsal root
ganglion neurons in a lower trunk avulsion pain model in rats.

Matsuura Y(1), Ohtori S, Iwakura N, Suzuki T, Kuniyoshi K, Takahashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.
y-m-1211@khaki.plala.or.jp

PURPOSE: Clinically, neuropathic pain is frequent and intense following brachial 
plexus injury. It is thought that brachial plexus pain is not generated by
avulsed roots, but rather by non-avulsed roots, since the avulsed root could not 
possibly transmit action potentials to central nerves. The aim of this study was 
to evaluate pain behavior and activation of sensory neurons in a brachial plexus 
avulsion (BPA) model in rats.
METHODS: Fifteen male Wistar rats were used. In the BPA group, the C8-T1 roots
were avulsed from the spinal cord with forceps at the lower trunk level (n = 5). 
In the naïve group, rats did not receive any procedures (n = 5). In the
sham-operated group, the lower trunk was simply exposed (n = 5). Mechanical
hyperalgesia of forelimbs corresponding to C6 and C7 dermatomes was measured
using von Frey filaments every third day for 3 weeks. Activation of DRG neurons
was immunohistochemically examined using anti-ATF3 (a marker for neuron
activation) antibodies 21 days after surgery. Von Frey and immunohistochemical
data between groups were analyzed using a Kruskal-Wallis test, followed by
Mann-Whitney U tests. Bonferroni corrections were performed.
RESULTS: Animals in the BPA group displayed significant mechanical hyperalgesia
at the dermatome innervated by uninjured nerves continuing through day 21
compared with animals in the sham-operated group. ATF3-immunoreactive small and
large DRG neurons were significantly activated in the BPA group (10.6 ± 9.5 and
5.2 ± 4.1 %, 39.7 ± 6.7 and 25.2 ± 10.3 %, 78.0 ± 9.1 and 53.7 ± 29.3 %) compared
with the sham-operated group (0.7 ± 0.9 and 0 ± 0 %, 2.8 ± 2.0 and 1.0 ± 2.0 %,
3.9 ± 2.7 and 8.6 ± 10.1 %) at every level of C5, 6, and 7. In the naïve group,
no DRG neurons were activated. ATF3-immunoreactive small and large DRG neurons
were significantly activated at the level of C7 compared with C6 and C5, and
significantly activated at the level of C6 compared with C5 in the BPA group.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of ATF3 in uninjured DRG neurons may contribute to pain
following brachial plexus avulsion injury. Consequently, spared spinal sensory
nerves may represent therapeutic targets for treatment of this pain.

PMCID: PMC3731502
PMID: 23471575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Oct 3;168(3):2201-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.01.222. Epub 
2013 Mar 5.

Differential regulation of TNF receptor 1 and receptor 2 in adiponectin
expression following myocardial ischemia.

Wang Y(1), Zhao J, Zhang Y, Lau WB, Jiao LY, Liu B, Yuan Y, Wang X, Tao L, Gao E,
Koch WJ, Ma XL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan 030001, China;
Department of Emergency Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA
19107, United States. Electronic address: Yajing.Wang@jefferson.edu.

BACKGROUND: In vitro experiments demonstrate that adiponectin, a cardioprotective
cytokine, is inhibited by tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFa). However, the role
of TNFa in post-myocardial infarction (post-MI) adiponectin reduction remains
unclear. More importantly, the TNF receptor type (TNFR1 or TNFR2) responsible for
TNFa-mediated suppression of adiponectin production is unknown. The current study
determined the role of TNFa in post-myocardial infarction (post-MI) adiponectin
reduction, and identified the receptor type responsible for TNFa-mediated
suppression of adiponectin production.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Adult male wild type (WT) and three knockout variety
(TNFa(-/-), TNFR1(-/-), and TNFR2(-/-)) mice were subjected to MI via coronary
artery occlusion. Histological and biochemical analyses were performed 3 and
7days post-MI. In WT mice, MI significantly increased plasma TNFa, reduced
adipocyte adiponectin mRNA, and decreased plasma adiponectin levels. TNFa
deletion had no significant effect upon basal adiponectin level, and partially
restored adiponectin expression/production post-MI (P<0.01 vs. WT). Basal
adiponectin levels were significantly increased in TNFR1(-/-) (P<0.05 vs. WT),
and unchanged in TNFR2(-/-) mice. Importantly, suppressed adiponectin
expression/production by MI or TNFa administration was markedly decreased by
TNFR1 deletion (P<0.01 vs. WT), but exacerbated by TNFR2 deletion (P<0.05 vs.
WT). Mechanistically, TNFR1 knockout significantly inhibited, whereas TNFR2
knockout further enhanced TNFa-induced mRNA and protein expression of ATF3, a
transcriptional factor known to significantly inhibit adiponectin expression.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrates that TNFa overproduction is responsible for
reduced adiponectin expression/production following MI. Furthermore, we show that
TNFR1/TNFR2 exerts opposite effects upon adiponectin expression/production via
differential regulation of ATF3.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3676729
PMID: 23465561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Diabetologia. 2013 Jun;56(6):1383-93. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-2879-z. Epub 2013
Mar 6.

Hypothalamic ATF3 is involved in regulating glucose and energy metabolism in
mice.

Lee YS(1), Sasaki T, Kobayashi M, Kikuchi O, Kim HJ, Yokota-Hashimoto H, Shimpuku
M, Susanti VY, Ido-Kitamura Y, Kimura K, Inoue H, Tanaka-Okamoto M, Ishizaki H,
Miyoshi J, Ohya S, Tanaka Y, Kitajima S, Kitamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Signal Research Center, Institute for Molecular and Cellular
Regulation, Gunma University, 3-39-15 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8512,
Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The pancreas and hypothalamus are critical for maintaining
nutrient and energy homeostasis, and combined disorders in these organs account
for the onset of the metabolic syndrome. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3)
is an adaptive response transcription factor. The physiological role of ATF3 in
the pancreas has been controversial, and its role in the hypothalamus remains
unknown. To elucidate the roles of ATF3 in these organs, we generated pancreas-
and hypothalamus-specific Atf3 knockout (PHT-Atf3-KO) mice in this study.
METHODS: We crossed mice bearing floxed Atf3 alleles with Pdx1-cre mice, in which
cre is specifically expressed in the pancreas and hypothalamus, and analysed
metabolic variables, pancreatic morphology, food intake, energy expenditure and
sympathetic activity in adipose tissue. We also used a hypothalamic cell line to 
investigate the molecular mechanism by which ATF3 regulates transcription of the 
gene encoding agouti-related protein (Agrp).
RESULTS: Although PHT-Atf3-KO mice displayed better glucose tolerance, neither
plasma glucagon nor insulin level was altered in these mice. However, these mice 
exhibited higher insulin sensitivity, which was accompanied by a leaner phenotype
due to decreased food intake and increased energy expenditure. We also observed
decreased hypothalamic Agrp expression in PHT-Atf3-KO mice. Importantly, an
increase in ATF3 levels is induced by fasting or low glucose in the hypothalamus.
We also showed that ATF3 interacts with forkhead box-containing protein, O
subfamily 1 (FoxO1) on the Agrp promoter and activates Agrp transcription.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that ATF3 plays an important role
in the control of glucose and energy metabolism by regulating Agrp.

PMCID: PMC3648686
PMID: 23462798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Agric Food Chem. 2013 Apr 3;61(13):3264-9. doi: 10.1021/jf305158q. Epub 2013
Mar 20.

Anticancer activity of olive oil hydroxytyrosyl acetate in human adenocarcinoma
Caco-2 cells.

Mateos R(1), Pereira-Caro G, Bacon JR, Bongaerts R, Sarriá B, Bravo L, Kroon PA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food Research, Norwich Research Park, Colney Lane, Norwich, UK.
raquel.mateos@ictan.csic.es

The anticancer activity of hydroxytyrosyl acetate (HTy-Ac) has been studied in
human colon adenocarcinoma cells. Gene expression of proteins involved in cell
cycle (p21, p53, cyclin B1, and cyclin G2) and programmed cell death (BNIP3,
BNIP3L, PDCD4, and ATF3), as well as phase I and phase II detoxifying enzymes
CYPA1 and UGT1A10, were evaluated by reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction after 24 h of exposure of Caco-2/TC7 cells to 5, 10, and 50 µM of
HTy-Ac. The results show that HTy-Ac inhibited cell proliferation and arrested
cell cycle by enhancing p21 and CCNG2 and lowering CCNB1 protein expression.
HTy-Ac also affected the transcription of genes involved in apoptosis
up-regulating of BNIP3, BNIP3L, PDCD4, and ATF3 and activating caspase-3. In
addition, HTy-Ac also up-regulated xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes CYP1A1 and
UGT1A10, thus enhancing carcinogen detoxification. In conclusion, these results
highlight that HTy-Ac has the potential to modulate biomarkers involved in colon 
cancer.

PMID: 23452288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Infect Dis. 2013 May 15;207(10):1556-68. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jit067. Epub 2013 
Feb 21.

Regulation of chemokines, CCL3 and CCL4, by interferon <U+03B3> and nitric oxide
synthase 2 in mouse macrophages and during Salmonella enterica serovar
typhimurium infection.

Chandrasekar B(1), Deobagkar-Lele M, Victor ES, Nandi D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012,
India.

BACKGROUND: Interferon <U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) increases the expression of multiple genes and
responses; however, the mechanisms by which IFN-<U+03B3> downmodulates cellular
responses is not well understood. In this study, the repression of CCL3 and CCL4 
by IFN-<U+03B3> and nitric oxide synthase 2 (NOS2) in macrophages and upon Salmonella
typhimurium infection of mice was investigated.
METHODS: Small molecule regulators and adherent peritoneal exudates cells
(A-PECs) from Nos2(-/-)mice were used to identify the contribution of signaling
molecules during IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated in vitro regulation of CCL3, CCL4, and CXCL10. In
addition, infection of bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) and mice (C57BL/6,
Ifn-<U+03B3>(-/), and Nos2(-/-)) with S. typhimurium were used to gain an understanding 
of the in vivo regulation of these chemokines.
RESULTS: IFN-<U+03B3> repressed CCL3 and CCL4 in a signal transducer and activator of
transcription 1 (STAT1)-NOS2-p38 mitogen activated protein kinase
(p38MAPK)-activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) dependent pathway in A-PECs.
Also, during intracellular replication of S. typhimurium in BMDMs, IFN-<U+03B3> and NOS2
repressed CCL3 and CCL4 production. The physiological roles of these observations
were revealed during oral infection of mice with S. typhimurium, wherein
endogenous IFN-<U+03B3> and NOS2 enhanced serum amounts of tumor necrosis factor a and
CXCL10 but repressed CCL3 and CCL4.
CONCLUSIONS: This study sheds novel mechanistic insight on the regulation of CCL3
and CCL4 in mouse macrophages and during S. typhimurium oral infection.

PMID: 23431040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Front Cell Neurosci. 2013 Feb 15;7:9. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00009. eCollection 
2013.

IL-1RAcPb signaling regulates adaptive mechanisms in neurons that promote their
long-term survival following excitotoxic insults.

Gosselin D(1), Bellavance MA, Rivest S.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Neuroscience Laboratory, CHU de Québec Research Center
and Department of Molecular Medicine, Laval University Quebec City, QC, Canada.

Excitotoxicity is a major component of neurodegenerative diseases and is
typically accompanied by an inflammatory response. Cytokines IL-1alpha and
IL-1beta are key regulators of this inflammatory response and modulate the
activity of numerous cell types, including neurons. IL-1RAcPb is an isoform of
IL-1RAcP expressed specifically in neurons and promotes their survival during
acute inflammation. Here, we investigated in vivo whether IL-1RAcPb also promotes
neuronal survival in a model of excitotoxicity. Intrastriatal injection of kainic
acid (KA) in mice caused a strong induction of IL-1 cytokines mRNA in the brain. 
The stress response of cortical neurons at 12 h post-injection, as measured by
expression of Atf3, FoxO3a, and Bdnf mRNAs, was similar in WT and AcPb-deficient 
mice. Importantly however, a delayed upregulation in the transcription of
calpastatin was significantly higher in WT than in AcPb-deficient mice. Finally, 
although absence of AcPb signaling had no effect on damage to neurons in the
cortex at early time points, it significantly impaired their long-term survival. 
These data suggest that in a context of excitotoxicity, stimulation of IL-1RAcPb 
signaling may promote the activity of a key neuroprotective mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3573345
PMID: 23423359  [PubMed]


315. Oncogene. 2014 Feb 20;33(8):1027-36. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.28. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Sensitisation of c-MYC-induced B-lymphoma cells to apoptosis by ATF2.

Walczynski J(1), Lyons S(1), Jones N(1), Breitwieser W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Regulation, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Transcription factors ATF2 (activating transcription factor 2) and ATF7
(activating transcription factor 7) are highly homologous members of the
activator protein 1 (AP-1) family. Their activities are growth factor and stress 
stimulated and they strictly require phosphorylation by mitogen-activated protein
(MAP) kinases for their transcriptional functions. In samples of human B-cell
lymphomas as well as Eµ-Myc-driven mouse B-cell lymphomas, we find that ATF2 as
well as MAP kinase c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) are significantly up-regulated
compared with normal human B-cell lines and mouse B cells, respectively. The B
cell-specific deletion of ATF2 and ATF7 in mice results in significantly
accelerated onset of Eµ-Myc-induced lymphoma. In addition, loss of ATF2/7
desensitises Eµ-Myc lymphoma cells to spontaneous as well as stress-induced
apoptosis. Our results therefore suggest that c-MYC induces stress-mediated
activation of ATF2 and ATF7 and that these transcription factors regulate
apoptosis in response to oncogenic transformation of B cells.

PMID: 23416976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Food Chem. 2013 Jun 1;138(2-3):1172-82. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2012.11.118. Epub
2012 Dec 5.

Hydroxytyrosyl ethyl ether exhibits stronger intestinal anticarcinogenic potency 
and effects on transcript profiles compared to hydroxytyrosol.

Pereira-Caro G(1), Mateos R, Traka MH, Bacon JR, Bongaerts R, Sarriá B, Bravo L, 
Kroon PA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food Research, Norwich Research Park, Colney Lane, Norwich NR4
7UA, UK.

The anticarcinogenic activity of hydroxytyrosyl ethyl ether (HTy-Et) compared to 
its precursor hydroxytyrosol (HTy) has been studied in human Caco-2 colon
adenocarcinoma cells. 451 and 977 genes were differentially expressed in Caco-2
cells exposed to HTy or HTy-Et for 24h, respectively, compared with untreated
cells (P<0.005; FDR=0), using Affymetrix microarrays. Results showed that both
HTy and HTy-Et inhibited cell proliferation and arrested the cell cycle by
up-regulating p21 and CCNG2 and down-regulating CCNB1 protein expression. HTy and
HTy-Et also altered the transcription of specific genes involved in apoptosis, as
suggested by the up-regulation of BNIP3, BNIP3L, PDCD4 and ATF3 and the
activation of caspase-3. Moreover, these polyphenols up-regulated xenobiotic
metabolizing enzymes UGT1A10 and CYP1A1, enhancing carcinogen detoxification. In 
conclusion, these results highlight that HTy and its derivative HTy-Et modulate
molecular mechanisms involved in colon cancer, with HTy-Et being more effective
than HTy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23411228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Endocrinology. 2013 Mar;154(3):1117-29. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1515. Epub 2013 Feb 
6.

Knockdown of RyR3 enhances adiponectin expression through an atf3-dependent
pathway.

Tsai SH(1), Chang EY, Chang YC, Hee SW, Tsai YC, Chang TJ, Chuang LM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine,
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 100 Taiwan.

Adiponectin is an important adipose-specific protein, which possesses insulin
(INS)-sensitizing, antiinflammatory, and antiatherosclerotic functions. However, 
its regulation remains largely unknown. In this study, we identified that
ryanodine receptor (RyR)3 plays an important role in the regulation of
adiponectin expression. RyR3 was expressed in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes, and its level
was decreased upon adipogenesis. Silencing of RyR3 expression in 3T3-L1
preadipocytes resulted in up-regulated adiponectin promoter activity, enhanced
adiponectin mRNA expression, and more adiponectin protein secreted into the
medium. An inverse relation between RyR3 and adiponectin mRNA levels was also
observed in adipose tissues of db/db mice. In addition, knockdown of RyR3 with
small interfering RNA (siRNA) in db/db mice and high-fat diet-fed obese mice
increased serum adiponectin level, improved INS sensitivity, and lowered fasting 
glucose levels. These effects were in parallel with decreased mitochondrial
Ca(2+), increased mitochondrial mass, and reduced activating transcription factor
3 (atf3) expression. Overexpression of atf3 in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes blocked the
effect of RyR3 silencing on adiponectin expression, indicating that an
atf3-dependent pathway mediates the effect downstream of RyR3 silencing. Our data
suggest that RyR3 may be a new therapeutic target for improving INS sensitivity
and related metabolic disorders.

PMID: 23389954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 22;288(12):8074-84. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.432773. Epub 2013
Jan 30.

Nuclear calcium signaling regulates nuclear export of a subset of class IIa
histone deacetylases following synaptic activity.

Schlumm F(1), Mauceri D, Freitag HE, Bading H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Interdisciplinary Centre for Neurosciences (IZN), 
University of Heidelberg, INF 364 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

In neurons, dynamic changes in the subcellular localization of histone
deacetylases (HDACs) are thought to contribute to signal-regulated gene
expression. Here we show that in mouse hippocampal neurons, synaptic
activity-dependent nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling is a common feature of all
members of class IIa HDACs, which distinguishes them from other classes of HDACs.
Nuclear calcium, a key regulator in neuronal gene expression, is required for the
nuclear export of a subset of class IIa HDACs. We found that inhibition of
nuclear calcium signaling using CaMBP4 or increasing the nuclear calcium
buffering capacity by means of expression of a nuclear targeted version of
parvalbumin (PV.NLS-mC) led to a build-up of HDAC4 and HDAC5 in the cell nucleus,
which in the case of PV.NLS-mC can be reversed by nuclear calcium transients
triggered by bursts of action potential firing. A similar nuclear accumulation of
HDAC4 and HDAC5 was observed in vivo in the mouse hippocampus following
stereotaxic delivery of recombinant adeno-associated viruses expressing either
CaMBP4 or PV.NLS-mC. The modulation of HDAC4 activity either by RNA
interference-mediated reduction of HDAC4 protein levels or by expression of a
constitutively nuclear localized mutant of HDAC4 leads to changes in the mRNA
levels of several nuclear calcium-regulated genes with known functions in
acquired neuroprotection (atf3, serpinb2), memory consolidation (homer1, arc),
and the development of chronic pain (ptgs2, c1qc). These results identify nuclear
calcium as a regulator of nuclear export of HDAC4 and HDAC5. The reduction of
nuclear localized HDACs represents a novel transcription-promoting pathway
stimulated by nuclear calcium.

PMCID: PMC3605626
PMID: 23364788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 15;431(3):421-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.12.154. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

ATF3 plays a role in adipocyte hypoxia-mediated mitochondria dysfunction in
obesity.

Jang MK(1), Son Y, Jung MH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Korean Medicine, Pusan National University, 30 Beom-eo ri,
Mulguem-eup, Yangsan-si, Gyeongnam, South Korea.

Obesity-associated adipose tissue hypoxia plays a pivotal role in insulin
resistance via impaired adipocyte dysfunction including mitochondria dysfunction.
In this study, we investigated the involvement of hypoxia-inducible ATF3 in
adipocyte hypoxia-mediated mitochondrial dysfunction. While HIF-1a and ATF3 were 
increased in white adipose tissue of high fat diet (HFD) obese mice compared with
control lean mice, mitochondria-related genes were significantly reduced.
Treatment with hypoxia mimetics CoCl(2) or incubation with 2% O(2) impaired
mitochondria function as demonstrated by decreases in ATP production, NADH
dehydrogenase activity, mitochondrial membrane potential, and reduced expression 
of mitochondria-related genes including NRF-1, PGC-1a, COX1 and SOD in 3T3-L1
adipocyte cells. Furthermore, overexpression of ATF3 in 3T3-L1 cells also
decreased mitochondria function as well as expression of mitochondria-related
genes. ATF3 knockdown in 3T3-L1 cells partly prevented the hypoxia-mediated
decrease in mitochondria function and expression of mitochondria-related genes.
The mitochondria-related genes were decreased in white adipose tissue of
ATF3-overexpressing mice compared with wild-type mice. These results suggest that
ATF3 may play a role in adipocyte hypoxia-mediated mitochondrial dysfunction in
obesity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23333392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Nutr Biochem. 2013 Jul;24(7):1314-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2012.10.006. Epub 
2013 Jan 17.

Refeeding with a standard diet after a 48-h fast elicits an inflammatory response
in the mouse liver.

Oarada M(1), Miki T, Kohno S, Sakai K, Nikawa T, Yoneyama M, Gonoi T.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Mycology Research Center, Chiba University, Chiba 260-8673, Japan.
motoko.o@faculty.chiba-u.jp

Unhealthy eating behaviors increase the risk of metabolic diseases, but the
underlying mechanisms are not fully elucidated. Because inflammation contributes 
to the pathogenesis of metabolic diseases, it is important to understand the
effects of unhealthy eating on the inflammatory state. The objective of our
present study was to address the effects of a fasting-refeeding regime, a model
of irregular eating, on the hepatic inflammatory responses in mouse. The animals 
were fasted for 48 h and then refed either a standard or
low-carbohydrate/high-fat diet. Inflammatory gene expression in the liver was
then sequentially measured for the first 17 h after initiation of refeeding. To
assess the roles of dietary carbohydrates and toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) in the 
refeeding-induced inflammatory changes, gene expression levels in mice refed only
carbohydrates (a-corn starch and sucrose) at different doses and in
TLR2-deficient mice refed a standard diet were also analyzed. Refeeding with a
standard diet increased the liver expression of Tlr2, proinflammatory mediators
(Cxcl10, Cxcl1, Cxcl2, Icam-1) and negative regulators of TLR-signaling (A20 and 
Atf3). These increases were attenuated in mice refed a low-carbohydrate/high-fat 
diet. Refeeding only a-corn starch and sucrose also increased the expression of
these inflammatory pathway genes depending on the doses. TLR2 deficiency
significantly attenuated the refeeding-induced increase in the liver expression
of Cxcl10, Cxcl1, Icam-1 and A20. These findings suggest that an irregular eating
behavior can elicit a liver inflammatory response, which is at least partly
mediated by TLR2, and that dietary carbohydrates play critical roles in this
process.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23333091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Physiol Genomics. 2013 Feb 15;45(4):127-37. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00160.2012. Epub 2012 Dec 26.

Elevated cJUN expression and an ATF/CRE site within the ATF3 promoter contribute 
to activation of ATF3 transcription by the amino acid response.

Fu L(1), Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, Shands
Cancer Center, and Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College
of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Mammalian cells respond to amino acid deprivation through multiple signaling
pathways referred to as the amino acid response (AAR). Transcription factors
mediate the AAR after their activation by several mechanisms; examples include
translational control (activating transcription factor 4, ATF4), phosphorylation 
(p-cJUN), and transcriptional control (ATF3). ATF4 induces ATF3 transcription
through a promoter-localized C/EBP-ATF response element (CARE). The present
report characterizes an ATF/CRE site upstream of the CARE that also contributes
to AAR-induced ATF3 transcription. ATF4 binds to the ATF/CRE and CARE sequences
and both are required for a maximal response to ATF4 induction. ATF3, which
antagonizes ATF4 and represses its own gene, also exhibited binding activity to
the ATF/CRE and CARE sequences. The AAR resulted in elevated total cJUN and
p-cJUN protein levels and both forms exhibited binding activity to the ATF/CRE
and CARE ATF3 sequences. Knockdown of AAR-enhanced cJUN expression blocked
induction of the ATF3 gene and mutation of either the ATF/CRE or the CARE site
prevented the cJUN-dependent increase in ATF3-driven luciferase activity. The
results indicate that both increased cJUN and the cis-acting ATF/CRE sequence
within the ATF3 promoter contribute to the transcriptional activation of the gene
during the AAR.

PMCID: PMC3568878
PMID: 23269699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Exp Neurol. 2013 Mar;241:159-68. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.12.007. Epub 2012 
Dec 21.

The up-regulation of IL-6 in DRG and spinal dorsal horn contributes to
neuropathic pain following L5 ventral root transection.

Wei XH(1), Na XD, Liao GJ, Chen QY, Cui Y, Chen FY, Li YY, Zang Y, Liu XG.

Author information: 
(1)Pain Research Center and Department of Physiology, Zhongshan Medical School of
Sun Yat-Sen University, PR China.

Our previous works have shown that pro-inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-a) plays an important role in neuropathic pain produced by
lumber 5 ventral root transection (L5-VRT). In the present work we evaluate the
role of interleukin-6 (IL-6), another key inflammatory cytokine, in the L5-VRT
model. We found that IL-6 was up-regulated in the ipsilateral L4 and L5 dorsal
root ganglian (DRG) neurons and in bilateral lumbar spinal cord following L5-VRT.
Double immunofluorescence stainings revealed that in DRGs the increased
immunoreactivity (IR) of IL-6 was almost restricted in neuronal cells, while in
the spinal dorsal horn IL-6-IR up-regulated in both glial cells (astrocyte and
microglia) and neurons. Intrathecal administration of IL-6 neutralizing antibody 
significantly delayed the induction of mechanical allodynia in bilateral hindpaws
after L5-VRT. Furthermore, inhibition of TNF-a synthesis by intraperitoneal
thalidomide prevented both mechanical allodynia and the up-regulation of IL-6 in 
DRGs following L5-VRT. These data suggested that the increased IL-6 in afferent
neurons and spinal cord contribute to the development of neuropathic pain
following motor fiber injury, and that TNF-a is responsible for the up-regulation
of IL-6.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23261764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Biol Open. 2012 Dec 15;1(12):1215-25. doi: 10.1242/bio.20122840. Epub 2012 Oct 4.

The bacterial and cellular determinants controlling the recruitment of mTOR to
the Salmonella-containing vacuole.

Tattoli I(1), Philpott DJ, Girardin SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto ,
Toronto, ON M6G 2T6 , Canada ; Department of Immunology, University of Toronto , 
Toronto, ON M6G 2T6 , Canada.

Bacterial invasion results in the rapid induction of an acute state of cytosolic 
amino acid (AA) starvation, provoked by host membrane damage. Bacteria-induced AA
starvation, in turn, down-regulates mTOR signaling while triggering autophagy and
the integrated stress response pathway dependent on GCN2, eIF2a and ATF3. In
Salmonella-infected cells, we now demonstrate that the host AA starvation
response program depended on the Salmonella pathogenicity island (SPI)-1, the
activity of which was required to damage the Salmonella-containing vacuole (SCV) 
in the early stage of infection. At a later stage (3-4 hour post-infection), the 
progressive recruitment of mTOR to the surface of the SCV appeared to be
independent of the activity of SPI-2 and of SCV positioning in the cell. Instead,
mTOR localization to the SCV required the activity of host AA transporters
SLC1A5, SLC3A2 and SLC7A5, resulting in bacterial escape from autophagy. These
results expand our understanding of the mechanisms underlying the AA starvation
response in Salmonella-infected cells.

PMCID: PMC3522883
PMID: 23259056  [PubMed]


324. Eur J Pain. 2013 Jul;17(6):867-80. doi: 10.1002/j.1532-2149.2012.00259.x. Epub
2012 Dec 11.

Effects of tapentadol on mechanical hypersensitivity in rats with ligatures of
the infraorbital nerve versus the sciatic nerve.

Michot B(1), Bourgoin S, Kayser V, Hamon M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U894-CPN, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Convergent data showed that neuropathic pain has specific
characteristics at cephalic versus extra-cephalic level, where single-targeted
drugs differentially alleviate pain. Because the novel analgesic drug,
tapentadol, is acting at two targets, µ-opioid receptors (as agonist) and
noradrenaline reuptake (as inhibitor), we tested its effects on neuropathic pain 
at both cephalic and extra-cephalic levels.
METHODS: Sprague-Dawley rats underwent unilateral constriction injury (CCI) to
the infraorbital nerve (ION; cephalic territory) or the sciatic nerve (SN;
extra-cephalic territory), and alleviation of nerve lesion-induced mechanical
allodynia/hyperalgesia was assessed after acute or repeated (for 4 days)
treatment with tapentadol compared with morphine and/or reboxetine (noradrenaline
reuptake inhibitor) 2 weeks after surgery. Possible changes in the expression of 
the neuroinflammatory markers activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3),
interleukin-6 (IL-6) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) by repeated
tapentadol treatment were quantified by real-time reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction in ganglia and central tissues.
RESULTS: Acute administration of tapentadol (1-10<U+2009>mg/kg, i.p.) significantly
reduced allodynia in both CCI-SN and CCI-ION rats. Although morphine (3<U+2009>mg/kg,
s.c.) or reboxetine (10<U+2009>mg/kg, i.p.) alone was only marginally active, the
combination of both drugs produced supra-additive effects like those observed
with tapentadol. In contrast to repeated morphine whose effects vanished, the
anti-allodynic effects of tapentadol remained unchanged after a 4-day treatment. 
However, the latter treatment with tapentadol did not affect nerve lesion-evoked 
overexpression of ATF3, IL-6 and BDNF transcripts.
CONCLUSIONS: The dual synergistic pharmacological properties of tapentadol, which
result in clear-cut anti-neuropathic pain effects at both cephalic and
extra-cephalic levels, probably involve mechanisms downstream of nerve
injury-induced neuroinflammatory reaction.

© 2012 European Federation of International Association for the Study of Pain
Chapters.

PMID: 23229959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Immunity. 2012 Dec 14;37(6):1024-36. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.08.022. Epub 2012
Nov 29.

The transcription factor Jdp2 controls bone homeostasis and antibacterial
immunity by regulating osteoclast and neutrophil differentiation.

Maruyama K(1), Fukasaka M, Vandenbon A, Saitoh T, Kawasaki T, Kondo T, Yokoyama
KK, Kidoya H, Takakura N, Standley D, Takeuchi O, Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host Defense, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Jdp2 is an AP-1 family transcription factor that regulates the epigenetic status 
of histones. Previous in vitro studies revealed that Jdp2 is involved in
osteoclastogenesis. However, the roles of Jdp2 in vivo and its pleiotropic
functions are largely unknown. Here we generated Jdp2(-/-) mice and discovered
its crucial roles not only in bone metabolism but also in differentiation of
neutrophils. Jdp2(-/-) mice exhibited osteopetrosis resulting from impaired
osteoclastogenesis. Jdp2(-/-) neutrophils were morphologically normal but had
impaired surface expression of Ly6G, bactericidal function, and apoptosis. We
also found that ATF3 was an inhibitor of neutrophil differentiation and that Jdp2
directly suppresses its expression via inhibition of histone acetylation.
Strikingly, Jdp2(-/-) mice were highly susceptible to Staphylococcus aureus and
Candida albicans infection. Thus, Jdp2 plays pivotal roles in in vivo bone
homeostasis and host defense by regulating osteoclast and neutrophil
differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23200825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. BMC Syst Biol. 2012 Nov 29;6:147. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-6-147.

The extended TILAR approach: a novel tool for dynamic modeling of the
transcription factor network regulating the adaption to in vitro cultivation of
murine hepatocytes.

Vlaic S(1), Schmidt-Heck W, Matz-Soja M, Marbach E, Linde J, Meyer-Baese A,
Zellmer S, Guthke R, Gebhardt R.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology -
Hans-Knöll-Institute, Beutenbergstr. 11a, D-07745 Jena, Germany.
Sebastian.Vlaic@hki-jena.de

BACKGROUND: Network inference is an important tool to reveal the underlying
interactions of biological systems. In the liver, a complex system of
transcription factors is active to distribute signals and induce the cellular
response following extracellular stimuli. Plenty of information is available
about single transcription factors important for the different functions of the
liver, but little is known about their causal relations to each other.
RESULTS: Given a DNA microarray time series dataset of collagen monolayers
cultured murine hepatocytes, we identified 22 differentially expressed genes for 
which the corresponding protein is known to exhibit transcription factor
activity. We developed the Extended TILAR (ExTILAR) network inference algorithm
based on the modeling concept of the previously published TILAR algorithm. Using 
ExTILAR, we inferred a transcription factor network based on gene expression data
which puts these important genes into a functional context. This way, we
identified a previously unknown relationship between Tgif1 and Atf3 which we
validated experimentally. Beside its known role in metabolic processes, this
extends the knowledge about Tgif1 in hepatocytes towards a possible influence of 
processes such as proliferation and cell cycle. Moreover, two positive (i.e.
double negative) regulatory loops were predicted that could give rise to bistable
behavior. We further evaluated the performance of ExTILAR by systematic inference
of an in silico network.
CONCLUSIONS: We present the ExTILAR algorithm, which combines the advantages of
the regression based inference algorithm TILAR, like large network sizes
processable and low computational costs, with the advantages of dynamic network
models based on ordinary differential equation (i.e. in silico knock-down
simulations). Like TILAR, ExTILAR makes use of various prior-knowledge types such
as transcription factor binding site information and gene interaction knowledge
to infer biologically meaningful gene regulatory networks. Therefore, ExTILAR is 
especially useful when a large number of genes is modeled using a small number of
experimental data points.

PMCID: PMC3573979
PMID: 23190768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Pain. 2012 Dec;13(12):1162-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2012.08.009.

Systemic administration of an alpha-7 nicotinic acetylcholine agonist reverses
neuropathic pain in male Sprague Dawley rats.

Loram LC(1), Taylor FR, Strand KA, Maier SF, Speake JD, Jordan KG, James JW, Wene
SP, Pritchard RC, Green H, Van Dyke K, Mazarov A, Letchworth SR, Watkins LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology & Neuroscience, and Center for Neuroscience,
University of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA. Lisa.Loram@colorado.edu

Alpha-7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (a7 nAChR) agonists attenuate pain and
inflammation in preclinical models. This study tested whether systemic delivery
of an a7 nAChR agonist attenuates neuropathic pain and associated immune-mediated
pro-inflammation. Hind paw response thresholds to mechanical stimuli in male
Sprague Dawley rats were assessed before and after sciatic chronic constriction
injury (CCI) or sham surgery. Osmotic mini-pumps containing TC-7020, an a7 nAChR 
selective agonist, were implanted 10 to 14 days after surgery. TC-7020 (1, 3, and
10 mg/kg/d; s.c.) significantly attenuated CCI-induced allodynia, which lasted
through 2 weeks of test compound administration. Spinal cords were collected
after 2 weeks and processed for microglial and astrocyte activation markers
within the ipsilateral L4-L6 dorsal horn. In addition, ipsilateral L4-5 dorsal
root ganglia (DRGs) were processed for neuronal injury and satellite cell
activation markers. CCI-induced central glial cell activation markers were not
suppressed by TC-7020, even though TC-7020 is mildly blood-brain barrier
permeable. However, TC-7020 downregulated the integrated density of activation
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) but not the number of ATF positive cells. TC-7020
also downregulated phosphorylated extracellular signal kinase (p-ERK) and
satellite cell activation in the CCI-affected DRGs. Therefore, systemic a7 nAChR 
agonist may be effective in treating neuropathic pain via reducing neuronal
injury and immune cells activation occurring in the periphery.PERSPECTIVE: These 
studies demonstrated that TC-7020, an alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
agonist with partial blood-brain barrier permeability, reversed neuropathic pain 
in rats, likely via attenuation of inflammation in the DRG and/or the site of
sciatic injury.

Copyright © 2012 American Pain Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 23182225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Jan 30;365(2):316-26. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.11.012.
Epub 2012 Nov 20.

Phosphorylation of ATF2 and interaction with NFY induces c-Jun in the
gonadotrope.

Lindaman LL(1), Yeh DM, Xie C, Breen KM, Coss D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, Center for Reproductive Science and
Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0674, USA.
llindaman@ucsd.edu

Induction of c-Jun and c-Fos, partners that comprise the AP1 transcription
factor, is critical for GnRH regulation of FSHß gene expression. The signaling
pathways that are necessary for regulation of AP1 in the gonadotrope cell are not
known. Here, we investigate the mechanism of c-Jun induction by GnRH, the sole
regulator of c-Jun in the gonadotrope. We identify that GnRH phosphorylates ATF2 
via p38 and JNK, the same pathways responsible for GnRH induction of c-Jun. Upon 
phosphorylation, ATF2 binds the CRE element within the c-Jun proximal promoter
and interacts with NFY. Functional ATF2 is necessary for both GnRH induction of
c-Jun and FSHß. Taken together, these studies elucidate the specificity of c-Jun 
induction by GnRH in the gonadotrope by demonstrating GnRH activation of the p38 
and JNK signaling pathways that lead to phosphorylation of ATF2, providing
critical insight into GnRH regulation of its target gene, the gonadotropin
subunit FSHß.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3529762
PMID: 23178797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Cancer Lett. 2013 Feb 28;329(2):217-27. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.11.006. Epub
2012 Nov 23.

Early growth response protein 1 upregulation and nuclear translocation by
2'-benzoyloxycinnamaldehyde induces prostate cancer cell death.

Kang HS(1), Ock J, Lee HJ, Lee YJ, Kwon BM, Hong SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Microbiology, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu 700-412, South Korea.

2'-Benzoyloxycinnamaldehyde (BCA) induces apoptosis in human cancer cells through
ROS generation. BCA upregulates proapoptotic genes such as activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3), NSAID-activated gene 1 protein (NAG-1), and growth
arrest and DNA-damage-inducible protein alpha (GADD45A) in prostate cancer cells.
These genes are known to be induced by transcription factor early growth response
protein 1 (EGR1). BCA induces significant EGR1 upregulation, while EGR1 knockdown
decreases the induction of these genes with concurrent alleviation of cell death 
by BCA. Antioxidant glutathione pretreatment with BCA removes EGR1 expression
increase, suggesting that EGR1 upregulation is dependent on oxidative stress
generated by BCA. In prostate cancer cells, EGR1 localizes in the cytoplasm;
however, BCA remarkably upregulates EGR1 nuclear translocalization, suggesting
its possible effect as a transcriptional activator. BCA induces transient
upregulation of importin-7 (IPO7) which is critical for EGR1 nuclear
translocation, and IPO7 knockdown led to a significant decrease in
chemosensitivity to BCA. Taken together, our findings suggest that BCA induces
prostate cancer cell death via EGR1 upregulation and nuclear translocalization,
followed by activation of proapoptotic target genes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23178451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012 Dec;23(12):2012-23. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012050438. Epub 2012
Nov 15.

MicroRNA-494 reduces ATF3 expression and promotes AKI.

Lan YF(1), Chen HH, Lai PF, Cheng CF, Huang YT, Lee YC, Chen TW, Lin H.

Author information: 
(1)PhD Program in Pharmacology and Toxicology, Tzu-Chi University, Hualien,
Taiwan.

MicroRNA-494 mediates apoptosis and necrosis in several types of cells, but its
renal target and potential role in AKI are unknown. Here, we found that
microRNA-494 binds to the 3'UTR of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and
decreases its transcription. In mice, overexpression of microRNA-494
significantly attenuated the level of ATF3 and induced inflammatory mediators,
such as IL-6, monocyte chemotactic protein-1, and P-selectin, after renal
ischemia/reperfusion, exacerbating apoptosis and further decreasing renal
function. Activation of NF-<U+03BA>B mediated this proinflammatory response. In this
ischemia/reperfusion model, urinary levels of microRNA-494 increased
significantly before the rise in serum creatinine. In humans, urinary
microRNA-494 levels were 60-fold higher in patients with AKI than normal
controls. In conclusion, upregulation of microRNA-494 contributes to inflammatory
or adhesion molecule-induced kidney injury after ischemia/reperfusion by
inhibiting expression of ATF3. Furthermore, microRNA-494 may be a specific and
noninvasive biomarker for AKI.

PMCID: PMC3507368
PMID: 23160513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Neurochem. 2013 Mar;124(6):757-69. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12089. Epub 2013 Jan 13.

Transcriptional analysis of rat photoreceptor cells reveals daily regulation of
genes important for visual signaling and light damage susceptibility.

Kunst S(1), Wolloscheck T, Hölter P, Wengert A, Grether M, Sticht C, Weyer V,
Wolfrum U, Spessert R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Functional and Clinical Anatomy, University Medical Center of the
Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany. kunsts@uni-mainz.de

Photoreceptor cells face the challenge of adjusting their function and, possibly,
their susceptibility to light damage to the marked daily changes in ambient light
intensity. To achieve a better understanding of photoreceptor adaptation at the
transcriptional level, this study aimed to identify genes which are under daily
regulation in photoreceptor cells using microarray analysis and quantitative PCR.
Included in the gene set obtained were a number of genes which up until now have 
not been shown to be expressed in photoreceptor cells, such as Atf3 (activating
transcription factor 3) and Pde8a (phosphodiesterase 8A), and others with a known
impact on phototransduction and/or photoreceptor survival, such as Grk1 (G
protein-coupled receptor kinase 1) and Pgc-1a (peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor <U+03B3>, coactivator 1alpha). According to their daily dynamics, the genes
identified could be clustered in two groups: those with peak expression during
the second part of the day which are uniformly promoted to cycle by light/dark
transitions and those with peak expression during the second part of the night
which are predominantly driven by a clock. Since Grk1 and Pgc-1a belong in the
first group, the present results support a concept in which transcriptional
regulation of genes by ambient light contributes to the functional adjustment of 
photoreceptor cells over the 24-h period.

© 2012 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 23145934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Neurosci Res. 2012 Dec;74(3-4):230-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2012.10.006. Epub
2012 Nov 3.

A novel model of combined neuropathic and inflammatory pain displaying
long-lasting allodynia and spontaneous pain-like behaviour.

Allchorne AJ(1), Gooding HL, Mitchell R, Fleetwood-Walker SM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuroregeneration, School of Biomedical Sciences, University of
Edinburgh, Chancellor's Building, Edinburgh EH16 4SB, UK.

Many clinical cases of chronic pain exhibit both neuropathic and inflammatory
components. In contrast, most animal models of chronic pain focus on one type of 
injury alone. Here we present a novel combined model of both neuropathic and
inflammatory pain and characterise its distinctive properties. This combined
model of chronic constriction injury (CCI) and intraplantar Complete Freund's
Adjuvant (CFA) injection results in enhanced mechanical allodynia, thermal
hyperalgesia, a static weight bearing deficit, and notably pronounced spontaneous
foot lifting (SFL) behaviour (which under our conditions was not seen in either
individual model and may reflect ongoing/spontaneous pain). Dorsal root ganglion 
(DRG) expression of Activating Transcription Factor-3 (ATF-3), a marker of axonal
injury, was no greater in the combined model than CCI alone. Initial
pharmacological characterisation of the new model showed that the SFL was
reversed by gabapentin or diclofenac, typical analgesics for neuropathic or
inflammatory pain respectively, but not by mexiletine, a Na(+) channel blocker
effective in both neuropathic and inflammatory pain models. Static weight bearing
deficit was moderately reduced by gabapentin, whereas only diclofenac reversed
mechanical allodynia. This novel animal model of chronic pain may prove a useful 
test-bed for further analysing the pharmacological susceptibility of complicated 
clinical pain states.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and the Japan Neuroscience Society. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 23131427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Feb;374(1-2):91-103. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1508-3. Epub 
2012 Nov 3.

Activation of the unfolded protein response during anoxia exposure in the turtle 
Trachemys scripta elegans.

Krivoruchko A(1), Storey KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, Carleton University, 1125
Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B6, Canada. krivoruchko@gmail.com

Red-eared slider turtles, Trachemys scripta elegans, can survive for several
weeks without oxygen when submerged in cold water. We hypothesized that
anaerobiosis is aided by adaptive up-regulation of the unfolded protein response 
(UPR), a stress-responsive pathway that is activated by accumulation of unfolded 
proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and functions to restore ER
homeostasis. RT-PCR, western immunoblotting and DNA-binding assays were used to
quantify the responses and/or activation status of UPR-responsive genes and
proteins in turtle tissues after animal exposure to 5 or 20 h of anoxic
submergence at 4 °C. The phosphorylation state of protein kinase-like ER kinase
(PERK) (a UPR-regulated kinase) and eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2a)
increased by 1.43-2.50 fold in response to anoxia in turtle heart, kidney, and
liver. Activation of the PERK-regulated transcription factor, activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), during anoxia was documented by elevated atf4
transcripts and total ATF4 protein (1.60-2.43 fold), increased nuclear ATF4
content, and increased DNA-binding activity (1.44-2.32 fold). ATF3 and GADD34
(downstream targets of ATF4) also increased by 1.38-3.32 fold in heart and liver 
under anoxia, and atf3 transcripts were also elevated in heart. Two
characteristic chaperones of the UPR, GRP78, and GRP94, also responded positively
to anoxia with strong increases in both the transcript and protein levels. The
data demonstrate that the UPR is activated in turtle heart, kidney, and liver in 
response to anoxia, suggesting that this pathway mediates an integrated stress
response to protect tissues during oxygen deprivation.

PMID: 23124854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Urol. 2012 Dec;188(6):2354-60. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2012.08.033. Epub 2012 Oct
22.

Exploration of gene-environment interactions, maternal effects and parent of
origin effects in the etiology of hypospadias.

van der Zanden LF(1), Galesloot TE, Feitz WF, Brouwers MM, Shi M, Knoers NV,
Franke B, Roeleveld N, van Rooij IA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. L.vanderZanden@ebh.umcn.nl

PURPOSE: Hypospadias is a common congenital malformation of the male external
genitalia. Association studies for single nucleotide polymorphisms in genes
encoding steroid 5alpha-reductase, estrogen receptors 1 and 2, and activating
transcription factor 3 have been equivocal. We examined whether nonreplication of
findings for 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms in these genes could be due to
interaction with environmental exposures.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We genotyped 712 Dutch hypospadias case-parent triads for 
the 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms, used questionnaire information to
determine exposures and performed association tests using the log-linear
approach. We studied gene-environment interactions for the 4 single nucleotide
polymorphisms with exposure to estrogens, cytokines or cigarette smoke, multiple 
birth, being born small for gestational age, maternal hypertension or
preeclampsia, high body mass index or primiparity. In addition, the presence of
maternal genetic and parent of origin effects was tested.
RESULTS: Gene-environment interactions were identified for rs523349 in SRD5A2
with estrogen exposure and maternal hypertension or preeclampsia, as well as for 
rs11119982 in ATF3 with exposure to cytokines. Both single nucleotide
polymorphisms seemed to influence hypospadias risk only in exposed cases. For
rs6932902 in ESR1 only maternally derived alleles appeared to increase
hypospadias risk in offspring.
CONCLUSIONS: Interactions between genetic and environmental factors may help to
explain nonreplication in genetic studies of hypospadias.

Copyright © 2012 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3602843
PMID: 23088992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2013 Jan;52:9-19. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2012.10.001. Epub 2012
Oct 9.

Tissue-type plasminogen activator protects neurons from excitotoxin-induced cell 
death via activation of the ERK1/2-CREB-ATF3 signaling pathway.

Wu F(1), Echeverry R, Wu J, An J, Haile WB, Cooper DS, Catano M, Yepes M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Center for Neurodegenerative Disease, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.

The release of the serine proteinase tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) from
cerebral cortical neurons has a neuroprotective effect in the ischemic brain.
Because excitotoxicity is a basic mechanism of ischemia-induced cell death, here 
we investigated the effect of tPA on excitotoxin-induced neuronal death. We
report that genetic overexpression of neuronal tPA or treatment with recombinant 
tPA renders neurons resistant to the harmful effects of an excitotoxic injury in 
vitro and in vivo. We found that at concentrations found in the ischemic brain,
tPA interacts with synaptic but not extrasynaptic NMDARs. This effect is
independent of tPA's proteolytic properties and leads to a rapid and transient
phosphorylation of the extracellular signal regulated kinases1/2 (ERK1/2), with
ERK1/2-mediated activation of the cAMP response element binding protein (CREB)
and induction of the neuroprotective CREB-regulated activating transcription
factor 3 (Atf3). In line with these observations, Atf3 down-regulation abrogates 
the protective effect of tPA against excitotoxin-induced neuronal death. Our data
indicate that tPA preferentially activates synaptic NMDARs via a
plasminogen-independent mechanism turning on a cell signaling pathway that
protects neurons from the deleterious effects of excitotoxicity.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3540185
PMID: 23063501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44990. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044990. Epub 2012 Sep 13.

Doxorubicin induces cytotoxicity through upregulation of pERK-dependent ATF3.

Park EJ(1), Kwon HK, Choi YM, Shin HJ, Choi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou University, Suwon, Korea.

Although doxorubicin is commonly used in the treatment of many cancer types, its 
use in chemotherapy has been limited, largely because of its severe side effects,
including cardiotoxicity and nephrotoxicity. In this study, we aimed to identify 
the mechanism of doxorubicin-induced cytotoxicity by using the human kidney
proximal tubule cell line HK-2. Furthermore, we investigated the role of
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) as a mediator of doxorubicin-induced
cytotoxicity by using wild-type mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) cells and ATF3 
knockout (KO) cells. In HK-2 cells, doxorubicin decreased cell viability in a
dose-dependent manner and induced an increase in cells in the sub G1 and G2/M
phases at all doses. Doxorubicin treatment showed the following dose-dependent
effects: increase in the secretion of tumor necrosis factor alpha; decrease in
the expression of phosphorylated protein kinase A and Bcl-2; and increase in the 
expression of phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription 3, 
phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), and ATF3. Based on
these results, we suggest that doxorubicin induces cytotoxicity through an
ERK-dependent pathway, and ATF3 plays a pivotal role as a transcriptional
regulator in this process.

PMCID: PMC3441731
PMID: 23028726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Neuroscience. 2012 Dec 27;227:370-80. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.09.044.
Epub 2012 Sep 25.

Neuronal expression of the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-2 in rat dorsal root ganglia:
modulation in the spared nerve injury model of neuropathic pain.

Cachemaille M(1), Laedermann CJ, Pertin M, Abriel H, Gosselin RD, Decosterd I.

Author information: 
(1)Pain Center, Department of Anesthesiology, University Hospital Center (CHUV)
and University of Lausanne (UNIL), Lausanne, Switzerland.
Matthieu.Cachemaille@chuv.ch

Neuronal hyperexcitability following peripheral nerve lesions may stem from
altered activity of voltage-gated sodium channels (VGSCs), which gives rise to
allodynia or hyperalgesia. In vitro, the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-2 is a negative
regulator of VGSC a-subunits (Na(v)), in particular Na(v)1.7, a key actor in
nociceptor excitability. We therefore studied Nedd4-2 in rat nociceptors, its
co-expression with Na(v)1.7 and Na(v)1.8, and its regulation in pathology. Adult 
rats were submitted to the spared nerve injury (SNI) model of neuropathic pain or
injected with complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA), a model of inflammatory pain. L4 
dorsal root ganglia (DRG) were analyzed in sham-operated animals, seven days
after SNI and 48 h after CFA with immunofluorescence and Western blot. We
observed Nedd4-2 expression in almost 50% of DRG neurons, mostly small and
medium-sized. A preponderant localization is found in the non-peptidergic
sub-population. Additionally, 55.7 ± 2.7% and 55.0 ± 3.6% of Nedd4-2-positive
cells are co-labeled with Na(v)1.7 and Na(v)1.8 respectively. SNI significantly
decreases the proportion of Nedd4-2-positive neurons from 45.9 ± 1.9% to 33.5 ±
0.7% (p<0.01) and the total Nedd4-2 protein to 44% ± 0.13% of its basal level
(p<0.01, n=4 animals in each group, mean ± SEM). In contrast, no change in
Nedd4-2 was found after peripheral inflammation induced by CFA. These results
indicate that Nedd4-2 is present in nociceptive neurons, is downregulated after
peripheral nerve injury, and might therefore contribute to the dysregulation of
Na(v)s involved in the hyperexcitability associated with peripheral nerve
injuries.

Copyright © 2012 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23022218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Cancer Res. 2012 Oct 1;72(19):5119-29. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-1842. Epub
2012 Sep 20.

Adenylate kinase-4 is a marker of poor clinical outcomes that promotes metastasis
of lung cancer by downregulating the transcription factor ATF3.

Jan YH(1), Tsai HY, Yang CJ, Huang MS, Yang YF, Lai TC, Lee CH, Jeng YM, Huang
CY, Su JL, Chuang YJ, Hsiao M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology, National Tsing Hua
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.

Biomarkers predicting metastatic capacity might assist the development of better 
therapeutic strategies for aggressive cancers such as lung cancer. In this study,
we show that adenylate kinase-4 (AK4) is a progression-associated gene in human
lung cancer that promotes metastasis. Analysis of published microarray data
showed that AK4 was upregulated in lung adenocarcinoma compared with normal
cells. High AK4 expression was associated with advanced stage, disease recurrence
and poor prognosis. Loss of AK4 expression suppressed the invasive potential of
lung cancer cell lines, whereas AK4 overexpression promoted invasion in vitro and
in vivo. Mechanistically, the transcription factor ATF3 was identified as a
pivotal regulatory target of AK4. Simultaneous reduction in AK4 and ATF3
expression abolished the inhibitory effects of ATF3 on invasion. ATF3
overexpression in AK4-overexpressing cells limits invasion activity. Furthermore,
patients with high AK4 and low ATF3 expression showed unfavorable outcomes
compared with patients with low AK4 and high ATF3 expression. Taken together, our
findings indicated that AK4 promotes malignant progression and recurrence by
promoting metastasis in an ATF3-dependent manner.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 23002211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Photochem Photobiol B. 2012 Dec 5;117:1-12. doi:
10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2012.08.005. Epub 2012 Aug 22.

Deleterious effects of mitochondrial ROS generated by KillerRed photodynamic
action in human cell lines and C. elegans.

Shibuya T(1), Tsujimoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka
University Medical School, Japan.

KillerRed, a red fluorescent protein, is a photosensitizer that efficiently
generates reactive oxygen species (ROS) when irradiated with green light. Because
KillerRed is genetically encoded, it can be expressed in a spatially and
temporally regulated manner under control of a chosen promoter and thus is a
powerful tool for studying the downstream cellular effects of ROS. However,
information is still limited about the effects of KillerRed-mediated production
of ROS inside the mitochondria (mtROS). Therefore, we investigated whether mtROS 
generated by KillerRed could trigger mitochondrial damage and cell death by
generating human cell lines (HEK293T and HeLa cells) that stably expressed
mitochondria-targeting KillerRed (mtKillerRed). We found that mtROS generated by 
mtKillerRed caused depolarization of the mitochondrial membrane and morphological
changes, which were partly due to the mitochondrial permeability transition
(MPT), as well as inducing both caspase-dependent cell death (apoptosis) and
caspase-independent cell death. In order to study the pathological processes
initiated by mtROS in animals, transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans expressing
mtKillerRed in muscle tissue were generated. Transgenic larvae showed
developmental delay following light irradiation, suggesting that mtROS influenced
the development of C. elegans larvae. In conclusion, our studies demonstrated
that the photosensitizer KillerRed is effective at inducing oxidative damage in
the mitochondria, and indicated that our experimental systems may be useful for
studying the downstream cellular effects of mtROS.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23000754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Mol Pain. 2012 Sep 21;8:70. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-8-70.

Positive allosteric modulation of TRPV1 as a novel analgesic mechanism.

Lebovitz EE(1), Keller JM, Kominsky H, Kaszas K, Maric D, Iadarola MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology and Pain Therapeutics Section, Laboratory Of Sensory Biology,
NIDCR, NIH, Bldg 49 Rm 1C2049 Convent Dr, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of long-term opiate use in treating chronic non-cancer
pain is increasing, and prescription opioid abuse and dependence are a major
public health concern. To explore alternatives to opioid-based analgesia, the
present study investigates a novel allosteric pharmacological approach operating 
through the cation channel TRPV1. This channel is highly expressed in
subpopulations of primary afferent unmyelinated C- and lightly-myelinated
Ad-fibers that detect low and high rates of noxious heating, respectively, and it
is also activated by vanilloid agonists and low pH. Sufficient doses of exogenous
vanilloid agonists, such as capsaicin or resiniferatoxin, can
inactivate/deactivate primary afferent endings due to calcium overload, and we
hypothesized that positive allosteric modulation of agonist-activated TRPV1 could
produce a selective, temporary inactivation of nociceptive nerve terminals in
vivo. We previously identified MRS1477, a 1,4-dihydropyridine that potentiates
vanilloid and pH activation of TRPV1 in vitro, but displays no detectable
intrinsic agonist activity of its own. To study the in vivo effects of MRS1477,
we injected the hind paws of rats with a non-deactivating dose of capsaicin,
MRS1477, or the combination. An infrared diode laser was used to stimulate
TRPV1-expressing nerve terminals and the latency and intensity of paw withdrawal 
responses were recorded. qRT-PCR and immunohistochemistry were performed on
dorsal root ganglia to examine changes in gene expression and the cellular
specificity of such changes following treatment.
RESULTS: Withdrawal responses of the capsaicin-only or MRS1477-only treated paws 
were not significantly different from the untreated, contralateral paws. However,
rats treated with the combination of capsaicin and MRS1477 exhibited increased
withdrawal latency and decreased response intensity consistent with agonist
potentiation and inactivation or lesion of TRPV1-containing nerve terminals. The 
loss of nerve endings was manifested by an increase in levels of axotomy markers 
assessed by qRT-PCR and colocalization of ATF3 in TRPV1+ cells visualized via
immunohistochemistry.
CONCLUSIONS: The present observations suggest a novel, non-narcotic, selective,
long-lasting TRPV1-based approach for analgesia that may be effective in acute,
persistent, or chronic pain disorders.

PMCID: PMC3556054
PMID: 22998799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Dec;6(6):1325-32. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.1082. Epub 2012 Sep 13.

Detection of significant pathways in osteoporosis based on graph clustering.

Xiao H(1), Shan L, Zhu H, Xue F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Fengxian Central Hospital, Shanghai 201400, P.R.
China.

Osteoporosis is the most common and serious skeletal disorder among the elderly, 
characterized by a low bone mineral density (BMD). Low bone mass in the elderly
is highly dependent on their peak bone mass (PBM) as young adults. Circulating
monocytes serve as early progenitors of osteoclasts and produce significant
molecules for bone metabolism. An improved understanding of the biology and
genetics of osteoclast differentiation at the pathway level is likely to be
beneficial for the development of novel targeted approaches for osteoporosis. The
objective of this study was to explore gene expression profiles comprehensively
by grouping individual differentially expressed genes (DEGs) into gene sets and
pathways using the graph clustering approach and Gene Ontology (GO) term
enrichment analysis. The results indicated that the DEGs between high and low PBM
samples were grouped into nine gene sets. The genes in clusters 1 and 8
(including GBP1, STAT1, CXCL10 and EIF2AK2) may be associated with osteoclast
differentiation by the immune system response. The genes in clusters 2, 7 and 9
(including SOCS3, SOD2, ATF3, ADM EGR2 and BCL2A1) may be associated with
osteoclast differentiation by responses to various stimuli. This study provides a
number of candidate genes that warrant further investigation, including DDX60,
HERC5, RSAD2, SIGLEC1, CMPK2, MX1, SEPING1, EPSTI1, C9orf72, PHLDA2, PFKFB3,
PLEKHG2, ANKRD28, IL1RN and RNF19B.

PMID: 22992777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Mar;114(3):589-98. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24396.

SUMOylation of ATF3 alters its transcriptional activity on regulation of TP53
gene.

Wang CM(1), Brennan VC, Gutierrez NM, Wang X, Wang L, Yang WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Mercer University School of Medicine,
Savannah, GA 31404, USA.

Cyclic AMP-dependent transcription factor-3 (ATF3), a stress sensor, plays an
essential role in cells to maintain homeostasis and has diverse functions in
cellular survival and death signal pathways. ATF3 is a novel regulator of p53
protein stability and function. The activities of ATF3 are modulated by
post-translational modifications (PTMs), such as ubiquitination, but whether it
is modified by small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) remains unknown. The aim
of this study was to investigate whether ATF3 is post-translationally modified by
SUMO proteins and also to elucidate SUMOylation of ATF3 on TP53 gene activity.
Here we report that ATF3 is clearly defined as a SUMO target protein both in
vitro SUMOylation assay using recombinant proteins and at the cellular levels.
Furthermore, ATF3 interacted with UBE2I, the only SUMO E2 enzyme found so far. In
addition, PIAS3ß (a SUMO E3 ligase) enhanced and SENP2 and SENP7 (two SUMOylation
proteases) decreased SUMOylation of ATF3, respectively. Finally, we found that
ATF3 is selectively SUMOylated at lysine residue 42 but the SUMOylation does not 
alter subcellular localization of ATF3. We then characterized the functional role
of ATF3 SUMOylation on TP53 gene expression. We found that SUMOylation of ATF3 is
required for full repression of TP53 gene. Overall, we provide the first evidence
that ATF3 is post-translationally modified by SUMO and SUMOylation of ATF3 plays 
a functional role in regulation of TP53 gene activity.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22991139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Nov-Dec;1819(11-12):1142-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.09.005. Epub 2012 Sep 16.

The bZIP repressor proteins, c-Jun dimerization protein 2 and activating
transcription factor 3, recruit multiple HDAC members to the ATF3 promoter.

Darlyuk-Saadon I(1), Weidenfeld-Baranboim K, Yokoyama KK, Hai T, Aronheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa, Israel. ilona.darlyuk@gmail.com

JDP2, is a basic leucine zipper (bZIP) protein displaying a high degree of
homology with the stress inducible transcription factor, ATF3. Both proteins bind
to cAMP and TPA response elements and repress transcription by multiple
mechanisms. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a key role in gene inactivation by 
deacetylating lysine residues on histones. Here we describe the association of
JDP2 and ATF3 with HDACs 1, 2-6 and 10. Association of HDAC3 and HDAC6 with JDP2 
and ATF3 occurs via direct protein-protein interactions. Only part of the
N-terminal bZIP motif of JDP2 and ATF3 basic domain is necessary and sufficient
for the interaction with HDACs in a manner that is independent of coiled-coil
dimerization. Class I HDACs associate with the bZIP repressors via the DAC
conserved domain whereas the Class IIb HDAC6 associates through its C-terminal
unique binder of ubiquitin Zn finger domain. Both JDP2 and ATF3 are known to bind
and repress the ATF3 promoter. MEF cells treated with histone deacetylase
inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA) display enhanced ATF3 transcription. ATF3
enhanced transcription is significantly reduced in MEF cells lacking both ATF3
and JDP2. Collectively, we propose that the recruitment of multiple HDAC members 
to JDP2 and ATF3 is part of their transcription repression mechanism.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3551276
PMID: 22989952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Biochem J. 2013 Jan 1;449(1):219-29. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120958.

Dynamic changes in genomic histone association and modification during activation
of the ASNS and ATF3 genes by amino acid limitation.

Balasubramanian MN(1), Shan J, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shands Cancer Center and
Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Gainesville, FL 32610, U.S.A.

Amino acid deprivation of mammalian cells triggers several signalling pathways,
the AAR (amino acid response), that results in transcriptional activation. For
the ASNS (asparagine synthetase) and ATF3 (activating transcription factor 3)
genes, increased transcription occurs in conjunction with recruitment of ATF4 to 
the gene. In HepG2 cells, analysis of the ASNS and ATF3 genes during AAR
activation revealed increases in histone H3K4me3 (histone 3 trimethylated Lys4)
and H4Ac (acetylated histone 4) levels, marks associated with active
transcription, but a concurrent loss of total H3 protein near the promoter. The
dynamic nature of AAR-regulated transcription was illustrated by a decline in
ASNS transcription activity within minutes after removal of the AAR stress and a 
return to basal levels by 2 h. Reversal of ASNS transcription occurred in
parallel with decreased promoter-associated H4Ac and ATF4 binding. However, the
reduction in histone H3 and increase in H3K4me3 were not reversed. In yeast,
persistence of H3K4me3 has been proposed to be a 'memory' mark of gene activity
that alters the responsiveness of the gene, but the time course and magnitude of 
ASNS induction was unaffected when cells were challenged with a second round of
AAR activation. The results of the present study document changes in
gene-associated nucleosome abundance and histone modifications in response to
amino-acid-dependent transcription.

PMCID: PMC3608204
PMID: 22978410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 19;287(43):36393-403. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.399600. Epub
2012 Sep 6.

ATF4-dependent regulation of the JMJD3 gene during amino acid deprivation can be 
rescued in Atf4-deficient cells by inhibition of deacetylation.

Shan J(1), Fu L, Balasubramanian MN, Anthony T, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, Shands
Cancer Center, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida
32610, USA.

Following amino acid deprivation, the amino acid response (AAR) induces
transcription from specific genes through a collection of signaling mechanisms,
including the GCN2-eIF2-ATF4 pathway. The present report documents that the
histone demethylase JMJD3 is an activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4)-dependent target gene. The JMJD3 gene contains two AAR-induced promoter
activities and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis showed that the AAR 
leads to enhanced ATF4 recruitment to the C/EBP-ATF response element (CARE)
upstream of Promoter-1. AAR-induced histone modifications across the JMJD3 gene
locus occur upon ATF4 binding. Jmjd3 transcription is not induced in
Atf4-knock-out cells, but the AAR-dependent activation was rescued by inhibition 
of histone deacetylation with trichostatin A (TSA). The TSA rescue of AAR
activation in the absence of Atf4 also occurred for the Atf3 and C/EBP homology
protein (Chop) genes, but not for the asparagine synthetase gene. ChIP analysis
of the Jmjd3, Atf3, and Chop genes in Atf4 knock-out cells documented that
activation of the AAR in the presence of TSA led to specific changes in
acetylation of histone H4. The results suggest that a primary function of ATF4 is
to recruit histone acetyltransferase activity to a sub-set of AAR target genes.
Thus, absolute binding of ATF4 to these particular genes is not required and no
ATF4 interaction with the general transcription machinery is necessary. The data 
are consistent with the hypothesis that ATF4 functions as a pioneer factor to
alter chromatin structure and thus, enhance transcription in a gene-specific
manner.

PMCID: PMC3476305
PMID: 22955275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Exp Neurol. 2012 Dec;238(2):225-34. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.08.023. Epub
2012 Aug 28.

Mitotoxicity and bortezomib-induced chronic painful peripheral neuropathy.

Zheng H(1), Xiao WH, Bennett GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada.

Many of the most effective anti-cancer drugs induce a dose-limiting peripheral
neuropathy that compromises therapy. Evidence from animal models of
chemotherapy-induced painful peripheral neuropathy produced by the taxane agent, 
paclitaxel, and the platinum-complex agent, oxaliplatin, indicate that they
produce neuropathy via a common mechanism-a toxic effect on the mitochondria in
primary afferent sensory neurons. Bortezomib is from the proteasome-inhibitor
class of chemotherapeutics. It also produces a dose-limiting peripheral
neuropathy, but its effects on neuronal mitochondria are unknown. To investigate 
this, we developed a model of bortezomib-induced painful peripheral neuropathy in
the rat and assessed mitochondrial function (respiration and ATP production) in
sciatic nerve samples harvested at two time points: day 7, which is three days
after treatment and before pain appears, and day 35, which is one month
post-treatment and the time of peak pain severity. We found significant deficits 
in Complex I-mediated and Complex II-mediated respiration, and in ATP production 
at both time points. Prophylactic treatment with acetyl-L-carnitine, which has
previously been shown to prevent paclitaxel- and oxaliplatin-induced
mitochondrial dysfunction and pain, completely blocked bortezomib's effects on
mitochondria and pain. These results suggest that mitotoxicity may be the core
pathology for all chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy and that drugs that 
protect mitochondrial function may be useful chemotherapy adjuncts.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22947198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Autophagy. 2012 Dec;8(12):1848-50. doi: 10.4161/auto.21863. Epub 2012 Aug 29.

Bacterial autophagy: the trigger, the target and the timing.

Tattoli I(1), Sorbara MT, Philpott DJ, Girardin SE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada.

Autophagy is a vital process through which cellular material and dysfunctional
organelles are degraded and recycled, and it is inhibited by the metabolic
checkpoint kinase MTOR. Autophagy also targets intracellular bacteria (a process 
termed xenophagy) for lysosomal degradation, thereby playing a key role in innate
immunity. In the past few years, the identification of molecules, such as
CALCOCO2/NDP52, SQSTM1/p62 and ubiquitin, implicated in the specific targeting of
intracellular bacteria, received considerable attention. However, it remains
unclear how xenophagy is initiated, since this process commonly occurs in
metabolically replete cells. In a recent study, we demonstrated that infection
with Shigella and Salmonella triggered an early state of intracellular amino acid
(AA) starvation causing MTOR dissociation from endomembranes, downregulation of
MTOR activity and activation of the EIF2AK4/GCN2-EIF2S1/eIF2a/ATF3 signaling
axis. We also observed that AA starvation was caused by host membrane damage,
which appeared to be transient in the case of Salmonella and sustained in
Shigella-infected cells, thus highlighting the existence of key timing
disparities in xenophagy triggering, depending on the bacterial pathogen.
Together, our findings demonstrate that xenophagy is only one arm of a more
general metabolic switch geared toward AA starvation in bacteria-infected cells.

PMCID: PMC3541301
PMID: 22932645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Gene. 2012 Nov 10;509(2):232-46. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.08.017. Epub 2012 Aug
19.

Dynamic expression profiles of virus-responsive and putative antimicrobial
peptide-encoding transcripts during Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) embryonic and
early larval development.

Rise ML(1), Hall JR, Alcock BP, Hori TS.

Author information: 
(1)Ocean Sciences Centre, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, NL,
Canada A1C 5S7. mrise@mun.ca

Early life stage mortality is one of the problems faced by Atlantic cod
aquaculture. However, our understanding of immunity in early life stage fish is
still incomplete, and the information available is restricted to a few species.
In the present work we investigated the expression of immune-relevant transcripts
in Atlantic cod during early development. The transcripts subjected to QPCR
analysis in the present study were previously identified as putative anti-viral
or anti-bacterial genes in Atlantic cod using suppression subtractive
hybridization (SSH) libraries, QPCR, and/or microarrays. Of the 11 genes involved
in this study, only atf3, cxc chemokine and gaduscidin-1 were not detected at the
transcript level in all developmental stages investigated from unfertilized egg
to early larval stage. Adam22, hamp, il8, irf1, irf7, lgp2, sacsin, and stat1
transcripts were detected in unfertilized egg and 7h post-fertilization (~2-cell 
stage) embryos, showing maternal contribution of these immune-relevant
transcripts to the early embryonic transcriptome. The Atlantic cod genes included
in this study presented diverse transcript expression profiles throughout
embryonic and early larval development. For example, adam22 and sacsin
transcripts rose abruptly during blastula/gastrula stage and were then expressed 
at relatively high levels through subsequent embryonic and early larval
developmental stages. A peak in irf1 and irf7 transcript expression during early 
segmentation suggests that these interferon pathway genes play developmental
stage-specific roles during cod embryogenesis. Stat1 had increasing transcript
expression throughout blastula/gastrula, segmentation, and early larval
developmental stages. Atf3, cxc chemokine, gaduscidin-1, and il8 transcripts rose
approximately 2-3 fold during hatching, supporting the hypothesis that there is
preparation at the immune-relevant transcript expression level to deal with
environmental pathogens that may be encountered during early larval development. 
The specific roles that interferon pathway and other immune-relevant genes play
in early life stage cod, and the potential impact of their dynamic transcript
expression on immune competence of Atlantic cod embryos and larvae, remain
unclear and warrant further study.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22925828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43249. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043249. Epub 2012 Aug 14.

Induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress response by the indole-3-carbinol
cyclic tetrameric derivative CTet in human breast cancer cell lines.

Galluzzi L(1), De Santi M, Crinelli R, De Marco C, Zaffaroni N, Duranti A, Brandi
G, Magnani M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Science, University of Urbino Carlo Bo, Fano, PU,
Italy. luca.galluzzi@uniurb.it

BACKGROUND: Indole-3-carbinol and its metabolic products are considered promising
chemopreventive and anticancer agents. Previously we have shown that the
indole-3-carbinol cyclic tetrameric derivative CTet induces autophagy and
inhibits cell proliferation via inhibition of Akt activity and overexpression of 
p21/CDKN1A and GADD45A, in both estrogen receptor-positive (MCF-7) and triple
negative (MDA-MB-231) breast cancer cell lines. In the present study, we further 
characterize the autophagic response and investigate the mechanism through which 
CTet regulates these events.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Analysis of gene expression microarray data and
subsequent confirmation by quantitative real-time PCR, showed that CTet is able
to induce up-regulation of key signaling molecules involved in endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress response (e.g. DDIT3/CHOP, CHAC1, ATF3, HSPA5/BiP/GRP78,
CEBPB, ASNS) and autophagy (e.g. MAP1LC3B), in both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cell
lines. Moreover, the monitoring of Xbp-1 splicing confirmed the activation of
IRE1/Xbp-1 ER stress response branch after CTet treatment. The role of autophagic
processes (known to be induced by ER stress) was investigated further through
ATG5 gene silencing and pharmacological inhibition of AVOs formation. CTet was
shown to induce an autophagy-related cell death. Moreover, CTet-treated cells
stained with Hoechst/PI revealed the presence of necrotic processes without
evidence of apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The ER stress response was identified as the main
upstream molecular mechanism through which CTet acts in both hormone-responsive
and triple-negative breast cancer cells. Because of its important role in cancer 
development, ER stress is a potential target in cancer therapy. The abiltiy of
CTet to induce ER stress response and subsequently activate a death program in
tumor cells confirms this molecule as a promising anticancer agent.

PMCID: PMC3419215
PMID: 22905241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Appl Toxicol. 2013 Dec;33(12):1407-15. doi: 10.1002/jat.2800. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Unraveling toxicological mechanisms and predicting toxicity classes with gene
dysregulation networks.

Pronk TE(1), van Someren EP, Stierum RH, Ezendam J, Pennings JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Health Protection Research, National Institute for Public
Health and the Environment, PO Box<U+2009>1, NL-3720, BA, Bilthoven, the Netherlands;
Department of Toxicogenomics, Maastricht University, PO Box<U+2009>616, NL-6200, MD,
Maastricht, the Netherlands.

The use of genes for distinguishing classes of toxicity has become well
established. In this paper we combine the reconstruction of a gene dysregulation 
network (GDN) with a classifier to assign unseen compounds to their appropriate
class. Gene pairs in the GDN are dysregulated in the sense that they are linked
by a common expression pattern in one class and differ in this pattern in another
class. The classifier gives a quantitative measure on this difference by its
prediction accuracy. As an in-depth example, gene pairs were selected that were
dysregulated between skin cells treated with either sensitizers or irritants.
Pairs with known and novel markers were found such as HMOX1 and ZFAND2A, ATF3 and
PPP1R15A, OXSR1 and HSPA1B, ZFP36 and MAFF. The resulting GDN proved biologically
valid as it was well-connected and enriched in known interactions, processes and 
common regulatory motifs for pairs. Classification accuracy was improved when
compared with conventional classifiers. As the dysregulated patterns for heat
shock responding genes proved to be distinct from those of other stress genes, we
were able to formulate the hypothesis that heat shock genes play a specific role 
in sensitization, apart from other stress genes. In conclusion, our combined
approach creates added value for classification-based toxicogenomics by obtaining
novel, well-distinguishing and biologically interesting measures, suitable for
the formulation of hypotheses on functional relationships between genes and their
relevance for toxicity class differences.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22886929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Endocr J. 2012;59(10):849-57. Epub 2012 Aug 9.

Adipose tissue inflammation and ectopic lipid accumulation.

Suganami T(1), Tanaka M, Ogawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Metabolism, Medical Research Institute,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Obesity may be viewed as a chronic low-grade inflammatory disease as well as a
metabolic disease. Indeed, unbalanced production of pro- and anti-inflammatory
adipocytokines critically contributes to the obesity-induced insulin resistance. 
In addition to lipid-laden mature adipocytes, adipose tissue is composed of
various stromal cells such as preadipocytes, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and 
immune cells that may be involved in adipose tissue functions. Accumulating
evidence has suggested that adipocytes and stromal cells in adipose tissue change
dramatically in number and cell type during the course of obesity, which is
referred to as "adipose tissue remodeling." Among stromal cells, infiltration of 
macrophages in obese adipose tissue precedes the development of insulin
resistance in animal models, suggesting that they are crucial for adipose tissue 
inflammation. We have provided evidence suggesting that a paracrine loop
involving saturated fatty acids and tumor necrosis factor-a derived from
adipocytes and macrophages, respectively, aggravates obesity-induced adipose
tissue inflammation. On the other hand, storing excessive energy as triglyceride 
is also a fundamental function of adipose tissue. Recent evidence suggests that
reduced lipid storage in obese adipose tissue contributes to ectopic lipid
accumulation in non-adipose tissues such as the liver, skeletal muscle, and
pancreas, where lipotoxicity impairs their metabolic functions. Notably, chronic 
inflammation is capable of inducing insulin resistance, lipolysis, and
interstitial fibrosis in adipose tissue, all of which may reduce the
lipid-storing function. Understanding the molecular mechanism underlying adipose 
tissue remodeling may lead to the identification of novel therapeutic strategies 
to prevent or treat obesity-induced adipose tissue inflammation.

PMID: 22878669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2012 Aug 7;5(1):12. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-5-12.

MK3 controls Polycomb target gene expression via negative feedback on ERK.

Prickaerts P(1), Niessen HE, Mouchel-Vielh E, Dahlmans VE, van den Akker GG,
Geijselaers C, Adriaens ME, Spaapen F, Takihara Y, Rapp UR, Peronnet F, Voncken
JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, GROW School for Oncology and Developmental
Biology, Maastricht University, Universiteitssingel 50, 6229ER, Maastricht, The
Netherlands. W.Voncken@maastrichtuniversity.nl.

BACKGROUND: Gene-environment interactions are mediated by epigenetic mechanisms. 
Polycomb Group proteins constitute part of an epigenetic cellular transcriptional
memory system that is subject to dynamic modulation during differentiation.
Molecular insight in processes that control dynamic chromatin association and
dissociation of Polycomb repressive complexes during and beyond development is
limited. We recently showed that MK3 interacts with Polycomb repressive complex 1
(PRC1). The functional relevance of this interaction, however, remained poorly
understood. MK3 is activated downstream of mitogen- and stress-activated protein 
kinases (M/SAPKs), all of which fulfill crucial roles during development. We here
use activation of the immediate-early response gene ATF3, a bona fide PRC1 target
gene, as a model to study how MK3 and its effector kinases MAPK/ERK and SAPK/P38 
are involved in regulation of PRC1-dependent ATF3 transcription.
RESULTS: Our current data show that mitogenic signaling through ERK, P38 and MK3 
regulates ATF3 expression by PRC1/chromatin dissociation and epigenetic
modulation. Mitogenic stimulation results in transient P38-dependent H3S28
phosphorylation and ERK-driven PRC1/chromatin dissociation at PRC1 targets. H3S28
phosphorylation by itself appears not sufficient to induce PRC1/chromatin
dissociation, nor ATF3 transcription, as inhibition of MEK/ERK signaling blocks
BMI1/chromatin dissociation and ATF3 expression, despite induced H3S28
phosphorylation. In addition, we establish that concomitant loss of local
H3K27me3 promoter marking is not required for ATF3 activation. We identify pERK
as a novel signaling-induced binding partner of PRC1, and provide evidence that
MK3 controls ATF3 expression in cultured cells via negative regulatory feedback
on M/SAPKs. Dramatically increased ectopic wing vein formation in the absence of 
Drosophila MK in a Drosophila ERK gain-of-function wing vein patterning model,
supports the existence of MK-mediated negative feedback regulation on pERK.
CONCLUSION: We here identify and characterize important actors in a
PRC1-dependent epigenetic signal/response mechanism, some of which appear to be
nonspecific global responses, whereas others provide modular specificity. Our
findings provide novel insight into a Polycomb-mediated epigenetic mechanism that
dynamically controls gene transcription and support a direct link between PRC1
and cellular responses to changes in the microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC3499388
PMID: 22870894  [PubMed]


353. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Oct;32(19):3949-62. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00429-12. Epub 2012 Jul 
30.

Activating transcription factor 3 regulates immune and metabolic homeostasis.

Rynes J(1), Donohoe CD, Frommolt P, Brodesser S, Jindra M, Uhlirova M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster in Cellular Stress
Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany.

Integration of metabolic and immune responses during animal development ensures
energy balance, permitting both growth and defense. Disturbed homeostasis causes 
organ failure, growth retardation, and metabolic disorders. Here, we show that
the Drosophila melanogaster activating transcription factor 3 (Atf3) safeguards
metabolic and immune system homeostasis. Loss of Atf3 results in chronic
inflammation and starvation responses mounted primarily by the larval gut
epithelium, while the fat body suffers lipid overload, causing energy imbalance
and death. Hyperactive proinflammatory and stress signaling through NF-<U+03BA>B/Relish,
Jun N-terminal kinase, and FOXO in atf3 mutants deregulates genes important for
immune defense, digestion, and lipid metabolism. Reducing the dose of either FOXO
or Relish normalizes both lipid metabolism and gene expression in atf3 mutants.
The function of Atf3 is conserved, as human ATF3 averts some of the Drosophila
mutant phenotypes, improving their survival. The single Drosophila Atf3 may
incorporate the diversified roles of two related mammalian proteins.

PMCID: PMC3457521
PMID: 22851689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Oct;11(10):2174-82. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0602.
Epub 2012 Jul 30.

PKCd regulates death receptor 5 expression induced by PS-341 through
ATF4-ATF3/CHOP axis in human lung cancer cells.

Xu L(1), Su L, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong University School of Life Sciences, Room 103, South Building, 27
Shanda South Road, Jinan, Shandong 250100, China.

PS-341 (bortezomib), a proteasome inhibitor, has been approved for the treatment 
of multiple myeloma. Our previous work has shown that PS-341 induces death
receptor 5 (DR5)-dependent apoptosis and enhances the TNF-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand-induced apoptosis in human non-small cell lung cancer
cells. However, the definite mechanism remains undefined. In the present study,
we reveal that PKCd and RSK2 mediate PS-341-induced DR5 upregulation, involving
coactivation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. We discovered that PS-341
activated ER stress through elevating the expression of BiP, p-eIF2a, IRE1a,
ATF4, ATF3, and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP). Further
study showed that DR5 upregulation was dependent on ATF4, ATF3, and CHOP
expression. Silencing either one of the ATF4, ATF3, and CHOP expression decreased
DR5 upregulation and subsequent apoptosis. We determined that ATF4 regulated ATF3
and CHOP expression. Thereafter, ATF3 and CHOP formed a complex and regulated DR5
expression. In addition, we discovered that the phosphorylation of extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 and RSK2 were elevated after PS-341 treatment
and inhibition of their phosphorylation using MAP-ERK kinase 1/2 inhibitor
decreased the DR5 level, indicating that ERK/RSK2 signaling is involved in DR5
upregulation. Furthermore, we detected the cleavage of PKCd, and the blockage of 
PKCd expression cut down DR5 upregulation and apoptosis. Importantly, knockdown
of PKCd expression decreased the induction of ER stress and the phosphorylation
of ERK1/2 and RSK2, suggesting that PKCd regulates DR5 expression through
ERK/RSK2 signaling and ATF4-CHOP/ATF3 axis. Collectively, we show that PS-341
induces PKCd-dependent DR5 expression through activation of ERK/RSK2 and ER
stress signaling pathway.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22848091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Cell Death Dis. 2012 Jul 19;3:e353. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2012.87.

Synergistic effects of nelfinavir and bortezomib on proteotoxic death of NSCLC
and multiple myeloma cells.

Kawabata S(1), Gills JJ, Mercado-Matos JR, Lopiccolo J, Wilson W 3rd, Hollander
MC, Dennis PA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Exploiting protein homeostasis is a new therapeutic approach in cancer.
Nelfinavir (NFV) is an HIV protease inhibitor that induces endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) stress in cancer cells. Under conditions of ER stress, misfolded proteins
are transported from the ER back to the cytosol for subsequent degradation by the
ubiquitin-proteasome system. Bortezomib (BZ) is a proteasome inhibitor and
interferes with degradation of misfolded proteins. Here, we show that NFV and BZ 
enhance proteotoxicity in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and multiple myeloma
(MM) cells. The combination synergistically inhibited cell proliferation and
induced cell death. Activating transcription factor (ATF)3 and CCAAT-enhancer
binding protein homologous protein (CHOP), markers of ER stress, were rapidly
increased, and their siRNA-mediated knockdown inhibited cell death. Knockdown of 
double-stranded RNA activated protein kinase-like ER kinase, a signal transducer 
in ER stress, significantly decreased apoptosis. Pretreatment with the protein
synthesis inhibitor, cycloheximide, decreased levels of ubiquitinated proteins,
ATF3, CHOP, and the overall total cell death, suggesting that inhibition of
protein synthesis increases cell survival by relieving proteotoxic stress. The
NFV/BZ combination inhibited the growth of NSCLC xenografts, which correlated
with the induction of markers of ER stress and apoptosis. Collectively, these
data show that NFV and BZ enhance proteotoxicity in NSCLC and MM cells, and
suggest that this combination could tip the precarious balance of protein
homeostasis in cancer cells for therapeutic gain.

PMCID: PMC3406586
PMID: 22825471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Neuroinflammation. 2012 Jul 23;9:180. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-9-180.

The persistent release of HMGB1 contributes to tactile hyperalgesia in a rodent
model of neuropathic pain.

Feldman P(1), Due MR, Ripsch MS, Khanna R, White FA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Medical Neurosciences, Paul and Carole Stark Neurosciences Research
Institute, Indiana University, School of Medicine, 950 West Walnut Street,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

BACKGROUND: High-mobility group box-1 protein (HMGB1) is a nuclear protein that
regulates gene expression throughout the body. It can also become cytoplasmic and
function as a neuromodulatory cytokine after tissue damage or injury. The manner 
in which HMGB1 influences the peripheral nervous system following nerve injury is
unclear. The present study investigated the degree to which HMGB1 signaling
contributes to the maintenance of neuropathic pain behavior in the rodent.
RESULTS: Redistribution of HMGB1 from the nucleus to the cytoplasm occurred in
both sensory neurons derived from a tibial nerve injured (TNI) rat and in a
sensory neuron-like cell line following exposure to a depolarizing stimulus. We
also observe that exogenous administration of HMGB1 to acutely dissociated
sensory neurons derived from naïve or TNI rodents elicit increased excitability. 
Furthermore systemic injection of glycyrrhizin (50 mg/kg; i.p.), a known
inhibitor of HMGB1, reversed TNI-induced mechanical hyperalgesia at fourteen days
and three months following nerve injury.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified that a persistent endogenous release of HMGB1 by 
sensory neurons may be a potent, physiologically relevant modulator of neuronal
excitability. More importantly, the use of the anti-inflammatory compound and
known inhibitor of HMGB1, glycyrrhizin, has the ability to diminish persistent
pain behavior in a model of peripheral neuropathy, presumably through its ability
to neutralize the cyotkine. The identification of HMGB1 as a potential
therapeutic target may contribute to a better understanding of mechanisms
associated with chronic pain syndromes.

PMCID: PMC3488576
PMID: 22824385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Nat Med. 2012 Aug;18(8):1232-8. doi: 10.1038/nm.2827. Epub 2012 Jul 22.

Neural precursor cells induce cell death of high-grade astrocytomas through
stimulation of TRPV1.

Stock K(1), Kumar J, Synowitz M, Petrosino S, Imperatore R, Smith ES, Wend P,
Purfürst B, Nuber UA, Gurok U, Matyash V, Wälzlein JH, Chirasani SR, Dittmar G,
Cravatt BF, Momma S, Lewin GR, Ligresti A, De Petrocellis L, Cristino L, Di Marzo
V, Kettenmann H, Glass R.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Neuroscience, Max Delbrück Centre for Molecular Medicine (MDC),
Berlin, Germany.

Primary astrocytomas of grade 3 or 4 according to the classification system of
the World Health Organization (high-grade astrocytomas or HGAs) are preponderant 
among adults and are almost invariably fatal despite the use of multimodal
therapy. Here we show that the juvenile brain has an endogenous defense mechanism
against HGAs. Neural precursor cells (NPCs) migrate to HGAs, reduce glioma
expansion and prolong survival time by releasing endovanilloids that activate the
vanilloid receptor (transient receptor potential vanilloid subfamily member-1 or 
TRPV1) on HGA cells. TRPV1 is highly expressed in tumor and weakly expressed in
tumor-free brain. TRPV1 stimulation triggers tumor cell death through the branch 
of the endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway that is controlled by activating
transcription factor-3 (ATF3). The antitumorigenic response of NPCs is lost with 
aging. NPC-mediated tumor suppression can be mimicked in the adult brain by
systemic administration of the synthetic vanilloid arvanil, suggesting that TRPV1
agonists have potential as new HGA therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3480991
PMID: 22820645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Nutr Biochem. 2013 Apr;24(4):664-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2012.03.016. Epub
2012 Jul 21.

3,3'-diindolylmethane induces activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) via ATF4
in human colorectal cancer cells.

Lee SH(1), Min KW, Zhang X, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Diagnostic Sciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996-4542, USA.

3,3'-Diindolylmethane (DIM) is a major in vivo condensation product of
indole-3-carbinol, which is present in cruciferous vegetables. Although these
compounds have been widely implicated in antitumorigenic and proapoptotic
properties in animal as well as in vitro models of cancer, the underlying
cellular mechanisms regulated by DIM are only partially understood. Activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a member of the ATF/c-AMP response
element-binding (CREB) subfamily of the basic-region leucine zipper family and
has been known to induce apoptosis in human colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. The
present study was performed to elucidate the molecular mechanism of ATF3
induction by DIM in human CRC cells. The DIM treatment induced apoptosis and
induced ATF3 gene expression at protein and messenger RNA levels. DIM increased
ATF3 promoter activity, and the region of -84 to +34 within ATF3 promoter was
responsible for promoter activation by DIM. This region contained an ATF binding 
site. Deletion and point mutation of the ATF binding site (-23 to -16) abolished 
ATF3 promoter activation by DIM, and overexpression of ATF4 enhanced ATF3
transactivation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay confirmed the binding of
ATF4 in the ATF3 promoter. Inhibition of ATF4 expression by small interference
RNA results in repression of DIM-induced ATF3 expression. The current study
demonstrates that DIM stimulates ATF3 expression through ATF4-mediated pathway
and subsequently induces apoptosis in human CRC cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3481000
PMID: 22819556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Mar;228(3):536-46. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24160.

Transcriptional regulators of the <U+0394>Np63: their role in limbal epithelial cell
proliferation.

Hsueh YJ(1), Kuo PC, Chen JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Taoyuan, 
Taiwan.

The surface cells of corneal epithelium are regularly shed off and replaced by
new cells that are derived from limbal epithelial stem cells (LESC). LESC are
believed to reside in the basal layer of the limbal epithelium and are
characterized with high expression levels of <U+0394>Np63, a transcription factor (TF)
which is believed to play roles in the regulation of LESC proliferation. In this 
study, we examined the transcriptional regulation of <U+0394>Np63 in limbal epithelial
cell. We employed DNA pull down assay followed by LC/MS analysis and cDNA
microarray analysis to identify the TFs that were capable of binding to <U+0394>Np63
promoter or were expressed at higher levels in limbus over cornea. The TFs thus
selected were further examined for their in vivo <U+0394>Np63 promoter binding by
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. We identified six putative TFs (PAX6, EGR1, 
CEBPB, JUN, ATF3, and ARID5B) through the aforementioned approaches. Among them, 
PAX6 and EGR1 were shown to promote the transcription of <U+0394>Np63 and led to
increased cell proliferation. In contrast, CEBPB and ATF3 appeared to exert
little or no effect on <U+0394>Np63 expression, however, their silencing suppressed cell
proliferation. Although JUN exhibited low promoter-binding specificity, however, 
it affected <U+0394>Np63 expression and limbal epithelial cell proliferation in ways
similar to that of PAX6 and EGR1. Intriguingly, ARID5B was highly expressed in
the limbal epithelial cell, however, its silencing by siRNA did not obviously
affect the expression of <U+0394>Np63, nor did it reduce cell proliferation of the
limbal epithelial cell.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22806179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. FEBS Lett. 2012 Sep 21;586(19):3159-65. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.06.026. Epub 
2012 Jul 13.

H3K27 methylation and H3S28 phosphorylation-dependent transcriptional regulation 
by INHAT subunit SET/TAF-Iß.

Kim JY(1), Kim KB, Son HJ, Chae YC, Oh ST, Kim DW, Pak JH, Seo SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Sciences, Research Center for
Biomolecules and Biosystems, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 156-756, Republic of
Korea.

Significant progress has been made in understanding the relationship between
histone modifications and 'reader' molecules and their effects on transcriptional
regulation. A previously identified INHAT complex subunit, SET/TAF-Iß, binds to
histones and inhibits histone acetylation. To investigate the binding
specificities of SET/TAF-Iß to various histone modifications, we employed
modified histone tail peptide array analyses. SET/TAF-Iß strongly recognized
PRC2-mediated H3K27me1/2/3; however, the bindings were completely disrupted by
H3S28 phosphorylation. We have demonstrated that SET/TAF-Iß is sequentially
recruited to the target gene promoter ATF3 after the PRC2 complex via H3K27me
recognition and may offer additive effects in the repression of the target gene.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22796192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Pain. 2012 Sep;153(9):1939-48. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2012.06.009. Epub 2012 Jul 15.

Differential effects of calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor blockade by
olcegepant on mechanical allodynia induced by ligation of the infraorbital nerve 
vs the sciatic nerve in the rat.

Michot B(1), Bourgoin S, Viguier F, Hamon M, Kayser V.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR_S894, CPN, Neuropsychopharmacologie, Paris, France.
bemichot@yahoo.fr

Previous studies showed that 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)(1B/1D) receptor
stimulation by triptans alleviates neuropathic pain caused by chronic
constriction injury to the infraorbital nerve (CCI-ION) but not the sciatic nerve
(CCI-SN) in rats. To assess whether such differential effects in the cephalic vs 
extracephalic territories is a property shared by other antimigraine drugs, we
used the same models to investigate the effects of olcegepant, which has an
antimigraine action mediated through calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)
receptor blockade. Adult male rats underwent unilateral CCI to the ION or the SN,
and subsequent allodynia and/or hyperalgesia were assessed in ipsilateral
vibrissal territory or hindpaw, respectively, using von Frey filaments and
validated nociceptive tests. c-Fos expression was quantified by
immunohistochemistry and interleukin 6 and activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) mRNAs by real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction. Like naratriptan (0.1 to 0.3mg/kg, subcutaneously), olcegepant (0.3 to 
0.9mg/kg, intravenously) markedly reduced mechanical allodynia in CCI-ION rats.
In contrast, in CCI-SN rats, mechanical allodynia was completely unaffected and
hyperalgesia was only marginally reduced by these drugs. A supra-additive
antiallodynic effect was observed in CCI-ION rats treated with olcegepant
(0.3mg/kg intravenously) plus naratriptan (0.1mg/kg subcutaneously), whereas this
drug combination remained inactive in CCI-SN rats. Olcegepant (0.6mg/kg,
intravenously) significantly reduced the number of c-Fos immunolabeled cells in
spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve and upregulation of ATF3 transcript (a
marker of neuron injury) but not that of interleukin-6 in trigeminal ganglion of 
CCI-ION rats. These findings suggest that CGRP receptor blockade might be of
potential interest to alleviate trigeminal neuropathic pain.

Copyright © 2012 International Association for the Study of Pain. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22795918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Exp Neurobiol. 2012 Jun;21(2):68-74. doi: 10.5607/en.2012.21.2.68. Epub 2012 Apr 
23.

Neurochemical properties of dental primary afferent neurons.

Vang H(1), Chung G, Kim HY, Park SB, Jung SJ, Kim JS, Oh SB.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory for Pain, Dental Research Institute and
Department of Neurobiology and Physiology, School of Dentistry, Seoul National
University, Seoul 110-749, Korea.

The long belief that dental primary afferent (DPA) neurons are entirely composed 
of nociceptive neurons has been challenged by several anatomical and functional
investigations. In order to characterize non-nociceptivepopulation among DPA
neurons, retrograde transport fluorescent dye was placed in upper molars of rats 
and immunohistochemical detection of peripherin and neurofilament 200 in the
labeled trigeminal ganglia was performed. As the results, majority ofDPA neurons 
were peripherin-expressing small-sized neurons, showing characteristic
ofnociceptive C-fibers. However, 25.7% of DPA were stained with antibody against 
neurofilament 200, indicating significant portion of DPA neurons are related to
large myelinated Aß fibers. There were a small number of neurons thatexpressed
both peripherin and neurofilament 200, suggestive of Ad fibers. The possible
transition of neurochemical properties by neuronal injury induced by retrograde
labeling technique was ruled out by detection of minimal expression of neuronal
injury marker, ATF-3. These results suggest that in addition to the large
population of C-fiber-related nociceptive neurons, a subset of DPA neurons is
myelinated large neurons, which is related to low-threshold mechanosensitive Aß
fibers. We suggest that these Aß fiber-related neurons might play a role as
mechanotransducers of fluid movement within dentinal tubules.

PMCID: PMC3381214
PMID: 22792027  [PubMed]


363. Front Physiol. 2012 Jul 6;3:234. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2012.00234. eCollection 2012.

Pathophysiological Mechanisms of Sino-Atrial Dysfunction and Ventricular
Conduction Disease Associated with SCN5A Deficiency: Insights from Mouse Models.

Huang CL(1), Lei L, Matthews GD, Zhang Y, Lei M.

Author information: 
(1)Physiological Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge 
Cambridge, UK.

Genetically modified mice provide a number of models for studying cardiac
channelopathies related to cardiac Na(+) channel (SCN5A) abnormalities. We review
key pathophysiological features in these murine models that may underlie clinical
features observed in sinus node dysfunction and progressive cardiac conduction
disease, thereby providing insights into their pathophysiological mechanisms. We 
describe loss of Na(+) channel function and fibrotic changes associated with both
loss and gain-of-function Na(+) channel mutations. Recent reports further relate 
the progressive fibrotic changes to upregulation of TGF-ß1 production and the
transcription factors, Atf3, a stress-inducible gene, and Egr1, to the presence
of heterozygous Scn5a gene deletion. Both changes are thus directly implicated in
the clinically observed disruptions in sino-atrial node pacemaker function, and
sino-atrial and ventricular conduction, and their progression with age. Murine
systems with genetic modifications in Scn5a thus prove a useful tool to address
questions concerning roles of genetic and environmental modifiers on human SCN5A 
disease phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3390692
PMID: 22783200  [PubMed]


364. Glia. 2012 Oct;60(10):1579-89. doi: 10.1002/glia.22377. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

P53 is required for the developmental restriction in Müller glial proliferation
in mouse retina.

Ueki Y(1), Karl MO, Sudar S, Pollak J, Taylor RJ, Loeffler K, Wilken MS, Reardon 
S, Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, USA.

Müller glia are normally mitotically quiescent cells, but in certain pathological
states they can re-enter the mitotic cell cycle. While several cell cycle
regulators have been shown to be important in this process, a role for the tumor 
suppressor, p53, has not been demonstrated. Here, we investigated a role for p53 
in limiting the ability of Müller glia to proliferate in the mature mouse retina.
Our data demonstrate that Müller glia undergo a developmental restriction in
their potential to proliferate. Retinal explants or dissociated cultures treated 
with EGF become mitotically quiescent by the end of the second postnatal week. In
contrast, Müller glia from adult trp53-/+ or trp53-/- mice displayed a greater
ability to proliferate in response to EGF stimulation in vitro. The enhanced
proliferative ability of trp53 deficient mice correlates with a decreased
expression of the mitotic inhibitor Cdkn1a/p21(cip) and an increase in c-myc, a
transcription factor that promotes cell cycle progression. These data show that
p53 plays an essential role in limiting the potential of Müller glia to re-enter 
the mitotic cycle as the retina matures during postnatal development.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3422417
PMID: 22777914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Diabetes. 2012 Nov;61(11):2763-75. doi: 10.2337/db12-0123. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

Death protein 5 and p53-upregulated modulator of apoptosis mediate the
endoplasmic reticulum stress-mitochondrial dialog triggering lipotoxic rodent and
human ß-cell apoptosis.

Cunha DA(1), Igoillo-Esteve M, Gurzov EN, Germano CM, Naamane N, Marhfour I,
Fukaya M, Vanderwinden JM, Gysemans C, Mathieu C, Marselli L, Marchetti P,
Harding HP, Ron D, Eizirik DL, Cnop M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, 
Belgium.

Environmental factors such as diets rich in saturated fats contribute to
dysfunction and death of pancreatic ß-cells in diabetes. Endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress is elicited in ß-cells by saturated fatty acids. Here we show that
palmitate-induced ß-cell apoptosis is mediated by the intrinsic mitochondrial
pathway. By microarray analysis, we identified a palmitate-triggered ER stress
gene expression signature and the induction of the BH3-only proteins death
protein 5 (DP5) and p53-upregulated modulator of apoptosis (PUMA). Knockdown of
either protein reduced cytochrome c release, caspase-3 activation, and apoptosis 
in rat and human ß-cells. DP5 induction depends on inositol-requiring enzyme 1
(IRE1)-dependent c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase and PKR-like ER kinase (PERK)-induced 
activating transcription factor (ATF3) binding to its promoter. PUMA expression
is also PERK/ATF3-dependent, through tribbles 3 (TRB3)-regulated AKT inhibition
and FoxO3a activation. DP5(-/-) mice are protected from high fat diet-induced
loss of glucose tolerance and have twofold greater pancreatic ß-cell mass. This
study elucidates the crosstalk between lipotoxic ER stress and the mitochondrial 
pathway of apoptosis that causes ß-cell death in diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3478544
PMID: 22773666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Aug 15;523(2):162-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.06.069. Epub 
2012 Jul 4.

Comparison of the electrophysiological and immunohistochemical properties of
acutely dissociated and 1-day cultured rat trigeminal ganglion neurons.

Ono K(1), Xu S, Hitomi S, Inenaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Physiology, Kyushu Dental College, 2-6-1 Manazuru, Kokurakitaku,
Kitakyushu 803-8580, Japan. ono@kyu-dent.ac.jp

To clarify whether changes to the cellular properties of sensory neurons occur
after a brief culture, we compared the electrophysiological and
immunohistochemical properties of rat trigeminal ganglion neurons. We compared
these neurons after acute dissociation and after a 1-day culture under serum-free
and neurotrophin-free conditions. In whole-cell patch-clamp recordings, the 1-day
cultured neurons required a lower current threshold to induce an action potential
in both small- and medium-sized neurons. Furthermore, the input resistance was
higher in the medium-sized neurons after a 1-day culture compared to the acutely 
dissociated medium-sized neurons. Immunofluorescent studies demonstrated that
both the translocation of the activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) into the
nucleus and the expression of a low threshold Na(+) channel (Na(v)1.3) were
upregulated after 1-day of culture. However, in the acutely dissociated neurons, 
ATF3 translocation occurred at low levels, and Na(v)1.3 was not expressed. These 
electrophysiological and immunohistochemical changes after 1-day of culture were 
very similar to the reported changes that occur after nerve injury. Our study
demonstrated that injury-like characteristics appear to be manifested in the
1-day cultured sensory neurons, which do not occur in acutely dissociated
neurons. Overall, our results are relevant and will help when interpreting the
results of studies examining dissociated sensory neurons in pain research.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22771569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Mol Pain. 2012 Jul 8;8:50. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-8-50.

Dose-dependent expression of neuronal injury markers during experimental
osteoarthritis induced by monoiodoacetate in the rat.

Ferreira-Gomes J(1), Adães S, Sousa RM, Mendonça M, Castro-Lopes JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Biology, University of Porto, Alameda Prof. Hernani
Monteiro, Porto, 4200-319, Portugal. jogomes@med.up.pt

BACKGROUND: It was recently reported that the mono-iodoacetate (MIA) experimental
model of osteoarthritis (OA) courses with changes of neurons innervating the
affected joints that are commonly interpreted as a neuronal response to axonal
injury. To better characterize these changes, we evaluated the expression of two 
markers of neuronal damage, ATF-3 and NPY, and the growth associated protein
GAP-43, in primary afferent neurons of OA animals injected with three different
doses of MIA (0.3, 1 or 2<U+2009>mg). Measurements were performed at days 3, 7, 14, 21
and 31 post-MIA injection.
RESULTS: OA animals showed the characteristic histopathological changes of the
joints and the accompanying nociceptive behaviour, evaluated by the Knee-Bed and 
CatWalk tests. An increase of ATF-3 expression was detected in the DRG of OA
animals as early as 3<U+2009>days after the injection of 1 or 2<U+2009>mg of MIA and 7<U+2009>days
after the injection of 0.3<U+2009>mg. NPY expression was increased in animals injected
with 1 or 2<U+2009>mg of MIA, at day 3 or in all time-points, respectively. From day 7
onwards there was a massive increase of GAP-43 expression in ATF-3 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of the neuronal injury markers ATF-3 and NPY as well 
as an up-regulation of GAP-43 expression, indicative of peripheral fibre
regeneration, suggests that axonal injury and a regeneration response may be
happening in this model of OA. This opens new perspectives in the unravelling of 
the physiopathology of the human disease.

PMCID: PMC3495674
PMID: 22769424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Radiat Res. 2012 Sep;178(3):234-43. Epub 2012 Jul 7.

Gene expression comparisons performed for biodosimetry purposes on in vitro
peripheral blood cellular subsets and irradiated individuals.

Riecke A(1), Rufa CG, Cordes M, Hartmann J, Meineke V, Abend M.

Author information: 
(1)Bundeswehr Institute of Radiobiology, 80937 Munich, Germany.

We examined the benefit of gene expression analysis on peripheral blood cellular 
subsets of different radiosensitivity to elucidate their utility as biodosimeters
for estimation of dose in irradiated individuals. Peripheral mononucleated cells 
were isolated from 18 healthy volunteers employing density separation in a CPT-NH
tube. Peripheral mononucleated cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium containing
10% autologous serum and were irradiated with 0.1-1 Gy (240 kV, 13 mA, X rays at 
1 Gy/min). A low-dose study was performed with isolated peripheral mononucleated 
cells from one healthy donor in three independent experiments. Peripheral
mononucleated cells were irradiated at 0 (sham), 1, 2.5 and 5 cGy (70 kV, 13 mA X
rays at 1 cGy/min) and gene expression was measured 24 and 48 h after
irradiation. After irradiation, CD4(+) or CD8(+) cells were isolated by magnetic 
beads in independent experiments. RNA from lymphocyte subsets and peripheral
mononucleated cells was isolated after 24 and 48 h and converted into cDNA. Gene 
expression of GADD45, CDKN1A, DDB2, PCNA, BAX and ATF3 were determined using
RTQ-PCR. Data were analyzed employing linear and logistic regression analysis.
The same examinations were performed in 5 individuals either diagnosed using CT
scans (up to 4.3 cGy) or by administering (F-18)-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (F-18
FDG, 0.6 cGy). Methodological, intra- and inter-individual variability in 90-95% 
of measurements did not exceed the introduced twofold change over sham-irradiated
control values in peripheral mononucleated cells and CD4(+) cells, and therefore 
no false positive results were observed. Dose reconstruction in peripheral
mononucleated cells in opposite to CD4(+) lymphocytes required fewer genes and
appeared more efficient (R-square = 84.8% compared to 51.8%). In vitro samples
exposed to 10 cGy could be completely discriminated from sham-irradiated samples 
without individual pre-exposure controls, which coincided with our preliminary in
vivo results. However, in vitro differential gene expression was measured
relative to control values and did not differ significantly at 24 and 48 h after 
irradiation in contrast to our preliminary in vivo data. In addition, below 5 cGy
in vitro data did not show reproducible significant changes in gene expression,
which was opposite to our preliminary in vivo data. Therefore a twofold change in
gene expression over control sufficiently controls for different sources of
variance, and measuring gene expression in peripheral mononucleated cell for
biological dosimetry purposes appears superior over measurements in lymphocyte
subsets. The increased gene expression measured after low absorbed doses in vivo 
and in vitro might indicate a particular applicability of this method for a
low-level radiation scenario in the absence of individual pre-exposure controls. 
However, the constant gene expression values measured up to 48 h in our in vitro 
model at doses >10 cGy, and the absence of reproducible and statistically
significant gene expression changes below 5 cGy contrast to the preliminary in
vivo results performed at similar doses. Therefore, measurements with our in
vitro models should be interpreted cautiously.

PMID: 22769026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e39448. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039448. Epub 2012 Jul 2.

The response of the prostate to circulating cholesterol: activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3) as a prominent node in a cholesterol-sensing network.

Kim J(1), Di Vizio D, Kim TK, Kim J, Kim M, Pelton K, Clinton SK, Hai T, Hwang D,
Solomon KR, Freeman MR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology and Therapeutics, Departments of Surgery and
Biomedical Sciences, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA. Jayoung.Kim@cshs.org

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(8). doi:10.1371/annotation/b77e9022-f87c-4f77-9f82-9072351e3360.

Elevated circulating cholesterol is a systemic risk factor for cardiovascular
disease and metabolic syndrome, however the manner in which the normal prostate
responds to variations in cholesterol levels is poorly understood. In this study 
we addressed the molecular and cellular effects of elevated and suppressed levels
of circulating cholesterol on the normal prostate. Integrated bioinformatic
analysis was performed using DNA microarray data from two experimental formats:
(1) ventral prostate from male mice with chronically elevated circulating
cholesterol and (2) human prostate cells exposed acutely to cholesterol
depletion. A cholesterol-sensitive gene expression network was constructed from
these data and the transcription factor ATF3 was identified as a prominent node
in the network. Validation experiments confirmed that elevated cholesterol
reduced ATF3 expression and enhanced proliferation of prostate cells, while
cholesterol depletion increased ATF3 levels and inhibited proliferation.
Cholesterol reduction in vivo alleviated dense lymphomononuclear infiltrates in
the periprostatic adipose tissue, which were closely associated with nerve tracts
and blood vessels. These findings open new perspectives on the role of
cholesterol in prostate health, and provide a novel role for ATF3, and associated
proteins within a large signaling network, as a cholesterol-sensing mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3388073
PMID: 22768301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Cutan Pathol. 2012 Aug;39(8):762-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0560.2012.01938.x. Epub
2012 Jul 5.

The utility of ATF3 in distinguishing cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma among
other cutaneous epithelial neoplasms.

Rose CL(1), Chakravarti N, Curry JL, Torres-Cabala CA, Bassett R, Prieto VG,
Tetzlaff MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Section of Dermatopathology, The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The histopathologic distinction between benign and malignant cutaneous
keratinocytic proliferations can pose a difficult diagnostic challenge - often
with important clinical implications. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3)
has emerged as a potential biomarker which may aid in the segregation of these
lesions, and we hypothesize that ATF3 expression may be a specific marker of
cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Using immunohistochemistry, we
characterized ATF3 expression in a series of 126 cutaneous epithelial
proliferations, including SCC (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>27), basal cell carcinomas (BCC, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>59),
seborrheic keratoses with atypia (SK, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>16), hyperplastic actinic keratoses
(AK, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>12) and prurigo nodularis cases (PN, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>12). We showed strong, nuclear 
and/or nucleolar expression of ATF3 in a statistically significant number of
cases of SCC compared to BCC, SK and PN. We conclude that ATF3 expression is a
surrogate of malignancy (or pre-malignancy) in keratinocytic epithelial
proliferations and thus helps distinguish SCC from other cutaneous epithelial
neoplasms.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22764884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Anticancer Res. 2012 Jul;32(7):2679-88.

Enhancement of cisplatin cytotoxicity by disulfiram involves activating
transcription factor 3.

O'Brien A(1), Barber JE, Reid S, Niknejad N, Dimitroulakos J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, 501 Smyth 
Road, Box 926, Ottawa, ON, K1H 8L6, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a stress-inducible gene, is
a regulator of cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity, and enhancement of the ATF3
expression potentiates this cytotoxicity.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: ATF3 expression and its binding to the transcription
target CHOP were evaluated by western blot and chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP), respectively, in a panel of five cell lines (WI38, MCF7, PC3, A549). MTT 
assays were employed to assess the effects of many drugs, including disulfiram,
on cell viability.
RESULTS: ATF3 protein expression was up-regulated after cytotoxic doses of
cisplatin treatment and it directly bound to the CHOP gene promoter, increasing
this pro-apoptotic protein's expression. In a library screen of 1200 compounds,
disulfiram, a dithiocarbamate drug, was identified as an enhancer of the
cytotoxic effects of cisplatin. This increased cytotoxic action was synergistic
and likely due to their ability to induce ATF3 independently.
CONCLUSION: Understanding the role of ATF3 in cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity will
lead to novel therapeutic approaches that could improve this drug's efficacy.

PMID: 22753726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 31;287(36):30625-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.324228. Epub
2012 Jun 28.

Impairment of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway by methyl
N-(6-phenylsulfanyl-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl)carbamate leads to a potent cytotoxic
effect in tumor cells: a novel antiproliferative agent with a potential
therapeutic implication.

Dogra N(1), Mukhopadhyay T.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Human Genome Studies and Research, Panjab University,
Chandigarh-160014, India.

In recent years, there has been a great deal of interest in proteasome inhibitors
as a novel class of anticancer drugs. We report that fenbendazole (FZ) (methyl
N-(6-phenylsulfanyl-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl)carbamate) exhibits a potent
growth-inhibitory activity against cancer cell lines but not normal cells. We
show here, using fluorogenic substrates, that FZ treatment leads to the
inhibition of proteasomal activity in the cells.
Succinyl-Leu-Leu-Val-Tyr-methylcoumarinamide (MCA),
benzyloxycarbonyl-Leu-Leu-Glu-7-amido-4-MCA, and
t-butoxycarbonyl-Gln-Ala-Arg-7-amido-4-MCA fluorescent derivatives were used to
assess chymotrypsin-like, post-glutamyl peptidyl-hydrolyzing, and trypsin-like
protease activities, respectively. Non-small cell lung cancer cells transiently
transfected with an expression plasmid encoding pd1EGFP and treated with FZ
showed an accumulation of the green fluorescent protein in the cells due to an
increase in its half-life. A number of apoptosis regulatory proteins that are
normally degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway like cyclins, p53, and I<U+03BA>Ba
were found to be accumulated in FZ-treated cells. In addition, FZ induced
distinct ER stress-associated genes like GRP78, GADD153, ATF3, IRE1a, and NOXA in
these cells. Thus, treatment of human NSCLC cells with fenbendazole induced
endoplasmic reticulum stress, reactive oxygen species production, decreased
mitochondrial membrane potential, and cytochrome c release that eventually led to
cancer cell death. This is the first report to demonstrate the inhibition of
proteasome function and induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress/reactive oxygen
species-dependent apoptosis in human lung cancer cell lines by fenbendazole,
which may represent a new class of anticancer agents showing selective toxicity
against cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3436308
PMID: 22745125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Neuroinflammation. 2012 Jul 9;9:136. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-9-136.

Chemokine CCL2 and its receptor CCR2 in the medullary dorsal horn are involved in
trigeminal neuropathic pain.

Zhang ZJ(1), Dong YL, Lu Y, Cao S, Zhao ZQ, Gao YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nautical Medicine, Jiangsu Key laboratory of Neuroregeneration,
Nantong University, 19 Qixiu Road, Nantong, 226001, China.

BACKGROUND: Neuropathic pain in the trigeminal system is frequently observed in
clinic, but the mechanisms involved are largely unknown. In addition, the
function of immune cells and related chemicals in the mechanism of pain has been 
recognized, whereas few studies have addressed the potential role of chemokines
in the trigeminal system in chronic pain. The present study was undertaken to
test the hypothesis that chemokine C-C motif ligand 2 (CCL2)-chemokine C-C motif 
receptor 2 (CCR2) signaling in the trigeminal nucleus is involved in the
maintenance of trigeminal neuropathic pain.
METHODS: The inferior alveolar nerve and mental nerve transection (IAMNT) was
used to induce trigeminal neuropathic pain. The expression of ATF3, CCL2, glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), and CCR2 were detected by immunofluorescence
histochemical staining and western blot. The cellular localization of CCL2 and
CCR2 were examined by immunofluorescence double staining. The effect of a
selective CCR2 antagonist, RS504393 on pain hypersensitivity was checked by
behavioral testing.
RESULTS: IAMNT induced persistent (>21 days) heat hyperalgesia of the orofacial
region and ATF3 expression in the mandibular division of the trigeminal ganglion.
Meanwhile, CCL2 expression was increased in the medullary dorsal horn (MDH) from 
3 days to 21 days after IAMNT. The induced CCL2 was colocalized with astroglial
marker GFAP, but not with neuronal marker NeuN or microglial marker OX-42.
Astrocytes activation was also found in the MDH and it started at 3<U+2009>days, peaked 
at 10 days and maintained at 21 days after IAMNT. In addition, CCR2 was
upregulated by IAMNT in the ipsilateral medulla and lasted for more than 21 days.
CCR2 was mainly colocalized with NeuN and few cells were colocalized with GFAP.
Finally, intracisternal injection of CCR2 antagonist, RS504393 (1, 10 µg)
significantly attenuated IAMNT-induced heat hyperalgesia.
CONCLUSION: The data suggest that CCL2-CCR2 signaling may be involved in the
maintenance of orofacial neuropathic pain via astroglial-neuronal interaction.
Targeting CCL2-CCR2 signaling may be a potentially important new treatment
strategy for trigeminal neuralgia.

PMCID: PMC3391989
PMID: 22721162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Neuroscience. 2012 Sep 18;220:100-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.06.010.
Epub 2012 Jun 13.

Increased inflammation and brain injury after transient focal cerebral ischemia
in activating transcription factor 3 knockout mice.

Wang L(1), Deng S, Lu Y, Zhang Y, Yang L, Guan Y, Jiang H, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060,
PR China.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a
stress-induced transcription factor that has been shown to repress inflammatory
gene expression in multiple cell types and diseases. This study was conducted to 
investigate the role of ATF3 in the pathological processes of cerebral ischemia
and its influence on post-ischemic inflammation.
METHODS: Wild-type (WT) and ATF3 knockout (KO) mice were subjected to middle
cerebral artery occlusion (45 min) followed by reperfusion. Infarct volume, brain
edema, and neurological deficits were examined. Neural apoptosis, inflammatory
gene expression, cellular inflammatory response and Matrix Metallo Proteinases 9 
(MMP9) activity were assessed. Activity of the nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B)
signaling pathway and cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB) was studied.
RESULTS: Knockout of ATF3 significantly exacerbated the infarct volume and
worsened neurological function after brain ischemia. Neural apoptosis,
inflammatory gene expression and cellular inflammatory response were upregulated 
in ATF3 KO mice. The MMP9 mRNA expression and protein activity were increased in 
ATF3 KO mice. KO of ATF3 led to an elevation in the activity of the NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling pathway and inhibition of CREB activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrated that ATF3 was markedly induced by brain
ischemia. ATF3 deficiency exacerbated the inflammatory response and brain injury 
after cerebral ischemia, potentially through further activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling pathway. ATF3 is likely an important protective regulator in cerebral
ischemic injury.

Copyright © 2012 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22704967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Cell Host Microbe. 2012 Jun 14;11(6):563-75. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2012.04.012.

Amino acid starvation induced by invasive bacterial pathogens triggers an innate 
host defense program.

Tattoli I(1), Sorbara MT, Vuckovic D, Ling A, Soares F, Carneiro LA, Yang C,
Emili A, Philpott DJ, Girardin SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2012 Aug;10(8):519.

Autophagy, which targets cellular constituents for degradation, is normally
inhibited in metabolically replete cells by the metabolic checkpoint kinase mTOR.
Although autophagic degradation of invasive bacteria has emerged as a critical
host defense mechanism, the signals that induce autophagy upon bacterial
infection remain unclear. We find that infection of epithelial cells with
Shigella and Salmonella triggers acute intracellular amino acid (AA) starvation
due to host membrane damage. Pathogen-induced AA starvation caused downregulation
of mTOR activity, resulting in the induction of autophagy. In Salmonella-infected
cells, membrane integrity and cytosolic AA levels rapidly normalized, favoring
mTOR reactivation at the surface of the Salmonella-containing vacuole and
bacterial escape from autophagy. In addition, bacteria-induced AA starvation
activated the GCN2 kinase, eukaryotic initiation factor 2a, and the transcription
factor ATF3-dependent integrated stress response and transcriptional
reprogramming. Thus, AA starvation induced by bacterial pathogens is sensed by
the host to trigger protective innate immune and stress responses.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22704617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Toxicol In Vitro. 2012 Sep;26(6):775-82. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2012.05.014. Epub
2012 Jun 7.

Inhibition of GSK-3ß reverses the pro-apoptotic effect of proadifen (SKF-525A) in
HT-29 colon adenocarcinoma cells.

Jendelovský R(1), Koval J, Mike J, Papcová Z, Plíková J, Fedorocko P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology and Ecology, Department of Cellular Biology, Pavol Jozef 
afárik University in Koice, Slovakia.

Proadifen (SKF-525A) is a well-known inhibitor of cytochrome P450 monooxygenases.
Besides the prevention of drug metabolism it affects the proliferation of cancer 
cells, although the mechanisms of possible anti-cancer activity of proadifen have
not been fully understood yet. The aim of this study therefore was to evaluate
the potential anti-proliferative effect of proadifen on HT-29 colon cancer cells.
Our results show that proadifen inhibited the growth of HT-29 cells by the
accumulation of cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle, reduction of metabolic
activity and colony formation and by the induction of apoptosis. Analyses of
Western blots and flow cytometry revealed time- and dose-dependent
phosphatidylserine externalization, caspase-3 activation and PARP cleavage.
Intense upregulation of NAG-1 and ATF3 and downregulation of Mcl-1 and Egr-1 were
also observed. Further investigation showed that NAG-1 gene silencing by siRNA
had no effect on the pro-apoptotic action of proadifen. In contrast, we found
that AR-A014418, the specific inhibitor of glycogen synthase kinase-3 ß (GSK-3ß),
significantly decreased proadifen-induced apoptosis. Inactivation of GSK-3ß
(phosphorylation at serine 9) resulted in changes in phosphatidylserine
externalization and caspase-3 activation. These data suggest that GSK-3ß is an
important factor in the induction of apoptosis in HT-29 colon cancer cells
treated with proadifen.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22683934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Aug;32(16):3190-202. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00159-12. Epub 2012 Jun
4.

The stress response mediator ATF3 represses androgen signaling by binding the
androgen receptor.

Wang H(1), Jiang M, Cui H, Chen M, Buttyan R, Hayward SW, Hai T, Wang Z, Yan C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell Biology and Cancer Research, Albany Medical College, Albany,
New York, USA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a common mediator of cellular stress 
response signaling and is often aberrantly expressed in prostate cancer. We
report here that ATF3 can directly bind the androgen receptor (AR) and
consequently repress AR-mediated gene expression. The ATF3-AR interaction
requires the leucine zipper domain of ATF3 that independently binds the
DNA-binding and ligand-binding domains of AR, and the interaction prevents AR
from binding to cis-acting elements required for expression of androgen-dependent
genes while inhibiting the AR N- and C-terminal interaction. The functional
consequences of the loss of ATF3 expression include increased transcription of
androgen-dependent genes in prostate cancer cells that correlates with increased 
ability to grow in low-androgen-containing medium and increased proliferative
activity of the prostate epithelium in ATF3 knockout mice that is associated with
prostatic hyperplasia. Our results thus demonstrate that ATF3 is a novel
repressor of androgen signaling that can inhibit AR functions, allowing prostate 
cells to restore homeostasis and maintain integrity in the face of a broad
spectrum of intrinsic and environmental insults.

PMCID: PMC3434546
PMID: 22665497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Aug 1;53(3):554-63. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.05.016. Epub 2012 May 23.

Transforming growth factor ß suppresses glutamate-cysteine ligase gene expression
and induces oxidative stress in a lung fibrosis model.

Liu RM(1), Vayalil PK, Ballinger C, Dickinson DA, Huang WT, Wang S, Kavanagh TJ, 
Matthews QL, Postlethwait EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, School of Public Health,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. rliu@uab.edu

The concentration of glutathione (GSH), the most abundant intracellular free
thiol and an important antioxidant, is decreased in the lung in both fibrotic
diseases and experimental fibrosis models. The underlying mechanisms and
biological significance of GSH depletion, however, remain unclear. Transforming
growth factor ß (TGF-ß) is the most potent and ubiquitous profibrogenic cytokine 
and its expression is increased in almost all fibrotic diseases. In this study,
we show that increasing TGF-ß1 expression in mouse lung to a level comparable to 
those found in lung fibrotic diseases by intranasal instillation of
AdTGF-ß1(223/225), an adenovirus expressing constitutively active TGF-ß1,
suppressed the expression of both catalytic and modifier subunits of
glutamate-cysteine ligase (GCL), the rate-limiting enzyme in de novo GSH
synthesis, decreased GSH concentration, and increased protein and lipid
peroxidation in mouse lung. Furthermore, we show that increasing TGF-ß1
expression activated JNK and induced activating transcription factor 3, a
transcriptional repressor involved in the regulation of the catalytic subunit of 
GCL, in mouse lung. Control virus (AdDL70-3) had no significant effect on any of 
these parameters, compared to saline-treated control. Concurrent with GSH
depletion, TGF-ß1 induced lung epithelial apoptosis and robust pulmonary
fibrosis. Importantly, lung GSH levels returned to normal, whereas fibrosis
persisted at least 21 days after TGF-ß1 instillation. Together, the data suggest 
that increased TGF-ß1 expression may contribute to the GSH depletion observed in 
pulmonary fibrosis diseases and that GSH depletion may be an early event in,
rather than a consequence of, fibrosis development.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3432394
PMID: 22634145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Toxicol Lett. 2012 Jul 20;212(2):126-36. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2012.05.010. Epub 
2012 May 18.

Immunocytological and biochemical analysis of the mode of action of bis
(tri-n-butyltin) tri-oxide (TBTO) in Jurkat cells.

Katika MR(1), Hendriksen PJ, de Ruijter NC, van Loveren H, Peijnenburg A.

Author information: 
(1)RIKILT-Institute of Food Safety, Wageningen University and Research Centre,
Wageningen, The Netherlands. maddycdfd@gmail.com

Bis (tri-n-butyltin) oxide (TBTO) is one of the organotin compounds known to
induce immunosuppression. Previously, we examined the effect of TBTO on
whole-genome mRNA expression in the human T lymphocyte cell line Jurkat, which
led to the hypothesis that induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is the 
first initiated event, which induces a rise of intracellular calcium levels,
activation of NF-kB and NFAT, T cell activation response and oxidative stress
together finally resulting in apoptosis. The present study verified this
hypothesis with biochemical and cytological experiments. The induction of ER
stress was confirmed by the rapid raise in protein levels of ATF3 and DDIT3.
Moreover, the impairment of cell viability by TBTO was moderated by the ER stress
inhibitor phenyl butyric acid. Real-time fluorescence microscopy confirmed that
TBTO increases intracellular calcium levels within 2min of exposure. Furthermore,
the involvement of increased calcium levels in the effects of TBTO was evident
from the induction of three calcium-dependent events: (1) activation of the
protease activity of M-calpain, (2) induction of NF-kB (p65) expression, and (3) 
activation of NFAT. The induction of oxidative stress was verified by detection
of increased levels of reactive oxygen species and a decrease in amount of
reduced glutathione. We also showed that TBTO induces cleavage of caspase-3, an
event known to mediate apoptosis. Finally, comparative microarray data analysis
showed that many of the processes observed in vitro also occur in vivo in
thymuses of TBTO-treated mice.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22613032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Bone Miner Metab. 2012 Sep;30(5):568-79. doi: 10.1007/s00774-012-0359-z. Epub
2012 May 19.

Salubrinal promotes healing of surgical wounds in rat femurs.

Zhang P(1), Hamamura K, Jiang C, Zhao L, Yokota H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis, SL220, 723 West Michigan Street, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA.

Phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2a (eIF2a), transiently activated
by various cellular stresses, is known to alleviate stress-induced cellular
damage. Here, we addressed a question: does elevation of eIF2a phosphorylation by
salubrinal (a pharmacological inhibitor of eIF2a dephosphorylation) enhance
healing of bone wounds? We hypothesized that salubrinal would accelerate a
closure of surgically generated bone holes by modifying expression of
stress-sensitive genes. To examine this hypothesis, we employed a rat wound
model. Surgical wounds were generated on anterior and posterior femoral cortexes,
and salubrinal was locally administered on the anterior side. The results showed 
that, compared to a contralateral control, the size of surgical wounds was
reduced by 10.8 % (day 10) and 18.0 % (day 20) on the anterior side (both
p < 0.001), and 4.1 % (day 10; p < 0.05) and 11.1 % (day 20; p < 0.001) on the
posterior side. In addition, salubrinal locally elevated cortical thickness and
increased BMD and BMC. Pharmacokinetic analysis revealed that subcutaneous
injection of salubrinal transiently increased its concentration in plasma
followed by a rapid decrease within 24 h, and its half-life in plasma was 1.2 h. 
Salubrinal altered the phosphorylation level of eIF2a as well as the mRNA levels 
of ATF3, ATF4, and CHOP, and suppressed cell death induced by stress to the
endoplasmic reticulum. In summary, the results herein demonstrate that
subcutaneous administration of salubrinal accelerates healing of surgically
generated bone holes through the modulation of eIF2a phosphorylation.

PMID: 22610062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. BMC Neurosci. 2012 May 18;13:48. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-13-48.

Increasing levels of wild-type CREB up-regulates several activity-regulated
inhibitor of death (AID) genes and promotes neuronal survival.

Tan YW(1), Zhang SJ, Hoffmann T, Bading H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 364, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.

BACKGROUND: CREB (cAMP-response element binding protein) is the prototypical
signal-regulated transcription factor. In neurons, it is the target of the
synaptic activity-induced nuclear calcium-calcium/calmodulin dependent protein
kinase (CaMK) IV signaling pathway that controls the expression of genes
important for acquired neuroprotection as well as other long-lasting adaptive
processes in the nervous system. The function of CREB as a transcriptional
activator is controlled by its phosphorylation on serine 133, which can be
catalyzed by CaMKIV and leads to the recruitment of the co-activator, CREB
binding protein (CBP). Activation of CBP function by nuclear calcium-CaMKIV
signaling is a second regulatory step required for CREB/CBP-mediated
transcription.
RESULTS: Here we used recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) to increase the
levels of wild type CREB or to overexpress a mutant version of CREB (mCREB)
containing a serine to alanine mutation at position amino acid 133 in mouse
hippocampal neurons. Increasing the levels of CREB was sufficient to boost
neuroprotective activity even under basal conditions (i.e., in the absence of
stimulation of synaptic activity). In contrast, overexpression of mCREB increased
cell death. The ratio of phospho(serine 133)CREB to CREB immunoreactivity in
unstimulated hippocampal neurons was similar for endogenous CREB and
overexpressed wild type CREB and, as expected, dramatically reduced for
overexpressed mCREB. A gene expression analysis revealed that increased
expression of CREB but not that of mCREB in hippocampal neurons led to elevated
expression levels of bdnf as well as that of several members of a previously
characterized set of Activity-regulated Inhibitor of Death (AID) genes, which
include atf3, btg2, gadd45ß, and gadd45<U+03B3>.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that the expression levels of wild type CREB
are a critical determinant of the ability of hippocampal neurons to survive
harmful conditions. Increasing the levels of wild type CREB can, even without
inducing synaptic activity, increase pro-survival gene expression and strengthen 
the neurons' neuroprotective shield. The observed degradation of CREB protein
following NMDA treatment of hippocampal neurons suggests that the known CREB
shut-off associated with extrasynaptic NMDA receptor-induced excitotoxicity is
followed by CREB proteolysis.

PMCID: PMC3407521
PMID: 22607375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Neurosci. 2012 May 16;32(20):7091-101. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0403-12.2012.

Cannabinoid type-1 receptor reduces pain and neurotoxicity produced by
chemotherapy.

Khasabova IA(1), Khasabov S, Paz J, Harding-Rose C, Simone DA, Seybold VS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic and Biological Sciences, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Painful peripheral neuropathy is a dose-limiting complication of chemotherapy.
Cisplatin produces a cumulative toxic effect on peripheral nerves, and 30-40% of 
cancer patients receiving this agent experience pain. By modeling
cisplatin-induced hyperalgesia in mice with daily injections of cisplatin (1
mg/kg, i.p.) for 7 d, we investigated the anti-hyperalgesic effects of anandamide
(AEA) and cyclohexylcarbamic acid 3'-carbamoyl-biphenyl-3-yl ester (URB597), an
inhibitor of AEA hydrolysis. Cisplatin-induced mechanical and heat hyperalgesia
were accompanied by a decrease in the level of AEA in plantar paw skin. No
changes in motor activity were observed after seven injections of cisplatin.
Intraplantar injection of AEA (10 µg/10 µl) or URB597 (9 µg/10 µl) transiently
attenuated hyperalgesia through activation of peripheral CB1 receptors.
Co-injections of URB597 (0.3 mg/kg daily, i.p.) with cisplatin decreased and
delayed the development of mechanical and heat hyperalgesia. The effect of URB597
was mediated by CB1 receptors since AM281 (0.33 mg/kg daily, i.p.) blocked the
effect of URB597. Co-injection of URB597 also normalized the cisplatin-induced
decrease in conduction velocity of Aa/Aß-fibers and reduced the increase of ATF-3
and TRPV1 immunoreactivity in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons. Since DRGs are 
a primary site of toxicity by cisplatin, effects of cisplatin were studied on
cultured DRG neurons. Incubation of DRG neurons with cisplatin (4 µg/ml) for 24 h
decreased the total length of neurites. URB597 (100 nM) attenuated these changes 
through activation of CB1 receptors. Collectively, these results suggest that
pharmacological facilitation of AEA signaling is a promising strategy for
attenuating cisplatin-associated sensory neuropathy.

PMCID: PMC3366638
PMID: 22593077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Asian J Androl. 2012 Sep;14(5):766-72. doi: 10.1038/aja.2012.27. Epub 2012 May
14.

A pilot study of the association between genetic polymorphisms involved in
estrogen signaling and infant male genital phenotypes.

Sathyanarayana S(1), Swan SH, Farin FM, Wilkerson HW, Bamshad M, Grady R, Zhou C,
Schwartz SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
sheela.sathyanarayana@seattlechildrens.org

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes that influence development of the
male reproductive tract have been associated with male genitourinary
abnormalities. However, no studies have tested the relationship between SNPs and 
intermediate phenotypes such as anogenital distance (AGD), anoscrotal distance
(ASD) and penile width (PW). We tested whether 24 common SNPs in eight genes that
influence male genital development were associated with intermediate phenotypes
in 106 healthy male infants from the Study for Future Families. We used DNA from 
buccal smears and linear regression models to assess the relationship between
anogenital measurements and SNP genotypes with adjustment for covariates. We
found that the rs2077647 G allele, located in the coding region of estrogen
receptor alpha (ESR1), was associated with a shorter AGD (P=0.02; -7.3 mm, 95%
confidence interval (CI): -11.6 to -3.1), and the rs10475 T allele, located in
the 3' untranslated region of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), was
associated with a shorter ASD (-4.3 mm, 95% CI: -7.2 to -1.4), although this
result was not significant (P=0.07) after controlling for multiple comparisons.
We observed no association between PW and the SNPs tested. Minor alleles for two 
SNPs in genes that regulate estrogen signaling during male genital development
were associated with AGD and ASD, although the significance of the association
was marginal. Our findings suggest that AGD and ASD are influenced by heritable
factors in genes known to be associated with frank male genital abnormalities
such as hypospadias and cryptorchidism.

PMCID: PMC3734991
PMID: 22580635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Exp Eye Res. 2012 Jun;99:17-26. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2012.04.004. Epub 2012 Apr
21.

Activation of survival pathways in the degenerating retina of rd10 mice.

Samardzija M(1), Wariwoda H, Imsand C, Huber P, Heynen SR, Gubler A, Grimm C.

Author information: 
(1)Lab for Retinal Cell Biology, Department of Ophthalmology, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Blinding diseases of the retina are frequently characterized by loss of
photoreceptor cells. The retinal degeneration 10 (rd10) mouse expresses a mutant 
form of rod phosphodiesterase leading to autosomal recessive photoreceptor
degeneration. In contrast to rd1, rd10 mice have remaining rod function mimicking
more closely most forms of human Retinitis Pigmentosa. Here we use morphology,
biochemistry, retinal whole mounts, real-time PCR, Western blotting and
immunofluorescence to compile a comprehensive report on progression of retinal
degeneration in the rd10 retina up to one year of age. We show that retinal
development, morphology, gene expression pattern and retinal vasculature was
normal until postnatal day 15. Thereafter, a bi-phasic pattern of rod cell death 
emerged with a first rapid phase peaking around 3 weeks of age followed by a
slower second phase. Death of cone cells followed with a delay and vessel dropout
was prominent in the retinal periphery of 6 months old rd10 mice. At one year of 
age, RPE atrophy was evident. The degenerating retina rapidly induced expression 
of transcriptional regulators Atf3 and Cebpd. Induction of Atf3 was transient and
lasted only for several days at the beginning of degeneration whereas levels of
Cebpd remained elevated throughout the period of photoreceptor loss. Several
protective genes such as Lif, Edn2 and Fgf2 which are implicated in a potent
endogenous survival pathway, and Mt1 and Mt2 were strongly upregulated in the
rd10 retina. In addition, increased expression of Casp1 and Il1b suggested an
inflammatory response.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22546314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Dairy Sci. 2012 May;95(5):2562-6. doi: 10.3168/jds.2011-4806.

Short communication: Endoplasmic reticulum stress gene network expression in
bovine mammary tissue during the lactation cycle.

Invernizzi G(1), Naeem A, Loor JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian NutriPhysioGenomics, Division of Nutritional Sciences, Department of
Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) has a crucial role in cellular metabolism. Recent 
studies in nonruminants discovered that components of the ER stress pathway,
induced during the unfolded protein response, play critical roles in regulating
lipogenesis. The bovine mammary gland faces extreme metabolic stress at the onset
of lactation due primarily to the increase in flux through pathways associated
with milk fat and protein synthesis. Our objective was to study, via quantitative
real-time PCR, the expression of the ER stress pathway components P58IPK, PERK,
XBP1, ATF4, ATF3, ATF6, CHOP, MBTPS1, GRP94, and BiP in mammary tissue (n=7 cows 
× 5 time points) collected at -15, 1, 15, 60, and 240 d relative to parturition. 
Expression of P58IPK and ATF4 increased to a peak at d 60, followed by a decrease
by d 240 postpartum. Despite the decrease in expression by 240 d, P58IPK remained
higher than prepartal levels (d -15). Expression patterns of ATF3 and CHOP were
similar and peaked at d 15, followed by a decrease through d 240, at which point 
CHOP expression was still greater than prepartal levels. The sharp increase in
milk production postpartum (d 15) as well as apoptosis during late lactation (240
d) may have induced a pseudo unfolded protein response state. This is supported
by the similar expression patterns of P58IPK and PERK. In the context of
lactation, however, transcriptional changes in the ER stress pathway at different
stages of the lactation cycle are a normal aspect of the tissue's adaptation to
the changing physiological state.

Copyright © 2012 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22541483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Mol Vis. 2012;18:730-43. Epub 2012 Mar 27.

Microarray analysis of gene expression in West Nile virus-infected human retinal 
pigment epithelium.

Munoz-Erazo L(1), Natoli R, Provis JM, Madigan MC, King NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Pathology, Bosch Institute, School of Medical Sciences, Sydney
Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

PURPOSE: To identify key genes differentially expressed in the human retinal
pigment epithelium (hRPE) following low-level West Nile virus (WNV) infection.
METHODS: Primary hRPE and retinal pigment epithelium cell line (ARPE-19) cells
were infected with WNV (multiplicity of infection 1). RNA extracted from
mock-infected and WNV-infected cells was assessed for differential expression of 
genes using Affymetrix microarray. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis of 23
genes was used to validate the microarray results.
RESULTS: Functional annotation clustering of the microarray data showed that gene
clusters involved in immune and antiviral responses ranked highly, involving
genes such as chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 (CCL2), chemokine (C-C motif) ligand
5 (CCL5), chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 10 (CXCL10), and toll like receptor 3
(TLR3). In conjunction with the quantitative real-time PCR analysis, other novel 
genes regulated by WNV infection included indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO1),
genes involved in the transforming growth factor-ß pathway (bone morphogenetic
protein and activin membrane-bound inhibitor homolog [BAMBI] and activating
transcription factor 3 [ATF3]), and genes involved in apoptosis (tumor necrosis
factor receptor superfamily, member 10d [TNFRSF10D]). WNV-infected RPE did not
produce any interferon-<U+03B3>, suggesting that IDO1 is induced by other soluble
factors, by the virus alone, or both.
CONCLUSIONS: Low-level WNV infection of hRPE cells induced expression of genes
that are typically associated with the host cell response to virus infection. We 
also identified other genes, including IDO1 and BAMBI, that may influence the RPE
and therefore outer blood-retinal barrier integrity during ocular infection and
inflammation, or are associated with degeneration, as seen for example in aging.

PMCID: PMC3324360
PMID: 22509103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 1;287(23):19242-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.349936. Epub 2012
Apr 9.

Ectopic expression of human MutS homologue 2 on renal carcinoma cells is induced 
by oxidative stress with interleukin-18 promotion via p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling pathways.

Mo C(1), Dai Y, Kang N, Cui L, He W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy
of Medical Sciences and School of Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005,
China.

Human MutS homologue 2 (hMSH2), a crucial element of the highly conserved DNA
mismatch repair system, maintains genetic stability in the nucleus of normal
cells. Our previous studies indicate that hMSH2 is ectopically expressed on the
surface of epithelial tumor cells and recognized by both T cell receptor <U+03B3>d
(TCR<U+03B3>d) and natural killer group 2 member D (NKG2D) on Vd2 T cells. Ectopically
expressed hMSH2 could trigger a <U+03B3>d T cell-mediated cytolysis. In this study, we
showed that oxidative stress induced ectopic expression of hMSH2 on human renal
carcinoma cells. Under oxidative stress, both p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathways have been confirmed to
mediate the ectopic expression of hMSH2 through the apoptosis-signaling kinase 1 
(ASK1) upstream and activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) downstream of both
pathways. Moreover, renal carcinoma cell-derived interleukin (IL)-18 in oxidative
stress was a prominent stimulator for ectopically induced expression of hMSH2,
which was promoted by interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> as well. Finally, oxidative stress or
pretreatment with IL-18 and IFN-<U+03B3> enhanced <U+03B3>d T cell-mediated cytolysis of renal 
carcinoma cells. Our results not only establish a mechanism of ectopic hMSH2
expression in tumor cells but also find a biological linkage between ectopic
expression of hMSH2 and activation of <U+03B3>d T cells in stressful conditions. Because
<U+03B3>d T cells play an important role in the early stage of innate anti-tumor
response, <U+03B3>d T cell activation triggered by ectopically expressed hMSH2 may be an
important event in immunosurveillance for carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3365956
PMID: 22493490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2012 Jul;25(4):454-65. doi:
10.1111/j.1755-148X.2012.01004.x. Epub 2012 May 3.

Gene expression changes in melanoma metastases in response to high-dose
chemotherapy during isolated limb perfusion.

Wouters J(1), Stas M, Govaere O, Van den Eynde K, Vankelecom H, van den Oord JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Cell & Tissue Research, Department of Imaging and Pathology, KU 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. jasper.wouters@med.kuleuven.be

Despite recent advances in melanoma therapy, disseminated melanoma still lacks
effective treatment, and recurrence of the tumor frequently occurs, even after
high-dose chemotherapy. The mechanisms responsible for this chemoresistance or
for the formation of new relapses remain poorly understood. Using a human
'model', in which the isolated limb is perfused with high doses of the
chemotherapeutic melphalan (ILP), we identified a five-gene set (ATF3, CYR61,
IER5, IL6, and PTGS2) of stress-induced genes that was consistently upregulated
after ILP in all in-transit metastatic melanoma samples as well as in three
melphalan-treated melanoma cell lines. Early post-ILP relapses retained these
elevated expressions, whereas the expression of these genes returned to their
original levels in late post-ILP recurrences. In addition, we identified
upregulation of these genes in the A375 cell line's side population (SP) and
melanospheres, established methods to enrich for candidate cancer stem cells
(CSCs), which are considered chemoresistant and tumorigenic, and thus proposed to
be responsible for tumor relapse. Our data identify an immediate and short-term
upregulation of early stress-responsive genes that are potentially linked to
chemoresistance and CSCs.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22486811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2011 Oct;151(6):713-6.

Comparative study of the expression of ATF-3 and ATF-4 genes in vessels involved 
into atherosclerosis process and in psoriatic skin.

Sobolev VV(1), Starodubtseva NL, Piruzyan AL, Minnibaev MT, Sautin ME, Tumanov
VP, Bruskin SA.

Author information: 
(1)N. I. Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow, Russia. sobolev_vl@mail.ru

Expression of ATF-3 and ATF-4 genes was examined quantitatively by real-time PCR 
and changes in the expression of these genes in atherosclerotic lesions and in
psoriatic skin were demonstrated. It was found that concomitant pathologies do
not affect the expression of these genes. Opposite changes in the expression of
ATF-3 and ATF-4 genes in atherosclerotic and psoriatic samples were revealed and 
a hypothesis was put forward that this parameter could be a criterion of
pathological process in both diseases.

PMID: 22485215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Apr 27;421(1):38-43. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.03.104. Epub 2012 Mar 27.

ATF3 inhibits adipocyte differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells.

Jang MK(1), Kim CH, Seong JK, Jung MH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Korean Medicine, Pusan National University, #30 Beom-eo ri,
Mulguem-eup, Yangsan-si, Gyeongnam 609-735, Republic of Korea.

ATF3 is a stress-adaptive gene that regulates proliferation or apoptosis under
stress conditions. However, the role of ATF3 is unknown in adipocyte cells.
Therefore, in this study, we investigated the functional role of ATF3 in
adipocytes. Both lentivirus-mediated overexpression of ATF3 and
stably-overexpressed ATF3 inhibited adipocyte differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells, as
revealed by decreased lipid staining with oil red staining and reduction in
adipogenic genes. Thapsigargin treatment and overexpression of ATF3 decreased
C/EBPa transcript and repressed the activity of the 3.6-kb mouse C/EBPa promoter,
demonstrating that ATF3 downregulates C/EBPa expression. Transfection studies
using mutant constructs containing 5'-deletions in the C/EBPa promoter revealed
that a putative ATF/CRE element, GGATGTCA, is located between -1921 and -1914.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
demonstrated that ATF3 directly binds to mouse C/EBPa promoter spanning from
-1928 to -1907. Both chemical hypoxia-mimetics or physical hypoxia led to reduce 
the C/EBPa mRNA and repress the promoter activity of the C/EBPa gene, whereas
increase ATF3 mRNA, suggesting that ATF3 may contribute to the inhibition of
adipocyte differentiation in hypoxia through downregulation of C/EBPa expression.
Collectively, these results demonstrate that ATF3 represses the C/EBPa gene,
resulting in inhibition of adipocyte differentiation, and thus plays a role in
hypoxia-mediated inhibition of adipocyte differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22475484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Exp Med. 2012 Apr 9;209(4):807-17. doi: 10.1084/jem.20111202. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

ATF3 protects against atherosclerosis by suppressing
25-hydroxycholesterol-induced lipid body formation.

Gold ES(1), Ramsey SA, Sartain MJ, Selinummi J, Podolsky I, Rodriguez DJ, Moritz 
RL, Aderem A.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease characterized by the
accumulation of lipid-loaded macrophages in the arterial wall. We demonstrate
that macrophage lipid body formation can be induced by modified lipoproteins or
by inflammatory Toll-like receptor agonists. We used an unbiased approach to
study the overlap in these pathways to identify regulators that control foam cell
formation and atherogenesis. An analysis method integrating epigenomic and
transcriptomic datasets with a transcription factor (TF) binding site prediction 
algorithm suggested that the TF ATF3 may regulate macrophage foam cell formation.
Indeed, we found that deletion of this TF results in increased lipid body
accumulation, and that ATF3 directly regulates transcription of the gene encoding
cholesterol 25-hydroxylase. We further showed that production of
25-hydroxycholesterol (25-HC) promotes macrophage foam cell formation. Finally,
deletion of ATF3 in Apoe(-/-) mice led to in vivo increases in foam cell
formation, aortic 25-HC levels, and disease progression. These results define a
previously unknown role for ATF3 in controlling macrophage lipid metabolism and
demonstrate that ATF3 is a key intersection point for lipid metabolic and
inflammatory pathways in these cells.

PMCID: PMC3328364
PMID: 22473958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33730. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033730. Epub 2012 Mar 21.

Characterisation of a peripheral neuropathic component of the rat monoiodoacetate
model of osteoarthritis.

Thakur M(1), Rahman W, Hobbs C, Dickenson AH, Bennett DL.

Author information: 
(1)Neuropharmacology of Pain Group, Department of Neuroscience, Physiology and
Pharmacology, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
ucklmth@ucl.ac.uk

Joint degeneration observed in the rat monoiodoacetate (MIA) model of
osteoarthritis shares many histological features with the clinical condition. The
accompanying pain phenotype has seen the model widely used to investigate the
pathophysiology of osteoarthritis pain, and for preclinical screening of
analgesic compounds. We have investigated the pathophysiological sequellae of MIA
used at low (1 mg) or high (2 mg) dose. Intra-articular 2 mg MIA induced
expression of ATF-3, a sensitive marker for peripheral neuron stress/injury, in
small and large diameter DRG cell profiles principally at levels L4 and 5 (levels
predominated by neurones innervating the hindpaw) rather than L3. At the 7 day
timepoint, ATF-3 signal was significantly smaller in 1 mg MIA treated animals
than in the 2 mg treated group. 2 mg, but not 1 mg, intra-articular MIA was also 
associated with a significant reduction in intra-epidermal nerve fibre density in
plantar hindpaw skin, and produced spinal cord dorsal and ventral horn
microgliosis. The 2 mg treatment evoked mechanical pain-related hypersensitivity 
of the hindpaw that was significantly greater than the 1 mg treatment. MIA
treatment produced weight bearing asymmetry and cold hypersensitivity which was
similar at both doses. Additionally, while pregabalin significantly reduced deep 
dorsal horn evoked neuronal responses in animals treated with 2 mg MIA, this
effect was much reduced or absent in the 1 mg or sham treated groups. These data 
demonstrate that intra-articular 2 mg MIA not only produces joint degeneration,
but also evokes significant axonal injury to DRG cells including those
innervating targets outside of the knee joint such as hindpaw skin. This
significant neuropathic component needs to be taken into account when
interpreting studies using this model, particularly at doses greater than 1 mg
MIA.

PMCID: PMC3312347
PMID: 22470467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Clin Invest. 2012 May;122(5):1677-87. doi: 10.1172/JCI61248. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

Activation of ER stress and mTORC1 suppresses hepatic sortilin-1 levels in obese 
mice.

Ai D(1), Baez JM, Jiang H, Conlon DM, Hernandez-Ono A, Frank-Kamenetsky M,
Milstein S, Fitzgerald K, Murphy AJ, Woo CW, Strong A, Ginsberg HN, Tabas I,
Rader DJ, Tall AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.
da2424@columbia.edu

Recent GWAS have identified SNPs at a human chromosom1 locus associated with
coronary artery disease risk and LDL cholesterol levels. The SNPs are also
associated with altered expression of hepatic sortilin-1 (SORT1), which encodes a
protein thought to be involved in apoB trafficking and degradation. Here, we
investigated the regulation of Sort1 expression in mouse models of obesity. Sort1
expression was markedly repressed in both genetic (ob/ob) and high-fat diet
models of obesity; restoration of hepatic sortilin-1 levels resulted in reduced
triglyceride and apoB secretion. Mouse models of obesity also exhibit increased
hepatic activity of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and ER
stress, and we found that administration of the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin to ob/ob
mice reduced ER stress and increased hepatic sortilin-1 levels. Conversely,
genetically increased hepatic mTORC1 activity was associated with repressed Sort1
and increased apoB secretion. Treating WT mice with the ER stressor tunicamycin
led to marked repression of hepatic sortilin-1 expression, while administration
of the chemical chaperone PBA to ob/ob mice led to amelioration of ER stress,
increased sortilin-1 expression, and reduced apoB and triglyceride secretion.
Moreover, the ER stress target Atf3 acted at the SORT1 promoter region as a
transcriptional repressor, whereas knockdown of Atf3 mRNA in ob/ob mice led to
increased hepatic sortilin-1 levels and decreased apoB and triglyceride
secretion. Thus, in mouse models of obesity, induction of mTORC1 and ER stress
led to repression of hepatic Sort1 and increased VLDL secretion via Atf3. This
pathway may contribute to dyslipidemia in metabolic disease.

PMCID: PMC3336989
PMID: 22466652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012;2012:303019. doi: 10.1155/2012/303019.
Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Antiangiogenic Effects and Therapeutic Targets of Azadirachta indica Leaf Extract
in Endothelial Cells.

Mahapatra S(1), Young CY, Kohli M, Karnes RJ, Klee EW, Holmes MW, Tindall DJ,
Donkena KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic/Foundation, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Azadirachta indica (common name: neem) leaves have been found to possess
immunomodulatory, anti-inflammatory and anti-carcinogenic properties. The present
study evaluates anti-angiogenic potential of ethanol extract of neem leaves
(EENL) in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Treatment of HUVECs
with EENL inhibited VEGF induced angiogenic response in vitro and in vivo. The in
vitro proliferation, invasion and migration of HUVECs were suppressed with EENL. 
Nuclear fragmentation and abnormally small mitochondria with dilated cristae were
observed in EENL treated HUVECs by transmission electron microscopy. Genome-wide 
mRNA expression profiling after treatment with EENL revealed differentially
regulated genes. Expression changes of the genes were validated by quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction. Additionally, increase in the expression of 
HMOX1, ATF3 and EGR1 proteins were determined by immunoblotting. Analysis of the 
compounds in the EENL by mass spectrometry suggests the presence of nimbolide,
2',3'-dehydrosalannol, 6-desacetyl nimbinene and nimolinone. We further confirmed
antiproliferative activity of nimbolide and 2',3'-dehydrosalannol in HUVECs. Our 
results suggest that EENL by regulating the genes involved in cellular
development and cell death functions could control cell proliferation, attenuate 
the stimulatory effects of VEGF and exert antiangiogenic effects. EENL treatment 
could have a potential therapeutic role during cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3296311
PMID: 22461839  [PubMed]


395. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Apr 25;515(1):34-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.03.011. Epub
2012 Mar 14.

Expression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF 3) and caspase 3 in Schwann 
cells and axonal outgrowth after sciatic nerve repair in diabetic BB rats.

Stenberg L(1), Kanje M, Dolezal K, Dahlin LB.

Author information: 
(1)Hand Surgery/Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Skåne
University Hospital, SE-205 02 Malmö, Sweden. Lena.Stenberg@med.lu.se

The aim of this study was to evaluate nerve regeneration in relation to the
transcription factor, Activating Transcription Factor 3 (ATF 3), and an apoptotic
marker, caspase 3, in the Schwann cells of diabetic BB rats (i.e. display type 1 
diabetes phenotype). Sciatic nerves in healthy Wistar rats and in diabetic BB
rats were transected and immediately repaired. Axonal outgrowth (neurofilament
staining) and expression of ATF 3 and caspase 3 were quantified by
immunohistochemistry after six days. There was no difference in axonal outgrowth 
between healthy and diabetic rats. However, the sciatic nerve in the diabetic
rats exhibited a larger number of ATF 3 expressing Schwann cells at the site of
the lesion and also a higher number of caspase 3 expressing Schwann cells.
Similar differences were observed in the distal nerve segment between the healthy
and diabetic rats. There were no correlations between the number of Schwann cells
expressing ATF 3 and caspase 3. Thus, diabetic BB rats display an increased
activation of ATF 3 and also a rise in apoptotic caspase 3 expressing Schwann
cells, but with no discrepancy in length of axonal outgrowth after nerve injury
and repair at six days. Knowledge about signal transduction mechanisms in
diabetes after stress may provide new insights into the development of diabetic
neuropathy and neuropathic pain.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22446192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 May;26(5):873-86. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1045. Epub 2012 Mar
22.

GnRH regulation of Jun and Atf3 requires calcium, calcineurin, and NFAT.

Binder AK(1), Grammer JC, Herndon MK, Stanton JD, Nilson JH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington 99164-7520, USA.

GnRH binds to its receptor on gonadotropes and activates multiple members of the 
MAPK signaling family that in turn regulates the expression of several immediate 
early genes (IEGs) including Jun, Fos, Atf3, and Egr1. These IEGs confer hormonal
responsiveness to gonadotrope-specific genes including Gnrhr, Cga, Fshb, and Lhb.
In this study we tested the hypothesis that GnRH specifically regulates the
accumulation of Jun and Atf3 mRNA through a pathway that includes intracellular
Ca²<U+207A>, calcineurin, and nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT). Our results
indicate that pretreatment of murine LßT2 cells with 1,
2-bis-(o-aminophenoxy)-ethane-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic acid
tetra(acetoxymethyl)-ester, a Ca²<U+207A> chelator, reduced the expression of all the
IEGs to varying degrees, whereas treatment with thapsigargin, an intracellular
Ca²<U+207A> protein pump inhibitor, increased the expression of the IEG. Furthermore,
cyclosporin A, a calcineurin-specific inhibitor, reduced the ability of GnRH to
regulate accumulation of Jun and Atf3 mRNA and to a lesser extent Fos. In
contrast, Egr1 mRNA was unaffected. NFATs are transcription factors regulated by 
calcineurin and were detected in LßT2 cells. GnRH increased luciferase activity
of an NFAT-dependent promoter reporter that was dependent on intracellular Ca²<U+207A>
and calcineurin activity. Additionally, although small interfering RNA specific
for Nfat4 only marginally reduced GnRH regulation of Jun, Fos, and Atf3 mRNA
accumulation, activity of an activator protein-1-responsive reporter construct
was reduced by 48%. Together these data suggest that calcineurin and NFAT are new
members of the gonadotrope transcriptional network that confer hormonal
responsiveness to several key genes required for gonadotropin synthesis and
secretion.

PMCID: PMC3355553
PMID: 22446101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Toxicol In Vitro. 2012 Aug;26(5):663-71. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2012.03.005. Epub
2012 Mar 16.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress mediates aristolochic acid I-induced apoptosis in
human renal proximal tubular epithelial cells.

Zhu S(1), Wang Y, Jin J, Guan C, Li M, Xi C, Ouyang Z, Chen M, Qiu Y, Huang M,
Huang Z.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006,
PR China.

Aristolochic acid (AA), derived from the Aristolochia species, has been
associated with aristolochic acid nephropathy (AAN), which has emerged as a
worldwide disease. Aristolochic acid I (AAI) is the main ingredient of AA, and
the underlying mechanisms for AAI-induced nephrotoxicity are still unclear. In
this study, we investigated whether endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress was
involved in AAI-induced nephrotoxicity. The results showed that treatment of HK-2
cells (a human proximal tubular epithelial cell line) with AAI caused an increase
in eukaryotic initiation factor-2a (eIF2a) phosphorylation, X-box binding protein
1 (XBP1) mRNA splicing and the expression of glucose-regulated protein (GRP) 78
and CAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein (CHOP). These events
represent typical markers of the ER stress-related signaling pathway.
Pretreatment with 4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA) or salubrinal (Sal) significantly
inhibited AAI-induced apoptosis, indicating the role of ER stress in AAI-induced 
apoptosis. In addition, AAI-induced cell death followed an increase of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) formation in HK-2 cells. Pretreatment with N-acetyl cysteine
(NAC) or glutathione (GSH) significantly inhibited AAI-induced ER stress proteins
and cell death, suggesting that ROS mediate AAI-induced ER stress. Taken
together, these results suggest that the ER stress response is involved in
apoptosis induced by AAI in HK-2 cells, thus offering a new insight into the
nephrotoxicity of AAI.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22445861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Cell Transplant. 2012;21(9):2063-78. doi: 10.3727/096368911X627372. Epub 2012 Mar
8.

Human islets express a marked proinflammatory molecular signature prior to
transplantation.

Cowley MJ(1), Weinberg A, Zammit NW, Walters SN, Hawthorne WJ, Loudovaris T,
Thomas H, Kay T, Gunton JE, Alexander SI, Kaplan W, Chapman J, O'Connell PJ, Grey
ST.

Author information: 
(1)Peter Wills Bioinformatics Centre, Darlinghurst, Australia.

In the context of islet transplantation, experimental models show that induction 
of islet intrinsic NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent proinflammatory genes can contribute to islet 
graft rejection. Isolation of human islets triggers activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B and
mitogen-activated kinase (MAPK) stress response pathways. However, the downstream
NF-<U+03BA>B target genes induced in human islets during the isolation process are
poorly described. Therefore, in this study, using microarray, bioinformatic, and 
RTqPCR approaches, we determined the pattern of genes expressed by a set of 14
human islet preparations. We found that isolated human islets express a panel of 
genes reminiscent of cells undergoing a marked NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent proinflammatory
response. Expressed genes included matrix metallopeptidase 1 (MMP1) and
fibronectin 1 (FN1), factors involved in tissue remodeling, adhesion, and cell
migration; inflammatory cytokines IL-1ß and IL-8; genes regulating cell survival 
including A20 and ATF3; and notably high expression of a set of chemokines that
would favor neutrophil and monocyte recruitment including CXCL2, CCL2, CXCL12,
CXCL1, CXCL6, and CCL28. Of note, the inflammatory profile of isolated human
islets was maintained after transplantation into RAG(-/-) recipients. Thus, human
islets can provide a reservoir of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent inflammatory factors that have 
the potential to contribute to the anti-islet-graft immune response. To test this
hypothesis, we extracted rodent islets under optimal conditions, forced
activation of NF-<U+03BA>B, and transplanted them into allogenic recipients. These NF-<U+03BA>B
activated islets not only expressed the same chemokine profile observed in human 
islets but also struggled to maintain normoglycemia posttransplantation. Further,
NF-<U+03BA>B-activated islets were rejected with a faster tempo as compared to
non-NF-<U+03BA>B-activated rodent islets. Thus, isolated human islets can make cell
autonomous contributions to the ensuing allograft response by elaborating
inflammatory factors that contribute to their own demise. These data highlight
the potential importance of islet intrinsic proinflammatory responses as targets 
for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 22404979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Exp Neurol. 2012 May;235(1):316-25. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.02.013. Epub
2012 Feb 28.

P2X3-mediated peripheral sensitization of neuropathic pain in
resiniferatoxin-induced neuropathy.

Hsieh YL(1), Chiang H, Lue JH, Hsieh ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei 10051, Taiwan.

Patients suffering from sensory neuropathy due to skin denervation frequently
have paradoxical manifestations of reduced nociception and neuropathic pain.
However, there is a lack of satisfactory animal models to investigate these
phenomena and underlying mechanisms. We developed a mouse system of neuropathy
induced by resiniferatoxin (RTX), a capsaicin analog, and examined the functional
significance of P2X3 receptor in neuropathic pain. From day 7 of RTX neuropathy, 
mice displayed mechanical allodynia (p<0.0001) and thermal hypoalgesia
(p<0.0001). After RTX treatment, dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons of the
peripherin type were depleted (p=0.012), while neurofilament (+) DRG neurons were
not affected (p=0.62). In addition, RTX caused a shift in neuronal profiles of
DRG: (1) increased in P2X3 receptor (p=0.0002) and ATF3 (p=0.0006) but (2)
reduced TRPV1 (p=0.036) and CGRP (p=0.015). The number of P2X3(+)/ATF3(+) neurons
was linearly correlated with mechanical thresholds (p=0.0017). The peripheral
expression of P2X3 receptor in dermal nerves was accordingly increased (p=0.016),
and an intraplantar injection of the P2X3 antagonists, A-317491 and TNP-ATP,
relieved mechanical allodynia in a dose-dependent manner. In conclusion,
RTX-induced sensory neuropathy with upregulation of P2X3 receptor for peripheral 
sensitization of mechanical allodynia, which provides a new therapeutic target
for neuropathic pain after skin denervation.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22391132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Biochem J. 2012 Jun 1;444(2):343-55. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120125.

Feedback regulation by Atf3 in the endothelin-1-responsive transcriptome of
cardiomyocytes: Egr1 is a principal Atf3 target.

Giraldo A(1), Barrett OP, Tindall MJ, Fuller SJ, Amirak E, Bhattacharya BS,
Sugden PH, Clerk A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research, School of Biological
Sciences, University of Reading, Whiteknights, UK.

Endothelin-1 promotes cardiomyocyte hypertrophy by inducing changes in gene
expression. Immediate early genes including Atf3 (activating transcription factor
3), Egr1 (early growth response 1) and Ptgs2 (prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase
2) are rapidly and transiently up-regulated by endothelin-1 in cardiomyocytes.
Atf3 regulates the expression of downstream genes and is implicated in negative
feedback regulation of other immediate early genes. To identify Atf3-regulated
genes, we knocked down Atf3 expression in cardiomyocytes exposed to endothelin-1 
and used microarrays to interrogate the transcriptomic effects. The expression of
23 mRNAs (including Egr1 and Ptgs2) was enhanced and the expression of 25 mRNAs
was inhibited by Atf3 knockdown. Using quantitative PCR, we determined that
knockdown of Atf3 had little effect on up-regulation of Egr1 mRNA over 30 min,
but abolished the subsequent decline, causing sustained Egr1 mRNA expression and 
enhanced protein expression. This resulted from direct binding of Atf3 to the
Egr1 promoter. Mathematical modelling established that Atf3 can suffice to
suppress Egr1 expression. Given the widespread co-regulation of Atf3 with Egr1,
we suggest that the Atf3-Egr1 negative feedback loop is of general significance. 
Loss of Atf3 caused abnormal cardiomyocyte growth, presumably resulting from the 
dysregulation of target genes. The results of the present study therefore
identify Atf3 as a nexus in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy required to facilitate the 
full and proper growth response.

PMCID: PMC3365354
PMID: 22390138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Nov;227(11):3678-92. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24076.

Nanog regulates molecules involved in stemness and cell cycle-signaling pathway
for maintenance of pluripotency of P19 embryonal carcinoma stem cells.

Choi SC(1), Choi JH, Park CY, Ahn CM, Hong SJ, Lim DS.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Center, Department of Cardiology, Korea University Anam
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

To identify potential downstream targets of Nanog, a key transcription factor in 
the maintenance of pluripotency of embryonic stem (ES) and embryonal carcinoma
(EC) cells, global gene expression profiles in Nanog small interfering RNA
(siRNA)-transfected P19 EC stem cells were performed using cDNA, 60-mer, and
30-mer microarray platforms. The putative Nanog target genes identified by Nanog 
silencing were verified using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
after Nanog overexpression. Downregulation of Nanog in P19 cells resulted in
reduction of pluripotency markers, such as Fgf4, Klf2, Mtf2, Oct-4, Rex1, Sox1,
Yes, and Zfp143, whereas overexpression of Nanog in P19 cells reversely
upregulated their expression. However, expressions of pluripotency markers
Cripto, germ cell nuclear factor, Sox2, and Zfp57 as well as leukemia inhibitory 
factor (LIF)/Stat3 pathway molecules LIF, IL6st, and Stat3 were not affected
after 48 h transfection with Nanog siRNA or construct. Nanog silencing also
downregulated expression of molecules involved in the p53- and cell
cycle-signaling pathway (Atf3, Jdp2, Cul3, Hist1hic, and Bcl6), whereas
expression of E2f1, Tob1, Lyn, and Smarcc1 was upregulated by Nanog silencing.
Expressions of cyclins D1, D2, D3, and E1 as well as cyclin-dependent kinase
(Cdk) 1 and Cdk6 were downregulated by Nanog silencing in P19 cells, whereas
Nanog overexpression reversely increased their expressions. Taken together,
examination of global transcriptional changes after Nanog silencing followed by
verification by Nanog overexpression has revealed new molecules involved in the
maintenance of self-renewal and in the regulation of the p53- and cell
cycle-pathway of P19 cells.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22378194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Hum Reprod Update. 2012 May-Jun;18(3):260-83. doi: 10.1093/humupd/dms002. Epub
2012 Feb 26.

Aetiology of hypospadias: a systematic review of genes and environment.

van der Zanden LF(1), van Rooij IA, Feitz WF, Franke B, Knoers NV, Roeleveld N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and HTA, Radboud University Nijmegen
Medical Centre, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. l.vanderzanden@ebh.umcn.nl

BACKGROUND: Hypospadias is a common congenital malformation of the male external 
genitalia. Most cases have an unknown aetiology, which is probably a mix of
monogenic and multifactorial forms, implicating both genes and environmental
factors. This review summarizes current knowledge about the aetiology of
hypospadias.
METHODS: Pubmed was used to identify studies on hypospadias aetiology published
between January 1995 and February 2011. Reference lists of the selected
manuscripts were also searched to identify additional studies, including those
published before 1995.
RESULTS: The search provided 922 articles and 169 articles were selected for this
review. Studies screening groups of patients with hypospadias for single gene
defects found mutations in WT1, SF1, BMP4, BMP7, HOXA4, HOXB6, FGF8, FGFR2, AR,
HSD3B2, SRD5A2, ATF3, MAMLD1, MID1 and BNC2. However, most investigators are
convinced that single mutations do not cause the majority of isolated hypospadias
cases. Indeed, associations were found with polymorphisms in FGF8, FGFR2, AR,
HSD17B3, SRD5A2, ESR1, ESR2, ATF3, MAMLD1, DGKK, MID1, CYP1A1, GSTM1 and GSTT1.
In addition, gene expression studies indentified CTGF, CYR61 and EGF as candidate
genes. Environmental factors consistently implicated in hypospadias are low
birthweight, maternal hypertension and pre-eclampsia, suggesting that placental
insufficiency may play an important role in hypospadias aetiology. Exogenous
endocrine-disrupting chemicals have the potential to induce hypospadias but it is
unclear whether human exposure is high enough to exert this effect. Other
environmental factors have also been associated with hypospadias but, for most,
the results are inconsistent.
CONCLUSIONS: Although a number of contributors to the aetiology of hypospadias
have been identified, the majority of risk factors remain unknown.

PMID: 22371315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2012 Oct 1;37(21):1810-8.

ISSLS prize winner: disc dynamic compression in rats produces long-lasting
increases in inflammatory mediators in discs and induces long-lasting nerve
injury and regeneration of the afferent fibers innervating discs: a
pathomechanism for chronic discogenic low back pain.

Miyagi M(1), Ishikawa T, Kamoda H, Suzuki M, Murakami K, Shibayama M, Orita S,
Eguchi Y, Arai G, Sakuma Y, Kubota G, Oikawa Y, Ozawa T, Aoki Y, Toyone T,
Takahashi K, Inoue G, Kawakami M, Ohtori S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan. masayuki008@aol.com

STUDY DESIGN: Animal model of intravertebral disc (IVD) degeneration.
OBJECTIVE: To examine production of inflammatory mediators in IVDs and
neuropeptides in dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) in rat models of IVD compression and 
injury.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Sensory nerve fibers in IVDs and inflammatory
mediator responses have been verified in animal models of IVD injury. However,
the IVD injury in animals incompletely models degenerated human IVDs causing
discogenic low back pain, because human IVDs are also subject to compression.
METHODS: Experimental groups (controls, IVD injury, IVD compression, and their
combination) of Sprague Dawley rats were prepared. Fluoro-Gold (FG; Fluorochrome,
Denver, CO) was applied into coccygeal IVDs. Inflammatory mediators in IVDs,
including nerve growth factor, tumor necrosis factor a, interleukin 1ß, and
interleukin 6, were quantified using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. DRGs
were immunostained for calcitonin gene-related peptide, activating transcription 
factor 3, and growth-associated phosphoprotein 43.
RESULTS: The upregulation of inflammatory mediators was transient in the IVD
injury group but delayed and long-lasting in the IVD compression group. When the 
IVD injury and compression were combined, the upregulation of inflammatory
mediators was long-lasting through 8 weeks. The proportion of calcitonin
gene-related peptide-immunoreactive neurons among Fluoro-Gold-labeled neurons
remained significantly higher in the IVD injury, compression, and combination
groups than in the controls. In contrast, increases in the proportions of
activating transcription factor 3-immunoreactive or growth-associated
phosphoprotein 43-immunoreactive neurons in the IVD injury group animals were
transient but long-lasting in the compression and combination groups compared
with controls.
CONCLUSION: Disc injury in rats produces persistent increases in neuropeptides in
DRGs but only transient increases in inflammatory mediators in IVDs. On the
contrary, disc compression in rats produces a long-lasting increase in
inflammatory mediators in IVDs and neuropeptides in DRGs. Moreover, disc
compression induces persistent nerve injury and regeneration of the afferent
fibers innervating IVDs.

PMID: 22366969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Front Mol Neurosci. 2012 Feb 10;5:8. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2012.00008. eCollection
2012.

Role of transcription factors in peripheral nerve regeneration.

Patodia S(1), Raivich G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Perinatal Brain Protection and Repair, University College London
London, UK.

Following axotomy, the activation of multiple intracellular signaling cascades
causes the expression of a cocktail of regeneration-associated transcription
factors which interact with each other to determine the fate of the injured
neurons. The nerve injury response is channeled through manifold and parallel
pathways, integrating diverse inputs, and controlling a complex transcriptional
output. Transcription factors form a vital link in the chain of regeneration,
converting injury-induced stress signals into downstream protein expression via
gene regulation. They can regulate the intrinsic ability of axons to grow, by
controlling expression of whole cassettes of gene targets. In this review, we
have investigated the functional roles of a number of different transcription
factors - c-Jun, activating transcription factor 3, cAMP response element binding
protein, signal transducer, and activator of transcription-3, CCAAT/enhancer
binding proteins ß and d, Oct-6, Sox11, p53, nuclear factor
kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cell, and ELK3 - in peripheral nerve
regeneration. Studies involving use of conditional mutants, microarrays, promoter
region mapping, and different injury paradigms, have enabled us to understand
their distinct as well as overlapping roles in achieving anatomical and
functional regeneration after peripheral nerve injury.

PMCID: PMC3277281
PMID: 22363260  [PubMed]


405. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Apr 1;18(7):1979-91. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-2113.
Epub 2012 Feb 20.

ON 01910.Na is selectively cytotoxic for chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells
through a dual mechanism of action involving PI3K/AKT inhibition and induction of
oxidative stress.

Chapman CM(1), Sun X, Roschewski M, Aue G, Farooqui M, Stennett L, Gibellini F,
Arthur D, Pérez-Galán P, Wiestner A.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Branch, NHLBI, NIH, Bld 10, CRC 3-5140, 10 Center Drive, 20892-1202
Bethesda, MD, USA.

PURPOSE: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), a malignancy of mature B cells, is
incurable with chemotherapy. Signals from the microenvironment support leukemic
cell survival and proliferation and may confer chemotherapy resistance. ON
01910.Na (Rigosertib), a multikinase phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor, 
is entering phase III trials for myelodysplastic syndrome. Our aim was to analyze
the efficacy of ON 01910.Na against CLL cells in vitro and investigate the
molecular effects of this drug on tumor biology.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Cytotoxicity of ON 01910.Na against CLL cells from 34
patients was determined in vitro with flow cytometry of cells stained with
Annexin V and CD19. Global gene expression profiling on Affymetrix microarrays,
flow cytometry, Western blotting, and cocultures with stroma cells were used to
delineate ON 01910.Na mechanism of action.
RESULTS: ON 01910.Na induced apoptosis in CLL B cells without significant
toxicity against T cells or normal B cells. ON 01910.Na was equally active
against leukemic cells associated with a more aggressive disease course
[immunoglobulin heavy-chain variable region unmutated, adverse cytogenetics] than
against cells without these features. Gene expression profiling revealed two main
mechanisms of action: PI3K/AKT inhibition and induction of ROS that resulted in
an oxidative stress response through activating protein 1 (AP-1),
c-jun-NH(2)-terminal kinase, and ATF3 culminating in the upregulation of NOXA.
ROS scavengers and shRNA mediated knockdown of ATF3- and NOXA-protected cells
from drug-induced apoptosis. ON 01910.Na also abrogated the prosurvival effect of
follicular dendritic cells on CLL cells and reduced SDF-1-induced migration of
leukemic cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These data support the clinical development of ON 01910.Na in CLL.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3321371
PMID: 22351695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Front Mol Neurosci. 2012 Feb 14;5:7. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2012.00007. eCollection
2012.

Activating transcription factor 3 and the nervous system.

Hunt D(1), Raivich G, Anderson PN.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Education Centre, Newham University Hospital London, UK.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) belongs to the ATF/cyclic AMP responsive
element binding family of transcription factors and is often described as an
adaptive response gene whose activity is usually regulated by stressful stimuli. 
Although expressed in a number of splice variants and generally recognized as a
transcriptional repressor, ATF3 has the ability to interact with a number of
other transcription factors including c-Jun to form complexes which not only
repress, but can also activate various genes. ATF3 expression is modulated mainly
at the transcriptional level and has markedly different effects in different
types of cell. The levels of ATF3 mRNA and protein are normally very low in
neurons and glia but their expression is rapidly upregulated in response to
injury. ATF3 expression in neurons is closely linked to their survival and the
regeneration of their axons following axotomy, and that in peripheral nerves
correlates with the generation of a Schwann cell phenotype that is conducive to
axonal regeneration. ATF3 is also induced by Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands but
acts as a negative regulator of TLR signaling, suppressing the innate immune
response which is involved in immuno-surveillance and can enhance or reduce the
survival of injured neurons and promote the regeneration of their axons.

PMCID: PMC3278981
PMID: 22347845  [PubMed]


407. Glia. 2012 May;60(5):782-93. doi: 10.1002/glia.22308. Epub 2012 Feb 16.

Involvement of activated microglia in increased vulnerability of motoneurons
after facial nerve avulsion in presymptomatic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis model
rats.

Sanagi T(1), Nakamura Y, Suzuki E, Uchino S, Aoki M, Warita H, Itoyama Y, Kohsaka
S, Ohsawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, National Institute of Neuroscience, Kodaira,
Japan.

Activated microglia are observed in various neurodegenerative diseases and are
thought to be involved in the processes of neuronal cell death. Motoneuron damage
in the facial nuclei after facial nerve avulsion is accelerated in presymptomatic
transgenic rats expressing human mutant Cu(2+) /Zn(2+) superoxide dismutase 1
(SOD1), compared with that in wild-type rats. To reveal the functional role of
microglia in motoneuronal death, we investigated the microglial response after
facial nerve avulsion in presymptomatic mutant SOD1(H46R) (mSOD1(H46R) ) rats. At
3 days after avulsion, microglial clusters were observed in the facial nuclei of 
both wild-type and mSOD1(H46R) rats. The numbers of microglial clusters,
proliferating microglia, and microglial attachments to motoneurons were
significantly higher in mSOD1(H46R) rats, compared with those in wild-type rats. 
Immunopositive signals for the phagocytic marker ED1 were significantly stronger 
in mSOD1(H46R) rats, compared with that in wild-type rats, at 2 weeks after
avulsion. Furthermore, primary microglia prepared from mSOD1(H46R) rats showed
enhanced phagocytic activity, compared with that in wild-type rats. The
expression of P2Y(12) mRNA was higher in the facial nuclei of mSOD1(H46R) rats,
compared with that in wild-type rats. A laser microdissection system revealed
that the expression of ATF3 mRNA was higher in the motoneurons of mSOD1(H46R)
rats, compared with that in wild-type rats, at 2 days after avulsion. These
results indicate that microglial activation in response to early neuronal damage 
increased in mSOD1(H46R) rats and suggest that the enhanced activation of
microglia may lead to an increase in the vulnerability of motoneurons after
avulsion in mSOD1(H46R) rats.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22344792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2012 Feb 2;9(1):6. doi: 10.1186/1743-8977-9-6.

Differences in gene expression and cytokine production by crystalline vs.
amorphous silica in human lung epithelial cells.

Perkins TN(1), Shukla A, Peeters PM, Steinbacher JL, Landry CC, Lathrop SA,
Steele C, Reynaert NL, Wouters EF, Mossman BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont College of Medicine, 89
Beaumont Avenue, Burlington, VT 05405, USA.

BACKGROUND: Exposure to respirable crystalline silica particles, as opposed to
amorphous silica, is associated with lung inflammation, pulmonary fibrosis
(silicosis), and potentially with lung cancer. We used Affymetrix/GeneSifter
microarray analysis to determine whether gene expression profiles differed in a
human bronchial epithelial cell line (BEAS 2B) exposed to cristobalite vs.
amorphous silica particles at non-toxic and equal surface areas (75 and 150 ×
106µm2/cm2). Bio-Plex analysis was also used to determine profiles of secreted
cytokines and chemokines in response to both particles. Finally, primary human
bronchial epithelial cells (NHBE) were used to comparatively assess silica
particle-induced alterations in gene expression.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis at 24 hours in BEAS 2B revealed 333 and 631
significant alterations in gene expression induced by cristobalite at low (75)
and high (150 × 106µm2/cm2) amounts, respectively (p < 0.05/cut off = 2.0-fold
change). Exposure to amorphous silica micro-particles at high amounts (150 ×
106µm2/cm2) induced 108 significant gene changes. Bio-Plex analysis of 27 human
cytokines and chemokines revealed 9 secreted mediators (p < 0.05) induced by
crystalline silica, but none were induced by amorphous silica. QRT-PCR revealed
that cristobalite selectively up-regulated stress-related genes and cytokines
(FOS, ATF3, IL6 and IL8) early and over time (2, 4, 8, and 24 h). Patterns of
gene expression in NHBE cells were similar overall to BEAS 2B cells. At 75 ×
106µm2/cm2, there were 339 significant alterations in gene expression induced by 
cristobalite and 42 by amorphous silica. Comparison of genes in response to
cristobalite (75 × 106µm2/cm2) revealed 60 common, significant gene alterations
in NHBE and BEAS 2B cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Cristobalite silica, as compared to synthetic amorphous silica
particles at equal surface area concentrations, had comparable effects on the
viability of human bronchial epithelial cells. However, effects on gene
expression, as well as secretion of cytokines and chemokines, drastically
differed, as the crystalline silica induced more intense responses. Our studies
indicate that toxicological testing of particulates by surveying viability and/or
metabolic activity is insufficient to predict their pathogenicity. Moreover, they
show that acute responses of the lung epithelium, including up-regulation of
genes linked to inflammation, oxidative stress, and proliferation, as well as
secretion of inflammatory and proliferative mediators, can be indicative of
pathologic potential using either immortalized lines (BEAS 2B) or primary cells
(NHBE). Assessment of the degree and magnitude of these responses in vitro are
suggested as predictive in determining the pathogenicity of potentially harmful
particulates.

PMCID: PMC3337246
PMID: 22300531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. BJU Int. 2012 May;109(10):1552-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2011.10705.x. Epub
2012 Feb 2.

Whole genome microarray of the major pelvic ganglion after cavernous nerve
injury: new insights into molecular profile changes after nerve injury.

Calenda G(1), Strong TD, Pavlovich CP, Schaeffer EM, Burnett AL, Yu W, Davies KP,
Bivalacqua TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.

What's known on the subject? and What does the study add? With the present study,
we aimed to provide a global picture of the molecular processes that are
activated by CN injury. The present study used genomic expression profiling to
identify candidate genes that might be useful targets in the CN recovery process 
and, thus, the ultimate preservation of penile erection. Regeneration of the CN
and axonal outgrowth clearly involve changes in multiple biochemical pathways
that have never been investigated by microarray analysis. We analyzed global gene
expression in the major pelvic ganglion at early stages (48 h and 14 days) after 
CN injury and focused on the detection of changes in genes related to nervous
tissue repair and proliferation. The findings of the present study provide
important insight into the molecular systems affected by CN injury and identify
candidate genes that may be utilized for novel molecular-based therapies for the 
preservation and protection of the CN during RP.OBJECTIVES: To to examine the
complexity of the many molecular systems involved in supporting cavernous nerve
(CN) repair and regeneration in a rat model of bilateral crush injury utilizing a
microarray analysis approach. Erectile dysfunction (ED) is a common clinical
complication after prostate cancer treatment by radical prostatectomy, and
recovery of erectile function can take as long as 2 years. There are gaps in our 
understanding of the autonomic pelvic innervation of the penis that still need to
be addressed for the development of an adequate treatment strategy for
post-prostatectomy ED. The molecular mechanisms of the intrinsic ability of CN to
regenerate after an injury have not been elucidated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed global gene expression in the major pelvic
ganglion 48 h and 14 days after CN injury. Overall, a comparative analysis showed
that 325 genes changed at the 48-h time point and 114 genes changed at 14 days.
There were 60 changed genes in common with both time points. Using the Ingenuity 
Pathway Analysis® system (Ingenuity Systems, Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA), we
were able to analyze the significantly changed genes that were unique and common 
to each time point by biological function. We focused on the detection of changes
related to nervous tissue repair and proliferation, molecular networks of
neurotrophic factors, stem cell regulation and synaptic transmission.
RESULTS: There was strong evidence of the early mobilization of genes involved in
repair and neuroprotection mechanisms (SERPINF1, IGF1, PLAU/PLAUR, ARG1). Genes
related to nervous system development (ATF3 GJA1, PLAU, SERPINE1), nerve
regeneration (SERPINE2, IGF1, ATF3, ARG1) and synaptic transmission (GJC1, GAL)
were changed. Several genes related to proliferation as well as apoptosis (A2M,
ATF3, C3, EGR4, FN1, GJA1, GAL) were also changed, possibly as part of a
protective mechanism or the initiation of remodelling.
CONCLUSIONS: The results obtained show that multiple biological processes are
associated with injury and repair of the CN and provide a systematic genome-wide 
screen for neurotrophic and/or inhibitory pathways of nerve regeneration. These
data identify the candidate genes that may be utilized in novel molecular-based
therapies for the preservation and protection of the CN during radical
prostatectomy.

© 2012 THE AUTHORS. BJU INTERNATIONAL © 2012 BJU INTERNATIONAL.

PMID: 22300381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Anesthesiology. 2012 Mar;116(3):692-700. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e318246ea68.

Molecular changes induced in rat liver by hemorrhage and effects of melanocortin 
treatment.

Lonati C(1), Sordi A, Giuliani D, Spaccapelo L, Leonardi P, Carlin A, Ottani A,
Galantucci M, Grieco P, Catania A, Guarini S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Surgical Research, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda - Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Milano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Melanocortin peptides improve hemodynamic parameters and prevent
death during severe hemorrhagic shock. In the present research we determined
influences of a synthetic melanocortin 1/4 receptor agonist on the molecular
changes that occur in rat liver during hemorrhage.
METHODS: Controlled-volume hemorrhage was performed in adult rats under general
anesthesia by a stepwise blood withdrawal until mean arterial pressure fell to 40
mmHg. Then rats received either saline or the synthetic melanocortin 1/4 receptor
agonist Butir-His-D-Phe-Arg-Trp-Sar-NH2 (Ro27-3225; n = 6-8 per group).
Hemogasanalysis was performed throughout a 60-min period. Gene expression in
liver samples was determined at 1 or 3 h using quantitative real-time polymerase 
chain reaction.
RESULTS: At 1 h, in saline-treated shocked rats, there were significant increases
in activating transcription factor 3 (Atf3), early growth response 1 (Egr1), heme
oxygenase (decycling) 1 (Hmox1), FBJ murine osteosarcoma viral oncogene homolog
(Fos), and jun oncogene (Jun). These changes were prevented by Ro27-3225 (mean ± 
SEM: Atf3 152.83 ± 58.62 vs. 579.00 ± 124.13, P = 0.002; Egr1 13.21 ± 1.28 vs.
26.63 ± 1.02, P = 0.001; Hmox1 3.28 ± 0.31 vs. 166.54 ± 35.03, P = 0.002; Fos
4.36 ± 1.03 vs. 14.90 ± 3.44, P < 0.001; Jun 6.62 ± 1.93 vs. 15.07 ± 2.09, P =
0.005; respectively). Increases in alpha-2-macroglobulin (A2m), heat shock 70kD
protein 1A (Hspa1a), erythropoietin (Epo), and interleukin-6 (Il6) occurred at 3 
h in shocked rats and were prevented by Ro27-3225 treatment (A2m 6.90 ± 0.82 vs. 
36.73 ± 4.00, P < 0.001; Hspa1a 10.34 ± 3.28 vs. 25.72 ± 3.64, P = 0.001; Epo
0.49 ± 0.13 vs. 2.37 ± 0.73, P = 0.002; Il6 1.05 ± 0.15 vs. 1.88 ± 0.23, P <
0.001; respectively). Further, at 3 h in shocked rats treated with Ro27-3225
there were significant increases in tight junction protein 1 (Tjp1; 27.30 ± 2.43 
vs. 5.03 ± 1.68, P < 0.001) and nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group A, member 1
(Nr4a1; 91.03 ± 16.20 vs. 30.43 ± 11.0, P = 0.01) relative to sham animals.
Treatment with Ro27-3225 rapidly restored blood pressure, hemogasanalysis
parameters, and lactate blood levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Melanocortin treatment significantly prevents most of the systemic
and hepatic detrimental changes induced by hemorrhage.

PMID: 22266570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e29498. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029498. Epub 2011 Dec 29.

Stress-induced C/EBP homology protein (CHOP) represses MyoD transcription to
delay myoblast differentiation.

Alter J(1), Bengal E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rappaport Institute for Research in the Medical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel.

When mouse myoblasts or satellite cells differentiate in culture, the expression 
of myogenic regulatory factor, MyoD, is downregulated in a subset of cells that
do not differentiate. The mechanism involved in the repression of MyoD expression
remains largely unknown. Here we report that a stress-response pathway repressing
MyoD transcription is transiently activated in mouse-derived C2C12 myoblasts
growing under differentiation-promoting conditions. We show that phosphorylation 
of the a subunit of the translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2a) is followed by
expression of C/EBP homology protein (CHOP) in some myoblasts. ShRNA-driven
knockdown of CHOP expression caused earlier and more robust differentiation,
whereas its constitutive expression delayed differentiation relative to wild type
myoblasts. Cells expressing CHOP did not express the myogenic regulatory factors 
MyoD and myogenin. These results indicated that CHOP directly repressed the
transcription of the MyoD gene. In support of this view, CHOP associated with
upstream regulatory region of the MyoD gene and its activity reduced histone
acetylation at the enhancer region of MyoD. CHOP interacted with histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) in cells. This protein complex may reduce histone
acetylation when bound to MyoD regulatory regions. Overall, our results suggest
that the activation of a stress pathway in myoblasts transiently downregulate the
myogenic program.

PMCID: PMC3248460
PMID: 22242125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Cell Signal. 2012 Apr;24(4):943-50. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.12.017. Epub 2011
Dec 30.

Patulin induces colorectal cancer cells apoptosis through EGR-1 dependent ATF3
up-regulation.

Kwon O(1), Soung NK, Thimmegowda NR, Jeong SJ, Jang JH, Moon DO, Chung JK, Lee
KS, Kwon YT, Erikson RL, Ahn JS, Kim BY.

Author information: 
(1)Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), 685-2
Ochang-eup, Cheongwon-gun 363-883, Republic of Korea.

Patulin is a fungal mycotoxin of Aspergilus and Penicillium that is commonly
found in rotting fruits and exerts its potential toxic effect mainly by reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) generation. However, the effect of patulin on cancer cells
as well as its intracellular mechanism has been controversial and not clearly
defined yet. In this study, patulin was found to induce G1/S accumulation and
cell growth arrest accompanied by caspase-3 activation, PARP cleavage and ATF3
expression in human colon cancer cell line HCT116. Ser/Thr phosphorylation of a
transcription factor, EGR-1, was increased while its expression did not change
upon patulin treatment to the cells. Knockdown of ATF3 and EGR-1 using their
respective siRNAs showed EGR-1 dependent ATF3 expression. Moreover, treatment of 
the cells with antioxidants N-acetylcysteine (NAC) and glutathione (GSH) revealed
that patulin induced ATF3 expression and apoptosis were dependent on ROS
generation. ATF3 expression was also increased by patulin in other colorectal
cancer cell types, Caco2 and SW620. Collectively, our data present a new
anti-cancer molecular mechanism of patulin, suggesting EGR-1 and ATF3 as critical
targets for the development of anti-cancer chemotherapeutics. In this regard,
patulin could be a candidate for the treatment of colorectal cancers.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3593654
PMID: 22230687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 30;287(14):11398-409. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.320416. Epub
2012 Jan 6.

Lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal causes endothelial
activation by inducing endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Vladykovskaya E(1), Sithu SD, Haberzettl P, Wickramasinghe NS, Merchant ML, Hill 
BG, McCracken J, Agarwal A, Dougherty S, Gordon SA, Schuschke DA, Barski OA,
O'Toole T, D'Souza SE, Bhatnagar A, Srivastava S.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky
40202, USA.

Lipid peroxidation products, such as 4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal (HNE), cause
endothelial activation, and they increase the adhesion of the endothelium to
circulating leukocytes. Nevertheless, the mechanisms underlying these effects
remain unclear. We observed that in HNE-treated human umbilical vein endothelial 
cells, some of the protein-HNE adducts colocalize with the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) and that HNE forms covalent adducts with several ER chaperones that assist
in protein folding. We also found that at concentrations that did not induce
apoptosis or necrosis, HNE activated the unfolded protein response, leading to an
increase in XBP-1 splicing, phosphorylation of protein kinase-like ER kinase and 
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a, and the induction of ATF3 and ATF4. 
This increase in eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a phosphorylation was 
prevented by transfection with protein kinase-like ER kinase siRNA. Treatment
with HNE increased the expression of the ER chaperones, GRP78 and HERP. Exposure 
to HNE led to a depletion of reduced glutathione and an increase in the
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS); however, glutathione depletion and
ROS production by tert-butyl-hydroperoxide did not trigger the unfolded protein
response. Pretreatment with a chemical chaperone, phenylbutyric acid, or
adenoviral transfection with ATF6 attenuated HNE-induced monocyte adhesion and
IL-8 induction. Moreover, phenylbutyric acid and taurine-conjugated
ursodeoxycholic acid attenuated HNE-induced leukocyte rolling and their firm
adhesion to the endothelium in rat cremaster muscle. These data suggest that
endothelial activation by HNE is mediated in part by ER stress, induced by
mechanisms independent of ROS production or glutathione depletion. The induction 
of ER stress may be a significant cause of vascular inflammation induced by
products of oxidized lipids.

PMCID: PMC3322871
PMID: 22228760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Acta Anaesthesiol Taiwan. 2011 Dec;49(4):144-8. doi: 10.1016/j.aat.2011.11.006.
Epub 2011 Dec 23.

Biphasic effects of chronic intrathecal gabapentin administration on the
expression of protein kinase C gamma in the spinal cord of neuropathic pain rats.

Yeh CY(1), Chung SC, Tseng FL, Tsai YC, Liu YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Tainan Hospital, Tainan City, Taiwan, ROC.

OBJECTIVES: Patients suffering from neuropathic pain are difficult to treat and
many methods are used to resolve this issue. In this study, we used a model of
neuropathic pain comprising rats with chronic constriction injury (CCI) on the
left sciatic nerve to investigate the chronic effect of gabapentin via
intrathecal administration. We also observed the expression of dorsal spinal
protein kinase C gamma subunit (PKC<U+03B3>) and other pain-related molecules in the
spinal area which included cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2), c-Fos and cyclic
AMP-dependent transcription factor (ATF3) in the neuropathic pain animals.
METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats (250-380 g) were randomly assigned to four
groups, i.e., control, gabapentin (Gaba), MK801, and gabapentin plus MK801
(Gaba+M) groups. A PE-5 catheter was inserted into the lumbar spine area via the 
cervical spine area. CCI was performed the following day after the intrathecal
catheter implant surgery. Gabapentin (1.05 µmol/day) was then given the following
day after CCI surgery. Intrathecal gabapentin was administrated for 14
consecutive days. Pain-related behavior was assessed every 2 days thereafter by
measuring the latency of foot withdrawal elicited by noxious radiant heat or Von 
Frey microfilament applied to the hind-paw plantar surface. MK801 (30 µg/day), an
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor blocker, was also added for potential
effect. The tissue of dorsal horn of the lumbar spine was harvested on the 14(th)
day for the expression of COX2, c-Fos, ATF3 and PKC<U+03B3> with Western blotting, and
positive finding protein was then checked on 7(th) day for further evaluation.
RESULTS: The beneficial effect of intrathecal gabapentin of statistic
significance on thermal duration and mechanical microfilament appeared after
7-day and 11-day consecutive treatment, respectively. Furthermore, the NMDA
receptor blocker also potentiated the effect on the behavior of thermal and
mechanical stimulations. Gabapentin had no effect on the expression of COX2,
c-Fos and ATF3. Interestingly, the expression of PKC<U+03B3> in the spinal cord was
initially inhibited by gabapentin on the 7(th) day but was potentiated on the
14(th) day.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that chronic intrathecal gabapentin has
beneficial effects on the behaviors of both thermal and mechanical stimulations
in the neuropathic pain animals and the NMDA blocker can potentiate this effect. 
Furthermore, gabapentin has biphasic effect on the expression of PKC<U+03B3> in the
spinal cord on Day 7 and Day 14 for the model rats with CCI.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22221687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28908. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028908. Epub 2011 Dec 21.

Phenotypic switching of nonpeptidergic cutaneous sensory neurons following
peripheral nerve injury.

Wang T(1), Molliver DC, Jing X, Schwartz ES, Yang FC, Samad OA, Ma Q, Davis BM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

In adult mammals, the phenotype of half of all pain-sensing (nociceptive) sensory
neurons is tonically modulated by growth factors in the glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family that includes GDNF, artemin (ARTN) and
neurturin (NRTN). Each family member binds a distinct GFRa family co-receptor,
such that GDNF, NRTN and ARTN bind GFRa1, -a2, and -a3, respectively. Previous
studies revealed transcriptional regulation of all three receptors in following
axotomy, possibly in response to changes in growth factor availability. Here, we 
examined changes in the expression of GFRa1-3 in response to injury in vivo and
in vitro. We found that after dissociation of adult sensory ganglia, up to 27% of
neurons die within 4 days (d) in culture and this can be prevented by nerve
growth factor (NGF), GDNF and ARTN, but not NRTN. Moreover, up-regulation of ATF3
(a marker of neuronal injury) in vitro could be prevented by NGF and ARTN, but
not by GDNF or NRTN. The lack of NRTN efficacy was correlated with rapid and
near-complete loss of GFRa2 immunoreactivity. By retrogradely-labeling cutaneous 
afferents in vivo prior to nerve cut, we demonstrated that GFRa2-positive neurons
switch phenotype following injury and begin to express GFRa3 as well as the
capsaicin receptor, transient receptor potential vanilloid 1(TRPV1), an important
transducer of noxious stimuli. This switch was correlated with down-regulation of
Runt-related transcription factor 1 (Runx1), a transcription factor that controls
expression of GFRa2 and TRPV1 during development. These studies show that
NRTN-responsive neurons are unique with respect to their plasticity and response 
to injury, and suggest that Runx1 plays an ongoing modulatory role in the adult.

© 2011 Wang et al.

PMCID: PMC3244441
PMID: 22216140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Mar 15;302(6):E654-65. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00373.2011. Epub 2012 Jan 3.

12/15-Lipoxygenase signaling in the endoplasmic reticulum stress response.

Cole BK(1), Kuhn NS, Green-Mitchell SM, Leone KA, Raab RM, Nadler JL, Chakrabarti
SK.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Internal Medicine, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA
23507, USA.

Central obesity is associated with chronic inflammation, insulin resistance,
ß-cell dysfunction, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. The 12/15-lipoxygenase
enzyme (12/15-LO) promotes inflammation and insulin resistance in adipose and
peripheral tissues. Given that obesity is associated with ER stress and 12/15-LO 
is expressed in adipose tissue, we determined whether 12/15-LO could mediate ER
stress signals. Addition of 12/15-LO lipid products 12(S)-HETE and 12(S)-HPETE to
differentiated 3T3-L1 adipocytes induced expression and activation of ER stress
markers, including BiP, XBP-1, p-PERK, and p-IRE1a. The ER stress inducer,
tunicamycin, upregulated ER stress markers in adipocytes with concomitant
12/15-LO activation. Addition of a 12/15-LO inhibitor, CDC, to
tunicamycin-treated adipocytes attenuated the ER stress response. Furthermore,
12/15-LO-deficient adipocytes exhibited significantly decreased
tunicamycin-induced ER stress. 12/15-LO action involves upregulation of
interleukin-12 (IL-12) expression. Tunicamycin significantly upregulated IL-12p40
expression in adipocytes, and IL-12 addition increased ER stress gene expression;
conversely, LSF, an IL-12 signaling inhibitor, and an IL-12p40-neutralizing
antibody attenuated tunicamycin-induced ER stress. Isolated adipocytes and liver 
from 12/15-LO-deficient mice fed a high-fat diet revealed a decrease in spliced
XBP-1 expression compared with wild-type C57BL/6 mice on a high-fat diet.
Furthermore, pancreatic islets from 12/15-LO-deficient mice showed reduced
high-fat diet-induced ER stress genes compared with wild-type mice. These data
suggest that 12/15-LO activity participates in ER stress in adipocytes,
pancreatic islets, and liver. Therefore, reduction of 12/15-LO activity or
expression could provide a new therapeutic target to reduce ER stress and
downstream inflammation linked to obesity.

PMCID: PMC3311293
PMID: 22215650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28577. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028577. Epub 2011 Dec 16.

Reduction in inflammatory gene expression in skeletal muscle from Roux-en-Y
gastric bypass patients randomized to omentectomy.

Tamboli RA(1), Hajri T, Jiang A, Marks-Shulman PA, Williams DB, Clements RH,
Melvin W, Bowen BP, Shyr Y, Abumrad NN, Flynn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America.

OBJECTIVES: To examine the effects of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) surgery
with and without laparoscopic removal of omental fat (omentectomy) on the
temporal gene expression profiles of skeletal muscle.
DESIGN: Previously reported were the whole-body metabolic effects of a
randomized, single-blinded study in patients receiving RYGB surgery stratified to
receive or not receive omentectomy. In this follow up study we report on changes 
in skeletal muscle gene expression in a subset of 21 patients, for whom biopsies 
were collected preoperatively and at either 6 months or 12 months
postoperatively.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: RNA isolated from skeletal muscle biopsies of 21 
subjects (8 without omentectomy and 13 with omentectomy) taken before RYGB or at 
6 and 12 months postoperatively were subjected to gene expression profiling via
Exon 1.0 S/T Array and Taqman Low Density Array. Robust Multichip Analysis and
gene enrichment data analysis revealed 84 genes with at least a 4-fold expression
difference after surgery. At 6 and 12 months the RYGB with omentectomy group
displayed a greater reduction in the expression of genes associated with skeletal
muscle inflammation (ANKRD1, CDR1, CH25H, CXCL2, CX3CR1, IL8, LBP, NFIL3, SELE,
SOCS3, TNFAIP3, and ZFP36) relative to the RYGB non-omentectomy group.
Expressions of IL6 and CCL2 were decreased at all postoperative time points.
There was differential expression of genes driving protein turnover (IGFN1,
FBXW10) in both groups over time and increased expression of PAAF1 in the
non-omentectomy group at 12 months. Evidence for the activation of skeletal
muscle satellite cells was inferred from the up-regulation of HOXC10. The
elevated post-operative expression of 22 small nucleolar RNAs and the decreased
expression of the transcription factors JUNB, FOS, FOSB, ATF3 MYC, EGR1 as well
as the orphan nuclear receptors NR4A1, NR4A2, NR4A3 suggest dramatic
reorganizations at both the cellular and genetic levels.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These data indicate that RYGB reduces skeletal muscle
inflammation, and removal of omental fat further amplifies this response.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00212160.

PMCID: PMC3241684
PMID: 22194858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Pain. 2012 Mar;153(3):562-74. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2011.11.020. Epub 2011 Dec 19.

Targeting A-type K(+) channels in primary sensory neurons for bone cancer pain in
a rat model.

Duan KZ(1), Xu Q, Zhang XM, Zhao ZQ, Mei YA, Zhang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Cancer pain is one of the most severe types of chronic pain, and the most common 
cancer pain is bone cancer pain. The treatment of bone cancer pain remains a
clinical challenge. Here, we report firstly that A-type K(+) channels in dorsal
root ganglion (DRG) are involved in the neuropathy of rat bone cancer pain and
are a new target for diclofenac, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug that can
be used for therapy for this distinct pain. There are dynamically functional
changes of the A-type K(+) channels in DRG neurons during bone cancer pain. The
A-type K(+) currents that mainly express in isolectin B4-positive small DRG
neurons are increased on post-tumor day 14 (PTD 14), then faded but still
remained at a higher level on PTD 21. Correspondingly, the expression levels of
A-type K(+) channel Kv1.4, Kv3.4, and Kv4.3 showed time-dependent changes during 
bone cancer pain. Diclofenac enhances A-type K(+) currents in the DRG neurons and
attenuates bone cancer pain in a dose-dependent manner. The analgesic effect of
diclofenac can be reversed or prevented by A-type K(+) channel blocker 4-AP or
pandinotoxin-Ka, also by siRNA targeted against rat Kv1.4 or Kv4.3. Repeated
diclofenac administration decreased soft tissue swelling adjacent to the tumor
and attenuated bone destruction. These results indicate that peripheral A-type
K(+) channels were involved in the neuropathy of rat bone cancer pain. Targeting 
A-type K(+) channels in primary sensory neurons may provide a novel
mechanism-based therapeutic strategy for bone cancer pain.

Copyright Â© 2011 International Association for the Study of Pain. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22188869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Front Mol Neurosci. 2011 Dec 12;4:53. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2011.00053. eCollection 
2011.

The nuclear events guiding successful nerve regeneration.

Kiryu-Seo S(1), Kiyama H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Anatomy and Neuroscience, Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya University Nagoya, Japan.

Peripheral nervous system (PNS) neurons survive and regenerate after nerve
injury, whereas central nervous system (CNS) neurons lack the capacity to do so. 
The inability of the CNS to regenerate presumably results from a lack of
intrinsic growth activity and a permissive environment. To achieve CNS
regeneration, we can learn from successful nerve regeneration in the PNS. Neurons
in the PNS elicit dynamic changes in gene expression in response to permissive
environmental cues following nerve injury. To switch gene expression on and off
in injured neurons, transcription factors and their networks should be carefully 
orchestrated according to the regeneration program. This is the so-called
"intrinsic power of axonal growth." There is an increasing repertoire of
candidate transcription factors induced by nerve injury. Some of them potentiate 
the survival and axonal regeneration of damaged neurons in vivo; however, our
knowledge of transcriptional events in injured neurons is still limited. How do
these transcription factors communicate with each other? How does the
transcriptional machinery regulate the wide variety of regeneration-associated
genes (RAGs) in the properly coordinated manner? In this review, we describe our 
current understanding of the injury-inducible transcriptional factors that
enhance the intrinsic growth capacity, and propose a potential role for
specificity protein 1 (Sp1), which provides a platform to recruit
injury-inducible transcription factors, in simultaneous gene regulation. Finally,
we discuss an additional mechanism that is involved in epigenetic modifications
in damaged neurons. A comprehensive understanding of the nuclear events in
injured neurons will provide clues to clinical interventions for successful nerve
regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3235624
PMID: 22180737  [PubMed]


420. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Mar;29(3):380-6. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.862. Epub 2011 Dec
14.

Gene networks related to the cell death elicited by hyperthermia in human oral
squamous cell carcinoma HSC-3 cells.

Tabuchi Y(1), Wada S, Furusawa Y, Ohtsuka K, Kondo T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics Research, Life Science Research Center,
University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.
ytabu@cts.u-toyama.ac.jp

Local hyperthermia (HT) for various types of malignant tumors has shown promising
antitumor effects. To confirm the detailed molecular mechanism underlying cell
death induced by HT, gene expression patterns and gene networks in human oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells were examined using a combination of DNA
microarray and bioinformatics tools. OSCC HSC-3 cells were treated with HT at
44°C for 90 min or mild hyperthermia (MHT) at 42°C for 90 min, followed by
culturing at 37°C for 0-24 h. Treatment of cells with HT prevented cell
proliferation (62%) and induced cell death (17%), whereas these alterations were 
not observed in cells treated with MHT. Microarray analysis revealed substantial 
differences with respect to gene expression patterns and biological function for 
the two different hyperthermic treatments. Moreover, we identified the
temperature-specific gene networks D and H that were obtained from significantly 
up-regulated genes in the HT and MHT conditions, respectively, using Ingenuity
pathway analysis tools. Gene network D, which contains 14 genes such as ATF3,
DUSP1 and JUN, was associated with relevant biological functions including cell
death and cellular movement. Gene network H, which contains 13 genes such as
BAG3, DNAJB1 and HSPA1B, was associated with cellular function and maintenance
and cellular assembly and organization. These findings provide a basis for
understanding the detailed molecular mechanisms of cell death elicited by HT in
human OSCC cells.

PMID: 22179328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Nat Med. 2011 Dec 18;18(1):128-34. doi: 10.1038/nm.2557.

ROS-induced ATF3 causes susceptibility to secondary infections during
sepsis-associated immunosuppression.

Hoetzenecker W(1), Echtenacher B, Guenova E, Hoetzenecker K, Woelbing F, Brück J,
Teske A, Valtcheva N, Fuchs K, Kneilling M, Park JH, Kim KH, Kim KW, Hoffmann P, 
Krenn C, Hai T, Ghoreschi K, Biedermann T, Röcken M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center, Eberhard Karls
University Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.

Sepsis, sepsis-induced hyperinflammation and subsequent sepsis-associated
immunosuppression (SAIS) are important causes of death. Here we show in humans
that the loss of the major reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger, glutathione
(GSH), during SAIS directly correlates with an increase in the expression of
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3). In endotoxin-stimulated monocytes, ROS 
stress strongly superinduced NF-E2-related factor 2 (NRF2)-dependent ATF3. In
vivo, this ROS-mediated superinduction of ATF3 protected against endotoxic shock 
by inhibiting innate cytokines, as Atf3(-/-) mice remained susceptible to
endotoxic shock even under conditions of ROS stress. Although it protected
against endotoxic shock, this ROS-mediated superinduction of ATF3 caused high
susceptibility to bacterial and fungal infections through the suppression of
interleukin 6 (IL-6). As a result, Atf3(-/-) mice were protected against
bacterial and fungal infections, even under conditions of ROS stress, whereas
Atf3(-/-)Il6(-/-) mice were highly susceptible to these infections. Moreover, in 
a model of SAIS, secondary infections caused considerably less mortality in
Atf3(-/-) mice than in wild-type mice, indicating that ROS-induced ATF3 crucially
determines susceptibility to secondary infections during SAIS.

PMCID: PMC3555699
PMID: 22179317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28946. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028946. Epub 2011 Dec 13.

Involvement of dopamine receptors in binge methamphetamine-induced activation of 
endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrial stress pathways.

Beauvais G(1), Atwell K, Jayanthi S, Ladenheim B, Cadet JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, National Institute on Drug Abuse,
Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Single large doses of methamphetamine (METH) cause endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress and mitochondrial dysfunctions in rodent striata. The dopamine D(1)
receptor appears to be involved in these METH-mediated stresses. The purpose of
this study was to investigate if dopamine D(1) and D(2) receptors are involved in
ER and mitochondrial stresses caused by single-day METH binges in the rat
striatum. Male Sprague-Dawley rats received 4 injections of 10 mg/kg of METH
alone or in combination with a putative D(1) or D(2) receptor antagonist,
SCH23390 or raclopride, respectively, given 30 min prior to each METH injection. 
Rats were euthanized at various timepoints afterwards. Striatal tissues were used
in quantitative RT-PCR and western blot analyses. We found that binge METH
injections caused increased expression of the pro-survival genes, BiP/GRP-78 and 
P58(IPK), in a SCH23390-sensitive manner. METH also caused up-regulation of
ER-stress genes, Atf2, Atf3, Atf4, CHOP/Gadd153 and Gadd34. The expression of
heat shock proteins (HSPs) was increased after METH injections. SCH23390
completely blocked induction in all analyzed ER stress-related proteins that
included ATF3, ATF4, CHOP/Gadd153, HSPs and caspase-12. The dopamine D(2)-like
antagonist, raclopride, exerted small to moderate inhibitory influence on some
METH-induced changes in ER stress proteins. Importantly, METH caused decreases in
the mitochondrial anti-apoptotic protein, Bcl-2, but increases in the
pro-apoptotic proteins, Bax, Bad and cytochrome c, in a SCH23390-sensitive
fashion. In contrast, raclopride provided only small inhibition of METH-induced
changes in mitochondrial proteins. These findings indicate that METH-induced
activation of striatal ER and mitochondrial stress pathways might be more related
to activation of SCH23390-sensitive receptors.

PMCID: PMC3236770
PMID: 22174933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Transplant Proc. 2011 Dec;43(10):3628-33. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2011.09.075.

Activations of mitogen-activated protein kinases and regulation of their
downstream molecules after rat lung transplantation from donors after cardiac
death.

Yamamoto S(1), Yamane M, Yoshida O, Okazaki M, Waki N, Toyooka S, Oto T, Miyoshi 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer and Thoracic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama University, Okayama, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Accepting organs donated after cardiac death (DCD) is an effective
approach to the donor shortage. However, lung transplantations from DCD donors
show severe rapid pulmonary graft dysfunction (PGD) followed by warm
ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI). This study sought to clarify the molecular
mediators in warm IRI, including activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) and the downstream cascades.
METHODS: We performed single left lung transplantation using organs from male
Sprague-Dawley rats after 0 (CIT group), 30 (30WIT group), or 180 (180WIT group) 
minutes of warm ischemia time. Pulmonary graft functions were estimated by blood 
gas analysis. At 1 hour after reperfusion, the phosphorylation status of MAPKs
(ERK, p38, and JNK) and the gene expression levels of transcription factors
(Egr-1 and ATF-3) and immune mediators (MCP-1, MIP-2, PAI-1, ICAM-1, TNF-a,
IL-1ß, IL-6, and COX-2) in the grafts were examined using Western blotting and
real-time polymerase chain reaction assays.
RESULTS: Severe PGD was observed in the 180WIT group compared with transplanted
lungs in the other groups, which exhibited good pulmonary graft function. ERK and
JNK activations, as well as mRNA levels of transcription factors (Egr-1 and ATF3)
significantly increased with greater warm ischemic times. The pattern of JNK
activation correlated with the severity of PGD. MCP-1, ICAM-1, IL-1ß, IL-6, and
COX-2 were also up-regulated among the 180WIT group, although MIP-2 and PAI-1
showed no significant differences among the groups.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that the ERK and JNK pathways may play important roles to
induce the injury caused by prolonged warm ischemia followed by reperfusion in
the setting of lung transplantation from DCD donors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22172817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Int Immunopharmacol. 2012 Jan;12(1):182-8. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2011.11.009.
Epub 2011 Dec 9.

Berberine ameliorates COX-2 expression in rat small intestinal mucosa partially
through PPAR<U+03B3> pathway during acute endotoxemia.

Feng AW(1), Gao W, Zhou GR, Yu R, Li N, Huang XL, Li QR, Li JS.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of General Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University
School of Medicine, 305 East Zhongshan Road, Nanjing 210002, China.

Berberine hydrochloride (BBR), a plant alkaloid, has been used to treat
intestinal inflammation or infection for years. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is
pro-inflammatory mediator and involved in the induction of gut inflammation. The 
expression of COX-2 in small bowel mucosa was determined and the mechanism by
which BBR modulated COX-2 expression was explored in a rat model of endotoxemia
induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The results showed that without LPS
stimulation COX-2 was constitutively expressed at low levels in control rats. LPS
challenge rapidly induced COX-2 gene transcription resulting in high levels of
inducible COX-2 expression in endotoxemic rats. BBR pre- and post-treatment had
no marked effect on constitutive COX-2 expression but inhibited inducible COX-2
overexpression. LPS challenge increased the expression and phosphorylation of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>), p38 and activating
transcription factor 2 and 3 (ATF2, ATF3), but the effects of LPS were inhibited 
by BBR treatment. GW9662 did not influence constitutive COX-2 expression but
enhanced inducible COX-2 overproduction. Besides, GW9662 abolished the inhibitory
effect of BBR on inducible COX-2, p38, ATF2, 3 expression and phosphorylation.
Collectively, these results indicated that BBR gavage could attenuate the
overexpression of inducible COX-2, not constitutive COX-2, in ileal mucosa during
acute endotoxemia in part via activation of PPAR<U+03B3> pathway, which negatively
interfered with p38/ATFs cascade.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22155099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Nat Med. 2011 Dec 4;18(1):100-10. doi: 10.1038/nm.2575.

PDGF-BB modulates hematopoiesis and tumor angiogenesis by inducing erythropoietin
production in stromal cells.

Xue Y(1), Lim S, Yang Y, Wang Z, Jensen LD, Hedlund EM, Andersson P, Sasahara M, 
Larsson O, Galter D, Cao R, Hosaka K, Cao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2012 Jan;18(1):22-4.

The platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) signaling system contributes to tumor
angiogenesis and vascular remodeling. Here we show in mouse tumor models that
PDGF-BB induces erythropoietin (EPO) mRNA and protein expression by targeting
stromal and perivascular cells that express PDGF receptor-ß (PDGFR-ß).
Tumor-derived PDGF-BB promoted tumor growth, angiogenesis and extramedullary
hematopoiesis at least in part through modulation of EPO expression. Moreover,
adenoviral delivery of PDGF-BB to tumor-free mice increased both EPO production
and erythropoiesis, as well as protecting from irradiation-induced anemia. At the
molecular level, we show that the PDGF-BB-PDGFR-bß signaling system activates the
EPO promoter, acting in part through transcriptional regulation by the
transcription factor Atf3, possibly through its association with two additional
transcription factors, c-Jun and Sp1. Our findings suggest that PDGF-BB-induced
EPO promotes tumor growth through two mechanisms: first, paracrine stimulation of
tumor angiogenesis by direct induction of endothelial cell proliferation,
migration, sprouting and tube formation, and second, endocrine stimulation of
extramedullary hematopoiesis leading to increased oxygen perfusion and protection
against tumor-associated anemia.

PMID: 22138754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Pain. 2012 Jan;153(1):68-79. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2011.09.009. Epub 2011 Nov 3.

Re-evaluation of the phenotypic changes in L4 dorsal root ganglion neurons after 
L5 spinal nerve ligation.

Fukuoka T(1), Yamanaka H, Kobayashi K, Okubo M, Miyoshi K, Dai Y, Noguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Hyogo College of Medicine,
Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan. tfukuoka@hyo-med.ac.jp

Comment in
    Pain. 2012 Jan;153(1):11-2.

The L5 spinal nerve ligation (SNL) is a widely used animal neuropathic pain
model. There are conflicting reports regarding the extent of injury to the L4
dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons in this model. If a significant number of
these neurons were injured, the previously reported phenotypic and
electrophysiological changes at this level are in need of re-evaluation by
separating the injured neurons and the frankly spared ones. So, we immunostained 
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and examined the change in expression of
transcripts for neuropeptide Y (NPY), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
and several voltage-gated sodium channel a-subunits (Nav1.1, Nav1.3, Nav1.6,
Nav1.7, Nav1.8, and Nav1.9) in the L4 DRG by comparing signal intensities of
individual neurons using in situ hybridization histochemistry.
ATF3-immunoreactivity was similarly observed in 4-6% of neuronal nuclei of the
SNL and sham-operated ipsilateral L4 DRGs. Comparison between ATF3+ and ATF3-
neurons in the SNL L4 DRG revealed that (1) whereas NPY induction occurred in
ATF3+ cells, BDNF increased mainly in ATF3- neurons; (2) although ATF3+ neurons
had higher Nav1.3 signals than ATF3- neurons, these signals were much lower than 
those of the L5 DRG neurons; and (3) ATF3+/N52- neurons selectively lost Nav1.8
and Nav1.9 mRNAs. Comparison of the total neuronal populations among naïve, SNL, 
and sham-operated rats revealed no significant differences for all examined Nav
mRNAs. Because neuropathic pain behaviors were developed by rats with SNL but not
the sham-operation, the small number of injured L4 neurons likely do not
contribute to the pathomechanisms of neuropathic pain.

Copyright © 2011 International Association for the Study of Pain. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22054598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26744. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026744. Epub 2011 Oct 28.

Activating transcription factor 3 deficiency promotes cardiac hypertrophy,
dysfunction, and fibrosis induced by pressure overload.

Zhou H(1), Shen DF, Bian ZY, Zong J, Deng W, Zhang Y, Guo YY, Li H, Tang QZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), which is encoded by an
adaptive-response gene induced by various stimuli, plays an important role in the
cardiovascular system. However, the effect of ATF3 on cardiac hypertrophy induced
by a pathological stimulus has not been determined. Here, we investigated the
effects of ATF3 deficiency on cardiac hypertrophy using in vitro and in vivo
models. Aortic banding (AB) was performed to induce cardiac hypertrophy in mice. 
Cardiac hypertrophy was estimated by echocardiographic and hemodynamic
measurements and by pathological and molecular analysis. ATF3 deficiency promoted
cardiac hypertrophy, dysfunction and fibrosis after 4 weeks of AB compared to the
wild type (WT) mice. Furthermore, enhanced activation of the MEK-ERK1/2 and JNK
pathways was found in ATF3-knockout (KO) mice compared to WT mice. In vitro
studies performed in cultured neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes confirmed that ATF3
deficiency promotes cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced by angiotensin II, which
was associated with the amplification of MEK-ERK1/2 and JNK signaling. Our
results suggested that ATF3 plays a crucial role in the development of cardiac
hypertrophy via negative regulation of the MEK-ERK1/2 and JNK pathways.

PMCID: PMC3203896
PMID: 22053207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. FASEB J. 2012 Feb;26(2):938-46. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-186700. Epub 2011 Nov 2.

Loss of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE)
induces apoptotic processes in pancreatic carcinoma cells.

Kemmner W(1), Kessel P, Sanchez-Ruderisch H, Möller H, Hinderlich S, Schlag PM,
Detjen K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Surgical Oncology, Experimental and Clinical Research Center,
Charité Campus Buch, Berlin, Germany. wkemmner@mdc-berlin.de

Early invasive growth and metastasis are features of pancreatic cancer that rely 
on its resistance to anoikis, an apoptosis program activated on loss of matrix
anchorage. How anoikis is regulated is unclear.
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine-kinase (GNE) was
silenced, or p16 was overexpressed, in human pancreatic carcinoma cells. Gene
expression profiling, enzymatic assays, Western blotting, and cell cycle analysis
were conducted. Silencing of GNE, the key enzyme of sialic acid biosynthesis,
sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to anoikis. Accordingly, we observed a loss of
GNE enzyme activity in cells, which became anoikis susceptible after transfection
with the tumor suppressor p16. Similarly, studies of another cell line with low
GNE activity revealed strong anoikis susceptibility, confirming the association
of low GNE activity and anoikis susceptibility. Gene expression profiling
demonstrated that the loss of GNE triggered the transcriptional activation of the
ATF4-ATF3-CHOP pathway, leading to apoptosis in the framework of the unfolded
protein response. In silico analysis showed that GNE up-regulation occurred
predominantly in pancreatic cancer but also in other malignancies. Delineation of
GNE-dependent signaling pathways may provide targets that control anchorage
dependence and/or restore drug efficacy, which is of utmost relevance for the
treatment of pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 22049060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26848. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026848. Epub 2011 Oct 26.

Systems analysis of ATF3 in stress response and cancer reveals opposing effects
on pro-apoptotic genes in p53 pathway.

Tanaka Y(1), Nakamura A, Morioka MS, Inoue S, Tamamori-Adachi M, Yamada K,
Taketani K, Kawauchi J, Tanaka-Okamoto M, Miyoshi J, Tanaka H, Kitajima S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genome Structure and Regulation, School of Biomedical Science
and Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan. ytanaka.bgen@mri.tmd.ac.jp

Stress-inducible transcription factors play a pivotal role in cellular adaptation
to environment to maintain homeostasis and integrity of the genome. Activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is induced by a variety of stress and inflammatory 
conditions and is over-expressed in many kinds of cancer cells. However,
molecular mechanisms underlying pleiotropic functions of ATF3 have remained
elusive. Here we employed systems analysis to identify genome-wide targets of
ATF3 that is either induced by an alkylating agent methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) 
or over-expressed in a prostate tumour cell line LNCaP. We show that
stress-induced and cancer-associated ATF3 is recruited to 5,984 and 1,423
targets, respectively, in the human genome, 89% of which are common. Notably,
ATF3 targets are highly enriched for not only ATF/CRE motifs but also binding
sites of several other stress-inducible transcription factors indicating an
extensive network of stress response factors in transcriptional regulation of
target genes. Further analysis of effects of ATF3 knockdown on these targets
revealed that stress-induced ATF3 regulates genes in metabolic pathways, cell
cycle, apoptosis, cell adhesion, and signalling including insulin, p53, Wnt, and 
VEGF pathways. Cancer-associated ATF3 is involved in regulation of distinct sets 
of genes in processes such as calcium signalling, Wnt, p53 and diabetes pathways.
Notably, stress-induced ATF3 binds to 40% of p53 targets and activates
pro-apoptotic genes such as TNFRSF10B/DR5 and BBC3/PUMA. Cancer-associated ATF3, 
by contrast, represses these pro-apoptotic genes in addition to CDKN1A/p21. Taken
together, our data reveal an extensive network of stress-inducible transcription 
factors and demonstrate that ATF3 has opposing, cell context-dependent effects on
p53 target genes in DNA damage response and cancer development.

PMCID: PMC3202577
PMID: 22046379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Nov 18;415(2):294-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.10.048. Epub 2011 Oct 18.

Role of activating transcription factor 3 in low glucose- and
thapsigargin-induced apoptosis in cultured mouse islets.

Duprez J(1), Jonas JC.

Author information: 
(1)Université catholique de Louvain, Institute of Experimental and Clinical
Research, Pole of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, Brussels, Belgium.

In vitro, survival and function of rat pancreatic ß-cells are optimally preserved
in the presence of 10 mmol/l glucose (G10) and markedly altered by prolonged
culture at either 2 mmol/l glucose (G2) or 30 mmol/l glucose (G30). The increase 
in islet cell apoptosis in G2 and G30 vs. G10 is preceded by parallel increases
in the mRNA levels of the integrated stress response (ISR) gene activating
transcription factor 3 (Atf3) and its putative target and proapoptotic gene
growth arrest- and DNA damage-inducible gene 153 (Gadd153/Chop). In this study,
we used islets from Atf3 knockout (Atf3(-/-)) mice to test the role of ATF3 in
the stimulation of islet cell apoptosis under conditions associated with ISR
activation. The glucose sensitivity of Atf3(-/-) and WT islets for the
stimulation of insulin secretion and Xbp1 mRNA splicing during 18h culture was
similar, demonstrating that glucose metabolism was unaffected by Atf3 deletion.
However, the stimulation of islet cell apoptosis by the SERCA pump inhibitor
thapsigargin was slightly but significantly reduced in Atf3(-/-) vs. WT islets
despite similar level of expression of Gadd153 and Gadd34 mRNA. Also, the
stimulation of islet cell apoptosis by 7 days of culture in G2 was slightly but
significantly reduced in Atf3(-/-) vs. WT islets, and this effect was accompanied
by a significant reduction in Gadd153 mRNA expression. In conclusion, the
increase in Atf3 gene expression induced by thapsigargin and low glucose
concentrations slightly contributes to the stimulation of islet cell apoptosis
under these culture conditions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22033410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2012 Jan;39(1):63-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1681.2011.05637.x.

Tanshinone IIA attenuates cyclic strain-induced endothelin-1 expression in human 
umbilical vein endothelial cells.

Hong HJ(1), Hsu FL, Tsai SC, Lin CH, Liu JC, Chen JJ, Cheng TH, Chan P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chinese Medicine, College of Chinese Medicine, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan, China.

1. Tanshinone IIA, one of the active components of the Radix of Salvia
miltiorrhiza, is used in traditional Chinese medicine to treat cardiovascular
diseases. However, the intracellular mechanism of action of tanshinone IIA remain
to be determined. The aims of the present study were to test the hypothesis that 
tanshinone IIA alters strain-induced endothelin (ET)-1 expression and nitric
oxide (NO) production, as well as to identify the putative signalling pathways
involved, in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). 2. Cultured HUVEC
were exposed to cyclic strain in the presence of 1-10 µmol/L tanshinone IIA.
Expression of ET-1 was examined by reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction and ELISA. Phosphorylation of endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) and
activating transcription factor (ATF) 3 was assessed by western blot analysis. 3.
Tanshinone IIA (3 and 10 µmol/L) inhibited strain-induced ET-1 expression. In
contrast, NO production, eNOS phosphorylation and ATF3 expression were enhanced
by tanshinone IIA. The eNOS inhibitor N(G) -nitro-L-arginine methyl ester
(l-NAME; 100 µmol/L), the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor LY294002 (5
µmol/L) and the soluble guanylyl cyclase inhibitor 1H-[1,2,4] oxadiazolo [4,3-a] 
quinoxalin-1-one (ODQ; 10 µmol/L) inhibited tanshinone IIA-induced increases in
ATF3 expression. Moreover, treatment of HUVEC with either an NO donor (3,3-bis
[aminoethyl]-1-hydroxy-2-oxo-1-triazene; 500 µmol/L) or an ATF3 activator
(carbobenzoxy-L-leucyl-L-leucyl-L-leucinal; 5 µmol/L) resulted in the repression 
of strain-induced ET-1 expression. The inhibitory effect of tanshinone IIA on
strain-induced ET-1 expression was significantly attenuated by l-NAME, ODQ and
the transfection of small interfering RNA for ATF3. 4. In conclusion, tanshinone 
IIA inhibits strain-induced ET-1 expression by increasing NO and upregulating
ATF3 in HUVEC. The present study provides important new insights into the
molecular pathways that may contribute to the beneficial effects of tanshinone
IIA in the cardiovascular system.

© 2011 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology © 2011 
Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 22032308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Anat Cell Biol. 2011 Sep;44(3):226-37. doi: 10.5115/acb.2011.44.3.226. Epub 2011 
Sep 29.

Co-localization of activating transcription factor 3 and phosphorylated c-Jun in 
axotomized facial motoneurons.

Park BG(1), Lee JS, Lee JY, Song DY, Jeong SW, Cho BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Yonsei University Wonju College of Medicine, Wonju,
Korea.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and c-Jun play key roles in either cell 
death or cell survival, depending on the cellular background. To evaluate the
functional significance of ATF3/c-Jun in the peripheral nervous system, we
examined neuronal cell death, activation of ATF3/c-Jun, and microglial responses 
in facial motor nuclei up to 24 weeks after an extracranial facial nerve axotomy 
in adult rats. Following the axotomy, neuronal survival rate was progressively
but significantly reduced to 79.1% at 16 weeks post-lesion (wpl) and to 65.2% at 
24 wpl. ATF3 and phosphorylated c-Jun (pc-Jun) were detected in the majority of
ipsilateral facial motoneurons with normal size and morphology during the early
stage of degeneration (1-2 wpl). Thereafter, the number of facial motoneurons
decreased gradually, and both ATF3 and pc-Jun were identified in degenerating
neurons only. ATF3 and pc-Jun were co-localized in most cases. Additionally, a
large number of activated microglia, recognized by OX6 (rat MHC II marker) and
ED1 (phagocytic marker), gathered in the ipsilateral facial motor nuclei.
Importantly, numerous OX6- and ED1-positive, phagocytic microglia closely
surrounded and ingested pc-Jun-positive, degenerating neurons. Taken together,
our results indicate that long-lasting co-localization of ATF3 and pc-Jun in
axotomized facial motoneurons may be related to degenerative cascades provoked by
an extracranial facial nerve axotomy.

PMCID: PMC3195827
PMID: 22025975  [PubMed]


433. Physiol Genomics. 2012 Jan 18;44(1):14-24. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00255.2010. Epub 2011 Oct 18.

Profiling CCK-mediated pancreatic growth: the dynamic genetic program and the
role of STATs as potential regulators.

Gurda GT(1), Wang JY, Guo L, Ernst SA, Williams JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0622, USA. ggurda1@jhmi.edu

Feeding mice with protease inhibitor (PI) leads to increased endogenous
cholecystokinin (CCK) release and results in pancreatic growth. This adaptive
response requires calcineurin (CN)-NFAT and AKT-mTOR pathways, but the genes
involved, the dynamics of their expression, and other regulatory pathways remain 
unknown. Here, we examined the early (1-8 h) transcriptional program that
underlies pancreatic growth. We found 314 upregulated and 219 downregulated genes
with diverse temporal and functional profiles. Several new identifications
include the following: stress response genes Gdf15 and Txnip, metabolic mediators
Pitpnc1 and Hmges2, as well as components of growth factor response Fgf21, Atf3, 
and Egr1. The genes fell into seven self-organizing clusters, each with a
distinct pattern of expression; a representative gene within each of the
upregulated clusters (Egr1, Gadd45b, Rgs2, and Serpinb1a) was validated by
qRT-PCR. Genes up at any point throughout the time course and CN-dependent genes 
were subjected to further bioinformatics-based networking and promoter analysis, 
yielding STATs as potential transcriptional regulators. As shown by PCR, qPCR,
and Western blots, the active phospho-form of STAT3 and the Jak-STAT feedback
inhibitor Socs2 were both increased throughout early pancreatic growth. Moreover,
immunohistochemistry showed a CCK-dependent and acinar cell-specific increase in 
nuclear localization of p-STAT3, with >75% nuclear occupancy in PI-fed mice vs.
<0.1% in controls. Thus, the study identified novel genes likely to be important 
for CCK-driven pancreatic growth, characterized and biologically validated the
dynamic pattern of their expression and investigated STAT-Socs signaling as a new
player in this trophic response.

PMCID: PMC3289124
PMID: 22010007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Med Chem. 2011 Nov 24;54(22):7751-8. doi: 10.1021/jm2004128. Epub 2011 Oct 28.

Activation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase/activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) pathway characterizes effective arylated diazeniumdiolate-based nitric
oxide-releasing anticancer prodrugs.

Maciag AE(1), Nandurdikar RS, Hong SY, Chakrapani H, Diwan B, Morris NL, Shami
PJ, Shiao YH, Anderson LM, Keefer LK, Saavedra JE.

Author information: 
(1)SAIC-Frederick, Inc. , National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland 21702,
United States.

Improved therapies are needed for nonsmall cell lung cancer.
Diazeniumdiolate-based nitric oxide (NO)-releasing prodrugs are a growing class
of promising NO-based therapeutics. Recently, we have shown that
O(2)-(2,4-dinitrophenyl)
1-[(4-ethoxycarbonyl)piperazin-1-yl]diazen-1-ium-1,2-diolate (JS-K, 1) is
effective against nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells in culture and in vivo.
Here we report mechanistic studies with compound 1 and its homopiperazine
analogue and structural modification of these into more stable prodrugs. Compound
1 and its homopiperazine analogue were potent cytotoxic agents against NSCLC
cells in vitro and in vivo, concomitant with activation of the SAPK/JNK stress
pathway and upregulation of its downstream effector ATF3. Apoptosis followed
these events. An aryl-substituted analogue, despite extended half-life in the
presence of glutathione, did not activate JNK or have antitumor activity. The
data suggest that rate of reactivity with glutathione and activation of JNK/ATF3 
are determinants of cancer cell killing by these prodrugs.

PMCID: PMC3422893
PMID: 22003962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Toxicol Sci. 2012 Jan;125(1):116-25. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr270. Epub 2011 Oct
14.

Chronic Nod2 stimulation potentiates activating transcription factor 3 and
paradoxical superinduction of epithelial proinflammatory chemokines by mucoactive
ribotoxic stressors via RNA-binding protein human antigen R.

Park SH(1), Choi HJ, Do KH, Yang H, Kim J, Moon Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Systems Mucosal Biomodulation, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology and Medical Research Institute, Pusan National University School of
Medicine, Yangsan 626-813, Korea.

Chronic exposure to gut bacteria and bacterial products including Nod2 ligands
triggers homeostatic regulation in response to various mucosal insults.
Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a negative regulator of
proinflammatory cytokines via bacterial pattern recognition. On the assumption
that ATF3 can be a critical modulator of epithelial inflammation, chronic
stimulation of Nod2 was assessed for its effects on ATF3 and proinflammatory
signals in response to mucosal ribotoxic insult, which is a critical etiological 
factor of human intestinal inflammatory disease. Muramyl dipeptide, the minimal
moiety of bacterial peptidoglycan, is the Nod2 ligand, and pre-exposure to it
enhanced ATF3 expression in ribotoxic stress-exposed human enterocytes. In terms 
of gene regulation, Nod2 preactivation potentiated ATF3 induction by enhancing
stability of the ATF3 transcript, which was particularly linked to the regulation
of the 3'-untranslated region of the human ATF3 gene. Moreover, chronic
stimulation of Nod2 enhanced both the basal and the ribotoxic stress-stimulated
cytoplasmic translocation of the HuR protein, which bound to and stabilized ATF3 
messenger RNA (mRNA). Functionally, chronic stimulation of Nod2 also led to
superinduction of proinflammatory chemokine genes by the mucoactive ribotoxic
stress. However, the chemokine superinduction was not affected by ATF3 gene
regulation although Nod2-triggered ATF3 had suppressive effects on the
proinflammatory nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) signal. This paradoxical
superinduction of chemokines was also mediated by enhanced mRNA stabilization by 
HuR protein in spite of ATF3-mediated suppression of NF-<U+03BA>B signal in human
intestinal epithelial cells.

PMID: 22003189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Diabetes. 2011 Dec;60(12):3169-74. doi: 10.2337/db10-1743. Epub 2011 Oct 12.

Impaired expression of the inducible cAMP early repressor accounts for sustained 
adipose CREB activity in obesity.

Favre D(1), Le Gouill E, Fahmi D, Verdumo C, Chinetti-Gbaguidi G, Staels B,
Caiazzo R, Pattou F, Lê KA, Tappy L, Regazzi R, Giusti V, Vollenweider P, Waeber 
G, Abderrahmani A.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Internal Medicine, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudoisand
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: Increase in adipose cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB)
activity promotes adipocyte dysfunction and systemic insulin resistance in obese 
mice. This is achieved by increasing the expression of activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3). In this study, we investigated whether impaired expression of
the inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER), a transcriptional antagonist of CREB, 
is responsible for the increased CREB activity in adipocytes of obese mice and
humans.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Total RNA and nuclear proteins were prepared from
visceral adipose tissue (VAT) of human nonobese or obese subjects and white
adipose tissue (WAT) of C57Bl6-Rj mice that were fed with normal or high-fat diet
for 16 weeks. The expression of genes was monitored by real-time PCR, Western
blotting, and electromobility shift assays. RNA interference was used to silence 
the expression of Icer.
RESULTS: The expression of Icer/ICER was reduced in VAT and WAT of obese humans
and mice, respectively. Diminution of Icer/ICER was restricted to adipocytes and 
was accompanied by a rise of Atf3/ATF3 and diminution of Adipoq/ADIPOQ and
Glut4/GLUT4. Silencing the expression of Icer in 3T3-L1 adipocytes mimicked the
results observed in human and mice cells and hampered glucose uptake, thus
confirming the requirement of Icer for appropriate adipocyte function.
CONCLUSIONS: Impaired expression of ICER contributes to elevation in CREB target 
genes and, therefore, to the development of insulin resistance in obesity.

PMCID: PMC3219947
PMID: 21998402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Nov 4;414(4):681-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.09.132. Epub 2011 Oct 2.

ATF3 inhibits PDX-1-stimulated transactivation.

Kim WH(1), Jang MK, Kim CH, Shin HK, Jung MH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolic Disease, Department of Biomedical Science, National
Institutes of Health, #194 Tongillo, Eunpyung-gu, Seoul 122-701, South Korea.

Chronic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress leads to ß-cell failure via reduction
of pancreatic and duodenal homeobox-1 (PDX-1) activity, which contributes to the 
pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. However, the exact mechanisms by which ER stress
reduces PDX-1 activity in pancreatic ß-cells are unclear. Previously, we showed
that ATF3 downregulates PDX-1 gene expression in MIN6N8 pancreatic ß-cells. Here,
we investigated another role of ATF3 on the regulation of PDX-1 activity. ATF3
significantly inhibited PDX-1-stimulated transactivation of reporter plasmid
containing promoters for PDX-1 binding element and the PDX-1 target gene
glucokinase, which is dependent on C-terminal domain of ATF3. ATF3 interacted
with PDX-1, and effectively inhibited p300-mediated transcriptional coactivation 
of the PBE-containing promoter, whereas C-terminal domain-deleted ATF3 did not
inhibit the transcoactivation of p300. ATF3 decreased the interaction of p300
with PDX-1 in MIN6N8 cells coexpressing PDX-1 and ATF3. In addition, chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated that both tunicamycin treatment and
ATF3 overexpression inhibited the recruitment of p300 to PDX-1 on the insulin
promoter in MIN6N8 cells. Taken together, these results suggest that ATF3
inhibits PDX-1-mediated transactivation through the inhibition of p300-stimulated
coactivation, which may lead to ß-cell dysfunction by ER stress.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21986529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2012 Jan 1;302(1):L27-35. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00174.2011. Epub 2011 Oct 7.

Hyperoxia-induced activation of the integrated stress response in the newborn rat
lung.

Konsavage WM(1), Zhang L, Wu Y, Shenberger JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Pennsylvania State College of Medicine, Hershey,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Diverse environmental stresses stimulate eukaryotic translation initiation factor
2a (eIF2a) phosphorylation, leading to a stress-resistant state characterized by 
global attenuation of protein synthesis and induction of cytoprotective genes.
The signal transduction network culminating in these effects is referred to as
the integrated stress response (ISR) or, when initiated by misfolded proteins
within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the unfolded protein response (UPR). Given
that we previously reported that exposure of 4-day-old Sprague-Dawley rats to 95%
O(2) (Ox) diminishes global pulmonary protein synthesis and increases eIF2a
phosphorylation, we conducted the current study to determine whether Ox activates
the ISR or UPR. We found that Ox-induced alterations in ER morphology of alveolar
type II cells and interstitial fibroblasts were not associated with activation of
the UPR sensors PERK or activating transcription factor (ATF) 6 or with X-box
binding protein-1 mRNA splicing in whole lung extracts. Exposure to Ox enhanced
ATF4 immunoreactivity and nuclear protein content, followed by a 2- and 5-fold
increase in ATF3 protein and mRNA expression, respectively. The accumulation of
nuclear ATF4 protein coincided with induction of glutamate-cysteine ligase
catalytic subunit, an ISR-responsive gene. Immunohistochemistry revealed that
changes in ATF3/4 expression were prominent in the alveolus, whereas primary cell
culture implicated epithelial and endothelial cells as targets. Finally,
induction of ISR intermediates in the intact lung occurred in the absence of the 
phosphorylation of PKR, JNK, ERK1/2, and p38 MAPK. These findings demonstrate
that Ox activates the ISR within the newborn lung and highlight regional and
cell-specific alterations in the expression ISR transcription factors that
regulate redox balance.

PMID: 21984568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Cell Sci. 2011 Oct 15;124(Pt 20):3405-13. doi: 10.1242/jcs.076026. Epub 2011
Sep 29.

Inducible nitric oxide synthase-nitric oxide signaling mediates the mitogenic
activity of Rac1 during endochondral bone growth.

Wang G(1), Yan Q, Woods A, Aubrey LA, Feng Q, Beier F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, N6A 5C1, Canada.

Coordinated proliferation and differentiation of growth plate chondrocytes
controls endochondral bone growth and final height in humans, and disruption of
this process results in diseases of the growing and adult skeleton, such as
chondrodysplasias or osteoarthritis. We had shown recently that
chondrocyte-specific deletion of the gene Rac1 in mice leads to severe dwarfism
due to reduced chondrocyte proliferation, but the molecular pathways involved
remained unclear. Here, we demonstrate that Rac1-deficient chondrocytes have
severely reduced levels of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) protein and
nitric oxide (NO) production. NO donors reversed the proliferative effects
induced by Rac1 deficiency, whereas inhibition of NO production mimicked the
effects of Rac1 loss of function. Examination of the growth plate of
iNOS-deficient mice revealed reduced chondrocyte proliferation and expression of 
cyclin D1, resembling the phenotype of Rac1-deficient growth plates. Finally, we 
demonstrate that Rac1-NO signaling inhibits the expression of ATF3, a known
suppressor of cyclin D1 expression in chondrocytes. In conclusion, our studies
identify the iNOS-NO pathway as a novel mediator of mitogenic Rac1 signaling and 
indicate that it could be a target for growth disorder therapies.

PMID: 21965529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24660. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024660. Epub 2011 Sep 19.

HCV causes chronic endoplasmic reticulum stress leading to adaptation and
interference with the unfolded protein response.

Merquiol E(1), Uzi D, Mueller T, Goldenberg D, Nahmias Y, Xavier RJ, Tirosh B,
Shibolet O.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Unit, Division of Medicine, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel.

BACKGROUND: The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the cellular site for protein
folding. ER stress occurs when protein folding capacity is exceeded. This stress 
induces a cyto-protective signaling cascades termed the unfolded protein response
(UPR) aimed at restoring homeostasis. While acute ER stress is lethal, chronic
sub-lethal ER stress causes cells to adapt by attenuation of UPR activation.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV), a major human pathogen, was shown to cause ER stress,
however it is unclear whether HCV induces chronic ER stress, and if so whether
adaptation mechanisms are initiated. We wanted to characterize the kinetics of
HCV-induced ER stress during infection and assess adaptation mechanisms and their
significance.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: The HuH7.5.1 cellular system and HCV-transgenic (HCV-Tg)
mice were used to characterize HCV-induced ER stress/UPR pathway activation and
adaptation. HCV induced a wave of acute ER stress peaking 2-5 days
post-infection, which rapidly subsided thereafter. UPR pathways were activated
including IRE1 and EIF2a phosphorylation, ATF6 cleavage and XBP-1 splicing.
Downstream target genes including GADD34, ERdj4, p58ipk, ATF3 and ATF4 were
upregulated. CHOP, a UPR regulated protein was activated and translocated to the 
nucleus. Remarkably, UPR activity did not return to baseline but remained
elevated for up to 14 days post infection suggesting that chronic ER stress is
induced. At this time, cells adapted to ER stress and were less responsive to
further drug-induced ER stress. Similar results were obtained in HCV-Tg mice.
Suppression of HCV by Interferon-a 2a treatment, restored UPR responsiveness to
ER stress tolerant cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows, for the first time, that HCV induces adaptation to 
chronic ER stress which was reversed upon viral suppression. These finding
represent a novel viral mechanism to manipulate cellular response pathways.

PMCID: PMC3176279
PMID: 21949742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Oncogene. 2012 Apr 26;31(17):2210-21. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.397. Epub 2011 Sep
19.

Key role of ATF3 in p53-dependent DR5 induction upon DNA damage of human colon
cancer cells.

Taketani K(1), Kawauchi J, Tanaka-Okamoto M, Ishizaki H, Tanaka Y, Sakai T,
Miyoshi J, Maehara Y, Kitajima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Stress response gene ATF3 is one of the p53 target genes and has a tumor
suppressor role in cancer. However, the biological role of p53-ATF3 pathway is
not well understood. Death receptor 5 (DR5) is a death domain-containing
transmembrane receptor that triggers cell death upon binding to its ligand TRAIL 
(tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand), and a combination of
TRAIL and agents that increase the expression of DR5 is expected as a novel
anticancer therapy. In this report, we demonstrate that ATF3 is required for
efficient DR5 induction upon DNA damage by camptothecin (CPT) in colorectal
cancer cells. In the absence of ATF3, induction of DR5 messenger RNA and protein 
is remarkably abrogated, and this is associated with reduced cell death by TRAIL 
and CPT. By contrast, exogenous expression of ATF3 causes more rapid and elevated
expression of DR5, resulting in enhanced sensitivity to apoptotic cell death by
TRAIL/CPT. Reporter assay and DNA affinity precipitation assay demonstrate that
at least three ATF/CRE motifs at the proximal promoter of the human DR5 gene are 
involved in the activation of DNA damage-induced DR5 gene transcription.
Furthermore, ATF3 is shown to interact with p53 to form a complex on the DR5 gene
by Re-chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Taken together, our results provide a 
novel insight into the role of ATF3 as an essential co-transcription factor for
p53 upon DNA damage, and this may represent a useful biomarker for TRAIL-based
anticancer therapy.

PMID: 21927023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Mol Cell. 2011 Sep 16;43(6):950-61. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.06.031.

RNA homeostasis governed by cell type-specific and branched feedback loops acting
on NMD.

Huang L(1), Lou CH, Chan W, Shum EY, Shao A, Stone E, Karam R, Song HW, Wilkinson
MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a conserved RNA decay pathway that degrades
aberrant mRNAs and directly regulates many normal mRNAs. This dual role for NMD
raises the possibility that its magnitude is buffered to prevent the potentially 
catastrophic alterations in gene expression that would otherwise occur if NMD
were perturbed by environmental or genetic insults. In support of this, here we
report the existence of a negative feedback regulatory network that directly acts
on seven NMD factors. Feedback regulation is conferred by different branches of
the NMD pathway in a cell type-specific and developmentally regulated manner. We 
identify feedback-regulated NMD factors that are rate limiting for NMD and
demonstrate that reversal of feedback regulation in response to NMD perturbation 
is crucial for maintaining NMD. Together, our results suggest the existence of an
intricate feedback network that maintains both RNA surveillance and the
homeostasis of normal gene expression in mammalian cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4281029
PMID: 21925383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Neurosignals. 2011;19(4):210-21. doi: 10.1159/000330195. Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Neuronal injury marker ATF-3 is induced in primary afferent neurons of
monoarthritic rats.

Nascimento D(1), Pozza DH, Castro-Lopes JM, Neto FL.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Experimental, Faculdade de Medicina do Porto e
Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular (IBMC), Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF-3) expression has been associated with
several signaling pathways implicated in cellular stress response in many cell
types and is usually regarded as a neuronal damage marker in dorsal root ganglia 
(DRG). We investigated ATF-3 expression in primary afferents in the monoarthritic
(MA) model of chronic inflammatory joint pain. Immunohistochemistry revealed that
ATF-3 is highly induced mainly in small and medium neurons, especially at 2 and 4
days of MA in L(5) DRGs. Colocalization with calcitonin gene-related peptide
(CGRP) and isolectin B4 (IB4) demonstrated that ATF-3-immunoreactive cells are
mainly peptidergic. The lack of significant differences in ATF-3 and pAkt
colocalization indicated that ATF-3 is probably not involved in a pAkt-mediated
survival pathway. Anti-inflammatory (ketoprofen) administration failed to reverse
ATF-3 induction in MA rats, but significantly increased CGRP expression. These
data suggest that ATF-3 expression is definitely involved in MA, actually marking
injured neurons. Some degree of neuronal damage seems to occur right from the
first days of disease, mainly affecting small-to-medium peptidergic neurons. The 
intra-articular injection of complete Freund's adjuvant and the generation of a
neuroinflammatory environment seem to be the plausible explanation for the local 
nerve damage.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21912089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Dec;32(12):1749-57. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr203. Epub 2011
Sep 7.

Transcriptional activity of ATF3 in the stromal compartment of tumors promotes
cancer progression.

Buganim Y(1), Madar S, Rais Y, Pomeraniec L, Harel E, Solomon H, Kalo E,
Goldstein I, Brosh R, Haimov O, Avivi C, Polak-Charcon S, Goldfinger N, Barshack 
I, Rotter V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Compelling evidences have rendered the tumor microenvironment a crucial
determinant in cancer outcome. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a stress
response transcription factor, is known to have a dichotomous role in tumor
cells, acting either as a tumor suppressor or an oncogene in a context-dependent 
manner. However, its expression and possible role in the tumor microenvironment
are hitherto unknown. Here we show that ATF3 is upregulated in the stromal
compartment of several types of cancer. Accordingly, Cancer-associated
fibroblasts (CAFs) ectopically expressing ATF3 proliferated faster as indicated
by increased colony-forming capacity and promoted the growth of adjacent tumor
cells when co-injected into nude mice. Utilizing a genome-wide profiling
approach, we unraveled a robust gene expression program induced by ATF3 in CAFs. 
Focusing on a specific subset of genes, we found that the ability of stromal ATF3
to promote cancer progression is mediated by transcriptional repression of CLDN1 
and induction of CXCL12 and RGS4. In addition, regulation of LIF, CLDN1,
SERPINE2, HSD17B2, ITGA7 and PODXL by ATF3 mediated the increased proliferation
capacity of CAFs. In sum, our findings implicate ATF3 as a novel stromal tumor
promoter and suggest that targeting ATF3 pathway might be beneficial for
anticancer therapy.

PMID: 21900211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2012 Mar;155(2):213-8. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpc.2011.08.006. Epub 2011 Aug 24.

Activating transcription factor 3 and reactive astrocytes following optic nerve
injury in zebrafish.

Neve LD(1), Savage AA, Koke JR, García DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Texas State University, San Marcos, TX 78666, USA.
ln1064@txstate.edu

Nerve regeneration in the central nervous system is restricted in mammals, but
fish and amphibians show amazing resiliency following injury to the central
nervous system. We have examined the response of zebrafish (Danio rerio) to optic
nerve injury to try to understand the differences between fish and mammals that
enable fish to regenerate their optic nerves following crushing and severing. In 
previous work, we have shown that activating transcription factor 3 (atf3) is
expressed at higher levels following optic nerve injury. Here we use a polyclonal
anti-ATF3 antibody, anti-cytokeratin (KRT-18) and anti-bystin (BYSL) antibodies
to show that Atf3 and Bysl colocalize with cytokeratin-expressing astrocytes in
the optic nerve following severing. Furthermore, anti-ATF3 antibodies fail to
colocalize with GFP in transgenic zebrafish expressing EGFP in astrocytes
Tg(gfap:GFP) or oligodendrocytes Tg(olig2:EGFP). Interestingly, labeling of Atf3 
was detected in retinal ganglion cell axons in both the nerve fiber layer and the
optic nerve on the injured side. Finally, optic nerve astrocytes labeled with
anti-bystin antibodies showed evidence of hypertrophy, suggesting that fish
astrocytes in the optic nerve raise a bona fide reactive response to injury even 
though they do not express glial fibrillary acidic protein.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21889613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Neurosci. 2011 Aug 31;31(35):12543-53. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1589-11.2011.

Accelerated age-related cognitive decline and neurodegeneration, caused by
deficient DNA repair.

Borgesius NZ(1), de Waard MC, van der Pluijm I, Omrani A, Zondag GC, van der
Horst GT, Melton DW, Hoeijmakers JH, Jaarsma D, Elgersma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus MC, 3015 GE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands,
Cancer Genomics Center, Department of Genetics, Center for Biomedical Genetics,
Erasmus MC, 3015 GE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Age-related cognitive decline and neurodegenerative diseases are a growing
challenge for our societies with their aging populations. Accumulation of DNA
damage has been proposed to contribute to these impairments, but direct proof
that DNA damage results in impaired neuronal plasticity and memory is lacking.
Here we take advantage of Ercc1(<U+0394>/-) mutant mice, which are impaired in DNA
nucleotide excision repair, interstrand crosslink repair, and double-strand break
repair. We show that these mice exhibit an age-dependent decrease in neuronal
plasticity and progressive neuronal pathology, suggestive of neurodegenerative
processes. A similar phenotype is observed in mice where the mutation is
restricted to excitatory forebrain neurons. Moreover, these neuron-specific
mutants develop a learning impairment. Together, these results suggest a causal
relationship between unrepaired, accumulating DNA damage, and age-dependent
cognitive decline and neurodegeneration. Hence, accumulated DNA damage could
therefore be an important factor in the onset and progression of age-related
cognitive decline and neurodegenerative diseases.

PMID: 21880916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2011 Dec;301(6):F1202-7. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00272.2011. Epub 2011 Aug 31.

Phosphorylation of eIF2a via the general control kinase, GCN2, modulates the
ability of renal medullary cells to survive high urea stress.

Cai Q(1), Brooks HL.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Physiology, College of Medicine, University of Arizona, 1656 E. Mabel
St., Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

The phosphorylation of the a-subunit of the eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 2 (eIF2a) occurs under many stress conditions in mammalian cells and is
mediated by one of four eIF2a kinases: PERK, PKR, GCN2, and HRI. Cells of the
renal medulla are regularly exposed to fluctuating concentrations of urea and
sodium, the extracellular solutes responsible for the high osmolality in the
renal medulla, and thus the kidneys ability to concentrate the urine in times of 
dehydration. Urea stress is known to initiate molecular responses that diverge
from those seen in response to hypertonic stress (NaCl). We show that
urea-inducible GCN2 activation initiates the phosphorylation of eIF2a and the
downstream increase of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3). Loss of GCN2
sensitized cells to urea stress, increasing the expression of activated caspase-3
and decreasing cell survival. Loss of GCN2 ablated urea-induced phosphorylation
of eIF2a and reduced the expression of ATF3.

PMCID: PMC3233868
PMID: 21880833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Exp Neurol. 2011 Nov;232(1):41-52. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2011.08.001. Epub
2011 Aug 16.

Bromocriptine methylate suppresses glial inflammation and moderates disease
progression in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Tanaka K(1), Kanno T, Yanagisawa Y, Yasutake K, Hadano S, Yoshii F, Ikeda JE.

Author information: 
(1)NGP Biomedical Research Institute, Neugen Pharma Inc., Tokai University School
of Medicine, Isehara, Kanagawa 259-1193, Japan.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an adult-onset neurodegenerative disease
characterized by a selective loss of upper and lower motor neurons. Since
oxidative stress plays a crucial role in the progression of motor neuron loss
observed in ALS, anti-oxidative agents could be an important therapeutic means
for the ALS treatment. We have previously developed a drug screening system
allowing the identification of small chemical compounds that upregulate
endogenous neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein (NAIP), an oxidative
stress-induced cell death suppressor. Using this system, we identified the
dopamine D2 receptor agonist bromocriptine (BRC) as one of NAIP-upregulating
compounds. In this study, to prove the efficacy of BRC in ALS, we conducted a set
of preclinical studies using a transgenic ALS mouse model carrying the H46R
mutation in the human Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) gene ALS(SOD1(H46R)) by
the post-onset administration of BRC. ALS(SOD1(H46R)) mice receiving BRC showed
sustained motor functions and modest prolonged survival after onset. Further, BRC
treatment delayed anterior horn cell loss, and reduced the number of reactive
astrocytes and the level of inflammatory factors such as inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a in the spinal cord of late
symptomatic mice. In vitro study showed the reduced level of extracellular TNF-a 
after lipopolysaccharide (LPS) exposure in BRC-treated mouse astrocytes.
BRC-treated ALS(SOD1(H46R)) mice also showed a reduced level of oxidative damage 
in the spinal cord. Notably, BRC treatment resulted in an upregulation of
anti-oxidative stress genes, activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and heme
oxygenase-1 (HO-1), and the generation of a glutathione (GSH) in SH-SY5Y cultured
neuronal cells in a dopamine receptor-independent manner. These results imply
that BRC protects motor neurons from the oxidative injury via suppression of
astrogliosis in the spinal cord of ALS(SOD1(H46R)) mice. Thus, BRC might be a
promising therapeutic agent for the treatment of ALS.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21867702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Biomol Screen. 2011 Sep;16(8):825-35. doi: 10.1177/1087057111414893. Epub 2011 
Aug 15.

Complementary cell-based high-throughput screens identify novel modulators of the
unfolded protein response.

Fribley AM(1), Cruz PG, Miller JR, Callaghan MU, Cai P, Narula N, Neubig RR,
Showalter HD, Larsen SD, Kirchhoff PD, Larsen MJ, Burr DA, Schultz PJ, Jacobs RR,
Tamayo-Castillo G, Ron D, Sherman DH, Kaufman RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Carmen and Ann Adams Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Wayne State University, 421 E. Canfield, Detroit, MI 48201, 
USA.

Despite advances toward understanding the prevention and treatment of many
cancers, patients who suffer from oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) confront a 
survival rate that has remained unimproved for more than 2 decades, indicating
our ability to treat them pharmacologically has reached a plateau. In an ongoing 
effort to improve the clinical outlook for this disease, we previously reported
that an essential component of the mechanism by which the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib (PS-341, Velcade) induced apoptosis in OSCC required the activation of
a terminal unfolded protein response (UPR). Predicated on these studies, the
authors hypothesized that high-throughput screening (HTS) of large diverse
chemical libraries might identify more potent or selective small-molecule
activators of the apoptotic arm of the UPR to control or kill OSCC. They have
developed complementary cell-based assays using stably transfected CHO-K1 cell
lines that individually assess the PERK/eIF2a/CHOP (apoptotic) or the IRE1/XBP1
(adaptive) UPR subpathways. An 66 K compound collection was screened at the
University of Michigan Center for Chemical Genomics that included a unique
library of prefractionated natural product extracts. The mycotoxin
methoxycitrinin was isolated from a natural extract and found to selectively
activate the CHOP-luciferase reporter at 80 µM. A series of citrinin derivatives 
was isolated from these extracts, including a unique congener that has not been
previously described. In an effort to identify more potent compounds, the authors
examined the ability of citrinin and the structurally related mycotoxins
ochratoxin A and patulin to activate the UPR. Strikingly, it was found that
patulin at 2.5 to 10 µM induced a terminal UPR in a panel of OSCC cells that was 
characterized by an increase in CHOP, GADD34, and ATF3 gene expression and XBP1
splicing. A luminescent caspase assay and the induction of several BH3-only genes
indicated that patulin could induce apoptosis in OSCC cells. These data support
the use of this complementary HTS strategy to identify novel modulators of UPR
signaling and tumor cell death.

PMCID: PMC3374590
PMID: 21844328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Oncogene. 2012 Mar 29;31(13):1723-32. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.353. Epub 2011 Aug
15.

Pancreatic ß-cells activate a JunB/ATF3-dependent survival pathway during
inflammation.

Gurzov EN(1), Barthson J, Marhfour I, Ortis F, Naamane N, Igoillo-Esteve M,
Gysemans C, Mathieu C, Kitajima S, Marchetti P, Ørntoft TF, Bakiri L, Wagner EF, 
Eizirik DL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, 
Belgium. egurzov@ulb.ac.be

Destruction of insulin-producing pancreatic ß-cells by local autoimmune
inflammation is a hallmark of type 1 diabetes. Histochemical analysis of
pancreases from non-obese diabetic mice indicated activation of the transcription
factor JunB/AP-1 (activator protein-1) after autoimmune infiltration of the
islets. In vitro studies demonstrated that the cytokines tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-a and interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> induce JunB expression as a protective mechanism
against apoptosis in both human and rodent ß-cells. The gene network affected was
studied by microarray analysis showing that JunB regulates nearly 20% of the
cytokine-modified ß-cell genes, including the transcription factor ATF3. Direct
transcriptional induction of ATF3 by JunB is a key event for ß-cell survival
after TNF-a+IFN-<U+03B3> treatment. Moreover, pharmacological upregulation of JunB/ATF3 
via increased cAMP protected rodent primary ß-cells and human islet cells against
pro-inflammatory mediators. These results were confirmed in genetically modified 
islets derived from Ubi-JunB transgenic mice. Our findings identify ATF3 as a
novel downstream target of JunB in the survival mechanism of ß-cells under
inflammatory stress.

PMID: 21841823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Aug 26;412(2):385-90. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.07.108. Epub 2011 Jul 29.

ATF3 represses PDX-1 expression in pancreatic ß-cells.

Jang MK(1), Park HJ, Jung MH.

Author information: 
(1)Pusan National University, School of Korean Medicine, #30 Beom-eo ri,
Mulguem-eup, Yangsan-si, Gyeongnam 609-735, South Korea.

The downregulation of PDX-1 expression plays an important role in development of 
type 2 diabetes. However, the negative regulator of PDX-1 expression is not well 
known. In this study, we analyzed the mouse PDX-1 promoter to characterize the
effects of ATF3 on PDX-1 expression in pancreatic ß-cells. Both thapsigargin
treatment, an inducer of ER stress, and ATF3 expression decreased PDX-1
expression in pancreatic ß-cells, MIN6N8. Furthermore, they also repressed the
activity of -4.5 Kb promoter of mouse PDX-1 gene. Transfection studies with 5'
deleted-reporters showed that ATF3 repressed the activity of 0.9Kb PDX-1
promoter, whereas it did not affect the activity of 0.7 Kb PDX-1 promoter,
suggesting that ATF3 responsive element is located between the -903 and -702. An 
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
demonstrated that ATF3 binds directly to the promoter region spanning from -759
to -738. Moreover, mutation of the putative ATF/CRE site between -752 and -745
abrogated ATF3-mediated transrepression of the PDX-1 promoter. PDX-1 was
decreased in MIN6N8 cells treated with high glucose or high palmitate, whereas
ATF3 was increased, indicating that ATF3 plays a role in hyperglycemia or
hyperlipidemia-mediated downregulation of PDX-1 expression. Collectively, these
results demonstrate that ATF3 represses PDX-1 expression via binding to an
ATF3-responsive element in its promoter, which plays an important role in
suppression of pancreatic ß-cells function.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21821004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Jul;16(7):1618-28. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01401.x.

Salermide up-regulates death receptor 5 expression through the ATF4-ATF3-CHOP
axis and leads to apoptosis in human cancer cells.

Liu G(1), Su L, Hao X, Zhong N, Zhong D, Singhal S, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan, China.

Sirtuins (a class III histone deacetylase) have emerged as novel targets for
cancer therapy. Salermide, a reverse amide compound that inhibits Sirtuin 1
(Sirt1) and Sirtuin 2 (Sirt2), has been shown to induce apoptosis in human cancer
cells. The mechanism underlying cellular apoptotic signalling by salermide
remains unclear. In this study, we show that salermide up-regulates the
expression of death receptor 5 (DR5) in human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
cells. Blocking DR5 expression by gene silencing technology results in a decrease
in activated forms of several pro-apoptotic proteins (caspase-8, caspase-9,
caspase-3, PARP). Increasing DR5 protein expression correlates with
salermide-induced apoptosis in human NSCLC cells. We discovered that IRE-1a, Bip,
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF4), activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) are induced by salermide, which
suggests that DR5-dependent apoptosis is induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress.
Moreover, knockdown of Sirt1 and Sirt2 expression resulted in up-regulation of
ATF4, CHOP and DR5. Transfected NSCLC cells with ATF4, ATF3 or CHOP siRNA results
in a decline in pro-apoptotic proteins (such as caspase-8, caspase-9, caspase-3
and PARP) despite salermide treatment. We demonstrate that salermide induces
expression of ATF4, and ATF4 up-regulates ATF3 and subsequently modulates CHOP.
This suggests that DR5 is modulated by the ATF4-ATF3-CHOP axis in NSCLC after
Sirt1/2 inhibition or salermide treatment. This study highlights the importance
of DR5 up-regulation in apoptosis induced by Sirt1/2 inhibition and elucidates
the underlying mechanism in human NSCLC cells.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3823229
PMID: 21801305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Neuroscience. 2011 Oct 13;193:421-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.07.031.
Epub 2011 Jul 20.

Different expression of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase family members in
rat dorsal root ganglia and their changes after peripheral nerve injury.

Huang B(1), Zhao X, Zheng LB, Zhang L, Ni B, Wang YW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200003, China.

Matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) and MMP2 are important in the development and
maintenance of neuropathic pain behavior induced by peripheral nerve injury. The 
enzymatic activity of MMP9 and MMP2 is balanced specifically by tissue inhibitor 
of metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP1) and TIMP2, respectively. In present study, we
measured the effect of peripheral nerve injury on the expression of TIMP1 and
TIMP2 in adult dorsal root ganglia (DRG). A dramatic increase of TIMP1 mRNA and a
decrease of TIMP2 in DRG after sciatic nerve transection (SNT) were displayed
through a real-time PCR method. Furthermore, data showed by in situ hybridization
that TIMP1 mRNA was only localized in DRG satellite cells under normal
conditions. TIMP1 mRNA was increased in satellite cells, and induced within
sensory neurons after SNT. Analysis of neuronal profiles showed that induced
TIMP1 mRNA was mainly contained in small and medium DRG neurons. Further study
displayed that induced TIMP1 mRNA was predominantly present in activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3)-positive injured DRG neurons. Comparatively, TIMP2 
mRNA was mostly contained within sensory neurons and the overall amount decreased
at the late stage after nerve injury. These data showed different change of TIMPs
in DRG after peripheral nerve injury.

Copyright © 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21782897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Oct;1809(10):549-56. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.07.003. Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Gestational low protein diet selectively induces the amino acid response pathway 
target genes in the liver of offspring rats through transcription factor binding 
and histone modifications.

Zhou D(1), Pan YX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illnois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

The amino acid response (AAR) pathway detects a deficiency of dietary amino acid 
or protein. To investigate the impact of gestational protein restriction on the
AAR pathway in offspring, pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were fed a control (C) or 
low protein (LP) diet during gestation. Livers of female offspring were collected
on postnatal d 38. The mRNA amount of Atf3 in LP offspring increased
significantly compared with C offspring, while Asns did not differ between the
two groups. ATF4 and p-eIF2a were both induced in LP offspring, whereas p-ERK was
significantly decreased. Additionally, amino acid limitation (-AA) in HepG2 cells
increased p-ERK and AAR pathway-related genes, while U0126 decreased p-ERK but
did not completely reverse the activation of AAR pathway-related genes. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated an increased association of both RNA
polymerase II (Pol II) and ATF4 at the Atf3 promoter in LP offspring, while
acetylated histone H4, tri-methyl histone H3 at lysine 9, ATF4, ATF3, C/EBPß, and
CHOP, but not Pol II, were all increased at the Asns promoter in LP offspring. In
-AA HepG2 cells, C/EBPß siRNA treatment did not prevent the activation of either 
ATF3 or ASNS in response to -AA, while ATF4 siRNA prevented the activation of
ASNS but not ATF3. Our data demonstrates that a maternal LP diet programs the AAR
pathway in the liver of offspring rats. The differential priming of the
downstream target genes of the AAR pathway in response to maternal LP diet
presents a novel regulatory mechanism related to nutrient-gene interactions.

2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21777709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2011 Sep;11(7):799-809.

Bortezomib targets the caspase-like proteasome activity in cervical cancer cells,
triggering apoptosis that can be enhanced by nelfinavir.

Bruning A(1), Vogel M, Mylonas I, Friese K, Burges A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Campus Innenstadt,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany.
ansgar.bruening@med.uni-muenchen.de

The occurrence of chemoresistance is a serious problem in the treatment of
cancer, urging the need for second and third-line treatment options that rely on 
different cell death pathways to overcome previously acquired resistance
mechanisms. The inhibition of proteasomal activity by specific proteasome
inhibitors or cross-reactivity of certain protease inhibitors with proteasomal
enzymes recently became of interest because of the anti-tumoral properties of
these agents. We tested the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib and the HIV protease 
inhibitor nelfinavir on human cervical cancer cells. Both drugs induced cell
cycle arrest in cervical cancer cells, as reflected by marked changes in the
expression of cell cycle-regulatory cyclins and ensuing mitochondrial-independent
apoptosis. Upregulation of the molecular chaperone BiP and the cell stress marker
ATF3 indicated induction of the unfolded protein response (UPR) as the main cause
of apoptosis induced by these drugs in cervical cancer cells. Unlike in leukemia 
cells, bortezomib mainly inhibited the caspase-like activity of the proteasome in
cervical cancer cells. Nelfinavir exhibited no effects on proteasomal activity in
cervical cancer cells and leukemia cells. Although both bortezomib and nelfinavir
acted on cisplatin-resistant cervical cancer cells (SiHa), neither of the drugs
induced a sensitization to cisplatin treatment. Instead, both drugs could
effectively be combined with each other, and enhanced the efficacy of an
apoptosis-inducing TRAIL receptor antibody. These results suggest that both
bortezomib and nelfinavir are effective agents against chemoresistant cervical
cancer cells and might be of interest for clinical studies on cervical cancer
patients with recurrent or metastatic cancer.

PMID: 21762082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2011 Aug;70(8):662-77. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e31822581ac.

Spinal inhibitory interneuron pathology follows motor neuron degeneration
independent of glial mutant superoxide dismutase 1 expression in SOD1-ALS mice.

Hossaini M(1), Cardona Cano S, van Dis V, Haasdijk ED, Hoogenraad CC, Holstege
JC, Jaarsma D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Motor neuron degeneration and skeletal muscle denervation are hallmarks of
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), but other neuron populations and glial cells
are also involved in ALS pathogenesis. We examined changes in inhibitory
interneurons in spinal cords of the ALS model low-copy Gurney G93A-SOD1 (G1del)
mice and found reduced expression of markers of glycinergic and GABAergic
neurons, that is, glycine transporter 2 (GlyT2) and glutamic acid decarboxylase
(GAD65/67), specifically in the ventral horns of clinically affected mice. There 
was also loss of GlyT2 and GAD67 messenger RNA-labeled neurons in the
intermediate zone. Ubiquitinated inclusions appeared in interneurons before 20
weeks of age, that is, after their development in motor neurons but before the
onset of clinical signs and major motor neuron degeneration, which starts from 25
weeks of age. Because mutant superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) in glia might
contribute to the pathogenesis, we also examined neuron-specific G93A-SOD1 mice; 
they also had loss of inhibitory interneuron markers in ventral horns and
ubiquitinated interneuron inclusions. These data suggest that, in mutant
SOD1-associated ALS, pathological changes may spread from motor neurons to
interneuronsin a relatively early phase of the disease, independent of the
presence of mutant SOD1 in glia. The degeneration of spinal inhibitory
interneurons may in turn facilitate degeneration of motor neurons and contribute 
to disease progression.

PMID: 21760539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Bone Miner Metab. 2012 Jan;30(1):31-9. doi: 10.1007/s00774-011-0292-6. Epub
2011 Jul 6.

Elbow loading promotes longitudinal bone growth of the ulna and the humerus.

Zhang P(1), Yokota H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
IN 46202, USA.

Mechanical stimulation plays a critical role in bone development and growth. In
view of recently recognized anabolic responses promoted by a joint-loading
modality, we examined the effects of elbow loading on longitudinal growth of the 
ulna and the humerus. Using a custom-made piezoelectric loader, the left elbow of
growing C57/BL/6 female mice was given daily 5-min bouts of dynamic loading for
10 days. The right forelimbs of those mice served as contralateral controls, and 
the limbs of non-treated mice were used as age-matched controls. The effects of
elbow loading were evaluated through measurement of bone length, weight, bone
mineral density (BMD), and bone mineral content (BMC), as well as mRNA expression
levels of load-sensitive transcription factors such as c-fos, egr1, and atf3. The
results revealed that the humerus was elongated by 1.2% compared to the
contralateral and age-matched controls (both p < 0.001), while the ulna had
become longer than the contralateral control (1.7%; p < 0.05) and the age-match
control (3.4%; p < 0.001). Bone lengthening was associated with increases in bone
weight, BMD and BMC. Furthermore, the mRNA levels of the selected transcription
factors were elevated in the loaded ulna and humerus. Interestingly, the increase
was observed not only at the elbow but also at the wrist and shoulder in the
loaded limb. The present study demonstrates that joint loading is potentially
useful for stimulating bone lengthening and treating limb length discrepancy.

PMID: 21748461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Lipids. 2011 Oct;46(10):885-92. doi: 10.1007/s11745-011-3587-4. Epub 2011 Jul 10.

JNK inhibition by SP600125 attenuates trans-10, cis-12 conjugated linoleic
acid-mediated regulation of inflammatory and lipogenic gene expression.

Martinez K(1), Kennedy A, McIntosh MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina, 318 Stone Building, PO 
Box 26170, Greensboro, NC 27402-6170, USA. kbmarti2@uncg.edu

Supplementation with a mixture of trans-10, cis-12 (t10,c12) and cis-9, trans-11 
(c9,t11) isomers of conjugated linoleic acid (CLA), or t10,c12 CLA alone, reduces
body weight and fat deposition in animals and some humans. However, these
anti-obesity actions of t10,c12 CLA are routinely accompanied by increased
markers of inflammation and insulin resistance. Thus, we examined the extent to
which blocking c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling using the JNK inhibitor 
SP600125 attenuated markers of inflammation and insulin resistance in primary
human adipocytes treated with t10,c12 CLA. SP600125 attenuated t10,c12
CLA-mediated phosphorylation of cJun and increased protein levels of activating
transcription factor (ATF) 3, two downstream targets of JNK. SP600125 attenuated 
t10,c12 CLA-mediated induction of inflammatory genes, including interleukin
(IL)-6, IL-8, IL-1ß, ATF3, monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1, and
cyclooxygenase-2. Consistent with these data, SP600125 prevented t10,c12
CLA-mediated secretion of IL-8, IL-6, and MCP-1. SP600125 prevented t10,c12 CLA
suppression of lipogenic genes including peroxisome proliferator activated
receptor gamma, liver X receptor, sterol regulatory element binding protein,
acetyl-CoA carboxylase, and stearoyl-CoA desaturase. Additionally, SP600125
blocked t10,c12 CLA-mediated induction of suppressor of cytokine synthesis-3 and 
suppression of adiponectin and insulin-dependent glucose transporter 4 mRNA
levels. Collectively, these data suggest that JNK signaling plays an important
role in t10,c12 CLA-mediated regulation of inflammatory and lipogenic gene
expression in primary cultures of human adipocytes.

PMCID: PMC3167035
PMID: 21744278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Brain Res. 2011 Aug 8;1405:95-108. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.06.022. Epub 2011
Jul 8.

Detailed characterization of neuro-immune responses following neuropathic injury 
in mice.

Kim CF(1), Moalem-Taylor G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052,
Australia.

Partial sciatic nerve injury is a common model of neuropathic pain in rodents,
and produces both mechanical and thermal pain hypersensitivity. Several types of 
immune cells have been implicated in the pathogenesis of neuropathic pain due to 
nerve injury; however, the timing of their appearance has not been fully
elucidated. Here, using immunohistochemistry, we characterized the time course
and magnitude of inflammatory cell infiltration and resident immune cell
activation in the sciatic nerves, L3-5 dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) and spinal
segments following partial ligation of the sciatic nerve (PSNL) in C57BL/6J mice.
PSNL markedly decreased paw withdrawal threshold to mechanical stimuli and paw
withdrawal latency to thermal stimuli in the injured side. No changes were
observed in the uninjured contralateral side. Mechanical allodynia persisted, and
thermal hyperalgesia resolved by 2weeks after injury. We found a significant
increase in the numbers of infiltrating neutrophils, macrophages, dendritic cells
and lymphocytes in the injured sciatic nerve and ipsilateral DRGs in comparison
to sham-operated controls, with different timelines of recruitment for each cell 
type. Expression of ATF3 in the cell bodies of DRG neurons indicated about 30-40%
neuronal damage. No neutrophils, dendritic cells, or lymphocytes were found in
the spinal cord. However, a significant increase in the level of microglial and
astrocytic activation was observed in the spinal dorsal horn and to a lesser
extent in the ventral horn, peaking on days 7 and 14 after nerve injury. These
changes corresponded with a significant increase in immunoreactivity for
phosphorylated NR1 subunit of the NMDA receptor, and a significant decrease in
IB4-labeled non-peptidergic nociceptive terminals in the ipsilateral dorsal horn.
Our findings suggest differential roles for peripheral and central neuroimmune
interactions in the production of neuropathic pain.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21741621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Oncogene. 2012 Jan 19;31(3):390-401. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.230. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Identification of a c-Jun N-terminal kinase-2-dependent signal amplification
cascade that regulates c-Myc levels in ras transformation.

Mathiasen DP(1), Egebjerg C, Andersen SH, Rafn B, Puustinen P, Khanna A, Daugaard
M, Valo E, Tuomela S, Bøttzauw T, Nielsen CF, Willumsen BM, Hautaniemi S,
Lahesmaa R, Westermarck J, Jäättelä M, Kallunki T.

Author information: 
(1)Apoptosis Department and Centre for Genotoxic Stress Research, Institute of
Cancer Biology, Danish Cancer Society, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Ras is one of the most frequently activated oncogenes in cancer. Two
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are important for ras transformation:
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase 2 (JNK2).
Here we present a downstream signal amplification cascade that is critical for
ras transformation in murine embryonic fibroblasts. This cascade is coordinated
by ERK and JNK2 MAPKs, whose Ras-mediated activation leads to the enhanced levels
of three oncogenic transcription factors, namely, c-Myc, activating transcription
factor 2 (ATF2) and ATF3, all of which are essential for ras transformation.
Previous studies show that ERK-mediated serine 62 phosphorylation protects c-Myc 
from proteasomal degradation. ERK is, however, not alone sufficient to stabilize 
c-Myc but requires the cooperation of cancerous inhibitor of protein phosphatase 
2A (CIP2A), an oncogene that counteracts protein phosphatase 2A-mediated
dephosphorylation of c-Myc. Here we show that JNK2 regulates Cip2a transcription 
via ATF2. ATF2 and c-Myc cooperate to activate the transcription of ATF3.
Remarkably, not only ectopic JNK2, but also ectopic ATF2, CIP2A, c-Myc and ATF3
are sufficient to rescue the defective ras transformation of JNK2-deficient
cells. Thus, these data identify the key signal converging point of JNK2 and ERK 
pathways and underline the central role of CIP2A in ras transformation.

PMID: 21706057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Eur Spine J. 2011 Nov;20(11):1885-91. doi: 10.1007/s00586-011-1877-4. Epub 2011
Jun 23.

The effect of repeated restraint stress in pain-related behavior induced by
nucleus pulposus applied on the nerve root in rats.

Uesugi K(1), Sekiguchi M, Kikuchi S, Konno S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Fukushima Medical University School of
Medicine, 1-Hikarigaoka, Fukushima City, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic pain has an impact on psychological and social factors. It 
is known that stress influences physiological and behavioral changes and affects 
several neurotransmitter and hormonal systems. It is also known that
corticosterone is increased by stress. The role of chronic stress in sciatica in 
lumbar disc herniation (LDH) in rats has not been investigated. The aim of this
study was to investigate the effect of the restraint stress (RS) on pain-related 
behavior induced by application of nucleus pulposus (NP) in rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Adult female Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into six
experimental groups (naive group; naive + RS; sham group; sham + RS; autologous
nucleus pulposus [NP] applied on the left L5 nerve root [NP group]; and NP + RS
group). Von Frey tests were used to test pain-related behavior. Concentrations of
plasma corticosterone were measured to assess changes in levels of endogenous
corticosterone caused by RS. Expression of ATF-3 in the left L5 DRG was examined 
by immunohistochemical analyses in each group.
RESULTS: Mechanical withdrawal thresholds of the NP and NP + RS groups were
significantly decreased after surgery compared with the naive group. Although the
thresholds in the NP group recovered after 28 days, the thresholds in the NP + RS
group were significantly decreased during the 42 days after surgery. RS increased
the concentration of plasma corticosterone at 21 and 42 days after surgery. In
the NP and the NP + RS groups, the expression of ATF-3 was significantly
increased at 7 days after surgery. The expression of ATF-3 was sustained for
21 days by RS.
CONCLUSION: Concentrations of plasma corticosterone were increased in three
groups that underwent RS. The pain-related behavior persisted for the long term
in the LDH model. The expression of ATF-3 in DRG neurons increased for 21 days by
RS. These results suggest that RS plays a role in the chronicity of pain-related 
behavior in the LDH rats.

PMCID: PMC3207337
PMID: 21698480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2011 Sep;31(3):475-81. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2011.06.002.
Epub 2011 Jun 12.

Identification and molecular cloning of Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) transcript and its induction in spleen following
intraperitoneal polyriboinosinic polyribocytidylic acid injection.

Feng CY(1), Rise ML.

Author information: 
(1)Ocean Sciences Centre, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, NL,
Canada.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) participates in cellular processes to
adapt to various extra- and intra-cellular changes including the modulation of
immunity to prevent uncontrolled immune responses to pathogens. In teleost
fishes, the involvement of ATF3 in immune response has not been documented. In
this study, the putative Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) ATF3 transcript was
identified by performing rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) based on unknown
expressed sequence tags (ESTs) that are potentially inducible by polyriboinosinic
polyribocytidylic acid (pIC, a synthetic double-stranded RNA viral mimic) in
Atlantic cod. ATF3-like ESTs were the most abundant unknown transcript (i.e.
lacking significant BLAST hits) generated from a previously constructed cDNA
library enriched for pIC inducible transcripts in Atlantic cod spleen. The
full-length cDNA of cod ATF3 consists of 2329 nucleotides with an open reading
frame (ORF) of 735 bp encoding 244 amino acids. The deduced amino acid sequence
of Atlantic cod ATF3 shares over 45% identity with its putative orthologs from
other vertebrates. In addition, the presence of a conserved basic region leucine 
zipper (bZIP) domain in the deduced Atlantic cod ATF3-like protein further
supports its identity as an ATF3 homolog. In the spleen of Atlantic cod
challenged with intraperitoneal (IP) injections of pIC, the time-course
transcript expression of ATF3 was studied using quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (QPCR). At 6 h following the pIC
injection, the relative expression level of ATF3 mRNA was significantly
up-regulated in comparison to a pre-injected control (61.9-fold) and its
time-matched saline-injected control (97.3-fold). At 24 h following the pIC
injection, the mRNA expression level of cod ATF3 had subsided and was no longer
significantly different from its pre-injected control, but significantly higher
(1.88-fold) than its time-matched saline-injected control. Collectively, these
results suggest that ATF3 may be involved in the modulation of innate anti-viral 
response in Atlantic cod.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21684340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2011 Jun 16;12:134. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-12-134.

Pain-related sensory innervation in monoiodoacetate-induced osteoarthritis in rat
knees that gradually develops neuronal injury in addition to inflammatory pain.

Orita S(1), Ishikawa T, Miyagi M, Ochiai N, Inoue G, Eguchi Y, Kamoda H, Arai G, 
Toyone T, Aoki Y, Kubo T, Takahashi K, Ohtori S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan. sumihisa@silver.email.ne.jp

BACKGROUND: The exact mechanism of knee osteoarthritis (OA)-associated pain is
unclear, whereas mixed evidence of inflammatory pain and neuropathic pain has
been noted. We aimed to investigate pain-related sensory innervation in a
monoiodoacetate (MIA)-induced model of OA.
METHODS: Sixty of seventy female Sprague Dawley rats of six week-old underwent
intra-articular MIA and fluorogold (FG) retrograde neurotracer injection into
their right (ipsilateral) knee, while their left knees were treated with FG in
saline as a control (contralateral knee). Other rats were treated with FG only
bilaterally, and used as controls. Rats were evaluated for tactile allodynia
using von Frey hairs. Proinflammatory mediators in the knee soft tissues,
including tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a, interleukin (IL)-6, and nerve growth
factor (NGF), were quantified using ELISAs to evaluate inflammation in the knee
after 1, 4, 7, 14, 21, and 28 days post injection. Dorsal root ganglia (DRG) were
immunostained for three molecules after 7, 14, 21, and 28 days post injection:
calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), a marker of inflammatory pain; and
activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3) and growth associated protein-43
(GAP43), as markers for nerve injury and regenerating axons. The distribution of 
microglia in the spinal cord were also evaluated, because they have been reported
to increase in neuropathic pain states. These evaluations were performed up to 28
days postinjection. P < 0.05 was considered significant.
RESULTS: Progressive tactile allodynia and elevated cytokine concentrations were 
observed in ipsilateral knees. CGRP-immunoreactive (-ir) ipsilateral DRG neurons 
significantly increased, peaking at 14 days postinjection, while expression of
FG-labeled ATF3-ir or ATF3-ir GAP43-ir DRG neurons significantly increased in a
time-dependent manner. Significant proliferation of microglia were found with
time in the ipsilateral dorsal horn.
CONCLUSIONS: Pain-related characteristics in a MIA-induced rat OA model can
originate from an inflammatory pain state induced by the local inflammation
initiated by inflammatory cytokines, and that state will be followed by gradual
initiation of neuronal injury, which may induce the neuropathic pain state.

PMCID: PMC3142251
PMID: 21679434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Dev Neurobiol. 2011 Dec;71(12):1186-211. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20934.

Multiple transcription factor families regulate axon growth and regeneration.

Moore DL(1), Goldberg JL.

Author information: 
(1)Bascom Palmer Eye Institute and the Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute,
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Florida, USA.

Understanding axon regenerative failure remains a major goal in neuroscience, and
reversing this failure remains a major goal for clinical neurology. Although an
inhibitory central nervous system environment clearly plays a role, focus on
molecular pathways within neurons has begun to yield fruitful insights. Initial
steps forward investigated the receptors and signaling pathways immediately
downstream of environmental cues, but recent work has also shed light on
transcriptional control mechanisms that regulate intrinsic axon growth ability,
presumably through whole cassettes of gene target regulation. Here we will
discuss transcription factors that regulate neurite growth in vitro and in vivo, 
including p53, SnoN, E47, cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB), signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), nuclear factor of activated 
T cell (NFAT), c-Jun activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), sex determining
region Ybox containing gene 11 (Sox11), nuclear factor <U+03BA>-light chain enhancer of 
activated B cells (NF<U+03BA>B), and Krüppel-like factors (KLFs). Revealing the
similarities and differences among the functions of these transcription factors
may further our understanding of the mechanisms of transcriptional regulation in 
axon growth and regeneration.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3212623
PMID: 21674813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. BMC Cancer. 2011 Jun 13;11:238. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-238.

COX-2 gene expression in colon cancer tissue related to regulating factors and
promoter methylation status.

Asting AG(1), Carén H, Andersson M, Lönnroth C, Lagerstedt K, Lundholm K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Increased cyclooxygenase activity promotes progression of colorectal 
cancer, but the mechanisms behind COX-2 induction remain elusive. This study was 
therefore aimed to define external cell signaling and transcription factors
relating to high COX-2 expression in colon cancer tissue.
METHOD: Tumor and normal colon tissue were collected at primary curative
operation in 48 unselected patients. COX-2 expression in tumor and normal colon
tissue was quantified including microarray analyses on tumor mRNA accounting for 
high and low tumor COX-2 expression. Cross hybridization was performed between
tumor and normal colon tissue. Methylation status of up-stream COX-2 promoter
region was evaluated.
RESULTS: Tumors with high COX-2 expression displayed large differences in gene
expression compared to normal colon. Numerous genes with altered expression
appeared in tumors of high COX-2 expression compared to tumors of low COX-2.
COX-2 expression in normal colon was increased in patients with tumors of high
COX-2 compared to normal colon from patients with tumors of low COX-2. IL1ß, IL6 
and iNOS transcripts were up-regulated among external cell signaling factors;
nine transcription factors (ATF3, C/EBP, c-Fos, Fos-B, JDP2, JunB, c-Maf, NF-<U+03BA>B, 
TCF4) showed increased expression and 5 (AP-2, CBP, Elk-1, p53, PEA3) were
decreased in tumors with high COX-2. The promoter region of COX-2 gene did not
show consistent methylation in tumor or normal colon tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: Transcription and external cell signaling factors are altered as
covariates to COX-2 expression in colon cancer tissue, but DNA methylation of the
COX-2 promoter region was not a significant factor behind COX-2 expression in
tumor and normal colon tissue.

PMCID: PMC3130705
PMID: 21668942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Arch Pharm Res. 2011 May;34(5):829-36. doi: 10.1007/s12272-011-0517-1. Epub 2011 
Jun 9.

Suppression of Nrf2 signaling by angiotensin II in murine renal epithelial cells.

Kang SJ(1), You A, Kwak MK.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan-si, Gyeongsangbuk-do
712-749, Korea.

Comment in
    Arch Pharm Res. 2011 May;34(5):695-7.

Angiotensin II (ATII), a physiologically active mediator of the renin-angiotensin
system, has been shown to be associated with renal fibrosis pathophysiology. In
our current study with murine renal epithelial TCMK-1 cells, ATII inhibited the
expression of NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)-target antioxidant genes such as
NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase-1 and <U+03B3>-glutamate cysteine ligase (GCL). In
accord to the reduced expression of GCL, a GSH biosynthesis enzyme, ATII
treatment reduced intracellular GSH content and increased the levels of reactive 
oxygen species (ROS). While, there was no significant changes in nuclear protein 
levels of Nrf2 following ATII treatment, implying the potential alterations in
the expression of partner proteins of Nrf2. Our measurement of Nrf2 partner bZIP 
transcription factors, including Bach1, small Maf proteins, and activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) showed that the expression level for ATF3 was
enhanced in ATII-treated TCMK cells. Presumably through ATII-induced oxidative
stress, ATII treatment was found to enhance the inducible level of TGFß-mediated 
a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) expression, which is one of molecular markers of
renal fibrosis. In conclusion, our results indicate that ATII suppresses Nrf2-GSH
signaling in murine renal epithelial cells. Elevated ROS levels in ATII exposed
epithelial cells might be a causing factor contributing to renal fibrosis
pathology.

PMID: 21656369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Physiol Genomics. 2011 Aug 16;43(15):917-29. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00051.2011. Epub 2011 Jun 7.

Comparative gene responses to collected ambient particles in vitro: endothelial
responses.

Aung HH(1), Lame MW, Gohil K, He G, Denison MS, Rutledge JC, Wilson DW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, School
of Medicine, University of California, Davis, California, USA.

Epidemiologic studies associate exposure to ambient particulate matter (APM) with
increased cardiovascular mortality. Since both pulmonary inflammation and
systemic circulation of ultrafine particles are hypothesized as initiating
cardiovascular effects, we examined responses of potential target cells in vitro.
Human aortic endothelial cells (HAEC) were exposed to 10 µg/ml fine and ultrafine
APM collected in an urban setting in summer 2006 or winter 2007 in the San
Joaquin Valley, California. RNA isolated after 3 h was analyzed with high-density
oligonucleotide arrays. Summer APM treatment affected genes involved in
xenobiotic and oxidoreductase activity, transcription factors, and inflammatory
responses in HAEC, while winter APM had a robust xenobiotic but lesser
inflammatory response. Real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis confirmed
that particulate matter (PM)-treated HAEC increased mRNA levels of xenobiotic
response enzymes CYP1A1, ALDH1A3, and TIPARP and cellular stress response
transcription factor ATF3. Inflammatory response genes included E-selectin,
PTGS2, CXCL-2 (MIP-2a), and CCL-2 (MCP-1). Multiplex protein assays showed
secretion of IL-6 and MCP-1 by HAEC. Since induction of CYP1A1 is mediated
through the ligand-activated aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), we demonstrated APM
induced AhR nuclear translocation by immunofluorescence and Western blotting and 
activation of the AhR response element using a luciferase reporter construct.
Inhibitor studies suggest differential influences of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon signaling, ROS-mediated responses and endotoxin alter stress and
proinflammatory endothelial cell responses. Our findings demonstrate gene
responses correlated with current concepts that systemic inflammation drives
cardiovascular effects of particulate air pollution. We also demonstrate a unique
pattern of gene responses related to xenobiotic metabolism in PM-exposed HAEC.

PMCID: PMC4631546
PMID: 21652769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011 Sep 30;667(1-3):292-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2011.05.062.
Epub 2011 Jun 2.

Nicorandil attenuates cyclic strain-induced endothelin-1 expression via the
induction of activating transcription factor 3 in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells.

Chao HH(1), Hong HJ, Sung LC, Chen JJ, Cheng TH, Liu JC.

Author information: 
(1)Shin Kong Wu Ho-Su Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

Nicorandil is an adenosine triphosphate-sensitive potassium channel opener that
combines an organic nitrate and a nicotinamide group which respectively confer to
nicorandil the additional properties of being a nitric oxide (NO) donor and
antioxidant; it also induces vasodilation, decreases the blood pressure, and
protects the heart. However, the intracellular mechanism of nicorandil remains to
be delineated. The aims of this study were to test the hypothesis that nicorandil
alters strain-induced endothelin-1 secretion and NO production, and to identify
the putative underlying signaling pathways in human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVECs). Cultured HUVECs were exposed to cyclic strain in the presence of 
nicorandil; endothelin-1 expression was examined by
reverse-transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay. Activation of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK),
endothelial NO synthase (eNOS), and activating transcription factor (ATF)-3 was
assessed by Western blot analysis. We show that nicorandil inhibited
strain-induced endothelin-1 expression. Nicorandil also inhibited
strain-increased reactive oxygen species formation and ERK phosphorylation. On
the contrary, NO production, eNOS phosphorylation, and ATF3 expression were
enhanced by nicorandil; however, L-NAME (an inhibitor of eNOS) and LY294002 (an
inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase) inhibited nicorandil-increased ATF3
expression. Moreover, treatment of HUVECs with either an NO donor (NOC18;
3,3-bis[aminoethyl]-1-hydroxy-2-oxo-1-triazene) or an ATF3 activator (MG-132;
carbobenzoxy-L-leucyl-L-leucyl-L-leucinal) resulted in repression of
strain-induced endothelin-1 expression. Furthermore, L-NAME, and small
interfering RNA transfection of eNOS also partially attenuated the inhibitory
effect of nicorandil on strain-induced endothelin-1 expression. We demonstrate
for the first time that nicorandil inhibits strain-induced endothelin-1 secretion
via an increase in NO and upregulation of ATF3 in HUVECs. This study provides
important new insights into the molecular pathways that may contribute to the
beneficial effects of nicorandil in the cardiovascular system.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21645504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Front Neurol. 2011 May 17;2:30. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2011.00030. eCollection 2011.

Activating transcription factor 3, a useful marker for regenerative response
after nerve root injury.

Lindå H(1), Sköld MK, Ochsmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet Stockholm, Sweden.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is induced in various tissues in
response to stress. In this experiment, ATF3 expression was studied in adult rats
subjected either to a dorsal or ventral root avulsion (VRA; L4-6), or sciatic
nerve transection (SNT). Post-operative survival times varied between 1.5<U+2009>h and
3<U+2009>weeks. In additional experiments an avulsed ventral root was directly replanted
to the spinal cord. Dorsal root ganglias (DRGs) from humans exposed to traumatic 
dorsal root avulsions were also examined. After SNT ATF3 immunoreactivity (ATF3
IR) was detected in a few DRG neurons already 6<U+2009>h after the lesion. After 24<U+2009>h
the number had clearly increased and still at 3<U+2009>weeks DRG neurons remained
labeled. In the ventral horn, ATF3 IR in motoneurons (MN) was first detected 24<U+2009>h
after the SNT, and still 3<U+2009>weeks post-operatively lesioned MN showed ATF3
labeling. After a VRA many spinal MN showed ATF3 IR already after 3<U+2009>h, and after 
6<U+2009>h all MN were labeled. At 3<U+2009>weeks a majority of the lesioned MN had died, but
all the remaining ones were labeled. When an avulsed ventral root was directly
replanted, MN survived and were still labeled at 5<U+2009>weeks. In DRG, a few neurons
were labeled already at 1.5<U+2009>h after a dorsal root avulsion. At 24<U+2009>h the number
had increased but still only a minority of the neurons were labeled. At 3<U+2009>days
the number of labeled neurons was reduced, and a further reduction was at hand at
7<U+2009>days and 3<U+2009>weeks. In parallel, in humans, 3<U+2009>days after a traumatic dorsal root 
avulsion, only a few DRG neurons showed ATF3 IR. At 6<U+2009>weeks no labeled neurons
could be detected. These facts imply that ATF3 response to axotomy involves a
distance-dependent mechanism. ATF3 also appears to be a useful and reliable
neuronal marker of nerve lesions even in humans. In addition, ATF3 up-regulation 
in both motor and sensory neurons seems to be linked to regenerative competence.

PMCID: PMC3099310
PMID: 21629765  [PubMed]


470. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 15;286(28):24882-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.255828. Epub
2011 May 31.

Multiple BH3 mimetics antagonize antiapoptotic MCL1 protein by inducing the
endoplasmic reticulum stress response and up-regulating BH3-only protein NOXA.

Albershardt TC(1), Salerni BL, Soderquist RS, Bates DJ, Pletnev AA, Kisselev AF, 
Eastman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, 
New Hampshire 03756, USA.

BH3 mimetics are small molecules designed or discovered to mimic the binding of
BH3-only proteins to the hydrophobic groove of antiapoptotic BCL2 proteins. The
selectivity of these molecules for BCL2, BCL-X(L), or MCL1 has been established
in vitro; whether they inhibit these proteins in cells has not been rigorously
investigated. In this study, we used a panel of leukemia cell lines to assess the
ability of seven putative BH3 mimetics to inhibit antiapoptotic proteins in a
cell-based system. We show that ABT-737 is the only BH3 mimetic that inhibits
BCL2 as assessed by displacement of BAD and BIM from BCL2. The other six BH3
mimetics activate the endoplasmic reticulum stress response inducing ATF4, ATF3, 
and NOXA, which can then bind to and inhibit MCL1. In most cancer cells,
inhibition of one antiapoptotic protein does not acutely induce apoptosis.
However, by combining two BH3 mimetics, one that inhibits BCL2 and one that
induces NOXA, apoptosis is induced within 6 h in a BAX/BAK-dependent manner.
Because MCL1 is a major mechanism of resistance to ABT-737, these results suggest
a novel strategy to overcome this resistance. Our findings highlight a novel
signaling pathway through which many BH3 mimetics inhibit MCL1 and suggest the
potential use of these agents as adjuvants in combination with various
chemotherapy strategies.

PMCID: PMC3137063
PMID: 21628457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Br J Surg. 2011 Aug;98(8):1155-9. doi: 10.1002/bjs.7431. Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Effect of injury on S1 dorsal root ganglia in an experimental model of
neuropathic faecal incontinence.

Peirce C(1), O'Herlihy C, O'Connell PR, Jones JF.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Medical Science, University College Dublin, Belfield,
Dublin, Ireland.

Comment in
    Br J Surg. 2011 Aug;98(8):1170.

BACKGROUND: An experimental model of neuropathic faecal incontinence has recently
been established. This study aimed to quantify and compare the effect of crush
and compression injury on first-order sensory neurones of the inferior rectal
nerve (IRN) using a nuclear marker of axonal injury, activating transcription
factor (ATF) 3.
METHODS: Eighteen Wistar rats were allocated to three groups: an unoperated
control group, an IRN crush group (positive control) and a retrouterine balloon
compression group. Five days after surgery, all animals were anaesthetized and
perfused with fixative, and S1 dorsal root ganglia (DRG) were harvested. The
tissue was sampled and neuronal nuclear ATF-3 expression calculated.
RESULTS: Estimated total S1 DRG ATF-3 nuclear labelling was higher in the nerve
crush (median (interquartile range) 171 (60-824) cells) and balloon compression
(59 (20-274) cells) groups, compared with that in the unoperated control group (9
(3-24) cells) (P = 0.001 and P = 0.008 respectively). In all groups, most
neurones displaying the marker of injury were of the C-fibre class.
CONCLUSION: This study confirmed the presence of axonal injury in a pelvic
compression model of obstetric injury. C-fibre afferent pathways appeared to be
most vulnerable. Neuromodulation may function through augmentation of residual
C-fibre pathways.

Copyright © 2011 British Journal of Surgery Society Ltd. Published by John Wiley 
& Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21618494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Neurosci Res. 2011 Aug;70(4):428-34. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2011.05.002. Epub 2011
May 14.

Role of activating transcription factor 3 in ischemic penumbra region following
transient middle cerebral artery occlusion and reperfusion injury.

Song DY(1), Oh KM, Yu HN, Park CR, Woo RS, Jung SS, Baik TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurosciences, School of Medicine and Medical
Sciences, Research Institute, Eulji University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

The activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is expressed by various types of
cellular insults. It has been suggested to serve diverse functions in both
cellular survival and death signal cascades, but the exact role of ATF3 in brain 
ischemia is little known so far. Thus, the authors examined the expression
pattern of ATF3 following middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) and reperfusion
injury. At 1-2 days after MCAO and reperfusion injury, numerous number of
ATF3-immunoreacitive (-ir) nuclei was observed in the ipsilateral peri-infarct
cortex, but declined rapidly at 3 days. Almost all ATF3-ir nuclei were
co-localized with NeuN-ir neurons. Neither GFAP- nor OX42-ir neuroglia were
co-localized with ATF3. Double labeling of Fluoro-Jade B with ATF3 showed that
ATF3-ir nuclei mismatched with Fluoro-Jade B-ir neurons. To further examine the
role of ATF3 in ischemic peri-infarct regions, double immunofluorescent labeling 
of ATF3/caspase 3, ATF3/Bcl-xl, and ATF3/HSP27 was conducted. Semiquantitive
estimation showed that about 15% of ATF3-ir neurons also expressed caspase 3.
However, about only 0.4% and 2.6% of ATF3-ir neurons were double-stained with
Bcl-xl and Hsp27, respectively. Consequently, it would be suggested that ATF3
seem to play an important role in caspase-dependent neuronal apoptotic signal
transduction pathways caused by focal cerebral ischemia and reperfusion injury.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and the Japan Neuroscience Society. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 21616101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. RNA Biol. 2011 Jul-Aug;8(4):648-64. doi: 10.4161/rna.8.4.15583. Epub 2011 Jul 1.

Gene expression profiling indicate role of ER stress in miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster 
induced apoptosis in HEK293T cells.

Chhabra R(1), Dubey R, Saini N.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Unit, Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology,
Delhi, India.

Previously, we had reported that overexpression of miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster
induces caspase-dependent and -independent apoptosis via JNK in human embryonic
kidney (HEK293T) cells. Herein, we describe the molecular mechanism(s)
responsible for miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster induced apoptosis. Gene expression
profiling was used to characterize the transcriptional response to
miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster overexpression in HEK293T cells. The microarray analysis
gave 1,025 differentially expressed genes and analysis of the gene expression
data with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software revealed p53 signaling,
oxidative stress response and mitochondrial dysfunction among the top processes
being affected. This data substantiates our previous study where we had reported 
increase of ROS and the release of proapoptotic factors such as cytochrome c (cyt
c) and apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) from the mitochondria to cytosol.
Additionally, components of ER stress-mediated apoptosis pathway i.e., C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP/DDIT3/GADD153) and TRIB3, an Akt inhibitor were found to
be significantly enriched. Also, the enhanced expression of ATF3 and ATF4 was
observed at RNA as well as protein level in miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster
overexpressed HEK293T cells. Induction of BIM appeared to be specific, because ER
stress caused only a minor change in the expression of the related BH3-only
proteins BID or PUMA. The fact that miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster triggered
endoplasmic reticulum stress (ER stress) was further established by the increase 
in cytosolic calcium levels after overexpression of this cluster in HEK293T
cells. These findings were also supported by PANTHER analysis wherein biological 
process categories of apoptosis and stress response were enriched. Taken
together, this work underlines the role of ER stress in miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster 
mediated apoptosis in HEK293T cells. Since the detailed knowledge of this cluster
induced apoptosis has now been elucidated, the in vivo study of this cluster
would help evaluate the prospect of its use as a therapeutic in diseases known to
occur because of deregulation of apoptosis.

PMID: 21593605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. BMC Genomics. 2011 May 10;12:222. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-222.

Transcriptional profiling of fetal hypothalamic TRH neurons.

Guerra-Crespo M(1), Pérez-Monter C, Janga SC, Castillo-Ramírez S, Gutiérrez-Rios 
RM, Joseph-Bravo P, Pérez-Martínez L, Charli JL.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética y Fisiología Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Cuernavaca, Morelos.

BACKGROUND: During murine hypothalamic development, different neuroendocrine cell
phenotypes are generated in overlapping periods; this suggests that cell-type
specific developmental programs operate to achieve complete maturation. A balance
between programs that include cell proliferation, cell cycle withdrawal as well
as epigenetic regulation of gene expression characterizes neurogenesis.
Thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH) is a peptide that regulates energy
homeostasis and autonomic responses. To better understand the molecular
mechanisms underlying TRH neuron development, we performed a genome wide study of
its transcriptome during fetal hypothalamic development.
RESULTS: In primary cultures, TRH cells constitute 2% of the total fetal
hypothalamic cell population. To purify these cells, we took advantage of the
fact that the segment spanning -774 to +84 bp of the Trh gene regulatory region
confers specific expression of the green fluorescent protein (GFP) in the TRH
cells. Transfected TRH cells were purified by fluorescence activated cell
sorting, various cell preparations pooled, and their transcriptome compared to
that of GFP- hypothalamic cells. TRH cells undergoing the terminal phase of
differentiation, expressed genes implicated in protein biosynthesis,
intracellular signaling and transcriptional control. Among the
transcription-associated transcripts, we identified the transcription factors
Klf4, Klf10 and Atf3, which were previously uncharacterized within the
hypothalamus.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is one of the first reports identifying
transcripts with a potentially important role during the development of a
specific hypothalamic neuronal phenotype. This genome-scale study forms a
rational foundation for identifying genes that might participate in the
development and function of hypothalamic TRH neurons.

PMCID: PMC3126781
PMID: 21569245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Med Food. 2011 Jun;14(6):584-93. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2010.0110. Epub 2011 May 9.

The dietary compounds resveratrol and genistein induce activating transcription
factor 3 while suppressing inhibitor of DNA binding/differentiation-1.

Bottone FG Jr(1), Alston-Mills B.

Author information: 
(1)North Carolina State University, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences,
Department of Animal Sciences, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
fbottone@scriptoriummedica.com

Various chemopreventive compounds alter gene expression, possibly explaining
their biological activity. One gene induced by a variety of chemopreventive
compounds is the one coding for the transcription factor activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3). In this study, we performed microarray analysis on mRNA isolated
from human colorectal cancer cells overexpressing ATF3 to ascertain the
biological activity of this gene in cancer. As a result, 64 genes were induced or
repressed. One gene identified by microarray analysis as repressed by
overexpression of ATF3 was inhibitor of DNA binding/differentiation-1 (Id1). Id1 
is important to cell growth and proliferation and therefore may represent an
important downstream target of ATF3 responsible for the biological activity of
ATF3. Id1 interacts with ATF3, thereby sequestering its activity, making it an
ideal candidate for further study. The induction of ATF3 and repression of Id1 in
these cells were confirmed at the mRNA and protein levels by semiquantitative
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and western blot
analysis, respectively. To determine if the repression of Id1 seen following
microarray analysis of these cells occurred following treatment with dietary
compounds with known chemotherapeutic activity, human colorectal cancer cells
were treated with resveratrol and genistein, and their expression was determined.
As a result, ATF3 was induced, and Id1 was repressed, by these compounds and by
sulindac sulfide, a positive control, at the mRNA and protein level. Further work
is needed to determine the molecular mechanism(s) responsible for the regulation 
of Id1 and to determine if biological activity of ATF3 overexpression is mediated
by repression of Id1 by these compounds.

PMCID: PMC3118781
PMID: 21554132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 26;6(4):e18146. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018146.

Glucose and fatty acids synergize to promote B-cell apoptosis through activation 
of glycogen synthase kinase 3ß independent of JNK activation.

Tanabe K(1), Liu Y, Hasan SD, Martinez SC, Cras-Méneur C, Welling CM,
Bernal-Mizrachi E, Tanizawa Y, Rhodes CJ, Zmuda E, Hai T, Abumrad NA, Permutt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Lipid Research, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The combination of elevated glucose and free-fatty acids (FFA),
prevalent in diabetes, has been suggested to be a major contributor to pancreatic
ß-cell death. This study examines the synergistic effects of glucose and FFA on
ß-cell apoptosis and the molecular mechanisms involved. Mouse insulinoma cells
and primary islets were treated with palmitate at increasing glucose and effects 
on apoptosis, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and insulin receptor substrate
(IRS) signaling were examined.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Increasing glucose (5-25 mM) with palmitate (400 µM) had
synergistic effects on apoptosis. Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) activation peaked
at the lowest glucose concentration, in contrast to a progressive reduction in
IRS2 protein and impairment of insulin receptor substrate signaling. A
synergistic effect was observed on activation of ER stress markers, along with
recruitment of SREBP1 to the nucleus. These findings were confirmed in primary
islets. The above effects associated with an increase in glycogen synthase kinase
3ß (Gsk3ß) activity and were reversed along with apoptosis by an adenovirus
expressing a kinase dead Gsk3ß.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Glucose in the presence of FFA results in synergistic
effects on ER stress, impaired insulin receptor substrate signaling and Gsk3ß
activation. The data support the importance of controlling both hyperglycemia and
hyperlipidemia in the management of Type 2 diabetes, and identify pancreatic
islet ß-cell Gsk3ß as a potential therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC3082528
PMID: 21541314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Mol Pain. 2011 Apr 28;7:30. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-7-30.

TRESK channel contribution to nociceptive sensory neurons excitability:
modulation by nerve injury.

Tulleuda A(1), Cokic B, Callejo G, Saiani B, Serra J, Gasull X.

Author information: 
(1)Neurophysiology Lab, Dept, Physiological Sciences I, Medical School,
University of Barcelona-Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer,
Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Neuronal hyperexcitability is a crucial phenomenon underlying
spontaneous and evoked pain. In invertebrate nociceptors, the S-type leak K(+)
channel (analogous to TREK-1 in mammals) plays a critical role of in determining 
neuronal excitability following nerve injury. Few data are available on the role 
of leak K(2P) channels after peripheral axotomy in mammals.
RESULTS: Here we describe that rat sciatic nerve axotomy induces
hyperexcitability of L4-L5 DRG sensory neurons and decreases TRESK (K2P18.1)
expression, a channel with a major contribution to total leak current in DRGs.
While the expression of other channels from the same family did not significantly
change, injury markers ATF3 and Cacna2d1 were highly upregulated. Similarly,
acute sensory neuron dissociation (in vitro axotomy) produced marked
hyperexcitability and similar total background currents compared with neurons
injured in vivo. In addition, the sanshool derivative IBA, which blocked TRESK
currents in transfected HEK293 cells and DRGs, increased intracellular calcium in
49% of DRG neurons in culture. Most IBA-responding neurons (71%) also responded
to the TRPV1 agonist capsaicin, indicating that they were nociceptors. Additional
evidence of a biological role of TRESK channels was provided by behavioral
evidence of pain (flinching and licking), in vivo electrophysiological evidence
of C-nociceptor activation following IBA injection in the rat hindpaw, and
increased sensitivity to painful pressure after TRESK knockdown in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, our results clearly support an important role of TRESK
channels in determining neuronal excitability in specific DRG neurons
subpopulations, and show that axonal injury down-regulates TRESK channels,
therefore contributing to neuronal hyperexcitability.

PMCID: PMC3095542
PMID: 21527011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Aug;226(8):2025-32. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22532.

Modulation of oxidative stress responses in the human retinal pigment epithelium 
following treatment with vitamin C.

Yin J(1), Thomas F, Lang JC, Chaum E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.

Oxidative stress (OS) in the retina plays an important role in the development
and progression of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Our previous work has 
shown that OS can quantitatively regulate the expression of AP-1 family genes in 
the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). In this study, we sought to determine
whether AP-1 genes can be used as cellular biomarkers of OS to evaluate the
efficacy of ascorbate, the major aqueous-phase antioxidant in the blood, in
reducing OS in RPE cells in vitro. Human ARPE19 cells were pretreated with
increasing levels of ascorbate (0-500 µM) for 3 days which was then removed from 
the medium. OS was induced 24 h later by the addition of hydrogen peroxide for
1-4 h, to bring the final media concentration of H(2)O(2) to 500 µM. FosB, c-Fos,
and ATF3 gene expression was examined from 0 to 24 h after OS. Pretreatment with 
200 µM ascorbate maximally reduced the transcriptional OS response of AP-1 genes 
by up to 87% after 1 and 4<U+2009>h, compared to controls. One hundred micromolar of
ascorbate provided a statistically significant, but far more modest effect.
Ascorbate supplementation of 100-200 µM appears to strongly inhibit OS-induced
activation of AP-1 in vitro, but pretreatment with higher levels of ascorbate
conferred no additional advantage. These studies suggest that there are optimal
levels of antioxidant supplementation to the RPE in vitro. Laboratory assays
based upon transcription factor biomarkers may be useful to define beneficial
molecular responses to new antioxidants, alternative dosing regimens, and to
explore therapeutic efficacy in OS models in vitro.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21520054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011 Jun;127(6):1632-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2011.03.034. 
Epub 2011 Apr 22.

Steroids and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 activity suppress
activating transcription factor 3 expression in patients with severe asthma.

Roussel L, Robins S, Schachter A, Bérubé J, Hamid Q, Rousseau S.

PMID: 21514952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2011 May;21(4):362-6. doi: 10.3109/15376516.2011.557876.

Acute kidney injury and the potential for ATF3-regulated epigenetic therapy.

Cheng CF(1), Lin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research, Tzu Chi General Hospital and Department of
Pediatrics, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.

The incidence of mortality in acute renal failure (ARF) induced by
ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury or septic shock is high. Previous studies using
animal models of ARF reported that inflammation-induced macrophage recruitment in
endothelial cells, along with I/R-induced production of inflammatory cytokines
and chemokines in tubule epithelial cells, results in macrophage and neutrophil
accumulation, and that both ultimately lead to irreversible kidney injury. Recent
studies suggest that ARF may also induce a beneficial stress response program and
express many transcriptional regulators, including activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3). ATF3 is a member of the ATF/CREB subfamily of the basic-region
leucine zipper (bZIP) family. Recent research has shed new light on the
protective role of the ATF3 signaling pathway in attenuating inflammation and
I/R-induced tubular cell death and nephrotoxicity. A recent clinical study also
reported that ATF3 can serve as an indicator of acute kidney injury (AKI). AKI is
associated with a robust inflammatory effect with increased levels of cytokines, 
including IL-6, IL-12, and IFN<U+03B3>. By inhibiting these cytokines, the ATF3 molecule
may hold the potential to provide future epigenetic therapy against
inflammation-induced renal injury.

PMID: 21495874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Diabetologia. 2011 Jul;54(7):1766-76. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2139-z. Epub 2011
Apr 7.

Differential regulation of adaptive and apoptotic unfolded protein response
signalling by cytokine-induced nitric oxide production in mouse pancreatic beta
cells.

Chan JY(1), Cooney GJ, Biden TJ, Laybutt DR.

Author information: 
(1)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, St Vincent's Hospital, 384 Victoria St, 
Darlinghurst, NSW, 2010, Australia.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1ß, IFN-<U+03B3> and TNF-a may
contribute to pancreatic beta cell destruction in type 1 diabetes. A mechanism
requiring nitric oxide, which is generated by inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS), in cytokine-induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and apoptosis has
been proposed. Here, we tested the role of nitric oxide in cytokine-induced ER
stress and the subsequent unfolded protein response (UPR) in beta cells.
METHODS: Isolated islets from wild-type and iNos (also known as Nos2) knockout
(iNos ( -/- )) mice, and MIN6 beta cells were incubated with IL-1ß, IFN-<U+03B3> and
TNF-a for 24-48 h. N (G)-methyl-L: -arginine was used to inhibit nitric oxide
production in MIN6 cells. Protein levels and gene expression were assessed by
western blot and real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: In islets and MIN6 cells, inhibition of nitric oxide production had no
effect on the generation of ER stress by cytokines, as evidenced by
downregulation of Serca2b (also known as Atp2a2) mRNA and increased
phosphorylation of PKR-like ER kinase, Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2 a subunit. However, nitric oxide regulated the
pattern of UPR signalling, which delineates the cellular decision to adapt to ER 
stress or to undergo apoptosis. Inhibition of nitric oxide production led to
reduced expression of pro-apoptotic UPR markers, Chop (also known as Ddit3), Atf3
and Trib3. In contrast, adaptive UPR markers (chaperones, foldases and
degradation enhancers) were increased. Further analysis of mouse islets showed
that cytokine-induced Chop and Atf3 expression was also dependent on JNK
activity.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The mechanism by which cytokines induce ER stress in 
mouse beta cells is independent of nitric oxide production. However, nitric oxide
may regulate the switch between adaptive and apoptotic UPR signalling.

PMID: 21472432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Cancer Res. 2011 May 15;71(10):3494-504. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3555. Epub
2011 Apr 5.

Expression of Id-1 is regulated by MCAM/MUC18: a missing link in melanoma
progression.

Zigler M(1), Villares GJ, Dobroff AS, Wang H, Huang L, Braeuer RR, Kamiya T,
Melnikova VO, Song R, Friedman R, Alani RM, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The acquisition of the metastatic melanoma phenotype is associated with increased
expression of the melanoma cell adhesion molecule MCAM/MUC18 (CD146). However,
the mechanism by which MUC18 contributes to melanoma metastasis remains unclear. 
Herein, we stably silenced MUC18 expression in two metastatic melanoma cell
lines, A375SM and C8161, and conducted cDNA microarray analysis. We identified
and validated that the transcriptional regulator, inhibitor of DNA binding-1
(Id-1), previously shown to function as an oncogene in several malignancies,
including melanoma, was downregulated by 5.6-fold following MUC18 silencing.
Additionally, we found that MUC18 regulated Id-1 expression at the
transcriptional level via ATF-3, which itself was upregulated by 6.9-fold in our 
cDNA microarray analysis. ChIP analysis showed increased binding of ATF-3 to the 
Id-1 promoter after MUC18 silencing. To complement these studies, we rescued the 
expression of MUC18, which reversed the expression patterns of Id-1 and ATF-3.
Moreover, we showed that MUC18 promotes melanoma invasion through Id-1, as
overexpression of Id-1 in MUC18-silenced cells resulted in increased MMP-2
expression and activity. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration that
MUC18 is involved in cell signaling regulating the expression of Id-1 and ATF-3, 
thus contributing to melanoma metastasis.

©2011 AACR

PMCID: PMC3096710
PMID: 21467165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 27;286(21):18949-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.232637. Epub
2011 Mar 21.

KAI1 gene is engaged in NDRG1 gene-mediated metastasis suppression through the
ATF3-NFkappaB complex in human prostate cancer.

Liu W(1), Iiizumi-Gairani M, Okuda H, Kobayashi A, Watabe M, Pai SK, Pandey PR,
Xing F, Fukuda K, Modur V, Hirota S, Suzuki K, Chiba T, Endo M, Sugai T, Watabe
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Southern Illinois University School of
Medicine, Springfield, Illinois 62794-9626, USA.

NDRG1 and KAI1 belong to metastasis suppressor genes, which impede the
dissemination of tumor cells from primary tumors to distant organs. Previously,
we identified the metastasis promoting transcription factor, ATF3, as a
downstream target of NDRG1. Further analysis revealed that the KAI1 promoter
contained a consensus binding motif of ATF3, suggesting a possibility that NDRG1 
suppresses metastasis through inhibition of ATF3 expression followed by
activation of the KAI1 gene. In this report, we found that ectopic expression of 
NDRG1 was able to augment endogenous KAI1 gene expression in prostate cancer cell
lines, whereas silencing NDRG1 was accompanied with significant decrease in KAI1 
expression in vitro and in vivo. In addition, our results of ChIP analysis
indicate that ATF3 indeed bound to the promoter of the KAI1 gene. Importantly,
our promoter-based analysis revealed that ATF3 modulated KAI1 transcription
through cooperation with other endogenous transcription factor as co-activator
(ATF3-JunB) or co-repressor (ATF3-NF<U+03BA>B). Moreover, loss of KAI1 expression
significantly abrogated NDRG1-mediated metastatic suppression in vitro as well as
in a spontaneous metastasis animal model, indicating that KA11 is a functional
downstream target of the NDRG1 pathway. Our result of immunohistochemical
analysis showed that loss of NDRG1 and KAI1 occurs in parallel as prostate cancer
progresses. We also found that a combined expression status of these two genes
serves as a strong independent prognostic marker to predict metastasis-free
survival of prostate cancer patients. Taken together, our result revealed a novel
regulatory network of two metastasis suppressor genes, NDRG1 and KAI1, which
together concerted metastasis-suppressive activities through an intrinsic
transcriptional cascade.

PMCID: PMC3099710
PMID: 21454613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Neurosci. 2011 Mar 30;31(13):4978-90. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2672-10.2011.

A signaling cascade of nuclear calcium-CREB-ATF3 activated by synaptic NMDA
receptors defines a gene repression module that protects against extrasynaptic
NMDA receptor-induced neuronal cell death and ischemic brain damage.

Zhang SJ(1), Buchthal B, Lau D, Hayer S, Dick O, Schwaninger M, Veltkamp R, Zou
M, Weiss U, Bading H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences,
University of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Synapse-to-nucleus signaling triggered by synaptic NMDA receptors can lead to the
buildup of a neuroprotective shield. Nuclear calcium activating the cAMP response
element binding protein (CREB) plays a key role in neuroprotection acquired by
synaptic activity. Here we show that in mouse hippocampal neurons, the
transcription factor Atf3 (activating transcription factor 3) is a direct target 
of CREB. Induction of ATF3 expression by CREB in hippocampal neurons was
initiated by calcium entry through synaptic NMDA receptors and required nuclear
calcium transients and calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV activity.
Acting as a transcriptional repressor, ATF3 protects cultured hippocampal neurons
from apoptosis and extrasynaptic NMDA receptor-induced cell death triggered by
bath application of NMDA or oxygen-glucose deprivation. Expression of ATF3 in
vivo using stereotaxic delivery of recombinant adeno-associated virus reduces
brain damage following a cerebral ischemic insult in mice. Conversion of ATF3 to 
a transcriptional activator transforms ATF3 into a potent prodeath protein that
kills neurons in cell culture and, when expressed in vivo in the hippocampus,
ablates the neuronal cell layer. These results link nuclear calcium-CREB
signaling to an ATF3-mediated neuroprotective gene repression program, indicating
that activity-dependent shutoff of genes is an important process for survival.
ATF3 supplementation may counteract age- and disease-related neuronal cell loss
caused by a reduction in synaptic activity, malfunctioning of calcium signaling
toward and within the nucleus ("nuclear calciopathy"), or increases in death
signaling by extrasynaptic NMDA receptors.

PMID: 21451036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Nutr Biochem. 2012 Jan;23(1):93-100. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2010.11.012. Epub
2011 Mar 22.

Gamma-tocotrienol induced apoptosis is associated with unfolded protein response 
in human breast cancer cells.

Patacsil D(1), Tran AT, Cho YS, Suy S, Saenz F, Malyukova I, Ressom H, Collins
SP, Clarke R, Kumar D.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Biological and Environmental
Sciences, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, DC 20008, USA.

Gamma-tocotrienol (<U+03B3>-T3) is a member of the vitamin E family. Tocotrienols (T3s) 
are powerful antioxidants and possess anticancer, neuroprotective and
cholesterol-lowering properties. Tocotrienols inhibit the growth of various
cancer cell lines without affecting normal cells. Less is known about the exact
mechanisms of action of T3s on cell death and other growth inhibitory pathways.
In the present study, we demonstrate that <U+03B3>-T3 induces apoptosis in MDA-MB 231
and MCF-7 breast cancer cells as evident by PARP cleavage and caspase-7
activation. Gene expression analysis of MCF-7 cells treated with <U+03B3>-T3 revealed
alterations in the expression of multiple genes involved in cell growth and
proliferation, cell death, cell cycle, cellular development, cellular movement
and gene expression. Further analysis of differentially modulated genes using
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software suggested modulation of canonical signal
transduction or metabolic pathways such as NRF-2-mediated oxidative stress
response, TGF-ß signaling and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response.
Analysis of ER-stress-related proteins in MCF-7 and MDA-MB 231 cells treated with
<U+03B3>-T3 demonstrated activation of PERK and pIRE1a pathway to induce ER stress.
Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) was identified as the most up-regulated 
gene (16.8-fold) in response to <U+03B3>-T3. Activating transcription factor 3 knockdown
using siRNA suggested an essential role of ATF3 in <U+03B3>-T3-induced apoptosis. In
summary, we demonstrate that <U+03B3>-T3 modulates ER stress signaling and have
identified ATF3 as a molecular target for <U+03B3>-T3 in breast cancer cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3123668
PMID: 21429729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Brain Behav Immun. 2011 Aug;25(6):1162-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2011.03.006. Epub
2011 Mar 21.

TREM-1 and DAP12 expression in monocytes of patients with severe psychiatric
disorders. EGR3, ATF3 and PU.1 as important transcription factors.

Weigelt K(1), Carvalho LA, Drexhage RC, Wijkhuijs A, de Wit H, van Beveren NJ,
Birkenhäger TK, Bergink V, Drexhage HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus Medical Centre Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. k.weigelt@erasmusmc.nl

INTRODUCTION: Immune activation is a characteristic of schizophrenia (SCZ),
bipolar disorder (BD) and unipolar major depressive disorder (MDD). The
triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 1 (TREM-1), its' adaptor molecule 
DAP12 and their transcription factor (TF) PU.1 are important key genes in
inflammation and expressed in activated monocytes and microglia.
AIM: To test: (1) if the expressions of TREM-1, DAP12 and PU.1 are increased in
monocytes of patients with severe psychiatric disorders and (2) if PU.1 and the
TFs ATF3 and EGR3 (which have been found as prominent increased monocyte genes in
previous studies) are involved in the regulation of TREM-1 and DAP12 expression.
METHODS: Using Q-PCR, we studied the gene expression of TREM-1, DAP12, PU.1, ATF3
and EGR3 in the monocytes of 73 patients with severe psychiatric disorders (27
recent onset SCZ patients, 22 BD patients and 24 MDD patients) and of 79 healthy 
controls (HC). Using in silico TF binding site prediction and in vivo chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP), we studied the actual binding of EGR3, ATF3 and PU.1 
to the promoter regions of TREM-1 and DAP12.
RESULTS: 1. TREM-1 gene expression was increased in the monocytes of SCZ and BD
patients and tended to be increased in the monocytes of MDD patients. 2. DAP12
gene levels were neither increased in the monocytes of SCZ, BD, nor MDD patients.
3. PU.1 expression levels were increased in the monocytes of MDD patients, but
not in those of SCZ and BD patients. 4. TREM-1 expression levels correlated in
particular to ATF3 and EGR3 expression levels, DAP12 expression levels correlated
in particular to PU.1 expression levels. 5. We found using binding site
prediction and ChIP assays that the TFs EGR3 and ATF3 indeed bound to the TREM-1 
promoter, PU.1 bound to both the TREM-1 and DAP12 promoter.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we provide evidence that TREM-1 gene expression is
significantly increased in monocytes of SCZ and BD patients and that the TREM-1
gene is a target gene of the TFs ATF3 and EGR3. In MDD patients, PU.1 gene
expression was increased with a tendency for TREM-1 gene over expression. Our
observations support the concept that monocytes are in a pro-inflammatory state
in severe psychiatric conditions and suggest differences in monocyte inflammatory
set points between SCZ, BD and MDD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21421043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Urol. 2011 May;185(5):1850-1. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2010.12.110. Epub 2011 Mar
21.

Editorial comment.

Braga LH.

Comment on
    J Urol. 2011 May;185(5):1845-9.

PMID: 21420109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Retrovirology. 2011 Mar 17;8:19. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-8-19.

ATF3, an HTLV-1 bZip factor binding protein, promotes proliferation of adult
T-cell leukemia cells.

Hagiya K(1), Yasunaga J, Satou Y, Ohshima K, Matsuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) is an aggressive malignancy of CD4+
T-cells caused by human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1). The HTLV-1 bZIP
factor (HBZ) gene, which is encoded by the minus strand of the viral genome, is
expressed as an antisense transcript in all ATL cases. By using yeast two-hybrid 
screening, we identified activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) as an
HBZ-interacting protein. ATF3 has been reported to be expressed in ATL cells, but
its biological significance is not known.
RESULTS: Immunoprecipitation analysis confirmed that ATF3 interacts with HBZ.
Expression of ATF3 was upregulated in ATL cell lines and fresh ATL cases.
Reporter assay revealed that ATF3 could interfere with the HTLV-1 Tax's
transactivation of the 5' proviral long terminal repeat (LTR), doing so by
affecting the ATF/CRE site, as well as HBZ. Suppressing ATF3 expression inhibited
proliferation and strongly reduced the viability of ATL cells. As mechanisms of
growth-promoting activity of ATF3, comparative expression profiling of ATF3
knockdown cells identified candidate genes that are critical for the cell cycle
and cell death, including cell division cycle 2 (CDC2) and cyclin E2. ATF3 also
enhanced p53 transcriptional activity, but this activity was suppressed by HBZ.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, ATF3 expression has positive and negative effects on the
proliferation and survival of ATL cells. HBZ impedes its negative effects,
leaving ATF3 to promote proliferation of ATL cells via mechanisms including
upregulation of CDC2 and cyclin E2. Both HBZ and ATF3 suppress Tax expression,
which enables infected cells to escape the host immune system.

PMCID: PMC3068935
PMID: 21414204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Cancer Res. 2011 Mar 15;71(6):2029-33. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3750.

Calcineurin signaling as a negative determinant of keratinocyte cancer stem cell 
potential and carcinogenesis.

Dotto GP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland.
Paolo.Dotto@unil.ch

Calcineurin is the only known serine-threonine phosphatase under
calcium-calmodulin control and key regulator of the immune system. Treatment of
patients with calcineurin-inhibitory drugs like cyclosporin A and FK506 to
prevent graft rejection dramatically increases the risk of cutaneous squamous
cell carcinoma, which is a major cause of death after organ transplants. Recent
evidence indicates that suppression of calcineurin signaling, together with its
impact on the immune system, exerts direct tumor-promoting effects in
keratinocytes, enhancing cancer stem cell potential. The underlying mechanism
involves interruption of a double negative regulatory axis, whereby calcineurin
and nuclear factors of activated T-cell signaling inhibits expression of ATF3, a 
negative regulator of p53. The resulting suppression of keratinocyte cancer cell 
senescence is of likely clinical significance for the many patients under
treatment with calcineurin inhibitors and may be of relevance for other cancer
types in which altered calcium-calcineurin signaling plays a role.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21406393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Immunobiology. 2011 Aug;216(8):871-81. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2011.02.005. Epub
2011 Feb 22.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) promotes sublytic C5b-9-induced
glomerular mesangial cells apoptosis through up-regulation of Gadd45a and KLF6
gene expression.

Xu K(1), Zhou Y, Qiu W, Liu X, Xia M, Liu L, Liu X, Zhao D, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nanjing Medical University, 140
Nanjing Hanzhong Road, Nanjing, PR China.

The sublytic C5b-9 complexes can result in glomerular mesangial cells (GMCs)
apoptosis, which involved in the initiation and development of rat Thy-1
nephritis. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is an immediate early gene
for cells to cope with a variety of stress signals, and our previous study
revealed that ATF3 could promote GMCs apoptosis attacked by sublytic C5b-9. But
the mechanism of ATF3 promoting GMCs apoptosis triggered by sublytic C5b-9 attack
has not been elucidated. In this study, the data showed that the expression of
ATF3, growth arrest and DNA damage-45 alpha (Gadd45a), Krüppel-like factor 6
(KLF6) and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) in the GMCs in response to
sublytic C5b-9 stimulation for the indicated time was significantly increased,
and ATF3 expression could lead to GMCs apoptosis through up-regulation of Gadd45a
and KLF6, but not up-regulation of PCNA. Furthermore, Gadd45a was identified as a
downstream target gene regulated by ATF3 directly, and KLF6 might be regulated by
ATF3 in an indirect manner.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21396734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011 Mar;59(2):78-84. doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1250434. Epub
2011 Mar 7.

Activation of cardiomyocytes depending on their proximity to human bone marrow
stem cells.

Roeske F(1), Stein A, Salameh A, Rastan A, Ziegelhoeffer B, Garbade J, Misfeld M,
Kostelka M, Mohr FW, Dhein S.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Cardiac Surgery, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

Our study aimed to elucidate whether bone marrow stem cell (BMC) treatment might 
result in a cellular response in cardiomyocytes IN VITRO. Subconfluent neonatal
rat cardiomyocyte cultures were cocultured for three days with Vybrant CM-DiI
labeled BMC from human sternal bone marrow and underwent immunohistological
staining for the proto-oncogene c-Myc and the cell cycle proteins CDK2, CDK4 and 
ATF-3. ß-adrenoceptor density was analyzed using [125I]-iodocyanopindolol (ICYP) 
histoautoradiography. Quantitative analysis of immunohistochemical images
revealed significantly increased expression and upregulation of c-Myc, and its
downstream targets ATF-3, CDK2 and CDK4 in neighboring cardiomyocytes to BMC,
depending on their distance to the BMC compared to cardiomyocytes far from the
BMC. Histoautoradiography revealed a significantly higher ß-adrenoceptor density 
in cardiomyocytes in the immediate vicinity to the BMC. With increasing distance 
to the BMC, ß-adrenoceptor density in cardiomyocytes declined. Thus, a small
number of BMC can affect a larger number of cardiomyocytes by activating an
intracellular signaling cascade and enhancing ß-adrenoceptor density.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 21384303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Jun;32(6):836-42. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr040. Epub 2011 Mar 
1.

Activation of nuclear TR3 (NR4A1) by a diindolylmethane analog induces apoptosis 
and proapoptotic genes in pancreatic cancer cells and tumors.

Yoon K(1), Lee SO, Cho SD, Kim K, Khan S, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioscience and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

NR4A1 (Nur77, TR3) is overexpressed in pancreatic tumors and activation of TR3 by
1,1-bis(3'-indolyl)-1-(p-methoxyphenyl)methane (DIM-C-pPhOCH(3)) inhibits cell
and tumor growth and induces apoptosis. Microarray analysis demonstrates that in 
L3.6pL pancreatic cancer cells DIM-C-pPhOCH(3) induces genes associated with
metabolism, homeostasis, signal transduction, transcription, stress, transport,
immune responses, growth inhibition and apoptosis. Among the most highly induced 
growth inhibitory and proapoptotic genes including activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3), p21, cystathionase, dual specificity phosphatase 1 and growth
differentiation factor 15, RNA interference studies demonstrated that induction
of all but the later gene by DIM-C-pPhOCH(3) were TR3-dependent. We also observed
that DIM-C-pPhOCH(3) induced Fas ligand and tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) and induction of TRAIL was ATF3 dependent.
Results of this and previous studies demonstrate that TR3 is unique among nuclear
receptors since nuclear TR3 is activated or deactivated by diindolylmethane
derivatives to induce different apoptotic and growth inhibitory pathways that
inhibit pancreatic cancer cell and tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC3106434
PMID: 21362629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Am J Pathol. 2011 Mar;178(3):1395-402. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.12.011.

Mutant IDH1 confers an in vivo growth in a melanoma cell line with BRAF mutation.

Shibata T(1), Kokubu A, Miyamoto M, Sasajima Y, Yamazaki N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan. tashibat@ncc.go.jp

Melanoma is the most deadly tumor of the skin, and systemic therapies for the
advanced stage are still limited. Recent genetic analyses have revealed the
molecular diversity of melanoma and potential therapeutic targets. By screening a
cohort of 142 primary nonepithelial tumors, we discovered that about 10% of
melanoma cases (4/39) harbored an IDH1 or IDH2 mutation. These mutations were
found to coexist with BRAF or KIT mutation, and all IDH1 mutations were detected 
in metastatic lesions. BRAF-mutated melanoma cells, additionally expressing the
cancer-related IDH1 mutant, acquired increased colony-forming and in vivo growth 
activities and showed enhanced activation of the MAPK and STAT3 pathways.
Genome-wide gene expression profiling demonstrated that mutant IDH1 affected the 
expression of a set of genes. Especially, it caused the induction of
growth-related transcriptional regulators (Jun, N-myc, Atf3) and the reduction of
Rassf1 and two dehydrogenase genes (Dhrs1 and Adh5), which may be involved in the
carcinogenesis of IDH1-mutated tumors. Our analyses demonstrate that IDH1
mutation works with other oncogenic mutations and could contribute to the
metastasis in melanoma.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3069821
PMID: 21356389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Med Hypotheses. 2011 May;76(5):685-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.01.033. Epub 2011 
Feb 22.

The potential role of ATF3 on immune response is regulated by BMP10 through Smad 
dependent pathway.

Wang Y(1), Zhang YW, Xu L, Xin HB.

Author information: 
(1)The National Key Laboratory for Biotherapy, Laboratory of Cardiovascular
Disease, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Cheng du 610041, PR China.

It is hypothesis that ATF3 is a downstream component of BMP10. The possible
function of ATF3 on immune response is partially regulated by BMP10 via Smad
dependent pathway. BMP10 is highly expressed in blood cells during embryonic
development based on our in situ hybridization. The expression of ATF3 is
enhanced by BMP10 in overexpression transgenic mice. Both BMP10 and ATF3 can
response to stress stimulate, and ATF3 is well understood as a stress inducible
gene which possible contributes to immune response. The Smad dependent pathway is
well established for BMP10 in regulation expression of downstream targets. It
would be interesting for us to determine the relationship between BMP10 and ATF3,
especially to understand the mechanism of BMP10 and ATF3 effecting on heart
development, as well as immune response exposed to stress stimulates.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21345597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Dairy Sci. 2011 Mar;94(3):1277-88. doi: 10.3168/jds.2010-3563.

Differential gene expression of the toll-like receptor-4 cascade and neutrophil
function in early- and mid-lactating dairy cows.

Stevens MG(1), Peelman LJ, De Spiegeleer B, Pezeshki A, Van De Walle GR,
Duchateau L, Burvenich C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Physiology and Biometrics, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Ghent University, B-9820 Merelbeke, Belgium.

During early lactation, neutrophils display several reduced immune functions.
Particularly, a delayed recruitment of neutrophils into the infected udder seems 
to be one of the underlying events involved in the severity of postpartum
Escherichia coli intramammary infections. The purpose of this study was to
analyze the effect of in vitro chemotaxis and diapedesis on the expression of
toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4)-related genes in bovine blood neutrophils isolated
from 10 early-lactating (EL) and 10 mid-lactating (ML) cows. Functional
characterization of the neutrophil population was performed by measuring
phagocytosis and production of reactive oxygen species (chemiluminescence).
Messenger RNA was extracted from neutrophils, and the expression of TLR4 and
associated genes in EL and ML cows was analyzed by reverse-transcription
quantitative PCR. To study the effect of chemotaxis and diapedesis on the
expression of genes of the TLR4 cascade, neutrophils were stimulated to
(trans)migrate in response to C5a using in vitro models. Our salient findings
were that both neutrophil migration in vitro and lactation stage induced
significant changes in the expression of several genes of the TLR4 signaling
cascade. Before migration, expression of TRAF6, ATF3, RELA, IL8, and C5aR were
lower in EL than in ML cows. Diapedesis and chemotaxis induced an increase in
expression of TLR4, ATF3, and IL8 in both EL and ML cows. Diapedesis resulted in 
a downregulation of Syk, a TLR4-associated gene, in ML cows. This study shows
that the perturbations in neutrophil functions during EL are accompanied by
modulation of TLR4 pathway genes. These data can contribute to the understanding 
of the mechanisms explaining the relationship between stage of lactation and risk
of severe E. coli mastitis.

Copyright © 2011 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21338793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Clin Chim Acta. 2011 May 12;412(11-12):1026-31. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2011.02.011.
Epub 2011 Feb 12.

Effect of obesity on the association between ATF3 gene haplotypes and C-reactive 
protein level in Taiwanese.

Wu S(1), Hsu LA, Cheng CF, Teng MS, Chou HH, Lin H, Chang PY, Ko YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Chinese Culture University, and Department of
Research, Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital Taipei Branch, Taipei, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: ATF3 has traditionally been related to various inflammatory processes.
Our aim was to test the statistical association between variations in the ATF3
gene and levels of nine serum inflammatory markers, including C reactive protein 
(CRP), in a Taiwanese population using interaction analysis.
METHODS: A sample population of 604 Taiwanese subjects was enrolled. Five tagging
single nucleotide polymorphisms of the ATF3 gene from the Han Chinese HapMap
Database were selected and genotyped.
RESULTS: With or without adjustment for clinical covariates, ATF3 genotypes were 
found to be associated with CRP levels but not with other inflammatory marker
levels. Minor alleles of 2 of the 5 ATF3 SNPs were associated with decreased CRP 
levels predominantly in non-obese subjects (Bonferoni P=0.018, and P=0.002 for
rs11571530, and rs10475, respectively). Two haplotypes inferred from the 5 SNPs, 
GATTA and TACCA, were also associated with increased or decreased CRP levels,
respectively, in non-obese subjects (Bonferoni P=0.012 and P=0.01, respectively) 
but not in obese subjects. Interaction analysis revealed interaction of obesity
with an ATF3 genotype associated with a high CRP level (interaction P=0.006 for
SNP rs10475). An effect of obesity on CRP level was also noted in haplotype
interaction analysis (interaction P=0.019 for haplotype TACCA).
CONCLUSIONS: ATF3 polymorphisms are independently associated with CRP levels in
Taiwanese subjects. Further, ATF3 genotypes/haplotypes interact with obesity to
set CRP levels. These findings may have implications for the prediction of
atherosclerotic disease.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21324310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Neurosci Lett. 2011 Apr 8;493(1-2):49-54. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.02.018. Epub
2011 Feb 12.

Contralateral neuropathology in dorsal root ganglia in a rat model of
noncompressive disc herniation.

Li Y(1), Xi C, Niu M, Liu X, Chi Z, Wang X, Yan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin
Medical University, Harbin 150001, PR China. yanjing-1985@hotmail.com

Some cases of lumbar disc herniation with contralateral radiculopathy have been
reported. Many investigators explained this clinical syndrome from several
aspects. However, to our best knowledge, there is no explanation on the basis of 
molecular changes in the contralateral dorsal root ganglia (DRG) until now. We
firstly explored the expression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3, a
marker of nerve injury), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, a marker of
satellite cells activation) in bilateral L5 DRG and spinal cord using
immunohistochemistry after nucleus pulposus (NP) application onto the left L5 DRG
exposed by unilateral facetectomy. Immunoblotting was used to detect the
expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) in bilateral L5 DRG. We
tested that ATF3-immunoreactive (IR) neurons, GFAP-IR satellite cells and
TNF-alpha expression in the contralateral DRG increased significantly after NP
application. In the spinal cord, ATF3-IR motor neurons increased significantly
after surgery, but GFAP-IR astrocytes were not significant. These results
suggested that NP application on the unilateral DRG could induce nerve injury,
satellite cells activation and upregulation of TNF-alpha expression in the
contralateral DRG. In addition, our results indicated that motor neurons injury
might play a significant role in contralateral changes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21320569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 31;6(1):e16515. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016515.

Activation of the canonical Wnt/ß-catenin pathway in ATF3-induced mammary tumors.

Yan L(1), Della Coletta L, Powell KL, Shen J, Thames H, Aldaz CM, MacLeod MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas, United States of America.

Female transgenic mice that constitutively overexpress the transcription factor
ATF3 in the basal epithelium of the mammary gland develop mammary carcinomas with
high frequency, but only if allowed to mate and raise pups early in life. This
transgenic mouse model system reproduces some features of human breast cancer in 
that about 20% of human breast tumor specimens exhibit overexpression of ATF3 in 
the tumor cells. The ATF3-induced mouse tumors are phenotypically similar to
mammary tumors induced by overexpression of activating Wnt/ß-catenin pathway
genes. We now show that the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway is indeed activated in
ATF3-induced tumors. ß-catenin is transcriptionally up-regulated in the tumors,
and high levels of nuclear ß-catenin are seen in tumor cells. A reporter gene for
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway activity, TOPGAL, is up-regulated in the tumors and several
downstream targets of Wnt signaling, including Ccnd1, Jun, Axin2 and Dkk4, are
also expressed at higher levels in ATF3-induced tumors compared to mammary glands
of transgenic females. Several positive-acting ligands for this pathway,
including Wnt3, Wnt3a, Wnt7b, and Wnt5a, are significantly overexpressed in tumor
tissue, and mRNA for Wnt3 is about 5-fold more abundant in transgenic mammary
tissue than in non-transgenic mammary tissue. Two known transcriptional targets
of ATF3, Snai1 and Snai2, are also overexpressed in the tumors, and Snail and
Slug proteins are found to be located primarily in the nuclei of tumor cells. In 
vitro knockdown of Atf3 expression results in significant decreases in expression
of Wnt7b, Tcf7, Snai2 and Jun, suggesting that these genes may be direct
transcriptional targets of ATF3 protein. By chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis, both ATF3 and JUN proteins appear to bind to a particular subclass of
AP-1 sites upstream of the transcriptional start sites of each of these genes.

PMCID: PMC3031586
PMID: 21304988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 15;286(15):12839-49. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.185637. Epub
2011 Feb 7.

Recruitment of SWI/SNF complex is required for transcriptional activation of the 
SLC11A1 gene during macrophage differentiation of HL-60 cells.

Xu YZ(1), Thuraisingam T, Marino R, Radzioch D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Medicine, Montreal General
Hospital Research Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1A4, Canada.

The solute carrier family 11 member 1 (SLC11A1) gene is strictly regulated and
exclusively expressed in myeloid lineage cells. However, little is known about
the transcriptional regulation of the SLC11A1 gene during myeloid development. In
this study, we used HL-60 cells as a model to investigate the regulatory
elements/factors involved in the transactivation of the SLC11A1 gene during
phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)-induced macrophage differentiation of HL-60
cells. Promoter deletion analysis showed that a 7-base AP-1-like element
(TGACTCT) was critical for the responsiveness of the SLC11A1 promoter to PMA.
Stimulation by PMA induced the binding of ATF-3 and the recruitment of two
components of the SWI/SNF complex, BRG1 and ß-actin, to this element in an
ATF-3-dependent manner. RNAi-mediated depletion of ATF-3 or BRG1 markedly
decreased SLC11A1 gene expression and its promoter activity induced by PMA.
Luciferase reporter experiments demonstrated that ATF-3 cooperated with BRG1 and 
ß-actin to activate the SLC11A1 promoter. Furthermore, we showed that PMA can
induce the proximal (GT/AC)(n) repeat sequence to convert to the Z-DNA structure 
in the SLC11A1 gene promoter, and depletion of BRG1 resulted in a significant
decrease of Z-DNA formation. Our results demonstrated that recruitment of the
SWI/SNF complex initiated Z-DNA formation and subsequently helped to
transactivate the SLC11A1 gene.

PMCID: PMC3075631
PMID: 21300803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Biol Chem. 2011 Apr;392(4):377-85. doi: 10.1515/BC.2011.030. Epub 2011 Feb 7.

Organelle stress-induced activating transcription factor-3 downregulates
low-density lipoprotein receptor expression in Sk-Hep1 human liver cells.

Lim JH(1), Lee HJ, Pak YK, Kim WH, Song J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolic Disease, Center for Biomedical Sciences, Korea National 
Institute of Health, 187 Osongsaengmyeong2-ro, Gangoe-myeon, Cheongwon-gun,
Chungcheongbuk-do, Republic of Korea.

The low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) plays a central role in cholesterol
homeostasis. Here, we provide evidence that an increase in endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) stress response or a disturbance of mitochondrial function inhibits LDLR
expression in human liver Sk-Hep1 cells. Both organelle stresses triggered
activation of activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3), which subsequently
reduced LDLR expression. Serial deletion studies revealed that the LDLR promoter 
region within -234 bp was involved in the repression of LDLR by ATF3. In
addition, we identified the region between -8 and -3 of LDLR promoter region as a
putative binding site for ATF3 by using deletion construct lacking 6 bp
nucleotide corresponding to this region. Transfection of ATF3-specific siRNA
rescued LDLR expression under organelle stress, indicating that ATF3 was mainly
responsible for the repression of LDLR by these stressors. Additionally,
chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that ATF3 directly binds to the LDLR
promoter in a stress-dependent manner. The unique sterol-independent LDLR
repression by organelle stress via ATF3 demonstrated here could be involved in
obesity-related hypercholesterolemia, which can lead to insulin resistance and
type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 21294679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2012 Feb 1;37(3):168-73. doi:
10.1097/BRS.0b013e31821258f7.

Differences in damage to CGRP immunoreactive sensory nerves after two lumbar
surgical approaches: investigation using humans and rats.

Ohtori S(1), Miyagi M, Takaso M, Inoue G, Orita S, Eguchi Y, Ochiai N, Kishida S,
Kuniyoshi K, Nakamura J, Aoki Y, Ishikawa T, Arai G, Kamoda H, Suzuki M, Toyone
T, Takahashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Chiba University, Chuo-ku, Chiba, Japan.
sohtori@faculty.chiba-u.jp

STUDY DESIGN: Immunohistochemical study.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate invasive surgical approaches by analyzing the number of
sensory nerve fibers at 2 back muscle sites in rats and humans and the number of 
injured nerve fibers innervating these 2 sites after muscle injury in rats.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA.: Several minimally invasive approaches have recently 
become popular in the treatment of lumbar spine disorders. Minimally invasive
surgery (MIS) is not invasive to back muscle and is thought to reduce low back
pain. Muscle damage has been generally evaluated by magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI); however, damage to sensory nerve fibers in and around back muscle that is 
directly related to pain has apparently not been explored.
METHODS: Human muscle at L4-L5 was obtained from the paraspinous process (during 
a midline approach) and from paraspinal back muscle (during a Wiltse paraspinal
approach) (n = 10 each). The muscle was sectioned and immunostained for
calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). To detect dorsal root ganglion (DRG)
neurons innervating back muscle in rats, Fluoro-Gold (FG) was applied to the same
2 sites on the lower back muscle at L4-L5 (only application, n = 12; application 
of FG + muscle injury, n = 12). DRGs were harvested and immunostained for CGRP
and activating transcription factor-3 (ATF-3: marker for nerve injury). The
numbers of FG-labeled CGRP-immunoreactive or FG-labeled ATF-3-immunoreactive DRG 
neurons innervating the 2 sites were counted and compared.
RESULTS: CGRP-immunoreactive sensory nerve fibers were found at the 2 sites. The 
average number of CGRP-immunoreactive sensory nerve fibers in muscle obtained in 
a midline approach was significantly higher than that in muscle obtained in a
Wiltse paraspinal approach (P < 0.01). The numbers of FG-labeled CGRP- and
ATF-3-immunoreactive DRG neurons innervating paraspinous process muscle were
significantly greater than those innervating paraspinal back muscle in rats (P < 
0.01).
CONCLUSION: There are more CGRP-immunoreactive sensory nerve fibers and DRG
neurons innervating muscle in the midline approach area than in the Wiltse
paraspinal approach area in humans and rats. There are more ATF-3-immunoreactive 
DRG neurons innervating muscle in the midline approach area than in the Wiltse
paraspinal approach area after muscle injury in rats. This result may show the
differences in sensory nerve injury during the 2 surgical approaches.

PMID: 21289592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. IUBMB Life. 2011 Jan;63(1):62-9. doi: 10.1002/iub.416.

Activating transcription factor 3 regulates survivability and migration of
vascular smooth muscle cells.

Lv D(1), Meng D, Zou FF, Fan L, Zhang P, Yu Y, Fang J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, The Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a member of the ATF/CREB (CAMP
responsive element binding protein) family of transcription factors. The
expression and the function of ATF3 in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs)
remain unknown. The aim of this work is to determine the expression and possible 
function of ATF3 in VSMCs. We found that VSMCs expressed ATF3, and expression of 
ATF3 in VSMCs was induced by a variety of stimuli including serum, angiotensin
II, and H(2)O(2). Knockdown of ATF3 induced apoptosis of VSMCs, caspase-3
cleavage, and cytochrome c release. The results suggest that ATF3 regulates
survivability of VSMCs. Moreover, we found that overexpression of ATF3 promoted
migration of VSMCs and induced expression of matrix metalloproteinase 1, 3, and
13. These results suggest that ATF3 plays a role in regulating migration of
VSMCs. In addition, we found that the expression of ATF3 was upregulated in
smooth muscle cells in the injured mouse femoral arteries compared with the
uninjured control group. These results suggest that ATF3 is relevant to disease
physiology.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21280179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2011 Oct 15;36(22):1829-34. doi:
10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181fa1fca.

Analgesic effects of prostaglandin E2 receptor subtype EP1 receptor antagonist:
experimental study of application of nucleus pulposus.

Sekiguchi M(1), Otoshi K, Kikuchi S, Konno S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Fukushima Medical University School of
Medicine, Fukushima City, Fukushima, Japan. miho-s@fmu.ac.jp

STUDY DESIGN: The effect of an EP1 receptor antagonist on pain-related behavior
induced by nucleus pulposus (NP) applied to the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) in
rats was investigated.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated pain-related behavior, the amount of prostaglandin E2 
(PGE2), and neural damage to the DRG after application of NP to the DRG after
administration of an EP1 receptor antagonist.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: PGE2 induces mechanical allodynia and hyperalgesia,
which are mediated by PGE2 receptors. EP1 is one of the PGE2 receptor subtypes.
An EP1 antagonist reduces hyperalgesia, allodynia, and c-fos expression in the
rat chronic nerve constriction model.
METHODS: Sprague-Dawley rats (n = 103) were used. Animals receiving NP were
divided into three experimental groups (n = 12 in each group): saline, high-dose 
(5 mg/kg) EP1 receptor antagonist (RA), and low-dose (2.5 mg/kg) EP1-RA (orally
once daily for 5 days). Animals in the sham group did not receive NP. Von Frey
tests were used for pain-behavior testing. The amount of PGE2 in DRG and the
number of activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3) immunoreactive positive cells 
were compared among groups.
RESULTS: The mechanical thresholds in the three groups decreased 7 days after
surgery (just before treatment). The threshold in both the high- and low-dose
EP1-RA groups increased at 11 days (5 days after treatment) and continued for 14 
days. The thresholds in both the low- and high-dose EP1-RA groups increased
significantly compared with the saline group (P < 0.05). The amount of PGE2 was
significantly increased in the NP group compared with the sham and naïve animals 
after application of NP. ATF3 expression was increased by NP but was not
increased after administration of the EP1-RA.
CONCLUSION: An EP1 receptor antagonist improves pain-related behavior in the rat 
model and might be a potential agent to improve pain-related behavior in patients
with lumbar disc herniation.

PMID: 21270690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Methods Enzymol. 2011;490:175-94. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385114-7.00011-8.

Immunohistochemical detection of activating transcription factor 3, a hub of the 
cellular adaptive-response network.

Hai T(1), Jalgaonkar S, Wolford CC, Yin X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) gene encodes a member of the ATF family 
of transcription factors and is induced by various stress signals, including many
of those that induce the unfolded protein response (UPR). Emerging evidence
suggests that ATF3 is a hub of the cellular adaptive-response network and studies
using various mouse models indicate that ATF3 plays a role in the pathogenesis of
various diseases. One way to investigate the potential relevance of ATF3 to human
diseases is to determine its expression in patient samples and test whether it
correlates with disease progression or clinical outcomes. Due to the scarcity and
preciousness of patient samples, methods that can detect ATF3 on archival tissue 
sections would greatly facilitate this research. In this chapter, we briefly
review the roles of ATF3 in cellular adaptive-response and UPR, and then describe
the detailed steps and tips that we developed based on general
immunohistochemistry (IHC) protocols to detect ATF3 on paraffin embedded
sections.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3675787
PMID: 21266251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Lasers Surg Med. 2010 Dec;42(10):752-65. doi: 10.1002/lsm.20983.

Microarray analysis of cellular thermotolerance.

Beckham JT(1), Wilmink GJ, Opalenik SR, Mackanos MA, Abraham AA, Takahashi K,
Contag CH, Takahashi T, Jansen ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN,
USA.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Previously, we have shown that a 43°C pretreatment can
provide thermotolerance to a following, more severe, thermal stress at 45°C.
Using cells that lack the Hsp70 gene, we have also shown that there is still some
thermotolerance in the absence of HSP70 protein. The purpose of this study was to
determine which genes play a role in thermotolerance by measuring viability and
proliferation of the cells at 2 days after heating. Specifically, we wanted to
understand which pathways may be responsible for protecting cells in the absence 
of HSP70.
STUDY DESIGN/MATERIALS AND METHODS: Murine embryonic fibroblast cells with and
without Hsp70 (MEF(+/+) and MEF(-/-), respectively) were exposed to a mild heat
shock of 43°C for 30<U+2009>minutes in a constant temperature water bath. After 3<U+2009>hours 
of recovery, RNA was harvested from three heated samples alongside three
untreated controls using a MicroRNeasy kit with DNAse treatment. RNA quality was 
verified by an Agilent Bioanalyzer. The RNA was then converted to cDNA and
hybridized to Affymetrix gene expression DNA microarrays. The genes that showed a
twofold change (up or down) relative to unheated controls were filtered by t-test
for significance at a threshold of P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05 using Genespring software. Data were 
verified by qRT-PCR. Genes were then categorized based upon their ontology.
RESULTS: While many genes were similarly upregulated, the main difference between
cell types was an increase in transcription factors and nucleic acid binding
proteins. Several genes known to be involved in the heat response were
upregulated more than twofold (Hsp70, Hsp40, Hsp110, Hsp25, Atf3), however,
another well studied heat responsive gene Hsp90 only increased by 1.5-fold under 
these conditions despite its role in thermotolerance.
CONCLUSIONS: The data herein presents genetic pathways which are candidates for
further study of pretreatment protocols in laser irradiation.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21246580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2011 Jan 1;36(1):E1-6.

Increased expression of vascular endothelial growth factor protein in dorsal root
ganglion exposed to nucleus pulposus on the nerve root in rats.

Miyoshi S(1), Sekiguchi M, Konno S, Kikuchi S, Kanaya F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of the
Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan. miyoshishinji@hotmail.com

STUDY DESIGN: An experimental rat study.
OBJECTIVE: To assess pain-related behavior and vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) expression induced by nucleus pulposus (NP) applied to nerve roots in
rats.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Radiculopathy from disc herniation is caused by nerve
compression and chemical inflammation. In experimental studies, a decrease in
mechanical withdrawal threshold, blood flow, and nerve root dysfunction was
reported when the NP was applied to nerve roots. However, neuron reproduction and
changes in nerve root blood vessels have not been clearly understood.
METHODS: NP harvested from the tail was applied to the left L5 dorsal root
ganglion (NP group; n = 77). As a control, sham-operated animals were used (n =
77). Behavioral testing with von Frey hairs was performed for 35 days.
Immunoreactivity (IR) for VEGF, activating transcription factor-3,
growth-associated protein-43 (GAP-43), factor VIII, and hypoxia-inducible
factor-1[alpha] (HIF-1 a) were studied by immunohistochemistry. Western blot
analyses of VEGF and GAP-43 were also performed.
RESULTS: The mechanical withdrawal threshold significantly decreased from 7 to 28
days in the NP group versus the sham group (P < 0.05). In the NP group,
activating transcription factor-3-IR cells increased from 3 to 14 days (P <
0.05), hypoxia-inducible factor-1[alpha]-IR cells increased at 14 days (P <
0.05), and blood vessels with Factor VII-IR cells increased at 28 days (P < 0.05)
compared with the sham group. The expression levels of VEGF and GAP-43 in the NP 
group significantly increased at 14 and 28 days (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Neuron damage induced by NP applied to the nerve root at the early
stage, and axon extension occurred from 14 days. VEGF increased at 14 and 28
days, and the numbers of blood vessels increased 28 days after surgery. The
mechanical withdrawal threshold improved at 35 days. Regeneration and
vascularization by VEGF might be associated with pain-related behavior.

PMID: 21243740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2011 May 15;36(11):E692-8. doi:
10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181ecd675.

Anti-HMGB1 neutralization antibody improves pain-related behavior induced by
application of autologous nucleus pulposus onto nerve roots in rats.

Otoshi K(1), Kikuchi S, Kato K, Sekiguchi M, Konno S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Fukushima Medical University School of
Medicine, Fukushima, Japan. kootoshi@fmu.ac

STUDY DESIGN: Controlled, interventional, animal study.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the involvement of high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) in the
neuropathic pain state induced by the application of nucleus pulposus onto the
dorsal root ganglion (DRG) and to investigate the effect of HMGB1 neutralization 
antibody in the pathogenesis.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: HMGB1 is a potent proinflammatory mediator when
present extracellularly, and anti-HMGB1 neutralization antibody inhibits
inflammation, cytokine expression, and macrophage activation.
METHODS: Thirty-nine adult female Sprague-Dawley rats (200-300 g) were used. The 
left L5/6 facet joint was removed, and the L5 DRG was exposed. Nucleus pulposus
harvested from the tail was applied to the left L5 DRG. Then, 400 µg of
anti-HMGB1 neutralization antibody was administered intraperitoneally after
surgery. Behavioral testing using von Frey hairs was performed to investigate the
mechanical withdrawal threshold. Neuronal damage was investigated by counting the
number of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) neurons. The expressions of
tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and HMGB1 were measured by double-labeled
immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting.
RESULTS: Immunoblotting of harvested nucleus pulposus revealed HMGB1 in the
nucleus pulposus. Double-labeled immunohistochemistry revealed that macrophages
in the applied nucleus pulposus expressed HMGB1 and TNF-a. Administration of
anti-HMGB1 neutralization antibody significantly reduced the TNF-a expression in 
the DRG and improved the pain-related behavior from day 2 to day 14.
CONCLUSION: HMGB1 appears to play an important role in the development of
pain-related behavior induced by the application of nucleus pulposus onto the
DRG. HMGB1 from applied nucleus pulposus and actively secreted from macrophages
would act as a proinflammatory mediator together with proinflammatory cytokines. 
HMGB1 blocking therapy might become a new treatment method for neuropathic pain.

PMID: 21217446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Neurodegener. 2011 Jan 6;6(1):2. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-6-2.

6-OHDA generated ROS induces DNA damage and p53- and PUMA-dependent cell death.

Bernstein AI(1), Garrison SP, Zambetti GP, O'Malley KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St, Louis, MO 63110, USA. omalleyk@pcg.wustl.edu.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by the selective loss of
dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN), resulting in tremor, rigidity,
and bradykinesia. Although the etiology is unknown, insight into the disease
process comes from the dopamine (DA) derivative, 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA),
which produces PD-like symptoms. Studies show that 6-OHDA activates stress
pathways, such as the unfolded protein response (UPR), triggers mitochondrial
release of cytochrome-c, and activates caspases, such as caspase-3. Because the
BH3-only protein, Puma (p53-upregulated mediator of apoptosis), is activated in
response to UPR, it is thought to be a link between cell stress and apoptosis.
RESULTS: To test the hypothesis that Puma serves such a role in 6-OHDA-mediated
cell death, we compared the response of dopaminergic neurons from wild-type and
Puma-null mice to 6-OHDA. Results indicate that Puma is required for
6-OHDA-induced cell death, in primary dissociated midbrain cultures as well as in
vivo. In these cultures, 6-OHDA-induced DNA damage and p53 were required for
6-OHDA-induced cell death. In contrast, while 6-OHDA led to upregulation of UPR
markers, loss of ATF3 did not protect against 6-OHDA.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, our results indicate that 6-OHDA-induced upregulation of
Puma and cell death are independent of UPR. Instead, p53 and DNA damage repair
pathways mediate 6-OHDA-induced toxicity.

PMCID: PMC3025875
PMID: 21211034  [PubMed]


9. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011 Jan;4(1):116-27. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0218.

Resveratrol-induced apoptosis is mediated by early growth response-1,
Krüppel-like factor 4, and activating transcription factor 3.

Whitlock NC(1), Bahn JH, Lee SH, Eling TE, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Carcinogenesis, Department of Pathobiology,
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennesse
37996, USA.

Resveratrol, a dietary phytoalexin readily available in the diet, is reported to 
possess antitumorigenic properties in several cancers, including colorectal.
However, the underlying mechanism(s) involved is not completely understood. In
the present study, we investigated the effect of resveratrol treatment on gene
modulation in human colorectal cancer cells and identified activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) as the most highly induced gene after treatment. We
confirmed that resveratrol upregulates ATF3 expression, both at the mRNA and
protein level, and showed resveratrol involvement in ATF3 transcriptional
regulation. Analysis of the ATF3 promoter revealed the importance of early growth
response-1 (Egr-1; located at -245 to -236) and Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4;
located at -178 to -174) putative binding sites in resveratrol-mediated ATF3
transactivation. Specificity of these sites to the Egr-1 and KLF4 protein was
confirmed by electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays. Resveratrol increased Egr-1 and KLF4 expression, which preceded ATF3
expression, and further suggests Egr-1 and KLF4 involvement in
resveratrol-mediated activity. We provide evidence for Egr-1 and KLF4 interaction
in the presence of resveratrol, which may facilitate ATF3 transcriptional
regulation by this compound. Furthermore, we demonstrate that induction of
apoptosis by resveratrol is mediated, in part, by increased ATF3 expression.
Taken together, these results provide a novel mechanism by which resveratrol
induces ATF3 expression and represent an additional explanation of how
resveratrol exerts its antitumorigenic effects in human colorectal cancer cells.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3064282
PMID: 21205742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Sports Sci Med. 2011 Jun 1;10(2):385-92. eCollection 2011.

Gene response of the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles to an acute aerobic run in 
rats.

McKenzie MJ(1), Goldfarb AH, Kump DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Performance and Sport Sciences.

Genes can be activated or inhibited by signals within the tissues in response to 
an acute bout of exercise. It is unclear how a particular aerobic exercise bout
may influence two muscles with similar actions to the activity. Therefore, the
purposes of this investigation was to determine the gene response of selected
genes involved in the "stress" response of the gastrocnemius (fast-twitch) and
soleus (slow-twitch) muscles to a single two hour aerobic exercise bout in female
Sprague-Dawley Rats at the 1 hour time point after the exercise. Exercised rats
were run (n=8) for 2 hours at 20 m.min(-1) and one hour after the completion of
the bout had their soleus (S) and gastrocnemius (G) muscles removed. Age and
timed matched sedentary control rats had both S and G muscles removed also. RNA
was isolated from all muscles. Real-time PCR analysis was performed on the
following genes: NF<U+03BA>B, TNFa, and Atf3. GAPDH was used as the housekeeping gene
for both muscles. S muscle showed more genes altered (n = 52) vs G (n = 26). NF<U+03BA>B
gene expression was 0.83 ± 0.14 in the exercised S but was + 1.36 ± 0.58 in the
exercised G and was not significantly different between the muscles. TNFa was
altered 1.30 ± 0. 34 in the exercised S and 1.36 ± 0.71 in the exercised G and
was not significantly different between the muscles. The gene Atf3 was
significantly altered at 4.97 ± 1.01 in the exercised S, while it was not
significantly altered in the exercised G (0.70 ± 0.55). This study demonstrates
that an acute bout of aerobic exercise can alter gene expression to a different
extent in both the S and G muscles. It is highly likely that muscle recruitment
was a factor which influenced the gene expression in theses muscles. It is
interesting to note that some genes were similarly activated in these two muscles
but other genes may demonstrate a varied response to the same exercise bout
depending on the type of muscle. Key pointsThe soleus (primarily slow twitch) and
the gastrocnemius (primarily fast type) do not respond the same to a given
exercise bout.There are gene transcription differences in stress genes between
the 2 muscles.The results of exercise studies should be carefully viewed as the
muscle used in measurements may not provide an adequate representation of all
skeletal muscles.

PMCID: PMC3761848
PMID: 24149887  [PubMed]


11. Basic Res Cardiol. 2011 Mar;106(2):175-87. doi: 10.1007/s00395-010-0145-9. Epub
2010 Dec 30.

Angiotensin II signaling up-regulates the immediate early transcription factor
ATF3 in the left but not the right atrium.

Hasin T(1), Elhanani O, Abassi Z, Hai T, Aronheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Rappaport Family Institute for Research 
in the Medical Sciences, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, 1 Efron St.,
Bat-Galim, 31096 Haifa, Israel.

The atria respond to various pathological stimuli including pressure and volume
overload with remodeling and dilatation. Dilatation of the left atrium is
associated with atrial fibrillation. The mechanisms involved in chamber-specific 
hypertrophy are largely unknown. Angiotensin II is hypothesized to take part in
mediating this response. ATF3 is an immediate early gene found at the receiving
end of multiple stress and growth stimuli. Here we characterize ATF3 as a direct 
target gene for angiotensin II. ATF3 expression is regulated by angiotensin
receptor-mediated signaling in vivo and in vitro at the transcriptional level.
ATF3 induction is mediated by cooperation between both the AT(1A) and AT2
receptor subtypes. While AT2R blocker (PD123319) efficiently blocks ATF3
induction in response to angiotensin II injection, it results in an increase in
blood pressure indicating that the effect of angiotensin II on ATF3 is
independent of its effect on blood pressure. In contrast to adrenergic
stimulation that induces ATF3 in all heart chambers, ATF3 induction in response
to angiotensin II occurs primarily in the left chambers. We hypothesize that the 
activation of differential signaling pathways accounts for the chamber-specific
induction of ATF3 expression in response to angiotensin II stimulation.
Angiotensin II injection rapidly activates the EGFR-dependent pathways including 
ERK and PI3K-AKT in the left but not the right atrium. EGF receptor inhibitor
(Gefitinib/Iressa) as well as the AKT inhibitor (Triciribine) significantly
abrogates ATF3 induction by angiotensin II in the left chambers. Collectively,
our data strongly place ATF3 as a unique nuclear protein target in response to
angiotensin II stimulation in the atria. The spatial expression of ATF3 may add
to the understanding of the signaling pathways involved in cardiac response to
neuro-hormonal stimulation, and in particular to the understanding of left
atrial-generated pathology such as atrial fibrillation.

PMCID: PMC3682928
PMID: 21191795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Dairy Sci. 2011 Jan;94(1):152-64. doi: 10.3168/jds.2010-3358.

Anaphylatoxin C5a-induced toll-like receptor 4 signaling in bovine neutrophils.

Stevens MG(1), Van Poucke M, Peelman LJ, Rainard P, De Spiegeleer B, Rogiers C,
Van de Walle GR, Duchateau L, Burvenich C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Physiology and Biometrics, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Ghent University, 9820 Merelbeke, Belgium.

It is well known that signaling in neutrophils through both the complement
component 5a (C5a) and C5a receptor (C5aR) and the toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)
pathways plays an essential role in innate defense. Neutrophil dysfunction, as
seen during sepsis in severe mastitis during the periparturient period, is
correlated with elevated concentrations of anaphylatoxin C5a. The aim of the
current study was to elucidate the effect of C5a on TLR4 signaling in bovine
neutrophils. Neutrophils were incubated with a high (but physiological) dose of
purified C5a, and mRNA was extracted from neutrophils at different time points
postincubation (PI). The incubation with C5a resulted in a biphasic C5aR
expression profile, a phenomenon that might be explained by internalization (at
10 min PI) with subsequent reconstitution (starting at 40 min PI) of this
receptor. The expression of TLR4, as well as its coreceptor, CD14, showed a
similar biphasic change as observed with C5aR. In addition, changes in the mRNA
expression levels of several genes belonging to the TLR4 pathway, such as
TICAM-1, IKKa, and MAP3K7 were noted. The maximal expression of TLR4, CD14, and
C5aR mRNA at 80 min PI was accompanied by a peak in IL8 mRNA, indicating that C5a
is able to induce IL-8 production in neutrophils in vitro without the need of a
costimulatory factor such as lipopolysaccharide. Moreover, a relatively constant 
expression of RELA was accompanied by increased expression of ATF3, an endogenous
inhibitor of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B mediated transcription, implying that C5a
regulates TLR4 signaling and IL-8 synthesis independently. A significant
time-dependent correlation was found between C5aR and TLR4, with the majority of 
the selected TLR4-dependent genes showing a significant correlation with C5aR at 
80 min PI, when C5aR and TLR4 mRNA expression reached its maximum, suggesting
crosstalk between both receptors. Taken together, this study showed that C5a is
able to (1) alter the expression of genes belonging to the TLR4 pathway and (2)
induce IL8 gene expression in bovine neutrophils. In addition, indications for
cross-talk between complement activation and TLR4 signaling were found in the
present study.

Copyright © 2011 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21183027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Pain. 2010 Dec 17;6:94. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-6-94.

Ablation of rat TRPV1-expressing Adelta/C-fibers with resiniferatoxin: analysis
of withdrawal behaviors, recovery of function and molecular correlates.

Mitchell K(1), Bates BD, Keller JM, Lopez M, Scholl L, Navarro J, Madian N,
Haspel G, Nemenov MI, Iadarola MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology and Pain Therapeutics Section, Laboratory of Sensory Biology,
National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Ablation of TRPV1-expressing nociceptive fibers with the potent
capsaicin analog resiniferatoxin (RTX) results in long lasting pain relief. RTX
is particularly adaptable to focal application, and the induced chemical
axonopathy leads to analgesia with a duration that is influenced by dose, route
of administration, and the rate of fiber regeneration. TRPV1 is expressed in a
subpopulation of unmyelinated C- and lightly myelinated Adelta fibers that detect
changes in skin temperature at low and high rates of noxious heating,
respectively. Here we investigate fiber-type specific behaviors, their time
course of recovery and molecular correlates of axon damage and nociception using 
infrared laser stimuli following an RTX-induced peripheral axonopathy.
RESULTS: RTX was injected into rat hind paws (mid-plantar) to produce thermal
hypoalgesia. An infrared diode laser was used to stimulate Adelta fibers in the
paw with a small-diameter (1.6 mm), high-energy, 100 msec pulse, or C-fibers with
a wide-diameter (5 mm), long-duration, low-energy pulse. We monitored behavioral 
responses to indicate loss and regeneration of fibers. At the site of injection, 
responses to C-fiber stimuli were significantly attenuated for two weeks after 5 
or 50 ng RTX. Responses to Adelta stimuli were significantly attenuated for two
weeks at the highest intensity stimulus, and for 5 weeks to a less intense Adelta
stimulus. Stimulation on the toe, a site distal to the injection, showed
significant attenuation of Adelta responses for 7- 8 weeks after 5 ng, or 9-10
weeks after 50 ng RTX. In contrast, responses to C-fiber stimuli exhibited
basically normal responses at 5 weeks after RTX. During the period of fiber loss 
and recovery, molecular markers for nerve regeneration (ATF3 and galanin) are
upregulated in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) when behavior is maximally
attenuated, but markers of nociceptive activity (c-Fos in spinal cord and MCP-1
in DRG), although induced immediately after RTX treatment, returned to normal.
CONCLUSION: Behavioral recovery following peripheral RTX treatment is linked to
regeneration of TRPV1-expressing Adelta and C-fibers and sustained expression of 
molecular markers. Infrared laser stimulation is a potentially valuable tool for 
evaluating the behavioral role of Adelta fibers in pain and pain control.

PMCID: PMC3019206
PMID: 21167052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cancer Res. 2010 Dec 15;70(24):10265-76. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2839.

Loss of metallothionein predisposes mice to diethylnitrosamine-induced
hepatocarcinogenesis by activating NF-kappaB target genes.

Majumder S(1), Roy S, Kaffenberger T, Wang B, Costinean S, Frankel W, Bratasz A, 
Kuppusamy P, Hai T, Ghoshal K, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA. sarmila.majumder@osumc.edu

Metallothioneins (MT) are potent scavengers of free radicals that are silenced in
primary hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) of human and rodent origin. To examine
whether loss of MT promotes hepatocarcinogenesis, male Mt-1 and Mt-2 double
knockout (MTKO) and wild-type (WT) mice were exposed to diethylnitrosamine (DEN) 
and induction of HCC was monitored at 23 and 33 weeks. The size and number of
liver tumors, the ratio between liver and body weight, and liver damage were
markedly elevated in the MTKO mice at both time points compared with the WT mice.
At 23 weeks, MTKO mice developed HCC whereas WT mice developed only preneoplastic
nodules suggesting that loss of MT accelerates hepatocarcinogenesis. MTKO tumors 
also exhibited higher superoxide anion levels. Although NF-<U+03BA>B activity increased 
in the liver nuclear extracts of both genotypes after DEN exposure, the complex
formed in MTKO mice was predominantly p50/65 heterodimer (transcriptional
activator) as opposed to p50 homodimer (transcriptional repressor) in WT mice.
Phosphorylation of p65 at Ser276 causing its activation was also significantly
augmented in DEN-exposed MTKO livers. NF-<U+03BA>B targets that include early growth
response genes and proinflammatory cytokines were significantly upregulated in
MTKO mice. Concurrently, there was a remarkable increase (~100-fold) in Pai-1
expression; significant increase in c-Jun, c-Fos, c-Myc, Ets2, and ATF3
expressions; and growth factor signaling that probably contributed to the
increased tumor growth in MTKO mice. Taken together, these results demonstrate
that MTs protect mice from hepatocarcinogen-induced liver damage and
carcinogenesis, underscoring their potential therapeutic application against
hepatocellular cancer.

©2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3059562
PMID: 21159647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 2;5(12):e14181. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014181.

ATF3 plays a key role in Kdo2-lipid A-induced TLR4-dependent gene expression via 
NF-<U+03BA>B activation.

Kim EY(1), Shin HY, Kim JY, Kim DG, Choi YM, Kwon HK, Rhee DK, Kim YS, Choi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou University, Suwon, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a negative regulator of
proinflammatory cytokine expression in macrophages, and ATF3 deficient mice are
more susceptible to endotoxic shock. This study addresses the role of ATF3 in the
Kdo(2)-Lipid A-induced Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signaling pathway in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEF). Kdo(2)-Lipid A upregulates ATF3 expression in wild
type MEF cells and induces both nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK) activation via the TLR4 signaling pathway, while neither 
of these pathways is activated in ATF3-/- MEF cells. Interestingly, in contrast
to Kdo(2)-Lipid A, the activation of both NF-<U+03BA>B and JNK by TNF-a was normal in
ATF3-/- MEF cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We found that several genes were dramatically
upregulated in ATF3+/+ MEF cells in response to Kdo(2)-Lipid A treatment, while
little difference was observed in the ATF3-/- MEF cells. However, we also found
that the signal intensities of I<U+03BA>B<U+03B6> in ATF3-/- MEF cells were substantially
higher than those in wild type MEF cells upon microarray analyses, and
upregulated I<U+03BA>B<U+03B6> expression was detected in the cytosol fraction.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings indicate that ATF3 deficiency affects
Kdo(2)-Lipid A-induced TLR4 signaling pathways in MEF cells, that it may
upregulate I<U+03BA>B<U+03B6> expression and that the high levels of I<U+03BA>B<U+03B6> expression in ATF3-/-
cells disrupts Kdo(2)-Lipid A-mediated signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC2996292
PMID: 21152039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Hepatol. 2011 Apr;54(4):729-37. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.07.023. Epub 2010 Sep 
29.

ATF4 and the integrated stress response are induced by ethanol and cytochrome
P450 2E1 in human hepatocytes.

Magne L(1), Blanc E, Legrand B, Lucas D, Barouki R, Rouach H, Garlatti M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR-S 747, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Molecular mechanisms underlying alcoholic liver disease (ALD) 
are still not fully understood. Activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4) is the
master coordinator of the integrated stress response (ISR), an adaptive pathway
triggered by multiple stressors. which can promote cell death and induce
metabolic dysregulation if the stress is intense or prolonged. The aim of this
study was to assess the effect of alcohol on the ISR signaling pathway in human
liver cells and to define the role of cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) in this
response.
METHODS: Primary cultured human hepatocytes and human HepG2 cells over-expressing
CYP2E1 by adenoviral infection were exposed to ethanol (25-100mM) for 8-48h.
RESULTS: Ethanol treatment of both liver cells up-regulated ATF4 as well as the
pro-survival and the pro-apoptotic transcriptional program of the ISR. Indeed, in
CYP2E1-expressing HepG2 cells exposed to ethanol, the expression of ISR target
genes (HMOX-1, GCLC, AsnS, IGFBP-1, GADD34,CHOP, ATF3, CHAC1) was induced.
Up-regulation of ATF4 and the ISR transcriptional program was decreased by
addition of the anti-oxidant glutathione. Several mechanisms mediated ATF4
protein induction, including, at early times, the phosphorylation of eIF2a which 
controls ATF4 translation, and, at later times, increased mRNA level and
increased stability of the protein. A decrease in cell survival was also
observed.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that both CYP2E1 and ethanol induce ATF4 and
the integrated stress response, a pathway which coordinates signals from multiple
stresses, as well as established risk factors for ALD, and can display
detrimental cellular effects upon prolonged activation.

Copyright © 2010 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21146245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Am J Hum Biol. 2011 Jan-Feb;23(1):22-8. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.21135.

Biochemical specificity of von Economo neurons in hominoids.

Stimpson CD(1), Tetreault NA, Allman JM, Jacobs B, Butti C, Hof PR, Sherwood CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, The George Washington University, Washington, DC
20052, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Von Economo neurons (VENs) are defined by their thin, elongated cell 
body and long dendrites projecting from apical and basal ends. These distinctive 
neurons are mostly present in anterior cingulate (ACC) and fronto-insular (FI)
cortex, with particularly high densities in cetaceans, elephants, and hominoid
primates (i.e., humans and apes). This distribution suggests that VENs contribute
to specializations of neural circuits in species that share both large brain size
and complex social cognition, possibly representing an adaptation to rapidly
relay socially-relevant information over long distances across the brain. Recent 
evidence indicates that unique patterns of protein expression may also
characterize VENs, particularly involving molecules that are known to regulate
gut and immune function.
METHODS: In this study, we used quantitative stereologic methods to examine the
expression of three such proteins that are localized in
VENs-activating-transcription factor 3 (ATF3), interleukin 4 receptor (IL4Ra),
and neuromedin B (NMB). We quantified immunoreactivity against these proteins in 
different morphological classes of ACC layer V neurons of hominoids.
RESULTS: Among the different neuron types analyzed (pyramidal, VEN, fork,
enveloping, and other multipolar), VENs showed the greatest percentage that
displayed immunostaining. Additionally, a higher proportion of VENs in humans
were immunoreactive to ATF3, IL4Ra, and NMB than in other apes. No other ACC
layer V neuron type displayed a significant species difference in the percentage 
of immunoreactive neurons.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that phylogenetic variation exists in the
protein expression profile of VENs, suggesting that humans might have evolved
biochemical specializations for enhanced interoceptive sensitivity.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3004764
PMID: 21140465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Carcinog. 2010 Nov 18;9:10. doi: 10.4103/1477-3163.72578.

Digitoxin activates EGR1 and synergizes with paclitaxel on human breast cancer
cells.

Einbond LS(1), Wu HA, Su T, Chang T, Panjikaran M, Wang X, Goldsberry S.

Author information: 
(1)Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Numerous studies have suggested that digitalis derivatives promise to
be superior to existing adjuvant therapy for breast cancer as to effects and
side-effects. In the present study, we have used gene expression analysis to
determine the molecular action of digitoxin on breast cancer cells and assessed
digitoxin's ability to synergize with the chemotherapy agent paclitaxel with
respect to inhibition of cell proliferation
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We treated (Her2 overexpressing, ER low) MDA-MB-453 human 
breast cancer cells with digitoxin at four doses {20 ng/ml (26 nM) to 1 µg/ml}
and collected RNA at 6 h and 24 h for gene expression analysis. To examine the
effects on ER positive cells, we treated MCF7 cells with digitoxin at 1 µg/ml and
collected RNA for RT-PCR analysis. In addition, we assayed the growth inhibitory 
effect of low doses of digitoxin combined with paclitaxel and determined
combination index values.
RESULTS: To reveal primary effects, we examined digitoxin's effect 6 h
post-treatment with the highest dose, 1µg/ml, and found upregulation of the
stress response genes EGR-1 and NAB2, lipid biosynthetic genes and the tumor
suppressor gene p21, and downregulation of the mitotic cell cycle gene CDC16 and 
the replication gene PolR3B. RT-PCR analysis validated effects on stress
response, apoptotic and cell cycle genes on MDA-MB-453 and MCF7 cells. Western
blot analysis confirmed induction of EGR1 protein at 1 h and ATF3 at 24 h.
Paclitaxel, as well as digitoxin, inhibited the in vitro activity of the purified
Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase; digitoxin enhanced the growth inhibitory effects of paclitaxel
on Her2 overexpressing breast cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies show the potential of digitoxin to prevent and treat
breast cancer and indicate that the combination of digitoxin and paclitaxel is a 
promising treatment for ER negative breast cancer. These findings are the first
to alert physicians to the possible dangers to patients who take a combination of
digitoxin and paclitaxel. The potential dangers ensuing when paclitaxel and
digitoxin are combined are dependent on the dose of digitoxin.

PMCID: PMC2997271
PMID: 21139994  [PubMed]


19. BMC Cancer. 2010 Dec 3;10:668. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-668.

Activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3) functions as a tumor suppressor in colon
cancer and is up-regulated upon heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90) inhibition.

Hackl C(1), Lang SA, Moser C, Mori A, Fichtner-Feigl S, Hellerbrand C, Dietmeier 
W, Schlitt HJ, Geissler EK, Stoeltzing O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Regensburg Medical Center, Franz-Josef
Strauß Allee 11, 93042 Regensburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3) is involved in the complex
process of cellular stress response. However, its exact role in cancer is
discussed controversially because both tumor suppressive and oncogenic effects
have been described. Here we followed-up on our previous observation that
inhibition of Hsp90 may increase ATF3 expression and sought to determine the role
of ATF3 in colon cancer.
METHODS: Regulation of ATF3 was determined in cancer cells using signaling
inhibitors and a heat-shock protein-90 (Hsp90) antagonist. Human HCT116 cancer
cells were stably transfected with an ATF3-shRNA or a luciferase-shRNA expression
plasmid and alterations in cell motility were assessed in migration assays. The
impact of ATF3 down-regulation on cancer growth and metastasis were investigated 
in a subcutaneous tumor model, a model of hepatic tumor growth and in a model of 
peritoneal carcinomatosis. Human colon cancer tissues were analyzed for ATF3
expression.
RESULTS: The results show that therapeutic Hsp90 inhibition substantially
up-regulates the expression of ATF3 in various cancer cells, including colon,
gastric and pancreatic cancer. This effect was evident both in vitro and in vivo.
RNAi mediated knock-down of ATF3 in HCT116 colon cancer cells significantly
increased cancer cell migration in vitro. Moreover, in xenogenic mouse models,
ATF3 knock-down promoted subcutaneous tumor growth and hepatic metastasis, as
well as peritoneal carcinomatosis. Importantly, ATF3 expression was lower in
human colon cancer specimens, as compared to corresponding normal surrounding
tissues, suggesting that ATF3 may represent a down-regulated tumor suppressor in 
colon cancer.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, ATF3 down-regulation in colon cancer promotes tumor
growth and metastasis. Considering that blocking Hsp90 induces ATF3 expression,
Hsp90 inhibition may represent a valid strategy to treat metastatic colon cancer 
by up-regulating this anti-metastatic transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC3003660
PMID: 21129190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Int J Oncol. 2011 Jan;38(1):179-88.

HARP<U+0394>111-136 enhances radiation-induced apoptosis of U87MG glioblastoma by
induction of the proapoptotic protein CHOP.

Karaky R(1), Gobbo E, Opolon P, Delbé J, Courty J, Griscelli F, Perricaudet M,
Martel-Renoir D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UMR 8121, Vectorologie et Transfert de Gènes, Institut Gustave Roussy,
39 rue Camille Desmoulins, Villejuif, France.

We previously demonstrated, using the glioblastoma cell line U87MG as an
experimental model, that the adenoviral mediated overexpression of the truncated 
protein HARP<U+0394>111-136 inhibits the proliferation of these cells in vitro as well
as tumor growth and angiogenesis in vivo. This study focused on identifying the
underlying mechanisms for the observed antitumoral effect. The present study
demonstrated that HARP<U+0394>111-136 induced the ATF4/ATF3/CHOP cascade resulting in a 
strong expression of the proapoptotic protein CHOP, leading to tumor cell
apoptosis as demonstrated by PARP cleavage and FACS analysis. siRNA-mediated CHOP
gene silencing abolished Ad-HARP<U+0394>111-136 induced apoptosis. Moreover,
Ad-HARP<U+0394>111-136 increased the expression of the death receptor DR5 and enhanced
U87MG cells sensitivity in vitro to TRAIL a DR5 ligand with subsequent activation
of caspase 8. Infection of U87MG cells with Ad-HARP<U+0394>111-136 also enhanced
radiation-induced apoptosis. In vivo, the combination of Ad-HARP<U+0394>111-136 and
radiation therapy resulted in a striking inhibition (92%) of the growth of U87MG 
xenografts, resulting from the potent effect on tumor angiogenesis and tumor cell
apoptosis as determined by TUNEL analysis. Taken together, our results indicated 
that the inhibitor HARP<U+0394>111-136 sensitized U87MG cells to apoptosis.

PMID: 21109939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. BMC Neurosci. 2010 Nov 23;11:148. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-11-148.

Long descending cervical propriospinal neurons differ from thoracic propriospinal
neurons in response to low thoracic spinal injury.

Siebert JR(1), Middleton FA, Stelzner DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, SUNY Upstate Medical University 
750 East Adams Street Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.

BACKGROUND: Propriospinal neurons, with axonal projections intrinsic to the
spinal cord, have shown a greater regenerative response than supraspinal neurons 
after axotomy due to spinal cord injury (SCI). Our previous work focused on the
response of axotomized short thoracic propriospinal (TPS) neurons following a low
thoracic SCI (T9 spinal transection or moderate spinal contusion injury) in the
rat. The present investigation analyzes the intrinsic response of cervical
propriospinal neurons having long descending axons which project into the
lumbosacral enlargement, long descending propriospinal tract (LDPT) axons. These 
neurons also were axotomized by T9 spinal injury in the same animals used in our 
previous study.
RESULTS: Utilizing laser microdissection (LMD), qRT-PCR, and
immunohistochemistry, we studied LDPT neurons (located in the C5-C6 spinal
segments) between 3-days, and 1-month following a low thoracic (T9) spinal cord
injury. We examined the response of 89 genes related to growth factors, cell
surface receptors, apoptosis, axonal regeneration, and neuroprotection/cell
survival. We found a strong and significant down-regulation of ~25% of the genes 
analyzed early after injury (3-days post-injury) with a sustained down-regulation
in most instances. In the few genes that were up-regulated (Actb, Atf3, Frs2,
Hspb1, Nrap, Stat1) post-axotomy, the expression for all but one was
down-regulated by 2-weeks post-injury. We also compared the uninjured TPS control
neurons to the uninjured LDPT neurons used in this experiment for phenotypic
differences between these two subpopulations of propriospinal neurons. We found
significant differences in expression in 37 of the 84 genes examined between
these two subpopulations of propriospinal neurons with LDPT neurons exhibiting a 
significantly higher base line expression for all but 3 of these genes compared
to TPS neurons.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken collectively these data indicate a broad overall
down-regulation in the genes examined, including genes for neurotrophic/growth
factor receptors as well as for several growth factors. There was a lack of a
significant regenerative response, with the exception of an up-regulation of Atf3
and early up-regulation of Hspb1 (Hsp27), both involved in cell
stress/neuroprotection as well as axonal regeneration. There was no indication of
a cell death response over the first month post-injury. In addition, there appear
to be significant phenotypic differences between uninjured TPS and LDPT neurons, 
which may partly account for the differences observed in their post-axotomy
responses. The findings in this current study stand in stark contrast to the
findings from our previous work on TPS neurons. This suggests that different
approaches will be needed to enhance the capacity for each population of
propriospinal neuron to survive and undergo successful axonal regeneration after 
SCI.

PMCID: PMC3001741
PMID: 21092315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Endocrine. 2011 Apr;39(2):118-27. doi: 10.1007/s12020-010-9421-6. Epub 2010 Nov
11.

Molecular mechanism of pancreatic ß-cell adaptive proliferation: studies during
pregnancy in rats and in vitro.

Chen G(1), Liu C, Xue Y, Mao X, Xu K, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.

There is a widespread interest in defining factors and mechanisms that stimulate 
proliferation of pancreatic islet ß-cells. Pregnancy is a special period when the
pancreatic islet displays a highly reproducible physiological proliferation.
However, the molecular mechanism of ß-cell proliferation during pregnancy is
unclear. Here, we used cDNA expression array to explore gene expression profiles 
of islet at various stages of pregnancy in rats. Differentially expressed genes
related to islet proliferation were screened by bioinformatics methods, and
further verified by real-time PCR, RT-PCR, and Western blotting. Compared with
control group, expressions of hundreds of genes were changed during pregnancy.
The differentially expressed genes related to islet proliferation were mainly
distributed in three groups: genes involved in transcription regulator activity, 
genes involved in apoptosis or tumor, and genes for Wnt signaling pathway. Among 
these genes, expressions of Nupr1, Atf3, Btg2, ß-catenin, and c-Myc mRNA were
up-regulated during pregnancy. A prominent expression of Nupr1 and Atf3 protein
was observed in islets on day 10.5 of pregnancy, i.e., with earlier time phases
than proliferation peak. Moreover, we found that prolactin (PRL) can increase the
proliferation of ß-cell in vitro, which is accompanied by up-regulation of Atf3
and Nupr1, indicating that they may play a crucial role in PRL-induced pancreatic
ß-cell growth. In conclusion, our results suggest that the transcription factor
Nupr1, Atf3, and Wnt pathway may play an important role in adaptive proliferation
of pancreatic islets during pregnancy in rats.

PMID: 21069579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Gene Expr. 2010;15(1):1-11.

ATF3, a hub of the cellular adaptive-response network, in the pathogenesis of
diseases: is modulation of inflammation a unifying component?

Hai T(1), Wolford CC, Chang YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA. hai.2@osu.edu

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) gene encodes a member of the ATF family 
of transcription factors and is induced by various stress signals. All members of
this family share the basic region-leucine zipper (bZip) DNA binding motif and
bind to the consensus sequence TGACGTCA in vitro. Previous reviews and an
Internet source have covered the following topics: the nomenclature of ATF
proteins, the history of their discovery, the potential interplays between ATFs
and other bZip proteins, ATF3-interacting proteins, ATF3 target genes, and the
emerging roles of ATF3 in cancer and immunity (see footnote 1). In this review,
we present evidence and clues that prompted us to put forth the idea that ATF3
functions as a "hub" of the cellular adaptive-response network. We will then
focus on the roles of ATF3 in modulating inflammatory response. Inflammation is
increasingly recognized to play an important role for the development of many
diseases. Putting this in the context of the hub idea, we propose that modulation
of inflammation by ATF3 is a unifying theme for the potential involvement of ATF3
in various diseases.

PMID: 21061913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Mar 18;52(3):1460-73. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-5930. 
Print 2011 Mar.

Early gene expression changes in the retinal ganglion cell layer of a rat
glaucoma model.

Guo Y(1), Johnson EC, Cepurna WO, Dyck JA, Doser T, Morrison JC.

Author information: 
(1)Kenneth C. Swan Ocular Neurobiology Laboratory, Casey Eye Institute, Oregon
Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

PURPOSE: To identify patterns of early gene expression changes in the retinal
ganglion cell layer (GCL) of a rodent model of chronic glaucoma.
METHODS: Prolonged elevation of intraocular pressure (IOP) was produced in rats
by episcleral vein injection of hypertonic saline (N = 30). GCLs isolated by
laser capture microdissection were grouped by grading of the nerve injury (<25%
axon degeneration for early injury; >25% for advanced injury). Gene expression
was determined by cDNA microarray of independent GCL RNA samples. Quantitative
PCR (qPCR) was used to further examine the expression of selected genes.
RESULTS: By array analysis, 533 GCL genes (225 up, 308 down) were significantly
regulated in early injury. Compared to only one major upregulated gene class of
metabolism regulation, more were downregulated, including mitochondria, ribosome,
proteasome, energy pathways, protein synthesis, protein folding, and synaptic
transmission. qPCR confirmed an early upregulation of Atf3. With advanced injury,
1790 GCL genes were significantly regulated (997 up, 793 down). Altered gene
categories included upregulated protein synthesis, immune response, and cell
apoptosis and downregulated dendrite morphogenesis and axon extension. Of all the
early changed genes, 50% were not present in advanced injury. These uniquely
affected genes were mainly associated with upregulated transcription regulation
and downregulated protein synthesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Early GCL gene responses to pressure-induced injury are
characterized by an upregulation of Atf3 and extensive downregulation in genes
associated with cellular metabolism and neuronal functions. Most likely, these
changes represent those specific to RGCs and are thus potentially important for
enhancing RGC survival in glaucoma.

PMCID: PMC3101663
PMID: 21051717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Pain. 2010 Nov 5;6:76. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-6-76.

Prevention of paclitaxel-induced allodynia by minocycline: Effect on loss of
peripheral nerve fibers and infiltration of macrophages in rats.

Liu CC(1), Lu N, Cui Y, Yang T, Zhao ZQ, Xin WJ, Liu XG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pain Research Center, Zhongshan Medical School,
Sun Yat-Sen University, 74 Zhongshan Rd, 2, Guangzhou, 510080, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Although paclitaxel is a frontline antineoplastic agent for treatment
of solid tumors, the paclitaxel-evoked pain syndrome is a serious problem for
patients. There is currently no valid drug to prevent or treat the
paclitaxel-induced allodynia, partly due to lack of understanding regarding the
cellular mechanism. Studies have shown that minocycline, an inhibitor of
microglia/macrophage, prevented neuropathic pain and promoted neuronal survival
in animal models of neurodegenerative disease. Recently, Cata et al also reported
that minocycline inhibited allodynia induced by low-dose paclitaxel (2 mg/kg) in 
rats, but the mechanism is still unclear.
RESULTS: Here, we investigate by immunohistochemistry the change of
intraepidermal nerve fiber (IENF) in the hind paw glabrous skin, expression of
macrophage and activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in DRG at different time 
points after moderate-dose paclitaxel treatment (cumulative dose 24 mg/kg; 3 × 8 
mg/kg) in rats. Moreover, we observe the effect of minocycline on the IENF,
macrophages and ATF3. The results showed that moderate-dose paclitaxel induced a 
persisted, gradual mechanical allodynia, which was accompanied by the loss of
IENF in the hind paw glabrous skin and up-regulation of macrophages and ATF3 in
DRG in rats. The expressions of ATF3 mainly focus on the NF200-positive cells.
More importantly, we observed that pretreatment of minocycline at dose of 30
mg/kg or 50 mg/kg, but not 5 mg/kg, prevented paclitaxel-evoked allodynia. The
evidence from immunohistochemistry showed that 30 mg/kg minocycline rescued the
degeneration of IENF, attenuated infiltration of macrophages and up-regulation of
ATF3 induced by paclitaxel treatment in rats.
CONCLUSIONS: Minocycline prevents paclitaxel-evoked allodynia, likely due to its 
inhibition on loss of IENF, infiltration of macrophages and up-regulation of ATF3
in rats. The finding might provide potential target for preventing
paclitaxel-induced neuropathic pain.

PMCID: PMC2991291
PMID: 21050491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 29;5(10):e13774. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013774.

Behavioral, medical imaging and histopathological features of a new rat model of 
bone cancer pain.

Doré-Savard L(1), Otis V, Belleville K, Lemire M, Archambault M, Tremblay L,
Beaudoin JF, Beaudet N, Lecomte R, Lepage M, Gendron L, Sarret P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke,
Quebec, Canada.

Pre-clinical bone cancer pain models mimicking the human condition are required
to respond to clinical realities. Breast or prostate cancer patients coping with 
bone metastases experience intractable pain, which affects their quality of life.
Advanced monitoring is thus required to clarify bone cancer pain mechanisms and
refine treatments. In our model of rat femoral mammary carcinoma MRMT-1 cell
implantation, pain onset and tumor growth were monitored for 21 days. The
surgical procedure performed without arthrotomy allowed recording of incidental
pain in free-moving rats. Along with the gradual development of mechanical
allodynia and hyperalgesia, behavioral signs of ambulatory pain were detected at 
day 14 by using a dynamic weight-bearing apparatus. Osteopenia was revealed from 
day 14 concomitantly with disorganization of the trabecular architecture (µCT).
Bone metastases were visualized as early as day 8 by MRI (T(1)-Gd-DTPA) before
pain detection. PET (Na(18)F) co-registration revealed intra-osseous activity, as
determined by anatomical superimposition over MRI in accordance with osteoclastic
hyperactivity (TRAP staining). Pain and bone destruction were aggravated with
time. Bone remodeling was accompanied by c-Fos (spinal) and ATF3 (DRG) neuronal
activation, sustained by astrocyte (GFAP) and microglia (Iba1) reactivity in
lumbar spinal cord. Our animal model demonstrates the importance of
simultaneously recording pain and tumor progression and will allow us to better
characterize therapeutic strategies in the future.

PMCID: PMC2966439
PMID: 21048940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Toxicol Lett. 2011 Jan 15;200(1-2):77-87. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2010.10.017. Epub
2010 Oct 30.

Global gene expression profiles of MT knockout and wild-type mice in the
condition of doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy.

Shuai Y(1), Guo J, Dong Y, Zhong W, Xiao P, Zhou T, Zhang L, Peng S.

Author information: 
(1)Evaluation and Research Center for Toxicology, Institute of Disease Control
and Prevention, Academy of Military Medical Science, 20 Dongdajie Street, Fengtai
District, Beijing 100071, PR China.

Increasing evidence from in vivo and in vitro studies has indicated that MT
exerts protective effects against DOX-induced cardiotoxicity; however the
underlying precise mechanisms still remain an enigma. Therefore, the present
study was designed using MT knockout mice in concert with genomic approaches to
explore the possible molecular and cellular mechanisms in terms of the genetic
network changes. MT-I/II null (MT<U+207B>/<U+207B>) mice and corresponding wild-type mice
(MT+/+) were administrated with a single dose of DOX (15 mg/kg, i.p.) or equal
volume of saline. Animals were sacrificed on the 4th day after DOX administration
and samples were collected for further analyses. Global gene expression profiles 
of cardiac mRNA from two genotype mice revealed that 381 characteristically
MT-responsive genes were identified between MT+/+ mice and MT<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice in response
to DOX, including fos, ucp3, car3, atf3, map3k6, etc. Functional analysis implied
MAPK signaling pathway, p53 signaling pathway, Jak-STAT signaling pathway, PPAR
signaling pathway, Wnt signaling pathway, etc. might be involved to mediate the
protection of DOX cardiomyopathy by MT. Results from the present study not only
validated the previously reported possible mechanisms of MT protection against
DOX toxicity, but also provided new clues into the molecular mechanisms involved 
in this process.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21040762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. BMC Cancer. 2010 Oct 30;10:595. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-595.

Gene expression analysis of cell death induction by taurolidine in different
malignant cell lines.

Chromik AM(1), Hahn SA, Daigeler A, Flier A, Bulut D, May C, Harati K, Roschinsky
J, Sülberg D, Weyhe D, Mittelkötter U, Uhl W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral and General Surgery, St. Josef Hospital,
Ruhr-University Bochum, Gudrunstrasse 56, D-44791 Bochum, Germany.
a.chromik@klinikum-bochum.de

BACKGROUND: The anti-infective agent Taurolidine (TRD) has been shown to have
cell death inducing properties, but the mechanism of its action is largely
unknown. The aim of this study was to identify potential common target genes
modulated at the transcriptional level following TRD treatment in tumour cell
lines originating from different cancer types.
METHODS: Five different malignant cell lines (HT29, Chang Liver, HT1080, AsPC-1
and BxPC-3) were incubated with TRD (100 µM, 250 µM and 1000 µM). Proliferation
after 8 h and cell viability after 24 h were analyzed by BrdU assay and FACS
analysis, respectively. Gene expression analyses were carried out using the
Agilent-microarray platform to identify genes which displayed conjoint regulation
following the addition of TRD in all cell lines. Candidate genes were subjected
to Ingenuity Pathways Analysis and selected genes were validated by qRT-PCR and
Western Blot.
RESULTS: TRD 250 µM caused a significant inhibition of proliferation as well as
apoptotic cell death in all cell lines. Among cell death associated genes with
the strongest regulation in gene expression, we identified pro-apoptotic
transcription factors (EGR1, ATF3) as well as genes involved in the ER stress
response (PPP1R15A), in ubiquitination (TRAF6) and mitochondrial apoptotic
pathways (PMAIP1).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first conjoint analysis of potential target genes of TRD
which was performed simultaneously in different malignant cell lines. The results
indicate that TRD might be involved in different signal transduction pathways
leading to apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2988031
PMID: 21034493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Nutr. 2010 Dec;140(12):2116-20. doi: 10.3945/jn.110.127803. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

A low-protein diet during gestation in rats activates the placental mammalian
amino acid response pathway and programs the growth capacity of offspring.

Strakovsky RS(1), Zhou D, Pan YX.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

Placental efficiency is a predictor of fetal growth and development, which is
also controlled by maternal gestational health and diet. The present study
investigated the effects of a gestational low-protein diet on offspring growth
capacity as well as the diet's contribution to altered expression of placental
genes associated with the mammalian amino acid response (AAR) pathway. To assess 
these outcomes, timed-pregnant Sprague Dawley rats were fed a control (C) diet
with 18% protein or a low-protein (LP) diet with 9% protein throughout gestation 
(Expt. 1) or throughout gestation and lactation (Expt. 2). Placentas were
collected during natural delivery and quantitative RT-PCR and Western-blot
analyses were performed to determine placental mRNA and protein levels. By the
end of the lactation period, offspring of dams fed the LP diet had stunted growth
in both experiments. mRNA expression of target genes in the AAR pathway, such as 
activating transcription factor-3 (Atf3), asparagine synthetase (Asns), and
Sodium-dependent neutral amino acid transporter-2 (Snat2), was greater in
placentas of rats fed the LP diet compared with controls, as were placental ATF4 
and p-eIF2a protein levels. The increase in mRNA expression of AAR
pathway-associated genes was correlated with the stunting of offspring growth
(Atf3: R(2) = 0.32, P = 0.086; Asns: R(2) = 0.44, P < 0.05; Snat2: R(2) = 0.33, P
= 0.084). Our study showed that the mammalian AAR pathway in placenta is
upregulated by a maternal low-protein diet and this activation may act as a cue
for the fetus to develop an adaptive response suited to their predicted postnatal
environment, i.e. a more favorable phenotype for their survival.

PMID: 20980649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Scand J Urol Nephrol. 2011 Feb;45(1):30-8. doi: 10.3109/00365599.2010.521188.
Epub 2010 Oct 25.

Partial urethral obstruction: ATF3 and p-c-Jun are involved in the growth of the 
detrusor muscle and its motor innervation.

Xu A(1), Frederiksen H, Kanje M, Uvelius B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Skane University Hospital, Malmo, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Infravesical obstruction leads to growth of urinary bladder
smooth-muscle cells. The ganglion cells innervating the bladder muscle also
increase in size. Stretch of detrusor muscle cells rapidly activates c-Jun
NH2-terminal kinase (JNK), which phosphorylates the transcription factor c-Jun,
and stimulates the synthesis of the cotranscription factor ATF3. The aim of the
study was to determine whether ATF3 and p-c-Jun were involved in growth of
bladder smooth-muscle and ganglion cells.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The urethra was partially obstructed in female rats. After 
3 days or 10 weeks bladders were weighed, fixated and cut for
immunohistochemistry to demonstrate ATF3 and p-c-Jun. Ganglia were processed
separately. Unoperated and sham-operated rats were used as controls.
RESULTS: There was no ATF3 or p-c-Jun in control detrusor muscle. After 3 days of
obstruction bladder weight had nearly doubled. Almost all nuclei in the detrusor 
showed immunofluorescence for ATF3 and p-c-Jun. After 10 weeks bladder weight had
increased 10-fold. Almost all detrusor nuclei still showed p-c-Jun, but few had
ATF3 activity. In control ganglia there was no ATF3 and only faint nuclear
p-c-Jun activity. After 3 days of obstruction the ganglion cells had increased in
size and many nuclei showed intense immunofluorescence for ATF3 and p-c-Jun.
After 10 weeks the ganglion cell size had increased further. There was no ATF3
activity and no more p-c-Jun than in control ganglia.
CONCLUSION: ATF3 and p-c-Jun seem to be involved in the growth of the detrusor
muscle and its motor innervation following infravesical outlet obstruction.

PMID: 20969496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Cell Sci. 2010 Oct 15;123(Pt 20):3558-65. doi: 10.1242/jcs.064915.

ATF3, an adaptive-response gene, enhances TGF{beta} signaling and
cancer-initiating cell features in breast cancer cells.

Yin X(1), Wolford CC, Chang YS, McConoughey SJ, Ramsey SA, Aderem A, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)The Ohio State Biochemistry Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA.

The activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) gene is induced by a variety of
signals, including many of those encountered by cancer cells. We present evidence
that ATF3 is induced by TGFß in the MCF10CA1a breast cancer cells and plays an
integral role for TGFß to upregulate its target genes snail, slug and twist, and 
to enhance cell motility. Furthermore, ATF3 upregulates the expression of the
TGFb gene itself, forming a positive-feedback loop for TGFß signaling.
Functionally, ectopic expression of ATF3 leads to morphological changes and
alterations of markers consistent with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). It also leads to features associated with breast-cancer-initiating cells: 
increased CD24(low)-CD44(high) population of cells, mammosphere formation and
tumorigenesis. Conversely, knockdown of ATF3 reduces EMT, CD24(low)-CD44(high)
cells and mammosphere formation. Importantly, knocking down twist, a downstream
target, reduces the ability of ATF3 to enhance mammosphere formation, indicating 
the functional significance of twist in ATF3 action. To our knowledge, this is
the first report demonstrating the ability of ATF3 to enhance breast
cancer-initiating cell features and to feedback on TGFß. Because ATF3 is an
adaptive-response gene and is induced by various stromal signals, these findings 
have significant implications for how the tumor microenvironment might affect
cancer development.

PMCID: PMC2951469
PMID: 20930144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Jan;1813(1):102-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2010.09.009. 
Epub 2010 Sep 27.

Role of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a in controlling copper-responsive
transcription.

Song MO(1), Freedman JH.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park,
NC, USA.

Previous global transcriptome and interactome analyses of copper-treated HepG2
cells identified hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) as a potential master
regulator of copper-responsive transcription. Copper exposure caused a decrease
in the expression of HNF4a at both mRNA and protein levels, which was accompanied
by a decrease in the level of HNF4a binding to its consensus DNA binding
sequence. qRT-PCR and RNAi studies demonstrated that changes in HNF4a expression 
ultimately affected the expressions of its down-stream target genes. Analysis of 
upstream regulators of HNF4a expression, including p53 and ATF3, showed that
copper caused an increase in the steady-state levels of these proteins. These
results support a model for copper-responsive transcription in which the metal
affects ATF3 expression and stabilizes p53 resulting in the down-regulation of
HNF4a expression. In addition, copper may directly affect p53 protein levels. The
suppression of HNF4a activity may contribute to the molecular mechanisms
underlying the physiological and toxicological consequences of copper toxicity in
hepatic-derived cells.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3014409
PMID: 20875833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Anal Biochem. 2011 Jan 15;408(2):321-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2010.09.021. Epub 2010 
Sep 22.

Determination of complementary antibody pairs using protein A capture with the
AlphaScreen assay format.

Bembenek ME(1), Burkhardt A, Ma J, Li Z, Loke HK, Wu D, Xu Q, Tayber O, Xie L, Li
P, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Millennium Pharmaceuticals, The Takeda Oncology Company, Cambridge, MA 02139, 
USA. michael.bembenek@mpi.com

The utility of antibody reagents for the detection of specific cellular targets
for both research and diagnostic applications is widespread and continually
expanding. Often it is useful to develop specific antibodies as reagent pairs
that distinguish different epitopes of the target such that sandwich
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay can be used for selective and specific
detection. However, the identification of pairing antibodies is often cumbersome 
and labor-intensive even with the use of designed peptide-specific epitopes as
antigens. We have developed a robust and high-throughput method for identifying
pairing complementary antibodies derived either from commercial sources or during
a rabbit hybridoma monoclonal screening and selection process using protein A
capture with the AlphaScreen bead-based assay format. We demonstrate the value
and effectiveness of this assay with three protein targets: Akt2, ATF3, and NAEß 
(the ß-subunit of the neddylation activation enzyme).

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20868646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2010 Oct;88(10):910-9. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20707.

Cryptorchidism and hypospadias as a sign of testicular dysgenesis syndrome (TDS):
environmental connection.

Toppari J(1), Virtanen HE, Main KM, Skakkebaek NE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Physiology and Pediatrics, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu
10, Turku, Finland. jorma.toppari@utu.fi

Comment in
    Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2011 Feb;91(2):126; author reply 127.

Cryptorchidism and hypospadias are common genital birth defects that affect 2-9% 
and 0.2-1% of male newborns, respectively. The incidence of both defects shows
large geographic variation, and in several countries increasing trends have been 
reported. The conditions share many risk factors, and they are also interlinked
to the risk of testis cancer and poor semen quality. Testicular Dysgenesis
Syndrome (TDS) may underlie many cases of all these male reproductive health
problems. Genetic defects in androgen production or action can cause both
cryptorchidism and hypospadias, but these are not common. A monogenic reason for 
cryptorchidism or hypospadias has been identified only in a small proportion of
all cases. Environmental effects appear to play a major role in TDS. Exposure to 
several persistent chemicals has been found to be associated with the risk of
cryptorchidism, and exposure to anti-androgenic phthalates has been shown to be
associated with hormonal changes predisposing to male reproductive problems.
Despite progress in identification of endocrine-disrupting substances, we are
still far from knowing all the risk factors for these birth defects, and advice
for prevention must be based on precautionary principles.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20865786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Cell. 2010 Sep 24;39(6):886-900. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.08.020.

Polycomb group protein displacement and gene activation through MSK-dependent
H3K27me3S28 phosphorylation.

Gehani SS(1), Agrawal-Singh S, Dietrich N, Christophersen NS, Helin K, Hansen K.

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen
N, Denmark.

Epigenetic regulation of chromatin structure is essential for the expression of
genes determining cellular specification and function. The Polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2) di- and trimethylates histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27me2/me3) to 
establish repression of specific genes in embryonic stem cells and during
differentiation. How the Polycomb group (PcG) target genes are regulated by
environmental cues and signaling pathways is quite unexplored. Here, we show that
the mitogen- and stress-activated kinases (MSK), through a mechanism that
involves promoter recruitment, histone H3K27me3S28 phosphorylation, and
displacement of PcG proteins, lead to gene activation. We present evidence that
the H3K27me3S28 phosphorylation is functioning in response to stress signaling,
mitogenic signaling, and retinoic acid (RA)-induced neuronal differentiation. We 
propose that MSK-mediated H3K27me3S28 phosphorylation serves as a mechanism to
activate a subset of PcG target genes determined by the biological stimuli and
thereby modulate the gene expression program determining cell fate.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20864036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 15;5(9):e12772. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012772.

Induction of ER stress in macrophages of tuberculosis granulomas.

Seimon TA(1), Kim MJ, Blumenthal A, Koo J, Ehrt S, Wainwright H, Bekker LG,
Kaplan G, Nathan C, Tabas I, Russell DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Columbia University,
New York, New York, United States of America. tseimon@wcs.org

BACKGROUND: The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress pathway known as the Unfolded
Protein Response (UPR) is an adaptive survival pathway that protects cells from
the buildup of misfolded proteins, but under certain circumstances it can lead to
apoptosis. ER stress has been causally associated with macrophage apoptosis in
advanced atherosclerosis of mice and humans. Because atherosclerosis shares
certain features with tuberculosis (TB) with regard to lesional macrophage
accumulation, foam cell formation, and apoptosis, we investigated if the ER
stress pathway is activated during TB infection.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show that ER stress markers such as C/EBP homologous 
protein (CHOP; also known as GADD153), phosphorylated inositol-requiring enzyme 1
alpha (Ire1a) and eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha (eIF2a), and activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) are expressed in macrophage-rich areas of
granulomas in lungs of mice infected with virulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(Mtb). These areas were also positive for numerous apoptotic cells as assayed by 
TUNEL. Microarray analysis of human caseous TB granulomas isolated by laser
capture microdissection reveal that 73% of genes involved in the UPR are
upregulated at the mRNA transcript level. The expression of two ER stress
markers, ATF3 and CHOP, were also increased in macrophages of human TB granulomas
when assayed by immunohistochemistry. CHOP has been causally associated with ER
stress-induced macrophage apoptosis. We found that apoptosis was more abundant in
granulomas as compared to non-granulomatous tissue isolated from patients with
pulmonary TB, and apoptosis correlated with CHOP expression in areas surrounding 
the centralized areas of caseation.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, ER stress is induced in macrophages of TB granulomas in 
areas where apoptotic cells accumulate in mice and humans. Although macrophage
apoptosis is generally thought to be beneficial in initially protecting the host 
from Mtb infection, death of infected macrophages in advanced granulomas might
favor dissemination of the bacteria. Therefore future work is needed to determine
if ER-stress is causative for apoptosis and plays a role in the host response to 
infection.

PMCID: PMC2939897
PMID: 20856677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Biol Chem. 2010 Nov 26;285(48):37251-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.142315. Epub
2010 Sep 20.

Chronic ethanol consumption-induced pancreatic {beta}-cell dysfunction and
apoptosis through glucokinase nitration and its down-regulation.

Kim JY(1), Song EH, Lee HJ, Oh YK, Park YS, Park JW, Kim BJ, Kim DJ, Lee I, Song 
J, Kim WH.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Metabolic Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Eunpyeong-gu, 
Seoul 122-701, Korea.

Chronic ethanol consumption is known as an independent risk factor for type 2
diabetes, which is characterized by impaired glucose homeostasis and insulin
resistance; however, there is a great deal of controversy concerning the
relationships between alcohol consumption and the development of type 2 diabetes.
We investigated the effects of chronic ethanol consumption on pancreatic ß-cell
dysfunction and whether generated peroxynitrite participates in the impaired
glucose homeostasis. Here we show that chronic ethanol feeding decreases the
ability of pancreatic ß-cells to mediate insulin secretion and ATP production in 
coordination with the decrease of glucokinase, Glut2, and insulin expression.
Specific blockade of ATF3 using siRNA or C-terminally deleted ATF3(<U+0394>C) attenuated
ethanol-induced pancreatic ß-cell apoptosis or dysfunction and restored the
down-regulation of glucokinase (GCK), insulin, and pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1
induced by ethanol. GCK inactivation and down-regulation were predominantly
mediated by ethanol metabolism-generated peroxynitrite, which were suppressed by 
the peroxynitrite scavengers N(<U+03B3>)-monomethyl-L-arginine, uric acid, and
deferoxamine but not by the S-nitrosylation inhibitor DTT, indicating that
tyrosine nitration is the predominant modification associated with GCK
down-regulation and inactivation rather than S-nitrosylation of cysteine.
Tyrosine nitration of GCK prevented its association with pBad, and GCK
translocation into the mitochondria results in subsequent proteasomal degradation
of GCK following ubiquitination. This study identified a novel and efficient
pathway by which chronic ethanol consumption may induce GCK down-regulation and
inactivation by inducing tyrosine nitration of GCK, resulting in pancreatic
ß-cell apoptosis and dysfunction. Peroxynitrite-induced ATF3 may also serve as a 
potent upstream regulator of GCK down-regulation and ß-cell apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2988331
PMID: 20855893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cancer Cell Int. 2010 Sep 9;10:32. doi: 10.1186/1475-2867-10-32.

Activating Transcription Factor 3 regulates in part the enhanced tumour cell
cytotoxicity of the histone deacetylase inhibitor M344 and cisplatin in
combination.

St Germain C(1), O'Brien A, Dimitroulakos J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, 501 Smyth 
Road, Ottawa, K1H 8L6, Canada. jdimitroulakos@ohri.ca.

BACKGROUND: Activating Transcription Factor (ATF) 3 is a key regulator of the
cellular integrated stress response whose expression has also been correlated
with pro-apoptotic activities in tumour cell models. Combination treatments with 
chemotherapeutic drugs, such as cisplatin, and histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors have been demonstrated to enhance tumour cell cytotoxicity. We
recently demonstrated a role for ATF3 in regulating cisplatin-induced apoptosis
and others have shown that HDAC inhibition can also induce cellular stress. In
this study, we evaluated the role of ATF3 in regulating the co-operative
cytotoxicity of cisplatin in combination with an HDAC inhibitor.
RESULTS: The HDAC inhibitor M344 induced ATF3 expression at the protein and mRNA 
level in a panel of human derived cancer cell lines as determined by Western blot
and quantitative RT-PCR analyses. Combination treatment with M344 and cisplatin
lead to increased induction of ATF3 compared with cisplatin alone. Utilizing the 
MTT cell viability assay, M344 treatments also enhanced the cytotoxic effects of 
cisplatin in these cancer cell lines. The mechanism of ATF3 induction by M344 was
found to be independent of MAPKinase pathways and dependent on ATF4, a known
regulator of ATF3 expression. ATF4 heterozygote (+/-) and knock out (-/-) mouse
embryonic fibroblast (MEF) as well as chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
were utilized in determining the mechanistic induction of ATF3 by M344. We also
demonstrated that ATF3 regulates the enhanced cytotoxicity of M344 in combination
with cisplatin as evidenced by attenuation of cytotoxicity in shRNAs targeting
ATF3 expressing cells.
CONCLUSION: This study identifies the pro-apoptotic factor, ATF3 as a novel
target of M344, as well as a mediator of the co-operative effects of cisplatin
and M344 induced tumour cell cytotoxicity.

PMCID: PMC2945341
PMID: 20828393  [PubMed]


39. Chin Med J (Engl). 2010 Jul;123(14):1915-23.

Ursolic acid induces human hepatoma cell line SMMC-7721 apoptosis via
p53-dependent pathway.

Yu YX(1), Gu ZL, Yin JL, Chou WH, Kwok CY, Qin ZH, Liang ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Soochow Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, Suzhou, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215007,
China.

BACKGROUND: Ursolic acid (UA) is a ubiquitous molecule in the plant kingdom with 
specific anticancer effects that have been shown in vitro and in vivo. Although
UA can inhibit the proliferation of liver cancer cells and induce apoptosis of
many types of tumor cells, the molecular mechanism of its anti-hepatoma activity 
is still not well defined. The objective of this study was to investigate the
inhibitory effect and mechanisms of UA on the human hepatoma cell line SMMC-7721.
METHODS: After treatment with UA, the growth inhibition of SMMC-7721 cells was
assessed by MTT assay. Cells were also evaluated by flow cytometric analysis,
Wright-Giemasa staining, Hoechst 33258 staining and transmission electron
microscope after they were induced by UA. DNA microarray technology was used to
investigate the gene expression pattern of SMMC-7721 cells exposed to UA 40
micromol/L. The molecular mechanism of cells death was analyzed by real-time
RT-PCR and Western blotting.
RESULTS: The proliferation of SMMC-7721 cells was significantly inhibited in a
dose- and time-dependent manner after UA treatment. UA induced cell cycle arrest 
and apoptosis. The DNA microarray analysis indicated that 64 genes were found to 
be markedly up- or down-expressed, including GDF15, SOD2, ATF3, and fos. The
result of Western blotting showed the apoptotic proteins p53 and Bax were
up-regulated while the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 was down-regulated. Real-time
RT-PCR confirmed UA could up-regulate the mRNA expressions of GDF15, SOD2, ATF3
and down-regulate the mRAN expression of fos. Meanwhile these effects were partly
blocked by pretreatment with the p53 inhibitor Pft-alpha.
CONCLUSION: Activation of the p53 pathway is involved in UA inhibition of
SMMC-7721 human hepatocellular carcinoma cell growth and induction of apoptosis.

PMID: 20819578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Bioelectromagnetics. 2011 Jan;32(1):28-36. doi: 10.1002/bem.20608.

In vitro study of the effects of ELF electric fields on gene expression in human 
epidermal cells.

Collard JF(1), Mertens B, Hinsenkamp M.

Author information: 
(1)Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.

An acceleration of differentiation, at the expense of proliferation, is observed 
after exposure of various biological models to low frequency and low amplitude
electric and electromagnetic fields. Following these results showing significant 
modifications, we try to identify the biological mechanism involved at the cell
level through microarray screening. For this study, we use epidermis cultures
harvested from human abdominoplasty. Two platinum electrodes are used to apply
the electric signal. The gene expressions of 38,500 well-characterized human
genes are analyzed using Affymetrix(®) microarray U133 Plus 2.0 chips. The
protocol is repeated on three different patients. After three periods of
exposure, a total of 24 chips have been processed. After the application of ELF
electric fields, the microarray analysis confirms a modification of the gene
expression of epidermis cells. Particularly, four up-regulated genes (DKK1,
TXNRD1, ATF3, and MME) and one down-regulated gene (MACF1) are involved in the
regulation of proliferation and differentiation. Expression of these five genes
was also confirmed by real-time rtPCR in all samples used for microarray
analysis. These results corroborate an acceleration of cell differentiation at
the expense of cell proliferation.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20809503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Dec 1;111(5):1244-51. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22851.

Characterization of E2F3a function in HepG2 liver cancer cells.

Li W(1), Ni GX, Zhang P, Zhang ZX, Li W, Wu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine, Ministry of Education, Shanghai Center 
for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China.

E2F3a is a transcription factor that has been shown to be overexpressed in liver 
cancer tissues. To characterize the function of E2F3a in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), effects of ectopic overexpression of E2F3a on cell cycle, apoptosis, and
gene expression of HepG2 cells were studied. E2F3a significantly enhances the
apoptotic rate of HepG2 cells by 33% but only has minor effects on cell
proliferation. By using microarray analyses, we identified 162 target genes (160 
upregulated and 2 downregulated) of the E2F3a. Differential expression of 11
genes was further confirmed by real-time PCR. Eight of these 11 genes, including 
XAF1, CEACAM1, STAT1, ATF3, TNFSF10, KLF6, CLDN1, and TAP1, were confirmed to be 
upregulated by more than twofold. Functional enrichments of differentially
expressed genes retrieved 21 apoptosis-related genes and 32 transcriptional
regulation-related genes. These results suggest that E2F3a induces apoptosis in
HepG2 cells and plays important roles in regulating transcription. Finally,
positive correlation was found between E2F3a and CEACAM1 mRNA levels in
clinically well-differentiated human HCC specimens.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20803551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Pain. 2010 Nov;151(2):394-403. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2010.07.030. Epub 2010 Aug 23.

Characterization of the acute and persistent pain state present in K/BxN serum
transfer arthritis.

Christianson CA(1), Corr M, Firestein GS, Mobargha A, Yaksh TL, Svensson CI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA,
USA.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune arthritis that affects
approximately 1% of the population. Synovial inflammation cannot fully explain
the level of pain reported by patients and facilitation of pain processing at the
spinal level has been implicated. We characterized the K/BxN serum transfer
arthritis model as a model of joint inflammation-induced pain and examined
pharmacologic responsiveness and spinal glia activation. Mechanical allodynia
developed congruently with joint swelling. Surprisingly, allodynia persisted
after resolution of inflammation. At the peak of joint inflammation (days 4-10), 
hypersensitivity was attenuated with i.p. etanercept, gabapentin, and ketorolac. 
Following resolution of synovial inflammation (days 19-23), only gabapentin
relieved allodynia. The superficial dorsal horn of arthritic mice displayed
increased staining of microglia at early and late time points, but astrocyte
staining increased only during the inflammatory phase. ATF3, a marker of nerve
injury, was significantly increased in the lumbar dorsal root ganglia during the 
late phase (day 28). Hence, serum transfer in the K/BxN serum transfer arthritis 
model produces a persistent pain state, where the allodynia during the
inflammatory state is attenuated by TNF and prostaglandin inhibitors, and the
pharmacology and histochemistry data suggest a transition from an inflammatory
state to a state that resembles a neuropathic condition over time. Therefore, the
K/BxN serum transfer model represents a multifaceted model for studies exploring 
pain mechanisms in conditions of joint inflammation and may serve as a platform
for exploring novel treatment strategies for pain in human arthritic conditions.

Copyright © 2010 International Association for the Study of Pain. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2955775
PMID: 20739123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Korean J Urol. 2010 Aug;51(8):561-4. doi: 10.4111/kju.2010.51.8.561. Epub 2010
Aug 18.

Is activating transcription factor 3 up-regulated in patients with hypospadias?

Gurbuz C(1), Demir S, Zemheri E, Canat L, Kilic M, Caskurlu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of 2nd Urology, Istanbul Goztepe Training Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey.

PURPOSE: Even though hypospadias is one of the most common congenital anomalies, 
the cause of hypospadias is largely unknown. With regard to molecular biology and
microarray technology, it appears that hypospadias is potentially related to
disrupted gene expression. Genomic analysis of hypospadiac tissue indicated a
potential role for activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in the development of
this anomaly. This study prospectively examined the expression of ATF3 in tissues
from 20 children with hypospadias compared with 26 normal penile skin tissue
samples from elective circumcision.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Prepucial tissue was obtained from children who underwent 
repair of hypospadias for comparison with tissue samples from children who
underwent elective circumcision. Skin specimens were evaluated for the expression
of ATF3 protein by immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical staining for ATF3 in samples from children who
underwent repair of hypospadias was significantly greater than in samples from
children who underwent elective circumcision (80% vs. 11%, respectively; p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that ATF3 is up-regulated in the penile skin
tissue of boys with hypospadias, which suggests a role for this transcription
factor in the development of this abnormality.

PMCID: PMC2924561
PMID: 20733963  [PubMed]


44. Mol Pharmacol. 2010 Nov;78(5):865-76. doi: 10.1124/mol.110.067637. Epub 2010 Aug 
16.

Thapsigargin induces expression of activating transcription factor 3 in human
keratinocytes involving Ca2+ ions and c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase.

Spohn D(1), Rössler OG, Philipp SE, Raubuch M, Kitajima S, Griesemer D, Hoth M,
Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Building 44,
University of Saarland Medical Center, D-66421 Homburg, Germany.

Thapsigargin is a specific inhibitor of the sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)
ATPase of the endoplasmic reticulum. Here, we show that stimulation of human
HaCaT keratinocytes with nanomolar concentrations of thapsigargin triggers
expression of activating transcription factor (ATF) 3, a basic-region leucin
zipper transcription factor. ATF3 expression was also up-regulated in
thapsigargin-stimulated glioma cells, hepatoma cells, retinal pigment epithelial 
cells, and airway epithelial cells. Thapsigargin-induced up-regulation of ATF3
expression in keratinocytes was attenuated by BAPTA-acetoxymethyl ester or by
expression of the Ca(2+)-binding protein parvalbumin in the cytosol of HaCaT
cells but not by a panel of pharmacological agents that chelate extracellular
Ca(2+) (EGTA) or inhibit either ryanodine receptors (dantrolene) or voltage-gated
Ca(2+) channels (nifedipine). Hence, elevated levels of intracellular Ca(2+),
released from intracellular stores, are essential for the effect of thapsigargin 
on the biosynthesis of ATF3. The thapsigargin-induced signaling pathway was
blocked by expression of either mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-1 or
-5. Experiments involving pharmacological and genetic tools revealed the
importance of c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase (JNK) within the signaling cascade,
whereas inhibition of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase or p38
protein kinase did not attenuate thapsigargin-induced expression of ATF3.
Functional studies showed that treatment of HaCaT keratinocytes with thapsigargin
led to a 2-fold induction of caspase-3/7 activity. The up-regulation of
caspase-3/7 activity in thapsigargin-stimulated HaCaT cells was attenuated by
inhibition of JNK. Together, these data show that stimulation of HaCaT cells with
thapsigargin induces a specific signaling pathway in keratinocytes involving
activation of JNK, biosynthesis of ATF3, and up-regulation of caspase-3/7
activity.

PMID: 20713550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Dec;51(12):6207-19. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-5632.
Epub 2010 Aug 11.

Retinal gene expression after central retinal artery ligation: effects of
ischemia and reperfusion.

Prasad SS(1), Kojic L, Wen YH, Chen Z, Xiong W, Jia W, Cynader MS.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Division, Biologics and Genetic Therapies Directorate, Health Canada,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. shiv_prasad@hc-sc.gc.ca

PURPOSE: To investigate the morphologic and molecular consequences of 30- and
90-minute central retinal artery ligation (CRAL)-induced retinal ischemia,
followed by 3 and 12 hours of reperfusion, and to identify potential targets for 
therapy.
METHODS: Retinal ischemia was induced for 30 and 90 minutes by ligating the rat
central retinal artery, and corresponding effects were examined histologically,
immunocytochemically, and molecularly at 3 hours and 12 hours of reperfusion.
Patterns of gene expression revealed significantly upregulated and downregulated 
genes by gene array analyses and were verified by quantitative RT-PCR. Functional
pathways were correlated using gene set enrichment analysis.
RESULTS: Substantial morphologic changes occurred from 3 hours to 7 days after
CRAL in rats, resulting in a cellular loss in most retinal layers, particularly
in inner nuclear and ganglion cell layers. After 30 minutes of CRAL and 3 hours
of reperfusion, transcription-related genes such as ATF3, ID2, Klf4, BTG2, c-Fos,
and c-Jun were activated. After 12 hours of reperfusion, the genes associated
with kinase and caspase molecular pathways-including MAP kinases, Casp3 and
Casp9-were upregulated. CRAL of 90 minutes and 3 hours of reperfusion induced
glycolysis and gluconeogenesis-related genes such as G6PC. However, prolonged
reperfusion of 12 hours was characterized by prominent activation of
apoptosis-related genes, including Tp53, Akt1, Akt3, Pik3R1, Prkcb1, caspases
(Casp3, Casp7, Casp9), and TNF.
CONCLUSIONS: CRAL is a clinically relevant retinal ischemia model, and gene
expression analysis can provide information regarding the molecular mechanisms
underlying the pathophysiological processes during retinal ischemia. In addition,
CRAL represents an effective experimental model with which to study retinal
inflammation, development, aging, and, neurodegeneration.

PMID: 20702827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Exp Physiol. 2010 Nov;95(11):1071-80. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2010.054858. Epub
2010 Aug 9.

Acute physical activity effects on cardiac gene expression.

Simonsen ML(1), Alessio HM, White P, Newsom DL, Hagerman AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology and Health, Miami University, Oxford, OH 45045, USA.

Regular bouts of physical activity may cause changes in gene expression that
accumulate over time and ultimately affect phenotypes, such as body weight, blood
lipid profile and tumour development. Furthermore, acute activity may affect gene
expression and phenotypes differently depending on whether the individual is
regularly inactive or active. One-month-old male Sprague-Dawley rats (n = 72)
were equally divided into SED (standard laboratory cage, n = 24), PA (large
activity box, n = 24) and EX groups (exercise wheel inside standard cage, n =
24). At 3 months of age, half the animals from each group were killed at rest and
the other half following 30 min of physical activity. The RNA was extracted from 
cardiac tissue, and microarray analysis was performed on 27,000 genes. Select
gene results were validated using quantitative PCR. No gene expression
differences occurred when comparing all 3-month-old groups at rest. A relatively 
small percentage of genes (1.9%) were differentially expressed (P < 0.05)
following acute swimming activity in all groups, but only 37 unique and
identifiable genes reached or exceeded twofold differences in expression. The
genes Atf3, Fos, Apold1 and Pxdn were expressed differently among SED, PA and EX 
following acute activity, with a clear separation of the magnitude in gene
expression with SED > PA > EX. Differences in gene expression levels in young
physically inactive and active animals following acute activity have different
regulatory roles in gene networks that affect health-related phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC2956844
PMID: 20696783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Sep 10;400(1):72-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.08.011. Epub 2010 Aug 7.

ATF3 negatively regulates adiponectin receptor 1 expression.

Park HJ(1), Kang YM, Kim CH, Jung MH.

Author information: 
(1)Pusan National University, School of Korean Medicine, #30 Beom-eo ri,
Mulguem-eup, Yangsan-si, Gyeongnam 609-735, South Korea.

Adiponectin is an adipocyte-derived hormone that has antidiabetic and
antiatherogenic effects through two membrane receptors, adiponectin receptor 1
(AdipoR1) and adiponectin receptor 2 (AdipoR2). Although it has been reported
that the expression of AdipoR1 and AdipoR2 is regulated under physiological and
pathophysiological states, their regulation is largely unknown. Previously, we
demonstrated that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress or obesity-inducible ATF3
negatively regulates the expression of adiponectin and AdipoR2. Here, we
investigated the regulation of another adiponectin receptor, AdipoR1 by ATF3, to 
determine if ATF3 may contribute to impairment of adiponectin signaling by
repressing the expression of both adiponectin and adiponectin receptors. We found
that treatment with thapsigargin, a stimulator of ATF3 expression as an inducer
of ER stress, decreased AdipoR1 expression in insulin-sensitive cells (HepG2,
C2C12) and insulin secreting cells (MIN6N8). Furthermore, overexpression of
lentivirus carrying-ATF3 decreased AdipoR1 expression in those cells,
demonstrating that ATF3 downregulates AdipoR1 expression. Next, we investigated
the effects of ATF3 on human AdipoR1 promoter activity and identified an
ATF3-responsive region in the promoter. Both thapsigargin treatment and ATF3
expression repressed AdipoR1 promoter activity. Transfection studies using mutant
constructs containing 5'-deletions in the human AdipoR1 promoter revealed that
putative ATF/CRE site is located between the -248 and -224, TGACGCGG. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated that ATF3 directly binds to human AdipoR1 
promoter spanning from -248 to -224. Finally, deletion of the putative ATF/CRE
site abrogated ATF3-mediated transrepression of the AdipoR1 promoter.
Importantly, ATF3 expression was increased in hyperglycemia or TNF-a-treated
C2C12 cells in which AdipoR1 expression was decreased, suggesting that ATF3 may
contribute to downregulation of AdipoR1 by hyperglycemia and TNF-a. Collectively,
these results demonstrate that ATF3 negatively regulates human AdipoR1 expression
via binding to an ATF3-responsive region in the promoter, which plays an
important role in attenuation of adiponectin signaling and induction of insulin
resistance.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20696134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Neoplasia. 2010 Jul;12(7):527-38.

Cisplatin induces cytotoxicity through the mitogen-activated protein kinase
pathways and activating transcription factor 3.

St Germain C(1), Niknejad N, Ma L, Garbuio K, Hai T, Dimitroulakos J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

The mechanisms underlying the proapoptotic effect of the chemotherapeutic agent, 
cisplatin, are largely undefined. Understanding the mechanisms regulating
cisplatin cytotoxicity may uncover strategies to enhance the efficacy of this
important therapeutic agent. This study evaluates the role of activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) as a mediator of cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity.
Cytotoxic doses of cisplatin and carboplatin treatments consistently induced ATF3
expression in five tumor-derived cell lines. Characterization of this induction
revealed a p53, BRCA1, and integrated stress response-independent mechanism, all 
previously implicated in stress-mediated ATF3 induction. Analysis of
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway involvement in ATF3 induction by 
cisplatin revealed a MAPK-dependent mechanism. Cisplatin treatment combined with 
specific inhibitors to each MAPK pathway (c-Jun N-terminal kinase, extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase, and p38) resulted in decreased ATF3 induction at the
protein level. MAPK pathway inhibition led to decreased ATF3 messenger RNA
expression and reduced cytotoxic effects of cisplatin as measured by the
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide cell viability
assay. In A549 lung carcinoma cells, targeting ATF3 with specific small hairpin
RNA also attenuated the cytotoxic effects of cisplatin. Similarly, ATF3-/- murine
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were shown to be less sensitive to cisplatin-induced
cytotoxicity compared with ATF3+/+ MEFs. This study identifies cisplatin as a
MAPK pathway-dependent inducer of ATF3, whose expression influences cisplatin's
cytotoxic effects.

PMCID: PMC2907579
PMID: 20651982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2010 Nov;13(10):1369-81. doi:
10.1017/S1461145710000799. Epub 2010 Jul 15.

Inflammatory gene expression in monocytes of patients with schizophrenia: overlap
and difference with bipolar disorder. A study in naturalistically treated
patients.

Drexhage RC(1), van der Heul-Nieuwenhuijsen L, Padmos RC, van Beveren N, Cohen D,
Versnel MA, Nolen WA, Drexhage HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
r.drexhage@erasmusmc.nl

Accumulating evidence indicates an activated inflammatory response system as a
vulnerability factor for schizophrenia (SZ) and bipolar disorder (BD). We aimed
to detect a specific inflammatory monocyte gene expression signature in SZ and
compare such signature with our recently described inflammatory monocyte gene
signature in BD. A quantitative-polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) case-control
gene expression study was performed on monocytes of 27 SZ patients and compared
to outcomes collected in 56 BD patients (all patients naturalistically treated). 
For Q-PCR we used nine 'SZ specific genes' (found in whole genome analysis), the 
19 BD signature genes (previously found by us) and six recently described
autoimmune diabetes inflammatory monocyte genes. Monocytes of SZ patients had
(similar to those of BD patients) a high inflammatory set point composed of three
subsets of strongly correlating genes characterized by different sets of
transcription/MAPK regulating factors. Subset 1A, characterized by ATF3 and
DUSP2, and subset 1B, characterized by EGR3 and MXD1, were shared between BD and 
SZ patients (up-regulated in 67% and 51%, and 34% and 41%, respectively). Subset 
2, characterized by PTPN7 and NAB2 was up-regulated in the monocytes of 62% BD,
but down-regulated in the monocytes of 48% of SZ patients. Our approach shows
that monocytes of SZ and BD patients overlap, but also differ in inflammatory
gene expression. Our approach opens new avenues for nosological classifications
of psychoses based on the inflammatory state of patients, enabling selection of
those patients who might benefit from an anti-inflammatory treatment.

PMID: 20633309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Pain. 2010 Nov;11(11):1066-73. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2010.02.001. Epub 2010 Jun 
2.

Skin incision induces expression of axonal regeneration-related genes in adult
rat spinal sensory neurons.

Hill CE(1), Harrison BJ, Rau KK, Hougland MT, Bunge MB, Mendell LM, Petruska JC.

Author information: 
(1)University of Miami, The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, Miami, Florida, USA.

Skin incision and nerve injury both induce painful conditions. Incisional and
postsurgical pain is believed to arise primarily from inflammation of tissue and 
the subsequent sensitization of peripheral and central neurons. The role of
axonal regeneration-related processes in development of pain has only been
considered when there has been injury to the peripheral nerve itself, even though
tissue damage likely induces injury of resident axons. We sought to determine if 
skin incision would affect expression of regeneration-related genes such as
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons.
ATF3 is absent from DRG neurons of the normal adult rodent, but is induced by
injury of peripheral nerves and modulates the regenerative capacity of axons.
Image analysis of immunolabeled DRG sections revealed that skin incision led to
an increase in the number of DRG neurons expressing ATF3. RT-PCR indicated that
other regeneration-associated genes (galanin, GAP-43, Gadd45a) were also
increased, further suggesting an injury-like response in DRG neurons. Our finding
that injury of skin can induce expression of neuronal
injury/regeneration-associated genes may impact how clinical postsurgical pain is
investigated and treated.PERSPECTIVE: Tissue injury, even without direct nerve
injury, may induce a state of enhanced growth capacity in sensory neurons. Axonal
regeneration-associated processes should be considered alongside nerve signal
conduction and inflammatory/sensitization processes as possible mechanisms
contributing to pain, particularly the transition from acute to chronic pain.

Copyright © 2010 American Pain Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC2955994
PMID: 20627820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Pain. 2010 Aug;150(2):290-301. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2010.05.005.

Differential ATF3 expression in dorsal root ganglion neurons reveals the profile 
of primary afferents engaged by diverse noxious chemical stimuli.

Bráz JM(1), Basbaum AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, WM Keck Foundation Center for Integrative Neuroscience,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
bjoao@phy.ucsf.edu

Although transgenic and knockout mice have helped delineate the mechanisms of
action of diverse noxious compounds, it is still difficult to determine
unequivocally the subpopulations of primary afferent nociceptor that these
molecules engage. As most noxious stimuli lead to tissue and/or nerve injury,
here we used induction of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a reliable
marker of nerve injury, to assess the populations of primary afferent fibers that
are activated after peripheral administration of noxious chemical stimuli. In
wild-type mice, hindpaw injections of capsaicin, formalin, mustard oil or menthol
induce expression of ATF3 in distinct subpopulations of sensory neurons.
Interestingly, even though these noxious chemicals are thought to act through
subtypes of transient receptor potential (TRP) channels, all compounds also
induced ATF3 in neurons that appear not to express the expected TRP channel
subtypes. On the other hand, capsaicin failed to induce ATF3 in mice lacking
TRPV1, indicating that TRPV1 is required for both the direct and indirect
induction of ATF3 in sensory neurons. By contrast, only low doses of formalin or 
mustard oil failed to induce ATF3 in TRPA1 null mice, indicating that injections 
of high doses (>0.5%) of formalin or mustard oil recruit both TRPA1- and
non-TRPA1 expressing primary afferent fibers. Finally, peripheral injection of
menthol, a TRPM8 receptor agonist, induced ATF3 in a wide variety of sensory
neurons, but in a TRPM8-independent manner. We conclude that purportedly
selective agonists can activate a heterogeneous population of sensory neurons,
which ultimately could contribute to the behavioral responses evoked.

PMCID: PMC2922479
PMID: 20605331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Acta Neuropathol. 2010 Oct;120(4):461-75. doi: 10.1007/s00401-010-0715-9. Epub
2010 Jul 4.

Age-related motor neuron degeneration in DNA repair-deficient Ercc1 mice.

de Waard MC(1), van der Pluijm I, Zuiderveen Borgesius N, Comley LH, Haasdijk ED,
Rijksen Y, Ridwan Y, Zondag G, Hoeijmakers JH, Elgersma Y, Gillingwater TH,
Jaarsma D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Degeneration of motor neurons contributes to senescence-associated loss of muscle
function and underlies human neurodegenerative conditions such as amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis and spinal muscular atrophy. The identification of genetic
factors contributing to motor neuron vulnerability and degenerative phenotypes in
vivo are therefore important for our understanding of the neuromuscular system in
health and disease. Here, we analyzed neurodegenerative abnormalities in the
spinal cord of progeroid Ercc1(Delta/-) mice that are impaired in several DNA
repair systems, i.e. nucleotide excision repair, interstrand crosslink repair,
and double strand break repair. Ercc1(Delta/-) mice develop age-dependent motor
abnormalities, and have a shortened life span of 6-7 months. Pathologically,
Ercc1(Delta/-) mice develop widespread astrocytosis and microgliosis, and motor
neuron loss and denervation of skeletal muscle fibers. Degenerating motor neurons
in many occasions expressed genotoxic-responsive transcription factors p53 or
ATF3, and in addition, displayed a range of Golgi apparatus abnormalities.
Furthermore, Ercc1(Delta/-) motor neurons developed perikaryal and axonal
intermediate filament abnormalities reminiscent of cytoskeletal pathology
observed in aging spinal cord. Our findings support the notion that accumulation 
of DNA damage and genotoxic stress may contribute to neuronal aging and motor
neuron vulnerability in human neuromuscular disorders.

PMCID: PMC2923326
PMID: 20602234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Cell Signal. 2010 Nov;22(11):1669-80. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.06.007. Epub
2010 Jun 26.

The induction of STAT1 gene by activating transcription factor 3 contributes to
pancreatic beta-cell apoptosis and its dysfunction in streptozotocin-treated
mice.

Kim JY(1), Song EH, Lee S, Lim JH, Choi JS, Koh IU, Song J, Kim WH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolic Diseases, Center for Biomedical Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, #194 Tongillo, Eunpyeong-gu, Seoul 122-701, Republic of
Korea.

It is well established that the IFN-gamma/STAT1 pathway plays an important role
in the pancreatic beta-cell apoptosis that is observed in STZ-induced type 1
diabetes; however, the upstream regulatory proteins involved have not been
understood. Here, we investigated whether activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) affects STAT1-mediated beta-cell dysfunction and apoptosis in
streptozotocin-treated mice. To this, STZ (80 mg/kg, i.p.) was administered to
wild-type and STAT1(-/-) or IFN-gamma(-/-) mice for 5 days and the mice were
euthanized after 14 days. STZ-induced beta-cell dysfunction and apoptosis were
associated with increased STAT1/IRF-1 and ATF3 expression and were correlated
with elevated IFN-gamma levels. Genetic depletion using IFN-gamma(-/-) or
STAT1(-/-) mice strongly inhibited the reduction of islet cell mass or insulin
synthesis/secretion and the increase of beta-cell apoptosis observed in
STZ-treated wild-type mice. ATF3 overexpression, especially the C-terminal
domain, strongly enhanced beta-cell dysfunction and apoptosis by enhancing STAT1 
activation and its accumulation, which were abolished with an ATF3-specific siRNA
or C-terminal-deleted ATF3. The STZ induction of ATF3 was completely depleted in 
IFN-gamma(-/-) mice, but not in STAT1(-/-) mice. Furthermore, STAT1 did not
affect ATF3 expression, but STAT1 depletion or its inactivation inhibited
STZ-induced ATF3 nuclear translocation and beta-cell apoptosis. Interestingly,
ATF3 also increased STAT1 transcription by directly binding to a putative binding
region (-116 to -96 bp) in the STAT1 promoter. Our results suggest that ATF3
functions as a potent upstream regulator of STAT1 and ATF3 may play a role in
STZ-induced beta-cell dysfunction by enhancing the steady state abundance of
STAT1.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20600850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Breast Cancer Res. 2010;12(4):R45. doi: 10.1186/bcr2602. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Tamoxifen enhances the cytotoxic effects of nelfinavir in breast cancer cells.

Brüning A(1), Friese K, Burges A, Mylonas I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Campus Innenstadt,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, 11 Maistrasse, Munich 80337, Germany.
ansgar.bruening@med.uni-muenchen.de

INTRODUCTION: The HIV protease inhibitor nelfinavir is currently under
investigation as a new anti-cancer drug. Several studies have shown that
nelfinavir induces cell cycle arrest, endoplasmic reticulum stress, autophagy,
and apoptosis in cancer cells. In the present article, the effect of nelfinavir
on human breast cancer cells is examined and potential combination treatments are
investigated.
METHODS: The effects of nelfinavir and tamoxifen on the human breast cancer cell 
lines MCF7, T47 D, MDA-MB-453, and MDA-MB-435 were tested by analysing their
influence on cell viability (via
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay), apoptosis
(annexin binding, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage), autophagy (autophagy
marker light chain 3B expression), endoplasmic reticulum stress (binding protein 
and activating transcription factor 3 expression), and the occurrence of
oxidative stress (intracellular glutathione level).
RESULTS: Nelfinavir induced apoptosis in all four breast cancer cell lines
tested, although the extent of autophagy and endoplasmic reticulum stress varied 
among the cell lines. The concentration of nelfinavir needed for an efficient
induction of apoptosis in breast cancer cells could be reduced from 15 µg/ml to 6
µg/ml when combined with tamoxifen. At a concentration of 6 µg/ml, tamoxifen
substantially enhanced the endoplasmic reticulum stress reaction in those cell
lines that responded to nelfinavir with binding protein (BiP) upregulation (MCF7,
T47D), and enhanced autophagy in cell lines that responded to nelfinavir
treatment with autophagy marker light chain 3B upregulation (MDA-MB-453).
Although tamoxifen has been described to be able to induce oxidative stress at
concentrations similar to those applied in this study (6 µg/ml), we observed that
nelfinavir but not tamoxifen reduced the intracellular glutathione level of
breast cancer cells within hours of application by up to 32%, suggesting the
induction of oxidative stress was an early event and an additional cause of the
apoptosis induced by nelfinavir.
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrate that nelfinavir may be an effective drug
against breast cancer and could be combined with tamoxifen to enhance its
efficacy against breast cancer cells. Moreover, the cytotoxic effect of a
tamoxifen and nelfinavir combination was independent of the oestrogen receptor
status of the analysed breast cancer cells, suggesting a potential benefit of a
combination of these two drugs even in patients with no hormone-responsive
tumours. We therefore recommend that clinical studies on nelfinavir with breast
cancer patients should include this drug combination to analyse the therapeutic
efficacy as well as the safety and tolerability of this potential treatment
option.

PMCID: PMC2949632
PMID: 20594311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 27;285(35):26908-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.132597. Epub
2010 Jun 30.

MDM2 mediates ubiquitination and degradation of activating transcription factor
3.

Mo P(1), Wang H, Lu H, Boyd DD, Yan C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell Biology and Cancer Research, Albany Medical College, Albany,
New York 12208, USA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a common stress sensor, and its rapid
induction by cellular stresses (e.g. DNA damage) is crucial for cells to mount
appropriate responses (e.g. activating the tumor suppressor p53) and maintain
homeostasis. Although emerging evidence suggests that dysregulation of ATF3
contributes to occurrences of human diseases including cancer, the mechanism(s)
by which ATF3 expression is regulated is largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate
that mouse double minute 2 (MDM2) is a bona fide E3 ubiquitin ligase for ATF3 and
regulates ATF3 expression by promoting its degradation. MDM2 via its C-terminal
RING finger can bind to the Basic region of ATF3 and mediate the addition of
ubiquitin moieties to the ATF3 leucine zipper domain. As a consequence, ATF3, but
not a mutant deficient in MDM2 binding (Delta80-100), is degraded by
MDM2-mediated proteolysis. Consistent with these results, ablation of MDM2 in
cells not only increases basal ATF3 levels, but results in stabilization of ATF3 
in late stages of DNA damage responses. Because ATF3 was recently identified as a
p53 activator, these results suggest that MDM2 could inactivate p53 through an
additional feedback mechanism involving ATF3. Therefore, we provide the first
evidence demonstrating that ATF3 is regulated by a posttranslational mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2930690
PMID: 20592017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Oncogene. 2010 Sep 16;29(37):5182-92. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.251. Epub 2010 Jun
28.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) controls tolfenamic acid-induced ATF3
expression via MAP kinase pathways.

Lee SH(1), Bahn JH, Whitlock NC, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Laboratory of Environmental Carcinogenesis,
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA.

Tolfenamic acid (TA) is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug associated with
anti-tumorigenic and pro-apoptotic properties in animal and in vitro models of
cancer. However, the underlying cellular mechanisms by which TA exerts its
effects are only partially understood. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3)
is a member of the ATF/CREB subfamily of the basic region-leucine zipper family
and has been known as a tumor suppressor in human colorectal cancer cells. The
present study was performed to observe whether ATF3 mediates TA-induced apoptosis
and to elucidate the molecular mechanism of ATF3 transcription induced by TA. TA 
treatment and ectopic expression of ATF3 increased apoptosis, whereas knockdown
of ATF3 resulted in significant repression of TA-activated apoptosis. The TA
treatment also induced ATF3 promoter activity. Internal deletion and point
mutation of the predicted ATF/C/EBP binding site in ATF3 promoter abolished
luciferase activation by TA. Overexpression of ATF2 resulted in significant
increase in ATF3 promoter activity, and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
identified this region as a core sequence to which ATF2 binds. TA treatment
resulted in an increase in ATF2 phosphorylation, which was followed by a
subsequent increase in ATF3 transcription. Knock down of ATF2 abolished
TA-induced ATF3 expression. We further provide evidence that TA leads to
increases in phospho-p38 MAPK, JNK and ERK levels. Inhibition of these pathways
using selective inhibitors and dominant negative constructs ameliorated
TA-induced ATF3 expression and promoter activities. The current study shows that 
TA stimulates ATF3 expression and subsequently induces apoptosis. These pathways 
are mediated through phosphorylation of ATF2, which is mediated by p38 MAPK-,
JNK- and ERK-dependent pathways.

PMCID: PMC2940954
PMID: 20581861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Cancer Res. 2010 Jul;8(7):994-1001. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0040. Epub 
2010 Jun 22.

Targeting activating transcription factor 3 by Galectin-9 induces apoptosis and
overcomes various types of treatment resistance in chronic myelogenous leukemia.

Kuroda J(1), Yamamoto M, Nagoshi H, Kobayashi T, Sasaki N, Shimura Y, Horiike S, 
Kimura S, Yamauchi A, Hirashima M, Taniwaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan. junkuro@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) against Bcr-Abl are the first-line therapeutics 
for chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). However, the resistance to Bcr-Abl TKIs
is induced in leukemic cells not only by loss of sensitivity to TKIs through
Bcr-Abl-related molecular mechanisms but also by loss of addiction to Bcr-Abl TK 
activity by acquiring Bcr-Abl-unrelated additional oncogenic mutations.
Therefore, the identification of an additional therapeutic target has been
anticipated for achievement of a complete cure and to overcome resistance to
treatment. We here showed that modified human Galectin-9 (hGal9), a lectin that
show specific affinity for beta-galactosides, inhibits the proliferation of five 
CML-derived cell lines by inducing apoptosis at their IC(50)s from 17.5 to 164.9 
nmol/L. Our study revealed that activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a
member of the ATF/cAMP-responsive element binding protein family transcription
factors, is the critical mediator for cell killing by hGal9, and that Noxa is one
of the downstream effector molecules of ATF3. Bim, on the other hand, the
BH3-only protein essential for apoptosis by Bcr-Abl TKIs, was not associated with
hGal9-induced cell death. ATF3-mediated cell death by hGal9 was not hampered by
the absence of p53, the presence of mutant Abl(T315I), or by P-glycoprotein
overexpression. In addition, hGal9 showed the additive growth-inhibitory effect
with imatinib on CML cell lines. Collectively, hGal9 is a candidate agent that
may overcome various kinds of resistance to treatment for CML and may suggest
that ATF3 may be a new target molecule for the development of new treatment
modalities that can overcome resistance to currently available chemotherapeutics.

PMID: 20571063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jun 18;9:155. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-155.

Upregulation of Id1 by Epstein-Barr virus-encoded LMP1 confers resistance to
TGFbeta-mediated growth inhibition.

Lo AK(1), Dawson CW, Lo KW, Yu Y, Young LS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Cancer Centre, School of Cancer Sciences, University of
Birmingham, Vincent Drive, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK. a.k.lo@bham.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded LMP1 protein is commonly expressed
in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). LMP1 is a prime candidate for driving
tumourigenesis given its ability to activate multiple signalling pathways and to 
alter the expression and activity of variety of downstream targets. Resistance to
TGFbeta-mediated cytostasis is one of the growth transforming effects of LMP1. Of
the downstream targets manipulated by LMP1, the induction of Id1 and inactivation
of Foxo3a appear particularly relevant to LMP1-mediated effects. Id1, a HLH
protein is implicated in cell transformation and plays a role in cell
proliferation, whilst Foxo3a, a transcription factor controls cell integrity and 
homeostasis by regulating apoptosis. The mechanism(s) by which LMP1 induces these
effects have not been fully characterised.
RESULTS: In this study, we demonstrate that the ability of LMP1 to induce the
phosphorylation and inactivation of Foxo3a is linked to the upregulation of Id1. 
Furthermore, we show that the induction of Id1 is essential for the transforming 
function of LMP1 as over-expression of Id1 increases cell proliferation,
attenuates TGFbeta-SMAD-mediated transcription and renders cells refractory to
TGFbeta-mediated cytostasis. Id1 silencing in LMP1-expressing epithelial cells
abolishes the inhibitory effect of LMP1 on TGFbeta-mediated cell growth arrest
and reduces the ability of LMP1 to attenuate SMAD transcriptional activity. In
response to TGFbeta stimulation, LMP1 does not abolish SMAD phosphorylation but
inhibits p21 protein expression. In addition, we found the induction of Id1 in
LMP1-expressing cells upon stimulation by TGFbeta. We provide evidence that LMP1 
suppresses the transcriptional repressor ATF3, possibly leading to the
TGFbeta-induced Id1 upregulation.
CONCLUSION: The current data provide novel information regarding the mechanisms
by which LMP1 suppresses TGFbeta-induced cytostasis, highlighting the importance 
of Id1 in LMP1 mediated cell transformation.

PMCID: PMC2908095
PMID: 20565867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Curr Neurovasc Res. 2010 Aug;7(3):201-12.

Endogenous agmatine inhibits cerebral vascular matrix metalloproteinases
expression by regulating activating transcription factor 3 and endothelial nitric
oxide synthesis.

Jung HJ(1), Yang MZ, Kwon KH, Yenari MA, Choi YJ, Lee WT, Park KA, Lee JE.

Author information: 
(1)BK 21 Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

Earlier investigations from our laboratory demonstrated that the expression of
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) was down-regulated by exogenously administered
agmatine against ischemia-like injuries in the murine brain capillary endothelial
(bEnd.3) cells. In our present study, we intended to investigate the mechanism
involved in the inhibition of MMPs in bEnd.3 cells infected with retroviral
containing human arginine decarboxylase (hADC) gene which can synthesize agmatine
endogenously (ADCDeltabEnd.3 cells). The ADCDeltabEnd.3 cells were subjected to
oxygen glucose deprivation (OGD, 6 hrs) with reperfusion (18 hrs). High
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis revealed the high levels of
agmatine in the ADCDeltabEnd.3 cells compared to other experimental groups. The
results demonstrated significant decrease in cell death and increase in the
nitric oxide (NO) production in the ADCDeltabEnd.3 cells. The increased
expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9, and decreased expression of endothelial nitric
oxide synthase (eNOS) by ischemic injury was attenuated in ADCDeltabEnd.3 cells. 
Moreover, the expression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) was
increased significantly in ADCDeltabEnd.3 cells. In addition, the suppression of 
the MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression in ADCDeltabEnd.3 cells was prevented with ATF3
small interfering RNA (siRNA) treatment. These results suggest that the
endogenous agmatine in ADCDeltabEnd.3 cells inhibits the MMPs expression mediated
via the regulation of eNOS, NO and ATF3.

PMID: 20560878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Life Sci. 2010 Jul 17;87(3-4):120-5. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2010.05.015. Epub 2010
Jun 8.

The sensitization of peripheral C-fibers to lysophosphatidic acid in bone cancer 
pain.

Zhao J(1), Pan HL, Li TT, Zhang YQ, Wei JY, Zhao ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurobiology, Institutes of Brain Science and State Key
Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

AIMS: Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is released from injured tissue and cancer
cells and is involved in the induction of neuropathic pain. The present study
explores whether LPA plays a role in the development of osteocarcinoma-induced
pain.
MAIN METHODS: The bone cancer model was established using the Walker 256 mammary 
gland carcinoma cell line, and cancer-related behavioral and physiological
changes were observed using von Frey, X-ray and immunohistochemical methods. The 
role of LPA in the bone cancer model and related mechanisms were examined by
using in vitro single fiber recording and western blot.
KEY FINDINGS: Rats exhibited severe hyperalgesia 2weeks after the cancer cell
implantation. Several changes were observed at this time point including:
ipsilateral dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons were labeled by injured neurons
marker ATF3; LPA(1) receptor expression in DRG neurons was increased; sural
C-fibers were more sensitive to LPA stimuli, and this response could be blocked
by LPA receptor and substance P receptor antagonists.
SIGNIFICANCE: These data indicate that LPA is involved in the induction of bone
cancer pain through mechanisms of peripheral C-fibers sensitization. LPA and its 
downstream molecules possibly are promising therapeutic targets for treatment of 
cancer pain.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20553953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Neurosci Res. 2010 Oct;88(13):2899-910. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22439.

Involvement of nerve injury and activation of peripheral glial cells in tetanic
sciatic stimulation-induced persistent pain in rats.

Liang L(1), Wang Z, Lü N, Yang J, Zhang Y, Zhao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurobiology, Institutes of Brain Science and State Key
Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Tetanic stimulation of the sciatic nerve (TSS) produces long-lasting pain
hypersensitivity in rats. Long-term potentiation (LTP) of C- and A-fiber-evoked
field potentials in the spinal cord has been explored as contributing to central 
sensitization in pain pathways. However, the peripheral mechanism underlying
TSS-induced pain hypersensitivity remains largely unknown. We investigated the
effect of TSS on peripheral nerve and the expression of activating transcription 
factor 3 (ATF3) in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) as a marker of neuronal injury. TSS
induced a mechanical allodynia for at least 35 days and induced ATF3 expression
in the ipsilateral DRG. ATF3 is colocalized with NF200-labeled myelinated DRG
neurons or CGRP- and IB4-labeled unmyelinated ones. Furthermore, we found that
TSS induced Wallerian degeneration of sciatic nerve at the level of myelinisation
by S100 protein (to label Schwann cells) immunohistochemistry, luxol fast blue
staining, and electron microscopy. TSS also elicited the activation of satellite 
glial cells (SGCs) and enhanced the colocalization of GFAP and P2X7 receptors.
Repeated local treatment with tetrodotoxin decreased GFAP expression in SGCs and 
behavioral allodynia induced by TSS. Furthermore, reactive microglia and
astrocytes were found in the spinal dorsal horn after TSS. These results suggest 
that TSS-induced nerve injury and glial activation in the DRG and spinal dorsal
horn may be involved in cellular mechanisms underlying the development of
persistent pain after TSS and that TSS-induced nerve injury may be used as a
novel neuropathic pain model.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20544834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Lipids Health Dis. 2010 Jun 2;9:56. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-9-56.

Polyunsaturated fatty acids synergize with lipid droplet binding thalidomide
analogs to induce oxidative stress in cancer cells.

Puskás LG(1), Fehér LZ, Vizler C, Ayaydin F, Rásó E, Molnár E, Magyary I,
Kanizsai I, Gyuris M, Madácsi R, Fábián G, Farkas K, Hegyi P, Baska F, Ozsvári B,
Kitajka K.

Author information: 
(1)Avidin Biotechnology, Közép fasor 52, Szeged H-6726, Hungary.
laszlo@avidinbiotech.com

BACKGROUND: Cytoplasmic lipid-droplets are common inclusions of eukaryotic cells.
Lipid-droplet binding thalidomide analogs
(2,6-dialkylphenyl-4/5-amino-substituted-5,6,7-trifluorophthalimides) with potent
anticancer activities were synthesized.
RESULTS: Cytotoxicity was detected in different cell lines including melanoma,
leukemia, hepatocellular carcinoma, glioblastoma at micromolar concentrations.
The synthesized analogs are non-toxic to adult animals up to 1 g/kg but are
teratogenic to zebrafish embryos at micromolar concentrations with defects in the
developing muscle. Treatment of tumor cells resulted in calcium release from the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), induction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), ER stress
and cell death. Antioxidants could partially, while an intracellular calcium
chelator almost completely diminish ROS production. Exogenous docosahexaenoic
acid or eicosapentaenoic acid induced calcium release and ROS generation, and
synergized with the analogs in vitro, while oleic acid had no such an effect.
Gene expression analysis confirmed the induction of ER stress-mediated apoptosis 
pathway components, such as GADD153, ATF3, Luman/CREB3 and the ER-associated
degradation-related HERPUD1 genes. Tumor suppressors, P53, LATS2 and ING3 were
also up-regulated in various cell lines after drug treatment. Amino-phthalimides 
down-regulated the expression of CCL2, which is implicated in tumor metastasis
and angiogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Because of the anticancer, anti-angiogenic action and the wide range
of applicability of the immunomodulatory drugs, including thalidomide analogs,
lipid droplet-binding members of this family could represent a new class of
agents by affecting ER-membrane integrity and perturbations of ER homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2902471
PMID: 20525221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Jul;24(7):1423-33. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0463. Epub 2010 Jun 
2.

The roles of ATF3, an adaptive-response gene, in high-fat-diet-induced diabetes
and pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction.

Zmuda EJ(1), Qi L, Zhu MX, Mirmira RG, Montminy MR, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology Program, Department of Molecular
and Cellular Biochemistry, Center for Molecular Neurobiology, Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Most people with type 2 diabetes (T2D) have reduced beta-cell mass, and apoptosis
is a key factor for this reduction. Previously, we showed that ATF3, an
adaptive-response gene, is induced by various stress signals relevant to T2D,
such as high glucose and high fatty acid. Because ATF3 is proapoptotic in
beta-cells, we tested the hypothesis that ATF3 plays a detrimental role and
contributes to the development of T2D. We compared wild-type (WT) and ATF3
knockout (KO) mice in an animal model for T2D, high-fat diet-induced diabetes. We
also used INS-1 beta-cells and primary islets to analyze the roles of ATF3 in
beta-cell function, including insulin gene expression and glucose-induced insulin
secretion. Surprisingly, WT mice performed better in glucose tolerance test than 
KO mice, suggesting a protective, rather than detrimental, role of ATF3. At 12 wk
on high-fat diet, no beta-cell apoptosis was observed, and the WT and KO mice had
comparable beta-cell areas. However, ATF3 deficiency significantly reduced serum 
insulin levels in the KO mice without affecting insulin sensitivity, suggesting
reduced beta-cell function in the KO mice. Analyses using INS-1 cells and primary
islets support the notion that this defect is due, at least partly, to reduced
insulin gene transcription in the KO islets without detectable reduction in
glucose-induced calcium influx, a critical step for insulin secretion. In
conclusion, our results support a model in which, before apoptosis becomes
obvious, expression of ATF3 can be beneficial by helping beta-cells to cope with 
higher metabolic demand.

PMCID: PMC2903910
PMID: 20519332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jun 8;107(23):10514-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0912260107. Epub 2010 May 24.

Alternative splicing regulates mouse embryonic stem cell pluripotency and
differentiation.

Salomonis N(1), Schlieve CR, Pereira L, Wahlquist C, Colas A, Zambon AC, Vranizan
K, Spindler MJ, Pico AR, Cline MS, Clark TA, Williams A, Blume JE, Samal E,
Mercola M, Merrill BJ, Conklin BR.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Two major goals of regenerative medicine are to reproducibly transform adult
somatic cells into a pluripotent state and to control their differentiation into 
specific cell fates. Progress toward these goals would be greatly helped by
obtaining a complete picture of the RNA isoforms produced by these cells due to
alternative splicing (AS) and alternative promoter selection (APS). To
investigate the roles of AS and APS, reciprocal exon-exon junctions were
interrogated on a genome-wide scale in differentiating mouse embryonic stem (ES) 
cells with a prototype Affymetrix microarray. Using a recently released
open-source software package named AltAnalyze, we identified 144 genes for 170
putative isoform variants, the majority (67%) of which were predicted to alter
protein sequence and domain composition. Verified alternative exons were largely 
associated with pathways of Wnt signaling and cell-cycle control, and most were
conserved between mouse and human. To examine the functional impact of AS, we
characterized isoforms for two genes. As predicted by AltAnalyze, we found that
alternative isoforms of the gene Serca2 were targeted by distinct microRNAs
(miRNA-200b, miRNA-214), suggesting a critical role for AS in cardiac
development. Analysis of the Wnt transcription factor Tcf3, using selective
knockdown of an ES cell-enriched and characterized isoform, revealed several
distinct targets for transcriptional repression (Stmn2, Ccnd2, Atf3, Klf4, Nodal,
and Jun) as well as distinct differentiation outcomes in ES cells. The findings
herein illustrate a critical role for AS in the specification of ES cells with
differentiation, and highlight the utility of global functional analyses of AS.

PMCID: PMC2890851
PMID: 20498046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Nature. 2010 May 20;465(7296):368-72. doi: 10.1038/nature08996.

Opposing roles for calcineurin and ATF3 in squamous skin cancer.

Wu X(1), Nguyen BC, Dziunycz P, Chang S, Brooks Y, Lefort K, Hofbauer GF, Dotto
GP.

Author information: 
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Calcineurin inhibitors such as cyclosporin A (CsA) are the mainstay of
immunosuppressive treatment for organ transplant recipients. Squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) of the skin is a major complication of treatment with these
drugs, with a 65 to 100-fold higher risk than in the normal population. By
contrast, the incidence of basal cell carcinoma (BCC), the other major
keratinocyte-derived tumour of the skin, of melanoma and of internal malignancies
increases to a significantly lesser extent. Here we report that genetic and
pharmacological suppression of calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated T cells
(NFAT) function promotes tumour formation in mouse skin and in xenografts, in
immune compromised mice, of H-ras(V12) (also known as Hras1)-expressing primary
human keratinocytes or keratinocyte-derived SCC cells. Calcineurin/NFAT
inhibition counteracts p53 (also known as TRP53)-dependent cancer cell
senescence, thereby increasing tumorigenic potential. ATF3, a member of the
'enlarged' AP-1 family, is selectively induced by calcineurin/NFAT inhibition,
both under experimental conditions and in clinically occurring tumours, and
increased ATF3 expression accounts for suppression of p53-dependent senescence
and enhanced tumorigenic potential. Thus, intact calcineurin/NFAT signalling is
critically required for p53 and senescence-associated mechanisms that protect
against skin squamous cancer development.

PMCID: PMC3050632
PMID: 20485437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Neuroscience. 2010 Aug 25;169(2):812-27. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.04.053.
Epub 2010 May 12.

Activation transcription factor-3 activation and the development of spinal cord
degeneration in a rat model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Malaspina A(1), Ngoh SF, Ward RE, Hall JC, Tai FW, Yip PK, Jones C, Jokic N,
Averill SA, Michael-Titus AT, Priestley JV.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuroscience and Trauma, Barts and the London School of Medicine
and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, Blizard Institute, 4 Newark
Street, London E1 2AT, UK. a.malaspina@qmul.ac.uk

It has been reported that an early activation of glial fibrillary acid protein
(GFAP) in astroglial cells occurs simultaneously in peripheral nerves and spinal 
cord from the G93A SOD1 mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), an
invariably fatal neurodegenerative disorder. In ALS, the contribute to the
pathological process of different cell types varies according to the disease
stage, with a florid immune response in spinal cord at end stage disease. In this
study, we have mapped in different anatomical sites the process of
disease-induced functional perturbation from a pre-symptomatic stage using a
marker of cellular distress expressed in neurons and glial cells, the activating 
transcription factor 3 (ATF-3), and applied large-scale gene expression analysis 
to define the pattern or transcriptional changes occurring in spinal cord from
the G93A SOD1 rat model of ALS in parallel with ATF-3 neuronal activation. From
the disease onset onward, transgenic lumbar spinal cord displayed ATF-3
transcriptional regulation and motor cells immunostaining in association with the
over-expression of genes promoting cell growth, the functional integrity of cell 
organelles and involved in the modulation of immune responses. While spinal cord 
from the pre-symptomatic rat showed no detectable ATF-3 transcriptional
regulation, ATF-3 activation was appreciated in large size neurofilament-rich,
small size non-peptidergic and parvalbumin-positive neurons within the dorsal
root ganglia (DRG), and in ventral roots Schwann cells alongside macrophages
infiltration. This pattern of peripheral ATF-3 activation remained detectable
throughout the disease process. In the G93A SOD1 rat model of ALS, signs of roots
and nerves subtle distress preceded overt clinical-pathological changes,
involving both glial cells and neurons that function as receptors of peripheral
sensory stimuli from the muscle. In addition, factors previously described to be 
linked to ATF-3 activation under various experimental conditions of stress,
become switched on in spinal cord from the end-stage transgenic rat model of ALS.

Copyright (c) 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20470869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Neurosci. 2010 May 12;30(19):6658-66. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5265-09.2010.

Demyelination increases axonal stationary mitochondrial size and the speed of
axonal mitochondrial transport.

Kiryu-Seo S(1), Ohno N, Kidd GJ, Komuro H, Trapp BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

Axonal degeneration contributes to permanent neurological disability in inherited
and acquired diseases of myelin. Mitochondrial dysfunction has been proposed as a
major contributor to this axonal degeneration. It remains to be determined,
however, if myelination, demyelination, or remyelination alter the size and
distribution of axonal mitochondrial stationary sites or the rates of axonal
mitochondrial transport. Using live myelinated rat dorsal root ganglion (DRG)
cultures, we investigated whether myelination and lysolecithin-induced
demyelination affect axonal mitochondria. Myelination increased the size of
axonal stationary mitochondrial sites by 2.3-fold. After demyelination, the size 
of axonal stationary mitochondrial sites was increased by an additional 2.2-fold 
and the transport velocity of motile mitochondria was increased by 47%. These
measures returned to the levels of myelinated axons after remyelination.
Demyelination induced activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in DRG neurons.
Knockdown of neuronal ATF3 by short hairpin RNA abolished the
demyelination-induced increase in axonal mitochondrial transport and increased
nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity in axonal mitochondria, suggesting that neuronal
ATF3 expression and increased mitochondrial transport protect demyelinated axons 
from oxidative damage. In response to insufficient ATP production, demyelinated
axons increase the size of stationary mitochondrial sites and thereby balance ATP
production with the increased energy needs of nerve conduction.

PMCID: PMC2885867
PMID: 20463228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Physiol Genomics. 2010 Aug;42(3):384-96. doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00117.2009.
Epub 2010 May 11.

Highly conserved transcriptional responses to mechanical ventilation of the lung.

Kompass KS(1), Deslee G, Moore C, McCurnin D, Pierce RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Cross-species analysis of microarray data has shown improved discriminating power
between healthy and diseased states. Computational approaches have proven
effective in deciphering the complexity of human disease by identifying upstream 
regulatory elements and the transcription factors that interact with them. Here
we used both methods to identify highly conserved transcriptional responses
during mechanical ventilation, an important therapeutic treatment that has
injurious side effects. We generated control and ventilated whole lung samples
from the premature baboon model of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD), processed
them for microarray, and combined them with existing whole lung oligonucleotide
microarray data from 85 additional control samples from mouse, rat, and human and
19 additional ventilated samples from mouse and rat. Of the 2,531 orthologs
shared by all 114 samples, 60 were modulated by mechanical ventilation [false
discovery rate (FDR)-adjusted q value (q(FDR)) = 0.005, ANOVA]. These included
transcripts encoding the transcription factors ATF3 and FOS. Because of
compelling known roles for these transcription factors, we used computational
methods to predict their targets in the premature baboon model of BPD, which
included elastin (ELN), gastrin-releasing polypeptide (GRP), and connective
tissue growth factor (CTGF). This approach identified highly conserved
transcriptional responses to mechanical ventilation and may facilitate
identification of therapeutic targets to reduce the side effects of this valuable
treatment.

PMCID: PMC2929881
PMID: 20460603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010 Aug 1;246(3):128-40. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2010.04.016. Epub 2010 Apr 25.

Disruption of Smad-dependent signaling for growth of GST-P-positive lesions from 
the early stage in a rat two-stage hepatocarcinogenesis model.

Ichimura R(1), Mizukami S(1), Takahashi M(2), Taniai E(1), Kemmochi S(3),
Mitsumori K(1), Shibutani M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Tokyo University of Agriculture and
Technology, 3-5-8 Saiwai-cho, Fuchu-shi, Tokyo 183-8509, Japan. (2)Division of
Pathology, National Institute of Health Sciences, 1-18-1 Kamiyoga, Setagaya-ku,
Tokyo 158-8501, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Tokyo University of
Agriculture and Technology, 3-5-8 Saiwai-cho, Fuchu-shi, Tokyo 183-8509, Japan;
Pathogenetic Veterinary Science, United Graduate School of Veterinary Sciences,
Gifu University, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu-shi, Gifu 501-1193, Japan.

To clarify the involvement of signaling of transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß
during the hepatocarcinogenesis, the immunohistochemical distribution of related 
molecules was analyzed in relation with liver cell lesions expressing glutathione
S-transferase placental form (GST-P) during liver tumor promotion by
fenbendazole, phenobarbital, piperonyl butoxide, or thioacetamide, using rats.
Our study focused on early-stage promotion (6weeks after starting promotion) and 
late-stage promotion (57weeks after starting promotion). With regard to
Smad-dependent signaling, cytoplasmic accumulation of phosphorylated Smad
(phospho-Smad)-2/3 - identified as Smad3 by later immunoblot analysis - increased
in the subpopulation of GST-P(+) foci, while Smad4, a nuclear transporter of
Smad2/3, decreased during early-stage promotion. By late-stage promotion,
GST-P(+) lesions lacking phospho-Smad2/3 had increased in accordance with lesion 
development from foci to carcinomas, while Smad4 largely disappeared in most
proliferative lesions. With regard to Smad-independent mitogen-activated protein 
kinases, GST-P(+) foci that co-expressed phospho-p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase increased during early-stage promotion; however, p38-downstream
phospho-activating transcriptional factor (ATF)-2, ATF3, and phospho-c-Myc, were 
inversely downregulated without relation to promotion. By late-stage promotion,
proliferative lesions downregulated phospho-ATF2 and phospho-c-Myc along with
lesion development, as with downregulation of phospho-p38 in all lesions. These
results suggest that from the early stages, carcinogenic processes were
facilitated by disruption of tumor suppressor functions of Smad-dependent
signaling, while Smad-independent activation of p38 was an early-stage
phenomenon. GST-P(-) foci induced by promotion with agonists of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-a did not change Smad expression, suggesting an
aberration in the Smad-dependent signaling prerequisites for induction of
GST-P(+) proliferative lesions.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20423715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. FEBS J. 2010 May;277(10):2304-17. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07646.x.

AdipoR2 is transcriptionally regulated by ER stress-inducible ATF3 in HepG2 human
hepatocyte cells.

Koh IU(1), Lim JH, Joe MK, Kim WH, Jung MH, Yoon JB, Song J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolic Disease, Department of Biomedical Science, National
Institutes of Health, Seoul, South Korea.

Adiponectin acts as an insulin-sensitizing adipokine that protects against
obesity-linked metabolic disease, which is generally associated with endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) stress. The physiological effects of adiponectin on energy
metabolism in the liver are mediated by its receptors. We found that the hepatic 
expression of adiponectin receptor 2 (AdipoR2) was lower, but the expression of
markers of the ER stress pathway, 78 kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP78) and
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), was higher in the liver of ob/ob mice
compared with control mice. To investigate the regulation of AdipoR2 by ER
stress, we added thapsigargin, an ER stress inducer, to a human hepatocyte cell
line, HepG2. Addition of the ER stress inducer increased the levels of GRP78 and 
ATF3, and decreased that of AdipoR2, whereas addition of a chemical chaperone,
4-phenyl butyric acid (PBA), could reverse them. Up- or down-regulation of ATF3
modulated the AdipoR2 protein levels and AdipoR2 promoter activities. Reporter
gene assays using a series of 5'-deleted AdipoR2 promoter constructs revealed the
location of the repressor element responding to ER stress and ATF3. In addition, 
using electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we
identified a region between nucleotides -94 and -86 of the AdipoR2 promoter that 
functions as a putative ATF3-binding site in vitro and in vivo. Thus, our
findings suggest that the ER stress-induced decrease in both protein and RNA of
AdipoR2 results from a concomitant increase in expression of ATF3, which may play
a role in the development of obesity-induced insulin resistance and related ER
stress in hepatocytes.

PMID: 20423458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2010 Aug 15;182(4):489-500. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200906-0925OC. Epub 2010 Apr 22.

Activating transcription factor 3 confers protection against ventilator-induced
lung injury.

Akram A(1), Han B, Masoom H, Peng C, Lam E, Litvack ML, Bai X, Shan Y, Hai T,
Batt J, Slutsky AS, Zhang H, Kuebler WM, Haitsma JJ, Liu M, dos Santos CC.

Author information: 
(1)Keenan Research Centre at the Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute of St. Michael's
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

RATIONALE: Ventilator-induced lung injury (VILI) significantly contributes to
mortality in patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome, the most severe
form of acute lung injury. Understanding the molecular basis for response to
cyclic stretch (CS) and its derangement during high-volume ventilation is of high
priority.
OBJECTIVES: To identify specific molecular regulators involved in the development
of VILI.
METHODS: We undertook a comparative examination of cis-regulatory sequences
involved in the coordinated expression of CS-responsive genes using microarray
analysis. Analysis of stretched versus nonstretched cells identified significant 
enrichment for genes containing putative binding sites for the transcription
factor activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3). To determine the role of ATF3 in
vivo, we compared the response of ATF3 gene-deficient mice to wild-type mice in
an in vivo model of VILI.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: ATF3 protein expression and nuclear translocation 
is increased in the lung after mechanical ventilation in wild-type mice.
ATF3-deficient mice have greater sensitivity to mechanical ventilation alone or
in conjunction with inhaled endotoxin, as demonstrated by increased cell
infiltration and proinflammatory cytokines in the lung and bronchoalveolar
lavage, and increased pulmonary edema and indices of tissue injury. The
expression of stretch-responsive genes containing putative ATF3 cis-regulatory
regions was significantly altered in ATF3-deficient mice.
CONCLUSIONS: ATF3 deficiency confers increased sensitivity to mechanical
ventilation alone or in combination with inhaled endotoxin. We propose ATF3 acts 
to counterbalance CS and high volume-induced inflammation, dampening its ability 
to cause injury and consequently protecting animals from injurious CS.

PMCID: PMC2937241
PMID: 20413626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Neurosci. 2010 Apr 21;30(16):5754-66. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5007-09.2010.

SOCS3-mediated blockade of JAK/STAT3 signaling pathway reveals its major
contribution to spinal cord neuroinflammation and mechanical allodynia after
peripheral nerve injury.

Dominguez E(1), Mauborgne A, Mallet J, Desclaux M, Pohl M.

Author information: 
(1)Pains Group and Biotechnology and Biotherapy Group, Centre de Recherches de
l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, Inserm, Unité Mixte de Recherche 
en Santé 975, F-75013 Paris, France.

Neuropathic pain after peripheral nerve injury, associated with local
neuroinflammation in the spinal cord, is a severe incapacitating condition with
which clinical treatment remains challenging. Inflammatory molecules signal
through various intracellular transduction pathways, activation of which may
amplify and cause spreading of the inflammatory response. We showed recently that
spinal nerve lesion leads to rapid activation of Janus kinase (JAK)/signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) signal transduction pathway
in dorsal spinal cord microglia in relation with enhanced levels of spinal
interleukin-6 (IL-6) protein. Here, we selectively inactivated JAK/STAT3
signaling in rat dorsal spinal cord glia through local, lentiviral-mediated
production of the suppressor of cytokine signaling SOCS3, a physiologic
inhibitory protein of JAK/STAT3, and analyzed its consequences in a preclinical
model of neuropathic pain. The targeted blockade of JAK/STAT3 activity prevented 
the abnormal expression of IL-6, CC chemokine ligand CCL2, and activating
transcription factor ATF3 induced in the spinal cord by chronic constriction
injury of the sciatic nerve (CCI) and substantially attenuated mechanical
hypersensitivity (allodynia) in rats. In naive rats, intrathecal administration
of a proalgesic cytokine IL-6 rapidly activated microglial JAK/STAT3 and induced 
downstream changes closely resembling CCI-evoked alterations. We identified
downstream mechanisms through which JAK/STAT3 pathway activation leads to the
spreading of neuroinflammation. Our findings reveal that JAK/STAT3 signaling
plays a major role in spinal cord plasticity and mechanical allodynia associated 
with peripheral nerve injury.

PMID: 20410127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Amino Acids. 2011 Jun;41(1):159-71. doi: 10.1007/s00726-010-0571-x. Epub 2010 Apr
2.

Gene expression and integrated stress response in HepG2/C3A cells cultured in
amino acid deficient medium.

Sikalidis AK(1), Lee JI, Stipanuk MH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

The integrated stress response (ISR), a defense mechanism cells employ when under
stress (e.g., amino acid deprivation), causes suppression of global protein
synthesis along with the paradoxical increased expression of a host of proteins
that are useful in combating various stresses. Genes that were similarly
differentially expressed under conditions of either leucine- or
cysteine-depletion were identified. Many of the genes known to contain an amino
acid response element and to be induced in response to eIF2a phosphorylation and 
ATF4 heterodimer binding (ATF3, C/EBPß, SLC7A1, SLC7A11, and TRIB3), as well as
others shown to be induced downstream of eIF2a phosphorylation (C/EBP<U+03B3>, CARS,
SARS, CLCN3, CBX4, and PPP1R15A) were among the upregulated genes. Evidence for
the induction of the ISR in these cells also included the increased
phosphorylation of eIF2a and increased protein abundance of ATF4, ATF3, and ASNS 
in cysteine- and leucine-depleted cells. Based on genes highly differentially
expressed in both leucine- and cysteine-deficient cells, a list of 67
downregulated and 53 upregulated genes is suggested as likely targets of
essential amino acid deprivation in mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC3119335
PMID: 20361218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010 Jun;21(6):1003-13. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2009070690. Epub 2010 
Apr 1.

ATF3-mediated epigenetic regulation protects against acute kidney injury.

Li HF(1), Cheng CF, Liao WJ, Lin H, Yang RB.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

A variety of stress stimuli, including ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury, induce 
the transcriptional repressor ATF3 in the kidney. The functional consequences of 
this upregulation in ATF3 after renal I/R injury are not well understood. Here,
we found that ATF3-deficient mice had higher renal I/R-induced mortality, kidney 
dysfunction, inflammation (number of infiltrating neutrophils, myeloperoxidase
activity, and induction of IL-6 and P-selectin), and apoptosis compared with
wild-type mice. Furthermore, gene transfer of ATF3 to the kidney rescued the
renal I/R-induced injuries in the ATF3-deficient mice. Molecular and biochemical 
analysis revealed that ATF3 interacted directly with histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) and recruited HDAC1 into the ATF/NF-kappaB sites in the IL-6 and IL-12b
gene promoters. The ATF3-associated HDAC1 deacetylated histones, which resulted
in the condensation of chromatin structure, interference of NF-kappaB binding,
and inhibition of inflammatory gene transcription after I/R injury. Taken
together, these data demonstrate epigenetic regulation mediated by the
stress-inducible gene ATF3 after renal I/R injury and suggest potential targeted 
approaches for acute kidney injury.

PMCID: PMC2900964
PMID: 20360311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Nutr. 2010 Jun;140(6):1080-5. doi: 10.3945/jn.109.120428. Epub 2010 Mar 31.

Growing rats respond to a sulfur amino acid-deficient diet by phosphorylation of 
the alpha subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 heterotrimeric complex and
induction of adaptive components of the integrated stress response.

Sikalidis AK(1), Stipanuk MH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Mammalian cells respond to various kinds of stress, including nutritional stress,
via pathways that are initiated by phosphorylation of the alpha subunit of the
eukaryotic initiation factor 2 complex (eIF2alpha). Because the models used to
study eIF2alpha-kinase-mediated responses to amino acid deficiency have commonly 
used media or diets devoid of 1 or more essential amino acids, we asked whether
eIF2alpha-kinase-mediated responses would be induced in animals fed a more
typical diet that was not as imbalanced as one in which 1 essential amino acid is
totally absent. To answer this question, we fed rats soy protein-based diets that
were either adequate or limiting in sulfur-containing amino acids (SAA). Rats fed
a SAA-deficient diet (3.4 g methionine equivalents/kg diet) grew more slowly than
rats fed the control diet (5.86 g methionine equivalents/kg diet). Analysis of
liver from rats fed these diets for 7 d showed that the SAA-deficient rats had
higher levels of eIF2alpha phosphorylation and higher levels of activating
transcription factor (ATF) 4, ATF3, asparagine synthetase, solute carrier 7A11,
cysteinyl-tRNA synthetase, and cystathionine gamma-lyase. On the other hand,
components of the integrated stress response (ISR) known to promote apoptosis or 
translational recovery were not induced. Taken together, our results indicate
that rats fed the SAA-deficient diet had a prolonged activation of an eIF2alpha
kinase that leads to upregulation of adaptive components of the ISR.

PMCID: PMC2869497
PMID: 20357079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 28;285(22):17011-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.068817. Epub 2010
Mar 29.

Differential gene expression downstream of Toll-like receptors (TLRs): role of
c-Src and activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3).

Nguyen TT(1), Johnsen IB, Knetter CF, Drabløs F, Fitzgerald KA, Lien E, Anthonsen
MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Children's and Women's Health, Norwegian
University of Science and Technology, N-7006 Trondheim, Norway.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are crucial for transcription during innate 
immune responses. We have previously shown that the tyrosine kinase c-Src
enhances IRF-3-dependent transcription in response to viral double-stranded RNA. 
In this study, we show that c-Src has distinct roles in Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-mediated activation of IRF-5 and IRF-3. Surprisingly, c-Src inhibition
markedly enhanced IRF-5 activation after treatment with unmethylated CpG, while
suppressing IRF-3 activation. Also, CpG-elicited interleukin-6 mRNA production
was increased, whereas IP10 mRNA synthesis was reduced in cells deficient in
c-Src. Interestingly, c-Src regulated TLR-stimulated induction of activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a transcriptional repressor. Depletion of ATF3 by 
small interfering RNA markedly enhanced interleukin-6 production after CpG
treatment, whereas IP10 production was reduced. These results demonstrate
functional specificity for c-Src in TLR-stimulated responses and suggest that
c-Src modulation and ATF3 activity may contribute to differential regulation of
IRF-3- versus IRF-5-mediated gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2878043
PMID: 20351107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Diabetologia. 2010 Jul;53(7):1438-50. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1696-x. Epub 2010
Mar 28.

Deficiency of Atf3, an adaptive-response gene, protects islets and ameliorates
inflammation in a syngeneic mouse transplantation model.

Zmuda EJ(1), Viapiano M, Grey ST, Hadley G, Garcia-Ocaña A, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology Program, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Islet transplantation is a potential therapeutic option for type
1 diabetes. However, the need for multiple donors per patient and heavy
immunosuppression of the recipients limit its use. The goal of this study was to 
test whether the gene encoding activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a
stress-inducible pro-apoptotic gene, plays a role in graft rejection in islet
transplantation.
METHODS: We compared wild-type (WT) and Atf3 knockout (KO) islets in vitro using 
stress paradigms relevant to islet transplantation: isolation, inflammation and
hypoxia. We also compared the WT and KO islets in vivo using a syngeneic mouse
transplantation model.
RESULTS: ATF3 was induced in all three stress paradigms and played a deleterious 
role in islet survival, as evidenced by the lower viability of WT islets compared
with KO islets. ATF3 upregulated various downstream target genes in a
stress-dependent manner. These target genes can be classified into two functional
groups: (1) apoptosis (Noxa [also known as Pmaip1] and Bnip3), and (2)
immunomodulation (Tnfalpha [also known as Tnf], Il-1beta [also known as Il1b],
Il-6 [also known as Il6] and Ccl2 [also known as Mcp-1]). In vivo, Atf3 KO islets
performed better than WT islets after transplantation, as evidenced by better
glucose homeostasis in the recipients and the reduction of the following
variables in the KO grafts: caspase 3 activation, macrophage infiltration and
expression of the above apoptotic and immunomodulatory genes.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: ATF3 plays a role in islet graft rejection by
contributing to islet cell death and inflammatory responses at the graft sites.
Silencing the ATF3 gene may provide therapeutic benefits in islet
transplantation.

PMCID: PMC2877761
PMID: 20349223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2010;25(4-5):523-32. doi: 10.1159/000303056. Epub 2010 Mar 
23.

Induction of LRF-1/ATF3 by vasopressin in hepatocytes: role of MAP kinases.

Sandnes D(1), Müller KM, Akhtar K, Johansen EJ, Christoffersen T, Thoresen GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical Faculty, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Liver regeneration factor 1 (LRF-1/ATF3) is an early response
gene which is rapidly induced upon partial hepatectomy in rats, and by growth
factors and G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) agonists in cultured rat
hepatocytes. The aim of the present study was to examine the mechanisms involved 
in induction of LRF-1/ATF3 by the GPCR agonist vasopressin.
METHODS: Primary cultures of rat hepatocytes were treated with vasopressin, TPA, 
and the Ca2+-elevating agents thapsigargin and A23187. LRF-1/ATF3 mRNA and
protein were measured by Northern blot analysis or RT-PCR and immunoblotting.
Signalling pathways were examined by immunoblots and kinase assays.
RESULTS: While elevation of intracellular calcium induced LRF-1/ATF3 expression, 
treatment with TPA did not. Inhibition of phospholipase C, protein kinase C, or
pretreatment with calcium chelators did not affect vasopressin-induced expression
of LRF-1/ATF3. Inhibition of each of the MAP kinases ERK1/2, JNK or p38 did not
affect vasopressin-induced LRF-1/ATF3 expression. Combined inhibition of JNK and 
p38, and of ERK1/2 and either JNK or p38 suppressed vasopressin-induced
expression of LRF-1/ATF3.
CONCLUSION: Vasopressin induces LRF-1/ATF3 expression by mechanisms that differ
from those activated by Ca2+-elevating agents. The results suggest that partly
redundant, complex MAP kinase networks are involved in induction of LRF-1/ATF3 by
vasopressin in hepatocytes.

2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20332633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Immunol. 2010 May 1;184(9):4990-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903106. Epub 2010 Mar
19.

Activating transcription factor 3 is a positive regulator of human IFNG gene
expression.

Filén S(1), Ylikoski E, Tripathi S, West A, Björkman M, Nyström J, Ahlfors H,
Coffey E, Rao KV, Rasool O, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi
University, P.O. Box 123, FI-20521 Turku, Finland.

IL-12 and IL-18 are essential for Th1 differentiation, whereas the role of
IFN-alpha in Th1 development is less understood. In this microarray-based study, 
we searched for genes that are regulated by IFN-alpha, IL-12, or the combination 
of IL-12 plus IL-18 during the early differentiation of human umbilical cord
blood CD4(+) Th cells. Twenty-six genes were similarly regulated in response to
treatment with IL-12, IFN-alpha, or the combination of IL-12 plus IL-18. These
genes could therefore play a role in Th1 lineage decision. Transcription factor
activating transcription factor (ATF) 3 was upregulated by these cytokines and
selected for further study. Ectopic expression of ATF3 in CD4(+) T cells enhanced
the production of IFN-gamma, the hallmark cytokine of Th1 cells, whereas small
interfering RNA knockdown of ATF3 reduced IFN-gamma production. Furthermore, ATF3
formed an endogenous complex with JUN in CD4(+) T cells induced to Th1. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and luciferase reporter assays showed that both ATF3 and JUN 
are recruited to and transactivate the IFNG promoter during early Th1
differentiation. Collectively, these data indicate that ATF3 promotes human Th1
differentiation.

PMID: 20304822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Dermatol Sci. 2010 May;58(2):143-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2010.02.007. Epub 
2010 Feb 23.

Gene expression profiling defines the role of ATP-exposed keratinocytes in skin
inflammation.

Ohara H(1), Saito R, Hirakawa S, Shimada M, Mano N, Okuyama R, Aiba S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 1-1 Seiryo-machi Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Various environmental stimuli, e.g., mechanical stress, osmolarity
change, oxidative stress, and microbial products trigger ATP release from cells. 
It is well known that ATP regulates cell growth, differentiation, terminal
differentiation, and cell-to-cell communication in keratinocytes. Moreover,
extracellular ATP stimulates the expression and release of IL-6 and modulates the
production several chemokines by keratinocytes.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of ATP-stimulated keratinocytes in skin
inflammation and immune response.
METHODS: We identified genes whose expression is augmented in ATP-stimulated
human keratinocytes by DNA microarray. These microarray data were validated by
quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Furthermore, we confirmed the observed mRNA change
at protein level by ELISA and Western blotting.
RESULTS: The statistical analysis of the microarray data revealed that, besides
IL-6, the expression of several novel genes such as IL-20, CXCL1-3, and ATF3 was 
significantly augmented in ATP-stimulated keratinocytes. These data was validated
by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. We also confirmed the augmented production of
IL-6, IL-20, CXCL1 by ELISA and that of ATF3 by Western blotting. Since both IL-6
and IL-20 that can stimulate STAT3 were produced by the ATP-stimulated
keratinocytes, we examined their phosphorylation of STAT3. The study demonstrated
biphasic activation of STAT3 after ATP stimulation, which was composed of a first
peak at 1-2 h and a second peak at 12-24 h. The latter peak was significantly
suppressed by anti-IL-6 antibody.
CONCLUSION: These studies characterized (1) STAT3 activation, (2) chemotaxis for 
neutrophils via CXCL1-3, and (3) ATF3 activation as possible roles of
ATP-stimulated keratinocytes in skin inflammation and immune response.

2010 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by Elsevier
Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20236803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 May;95(5):2384-90. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2101. Epub 
2010 Mar 9.

Genetics of hypospadias: are single-nucleotide polymorphisms in SRD5A2, ESR1,
ESR2, and ATF3 really associated with the malformation?

van der Zanden LF(1), van Rooij IA, Feitz WF, Vermeulen SH, Kiemeney LA, Knoers
NV, Roeleveld N, Franke B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, P.O.
Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

CONTEXT: Hypospadias is a common congenital malformation of the male external
genitalia with a multifactorial etiology. Little is known about the genes
involved in hypospadias. A few genetic associations have been reported but mainly
in studies of small sample size. Most of these associations have not been
replicated.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate whether previously reported
associations for four single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes involved in
hormonal pathways could be replicated in a large Dutch hypospadias sample. The
SNPs investigated are rs523349 in steroid-5 alpha-reductase (SRD5A2), rs6932902
in estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), rs2987983 in ESR2, and rs11119982 in activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3).
DESIGN, PARTICIPANTS, AND METHODS: We genotyped 620 Caucasian hypospadias cases
and 596 controls for these SNPs using TaqMan-based genotyping.
RESULTS: We did not replicate the associations of the SNPs in SRD5A2 and ESR1
with hypospadias. The SNPs in ESR2 and ATF3 were borderline associated with
hypospadias [odds ratios 0.9 (95% confidence interval 0.7-1.0) and 1.2 (95%
confidence interval 1.0-1.4), respectively] but in the opposite direction
compared with earlier publications. Stratification according to localization of
the urethral opening produced comparable results in the subgroups.
CONCLUSIONS: The lack of consistency between our and previously performed studies
might represent spurious results or chance findings in our or the earlier
studies, differences in criteria used to select the study populations, or a real 
difference between populations, i.e. different genes contributing to disease
risk. These results once again confirm the importance of replication in genetic
association approaches.

PMID: 20215396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Eur J Neurosci. 2010 Mar;31(6):951-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07108.x.
Epub 2010 Feb 26.

Transient oxidative stress evokes early changes in the functional properties of
neonatal rat hypoglossal motoneurons in vitro.

Nani F(1), Cifra A, Nistri A.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology Sector, International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Via
Beirut 2-4, 34151 Trieste, Italy.

Oxidative stress of motoneurons is believed to be an important contributor to
neurodegeneration underlying the familial (and perhaps even the sporadic) form of
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). This concept has generated numerous rodent
genetic models with inborn oxidative stress to mimic the clinical condition. ALS 
is, however, a predominantly sporadic disorder probably triggered by
environmental causes. Thus, it is interesting to understand how wild-type
motoneurons react to strong oxidative stress as this response might cast light on
the presymptomatic disease stage. The present study used, as a model, hypoglossal
motoneurons from the rat brainstem slice to investigate how hydrogen peroxide
could affect synaptic transmission and intrinsic motoneuron excitability in
relation to their survival. Hydrogen peroxide (1 mm; 30 min) induced inward
current or membrane depolarization accompanied by an increase in input
resistance, enhanced firing and depressed spontaneous synaptic events. Despite
enhanced intracellular oxidative processes, there was no death of motoneurons,
although most cells were immunopositive for activating transcription factor 3, a 
stress-related transcription factor. Voltage-clamp experiments indicated
increased frequency of excitatory or inhibitory miniature events, and reduced
voltage-gated persistent currents of motoneurons. The global effect of this
transient oxidative challenge was to depress the input flow from the premotor
interneurons to motoneurons that became more excitable due to a combination of
enhanced input resistance and impaired spike afterhyperpolarization. Our data
show previously unreported changes in motoneuron activity associated with cell
distress caused by a transient oxidative insult.

PMID: 20214680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Blood. 2010 Jun 10;115(23):4734-41. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-213512. Epub 2010 
Mar 4.

A key role for ATF3 in regulating mast cell survival and mediator release.

Gilchrist M(1), Henderson WR Jr, Morotti A, Johnson CD, Nachman A, Schmitz F,
Smith KD, Aderem A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98103, USA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a basic leucine zipper transcription 
factor that plays a regulatory role in inflammation, cell division, and
apoptosis. Mast cells (MCs) initiate many inflammatory responses and have a
central role in allergy and allergic diseases. We report here that ATF3 has a
central role in MC development and function. Bone marrow-derived MC populations
from ATF3-deficient mice are unresponsive to interleukin-3 (IL-3)-induced
maturation signals, and this correlates with increased apoptosis, diminished
activation of the Akt kinase, and decreased phosphorylation of the proapoptotic
protein Bad. Furthermore, ATF3-null mice lacked MCs in the peritoneum and dermis,
showing that the in vitro results are recapitulated in vivo. ATF3-null MCs also
showed functional defects; high-affinity immunoglobulin E receptor-mediated
degranulation was significantly inhibited, whereas IL-4 and IL-6 expression was
enhanced. This dual role of ATF3 provides insight into the complex interplay
between MC development and its subsequent physiologic role.

PMCID: PMC2890168
PMID: 20203264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cancer Res. 2010 Mar 15;70(6):2274-84. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2661. Epub
2010 Mar 2.

p53 Regulates the Ras circuit to inhibit the expression of a cancer-related gene 
signature by various molecular pathways.

Buganim Y(1), Solomon H, Rais Y, Kistner D, Nachmany I, Brait M, Madar S,
Goldstein I, Kalo E, Adam N, Gordin M, Rivlin N, Kogan I, Brosh R, Sefadia-Elad
G, Goldfinger N, Sidransky D, Kloog Y, Rotter V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.

In this study, we focus on the analysis of a previously identified cancer-related
gene signature (CGS) that underlies the cross talk between the p53 tumor
suppressor and Ras oncogene. CGS consists of a large number of known Ras
downstream target genes that were synergistically upregulated by wild-type p53
loss and oncogenic H-Ras(G12V) expression. Here we show that CGS expression
strongly correlates with malignancy. In an attempt to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms underling the cooperation between p53 loss and oncogenic H-Ras(G12V), 
we identified distinguished pathways that may account for the regulation of the
expression of the CGS. By knocking-down p53 or by expressing mutant p53, we
revealed that p53 exerts its negative effect by at least two mechanisms mediated 
by its targets B-cell translocation gene 2 (BTG2) and activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3). Whereas BTG2 binds H-Ras(G12V) and represses its activity by
reducing its GTP loading state, which in turn causes a reduction in CGS
expression, ATF3 binds directly to the CGS promoters following p53 stabilization 
and represses their expression. This study further elucidates the molecular loop 
between p53 and Ras in the transformation process.

PMID: 20197462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2010 Mar-Apr;24(2):73-88. doi: 10.1002/jbt.20313.

Global changes in gene regulation demonstrate that unconjugated bilirubin is able
to upregulate and activate select components of the endoplasmic reticulum stress 
response pathway.

Oakes GH(1), Bend JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, Siebens-Drake Medical Research
Institute, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, University of Western
Ontario, 1400 Western Road, London, Ontario, Canada.

Elevated concentrations of unconjugated bilirubin (UCB) are responsible for
neonatal jaundice and can eventually lead to kernicterus or death. The molecular 
mechanism of UCB toxicity is incompletely elucidated. The purpose of this study
was to analyze changes in gene regulation mediated by UCB to determine novel
pathways that contribute to UCB-mediated toxicity. We employed microarray
analysis to determine changes in gene regulation mediated by UCB at both pro- (50
microM) and antioxidant (70 nM) concentrations in Hepa 1c1c7 cells at 1 and 6 h. 
The changes observed in select genes were validated with qPCR. Using immunoblot
analysis, we validated these changes at the protein level for select genes and
documented the activation of two proteins involved in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress pathway, eIF2 alpha and PERK. Following treatment with 50 microM UCB,
microarray analysis revealed the upregulation of many genes involved in ER stress
(ATF3, BiP, CHOP, Dnajb1, and Herp). We demonstrate that upregulation of the
proapoptotic transcription factor CHOP results in increased intracellular protein
content. It was determined that activation of proteins involved in ER stress was 
an early event in UCB toxicity as eIF2 alpha and PERK were both phosphorylated
and activated by 1 h posttreatment. We also demonstrate that procaspase-12
content, a proposed initiator caspase in ER stress-mediated apoptosis, is
decreased by 4 h posttreatment. In conclusion, this study demonstrates that
elevated concentrations of UCB (50 microM) are able to activate select components
of the ER stress pathway in Hepa 1c1c7 cells, which may contribute to
UCB-mediated apoptosis.

(c) 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 20196124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2009 Dec;15(12):1075-80.

[Expressions of ATF3 and CTGF and their regulation by estradiol in the prepuce of
hypospadias patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou J(1), Wang H, Peng YB, Chen Q, Da J, Wang Z, Ma LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200011, China.

OBJECTIVE: Estrogen is closely associated with hypospadias. The present study was
to explore the molecular mechanism of hypospadias caused by estradiol.
METHODS: Fibroblasts obtained from the prepuce of hypospadiac and normal children
were cultured in vitro and treated with 17-beta ethinyl estradiol (17-EE) at the 
concentrations of 1 micromol/L to 0.1 nmol/L for 2 hours, or at 0.1 micromol/L
for 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 and 24 hours. MTT assay was used to evaluate the effect
of 17-EE on the proliferation of the cells, and RT-PCR was employed to detect the
expressions of the activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3) and connective tissue
growth factor (CTGF) in the hypospadiac tissue. The results were compared with
those obtained from the nonhypospadiac tissue.
RESULTS: The expressions of ATF3 and CTGF were significantly upregulated in the
hypospadiac tissue as compared with the nonhypospadiac group. At the
concentration of 1 micromol/L, 17-EE significantly inhibited the proliferation of
the cells. ATF3 mRNA was elevated at 1-2 hours, while CTGF mRNA showed no
significant changes in 24 hours.
CONCLUSION: ATF3 and CTGF are two candidate genes involved in the etiology of
hypospadias. And estradiol may induce hypospadias by upregulating the expressions
of ATF3 and CTGF.

PMID: 20180416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 23;285(17):13201-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.058669. Epub
2010 Feb 18.

Activating transcription factor 3 activates p53 by preventing E6-associated
protein from binding to E6.

Wang H(1), Mo P, Ren S, Yan C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell Biology and Cancer Research, Albany Medical College, Albany,
New York 12208, USA.

Genomic integration of human papillomavirus (HPV) DNA accounts for more than 90% 
of cervical cancers. High-risk genital HPVs encode E6 proteins that can interact 
with a cellular ubiquitin ligase E6-associated protein (E6AP) and target the
tumor suppressor p53 for ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. Currently, how this
critical event is regulated is largely unknown. Here we report that activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a broad DNA damage sensor whose expression is
frequently downregulated in cervical cancer, interacted with E6 and prevented p53
from ubiquitination and degradation mediated by the viral protein. Consistent
with its role as a potent E6 antagonist, ATF3 expressed enforcedly in
HPV-positive SiHa cells activated p53, leading to expression of p53-target genes 
(e.g. p21 and PUMA), cell cycle arrest and apoptotic cell death. The leucine
zipper domain of ATF3 appears indispensable for these effects as an ATF3 mutant
lacking this domain failed to interact with E6 and activate p53 in the cervical
cancer cells. The prevention of p53 degradation was unlikely caused by binding of
ATF3 to the tumor suppressor, but rather was a consequence of disruption of the
E6-E6AP interaction by ATF3. These results indicate that ATF3 plays a key role in
a mechanism defending against HPV-induced carcinogenesis, and could serve as a
novel therapeutic target for HPV-positive cancers.

PMCID: PMC2857083
PMID: 20167600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Jul 1;87(1):119-26. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvq048. Epub 2010 Feb
12.

Gadd45beta is a novel mediator of cardiomyocyte apoptosis induced by
ischaemia/hypoxia.

Kim MY(1), Seo EJ, Lee DH, Kim EJ, Kim HS, Cho HY, Chung EY, Lee SH, Baik EJ,
Moon CH, Jung YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Ajou University, Suwon 443-749, 
Republic of Korea.

AIMS: Because apoptotic death plays a critical role in cardiomyocyte loss during 
ischaemic heart injury, a detailed understanding of the mechanisms involved is
likely to have a substantial impact on the optimization and development of
treatment strategies. The goal of this study was to assess gene profiling during 
ischaemia/hypoxia and to evaluate the functions of ischaemia/hypoxia-responsive
genes in in vivo and in vitro ischaemia/hypoxia-induced cardiomyocyte apoptosis
models.
METHODS AND RESULTS: DNA microarray analysis and real-time polymerase chain
reaction were performed on hearts obtained from an in vivo rat transient
ischaemia model and on neonatal rat cardiomyocytes from an in vitro hypoxia
model. Three genes, namely Ddit4, Gadd45beta and Atf3, were found to be
up-regulated in vivo and in vitro. Using loss-of-function and gain-of-function
techniques, the functions of these ischaemia/hypoxia-responsive genes were
evaluated. Ischaemia/hypoxia-induced cardiomyocyte apoptosis was remarkably
attenuated by the small interfering RNA-mediated down-regulation of Gadd45beta in
vivo and in vitro, whereas ectopic Gadd45beta expression significantly aggravated
hypoxia-induced apoptosis in vitro.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that Gadd45beta is a key player in
ischaemia/hypoxia-induced apoptotic cardiomyocyte death, and that strategies
based on its inhibition might be of benefit in the treatment of acute ischaemic
heart disease.

PMID: 20154065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Exp Neurol. 2010 Jun;223(2):516-22. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2010.01.019. Epub
2010 Feb 8.

The conditioning lesion effect on sympathetic neurite outgrowth is dependent on
gp130 cytokines.

Hyatt Sachs H(1), Rohrer H, Zigmond RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland OH, 44106-4975, USA.

Sympathetic neurons, like sensory neurons, increase neurite outgrowth after a
conditioning lesion. Studies in leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) knockout animals
showed that the conditioning lesion effect in sensory neurons is dependent in
part on this cytokine; however, similar studies on sympathetic neurons revealed
no such effect. Comparable studies with sensory neurons taken from mice lacking
the related cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) have yielded conflicting results. LIF
and IL-6 belong to a family of cytokines known as the gp130 family because they
act on receptors containing the subunit gp130. In sympathetic ganglia, axotomy
leads to increases in mRNA for four of these cytokines (LIF, IL-6, IL-11, and
oncostatin M). To test the role of this family of cytokines as a whole in the
conditioning lesion response in sympathetic neurons, mice in which gp130 was
selectively eliminated in noradrenergic neurons were studied. The postganglionic 
axons of the SCG were transected, and 7days later the ganglia were removed and
neurite outgrowth was measured in explant and dissociated cell cultures. In both 
systems, neurons from wild type animals showed enhanced growth after a
conditioning lesion. In contrast, no enhancement occurred in neurons from mutant 
animals. This lack of stimulation of outgrowth occurred despite an increase in
expression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in the mutant mice. These 
studies demonstrate that stimulation of enhanced growth of sympathetic neurons
after a conditioning lesion is dependent on gp130 cytokine signaling and is
blocked in the absence of signaling by these cytokines in spite of an increase in
ATF3.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2864361
PMID: 20144891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cell Mol Immunol. 2010 Mar;7(2):143-51. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2009.109. Epub 2010 Feb 
8.

Role of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in sublytic C5b-9-induced
glomerular mesangial cell apoptosis.

Jiang X(1), Zhang J, Xia M, Qiu W, Wang H, Zhao D, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, China.

Sublytic complement C5b-9 complexes can cause cell apoptosis, but the mechanism
of glomerular mesangial cell (GMC) apoptosis mediated by these complexes has not 
been well defined. The activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) gene is an
immediate early gene for the cell to cope with a variety of stress signals and
can promote apoptosis of some cells. In this study, ATF3 expression and cell
apoptosis in GMCs induced by sublytic C5b-9 were measured, and then the effects
of ATF3 gene over-expression or knockdown on GMC apoptosis induced by sublytic
C5b-9 were examined at a fixed time. The results showed that both ATF3 expression
and GMC apoptosis were markedly increased and ATF3 over-expression obviously
increased sublytic C5b-9-induced GMC apoptosis, whereas ATF3 gene silencing had a
significant opposite effect. Collectively, these findings indicate that
upregulation of ATF3 gene expression is involved in regulating GMC apoptosis
induced by sublytic C5b-9 complexes.

PMCID: PMC4001887
PMID: 20140008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. BMC Cancer. 2010 Feb 5;10:34. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-34.

Onconase responsive genes in human mesothelioma cells: implications for an RNA
damaging therapeutic agent.

Altomare DA(1), Rybak SM, Pei J, Maizel JV, Cheung M, Testa JR, Shogen K.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics & Signaling Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman
Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

BACKGROUND: Onconase represents a new class of RNA-damaging drugs.
Mechanistically, Onconase is thought to internalize, where it degrades
intracellular RNAs such as tRNA and double-stranded RNA, and thereby suppresses
protein synthesis. However, there may be additional or alternative mechanism(s)
of action.
METHODS: In this study, microarray analysis was used to compare gene expression
profiles in untreated human malignant mesothelioma (MM) cell lines and cells
exposed to 5 microg/ml Onconase for 24 h. A total of 155 genes were found to be
regulated by Onconase that were common to both epithelial and biphasic MM cell
lines. Some of these genes are known to significantly affect apoptosis (IL-24,
TNFAIP3), transcription (ATF3, DDIT3, MAFF, HDAC9, SNAPC1) or inflammation and
the immune response (IL-6, COX-2). RT-PCR analysis of selected up- or
down-regulated genes treated with varying doses and times of Onconase generally
confirmed the expression array findings in four MM cell lines.
RESULTS: Onconase treatment consistently resulted in up-regulation of IL-24,
previously shown to have tumor suppressive activity, as well as ATF3 and IL-6.
Induction of ATF3 and the pro-apoptotic factor IL-24 by Onconase was highest in
the two most responsive MM cell lines, as defined by DNA fragmentation analysis. 
In addition to apoptosis, gene ontology analysis indicated that pathways impacted
by Onconase include MAPK signaling, cytokine-cytokine-receptor interactions, and 
Jak-STAT signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide a broad picture of gene activity after
treatment with a drug that targets small non-coding RNAs and contribute to our
overall understanding of MM cell response to Onconase as a therapeutic strategy. 
The findings provide insights regarding mechanisms that may contribute to the
efficacy of this novel drug in clinical trials of MM patients who have failed
first line chemotherapy or radiation treatment.

PMCID: PMC2829496
PMID: 20137089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Apr;31(4):703-11. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq008. Epub 2010 Feb 
3.

The integrated stress response-associated signals modulates intestinal tumor cell
growth by NSAID-activated gene 1 (NAG-1/MIC-1/PTGF-beta).

Yang H(1), Park SH, Choi HJ, Moon Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Medical Research Institute,
Pusan National University School of Medicine, Yangsan 626-813, Korea.

Phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 alpha (eIF2alpha)
is a critical convergence point of the integrated stress response (ISR), which
supports eukaryotic cellular adaptation to diverse stressful conditions,
including the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress by global protein translational
arrest and induction of numerous stress-triggered cytoprotective genes. Challenge
with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) leads to ER perturbation that
may sensitize cancer cells to drug-induced apoptosis. Here, we examined the ER
stress signals in the context of NSAID exposure and the induction of the critical
tumor suppressor, NSAID-activated gene 1 (NAG-1), in the epithelial cancer cells.
Sulindac sulfide, the active sulindac metabolite, was shown to trigger the ISRs
via eIF2alpha kinase such as RNA-dependent protein kinase-related endoplasmic
reticulum kinase (PERK) and RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR). ER stress markers
such as glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) and
activating transcription factor (ATF)-3 were enhanced by sulindac sulfide in
colon cancer cells. In these cells, the PERK-activated ATF3-CHOP signaling
pathway mediated the gene expression of pro-apoptotic NAG-1- and NSAID-induced
apoptosis. In contrast, PKR protein was not involved in the signaling cascade for
the gene expression of CHOP-linked NAG-1. Instead, PKR mediated activation of
pro-survival extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) signaling
pathway, which was enhanced by NAG-1 suppression in response to cytotoxic
sulindac sulfide exposure. PKR-ERK1/2 activation may thus contribute to the
defensive cellular response to cytotoxic NSAIDs while drug-mediated ER stress
triggers the pro-apoptotic NAG-1 production in human colon cancer cells.

PMID: 20130018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mycotoxin Res. 2010 Feb;26(1):9-14. doi: 10.1007/s12550-009-0035-x. Epub 2010 Jan
12.

Induction of MAPK-dependent transcription factors by deoxynivalenol in human cell
lines.

Casteel M(1), Nielsen C, Didier A, Dietrich R, Märtlbauer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Sciences, Ludwig Maximilians-Universität München,
Schönleutnerstraße 8, 85764, Oberschleißheim, Germany,
m.casteel@mh.vetmed.uni-muenchen.de.

Contamination of cereals with the trichothecene deoxynivalenol (DON) is a global 
problem in agriculture. DON-related cytotoxicity results from inhibition of
translation preceded by a ribotoxic stress response, which is characterized by
phosphorylation of the mitogen-activated protein kinases and activation of
downstream transcription factors. In this study, we measured the expression of
AP-1 associated transcription factor mRNA levels in six human cell lines (Hep-G2,
A549, U937, A204, Jurkat, and CaCo-2) by using real-time RT-PCR. Previous work
suggested that transcription factors mRNA and protein levels are affected by DON 
in Hep-G2 cells. In this study, we found significant cell-specific differences in
mRNA levels for the transcription factors JUN, JUND, FOS, FOSL2, ATF3, and EGR1. 
After exposure to 1 µmol/l DON for 3 h, the induction of the transcription factor
JUN was highest in the Jurkat (342-fold) and Hep-G2 (84-fold) cell lines. JUND
expression was mainly affected in the immunocompetent cell-lines U937 (11-fold)
and Jurkat (12-fold), whereas significant FOSL2 induction (5-fold) was only found
in Jurkat cells. DON-induced expression of FOS was mainly observed in Hep-G2
(96-fold) and U937 cells (59-fold). In contrast, response of A549 cells to DON
was characterized by a distinct induction of ATF3 (44-fold) and EGR1 (92-fold).
Time- and concentration-dependent induction of the transcription factors by DON
was studied in detail for Hep-G2, A549, A204, and U937 cells. Considering the
chronic dietary exposure of humans, broader investigations on DON influence on
cell signaling pathways are required to understand the impact of this mycotoxin
on human health.

PMID: 23605236  [PubMed]


94. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Apr;31(4):719-28. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq016. Epub 2010 Jan 
28.

NSAID-activated gene-1 as a molecular target for capsaicin-induced apoptosis
through a novel molecular mechanism involving GSK3beta, C/EBPbeta and ATF3.

Lee SH(1), Krisanapun C, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Carcinogenesis, Department of Pathobiology,
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996,
USA.

Capsaicin, a natural product of the Capsicum species of red peppers, is known to 
induce apoptosis and suppress growth. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drug-activated gene-1 (NAG-1) is a cytokine associated with pro-apoptotic and
antitumorigenic property in colorectal and lung cancer. Our data demonstrate that
capsaicin leads to induction of apoptosis and up-regulates NAG-1 gene expression 
at the transcriptional level. Overexpression of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
beta (C/EBPbeta) caused a significant increase of basal and capsaicin-induced
NAG-1 promoter activity. We subsequently identified C/EBPbeta binding sites in
the NAG-1 promoter responsible for capsaicin-induced NAG-1 transactivation.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
confirmed binding of C/EBPbeta to the NAG-1 promoter. Capsaicin treatment
resulted in an increase of phosphorylated serine/threonine residues on C/EBPbeta,
and the immunoprecipitation study showed that capsaicin enhanced binding of
C/EBPbeta with glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) and activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3). The phosphorylation and interaction of C/EBPbeta
with GSK3beta and ATF3 are decreased by the inhibition of the GSK3beta and
Protein Kinase C pathways. Knockdown of C/EBPbeta, GSK3beta or ATF3 ameliorates
NAG-1 expression induced by capsaicin treatment. These data indicate that
C/EBPbeta phosphorylation through GSK3beta may mediate capsaicin-induced
expression of NAG-1 and apoptosis through cooperation with ATF3 in human
colorectal cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2847092
PMID: 20110283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mult Scler. 2010 Mar;16(3):303-16. doi: 10.1177/1352458509357063. Epub 2010 Jan
19.

Alterations in neuronal gene expression profiles in response to experimental
demyelination and axonal transection.

Lovas G(1), Nielsen JA, Johnson KR, Hudson LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Semmelweis University, Department of Neurology
Budapest, Balassa str. 6, Budapest, H-1083 Hungary. lovasgab@hotmail.com

The main pathological features of multiple sclerosis, demyelination and axonal
transection, are considered to cause reversible and irreversible neurological
deficits, respectively. This study aimed to separately analyze the effects of
these pathological hallmarks on neuronal gene expression in experimental
paradigms. The pontocerebellar pathway was targeted with either
lysolecithin-induced chemical demyelination or a complete pathway transection
(axonal transection) in rats. Transcriptional changes in the pontocerebellar
neurons were investigated with microarrays at days 4, 10 and 37
post-intervention, which was confirmed by immunohistochemistry on protein level. 
A common as well as unique set of injury-response genes was identified. The
increased expression of activating transcription factor 3 (Atf3) and
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (Trh) in both injury paradigms was validated by
immunohistochemistry. The expression of Atf3 in a patient with Marburg's variant 
of multiple sclerosis was also detected, also confirming the activation of the
Atf3 pathway in a human disease sample. It was concluded that this experimental
approach may be useful for the identification of pathways that could be targeted 
for remyelinative or neuroprotective drug development.

PMID: 20086029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Jun;51(6):3003-18. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-4663.
Epub 2010 Jan 13.

Retinal cell responses to elevated intraocular pressure: a gene array comparison 
between the whole retina and retinal ganglion cell layer.

Guo Y(1), Cepurna WO, Dyck JA, Doser TA, Johnson EC, Morrison JC.

Author information: 
(1)Kenneth C Swan Ocular Neurobiology Laboratory, Casey Eye Institute, Oregon
Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine and compare gene expression patterns in the whole retina
and retinal ganglion cell layer (RGCL) in a rodent glaucoma model.
METHODS: IOP was unilaterally elevated in Brown Norway rats (N = 26) by injection
of hypertonic saline and monitored for 5 weeks. A cDNA microarray was used on
whole retinas from one group of eyes with extensive optic nerve injury and on
RGCL isolated by laser capture microdissection (LCM) from another group with
comparable injury, to determine the significantly up- or downregulated genes and 
gene categories in both groups. Expression changes of selected genes were
examined by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qPCR) to verify microarray
results.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis of the whole retina identified 632 genes with
significantly changed expression (335 up, 297 down), associated with 9
upregulated and 3 downregulated biological processes. In contrast, the RGCL
microarray yielded 3726 genes with significantly changed expression (2003 up,
1723 down), including 60% of those found in whole retina. Thirteen distinct
upregulated biological processes were identified in the RGCL, dominated by
protein synthesis. Among 11 downregulated processes, axon extension and dendrite 
morphogenesis and generation of precursor metabolism and energy were uniquely
identified in the RGCL. qPCR confirmed significant changes in 6 selected messages
in whole retina and 11 in RGCL. Increased Atf3, the most upregulated gene in the 
RGCL, was confirmed by immunohistochemistry of RGCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Isolation of RGCL by LCM allows a more refined detection of gene
response to elevated pressure and improves the potential of determining cellular 
mechanisms in RGCs and their supporting cells that could be targets for enhancing
RGC survival.

PMCID: PMC2891461
PMID: 20071680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Med. 2010 Mar;16(3-4):92-101. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2009.00149. Epub 2010 Jan
6.

Attenuation of the transforming growth factor beta-signaling pathway in chronic
venous ulcers.

Pastar I(1), Stojadinovic O, Krzyzanowska A, Barrientos S, Stuelten C, Zimmerman 
K, Blumenberg M, Brem H, Tomic-Canic M.

Author information: 
(1)Wound Healing and Regenerative Medicine Research Program, Department of
Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, Florida 33136, United States of America.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) is important in inflammation,
angiogenesis, reepithelialization and connective tissue regeneration during wound
healing. We analyzed components of TGFbeta signaling pathway in biopsies from 10 
patients with nonhealing venous ulcers (VUs). Using comparative genomics of
transcriptional profiles of VUs and TGFbeta-treated keratinocytes, we found
deregulation of TGFbeta target genes in VUs. Using quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction (qPCR) and immunohistochemical analysis, we found suppression of TGFbeta
RI, TGFbeta RII and TGFbeta RIII, and complete absence of phosphorylated Smad2
(pSmad2) in VU epidermis. In contrast, pSmad2 was induced in the cells of the
migrating epithelial tongue of acute wounds. TGFbeta-inducible transcription
factors (GADD45beta , ATF3 and ZFP36L1) were suppressed in VUs. Likewise, genes
suppressed by TGFbeta (FABP5, CSTA and S100A8) were induced in nonhealing VUs. An
inhibitor of Smad signaling, Smad7 was also downregulated in VUs. We conclude
that TGFbeta signaling is functionally blocked in VUs by downregulation of
TGFbeta receptors and attenuation of Smad signaling resulting in deregulation of 
TGFbeta target genes and consequent hyperproliferation. These data suggest that
application of exogenous TGFbeta may not be a beneficial treatment for VUs.

PMCID: PMC2804290
PMID: 20069132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 15;70(2):609-20. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2327. Epub
2010 Jan 12.

Apoptotic sensitivity of colon cancer cells to histone deacetylase inhibitors is 
mediated by an Sp1/Sp3-activated transcriptional program involving
immediate-early gene induction.

Wilson AJ(1), Chueh AC, Tögel L, Corner GA, Ahmed N, Goel S, Byun DS, Nasser S,
Houston MA, Jhawer M, Smartt HJ, Murray LB, Nicholas C, Heerdt BG, Arango D,
Augenlicht LH, Mariadason JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Montefiore Medical Center, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) induce growth arrest and apoptosis in
colon cancer cells and are being considered for colon cancer therapy. The
underlying mechanism of action of these effects is poorly defined with both
transcription-dependent and -independent mechanisms implicated. We screened a
panel of 30 colon cancer cell lines for sensitivity to HDACi-induced apoptosis
and correlated the differences with gene expression patterns induced by HDACi in 
the five most sensitive and resistant lines. A robust and reproducible
transcriptional response involving coordinate induction of multiple
immediate-early (fos, jun, egr1, egr3, atf3, arc, nr4a1) and stress response
genes (Ndrg4, Mt1B, Mt1E, Mt1F, Mt1H) was selectively induced in HDACi sensitive 
cells. Notably, a significant percentage of these genes were basally repressed in
colon tumors. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the promoter regions of the
HDACi-induced genes were enriched for KLF4/Sp1/Sp3 transcription factor binding
sites. Altering KLF4 levels failed to modulate apoptosis or transcriptional
responses to HDACi treatment. In contrast, HDACi preferentially stimulated the
activity of Spl/Sp3 and blocking their action attenuated both the transcriptional
and apoptotic responses to HDACi treatment. Our findings link HDACi-induced
apoptosis to activation of a Spl/Sp3-mediated response that involves derepression
of a transcriptional network basally repressed in colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC2939837
PMID: 20068171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Br J Cancer. 2010 Feb 2;102(3):561-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605491. Epub 2010 Jan 
5.

Circulating tumour cells demonstrate an altered response to hypoxia and an
aggressive phenotype.

Ameri K(1), Luong R, Zhang H, Powell AA, Montgomery KD, Espinosa I, Bouley DM,
Harris AL, Jeffrey SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305-5494, USA. kurosh.ameri@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Tumours contain hypoxic regions that select for an aggressive cell
phenotype; tumour hypoxia induces metastasis-associated genes. Treatment
refractory patients with metastatic cancer show increased numbers of circulating 
tumour cells (CTCs), which are also associated with disease progression. The aim 
of this study was to examine the as yet unknown relationship between hypoxia and 
CTCs.
METHODS: We generated human MDA-MB-231 orthotopic xenografts and, using a new
technology, isolated viable human CTCs from murine blood. The CTCs and parental
MDA-MB-231 cells were incubated at 21 and 0.2% (hypoxia) oxygen, respectively.
Colony formation was assayed and levels of hypoxia- and anoxia-inducible factors 
were measured. Xenografts generated from CTCs and parental cells were compared.
RESULTS: MDA-MB-231 xenografts used to generate CTCs were hypoxic, expressing
hypoxia factors: hypoxia-inducible factor1 alpha (HIF1alpha) and glucose
transporter protein type 1 (GLUT1), and anoxia-induced factors: activating
transcription factor 3 and 4 (ATF3 and ATF4). Parental MDA-MB-231 cells induced
ATF3 in hypoxia, whereas CTCs expressed it constitutively. Asparagine synthetase 
(ASNS) expression was also higher in CTCs. Hypoxia induced ATF4 and the HIF1alpha
target gene apelin in CTCs, but not in parental cells. Hypoxia induced lower
levels of carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX), GLUT1 and BCL2/adenovirus E1B 19-KD
protein-interacting protein 3 (BNIP3) proteins in CTCs than in parental cells,
supporting an altered hypoxia response. In chronic hypoxia, CTCs demonstrated
greater colony formation than parental cells. Xenografts generated from CTCs were
larger and heavier, and metastasised faster than MDA-MB-231 xenografts.
CONCLUSION: CTCs show an altered hypoxia response and an enhanced aggressive
phenotype in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2805847
PMID: 20051957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Exp Ther Med. 2010 Jan;1(1):181-186. Epub 2010 Jan 1.

In vitro anti-proliferative activity of alcoholic stem extract of Coscinium
fenestratum in human colorectal cancer cells.

Rojsanga P(1), Sukhthankar M, Krisanapun C, Gritsanapan W, Lawson DB, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA ; ; Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of
Pharmacy, Mahidol University, Bangkok;

Coscinium fenestratum (Gaertn.) Colebr. is traditionally used for the treatment
of cancer, arthritis and diabetes mellitus. The purpose of this study was to
determine the molecular mechanisms by which this plant shows beneficial effects. 
An 80% ethanolic extract of C. fenestratum (80ET) was separated by its polarity
into dichloromethane (DCM) and aqueous fractions (WF), and the anti-proliferative
effects of 80ET, DCM and WF were investigated. Berberine, one of the major
components of C. fenestratum, was used as a control. The 80ET, DCM, WF and
berberine showed anti-proliferative activity as assessed by cell growth assay.
Subsequently, the pro-apoptotic proteins NAG-1 and ATF3 were increased and the
cell cycle protein cyclin D1 was decreased by the extract and its fractions.
Interestingly, only the DCM fraction exhibited the induction of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) binding activity, which represents a
pro-apoptotic activity in colorectal cancer cells. The overall results of this
study indicate that the extract from this plant has anti-proliferative activity
through the activation of pro-apoptotic proteins and PPAR<U+03B3>, and may have
potential as a preventive regimen in the treatment of cancer.

PMCID: PMC3490397
PMID: 23136612  [PubMed]


101. FEBS Lett. 2010 Feb 19;584(4):745-52. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.12.028. Epub
2009 Dec 22.

Mechanical stimulation suppresses phosphorylation of eIF2alpha and PERK-mediated 
responses to stress to the endoplasmic reticulum.

Hirasawa H(1), Jiang C, Zhang P, Yang FC, Yokota H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Cellular perturbations such as stress to the endoplasmic reticulum induce an
integrated stress response, which activates phosphorylation of eIF2alpha and
leads to alleviation of cellular injury or apoptosis. This study investigated the
role of mechanical stimulation in the regulation of eIF2alpha and cell death.
Mechanical stimulation was applied to mouse ulnae, MC3T3 cells, and mesenchymal
stem cells. The results demonstrate that mechanical stimulation reduces
phosphorylation of eIF2alpha through inactivation of Perk. Furthermore, flow
pre-treatment reduces thapsigargin-induced cell mortality through suppression of 
phosphorylation of Perk. However, H(2)O(2)-driven cell mortality, which is not
mediated by Perk, is not suppressed by mechanical stimulation. Taken together,
our observations suggest a pro-survival role of mechanical stimulation in
Perk-mediated stress responses.

Copyright 2009 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20034494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2010 Apr;298(4):L483-91. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00106.2009. Epub 2009 Dec 18.

Gene expression profile in flow-associated pulmonary arterial hypertension with
neointimal lesions.

van Albada ME(1), Bartelds B, Wijnberg H, Mohaupt S, Dickinson MG, Schoemaker RG,
Kooi K, Gerbens F, Berger RM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Congenital Heart Disease, Beatrix Children's Hospital, Groningen,
The Netherlands.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a pulmonary angioproliferative disease
with high morbidity and mortality, characterized by a typical pattern of
pulmonary vascular remodeling including neointimal lesions. In congenital heart
disease, increased pulmonary blood flow has appeared to be a key mediator in the 
development of these characteristic lesions, but the molecular mechanisms
underlying the pulmonary vascular lesions are largely unknown. We employed a rat 
model of flow-associated PAH, which induced specific pulmonary neointimal
lesions. We identified gene expression profiles in rats specifically related to
the addition of increased pulmonary blood flow to monocrotaline and the
associated occurrence of neointimal lesions. Increased pulmonary blood flow
induced the expression of the transcription factors activating transcription
factor-3 (ATF3) and early growth response factor-1 (EGR-1), for which presence
was confirmed in neointimal lesions. Monocrotaline alone induced increased
numbers of activated mast cells and their products. We further identified
molecular pathways that may be involved in treatment with the prostacyclin analog
iloprost, a vasoactive compound with clinically beneficial effects in patients
with PAH, which were similar to pathways described in samples from patient
studies. These pathways, associated with the development of angioproliferative
lesions as well as with the response to therapy in PAH, may provide new
therapeutic targets.

PMID: 20023177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Development. 2010 Jan;137(1):141-50. doi: 10.1242/dev.037861.

Interaction between Drosophila bZIP proteins Atf3 and Jun prevents replacement of
epithelial cells during metamorphosis.

Sekyrova P(1), Bohmann D, Jindra M, Uhlirova M.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Center, Czech Academy of Sciences and Department of Molecular Biology,
University of South Bohemia, Ceske Budejovice 37005, Czech Republic.

Epithelial sheet spreading and fusion underlie important developmental processes.
Well-characterized examples of such epithelial morphogenetic events have been
provided by studies in Drosophila, and include embryonic dorsal closure,
formation of the adult thorax and wound healing. All of these processes require
the basic region-leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors Jun and Fos. Much
less is known about morphogenesis of the fly abdomen, which involves replacement 
of larval epidermal cells (LECs) with adult histoblasts that divide, migrate and 
finally fuse to form the adult epidermis during metamorphosis. Here, we implicate
Drosophila Activating transcription factor 3 (Atf3), the single ortholog of human
ATF3 and JDP2 bZIP proteins, in abdominal morphogenesis. During the process of
the epithelial cell replacement, transcription of the atf3 gene declines. When
this downregulation is experimentally prevented, the affected LECs accumulate
cell-adhesion proteins and their extrusion and replacement with histoblasts are
blocked. The abnormally adhering LECs consequently obstruct the closure of the
adult abdominal epithelium. This closure defect can be either mimicked and
further enhanced by knockdown of the small GTPase Rho1 or, conversely, alleviated
by stimulating ecdysone steroid hormone signaling. Both Rho and ecdysone pathways
have been previously identified as effectors of the LEC replacement. To elicit
the gain-of-function effect, Atf3 specifically requires its binding partner Jun. 
Our data thus identify Atf3 as a new functional partner of Drosophila Jun during 
development.

PMCID: PMC2796931
PMID: 20023169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 26;285(9):6091-100. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.014092. Epub 2009
Dec 18.

Regulation of endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced cell death by ATF4 in
neuroectodermal tumor cells.

Armstrong JL(1), Flockhart R, Veal GJ, Lovat PE, Redfern CP.

Author information: 
(1)Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United
Kingdom. J.L.Armstrong@ncl.ac.uk

The neuroectodermal tumors neuroblastoma and melanoma represent biologically
aggressive and chemoresistant cancers. The chemotherapeutic agents fenretinide
and bortezomib induce apoptosis through endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in
these tumor types. The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that the
early events of ER stress signaling and response pathways induced by fenretinide 
and bortezomib are mediated by the eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha
(eIF2alpha)-ATF4 signaling pathway. Treatment of neuroblastoma and melanoma cell 
lines with fenretinide, bortezomib, or thapsigargin resulted in induction of
eIF2alpha signaling, characterized by increased expression of phosphorylated
eIF2alpha, ATF4, ATF3, and GADD34. These events correlated with induction of the 
pro-apoptotic protein Noxa. The cytotoxic response, characterized by
up-regulation of Noxa and cell death, was dependent on ATF4, but not the
ER-related pro-death signaling pathways involving GADD153 or IRE1. Although
PERK-dependent phosphorylation of eIF2alpha enhanced ATF4 protein levels during
ER stress, cell death in response to fenretinide, bortezomib, or thapsigargin was
not abrogated by inhibition of eIF2alpha phosphorylation through PERK knockdown
or overexpression of wild-type eIF2alpha. Furthermore, ATF4 induction in response
to ER stress was dependent primarily on transcriptional activation, which
occurred in a PERK- and phosphorylated eIF2alpha-independent manner. These
results demonstrate that ATF4 mediates ER stress-induced cell death of
neuroectodermal tumor cells in response to fenretinide or bortezomib.
Understanding the complex regulation of cell death pathways in response to ER
stress-inducing drugs has the potential to reveal novel therapeutic targets, thus
allowing the development of improved treatment strategies to overcome
chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC2825403
PMID: 20022965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Immunol. 2010 Jan 15;184(2):1041-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902579. Epub 2009
Dec 16.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 inhibits expression of IL-6 through activating 
transcription factor 3.

Takii R(1), Inouye S, Fujimoto M, Nakamura T, Shinkawa T, Prakasam R, Tan K,
Hayashida N, Ichikawa H, Hai T, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Ube, Japan.

The febrile response is a complex physiological reaction to disease, including a 
cytokine-mediated increase in body temperature and the activation of inflammatory
systems. Fever has beneficial roles in terms of disease prognosis, partly by
suppressing the expression of inflammatory cytokines. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlining the fever-mediated suppression of inflammatory gene
expression have not been clarified. In this study, we showed that heat shock
suppresses LPS-induced expression of IL-6, a major pyrogenic cytokine, in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts and macrophages. Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1)
activated by heat shock induced the expression of activating transcription factor
(ATF) 3, a negative regulator of IL-6, and ATF3 was necessary for heat-mediated
suppression of IL-6, indicating a fever-mediated feedback loop consisting of HSF1
and ATF3. A comprehensive analysis of inflammatory gene expression revealed that 
heat pretreatment suppresses LPS-induced expression of most genes (86%), in part 
(67%) via ATF3. When HSF1-null and ATF3-null mice were injected with LPS, they
expressed much higher levels of IL-6 than wild-type mice, resulting in an
exaggerated febrile response. These results demonstrate a novel inhibitory
pathway for inflammatory cytokines.

PMID: 20018623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Int J Microbiol. 2009;2009:753278. doi: 10.1155/2009/753278. Epub 2009 Feb 3.

Epithelial Cell Gene Expression Induced by Intracellular Staphylococcus aureus.

Li X(1), Fusco WG, Seo KS, Bayles KW, Mosley EE, McGuire MA, Bohach GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of 
Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844, USA.

HEp-2 cell monolayers were cocultured with intracellular Staphylococcus aureus,
and changes in gene expression were profiled using DNA microarrays. Intracellular
S. aureus affected genes involved in cellular stress responses, signal
transduction, inflammation, apoptosis, fibrosis, and cholesterol biosynthesis.
Transcription of stress response and signal transduction-related genes including 
atf3, sgk, map2k1, map2k3, arhb, and arhe was increased. In addition, elevated
transcription of proinflammatory genes was observed for tnfa, il1b, il6, il8,
cxcl1, ccl20, cox2, and pai1. Genes involved in proapoptosis and fibrosis were
also affected at transcriptional level by intracellular S. aureus. Notably,
intracellular S. aureus induced strong transcriptional down-regulation of several
cholesterol biosynthesis genes. These results suggest that epithelial cells
respond to intracellular S. aureus by inducing genes affecting immunity and in
repairing damage caused by the organism, and are consistent with the possibility 
that the organism exploits an intracellular environment to subvert host immunity 
and promote colonization.

PMCID: PMC2775199
PMID: 20016671  [PubMed]


107. Exp Dermatol. 2010 Aug;19(8):e310-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2009.01008.x.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) expression is increased in erythema
multiforme and is regulated by IFN-gamma in human keratinocytes.

Pollack BP, Sapkota B, Haun PL.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) expression is increased in erythema
multiforme and is regulated by IFN-gamma in human keratinocytes. Experimental
Dermatology 2010; 19: e310-e313. Abstract: Activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) is a member of the ATF/cyclic AMP responsive element-binding protein
(CREB) family of transcription factors and is involved in the regulation of
immune responses, apoptosis, DNA repair and oncogenesis. The epidermal expression
of ATF3 in the setting of cutaneous inflammation has not been well characterized.
To examine the expression of ATF3 in the setting of inflammatory skin disease,
ATF3 protein expression was analysed by immunohistochemistry (IHC). We found
diffuse epidermal ATF3 protein expression in skin biopsies of erythema multiforme
(EM). Given the role of interferon (IFN)-gamma in erythema multiforme, we sought 
to examine the impact of IFN-gamma on ATF3 expression in human keratinocytes.
IFN-gamma induced ATF3 mRNA and protein in primary human keratinocytes and HaCaT 
cells. Thus, epidermal ATF3 expression can be increased in the setting of
inflammatory skin diseases and is regulated by IFN-gamma in human keratinocytes.

PMID: 20002170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Int J Cancer. 2010 May 15;126(10):2268-81. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25102.

Ras inhibits endoplasmic reticulum stress in human cancer cells with amplified
Myc.

Yaari-Stark S(1), Shaked M, Nevo-Caspi Y, Jacob-Hircsh J, Shamir R, Rechavi G,
Kloog Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, The George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences,
Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.

In neuroblastoma LAN-1 cells harboring an amplified MycN gene, disruption of
cooperation between Ras and MycN proteins by the Ras inhibitor
farnesylthiosalicylic acid (FTS, Salirasib) reportedly arrests cell growth. Our
aim was to establish whether this is a general phenomenon. We examined the
effects of FTS on gene-expression profiles, growth and death of NCIH929 myeloma
cells and K562 leukemia cells, which-like LAN-1 cells-exhibit Myc gene
amplification and harbor active Ras. Under specified conditions, FTS reduced Ras 
and Myc and induced cell growth arrest and death in all Myc-amplified cell lines 
but not in SHEP, a neuroblastoma cell line without Myc gene amplification.
Gene-expression analysis revealed a common pattern of FTS-induced endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, known as the unfolded protein response (UPR), in
Myc-amplified cells, but not in SHEP. Thus, Ras negatively regulates ER stress in
cells with amplified Myc. ER stress was also inducible by dominant-negative
(DN)-Ras or shRNA to Ras isoforms, all of which induced an increase in BIP (the
master regulator of ER stress) and its downstream targets Nrf2 and eIF2alpha,
both regulated by active p-PERK. FTS also induced an increase in p-PERK, while
small interfering RNA to PERK reduced Nrf2 and ATF4 and rescued cells from
FTS-induced death. BIP and its downstream targets were also increased by
inhibitors of MAPK p38 and MEK. Ras, acting through MAPK p38 and MEK, negatively 
regulates the ER stress cascades BIP/PERK/Nrf2 and eIF2alpha/ATF4/ATF3. These
findings can explain the Ras-dependent protection of Myc-amplified cells from ER 
stress-associated death.

PMID: 19998334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2010 Apr;30(4):849-56. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2009.249.
Epub 2009 Dec 9.

Overexpression of heat shock protein 27 reduces cortical damage after cerebral
ischemia.

van der Weerd L(1), Tariq Akbar M, Aron Badin R, Valentim LM, Thomas DL, Wells
DJ, Latchman DS, Gadian DG, Lythgoe MF, de Belleroche JS.

Author information: 
(1)RCS Unit of Biophysics, Institute of Child Health, University College London, 
London, UK.

Heat shock protein 27 (HSP27) has a major role in mediating survival responses to
a range of central nervous system insults, functioning as a protein chaperone, an
antioxidant, and through inhibition of cell death pathways. We have used
transgenic mice overexpressing HSP27 (HSP27tg) to examine the role of HSP27 in
cerebral ischemia, using model of permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO). Infarct size was evaluated using multislice T(2)-weighted anatomical
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) after 24 h. A significant reduction of 30% in
infarct size was detected in HSP27tg animals compared with wild-type (WT)
littermates. To gain some insight into the mechanisms contributing to cell death 
and its attenuation by HSP27, we monitored the effect of induction of c-jun and
ATF3 on tissue survival in MCAO and their effects on the expression of endogenous
mouse HSP25 and HSP70. It is important that, the c-jun induction seen at 4 h
tended to be localized to regions that were salvageable in HSP27tg mice but
became infarcted in WT animals. Our results provide support for the powerful
neuroprotective effects of HSP27 in cerebral ischemia.

PMCID: PMC2949174
PMID: 19997117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Physiol Genomics. 2010 Mar 3;41(1):21-32. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00108.2009. Epub 2009 Dec 8.

Effects of reduced frequency of milk removal on gene expression in the bovine
mammary gland.

Littlejohn MD(1), Walker CG, Ward HE, Lehnert KB, Snell RG, Verkerk GA, Spelman
RJ, Clark DA, Davis SR.

Author information: 
(1)DairyNZ Limited, Hamilton, New Zealand. matt.littlejohn@dairynz.co.nz

Regulation of milk synthesis and secretion is controlled mostly through local
(intramammary) mechanisms. To gain insight into the molecular pathways comprising
this response, an analysis of mammary gene expression was conducted in 12
lactating cows shifted from twice daily to once daily milking. Tissues were
sampled by biopsy from adjacent mammary quarters of these animals during the two 
milking frequencies, allowing changes in gene expression to be assessed within
each animal. Using bovine-specific, oligonucleotide arrays representing 21,495
unique transcripts, a range of differentially expressed genes were found as a
result of less frequent milk removal, constituting transcripts and pathways
related to apoptotic signaling (NF-kappaB, JUN, ATF3, IGFBP5, TNFSF12A)
mechanical stress and epithelial tight junction synthesis (CYR61, CTGF, THBS1,
CLDN4, CLDN8), and downregulated milk synthesis (LALBA, B4GALT1, UGP2, CSN2,
GPAM, LPL). Quantitative real-time PCR was used to assess the expression of 13
genes in the study, and all 13 of these were correlated (P < 0.05) with values
derived from array analysis. It can be concluded that the physiological changes
that occur in the bovine mammary gland as a result of reduced milk removal
frequency likely comprise the earliest stages of the involution response and that
mechano-signal transduction cascades associated with udder distension may play a 
role in triggering these events.

PMID: 19996161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Dec 22;106(51):21978-83. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0911684106. Epub 2009 Dec 3.

Elevated cyclic AMP and PDE4 inhibition induce chemokine expression in human
monocyte-derived macrophages.

Hertz AL(1), Bender AT, Smith KC, Gilchrist M, Amieux PS, Aderem A, Beavo JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, 
WA 98195, USA.

Macrophages are central mediators of the innate immune system that can be
differentiated from monocytes upon exposure to cytokines. While increased cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels are known to inhibit many
lipopolysaccharide-elicited macrophage inflammatory responses, the effects of
elevated cAMP on monocyte/macrophage differentiation are not as well understood. 
We show here that during differentiation, cAMP agonists can cause a large
increase in the mRNA and protein levels of several of the pro-inflammatory CXCL
and CCL chemokines. The cAMP mediator-exchange protein activated by cAMP (Epac)
contributes substantially to the increase in these chemokines. These chemokines
are known to play an important role in the regulation of immune responses,
particularly regarding the pathogenesis of asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disorder. We also found that a selective cAMP-degrading
phosphodiesterase (PDE) 4 inhibitor can potentiate the chemokine expression
elicited by low-dose forskolin or Prostaglandin E2 (PGE(2)). These data suggest
that chemokine receptor antagonists administered in conjunction with a PDE4
inhibitor may improve both the efficacy and safety of PDE4-inhibitor therapy for 
chronic inflammatory disorders.

PMCID: PMC2799834
PMID: 19959669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Pain. 2010 Jan;148(1):148-57. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2009.10.032. Epub 2009 Nov 27.

Limited BDNF contributes to the failure of injury to skin afferents to produce a 
neuropathic pain condition.

Zhou LJ(1), Ren WJ, Zhong Y, Yang T, Wei XH, Xin WJ, Liu CC, Zhou LH, Li YY, Liu 
XG.

Author information: 
(1)Pain Research Center and Department of Physiology, Zhongshan Medicine School
of Sun Yat-Sen University, 510089 Guangzhou, China.

Although a large body of evidence has shown that peripheral nerve injury usually 
induces neuropathic pain, there are also clinical studies demonstrating that
injury of the sural nerve, which almost only innervates skin, fails to do so. The
underlying mechanism, however, is largely unknown. In the present work, we found 
that the transection of either the gastrocnemius-soleus (GS) nerve innervating
skeletal muscle or tibial nerve supplying both muscle and skin, but not of the
sural nerve produced a lasting mechanical allodynia and thermal hyperalgesia in
adult rats. High-frequency stimulation (HFS) or injury of either the tibial nerve
or the GS nerve induced late-phase long-term potentiation (L-LTP) of
C-fiber-evoked field potentials in spinal dorsal horn, while HFS or injury of the
sural nerve only induced early-phase LTP (E-LTP). Furthermore, HFS of the tibial 
nerve induced L-LTP of C-fiber responses evoked by the stimulation of the sural
nerve and the heterotopic L-LTP was completely prevented by spinal application of
TrkB-Fc (a BDNF scavenger). Spinal application of low dose BDNF (10pg/ml) enabled
HFS of the sural nerve to produce homotopic L-LTP. Finally, we found that injury 
of the GS nerve but not that of the sural nerve up-regulated BDNF in DRG neurons,
and that the up-regulation of BDNF occurred not only in injured neurons but also 
in many uninjured ones. Therefore, the sural nerve injury failing to produce
neuropathic pain may be due to the nerve containing insufficient BDNF under both 
physiological and pathological conditions.

Copyright 2009 International Association for the Study of Pain. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19945222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jan 1;391(1):634-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.111. Epub 2009 Nov 22.

cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) positively regulates mouse
adiponectin gene expression in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Kim HB(1), Kim WH, Han KL, Park JH, Lee J, Yeo J, Jung MH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Korean Medicine, Pusan National University, Pusan National
University School, #30 Beomeo-ri, Mulguem-eup, Yangsan-Si, Gyeongnam 609-735,
South Korea.

Adiponectin is expressed in adipose tissue by adipogenic transcription factors
including PPARgamma, C/EBPalpha, and ADD1/SREBP1c. Because cAMP-response element 
binding protein (CREB) is also a central transcriptional activator of adipocyte
differentiation, we evaluated CREB to determine if it stimulates adiponectin gene
expression. To accomplish this, we evaluated the effects of activated CREB on the
promoter activity of the mouse adiponectin gene, and identified the cAMP-response
element (CRE) in the promoter. The constitutively active form of CREB increased
the promoter activity of the mouse adiponectin gene. In addition, transfection
studies using 5' serial deleted promoters revealed the presence of a putative CRE
located between the -1250 and -1000bp region. Furthermore, an electrophoresis
mobility shift assay (EMSA) and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis
demonstrated that CREB bound to the region between -1022 and -995 in the
adiponectin promoter. Insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1), which activate CREB,
increased the adiponectin promoter activity. However, this stimulation was
prevented by the dominant negative form of CREB (ACREB) and pretreatment with
PD098059, indicating that IGF-1 stimulate adiponectin expression through CREB
phosphorylation via the ERK pathway. Importantly, the transactivation of
adiponectin expression by CREB was inhibited by ATF3. Coimmunoprecipitation and
GST pull-down assay revealed that ATF3 bound to CREB and prevented CREB
phosphorylation induced during differentiation of 3T3-L1 adipocytes.
Collectively, these findings demonstrate that CREB is a positive regulator of
mouse adiponectin gene expression in adipocytes, which play an important role in 
the regulation of adiponectin expression in response to growth factor.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19932681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 12;4(11):e7820. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007820.

Dramatic co-activation of WWOX/WOX1 with CREB and NF-kappaB in delayed loss of
small dorsal root ganglion neurons upon sciatic nerve transection in rats.

Li MY(1), Lai FJ, Hsu LJ, Lo CP, Cheng CL, Lin SR, Lee MH, Chang JY, Subhan D,
Tsai MS, Sze CI, Pugazhenthi S, Chang NS, Chen ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology & Anatomy, National Cheng Kung University Medical
College, Tainan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Tumor suppressor WOX1 (also named WWOX or FOR) is known to
participate in neuronal apoptosis in vivo. Here, we investigated the functional
role of WOX1 and transcription factors in the delayed loss of axotomized neurons 
in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) in rats.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Sciatic nerve transection in rats rapidly induced
JNK1 activation and upregulation of mRNA and protein expression of WOX1 in the
injured DRG neurons in 30 min. Accumulation of p-WOX1, p-JNK1, p-CREB, p-c-Jun,
NF-kappaB and ATF3 in the nuclei of injured neurons took place within hours or
the first week of injury. At the second month, dramatic nuclear accumulation of
WOX1 with CREB (>65% neurons) and NF-kappaB (40-65%) occurred essentially in
small DRG neurons, followed by apoptosis at later months. WOX1 physically
interacted with CREB most strongly in the nuclei as determined by FRET analysis. 
Immunoelectron microscopy revealed the complex formation of p-WOX1 with p-CREB
and p-c-Jun in vivo. WOX1 blocked the prosurvival CREB-, CRE-, and AP-1-mediated 
promoter activation in vitro. In contrast, WOX1 enhanced promoter activation
governed by c-Jun, Elk-1 and NF-kappaB. WOX1 directly activated
NF-kappaB-regulated promoter via its WW domains. Smad4 and p53 were not involved 
in the delayed loss of small DRG neurons.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Rapid activation of JNK1 and WOX1 during the acute
phase of injury is critical in determining neuronal survival or death, as both
proteins functionally antagonize. In the chronic phase, concurrent activation of 
WOX1, CREB, and NF-kappaB occurs in small neurons just prior to apoptosis. Likely
in vivo interactions are: 1) WOX1 inhibits the neuroprotective CREB, which leads 
to eventual neuronal death, and 2) WOX1 enhances NF-kappaB promoter activation
(which turns to be proapoptotic). Evidently, WOX1 is the potential target for
drug intervention in mitigating symptoms associated with neuronal injury.

PMCID: PMC2771921
PMID: 19918364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Acta Histochem Cytochem. 2009 Oct 30;42(5):143-9. doi: 10.1267/ahc.09017. Epub
2009 Sep 15.

Activation of satellite glial cells in rat trigeminal ganglion after upper molar 
extraction.

Gunjigake KK(1), Goto T, Nakao K, Kobayashi S, Yamaguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Orofacial Functions and Orthodontics, Kyushu Dental College,
Kitakyushu, 803-8580, Japan.

The neurons in the trigeminal ganglion (TG) are surrounded by satellite glial
cells (SGCs), which passively support the function of the neurons, but little is 
known about the interactions between SGCs and TG neurons after peripheral nerve
injury. To examine the effect of nerve injury on SGCs, we investigated the
activation of SGCs after neuronal damage due to the extraction of the upper
molars in rats. Three, 7, and 10 days after extraction, animals were fixed and
the TG was removed. Cryosections of the ganglia were immunostained with
antibodies against glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), a marker of activated 
SGCs, and ATF3, a marker of damaged neurons. After tooth extraction, the number
of ATF3-immunoreactive (IR) neurons enclosed by GFAP-IR SGCs had increased in a
time-dependent manner in the maxillary nerve region of the TG. Although ATF3-IR
neurons were not detected in the mandibular nerve region, the number of GFAP-IR
SGCs increased in both the maxillary and mandibular nerve regions. Our results
suggest that peripheral nerve injury affects the activation of TG neurons and the
SGCs around the injured neurons. Moreover, our data suggest the existence of a
neuronal interaction between maxillary and mandibular neurons via SGC activation.

PMCID: PMC2775105
PMID: 19918323  [PubMed]


116. Brain Res. 2010 Jan 15;1310:1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.11.011. Epub 2009
Nov 11.

Peripherin and ATF3 genes are differentially regulated in regenerating and
non-regenerating primary sensory neurons.

Reid AJ(1), Welin D, Wiberg M, Terenghi G, Novikov LN.

Author information: 
(1)Blond McIndoe Research Laboratories, Tissue Injury and Repair Group,
University of Manchester, UK. adam.reid@manchester.ac.uk

Peripheral nerve injury leads to deficient recovery of sensation and a causative 
factor may be that only 50-60% of primary sensory neurons succeed in regenerating
axons after primary nerve repair. In this study, an in vivo rat sciatic nerve
injury and regeneration model was combined with laser microdissection and
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction with the aim of examining the
gene expression of regenerative molecules in cutaneous and muscular sensory
neurons. Recent studies have identified peripherin and ATF-3 molecules as crucial
for neurite outgrowth propagation; our novel findings demonstrate a subpopulation
of non-regenerating sensory neurons characterized by a failure to upregulate
transcription of these molecules and that a greater peripherin mRNA expression in
injured cutaneous neurons may potentiate this subpopulation to regenerate more
axons than muscle afferent neurons following injury. The gene expression of the
structural neurofilament NF-H is found to be significantly downregulated
following injury in both sensory subpopulations.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19913522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2010 Feb;155(2):172-82. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpa.2009.10.042. Epub 2009 Nov 5.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) expression in the neural retina and
optic nerve of zebrafish during optic nerve regeneration.

Saul KE(1), Koke JR, García DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Texas State University-San Marcos, San Marcos, Texas
78666, USA. ksaul2008@gmail.com

Fish, unlike mammals, can regenerate axons in the optic nerve following optic
nerve injury. We hypothesized that using microarray analysis to compare gene
expression in fish which had experienced optic nerve lesion to fish which had
undergone a similar operation but without optic nerve injury would reveal genes
specifically involved in responding to optic nerve injury (including repair),
reducing detection of genes involved in the general stress and inflammatory
responses. We discovered 120 genes were significantly (minimally two-fold with a 
P-value < or = 0.05) differentially expressed (up or down) at one or more time
point. Among these was ATF3, a member of the cAMP-response element binding
protein family. Work by others has indicated that elevated cAMP could be
important in axon regeneration. We investigated ATF3 expression further by
qRT-PCR, in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry and found ATF3 expression
is significantly upregulated in the ganglion cell layer of the retina, the nerve 
fiber layer and the optic nerve of the injured eye. The upregulation in retina is
detectable by qRT-PCR by 24 h after injury, at which time ATF-3 mRNA levels are
8-fold higher than in retinas from sham-operated fish. We conclude ATF3 may be an
important mediator of optic nerve regeneration-promoting gene expression in fish,
a role which merits further investigation.

2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19896551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jan;38(1):48-59. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp865. Epub 2009 Oct
28.

Expression of stress-response ATF3 is mediated by Nrf2 in astrocytes.

Kim KH(1), Jeong JY, Surh YJ, Kim KW.

Author information: 
(1)NeuroVascular Coordination Research Center, College of Pharmacy and Research
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Activating Transcription Factor 3 (ATF3), a member of the ATF/CREB family, is
induced rapidly by various stresses. Its induction mechanism and role in response
to changes in cellular redox status, however, have not been elucidated. Here, we 
found that NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), a transcription factor known to bind to
antioxidant response element (ARE) in promoters, transcriptionally upregulated
ATF3 expression in astrocytes. Treatment with Nrf2 activators and oxidants
provoked ATF3 induction in astrocytes, whereas its expression was reduced in
Nrf2-depleted cells. We further demonstrated that the consensus ARE in the ATF3
promoter is critical for Nrf2-mediation by promoter analyses using an ATF3
promoter-driven luciferase construct and a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
In addition, we found that Nrf2-dependent ATF3 induction contributed to the
antioxidative and cytoprotective functions of Nrf2 in astrocytes. Taken together,
our findings suggest that ATF3 is a new target for Nrf2 and has a cytoprotective 
function in astrocytes.

PMCID: PMC2800224
PMID: 19864258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Anesthesiology. 2009 Nov;111(5):1052-64. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e3181bbcb2a.

Age-associated changes in cardiac gene expression after preconditioning.

Liu L(1), Zhu J, Glass PS, Brink PR, Rampil IJ, Rebecchi MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Stony Brook University School of Medicine, New
York 11794, USA. lixliu@notes.cc.sunysb.edu

BACKGROUND: Cardiac protection afforded by ischemic preconditioning (IPC) and
anesthetic preconditioning (APC) are significantly reduced in the senescent
myocardium. The authors hypothesized that age would differentially modulate gene 
expression induced by IPC and APC in vivo.
METHODS: Affymetrix RAT EXON ST 1.0 gene chips (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) were
used to explore the transcriptional response to IPC and APC in Fisher 344 male
rats (young, 3-5 months, and old, 20-24 months, respectively). Both cohorts,
young and old, were divided into three groups: (1) sham control, (2) IPC, and (3)
APC. After a total of 90 min, the heart was removed, and the total RNA and
protein were extracted.
RESULTS: Thirty-one transcripts were increased in the young animals subjected to 
IPC, particularly transcriptional regulators (Atf3, Egr-1, Btg2, Egr2), cytokines
(interleukin 6, CSF1, Myd88), chemokines (Cxcl10, Ccl2, Ccl7), regulators of
growth and inflammation (Reg3g, Hamp), remodeling and cell adhesion migration
(Cyr61, Tfpi2, Timp1), regulators of apoptosis/cell death (Birc3, Arntl, Hamp,
Phlda1), and cell cycle control/DNA repairs (Rrad, Gadd45b, Gadd45g). In
contrast, only one transcript increased (Atf3) in the old animals subjected to
IPC. No changes in gene expression were found in the young or the old animals
subjected to APC.
CONCLUSIONS: Early-phase IPC and APC induced different genomic responses. The
absence of detectable changes associated with early-phase APC suggests a
posttranscriptional or posttranslational mechanism. The absence of a genomic
response in the senescent myocardium (except for IPC-induced Atf3) could underlie
the failure of IPC to provide any cardiac protective benefit to older animals.

PMID: 19858872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Pain. 2009 Dec 15;147(1-3):265-76. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2009.09.030. Epub 2009 Oct
22.

Peripheral and central sensitization in remote spinal cord regions contribute to 
central neuropathic pain after spinal cord injury.

Carlton SM(1), Du J, Tan HY, Nesic O, Hargett GL, Bopp AC, Yamani A, Lin Q,
Willis WD, Hulsebosch CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, TX 77555-1069, USA. smcarlto@utmb.edu

Central neuropathic pain (CNP) developing after spinal cord injury (SCI) is
described by the region affected: above-level, at-level and below-level pain
occurs in dermatomes rostral, at/near, or below the SCI level, respectively.
People with SCI and rodent models of SCI develop above-level pain characterized
by mechanical allodynia and thermal hyperalgesia. Mechanisms underlying this pain
are unknown and the goals of this study were to elucidate components contributing
to the generation of above-level CNP. Following a thoracic (T10) contusion,
forelimb nociceptors had enhanced spontaneous activity and were sensitized to
mechanical and thermal stimulation of the forepaws 35 days post-injury. Cervical 
dorsal horn neurons showed enhanced responses to non-noxious and noxious
mechanical stimulation as well as thermal stimulation of receptive fields.
Immunostaining dorsal root ganglion (DRG) cells and cord segments with activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3, a marker for neuronal injury) ruled out neuronal
damage as a cause for above-level sensitization since few C8 DRG cells expressed 
AFT3 and cervical cord segments had few to no ATF3-labeled cells. Finally,
activated microglia and astrocytes were present in thoracic and cervical cord at 
35 days post-SCI, indicating a rostral spread of glial activation from the injury
site. Based on these data, we conclude that peripheral and central sensitization 
as well as reactive glia in the uninjured cervical cord contribute to CNP. We
hypothesize that reactive glia in the cervical cord release pro-inflammatory
substances which drive chronic CNP. Thus a complex cascade of events spanning
many cord segments underlies above-level CNP.

PMCID: PMC2787843
PMID: 19853381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Dec;29(24):6515-26. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00489-09. Epub 2009 Oct 
12.

Identification of a novel amino acid response pathway triggering ATF2
phosphorylation in mammals.

Chaveroux C(1), Jousse C, Cherasse Y, Maurin AC, Parry L, Carraro V, Derijard B, 
Bruhat A, Fafournoux P.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 1019, Unité Nutrition Humaine, INRA de Theix, 63122 St. Genès Champanelle,
France.

It has been well established that amino acid availability can control gene
expression. Previous studies have shown that amino acid depletion induces
transcription of the ATF3 (activation transcription factor 3) gene through an
amino acid response element (AARE) located in its promoter. This event requires
phosphorylation of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2), a constitutive
AARE-bound factor. To identify the signaling cascade leading to phosphorylation
of ATF2 in response to amino acid starvation, we used an individual gene
knockdown approach by small interfering RNA transfection. We identified the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) module MEKK1/MKK7/JNK2 as the pathway
responsible for ATF2 phosphorylation on the threonine 69 (Thr69) and Thr71
residues. Then, we progressed backwards up the signal transduction pathway and
showed that the GTPase Rac1/Cdc42 and the protein Galpha12 control the MAPK
module, ATF2 phosphorylation, and AARE-dependent transcription. Taken together,
our data reveal a new signaling pathway activated by amino acid starvation
leading to ATF2 phosphorylation and subsequently positively affecting the
transcription of amino acid-regulated genes.

PMCID: PMC2786873
PMID: 19822663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Dec 15;108(6):1280-91. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22358.

Quantitative AP-1 gene regulation by oxidative stress in the human retinal
pigment epithelium.

Chaum E(1), Yin J, Yang H, Thomas F, Lang JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, Tennessee 38163, USA. echaum@utmem.edu

The purpose of this study was to characterize the early molecular responses to
quantified levels of oxidative stress (OS) in the human retinal pigment
epithelium (RPE). Confluent ARPE-19 cells were cultured for 3 days in defined
medium to stabilize gene expression. The cells were exposed to varying levels of 
OS (0-500 microM H(2)O(2)) for 1-8 h and gene expression was followed for up to
24-h after OS. Using real-time qPCR, we quantified the expression of immediate
early genes from the AP-1 transcription factor family and other genes involved in
regulating the redox status of the cells. Significant and quantitative changes
were seen in the expression of six AP-1 transcription factor genes, FosB, c-Fos, 
Fra-1, c-Jun, JunB, and ATF3 from 1-8 h following OS. The peak level of induced
transcription from OS varied from 2- to 128-fold over the first 4 h, depending on
the gene and magnitude of OS. Increased transcription at higher levels of OS was 
also seen for up to 8-h for some of these genes. Protein translation was examined
for 24-h following OS using Western blotting methods, and compared to the qPCR
responses. We identified six AP-1 family genes that demonstrate quantitative
upregulation of expression in response to OS. Two distinct types of quantifiable 
OS-specific responses were observed; dose-dependent responses, and threshold
responses. Our studies show that different levels of OS can regulate the
expression of AP-1 transcription factors quantitatively in the human RPE in
vitro.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19795388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. BMC Genomics. 2009 Sep 2;10:408. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-408.

Hypoxic transcription gene profiles under the modulation of nitric oxide in
nuclear run on-microarray and proteomics.

Igwe EI(1), Essler S, Al-Furoukh N, Dehne N, Brüne B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry I/ZAFES, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe-University
Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany. emekaigwe@zbc.kgu.de

BACKGROUND: Microarray analysis still is a powerful tool to identify new
components of the transcriptosome. It helps to increase the knowledge of targets 
triggered by stress conditions such as hypoxia and nitric oxide. However,
analysis of transcriptional regulatory events remain elusive due to the
contribution of altered mRNA stability to gene expression patterns as well as
changes in the half-life of mRNAs, which influence mRNA expression levels and
their turn over rates. To circumvent these problems, we have focused on the
analysis of newly transcribed (nascent) mRNAs by nuclear run on (NRO), followed
by microarray analysis.
RESULTS: We identified 196 genes that were significantly regulated by hypoxia, 85
genes affected by nitric oxide and 292 genes induced by the cotreatment of
macrophages with both NO and hypoxia. Fourteen genes (Bnip3, Ddit4, Vegfa, Trib3,
Atf3, Cdkn1a, Scd1, D4Ertd765e, Sesn2, Son, Nnt, Lst1, Hps6 and Fxyd5) were
common to all treatments but with different levels of expression in each group.
We observed that 162 transcripts were regulated only when cells were co-treated
with hypoxia and NO but not with either treatment alone, pointing to the
importance of a crosstalk between hypoxia and NO. In addition, both array and
proteomics data supported a consistent repression of hypoxia-regulated targets by
NO.
CONCLUSION: By eliminating the interference of steady state mRNA in gene
expression profiling, we obtained a smaller number of significantly regulated
transcripts in our study compared to published microarray data and identified
previously unknown hypoxia-induced targets. Gene analysis profiling corroborated 
the interplay between NO- and hypoxia-induced signaling.

PMCID: PMC2743718
PMID: 19725949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Mol Med (Berl). 2009 Nov;87(11):1053-60. doi: 10.1007/s00109-009-0520-x. Epub
2009 Aug 25.

ATF3 transcription factor and its emerging roles in immunity and cancer.

Thompson MR(1), Xu D, Williams BR.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Institute of Medical Research, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a member of the ATF/cyclic AMP
response element-binding (ATF/CREB) family of transcription factors. It is an
adaptive-response gene that participates in cellular processes to adapt to extra-
and/or intracellular changes, where it transduces signals from various receptors 
to activate or repress gene expression. Advances made in understanding the
immunobiology of Toll-like receptors have recently generated new momentum for the
study of ATF3 in immunity. Moreover, the role of ATF3 in the regulation of the
cell cycle and apoptosis has important implications for understanding
susceptibility to and progression of several cancers.

PMCID: PMC2783469
PMID: 19705082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Toxicol Pathol. 2009 Oct;37(6):761-9. doi: 10.1177/0192623309344087. Epub 2009
Aug 18.

Mechanistic study on hepatocarcinogenesis of piperonyl butoxide in mice.

Kawai M(1), Saegusa Y, Jin M, Dewa Y, Nishimura J, Harada T, Shibutani M,
Mitsumori K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Tokyo University of Agriculture and
Technology, Fuchu-shi, Tokyo 183-8509, Japan.

To clarify the mechanism of piperonyl butoxide (PBO)-induced hepatocarcinogenesis
in mice, male mice were subjected to a two-thirds partial hepatectomy,
N-diethylnitrosamine (DEN) initiation, and a diet containing 0.6% PBO for eight
weeks. The incidence of gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)-positive foci and
PCNA-positive cells was significantly increased in the DEN + PBO group compared
with the DEN-alone group. Real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis showed up-regulation of genes related to metabolism,
such as cytochrome P450 1A1 and 2B10, and metabolic stress, such as Por, Nqo1,
Nrf2, abcc3, and abcc4. Early responsive genes downstream of mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK), such as c-fos, c-jun, c-myc, and activating transcription 
factor 3 (ATF3), were also up-regulated in this group. Positive
immunohistochemical staining for ATF3 was diffusely observed in nonproliferating 
hepatocytes of the DEN + PBO group, but altered foci were negative or weakly
positive for ATF3. The nuclei of hepatocytes within ATF3-negative foci were
positive for cyclin D. Thus PBO can induce oxidative stress, activate the MAPK
pathway, and increase ATF3 transcript levels in hepatocytes outside the altered
foci during the early stage of PBO-induced hepatocarcinogenesis in mice.

PMID: 19690152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Exp Eye Res. 2009 Dec;89(6):921-33. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2009.08.003. Epub 2009
Aug 14.

Does elevated intraocular pressure reduce retinal TRKB-mediated survival
signaling in experimental glaucoma?

Guo Y(1), Johnson E, Cepurna W, Jia L, Dyck J, Morrison JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Kenneth C. Swan Ocular Neurobiology Laboratory, Casey Eye Institute,
Oregon Health and Science University, 3375 SW Terwilliger Blvd, Portland, OR
97239, USA. johnsoel@ohsu.edu

Reduced retrograde transport of neurotrophins (NT) and their receptors has been
hypothesized to contribute directly to retinal ganglion cell (RGC) loss in
glaucoma. However, strategies of supplementing NT and NT receptors have failed to
avert ultimate RGC death in experimental glaucoma. This study examines the
response of major components of the NT system and their interacting proteins in a
rat glaucoma model. Unilateral chronic intraocular pressure (IOP) elevation was
produced by episcleral vein injection of hypertonic saline (N = 99). Retinas were
collected and grouped by extent of optic nerve injury. Quantitative reverse
transcription PCR, western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry were used to
determine mRNA and protein levels and protein localization. Out of three
RGC-specific Brn3 proteins (Brn3a, b, and c), only Brn3a was significantly
downregulated at the message level to 35 +/- 4% of fellow values with the
severest nerve injury. With IOP elevation, no significant alterations were found 
in retinal mRNA levels for BDNF, NGF, NT-4/5 or NT-3. The abundance of mature
retinal BDNF protein was not significantly affected by elevated IOP, while
proBDNF protein decreased linearly with increasing injury grade (r(2) = 0.50). In
retinas with the severest nerve injury, TrkB and TrkC receptor mRNA levels
significantly declined to 67 +/- 9% and 44 +/- 5% of fellow values, respectively.
However, the levels of TRKB protein and its phosphorylated form were unchanged.
Message level for p75(NTR) was linearly upregulated up to 219 +/- 26% with
increasing injury (r(2) = 0.46), but no alteration was detected at protein level.
The mRNA expression of p75(NTR) apoptosis adaptor proteins NADE, NRIF, and Lingo1
were significantly downregulated in retinas with the greatest nerve injury. A
positive correlation was found between injury extent and message levels for Jun
(r(2) = 0.23) as well as Junb (r(2) = 0.27), and RGC labeling of activated JUN
protein increased. Atf3 mRNA levels demonstrated a positive linear correlation to
the extent of injury (r(2) = 0.53), resulting in a nearly five-fold increase (482
+/- 76%) in eyes with the greatest nerve damage. Among downstream pro-survival
signaling components, Erk5 mRNA expression was linearly upregulated (r(2) = 0.32)
up to 157 +/- 15% of fellow values in retinas with the severest nerve injury (p <
0.01). A slight positive correlation was found between NF-kappaB message levels
and injury extent (r(2) = 0.12). Bcl-xl mRNA levels in the most severely injured 
retinas were significantly reduced to 83 +/- 7% by elevated IOP exposure. Message
levels for Erk1/2, Akt1-3 or Bcl2 appeared unaffected. Elevated IOP did not alter
mRNA levels of pro-apoptotic Bim, Bax, or p53. This study demonstrates that
elevated IOP exposure does not result in a dramatic decrease in retinal levels of
either BDNF or its receptor, TrkB. It shows that the responses of NT pathways to 
elevated IOP are complex, particularly with regard to the role of p75(NTR) and
Atf3. A better understanding of the roles of these proteins in IOP-induced injury
is likely to suggest informed strategies for neuroprotection in glaucoma.

PMCID: PMC2783343
PMID: 19682984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. PLoS Genet. 2009 Aug;5(8):e1000604. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000604. Epub 2009 
Aug 14.

Nuclear calcium signaling controls expression of a large gene pool:
identification of a gene program for acquired neuroprotection induced by synaptic
activity.

Zhang SJ(1), Zou M, Lu L, Lau D, Ditzel DA, Delucinge-Vivier C, Aso Y, Descombes 
P, Bading H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences (IZN), 
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Synaptic activity can boost neuroprotection through a mechanism that requires
synapse-to-nucleus communication and calcium signals in the cell nucleus. Here we
show that in hippocampal neurons nuclear calcium is one of the most potent
signals in neuronal gene expression. The induction or repression of 185 neuronal 
activity-regulated genes is dependent upon nuclear calcium signaling. The nuclear
calcium-regulated gene pool contains a genomic program that mediates synaptic
activity-induced, acquired neuroprotection. The core set of neuroprotective genes
consists of 9 principal components, termed Activity-regulated Inhibitor of Death 
(AID) genes, and includes Atf3, Btg2, GADD45beta, GADD45gamma, Inhibin beta-A,
Interferon activated gene 202B, Npas4, Nr4a1, and Serpinb2, which strongly
promote survival of cultured hippocampal neurons. Several AID genes provide
neuroprotection through a common process that renders mitochondria more resistant
to cellular stress and toxic insults. Stereotaxic delivery of AID gene-expressing
recombinant adeno-associated viruses to the hippocampus confers protection in
vivo against seizure-induced brain damage. Thus, treatments that enhance nuclear 
calcium signaling or supplement AID genes represent novel therapies to combat
neurodegenerative conditions and neuronal cell loss caused by synaptic
dysfunction, which may be accompanied by a deregulation of calcium signal
initiation and/or propagation to the cell nucleus.

PMCID: PMC2718706
PMID: 19680447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Cell Signal. 2009 Dec;21(12):1758-67. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2009.07.011. Epub
2009 Jul 30.

A critical role of STAT1 in streptozotocin-induced diabetic liver injury in mice:
controlled by ATF3.

Kim JY(1), Lee SH, Song EH, Park YM, Lim JY, Kim DJ, Choi KH, Park SI, Gao B, Kim
WH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Intractable Diseases, Center for Biomedical Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, #194 Tongillo, Eunpyeong-gu, Seoul 122-701, Korea.

It is well-established that the administration of streptozotocin accelerates
diabetic liver injury as well as type-I diabetes, however the underlying
mechanisms are poorly understood. Here we investigated the molecular mechanisms
of diabetic liver injury in a model of streptozotocin (STZ)-induced type-I
diabetes. STZ administration induced type-1 diabetes and chronic liver injury was
associated with increased STAT1, which is implicated in diabetic liver injury by 
virtue of its ability to promote hepatocyte apoptosis, in the liver and pancreas,
which were all strongly inhibited in STAT1(-)(/-) mice. Similarly, STZ-induced
ATF3, a stress-inducible gene, was completely abolished in the liver of
IFN-gamma(-/-) mice, but not in STAT1(-/-) mice. Inhibition of STAT1 by siRNA or 
dominant-negative DNA did not affect ATF3 protein expression but blocked
IFN-gamma-induced ATF3 translocation from the cytosol into the nucleus. In
contrast, inhibition of ATF3 by using siRNA diminished STAT1 protein expression
and IFN-gamma/STZ-induced hepatocyte apoptosis. Furthermore, GST pull-down and
co-IP assay showed that STAT1 bound to C-terminal domain of ATF3. Such direct
interaction increased the stability of STAT1 by inhibiting its ubiquitination as 
well as proteasome activity. Our results suggest that STAT1 is a common signaling
pathway contributing to STZ-induced diabetes and diabetic liver injury. ATF3
functions as a potent regulator of STAT1 stability, accelerating STZ-induced
diabetes and diabetic liver injury.

PMCID: PMC4779502
PMID: 19647793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Lipid Res. 2010 Jan;51(1):53-62. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M900146-JLR200.

The flavoheme reductase Ncb5or protects cells against endoplasmic reticulum
stress-induced lipotoxicity.

Zhang Y(1), Larade K, Jiang ZG, Ito S, Wang W, Zhu H, Bunn HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

NCB5OR is a novel flavoheme reductase with a cytochrome b5-like domain at the
N-terminus and a cytochrome b5 reductase-like domain at the C terminus. Ncb5or
knock-out mice develop insulin deficient diabetes and loss of white adipose
tissue. Ncb5or(-/-) mice have impairment of Delta9 fatty acid desaturation with
elevated ratios of palmitate to palmitoleate and stearate to oleate. In this
study we assess the role of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response in
mediating lipotoxicity in Ncb5or(-/-) mice. The ER stress response was assessed
by induction of BiP, ATF3, ATF6, XBP-1, and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP).
Exposure to palmitate, but not oleate or mixtures of oleate and palmitate induced
these markers of ER stress to a much greater extent in Ncb5or(-/-) hepatocytes
than in wild-type cells. In contrast, Ncb5or(-/-) and Ncb5or(+/+) hepatocytes
were equally sensitive to ER stress imposed by increasing concentrations of
tunicamycin. In order to assess the role of ER stress in vivo, we prepared mice
that lack both NCB5OR and CHOP, a proapoptotic transcription factor important in 
the ER stress response. Onset of hyperglycemia in the Chop(-/-);Ncb5or(-/-) mice 
was delayed two weeks beyond that observed in Chop(+/+);Ncb5or(-/-) mice. Taken
together these results suggest that ER stress plays a critical role in
palmitate-induced lipotoxicity both in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2789786
PMID: 19609006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2009 Oct 1;240(1):46-54. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2009.06.023.
Epub 2009 Jul 7.

HuR/ELAVL1 RNA binding protein modulates interleukin-8 induction by muco-active
ribotoxin deoxynivalenol.

Choi HJ(1), Yang H, Park SH, Moon Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Medical Research Institute,
Pusan National University School of Medicine, Yangsan, 626-813, Republic of
Korea.

HuR/Elav-like RNA binding protein 1 (ELAVL1) positively regulates mRNA stability 
of AU-rich elements (ARE)-containing transcript such as pro-inflammatory
cytokines. Ribotoxic stresses can trigger the production of pro-inflammatory
mediators by enhancing mRNA stability and the transcriptional activity. We
investigated the effects of ribotoxin deoxynivalenol (DON) on HuR translocation
and its involvement in the regulation of the pro-inflammatory interleukin-8
(IL-8) mRNA stability. Exposure to the muco-active DON induced nuclear export of 
both endogenous and exogenous HuR RNA binding protein in human intestinal
epithelial cells. Moreover, the interference with HuR protein production
suppressed ribotoxic DON-induced IL-8 secretion and its mRNA stability.
Cytoplasmic HuR protein interacted with IL-8 mRNA and the complex stabilization
was due to the presence of 3'-untranslated region of the transcript. Partly in
terms of IL-8-modulating transcription factors, HuR protein was demonstrated to
be positively and negatively associated with DON-induced early growth response
gene 1 (EGR-1) and activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), respectively. HuR
was a critical mechanistic link between ribotoxic stress and the pro-inflammatory
cytokine production, and may have a broader functional significance with regard
to mucosal insults since ribotoxic stress responses are also produced upon
interactions with the diverse environment of gut.

PMID: 19591856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. PLoS One. 2009 Jun 30;4(6):e6092. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006092.

Methamphetamine induces dopamine D1 receptor-dependent endoplasmic reticulum
stress-related molecular events in the rat striatum.

Jayanthi S(1), McCoy MT, Beauvais G, Ladenheim B, Gilmore K, Wood W 3rd, Becker
K, Cadet JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, National Institute of Drug Abuse,
National Institutes of Health (NIH)/Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS), Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Methamphetamine (METH) is an illicit toxic psychostimulant which is widely
abused. Its toxic effects depend on the release of excessive levels of dopamine
(DA) that activates striatal DA receptors. Inhibition of DA-mediated
neurotransmission by the DA D1 receptor antagonist, SCH23390, protects against
METH-induced neuronal apoptosis. The initial purpose of the present study was to 
investigate, using microarray analyses, the influence of SCH23390 on
transcriptional responses in the rat striatum caused by a single METH injection
at 2 and 4 hours after drug administration. We identified 545 out of a total of
22,227 genes as METH-responsive. These include genes which are involved in
apoptotic pathways, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and in transcription
regulation, among others. Of these, a total of 172 genes showed SCH23390-induced 
inhibition of METH-mediated changes. Among these SCH23390-responsive genes were
several genes that are regulated during ER stress, namely ATF3, HSP27, Hmox1,
HSP40, and CHOP/Gadd153. The secondary goal of the study was to investigate the
role of DA D1 receptor stimulation on the expression of genes that participate in
ER stress-mediated molecular events. We thus used quantitative PCR to confirm
changes in the METH-responsive ER genes identified by the microarray analyses. We
also measured the expression of these genes and of ATF4, ATF6, BiP/GRP78, and of 
GADD34 over a more extended time course. SCH23390 attenuated or blocked
METH-induced increases in the expression of the majority of these genes. Western 
blot analysis revealed METH-induced increases in the expression of the
antioxidant protein, Hmox1, which lasted for about 24 hours after the METH
injection. Additionally, METH caused DA D1 receptor-dependent transit of the
Hmox1 regulator protein, Nrf2, from cytosolic into nuclear fractions where the
protein exerts its regulatory functions. When taken together, these findings
indicate that SCH23390 can provide protection against neuronal apoptosis by
inhibiting METH-mediated DA D1 receptor-mediated ER stress in the rat striatum.
Our data also suggest that METH-induced toxicity might be a useful model to
dissect molecular mechanisms involved in ER stress-dependent events in the rodent
brain.

PMCID: PMC2699544
PMID: 19564919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Pain. 2009 Sep;145(1-2):151-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2009.06.002. Epub 2009 Jun 26.

Experimental arthritis causes tumor necrosis factor-alpha-dependent infiltration 
of macrophages into rat dorsal root ganglia which correlates with pain-related
behavior.

Segond von Banchet G(1), Boettger MK, Fischer N, Gajda M, Bräuer R, Schaible HG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology I, University Hospital Jena, Germany.
Gisela.SegondvonBanchet@mti.uni-jena.de

After peripheral nerve damage macrophages infiltrate the dorsal root ganglia
(DRG) in which cell bodies of lesioned neurons are located. However, infiltration
of macrophages into the DRGs was also reported in complete Freund's adjuvant
(CFA)-induced inflammation raising the question whether CFA inflammation induces 
nerve cell damage or whether peripheral inflammation may also trigger macrophage 
infiltration into DRGs. Related questions are, first, which signals trigger
macrophage infiltration into DRGs and, second, is macrophage infiltration
correlated with pain-related behavior. Using the rat model of unilateral
antigen-induced arthritis (AIA) in the knee we found a massive infiltration of
ED1(+) macrophages into the ipsi- and contralateral lumbar DRGs but not into
thoracic DRGs. At no time point of AIA DRG neurons showed expression of
activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3) indicating that macrophage infiltration 
is not explainable by nerve cell lesions in this model. During AIA, lumbar but
not thoracic DRGs exhibited a bilateral de novo expression of vascular cell
adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) which is known to be involved in macrophage
infiltration. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) neutralization with
etanercept or infliximab treatment after induction of AIA significantly reduced
both macrophage infiltration and VCAM-1 expression. It also decreased mechanical 
hyperalgesia at the inflamed joint although the joint inflammation itself was
barely attenuated, and it reduced mechanical hyperalgesia at the non-inflamed
contralateral knee joint. Thus, bilateral segment-specific infiltration of
macrophages into DRGs is part of an unilateral inflammatory process in peripheral
tissue and it may be involved in the generation of hyperalgesia in particular on 
the non-inflamed side.

PMID: 19560272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Brain Res. 2009 Aug 25;1286:221-9. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.06.049. Epub 2009
Jun 24.

ATF3 plays a protective role against toxicity by N-terminal fragment of mutant
huntingtin in stable PC12 cell line.

Liang Y(1), Jiang H, Ratovitski T, Jie C, Nakamura M, Hirschhorn RR, Wang X,
Smith WW, Hai T, Poirier MA, Ross CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurobiology, Department of Psychiatry, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, CMSC 8-121, 600 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21287,
USA.

Huntington's disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder caused by a
polyglutamine expansion near the N-terminus of huntingtin. The mechanisms of
polyglutamine neurotoxicity, and cellular responses are not fully understood. We 
have studied gene expression profiles by short oligo array using an inducible
PC12 cell model expressing an N-terminal huntingtin fragment with expanded
polyglutamine (Htt-N63-148Q). Mutant huntingtin Htt-N63 induced cell death and
increased the mRNA and protein levels of activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3). Mutant Htt-N63 also significantly enhanced ATF3 transcriptional activity 
by a promoter-based reporter assay. Overexpression of ATF3 protects against
mutant Htt-N63 toxicity and knocking down ATF3 expression reduced Htt-N63
toxicity in a stable PC12 cell line. These results indicated that ATF3 plays a
critical role in toxicity induced by mutant Htt-N63 and may lead to a useful
therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC2765721
PMID: 19559011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Biochem Pharmacol. 2009 Nov 1;78(9):1205-13. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.06.012. Epub
2009 Jun 18.

Macrophage inhibitory cytokine-1 (MIC-1) and subsequent urokinase-type
plasminogen activator mediate cell death responses by ribotoxic anisomycin in
HCT-116 colon cancer cells.

Yang H(1), Choi HJ, Park SH, Kim JS, Moon Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Medical Research Institute,
Pusan National University School of Medicine, Yangsan, Republic of Korea.

Ribosome-inactivating stresses possess a potent regulatory activity against tumor
cell progression. In this study, we demonstrated that macrophage inhibitory
cytokine-1 (MIC-1) and its associated signals determined the colon cancer cell
response to the chemical ribotoxic stress. The ribotoxic stress agent
anisomycin-induced MIC-1 gene expression which was involved in the
ribotoxin-induced apoptotic pathway. MIC-1 was also a critical inducer of
apoptosis-related gene products such as activated urokine-type plasminogen
activator (PLAU) and PLAU receptor (uPAR). When MIC-1 or PLAU action was
repressed in the tumor cells, the chemical ribotoxic stress triggered a
survival-related MAP kinase such as ERK. Mechanistically, gene expression of
apoptosis-mediator MIC-1 was enhanced by activating transcription factor 3
(ATF-3) via the p38 MAP kinase signaling pathway. Moreover, both promoter
activity and mRNA stability of MIC-1 gene were up-regulated by ribotoxic
anisomycin via the p38 MAP kinase signaling pathway. In conclusion, ribotoxic
anisomycin-induced MIC-1 expression via p38-ATF3 pathway and subsequent apoptosis
while suppressing survival ERK signal in the colon cancer cells. The results of
this study provide mechanistic insight into tumor cell decision for death or
survival pathways in response to ribosome-disrupting stresses from
chemotherapeutics.

PMID: 19540205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Circ Res. 2009 Jul 2;105(1):25-32. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.196261. Epub 2009 
May 28.

Activating transcription factor 3 constitutes a negative feedback mechanism that 
attenuates saturated Fatty acid/toll-like receptor 4 signaling and macrophage
activation in obese adipose tissue.

Suganami T(1), Yuan X, Shimoda Y, Uchio-Yamada K, Nakagawa N, Shirakawa I, Usami 
T, Tsukahara T, Nakayama K, Miyamoto Y, Yasuda K, Matsuda J, Kamei Y, Kitajima S,
Ogawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Metabolism, Medical Research Institute,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Japan.

Obese adipose tissue is markedly infiltrated by macrophages, suggesting that they
may participate in the inflammatory pathways that are activated in obese adipose 
tissue. Evidence has suggested that saturated fatty acids released via adipocyte 
lipolysis serve as a naturally occurring ligand that stimulates Toll-like
receptor (TLR)4 signaling, thereby inducing the inflammatory responses in
macrophages in obese adipose tissue. Through a combination of cDNA microarray
analyses of saturated fatty acid-stimulated macrophages in vitro and obese
adipose tissue in vivo, here we identified activating transcription factor
(ATF)3, a member of the ATF/cAMP response element-binding protein family of basic
leucine zipper-type transcription factors, as a target gene of saturated fatty
acids/TLR4 signaling in macrophages in obese adipose tissue. Importantly, ATF3,
when induced by saturated fatty acids, can transcriptionally repress tumor
necrosis factor-alpha production in macrophages in vitro. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay revealed that ATF3 is recruited to the region
containing the activator protein-1 site of the endogenous tumor necrosis
factor-alpha promoter. Furthermore, transgenic overexpression of ATF3
specifically in macrophages results in the marked attenuation of proinflammatory 
M1 macrophage activation in the adipose tissue from genetically obese KKA(y) mice
fed high-fat diet. This study provides evidence that ATF3, which is induced in
obese adipose tissue, acts as a transcriptional repressor of saturated fatty
acids/TLR4 signaling, thereby revealing the negative feedback mechanism that
attenuates obesity-induced macrophage activation. Our data also suggest that
activation of ATF3 in macrophages offers a novel therapeutic strategy to prevent 
or treat obesity-induced adipose tissue inflammation.

PMID: 19478204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Diabetes. 2009 Aug;58(8):1757-65. doi: 10.2337/db09-0188. Epub 2009 May 28.

Individual stearoyl-coa desaturase 1 expression modulates endoplasmic reticulum
stress and inflammation in human myotubes and is associated with skeletal muscle 
lipid storage and insulin sensitivity in vivo.

Peter A(1), Weigert C, Staiger H, Machicao F, Schick F, Machann J, Stefan N,
Thamer C, Häring HU, Schleicher E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Vascular Medicine, Nephrology, and Clinical Chemistry, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany. andreas.peter@med.uni-tuebingen.de

OBJECTIVE: Increased plasma levels of free fatty acids occur in obesity and type 
2 diabetes and contribute to the development of insulin resistance. Saturated
fatty acids (SFAs) such as palmitate especially have lipotoxic effects leading to
endoplasmatic reticulum (ER) stress, inflammation, and insulin resistance.
Stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (SCD1) plays a key role in preventing lipotoxic
effects, as it converts SFAs to less harmful monounsaturated fatty acids. Here,
we tested the hypothesis that individual differences in the regulation of SCD1
expression by palmitate exist and influence insulin sensitivity and the cellular 
response to palmitate.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Palmitate-induced gene expression was studied in
primary human myotubes of 39 metabolically characterized individuals, as well as 
in an SCD1-overexpressing cell culture model.
RESULTS: SCD1 mRNA expression and inducibility by palmitate in cultured myotubes 
showed a broad interindividual variation, presumably due to inheritable
characteristics of the donors. Overexpression of SCD1 prevented the inflammatory 
and ER stress response to palmitate exposure. In primary human myotubes, high
SCD1 inducibility was associated with a low inflammatory (interleukin [IL]-6,
IL-8, and chemokine [CXC motif] ligand 3 [CXCL3]) and ER stress (CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein [C/EBP] homologous protein, activating transcription factor 3
[ATF3], and X-box binding protein 1 [XBP1]) response to palmitate exposure.
Finally, palmitate-stimulated SCD1 mRNA expression, positively correlated with
intramyocellular lipid (IMCL) content of the donors, was measured by
(1)H-magnetic resonance spectroscopy. After adjustment for IMCL, SCD1 expression 
and inducibility were positively correlated with insulin sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: We hypothesize that myocellular SCD1 inducibility by palmitate is an
individual characteristic that modulates lipid storage, palmitate-induced
inflammation, ER stress, and insulin resistance. This may describe individuals
with increased capability of innoxious free fatty acid handling and benign
triglyceride storage.

PMCID: PMC2712792
PMID: 19478146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. FEBS Lett. 2009 Jun 18;583(12):1999-2003. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.05.013.
Epub 2009 May 15.

Apigenin inhibits proliferation of ovarian cancer A2780 cells through Id1.

Li ZD(1), Hu XW, Wang YT, Fang J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, SIBS, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Apigenin, a common dietary flavonoid, has been shown to possess anti-tumor
properties. However, the mechanism by which apigenin inhibits cancer cells is not
fully understood. Id1 (inhibitor of differentiation or DNA binding protein 1)
contributes to tumorigenesis by stimulating cell proliferation, inhibiting cell
differentiation and facilitating tumor neoangiogenesis. Elevated Id1 is found in 
ovarian cancers and its level correlates with the malignant potential of ovarian 
tumors. Therefore, Id1 is a potential target for ovarian cancer treatment. Here, 
we demonstrate that apigenin inhibits proliferation and tumorigenesis of human
ovarian cancer A2780 cells through Id1. Apigenin suppressed the expression of Id1
through activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3). Our results may elucidate a new
mechanism underlying the inhibitory effects of apigenin on cancer cells.

PMID: 19447105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Exp Neurol. 2009 Sep;219(1):146-55. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.05.006. Epub
2009 May 13.

Selective inhibition of JNK with a peptide inhibitor attenuates pain
hypersensitivity and tumor growth in a mouse skin cancer pain model.

Gao YJ(1), Cheng JK, Zeng Q, Xu ZZ, Decosterd I, Xu X, Ji RR.

Author information: 
(1)Pain Research Center, Department of Anesthesiology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Medical Research
Building, Room 604, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Cancer pain significantly affects the quality of cancer patients, and current
treatments for this pain are limited. C-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) has been
implicated in tumor growth and neuropathic pain sensitization. We investigated
the role of JNK in cancer pain and tumor growth in a skin cancer pain model.
Injection of luciferase-transfected B16-Fluc melanoma cells into a hindpaw of
mouse induced robust tumor growth, as indicated by increase in paw volume and
fluorescence intensity. Pain hypersensitivity in this model developed rapidly (<5
days) and reached a peak in 2 weeks, and was characterized by mechanical
allodynia and heat hyperalgesia. Tumor growth was associated with JNK activation 
in tumor mass, dorsal root ganglion (DRG), and spinal cord and a peripheral
neuropathy, such as loss of nerve fibers in the hindpaw skin and induction of
ATF-3 expression in DRG neurons. Repeated systemic injections of D-JNKI-1 (6
mg/kg, i.p.), a selective and cell-permeable peptide inhibitor of JNK, produced
an accumulative inhibition of mechanical allodynia and heat hyperalgesia. A bolus
spinal injection of D-JNKI-1 also inhibited mechanical allodynia. Further, JNK
inhibition suppressed tumor growth in vivo and melanoma cell proliferation in
vitro. In contrast, repeated injections of morphine (5 mg/kg), a commonly used
analgesic for terminal cancer, produced analgesic tolerance after 1 day and did
not inhibit tumor growth. Our data reveal a marked peripheral neuropathy in this 
skin cancer model and important roles of the JNK pathway in cancer pain
development and tumor growth. JNK inhibitors such as D-JNKI-1 may be used to
treat cancer pain.

PMCID: PMC2728781
PMID: 19445931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Jul;30(7):1139-46. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp116. Epub 2009 May
7.

Overexpression of SMYD2 relates to tumor cell proliferation and malignant outcome
of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Komatsu S(1), Imoto I, Tsuda H, Kozaki KI, Muramatsu T, Shimada Y, Aiko S,
Yoshizumi Y, Ichikawa D, Otsuji E, Inazawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Medical Research Institute and School of
Biomedical Science, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Although we have identified two putative targets, ATF3 and CENPF, for a
frequently gained/amplified region around 1q32-q41 in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC), it is possible that other amplification targets remain to be
identified. In this study, we tested whether SET and MYND domain-containing
protein 2 (SMYD2), located between those two genes and encoding a lysine
methyltransferase for histone H3K36 and p53K370 that regulates transcription and 
inhibits transactivation activity, respectively, acts as a cancer-promoting gene 
through activation/overexpression in ESCC. Frequent overexpression of SMYD2
messenger RNA and protein was observed in KYSE150 cells with remarkable
amplification at 1q32-41.1 and other ESCC cell lines (11/43 lines, 25.6%).
Overexpression of SMYD2 protein was frequently detected in primary tumor samples 
of ESCC (117/153 cases, 76.5%) as well and significantly correlated with gender, 
venous invasion, the pT category in the tumor-lymph node-metastases
classification and status of recurrence. Patients with SMYD2-overexpressing
tumors had a worse overall rate of survival than those with non-expressing
tumors, and SMYD2 positivity was independently associated with a worse outcome in
the multivariate analysis. Knockdown of SMYD2 expression inhibited and ectopic
overexpression of SMYD2 promoted the proliferation of ESCC cells in a TP53
mutation-independent but SMYD2 expression-dependent manner. These findings
suggest that SMYD2 plays an important role in tumor cell proliferation through
its activation/overexpression and highlight its usefulness as a prognosticator
and potential therapeutic target in ESCC.

PMID: 19423649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009 Mar 15;606(1-3):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.01.015.
Epub 2009 Jan 21.

Stimulatory effect of benzylidenemalononitrile tyrphostins on expression of
NO-dependent genes in U-937 monocytic cells.

Turpaev K(1), Drapier JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Chimie des Substances Naturelles, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique, Gif-sur-Yvette, France. turpaev@icsn.cnrs-gif.fr

Tyrphostins are well-established selective inhibitors of protein tyrosine kinase 
activity of EGF receptor and other growth factor receptors. Unexpectedly, we
found that, in U-937 monocytic cells, tyrphostin AG-126 augments the sensitivity 
of the corresponding genes to NO, in contrast to other protein tyrosine kinase
inhibitors like genistein, PD 168393, PP2, and SU 11652. Moreover, by itself
AG-126 appeared to be a potent activator of the expression of heme oxygenase 1
(HO-1), H-ferritin, activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), interleukin 8
(IL-8), and several other NO- and redox-regulated genes. The most sensitive to
AG-126 was the HO-1 gene, with a fold-change of expression reaching 300. Besides,
we showed that AG-126 stimulated key elements of upstream signaling systems as
p38 MAP kinase and AP-1 and Nrf2 transcription factors. Together with AG-126,
structurally related benzylidenemalononitrile tyrphostins AG-9, AG-10, AG-18, and
AG-1288 were able to up-regulate the expression of HO-1 and several other genes, 
although with relatively less efficacy. Conversely, tyrphostins AG-30 and AG-490 
were ineffective regulators of gene expression. Comparison of the chemical
structures of these compounds indicates that most important for transcriptional
activation of target genes is the presence of either the 4-nitro or 4-methoxy
group in the benzene ring and two CN-groups of the malononitrile residue. Several
lines of evidence indicate that the gene induction capacity of AG-126-like
tyrphostins is not related to the inhibition of protein tyrosine kinases.

PMID: 19374863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Phys Chem B. 2008 Dec 18;112(50):16021-9. doi: 10.1021/jp8056306.

Spin-orbit and electron correlation effects on the structure of EF3 (E = I, At,
and element 117).

Kim H(1), Choi YJ, Lee YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and School of Molecular Science (BK21), KAIST, Daejeon
305-701, Republic of Korea.

Structures and vibrational frequencies of group 17 fluorides EF3 (E = I, At, and 
element 117) are calculated at the density functional theory (DFT) level of
theory using relativistic effective core potentials (RECPs) with and without
spin-orbit terms in order to investigate the effects of spin-orbit interactions
and electron correlations on the structures and vibrational frequencies of EF3.
Various tests imply that spin-orbit and electron correlation effects estimated
presently from Hartree-Fock (HF) and DFT calculations with RECPs with and without
spin-orbit terms are quite reasonable. Spin-orbit and electron correlation
effects generally increase bond lengths and/or angles in both C2v and D3h
structures. For IF3, the C2v structure is a global minimum, and the D3h structure
is a second-order saddle point in both HF and DFT calculations with and without
spin-orbit interactions. Spin-orbit effects for IF3 are negligible in comparison 
to electron correlation effects. The D3h global minimum is the only minimum
structure for (117)F3 in all RECP calculations, and the C2v structure is neither 
a local minimum nor a saddle point. In the case of AtF3, the C2v structure is
found to be a local minimum in all RECP calculations without spin-orbit terms,
and the D3h structure becomes a local minimum at the DFT level of theory with and
without spin-orbit interactions. In the HF calculation with spin-orbit terms, the
D3h structure of AtF3 is a second-order saddle point. AtF3 is a borderline case
between the valence-shell-electron-pair-repulsion (VSEPR) structure of IF3 and
the non-VSEPR structure of (117)F3. Relativistic effects, including scalar
relativistic and spin-orbit effects, and electron correlation effects together or
separately stabilize the D3h structures more than the C2v structures. As a
result, one may suggest that the VSEPR predictions agree very well with the
structures optimized by the nonrelativistic HF level of theory even for
heavy-atom molecules but not so well with those from more elaborate theoretical
methods. Vibrational frequencies of AtF3 and (117)F3 are modified substantially
and nonadditively by spin-orbit and electron correlation contributions. This is
one of those rare cases for which vibrational frequencies of the closed-shell
molecules are significantly affected by spin-orbit interactions. Spin-orbit
interactions decrease all vibrational frequencies of EF3 molecules considered.

PMID: 19367904  [PubMed]


142. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2009 Apr;53(4):479-91. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.200800475.

Potential of deoxynivalenol to induce transcription factors in human hepatoma
cells.

Nielsen C(1), Lippke H, Didier A, Dietrich R, Märtlbauer E.

Author information: 
(1)Central Institute of the Bundeswehr Medical Service, Department of Food
Chemistry and Environmental Chemistry, Garching-Hochbrück, Germany.
c.nielsen@mh.vetmed.uni-muenchen.de

To assess the hepatotoxicity of deoxynivalenol (DON), human hepatoma cells
(Hep-G2) were used as an in vitro model. After exposing Hep-G2 cells to low (1
mciroM) and high dose (10 mciroM), gene expression profiles were analysed by
microarray. More than 5% of genes were up-regulated, most of them being involved 
in transcriptional regulation. By real-time RT-PCR, elevated expression of
transcription factors, commonly induced by activation of MAPK-pathway, was
demonstrated for Hep-G2 cells on mRNA and protein level. Further studies,
involving U937 human monocytes, showed that effects of DON treatment on mRNA and 
protein level were concentration-dependent and cell-specific. An inverse relation
was noticed for the level of DON induced expression of transcription factors
(JUN, FOS, EGR1 and ATF3) and the susceptibility of the cell lines towards the
mycotoxin. This is the first report giving evidence that on a molecular level the
mild hepatotoxic effects of DON are probably caused by the induction of
transcription factors which are known to be associated with injury-induced liver 
regeneration processes. With ATF3, a novel downstream target gene was identified 
in DON-related cell signalling suggesting a potential linkage between molecular
action and biological effects like reduction of glycogen storage in liver tissue.

PMID: 19360757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mol Pain. 2009 Mar 27;5:16. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-5-16.

Transforming growth factor-beta1 impairs neuropathic pain through pleiotropic
effects.

Echeverry S(1), Shi XQ, Haw A, Liu H, Zhang ZW, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)The Alan Edwards Centre for Research on Pain, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada. Stefania.Echeverry@mail.mcgill.ca

BACKGROUND: Understanding the underlying mechanisms of neuropathic pain caused by
damage to the peripheral nervous system remains challenging and could lead to
significantly improved therapies. Disturbance of homeostasis not only occurs at
the site of injury but also extends to the spinal cord and brain involving
various types of cells. Emerging data implicate neuroimmune interaction in the
initiation and maintenance of chronic pain hypersensitivity.
RESULTS: In this study, we sought to investigate the effects of TGF-beta1, a
potent anti-inflammatory cytokine, in alleviating nerve injury-induced
neuropathic pain in rats. By using a well established neuropathic pain animal
model (partial ligation of the sciatic nerve), we demonstrated that intrathecal
infusion of recombinant TGF-beta1 significantly attenuated nerve injury-induced
neuropathic pain. TGF-beta1 treatment not only prevents development of
neuropathic pain following nerve injury, but also reverses previously established
neuropathic pain conditions. The biological outcomes of TGF-beta1 in this context
are attributed to its pleiotropic effects. It inhibits peripheral nerve
injury-induced spinal microgliosis, spinal microglial and astrocytic activation, 
and exhibits a powerful neuroprotective effect by preventing the induction of
ATF3+ neurons following nerve ligation, consequently reducing the expression of
chemokine MCP-1 in damaged neurons. TGF-beta1 treatment also suppresses nerve
injury-induced inflammatory response in the spinal cord, as revealed by a
reduction in cytokine expression.
CONCLUSION: Our findings revealed that TGF-beta1 is effective in the treatment of
neuropathic by targeting both neurons and glial cells. We suggest that
therapeutic agents such as TGF-beta1 having multipotent effects on different
types of cells could work in synergy to regain homeostasis in local spinal cord
microenvironments, therefore contributing to attenuate neuropathic pain.

PMCID: PMC2669449
PMID: 19327151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Eur Spine J. 2009 Jul;18(7):1001-7. doi: 10.1007/s00586-009-0940-x. Epub 2009 Mar
24.

Nuclear factor-kappa B decoy suppresses nerve injury and improves mechanical
allodynia and thermal hyperalgesia in a rat lumbar disc herniation model.

Suzuki M(1), Inoue G, Gemba T, Watanabe T, Ito T, Koshi T, Yamauchi K, Yamashita 
M, Orita S, Eguchi Y, Ochiai N, Kishida S, Takaso M, Aoki Y, Takahashi K, Ohtori 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB) is a gene transcriptional regulator of
inflammatory cytokines. We investigated the transduction efficiency of NF-kappaB 
decoy to dorsal root ganglion (DRG), as well as the decrease in nerve injury,
mechanical allodynia, and thermal hyperalgesia in a rat lumbar disc herniation
model. Forty rats were used in this study. NF-kappaB decoy-fluorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC) was injected intrathecally at the L5 level in five rats,
and its transduction efficiency into DRG measured. In another 30 rats, mechanical
pressure was placed on the DRG at the L5 level and nucleus pulposus harvested
from the rat coccygeal disc was transplanted on the DRG. Rats were classified
into three groups of ten animals each: a herniation + decoy group, a herniation +
oligo group, and a herniation only group. For behavioral testing, mechanical
allodynia and thermal hyperalgesia were evaluated. In 15 of the herniation rats, 
their left L5 DRGs were resected, and the expression of activating transcription 
factor 3 (ATF-3) and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) was evaluated
immunohistochemically compared to five controls. The total transduction
efficiency of NF-kappaB decoy-FITC in DRG neurons was 10.8% in vivo. The
expression of CGRP and ATF-3 was significantly lower in the herniation + decoy
group than in the other herniation groups. Mechanical allodynia and thermal
hyperalgesia were significantly suppressed in the herniation + decoy group.
NF-kappaB decoy was transduced into DRGs in vivo. NF-kappaB decoy may be useful
as a target for clarifying the mechanism of sciatica caused by lumbar disc
herniation.

PMCID: PMC2899582
PMID: 19308465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Dev Neurobiol. 2009 May;69(6):392-400. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20706.

The dependence on gp130 cytokines of axotomy induced neuropeptide expression in
adult sympathetic neurons.

Habecker BA(1), Sachs HH, Rohrer H, Zigmond RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Oregon Health Sciences University, 
Portland, Oregon 97239-3098, USA.

Adult peripheral neurons exhibit dramatic changes in gene expression after axonal
injury, including changes in neuropeptide phenotype. For example, sympathetic
neurons in the superior cervical ganglion (SCG) begin to express vasoactive
intestinal peptide (VIP), galanin, pituitary adenylate cyclase activating
polypeptide (PACAP), and cholecystokinin after axotomy. Before these changes,
nonneuronal cells in the SCG begin to express leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF).
When the effects of axotomy were compared in LIF-/- and wild-type mice, the
increases in VIP and galanin expression were less in the former, though
significant increases still occurred. LIF belongs to a family of cytokines with
overlapping physiological effects and multimeric receptors containing the subunit
gp130. Real-time PCR revealed large increases in the SCG after axotomy in mRNA
for three members of this cytokine family, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-11, and LIF,
with modest increases in oncostatin M, no changes in ciliary neurotrophic factor,
and decreases in cardiotrophin-1. To explore the role of these cytokines, animals
with selective elimination of the gp130 receptor in noradrenergic neurons were
studied. No significant changes in mRNA levels for VIP, galanin, and PACAP were
seen in axotomized ganglia from these mutant mice, while the increase in
cholecystokinin was as large as that seen in wild-type mice. The data indicate
that the inductions of VIP, galanin, and PACAP after axotomy are completely
dependent on gp130 cytokines and that a second cytokine, in addition to LIF, is
involved. The increase in cholecystokinin after axotomy, however, does not
require the action of these cytokines.

PMCID: PMC2721278
PMID: 19280647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Nat Immunol. 2009 Apr;10(4):437-43. doi: 10.1038/ni.1721. Epub 2009 Mar 8.

Function of C/EBPdelta in a regulatory circuit that discriminates between
transient and persistent TLR4-induced signals.

Litvak V(1), Ramsey SA, Rust AG, Zak DE, Kennedy KA, Lampano AE, Nykter M,
Shmulevich I, Aderem A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, Washington, USA.

The innate immune system is like a double-edged sword: it is absolutely required 
for host defense against infection, but when uncontrolled, it can trigger a
plethora of inflammatory diseases. Here we use systems-biology approaches to
predict and confirm the existence of a gene-regulatory network involving dynamic 
interaction among the transcription factors NF-kappaB, C/EBPdelta and ATF3 that
controls inflammatory responses. We mathematically modeled transcriptional
regulation of the genes encoding interleukin 6 and C/EBPdelta and experimentally 
confirmed the prediction that the combination of an initiator (NF-kappaB), an
amplifier (C/EBPdelta) and an attenuator (ATF3) forms a regulatory circuit that
discriminates between transient and persistent Toll-like receptor 4-induced
signals. Our results suggest a mechanism that enables the innate immune system to
detect the duration of infection and to respond appropriately.

PMCID: PMC2780024
PMID: 19270711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cell Metab. 2009 Mar;9(3):277-86. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2009.01.006.

Adipocyte CREB promotes insulin resistance in obesity.

Qi L(1), Saberi M, Zmuda E, Wang Y, Altarejos J, Zhang X, Dentin R, Hedrick S,
Bandyopadhyay G, Hai T, Olefsky J, Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories for Peptide Biology, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Increases in adiposity trigger metabolic and inflammatory changes that interfere 
with insulin action in peripheral tissues, culminating in beta cell failure and
overt diabetes. We found that the cAMP Response Element Binding protein (CREB) is
activated in adipose cells under obese conditions, where it promotes insulin
resistance by triggering expression of the transcriptional repressor ATF3 and
thereby downregulating expression of the adipokine hormone adiponectin as well as
the insulin-sensitive glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4). Transgenic mice expressing a
dominant-negative CREB transgene in adipocytes displayed increased whole-body
insulin sensitivity in the contexts of diet-induced and genetic obesity, and they
were protected from the development of hepatic steatosis and adipose tissue
inflammation. These results indicate that adipocyte CREB provides an early signal
in the progression to type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2730923
PMID: 19254572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Apr;37(7):2194-203. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp083. Epub 2009
Feb 20.

The ubiquitously expressed bZIP inhibitor, JDP2, suppresses the transcription of 
its homologue immediate early gene counterpart, ATF3.

Weidenfeld-Baranboim K(1), Hasin T, Darlyuk I, Heinrich R, Elhanani O, Pan J,
Yokoyama KK, Aronheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Rappaport Family Institute for Research 
in the Medical Sciences, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096,
Israel.

JDP2 is a ubiquitously expressed bZIP repressor protein. JDP2 binds TPA response 
element and cyclic AMP response element located within various promoters. JDP2
displays a high degree of homology to the immediate early gene ATF3. ATF3 plays a
crucial role in the cellular adaptive response to multiple stress insults as well
as growth stimuli. We have identified ATF3 as a potential target gene for JDP2
repression. JDP2 regulates the ATF3 promoter potentially through binding to both 
the consensus ATF/CRE site and a non-consensus ATF3 auto-repression DNA-binding
element. Expression of ATF3 protein in wild-type mouse embryo fibroblast (MEF)
cells is below the detectable levels, whereas, JDP2 disrupted MEF cells display
noticeable level of ATF3 protein. Following either serum or ER stress
stimulation, ATF3 expression is potentiated in JDP2-KO fibroblast cells as
compared with wild-type cells. Mice with either JDP2 over-expression or JDP2
disruption display undetectable level of ATF3 protein. However, ATF3 induction in
response to either growth or stress signals is dependent on JDP2 expression
level. ATF3 induction is attenuated in JDP2 over-expressing mice whereas is
potentiated in JDP2-KO mice as compared with the corresponding wild-type mice.
Collectively, the data presented strongly suggest that JDP2 plays a role in the
determination of the ATF3 adaptive cellular threshold response to different
stress insults and growth stimuli.

PMCID: PMC2673429
PMID: 19233874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Cell Death Differ. 2009 May;16(5):728-37. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.2. Epub 2009 Feb 
13.

ATF3 and p15PAF are novel gatekeepers of genomic integrity upon UV stress.

Turchi L(1), Fareh M, Aberdam E, Kitajima S, Simpson F, Wicking C, Aberdam D,
Virolle T.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U898, Nice F-06107, France.

After genotoxic stress, normal cells trigger DNA repair or, if unable to repair, 
undergo apoptosis to eradicate the cells that bear the risk of becoming
tumorigenic. Here we show that repression of the transcription factor, activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3), after ultraviolet (UV)-mediated genotoxic stress
impairs the DNA repair process. We provide evidence that ATF3 directly regulates 
the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA)-associated factor
KIAA0101/p15(PAF). We further show that the expressions of ATF3 and p15(PAF) is
sufficient to trigger the DNA repair machinery, and that attenuation of their
expression alters DNA repair mechanisms. We show that the expression of p15(PAF) 
compensates for a lack of ATF3 expression, thereby constituting a major effector 
of ATF3 in the DNA repair process. In addition, we provide evidence that p15(PAF)
expression is required for the correct function of PCNA during DNA repair, as
prevention of their interaction significantly alters DNA repair mechanisms.
Finally, defective DNA repair, because of the downregulation of p15(PAF)
expression, rendered the cells more sensitive to UV-induced cell death.
Therefore, our results suggest ATF3 and p15(PAF) as novel gatekeepers of genomic 
integrity after UV exposure.

PMID: 19219066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Adv Enzyme Regul. 2009;49(1):30-42. doi: 10.1016/j.advenzreg.2008.12.007. Epub
2008 Dec 31.

Endothelin-1 regulation of immediate early gene expression in cardiac myocytes:
negative feedback regulation of interleukin 6 by Atf3 and Klf2.

Clerk A(1), Cullingford TE, Fuller SJ, Giraldo A, Sugden PH.

Author information: 
(1)NHLI Division (Cardiovascular Sciences), Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College
London, Flowers Building, Armstrong Road, London SW72AZ, UK.
a.clerk@imperial.ac.uk

PMID: 19192484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Int J Cancer. 2009 Jun 1;124(11):2549-58. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24216.

Roles of ezrin in the growth and invasiveness of esophageal squamous carcinoma
cells.

Xie JJ(1), Xu LY, Xie YM, Zhang HH, Cai WJ, Zhou F, Shen ZY, Li EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Shantou
University, Shantou, People's Republic of China.

Ezrin, which crosslinks the cytoskeleton and plasma membrane, is involved in the 
growth and metastatic potential of cancer cells. Ezrin expression in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) was described recently, but its roles and the
underlying mechanism(s) remain unclear. In our study, we first showed that ezrin 
in ESCC cell is expressed in the nucleus as well as in the cytoplasm and plasma
membrane. Then, by using RNAi, we revealed that interference of ezrin expression 
suppressed the growth, adhesion and invasiveness of ESCC cells. Tumorigenesis
experiments revealed that ezrin may directly regulate tumor formation in vivo. To
explore the molecular mechanisms through which ezrin contributes to the
proliferation and invasiveness of ESCC cells, we used cDNA microarrays to analyze
ezrin knockdown cells and the control cells; of 39,000 genes examined, 297 were
differentially expressed upon ezrin knockdown, including some proliferation- and 
invasiveness-related genes such as ATF3, CTGF and CYR61. Furthermore, pathway
analysis showed that ezrin knockdown led to decreased activation of the TGF-beta 
and MAPK pathways, and ezrin-mediated cell invasiveness alteration was dependent 
on the activation of these pathways. Finally, immunohistochemical staining on 80 
ESCC specimens and 50 normal esophageal mucosae revealed that the expression
levels of 3 altered genes involved in the regulation of cell proliferation and
tumor metastasis, including CTGF, CYR61 and ATF3, were altered in ESCCs, and
their expression pattern correlated with ezrin expression. Taken together, we
propose that ezrin might function in the growth and invasiveness of ESCC cells
through the MAPK and TGF-beta pathways.

PMID: 19165868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 17;106(7):2200-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0807611106. Epub 2009 Jan 22.

ERAD inhibitors integrate ER stress with an epigenetic mechanism to activate
BH3-only protein NOXA in cancer cells.

Wang Q(1), Mora-Jensen H, Weniger MA, Perez-Galan P, Wolford C, Hai T, Ron D,
Chen W, Trenkle W, Wiestner A, Ye Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The ubiquitin-proteasome system has recently emerged as a major target for drug
development in cancer therapy. The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib has clinical
activity in multiple myeloma and mantle cell lymphoma. Here we report that
Eeyarestatin I (EerI), a chemical inhibitor that blocks endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-associated protein degradation, has antitumor and biologic activities
similar to bortezomib and can synergize with bortezomib. Like bortezomib,
EerI-induced cytotoxicity requires the up-regulation of the Bcl-2 homology3
(BH3)-only pro-apoptotic protein NOXA. We further demonstrate that both EerI and 
bortezomib activate NOXA via an unanticipated mechanism that requires cooperation
between two processes. First, these agents elicit an integrated stress response
program at the ER to activate the CREB/ATF transcription factors ATF3 and ATF4.
We show that ATF3 and ATF4 form a complex capable of binding to the NOXA
promoter, which is required for NOXA activation. Second, EerI and bortezomib also
block ubiquitination of histone H2A to relieve its inhibition on NOXA
transcription. Our results identify a class of anticancer agents that integrate
ER stress response with an epigenetic mechanism to induce cell death.

PMCID: PMC2629785
PMID: 19164757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Apr;23(4):475-85. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0284. Epub 2009 Jan
22.

Insulin regulates TRB3 and other stress-responsive gene expression through
induction of C/EBPbeta.

Du K(1), Ding J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts 02111, USA. kdu@tufts-nemc.org

Pseudokinase TRB3 is an inducible gene whose expression is regulated by stress
response and insulin and associated with insulin resistance and metabolic
syndrome. In this report, we have investigated the mechanism under which insulin 
regulates TRB3 gene expression and demonstrated that insulin induces TRB3
expression via C/EBPbeta. We found that in Fao hepatoma and 3T3-L1 adipocytes,
C/EBPbeta expression induced by insulin preceded that of TRB3 and that mutation
of the C/EBPbeta binding site in TRB3 promoter abolished the responsiveness of
the TRB3 gene to insulin. We further showed that ectopic expression of C/EBPbeta 
augmented, whereas knockdown of C/EBPbeta reduced, TRB3 expression induced by
insulin. In addition, we presented data to show that insulin, through a similar
mechanism under which insulin induces TRB3 expression, promotes the expression of
genes such as ANAS, ATF3, BIP, and CHOP, which are typical stress-responsive
genes. We also examined the impact of C/EBPbeta expression on Akt activation and 
found that inaction of C/EBPbeta not only augmented Akt activation but also
obliterated the suppression of Akt activation due to prolonged insulin
stimulation. We suggest, through induction of C/EBPbeta in hepatic cells and
adipocytes, that insulin induces the expression of stress-responsive genes, which
may represent a novel insulin action.

PMID: 19164449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Transplantation. 2009 Jan 27;87(2):178-88. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e3181938971.

Intragraft TNF receptor signaling contributes to activation of innate and
adaptive immunity in a renal allograft model.

Hummel M(1), Kurian SM, Lin S, Borodyanskiy A, Zhang Z, Li Z, Kim SJ, Salomon DR,
Abecassis M.

Author information: 
(1)Transplant Division, Department of Surgery, Northwestern University, Chicago, 
IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Increased levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) are a risk factor for
allograft rejection. In vitro studies have shown that binding of TNF to its
receptor activates signaling cascades that induce expression of many genes
involved in inflammation. The role of intragraft TNF receptor (TNFR) signaling in
activation of gene expression in allografts has not been studied.
METHODS: Gene expression profiling and quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction analysis were used to investigate the role of TNFR signaling in the
early intragraft activation of cellular gene expression in renal allografts at 2 
days posttransplant.
RESULTS: The TNFRs play a critical role in activating intragraft expression of
transcription factors controlling innate and adaptive immunity and stress
responses (interferon regulatory factor [IRF]1, IRF 8, Isgf3g, and ATF3) of
cytokines and receptors mediating inflammation (TNF, interleukin [IL]-6,
interferon-gamma, oncostatin M receptor [OMCR], toll-like receptor [TLR]2, and
IL-2Rgamma), of chemokines and adhesion molecules that recruit inflammatory cells
(Cxcl9, Cxcl11, E-selectin, and intracellular adhesion molecule [ICAM]-1), of
genes involved in costimulation of T cells and processing and presentation of
antigens (H2-DMb, Psmb8, and CD40), and genes that mediate the response to
interferons. In addition to its proinflammatory role, TNFR signaling induces
expression of SOCS3, a negative regulator of IL-6 and OSMR signaling and Nfkbie, 
and a negative regulator of TNFR signal transduction.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies illustrate the pleiotropic effect of TNF in both
activation and down-modulation of the immune response and the complex
interactions between the TNFRs and other cytokine signaling pathways in the early
allograft response.

PMID: 19155971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2009 Mar;234(3):263-77. doi: 10.3181/0805-RM-178. Epub
2009 Jan 14.

Ammonium glycyrrhizinate protects gastric epithelial cells from hydrogen
peroxide-induced cell death.

Oh HM(1), Lee S, Park YN, Choi EJ, Choi JY, Kim JA, Kweon JH, Han WC, Choi SC,
Han JK, Son JK, Lee SH, Jun CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, GIST, Gwangju 500-712, Korea.

Glycyrrhiza uralensis has a potential for preventing or ameliorating gastric
mucosal ulceration. To understand the molecular mechanism about the medicinal
effect of G. uralensis, we isolated four single compounds from G. uralensis and
one related compound and screened for the cellular protective effect against
H(2)O(2)-induced damage in gastric epithelial AGS cells. Interestingly, we found 
that ammonium glycyrrhizinate (AG) prepared from glycyrrhizin dramatically
protects AGS cells from H(2)O(2)-induced damage as measured by the integrity of
actin cytoskeleton. AG also inhibited FeSO(4)-induced reactive oxygen radicals in
a dose-dependent manner, suggesting the role for AG as a free radical scavenger. 
To better understand the protective role of AG at the transcriptional level, we
performed genome-wide expression profiling using high-density oligonucleotide
microarrays, followed by validation using RT-PCR. Among the 33,096 genes that
were screened in the microarray, 936 genes were found to be differentially
expressed in a statistically significant manner in the presence or absence of
H(2)O(2) and AG. Among the 936 genes, 51 genes were differentially expressed at
least 3-fold in response to the H(2)O(2) treatment. AG blocked the expression of 
genes related to apoptotic cell death (GDF15, ATF3, TNFRSF10A, NALP1) or
oxidative stress path-ways (HMOX1) which was elevated in response to H(2)O(2)
treatment, suggesting a potential protective role for AG in oxidative
stress-induced cell death. Collectively, current results demonstrate that AG is a
novel antioxidant that could be effective for the treatment of gastric diseases
related to the oxidative stress-induced mucosal damage.

PMID: 19144869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Leuk Res. 2009 Jul;33(7):913-8. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2008.11.006. Epub 2009 Jan
13.

Testican 3 expression in adult T-cell leukemia.

Kamioka M(1), Imamura J, Komatsu N, Daibata M, Sugiura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kochi University, Kochi 783-8505, Japan.
mkamioka@kochi-u.ac.jp

Adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) is an aggressive disease characterized by visceral
invasion, and ATL regulates matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activities of the
endothelial cells. The controlling system of MMP activities in ATL is regulated
by various factors such as Emmprin and tissue inhibitor of MMP. In this study, we
demonstrated that Testican 3 expression in ATL decreased the activity of MMP.
Furthermore, we showed that the expression of Testican 3 was regulated by
activating transcriptional factor 3 in human T-lymphotropic virus type I-related 
cell lines. Thus, Testican 3 is a novel regulator to reduce the activity of MMP
in ATL.

PMID: 19144404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Apr;37(5):1438-51. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn1082. Epub 2009
Jan 9.

Differential usage of alternate promoters of the human stress response gene ATF3 
in stress response and cancer cells.

Miyazaki K(1), Inoue S, Yamada K, Watanabe M, Liu Q, Watanabe T, Adachi MT,
Tanaka Y, Kitajima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute and Laboratory 
of Genome Structure and Regulation, School of Biomedical Science, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, Tokyo, 113-8510, Japan.

Stress response gene ATF3 plays a pleiotropic role in determining cell fate in
response to mitogenic or stress stimuli. An alternate promoter of the human ATF3 
gene (designated P1 in this study) has recently been reported, which is located
approximately 43.5 kb upstream of the previously reported P2 promoter. We showed 
here that the P1 promoter is highly conserved between human and mouse and is
functional in response to various stimuli, whereas the P1 promoter was dominantly
induced by serum and the P2 promoter was more efficiently activated in response
to TGF-beta and oncogenic HRAS. The P1 promoter contains multiple transcriptional
start sites, and the different 5'-UTRs markedly affected their translation in
response to stress. In human prostate and Hodgkin Reed-Sternberg cancer cells
with elevated expression of ATF3, the P1 promoter was constitutively activated
and its chromatin structure was modified into active configuration. The
differential usage of alternate promoters of the ATF3 gene at both
transcriptional and translational level and the modification of chromatin
structure may provide a novel mechanism for expressing ATF3 in determining cell
fate during stress response and cancer.

PMCID: PMC2655689
PMID: 19136462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Brain Res. 2009 Feb 23;1256:43-54. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.12.032. Epub 2008
Dec 24.

Sox11 transcription factor modulates peripheral nerve regeneration in adult mice.

Jankowski MP(1), McIlwrath SL, Jing X, Cornuet PK, Salerno KM, Koerber HR, Albers
KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 200
Lothrop Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

The ability of adult peripheral sensory neurons to undergo functional and
anatomical recovery following nerve injury is due in part to successful
activation of transcriptional regulatory pathways. Previous in vitro evidence had
suggested that the transcription factor Sox11, a HMG-domain containing protein
that is highly expressed in developing sensory neurons, is an important component
of this regenerative transcriptional control program. To further test the role of
Sox11 in an in vivo system, we developed a new approach to specifically target
small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) conjugated to the membrane permeable molecule
Penetratin to injured sensory afferents. Injection of Sox11 siRNAs into the mouse
saphenous nerve caused a transient knockdown of Sox11 mRNA that transiently
inhibited in vivo regeneration. Electron microscopic level analysis of Sox11
RNAi-injected nerves showed that regeneration of myelinated and unmyelinated
axons was inhibited. Nearly all neurons in ganglia of crushed nerves that were
Sox11 immunopositive showed colabeling for the stress and injury-associated
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3). In addition, treatment with Sox11
siRNAs in vitro and in vivo caused a transcriptional and translational level
reduction in ATF3 expression. These anatomical and expression data support an
intrinsic role for Sox11 in events that underlie successful regeneration
following peripheral nerve injury.

PMCID: PMC2666926
PMID: 19133245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Mar;23(3):402-11. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0370. Epub 2009 Jan
8.

GnRH-regulated expression of Jun and JUN target genes in gonadotropes requires a 
functional interaction between TCF/LEF family members and beta-catenin.

Salisbury TB(1), Binder AK, Grammer JC, Nilson JH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, 639 Fulmer Hall, Washington State University 
99164-4660, USA.

GnRH regulates gonadotrope function through a complex transcriptional network
that includes three members of the immediate early gene family: Egr1, Jun, and
Atf3. These DNA-binding proteins act alone or in pairs to confer hormonal
responsiveness to Cga, Lhb, Fshb, and Gnrhr. Herein we suggest that the
transcriptional response of Jun requires a functional interaction between the
T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) family of DNA-binding proteins
and beta-catenin (officially CTNNB1), a coactivator of TCF/LEF. Supporting data
include demonstration that GnRH increases activity of TOPflash, a
TCF/LEF-dependent luciferase reporter, in LbetaT2 cells, a gonadotrope-derived
cell line. Additional cotransfection experiments indicate that a
dominant-negative form of TCF7L2 (TCFDN) that binds DNA, but not beta-catenin,
blocks GnRH induction of TOPflash. Overexpression of AXIN, an inhibitor of
beta-catenin, also reduces GnRH stimulation of TOPflash. Transduction of LbetaT2 
cells with TCFDN adenoviruses diminishes GnRH stimulation of Jun mRNA without
altering expression of Egr1 and Atf3, two other immediate early genes that confer
GnRH responsiveness. Reduction of beta-catenin in LbetaT2 cells, through stable
expression of short hairpin RNA, also selectively compromises GnRH regulation of 
Jun expression and levels of JUN protein. Finally, overexpression of TCFDN
attenuates GnRH regulation of Cga promoter activity, a known downstream target of
JUN. Together, these results indicate that GnRH regulation of Jun transcription
requires a functional interaction between TCF/LEF and beta-catenin and that
alteration of either impacts expression of JUN downstream targets such as Cga.

PMCID: PMC2654513
PMID: 19131506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Carcinog. 2009 Aug;48(8):692-702. doi: 10.1002/mc.20518.

Induction of apoptosis and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-activated gene 1
in pancreatic cancer cells by a glycyrrhetinic acid derivative.

Jutooru I(1), Chadalapaka G, Chintharlapalli S, Papineni S, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USA.

Methyl 2-cyano-3,11-dioxo-18beta-olean-1,12-dien-30-oate (CDODA-Me) is a
synthetic triterpenoid derived from glycyrrhetinic acid, a bioactive
phytochemical in licorice, CDODA-Me inhibits growth of Panc1 and Panc28
pancreatic cancer cell lines and activates peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma (PPARgamma)-dependent transactivation in these cells. CDODA-Me
also induced p21 and p27 protein expression and downregulates cyclin D1; however,
these responses were receptor-independent. CDODA-Me induced apoptosis in Panc1
and Panc28 cells, and this was accompanied by receptor-independent induction of
the proapoptotic proteins early growth response-1 (Egr-1), nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drug-activated gene-1 (NAG-1), and activating transcription
factor-3 (ATF3). Induction of NAG-1 and Egr-1 by CDODA-Me was dependent on
activation of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3-K) and/or p42 and p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways but there were differences
between Panc28 and Panc1 cells. Induction of NAG-1 in Panc28 cells was p38-MAPK- 
and PI3-K-dependent but Egr-1-independent, whereas induction in Panc1 cells was
associated with activation of p38-MAPK, PI3-K, and p42-MAPK and was only
partially Egr-1-dependent. This is the first report of the induction of the
proapoptotic protein NAG-1 in pancreatic cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2746008
PMID: 19125423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 1;182(1):466-76.

CHAC1/MGC4504 is a novel proapoptotic component of the unfolded protein response,
downstream of the ATF4-ATF3-CHOP cascade.

Mungrue IN(1), Pagnon J, Kohannim O, Gargalovic PS, Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, CA 90095,
USA. imungrue@yahoo.com

To understand pathways mediating the inflammatory responses of human aortic
endothelial cells to oxidized phospholipids, we previously used a combination of 
genetics and genomics to model a coexpression network encompassing >1000 genes.
CHAC1 (cation transport regulator-like protein 1), a novel gene regulated by
ox-PAPC (oxidized 1-palmitoyl-2-arachidonyl-sn-3-glycero-phosphorylcholine), was 
identified in a co-regulated group of genes enriched for components of the ATF4
(activating transcription factor 4) arm of the unfolded protein response pathway.
Herein, we characterize the role of CHAC1 and validate the network model. We
first define the activation of CHAC1 mRNA by chemical unfolded protein
response-inducers, but not other cell stressors. We then define activation of
CHAC1 by the ATF4-ATF3-CHOP (C/EBP homologous protein), and not parallel XBP1 (X 
box-binding protein 1) or ATF6 pathways, using siRNA and/or overexpression
plasmids. To examine the subset of genes downstream of CHAC1, we used expression 
microarray analysis to identify a list of 227 differentially regulated genes. We 
validated the activation of TNFRSF6B (tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily,
member 6b), a FASL decoy receptor, in cells treated with CHAC1 small interfering 
RNA. Finally, we showed that CHAC1 overexpression enhanced apoptosis, while CHAC1
small interfering RNA suppressed apoptosis, as determined by TUNEL, PARP
(poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase) cleavage, and AIF (apoptosis-inducing factor)
nuclear translocation.

PMCID: PMC2846782
PMID: 19109178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Biochem Pharmacol. 2009 Mar 15;77(6):1105-15. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2008.11.028.
Epub 2008 Dec 3.

Epithelial cell survival by activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in response 
to chemical ribosome-inactivating stress.

Yang H(1), Park SH, Choi HJ, Moon Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical Research Institute, Pusan
National University School of Medicine, 1-10 Ami-dong Seo-Ku, Busan 602-739,
Republic of Korea.

Ribotoxic stress responses lead to the expression of genes important for cellular
homeostasis by modulating cell survival, proliferation and differentiation. ATF3 
was investigated for its modulation of the epithelial cellular integrity in
response to mucosal ribotoxic stress. ATF3 expression was up-regulated by
chemical agents causing ribotoxic stress such as deoxynivalenol and anisomycin in
different types of intestinal epithelial cells. Moreover, reduction of ATF3 gene 
expression promoted ribotoxic stress-triggered programmed cell death, implicating
a protective role of ATF3 in epithelial cell survival. Mechanistically,
stabilization of ATF3 messenger RNA and protein played a critical role in
maintaining enhanced levels of ATF3 production in response to the ribotoxic
chemical agent. For ATF3 mRNA stability, p38 specific inhibitor SB203580 was the 
most efficient agent for suppression, suggesting the involvement of the p38 MAP
kinase in ATF3 mRNA stabilization. In addition, the p38 MAP kinase as well as its
downstream mediator glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) was involved in
ATF3 protein stabilization caused by chemical ribotoxic stress in human
epithelial cells. As another separate signaling cascade, double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA)-activated protein kinase (PKR) was demonstrated to translationally
modulate ATF3 expression and contribute to the epithelial cell survival. PKR
interference caused cells to be more susceptible to cell death caused by the
chemical ribotoxic stress. The results of this study showed that enhanced ATF3
production was associated with cellular defenses by maintaining the epithelial
survival after ribotoxic mucosal insults.

PMID: 19101521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2009 Jul;41(1):114-23. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2008-0146OC. 
Epub 2008 Dec 18.

Alterations in gene expression in human mesothelial cells correlate with mineral 
pathogenicity.

Shukla A(1), MacPherson MB, Hillegass J, Ramos-Nino ME, Alexeeva V, Vacek PM,
Bond JP, Pass HI, Steele C, Mossman BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont College of Medicine, 89
Beaumont Avenue, Burlington, VT 05405, USA. Arti.Shukla@uvm.edu

Human mesothelial cells (LP9/TERT-1) were exposed to low and high (15 and 75
microm(2)/cm(2) dish) equal surface area concentrations of crocidolite asbestos, 
nonfibrous talc, fine titanium dioxide (TiO2), or glass beads for 8 or 24 hours. 
RNA was then isolated for Affymetrix microarrays, GeneSifter analysis and
QRT-PCR. Gene changes by asbestos were concentration- and time-dependent. At low 
nontoxic concentrations, asbestos caused significant changes in mRNA expression
of 29 genes at 8 hours and of 205 genes at 24 hours, whereas changes in mRNA
levels of 236 genes occurred in cells exposed to high concentrations of asbestos 
for 8 hours. Human primary pleural mesothelial cells also showed the same
patterns of increased gene expression by asbestos. Nonfibrous talc at low
concentrations in LP9/TERT-1 mesothelial cells caused increased expression of 1
gene Activating Transcription Factor 3 (ATF3) at 8 hours and no changes at 24
hours, whereas expression levels of 30 genes were elevated at 8 hours at high
talc concentrations. Fine TiO2 or glass beads caused no changes in gene
expression. In human ovarian epithelial (IOSE) cells, asbestos at high
concentrations elevated expression of two genes (NR4A2, MIP2) at 8 hours and 16
genes at 24 hours that were distinct from those elevated in mesothelial cells.
Since ATF3 was the most highly expressed gene by asbestos, its functional
importance in cytokine production by LP9/TERT-1 cells was assessed using siRNA
approaches. Results reveal that ATF3 modulates production of inflammatory
cytokines (IL-1 beta, IL-13, G-CSF) and growth factors (VEGF and PDGF-BB) in
human mesothelial cells.

PMCID: PMC2701958
PMID: 19097984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Occup Health. 2009;51(1):57-63. Epub 2008 Dec 19.

Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate upregulates ATF3 expression and suppresses apoptosis 
in mouse genital tubercle.

Liu X(1), Zhang DY, Li YS, Xiong J, He DW, Lin T, Li XL, Wei GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Urology, Chongqing Children's Hospital, Chongqing,
China.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the effect of di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) on
the expression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and apoptosis of fetal
mouse genital tubercle (GT).
METHODS: In this developmental toxicity study, pregnant C57BL/6 mice were exposed
to corn oil or DEHP (100 or 500 mg/kg/day) from embryonic day 12 (ED12) to ED16. 
Apoptosis was characterized by Terminal transferase dUTP nick end labeling
(TUNEL) assay. Using RT-PCR and western blot, the expressions of ATF3 and
apoptosis-related genes (P53, Bcl-2 and Bax) were investigated.
RESULTS: Apoptosis of fetal mouse GT cells notably decreased after DEHP
treatment. DEHP activated ATF3 both at the mRNA and protein levels in GT.
Furthermore, pro-apoptotic P53 was downregulated and the ratio of anti-apoptotic 
(Bcl-2)/pro-apoptotic (Bax) was not significantly changed.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that DEHP may induce external genital defects 
via a mechanism involving apoptosis, which might correlate with the regulation of
ATF3 and P53 expressions.

PMID: 19096195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Blood. 2009 Apr 23;113(17):4027-37. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-09-179796. Epub 2008 
Dec 18.

Identification of a potent natural triterpenoid inhibitor of proteosome
chymotrypsin-like activity and NF-kappaB with antimyeloma activity in vitro and
in vivo.

Tiedemann RE(1), Schmidt J, Keats JJ, Shi CX, Zhu YX, Palmer SE, Mao X, Schimmer 
AD, Stewart AK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Mayo Clinic,
Scottsdale, AZ 85259, USA. tiedemann.rodger@mayo.edu

As multiple myeloma tumors universally dysregulate cyclin D genes we conducted
high-throughput chemical library screens for compounds that induce suppression of
cyclin D2 promoter transcription. The top-ranked compound was a natural
triterpenoid, pristimerin. Strikingly, the early transcriptional response of
cells treated with pristimerin closely resembles cellular responses elicited by
proteosome inhibitors, with rapid induction of heat shock proteins, activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3), and CHOP. Enzymatic assays and immunoblotting
confirm that pristimerin rapidly (< 90 minutes) and specifically inhibits
chymotrypsin-like proteosome activity at low concentrations (< 100 nM) and causes
accumulation of cellular ubiquitinated proteins. Notably, cytotoxic triterpenoids
including pristimerin inhibit NF-kappaB activation via inhibition of IKK alpha or
IKK beta, whereas proteosome inhibitors instead suppress NF-kappaB function by
impairing degradation of ubiquitinated I kappaB. By inhibiting both IKK and the
proteosome, pristimerin causes overt suppression of constitutive NF-kappaB
activity in myeloma cells that may mediate its suppression of cyclin D. Multiple 
myeloma is exquisitely sensitive to proteosome or NF-kappaB pathway inhibition.
Consistent with this, pristimerin is potently and selectively lethal to primary
myeloma cells (IC(50) < 100 nM), inhibits xenografted plasmacytoma tumors in
mice, and is synergistically cytotoxic with bortezomib--providing the rationale
for pharmaceutical development of triterpenoid dual-function proteosome/NF-kappaB
inhibitors as therapeutics for human multiple myeloma and related malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3952546
PMID: 19096011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. PLoS One. 2008;3(12):e3943. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003943. Epub 2008 Dec 15.

Identification of G1-regulated genes in normally cycling human cells.

Beyrouthy MJ(1), Alexander KE, Baldwin A, Whitfield ML, Bass HW, McGee D, Hurt
MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Florida State
University, Tallahassee, Florida, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Obtaining synchronous cell populations is essential for cell-cycle
studies. Methods such as serum withdrawal or use of drugs which block cells at
specific points in the cell cycle alter cellular events upon re-entry into the
cell cycle. Regulatory events occurring in early G1 phase of a new cell cycle
could have been overlooked.
METHODOLOGY AND FINDINGS: We used a robotic mitotic shake-off apparatus to select
cells in late mitosis for genome-wide gene expression studies. Two separate
microarray experiments were conducted, one which involved isolation of RNA hourly
for several hours from synchronous cell populations, and one experiment which
examined gene activity every 15 minutes from late telophase of mitosis into G1
phase. To verify synchrony of the cell populations under study, we utilized
methods including BrdU uptake, FACS, and microarray analyses of histone gene
activity. We also examined stress response gene activity. Our analysis enabled
identification of 200 early G1-regulated genes, many of which currently have
unknown functions. We also confirmed the expression of a set of genes candidates 
(fos, atf3 and tceb) by qPCR to further validate the newly identified genes.
CONCLUSION AND SIGNIFICANCE: Genome-scale expression analyses of the first two
hours of G1 in naturally cycling cells enabled the discovery of a unique set of
G1-regulated genes, many of which currently have unknown functions, in cells
progressing normally through the cell division cycle. This group of genes may
contain future targets for drug development and treatment of human disease.

PMCID: PMC2600614
PMID: 19079774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Photochem Photobiol. 2009 May-Jun;85(3):652-62. doi:
10.1111/j.1751-1097.2008.00485.x. Epub 2008 Dec 8.

Ultraviolet radiation-induced transcription is associated with gene-specific
histone acetylation.

Pollack BP(1), Sapkota B, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA,
USA. bppolla@emory.edu

UVR is an important environmental carcinogen and a powerful modulator of the
cutaneous immune system. Exposure to UVR activates many signaling pathways
leading to changes in the expression of several hundred genes. While the covalent
modification of histones has been shown to play a central role in regulating gene
expression, the impact of UVR on histone modifications and the contribution of
histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) to the
UVR-induced transcriptional response have not been completely characterized. In
this report, we have examined the impact of UVR on histone H3 K9/14 acetylation. 
The potential role of UVR-induced histone acetylation in the UVR transcriptional 
response was also explored using the HAT inhibitor curcumin and HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A (TSA). We found that UVR caused an increase in histone H3
acetylation within the promoter regions of ATF3, COX2, IL-8, MKP1 and MnSOD. In
most of the regions examined, histone H3 acetylation peaked 24 h after UVR and
then returned to baseline levels by 72 h. The induction of ATF3, COX2 and MKP1
was blocked in the presence of curcumin at doses that decrease in vivo histone H3
acetylation but not at lower doses that do not affect acetylation levels. We also
provide evidence that for ATF3, a transcriptional superinduction occurs after
repeat exposures to UVR that can be recapitulated when the second UVR exposure is
replaced with TSA treatment. Thus, UVR can alter histone acetylation within human
keratinocytes and these changes may contribute to the UVR-transcriptional
response.

PMID: 19076306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jan 23;378(4):789-94. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.11.124. Epub 2008 Dec 6.

Amino acid limitation induces down-regulation of WNT5a at transcriptional level.

Wang Z(1), Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

An aberrant WNT signaling contributes to the development and progression of
multiple cancers. WNT5a is one of the WNT signaling molecules. This study was
designed to test the hypothesis that amino acid deprivation induces changes in
the WNT signaling pathway in colon cancer cells. Results showed that targets of
the amino acid response pathway, ATF3 and p21, were induced in the human colon
cancer cell line SW480 during amino acid limitation. There was a significant
decrease in the WNT5a mRNA level following amino acid deprivation. The
down-regulation of WNT5a mRNA by amino acid deprivation is not due to mRNA
destabilization. There is a reduction of nuclear beta-catenin protein level by
amino acid limitation. Under amino acid limitation, phosphorylation of ERK1/2 was
increased and the blockage of ERK1/2 by the inhibitor U0126 partially restored
WNT5a mRNA level. In conclusion, amino acid limitation in colon cancer cells
induces phosphorylation of ERK1/2, which then down-regulates WNT5a expression.

PMID: 19063862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 13;284(7):4132-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808118200. Epub 2008
Dec 7.

Dual regulation of Cdc25A by Chk1 and p53-ATF3 in DNA replication checkpoint
control.

Demidova AR(1), Aau MY, Zhuang L, Yu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR (Agency
for Science, Technology and Research), Biopolis, Singapore 138672.
demidovaa@gis.a-star.edu.sg

Eukaryotic cells respond to DNA damage and stalled replication forks by
activating signaling pathways that promote cell cycle arrest and DNA repair. A
systematic screening of the protein kinase small interfering RNA library reveals 
that Chk1 and ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) and Rad3-related (ATR) are the 
main kinases responsible for intra-S-phase checkpoint upon topoisomerase I
inhibitor camptothecin-induced DNA damage. It is well known that
ATR-Chk1-mediated protein degradation of Cdc25A protein phosphatase is a crucial 
mechanism conferring this checkpoint activation. Here we describe another
mechanism underlying Cdc25A down-regulation in response to DNA damage that occurs
at the transcriptional level. We show that activation of tumor suppressor p53 by 
DNA damage results in inhibition of Cdc25A transcription as a result of
activation of transcriptional repressor ATF3 that directly binds to the Cdc25A
promoter. In cells deficient in both Chk1 and p53, Cdc25A down-regulation upon
camptothecin-induced DNA damage is completely abolished, leading to severe
defects in cell cycle checkpoints and remarkable cell death in mitosis. Our
findings reveal two independent mechanisms acting in concert in regulation of
Cdc25A in DNA damage response. Although Chk1 affects Cdc25A via rapid
phosphorylation and protein turnover, inhibition of Cdc25A transcription by
p53-ATF3 is required for the maintenance of cell cycle arrest.

PMID: 19060337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Chem Biol Interact. 2009 Mar 16;178(1-3):242-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2008.10.055.
Epub 2008 Nov 11.

Aldose reductase decreases endoplasmic reticulum stress in ischemic hearts.

Keith RJ(1), Haberzettl P, Vladykovskaya E, Hill BG, Kaiserova K, Srivastava S,
Barski O, Bhatnagar A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Cardiology, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY
40202, United States.

Aldose reductase (AR) is a multi-functional AKR (AKR1B1) that catalyzes the
reduction of a wide range of endogenous and xenobiotic aldehydes and their
glutathione conjugates with high efficiency. Previous studies from our laboratory
show that AR protects against myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury, however,
the mechanisms by which it confers cardioprotection remain unknown. Because AR
metabolizes aldehydes generated from lipid peroxidation, we tested the hypothesis
that it protects against ischemic injury by preventing ER stress induced by
excessive accumulation of aldehyde-modified proteins in the ischemic heart. In
cell culture experiments, exposure to model lipid peroxidation
aldehydes-4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal (HNE), 1-palmitoyl-2-oxovaleroyl
phosphatidylcholine (POVPC) or acrolein led to an increase in the phosphorylation
of ER stress markers PERK and eIF2-alpha and an increase in ATF3. The reduced
metabolite of POVPC 1-palmitoyl-2-hydroxyvaleroyl phosphatidylcholine (PHVPC) was
unable to stimulate JNK phosphorylation. No increase in phospho-eIF2-alpha, ATF3 
or phospho-PERK was observed in cells treated with the reduced HNE metabolite
1,4-dihydroxynonenol (DHN). Lysates prepared from isolated perfused mouse hearts 
subjected to 15 min of global ischemia followed by 30 min of reperfusion ex vivo 
showed greater phosphorylation of PERK and eIF2-alpha than hearts subjected to
aerobic perfusion alone. Ischemia-induced increases in phospho-PERK and
phospho-eIF2-alpha were diminished in the hearts of cardiomyocyte-specific
transgenic mice overexpressing the AR transgene. These observations support the
notion that by removing aldehydic products of lipid peroxidation, AR decreases
ischemia-reperfusion injury by diminishing ER stress.

PMCID: PMC3178409
PMID: 19041636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Invest New Drugs. 2009 Dec;27(6):543-51. doi: 10.1007/s10637-008-9206-4. Epub
2008 Nov 28.

Bortezomib treatment of ovarian cancer cells mediates endoplasmic reticulum
stress, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis.

Brüning A(1), Burger P, Vogel M, Rahmeh M, Friese K, Lenhard M, Burges A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology, University Hospital Munich, Maistrasse
11, 80337, Munich, Germany. ansgar.bruening@med.uni-muenchen.de

Bortezomib, an approved drug for the treatment of certain haematological
neoplasms, is currently being tested in clinical trials as a potential
therapeutic agent against several types of solid cancer, including ovarian
cancer. We have analyzed the effect of bortezomib on ovarian cancer cells and
tissue explants either as a single agent or in combination with carboplatin,
taxol, or TRAIL (tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand).
Bortezomib alone efficiently induced apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells. Apoptosis
was preceded by an upregulation of the endoplasmic reticulum stress sensor ATF3, 
and increased the expression of cytoplasmic heat shock proteins. Bortezomib
enhanced the sensitivity of ovarian cancer cells and tissue explants to an
apoptosis-inducing TRAIL receptor antibody by upregulating the TRAIL receptor
DR5. In contrast to the synergistic effect observed for TRAIL, the efficacy of
the taxol treatment was reduced by bortezomib, and bortezomib inhibited the G2/M 
phase accumulation of ovarian cancer cells treated with taxol. Bortezomib alone
or in combination with taxol induced a cell cycle arrest within the S phase, and 
downregulation of cdk1, a cyclin-dependent kinase that is necessary for the entry
into the M phase. Thus, bortezomib can be regarded as a promising agent for the
treatment of ovarian cancer and could either be administered as a single agent or
in combination with TRAIL. However, a combination treatment with taxanes may not 
be beneficial and may even be less effective.

PMID: 19039521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Placenta. 2009 Jan;30(1):66-73. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2008.10.009. Epub 2008
Nov 25.

Hyperosmolar stress induces global mRNA responses in placental trophoblast stem
cells that emulate early post-implantation differentiation.

Liu J(1), Xu W, Sun T, Wang F, Puscheck E, Brigstock D, Wang QT, Davis R,
Rappolee DA.

Author information: 
(1)C.S. Mott Center for Human Growth and Development, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201,
USA.

Hyperosmolar stress acts in two ways on the implanting embryo and its major
constituent, placental trophoblast stem cells (TSC). Stress causes homeostasis
that slows development with lesser cell accumulation, increased cell cycle
arrest, and apoptosis. Stress may also cause placental differentiation at
implantation. To test for the homeostatic and differentiation-inducing
consequences of stress, TSC were exposed to hyperosmolar stress for 24 h and
tested using whole mouse genome arrays and Real-time quantitative (Q)PCR. At 0.5 
h, all 31 highly changing mRNA (>1.5-fold compared with unstressed TSC)
decreased, but by 24 h 158/288 genes were upregulated. Many genes upregulated at 
24 h were near baseline levels in unstressed TSC, suggesting new transcription.
Thus few genes change during the early stress response, but by 24 h TSC have
adapted to start new transcription with large gene sets. Types of genes
upregulated at 24 h included homeostatic genes regulating growth and DNA damage
induced (GADD45beta/gamma), activator protein (AP)-1 (junB/junC/ATF3/4), heat
shock proteins (HSP22/68), and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor [CDKI; p15,
p21]. But, stress also induced transcription factors that mediate TSC
differentiation to trophoblast giant cells (TGC) (Stra13, HES1, GATA-binding2),
placental hormones [proliferin, placental lactogen (PL)1, prolactin-like protein 
(PLP)M], and extracellular matrix genes (CCN1/2). Transcription factors for later
placental cell lineages, spongiotrophoblast (MASH2, TPBPalpha) and
syncytiotrophoblast (GCM1, TEF5) and placental hormones (PLPA, PLII) were not
induced by 24 h stress. Thus stress induced the temporal and spatial placental
differentiation normal after implantation. Although differentiation was induced, 
markers of TSC stemness such as inhibitor of differentiation (ID)2 remained at
100% of levels of unstressed TSC, suggesting that retained mRNA might mediate
dedifferentiation were stress to subside.

PMCID: PMC3343317
PMID: 19036436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Brain Res. 2009 Jan 16;1249:19-33. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.10.050. Epub 2008
Oct 31.

Identification of new Nerve Growth Factor-responsive immediate-early genes.

Dijkmans TF(1), van Hooijdonk LW, Schouten TG, Kamphorst JT, Fitzsimons CP,
Vreugdenhil E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Pharmacology, Leiden/Amsterdam Center for Drug Research,
Leiden University Medical Center, PO Box 9502, 2300 RA, Leiden, The Netherlands. 
tdijkmans@gmail.com

Stimulation of the PC12 pheochromocytoma cell line with the prototypical
neurotrophin Nerve Growth Factor (NGF) induces a cellular response of neuronal
differentiation and is therefore a widely used model to gain molecular insight
into this process. Classically, the transcriptional response to extracellular
stimuli such as NGF is divided in genes that require no protein synthesis prior
to their induction (immediate-early genes) and genes that do (delayed-response
genes). Because an increasing number of studies have reported important roles for
immediate-early genes (IEGs) in neuronal differentiation, the goal of the present
study was to identify previously unrecognized NGF-responsive IEGs. Stimulation
with NGF for 15, 30, 60 and 120 min resulted in a typical transient induction of 
many known NGF-responsive IEGs. To identify candidate new genes, we analyzed
27000 measured expression profiles and selected 10 genes for further study. Five 
genes, including Cbp/p300-interacting transactivator 2 (Cited2), Kruppel-like
factor 4 (Klf4), v-Maf musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene family, protein F
(Maff), Kruppel-like factor 10 (Klf10 or Tieg) and Activating transcription
factor 3 (Atf3) were selected and positively validated by qPCR. NGF-induced
activation of all five genes seems to be mediated by MAPK and PI3K-mediated
pathways. Additionally, we tested translation-independent induction and showed
that NGF induced upregulation of these genes in both the subclonal Neuroscreen-1 
PC12 and parental PC12 cell line. These 5 transcription factors have not been
previously reported as NGF-responsive IEGs, however have previously been reported
as important regulators of cell differentiation and proliferation in different
systems. These observations may therefore provide important new information on
the molecular mechanisms underlying NGF-induced differentiation.

PMID: 19013137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2008 Sep;14(9):796-9.

[Isolation of Id1 interaction protein in human prostate cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu XL(1), Xie JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Medical College of Qingdao University, Qingdao,
Shandong 266021, China. xiaoling_yu2004@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To isolate the inhibitor of DNA binding 1 (Id1) interaction protein
and to determine the role and action mechanism of Id1 in human prostate cancer.
METHODS: The expression vector pET-28a/Id1 was established and used as a bait to 
prey the interaction protein by pull-down assay.
RESULTS: A clear interaction protein band was observed by SDS-PAGE, which was
found to be activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) by Western blotting.
CONCLUSION: Id1 may play a role in human prostate cancer by interacting with
ATF3.

PMID: 18998462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Toxicol Pathol. 2008 Dec;36(7):950-7. doi: 10.1177/0192623308327118. Epub 2008
Oct 31.

Hepatocarcinogenic susceptibility of fenofibrate and its possible mechanism of
carcinogenicity in a two-stage hepatocarcinogenesis model of rasH2 mice.

Kawai M(1), Jin M, Nishimura J, Dewa Y, Saegusa Y, Matsumoto S, Taniai E,
Shibutani M, Mitsumori K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Tokyo University of Agriculture and
Technology, Fuchu, Tokyo, Japan. m_kawai@cc.tuat.ac.jp

Fenofibrate (FF) has previously been shown to induce hepatocellular neoplasia in 
a conventional mouse bioassay (NDA 1993), but there has been no report to examine
the carcinogenic susceptibility of rasH2 mice to this chemical. In the present
study, male rasH2 mice were subjected to a two-thirds partial hepatectomy (PH),
followed by an N-diethylnitrosamine (DEN) initiation twenty-four hours after PH, 
and given a diet containing 0, 1200, or 2400 ppm FF for seven weeks. The
incidences of preneoplastic foci were significantly increased in mice from the
FF-treated groups. Immunohistochemistry revealed that significant increases in
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA)-positive cells and cytokeratin 8/18
positive foci were observed in FF-treated groups. In addition, the transgene and 
several downstream molecules such as c-myc, c-jun, activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3), and cyclin D1 were overexpressed in these groups. These results 
suggest that the hepatocarcinogenic activity of rasH2 mice to FF can be detected 
in this hepatocarcinogenesis model and that up-regulation of genes for the
ras/MAPK pathway and cell cycle was probably involved in the hepatocarcinogenic
mechanism of rasH2 mice.

PMID: 18978307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2009 Jan 1;234(1):14-24. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2008.09.019.
Epub 2008 Oct 7.

Role of endoplasmic reticulum stress in acrolein-induced endothelial activation.

Haberzettl P(1), Vladykovskaya E, Srivastava S, Bhatnagar A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

Acrolein is a ubiquitous environmental pollutant and an endogenous product of
lipid peroxidation. It is also generated during the metabolism of several drugs
and amino acids. In this study, we examined the effects of acrolein on
endothelial cells. Treatment of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs)
with 2 to 10 microM acrolein led to an increase in the phosphorylation of
eIF-2alpha within 10 to 30 min of exposure. This was followed by alternate
splicing of XBP-1 mRNA and an increase in the expression of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) chaperone genes Grp78 and Herp. Within 2-4 h of treatment,
acrolein also increased the abundance and the nuclear transport of the
transcription factors ATF3, AFT4, and CHOP. Acrolein-induced increase in ATF3 was
prevented by treating the cells with the chemical chaperone - phenylbutyric acid 
(PBA). Treatment with acrolein increased phosphorylation of ERK1/2, p38, and JNK.
The increase in JNK phosphorylation was prevented by PBA. Acrolein treatment led 
to activation and nuclear translocation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB and
an increase in TNF-alpha, IL-6 and IL-8, but not MCP-1, mRNA. Increased
expression of cytokine genes and NF-kappaB activation were not observed in cells 
treated with PBA. These findings suggest that exposure to acrolein induces ER
stress and triggers the unfolded protein response and that NF-kappaB activation
and stimulation of cytokine production by acrolein could be attributed, in part, 
to ER stress. Chemical chaperones of protein-folding may be useful in treating
toxicological and pathological states associated with excessive acrolein exposure
or production.

PMCID: PMC2936103
PMID: 18951912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Int J Cancer. 2009 Jan 15;124(2):494-501. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23973.

Nuclear factor kappa B subunit p50 promotes melanoma angiogenesis by upregulating
interleukin-6 expression.

Karst AM(1), Gao K, Nelson CC, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Skin Science, Jack Bell Research Centre,
Vancouver Coastal Health Research Institute, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) signaling is deregulated in many tumor types, 
resulting in aberrant expression and/or activation of NF-kappaB transcriptional
complexes. We have previously reported that nuclear expression of the NF-kappaB
subunit p50 is strongly correlated with melanoma progression and poor 5-year
patient survival. In this study, we used cDNA microarray to analyze the gene
expression profiles of melanoma cells overexpressing NF-kappaB p50. We found that
NF-kappaB p50 expression strongly induced interleukin-6 (IL-6) upregulation in
melanoma cells at both the transcriptional and translational levels and that IL-6
production by melanoma cells enhanced the growth of endothelial cells in vitro.
Expression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a negative regulator of
IL-6 gene transcription, inhibited p50-mediated IL-6 upregulation. Knockdown of
p50 expression using lentiviral-based shRNA abrogated IL-6 induction in melanoma 
cells and inhibited its effects on endothelial cell growth. Finally, we used an
in vivo matrigel plug assay to show that NF-kappaB p50 overexpression promotes
angiogenesis, while silencing NF-kappaB p50 inhibits blood vessel formation. Our 
results demonstrate for the first time that the NF-kappaB p50 subunit mediates
melanoma angiogenesis by specifically upregulating IL-6, highlighting a novel and
important role for the NF-kappaB p50/IL-6 signaling axis in melanoma progression.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18942706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Ther. 2009 Jan;17(1):42-50. doi: 10.1038/mt.2008.214. Epub 2008 Oct 21.

Nonviral retrograde gene transfer of human hepatocyte growth factor improves
neuropathic pain-related phenomena in rats.

Tsuchihara T(1), Ogata S, Nemoto K, Okabayashi T, Nakanishi K, Kato N, Morishita 
R, Kaneda Y, Uenoyama M, Suzuki S, Amako M, Kawai T, Arino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, National Defense Medical College,
Tokorozawa, Japan.

Peripheral nerve injury occasionally causes chronic neuropathic pain with
hyperalgesia and allodynia. However, its treatment is difficult. Here, we used a 
chronic constriction injury (CCI) model in rats to investigate the effects on
experimental neuropathic pain of the human hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) gene
delivered into the nervous system by retrograde axonal transport following its
repeated intramuscular transfer, using liposomes containing the hemagglutinating 
virus of Japan (HVJ). CCI (control) rats exhibited marked mechanical allodynia
and thermal hyperalgesia, and decreased blood flow in sciatic nerve and hind paw.
All these changes were significantly reversed by HGF gene transfer. In the
sciatic nerve in HGF-treated rats, the size-frequency distributions for
myelinated and unmyelinated axons each showed a rightward shift, the number of
myelinated axons >5 microm in diameter was significantly increased, and the mean 
diameter of unmyelinated axons was significantly increased (versus CCI rats).
Levels of P2X3, P2X4, and P2Y1 receptor mRNAs, and of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) mRNAs, were elevated in the ipsilateral 
dorsal root ganglia and/or sciatic nerve by CCI, and these levels were decreased 
by HGF gene transfer. These results may point toward a potential new treatment
strategy for chronic neuropathic pain in this model.

PMCID: PMC2834986
PMID: 18941443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cell Signal. 2009 Jan;21(1):69-78. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.09.015. Epub 2008 
Oct 7.

Mitochondrial dysfunction: glucokinase downregulation lowers interaction of
glucokinase with mitochondria, resulting in apoptosis of pancreatic beta-cells.

Lee JW(1), Kim WH, Lim JH, Song EH, Song J, Choi KY, Jung MH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolic Disease, Department of Biomedical Science, National
Institutes of Health, Seoul 122-701, South Korea.

Mitochondrial dysfunction has been considered a critical component in the
development of diabetes. In pancreatic beta-cells especially, mitochondrial
dysfunction impairs insulin secretion and the eventual apoptosis of beta-cells.
The aim of this study was to elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying these
events. Metabolic stress induced by antimycin or oligomycin was used to impair
mitochondrial function in MIN6N8 cells, a mouse pancreatic beta-cells, and the
effects of glucokinase (GCK) and mitochondria were investigated. Concurrent with 
reduction in mitochondrial membrane potential (DeltaPsim) and cellular ATP
content, impaired mitochondrial function reduced GCK expression and resulted in
decreased insulin secretion and beta-cell apoptosis. Specifically, lowered GCK
expression led to decreased interactions between GCK and mitochondria, which
increased Bax binding to mitochondria and cytochrome C release into cytoplasm.
However, these events were blocked by treatment with the antioxidant,
N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC), as well as GCK overexpression. Moreover, examination of 
the GCK promoter in antimycin-treated cells demonstrated that the promoter region
within -287 bases from transcription site is involved in the transcriptional
repression of GCK by mitochondrial stress, whose region contains a putative
binding site for pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1 (PDX-1). Mitochondrial stress
reduced PDX-1 expression, and increased ATF3 expression dependent on reactive
oxygen species (ROS). Collectively, these data demonstrate that mitochondrial
dysfunction by metabolic stress reduces GCK expression through PDX-1
downregulation via production of ROS, which then decreases the association of GCK
with mitochondria, resulting in pancreatic beta-cell apoptosis and reduction of
insulin secretion.

PMID: 18940247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Cancer Res. 2008 Oct 15;68(20):8333-41. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0080.

Down-regulation of inhibition of differentiation-1 via activation of activating
transcription factor 3 and Smad regulates REIC/Dickkopf-3-induced apoptosis.

Kashiwakura Y(1), Ochiai K, Watanabe M, Abarzua F, Sakaguchi M, Takaoka M,
Tanimoto R, Nasu Y, Huh NH, Kumon H.

Author information: 
(1)Innovation Center Okayama for Nanobio-Targeted Therapy, Okayama University
Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama,
Japan. yu-kashi@cj9.so-net.ne.jp

REIC/Dickkopf-3 (Dkk-3), a tumor suppressor gene, has been investigated in gene
therapy studies. Our previous study suggested that REIC/Dkk-3-induced apoptosis
mainly resulted from phosphorylation of c-Jun-NH(2) kinase (JNK) in prostate
cancer cells. However, the precise mechanisms, especially the molecular
mechanisms regulating JNK phosphorylation, remain unclear. In this study, we
investigated the mechanisms participating in JNK phosphorylation in the context
of a refractory cancer disease, malignant mesothelioma (MM). Adenovirus-mediated 
overexpression of REIC/Dkk-3 induced apoptosis mainly through JNK activation in
immortalized MM cells (211H cells). Interestingly, transcriptional
down-regulation of inhibition of differentiation-1 (Id-1) was detected in
REIC/Dkk-3-overexpressed 211H cells. Moreover, restoration of Id-1 expression
antagonized REIC/Dkk-3-induced JNK phosphorylation and apoptosis. Mutagenesis
experiments with the 2.1-kb human Id-1 promoter revealed that activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and Smad interaction, with their respective binding
motifs, was essential for REIC/Dkk-3-mediated suppression of Id-1 promoter
activity. ATF3 activation was probably induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress.
Finally, we showed strong antitumor effects from REIC/Dkk-3 gene transfer into
the pleural cavity in an orthotopic MM mouse model. Relative to control tumor
tissue, REIC/Dkk-3-treated tumor tissue showed down-regulated expression of Id-1 
mRNA, enhanced expression of phosphorylated JNK, and an increased number of
apoptotic cells. In summary, we first showed that both ATF3 and Smad were
crucially and synergistically involved in down-regulation of Id-1, which
regulated JNK phosphorylation in REIC/Dkk-3-induced apoptosis. Thus, gene therapy
with REIC/Dkk-3 may be a promising therapeutic tool for MM.

PMID: 18922905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Biochem J. 2009 Feb 1;417(3):695-703. doi: 10.1042/BJ20081706.

Transcriptional induction of the human asparagine synthetase gene during the
unfolded protein response does not require the ATF6 and IRE1/XBP1 arms of the
pathway.

Gjymishka A(1), Su N, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, Shands
Cancer Center and Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College 
of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

The UPR (unfolded protein response) pathway comprises three signalling cascades
mediated by the ER (endoplasmic reticulum) stress-sensor proteins PERK [PKR
(double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase)-like ER kinase], IRE1
(inositol-requiring kinase 1) and ATF6 (activating transcription factor 6). The
present study shows that ASNS (asparagine synthetase) transcription activity was 
up-regulated in HepG2 cells treated with the UPR activators thapsigargin and
tunicamycin. ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) analysis demonstrated that
during ER stress, ATF4, ATF3 and C/EBPbeta (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta) 
bind to the ASNS proximal promoter region that includes the genomic sequences
NSRE (nutrient-sensing response element)-1 and NSRE-2, previously implicated by
mutagenesis in UPR activation. Consistent with increased ASNS transcription, ChIP
analysis also demonstrated that UPR signalling resulted in enhanced recruitment
of general transcription factors, including RNA Pol II (polymerase II), to the
ASNS promoter. The ASNS gene is also activated by the AAR (amino acid response)
pathway following amino acid deprivation of tissue or cells. Immunoblot analysis 
of HepG2 cells demonstrated that simultaneous activation of the AAR and UPR
pathways did not further increase the ASNS or ATF4 protein abundance when
compared with triggering either pathway alone. In addition, siRNA (small
interfering RNA)-mediated knockdown of XBP1 (X-box-binding protein 1), ATF6alpha 
or ATF6beta expression did not affect ASNS transcription, whereas siRNA against
ATF4 suppressed ASNS transcription during UPR activation. Collectively, these
results indicate that the PERK/p-eIF2alpha (phosphorylated eukaryotic initiation 
factor 2alpha)/ATF4 signalling cascade is the only arm of the UPR that is
responsible for ASNS transcriptional induction during ER stress. Consequently,
ASNS NSRE-1 and NSRE-2, in addition to ERSE (ER stress response element)-I,
ERSE-II and the mUPRE (mammalian UPR element), function as mammalian
ER-stress-responsive sequences.

PMCID: PMC3595601
PMID: 18840095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2009 May;63(6):1131-9. doi:
10.1007/s00280-008-0832-5. Epub 2008 Oct 3.

Cytotoxic diarylheptanoid induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis via increasing 
ATF3 and stabilizing p53 in SH-SY5Y cells.

Tian Z(1), An N, Zhou B, Xiao P, Kohane IS, Wu E.

Author information: 
(1)Informatics Program, MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology,
Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

PURPOSE: The aim of the study is to dissect the cytotoxic mechanisms of
1-(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)-7-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-4E-en-3-heptanone (compound
1) in SH-SY5Y cells and therefore to provide new insight into neuroblastoma
chemotherapy.
METHODS: Nine diarylheptanoids were isolated from Alpinia officinarum by
chromatography and their cytotoxicity was evaluated by an MTS assay. Flow
cytometry, BrdU incorporation assay and fluorescence staining were employed to
investigate cytostatic and apoptotic effects induced by the compound 1. In
addition, Western blot, qPCR and siRNA techniques were used to elucidate the
molecular mechanisms of the cytotoxicity.
RESULTS: The study to elucidate the cytotoxic mechanisms of compound 1, the most 
potent diarylheptanoid showed that cell cycle-related proteins, cyclins, CDKs and
CDKIs, as well as two main apoptotic related families, caspase and Bcl 2 were
involved in S phase arrest and apoptosis in neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y.
Furthermore, following the drug treatment, the protein expression of p53,
phospho-p53 (Ser20) as well as the p53 transcriptional activated genes ATF3, puma
and Apaf-1 were increased dramatically; MDM2 and Aurora A, the two p53 negative
regulators were decreased; the p53 protein stability was enhanced, whereas the
p53 mRNA expression level slightly decreased and ATF3 mRNA expression apparently 
increased. In addition, the knockdown of ATF3 gene by siRNA partially suppressed 
p53, caspase 3, S phase arrest and apoptosis triggered by compound 1.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that compound 1 induces S phase arrest and
apoptosis via up regulation of ATF3 and stabilization of p53 in SH-SY5Y cell
line. Therefore, compound 1 might be a promising lead structure for neuroblastoma
therapy.

PMCID: PMC3709019
PMID: 18836721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Am J Pathol. 2008 Nov;173(5):1397-405. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.080440. Epub 2008
Oct 2.

Up-regulation of activating transcription factor-5 suppresses SAP expression to
activate T cells in hemophagocytic syndrome associated with Epstein-Barr virus
infection and immune disorders.

Chuang HC(1), Wang JM, Hsieh WC, Chang Y, Su IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Research, National Health Research Institutes, Tainan,
Taiwan.

Hemophagocytic syndrome (HPS) is a fatal, pro-inflammatory cytokine disorder that
is associated with viral infections and immune disorders. Previously, we
demonstrated that Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein-1 (LMP-1) could
down-regulate the SAP gene, enhancing Th1 cytokine secretion in T cells and
leading to HPS. The exact mechanism of SAP gene regulation by LMP-1 remains to be
clarified. In this study, using cDNA microarray analysis, we identified ATF5 as
the candidate transcriptional repressor for SAP expression in LMP-1-expressing T 
cells. LMP-1 up-regulated ATF5 via TRAF2,5/NF-kappaB signals to suppress SAP gene
expression. Reporter assays and electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed
that ATF5 bound differentially to two sites of the SAP promoter. In resting T
cells, ATF5 bound predominantly to the high-affinity site in the -81 to -74
region while additionally binding to the low-affinity site at -305 to -296 in
LMP-1-expressing T cells. Such binding subsequently disrupted the transcription
of the SAP gene. At the same time, Th1 cytokine secretion was enhanced. This
phenomenon was also observed in conditions such as ATF5 overexpression,
phytohemagglutinin stimulation of primary T cells, and ligand engagement of
T-cell lines. Therefore, the down-regulation of the SAP gene by ATF5 may
represent a common mechanism for the pathogenesis of HPS that is associated with 
either Epstein-Barr virus infection or immune disorders with dysregulated T-cell 
activation.

PMCID: PMC2570130
PMID: 18832568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. BMC Cancer. 2008 Sep 22;8:268. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-8-268.

The transcription factor ATF3 acts as an oncogene in mouse mammary tumorigenesis.

Wang A(1), Arantes S, Yan L, Kiguchi K, McArthur MJ, Sahin A, Thames HD, Aldaz
CM, Macleod MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M D Anderson Cancer
Center, Smithville, TX, USA. oaktexas@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Overexpression of the bZip transcription factor, ATF3, in basal
epithelial cells of transgenic mice under the control of the bovine cytokeratin-5
(CK5) promoter has previously been shown to induce epidermal hyperplasia, hair
follicle anomalies and neoplastic lesions of the oral mucosa including squamous
cell carcinomas. CK5 is known to be expressed in myoepithelial cells of the
mammary gland, suggesting the possibility that transgenic BK5.ATF3 mice may
exhibit mammary gland phenotypes.
METHODS: Mammary glands from nulliparous mice in our BK5.ATF3 colony, both
non-transgenic and transgenic, were examined for anomalies by histopathology and 
immunohistochemistry. Nulliparous and biparous female mice were observed for
possible mammary tumor development, and suspicious masses were analyzed by
histopathology and immunohistochemistry. Human breast tumor samples, as well as
normal breast tissue, were similarly analyzed for ATF3 expression.
RESULTS: Transgenic BK5.ATF3 mice expressed nuclear ATF3 in the basal layer of
the mammary ductal epithelium, and often developed squamous metaplastic lesions
in one or more mammary glands by 25 weeks of age. No progression to malignancy
was seen in nulliparous BK5.ATF3 or non-transgenic mice held for 16 months.
However, biparous BK5.ATF3 mice developed mammary carcinomas with squamous
metaplasia between 6 months and one year of age, reaching an incidence of 67%.
Cytokeratin expression in the tumors was profoundly disturbed, including
expression of CK5 and CK8 (characteristic of basal and luminal cells,
respectively) throughout the epithelial component of the tumors, CK6 (potentially
a stem cell marker), CK10 (a marker of interfollicular epidermal
differentiation), and mIRSa2 and mIRSa3.1 (markers of the inner root sheath of
hair follicles). Immunohistochemical studies indicated that a subset of human
breast tumors exhibit high levels of nuclear ATF3 expression.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of ATF3 in CK5-expressing cells of the murine mammary 
gland results in the development of squamous metaplastic lesions in nulliparous
females, and in mammary tumors in biparous mice, suggesting that ATF3 acts as a
mammary oncogene. A subset of human breast tumors expresses high levels of ATF3, 
suggesting that ATF3 may play an oncogenic role in human breast tumorigenesis,
and therefore may be useful as either a biomarker or therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC2564979
PMID: 18808719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Urol. 2008 Nov;180(5):2183-8; discussion 2188. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2008.07.066.
Epub 2008 Sep 19.

Genomic variants of ATF3 in patients with hypospadias.

Kalfa N(1), Liu B, Klein O, Wang MH, Cao M, Baskin LS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Study and Treatment of Hypospadias, Department of Urology,
University of California-San Francisco Children's Medical Center, San Francisco, 
California 94143, USA.

PURPOSE: ATF3, an estrogen responsive gene expressed during genital development, 
could be implicated in the etiology of hypospadias. ATF3 is up-regulated in the
foreskin of patients with hypospadias and is implicated in suppression of the
cell cycle, which may interfere with urethral cell growth. We sought to
investigate the sequence of ATF3 in patients with hypospadias.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Direct sequencing of coding exons and splice sites of ATF3 
was performed in 41 boys with hypospadias and 30 controls. In addition, ATF3
expression in 1 human fetal penis with and 1 without hypospadias was studied by
immunohistochemical analysis.
RESULTS: A missense variant (L23M) was identified in a boy with anterior
hypospadias. This amino acid is highly conserved. Three genomic variants
(C53070T, C53632A, Ins53943A) were found in or close to exon 6 in patients with
perineal, penoscrotal and anterior hypospadias. This important exon includes
splice sites for an alternative transcript (ATF3DeltaZip) that have been
implicated in regulation of the function of ATF3. None of these genomic variants 
was present in controls. Immunochemical analysis revealed that in normal fetuses 
ATF3 is not expressed in and around the urethra, while in patients with
hypospadias ATF3 is over expressed in the urethral plate and subcutaneous tissue,
especially around the ectopic orifice of the urethra.
CONCLUSIONS: Genomic variants of ATF3 are present in 10% of our patients with
hypospadias. We also report an abnormal expression pattern of ATF3 in a
hypospadiac fetus. The direct implication of ATF3 in the occurrence of
hypospadias remains to be confirmed by functional studies of the genomic variants
we describe.

PMID: 18804813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Immunol. 2008 Oct 1;181(7):5089-97.

Lipopolysaccharide-induced expression of matrix metalloproteinases in human
monocytes is suppressed by IFN-gamma via superinduction of ATF-3 and suppression 
of AP-1.

Ho HH(1), Antoniv TT, Ji JD, Ivashkiv LB.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Tissue Degeneration Program, Department of Medicine, Hospital
for Special Surgery, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, 
USA.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are induced during inflammatory responses and
are important for immune regulation, angiogenesis, wound healing, and tissue
remodeling. Expression of MMPs needs to be tightly controlled to avoid excessive 
tissue damage. In this study, we investigated the regulation of MMP expression by
inflammatory factors in primary human monocytes and macrophages. IFN-gamma, which
augments inflammatory cytokine production in response to macrophage-activating
factors such as TLR ligands, instead broadly suppressed TLR-induced MMP
expression. Inhibition of MMP expression was dependent on STAT1 and required de
novo protein synthesis. IFN-gamma strongly enhanced TLR-induced expression of the
transcriptional repressor activating transcription factor (ATF-3) in a
STAT1-dependent manner, which correlated with recruitment of ATF-3 to the
endogenous MMP-1 promoter as detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
RNA interference experiments further supported a role for ATF-3 in suppression of
MMP-1 expression. In addition, IFN-gamma suppressed DNA binding by AP-1
transcription factors that are known to promote MMP expression and a combination 
of supershift, RNA interference and overexpression experiments implicated AP-1
family member Fra-1 in the regulation of MMP-1 expression. These results define
an IFN-gamma-mediated homeostatic loop that limits the potential for tissue
damage associated with inflammation, and identify transcriptional factors that
regulate MMP expression in myeloid cells in inflammatory settings.

PMCID: PMC2610354
PMID: 18802113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. BMC Neurosci. 2008 Sep 18;9:88. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-9-88.

Expression of ATF3 and axonal outgrowth are impaired after delayed nerve repair.

Saito H(1), Dahlin LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hand Surgery, Malmö University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
haruka-z@fa2.so-net.ne.jp

BACKGROUND: A delay in surgical nerve repair results in impaired nerve function
in humans, but mechanisms behind the weakened nerve regeneration are not known.
Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) increases the intrinsic growth state of 
injured neurons early after injury, but the role of long-term changes and their
relation to axonal outgrowth after a delayed nerve repair are not well
understood. ATF3 expression was examined by immunohistochemistry in motor and
sensory neurons and in Schwann cells in rat sciatic nerve and related to axonal
outgrowth after transection and delayed nerve repair (repair 0, 30, 90 or 180
days post-injury). Expression of the neuronal cell adhesion molecule (NCAM),
which is expressed in non-myelinating Schwann cells, was also examined.
RESULTS: The number of neurons and Schwann cells expressing ATF3 declined and the
length of axonal outgrowth was impaired if the repair was delayed. The decline
was more rapid in motor neurons than in sensory neurons and Schwann cells.
Regeneration distances over time correlated to number of ATF3 stained neurons and
Schwann cells. Many neurofilament stained axons grew along ATF3 stained Schwann
cells. If nerve repair was delayed the majority of Schwann cells in the distal
nerve segment stained for NCAM.
CONCLUSION: Delayed nerve repair impairs nerve regeneration and length of axonal 
outgrowth correlates to ATF3 expression in both neurons and Schwann cells. Mainly
non-myelinating Schwann cells (NCAM stained) are present in distal nerve segments
after delayed nerve repair. These data provide a neurobiological basis for the
poor outcomes associated with delayed nerve repair. Nerve trunks should, if
possible, be promptly repaired.

PMCID: PMC2556676
PMID: 18801180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Exp Med. 2008 Sep 29;205(10):2349-57. doi: 10.1084/jem.20072254. Epub 2008 Sep 
15.

Activating transcription factor 3 is a negative regulator of allergic pulmonary
inflammation.

Gilchrist M(1), Henderson WR Jr, Clark AE, Simmons RM, Ye X, Smith KD, Aderem A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98103, USA.

We recently demonstrated the pivotal role of the transcription factor (TF)
activating TF 3 (ATF3) in dampening inflammation. We demonstrate that ATF3 also
ameliorates allergen-induced airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness in a
mouse model of human asthma. ATF3 expression was increased in the lungs of mice
challenged with ovalbumin allergen, and this was associated with its recruitment 
to the promoters of genes encoding Th2-associated cytokines. ATF3-deficient mice 
developed significantly increased airway hyperresponsiveness, pulmonary
eosinophilia, and enhanced chemokine and Th2 cytokine responses in lung tissue
and in lung-derived CD4(+) lymphocytes. Although several TFs have been associated
with enhanced inflammatory responses in the lung, ATF3 attenuates the
inflammatory responses associated with allergic airway disease.

PMCID: PMC2556774
PMID: 18794337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 31;283(44):29795-801. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802515200. Epub
2008 Aug 28.

KLF6 induces apoptosis in prostate cancer cells through up-regulation of ATF3.

Huang X(1), Li X, Guo B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, North Dakota State
University, Fargo, North Dakota 58105, USA.

KLF6 (Kruppel-like factor 6) is a zinc finger transcription factor and a tumor
suppressor that is frequently mutated in prostate cancer. KLF6 suppresses tumor
growth and induces apoptosis in cancer cells through mechanisms still not
defined. Here we show that KLF6 induces apoptosis in prostate cancer cells by
ATF3 (activating transcription factor 3) expression. KLF6 binds directly to and
activates the ATF3 promoter. ATF3 induced apoptosis when ectopically expressed in
cells, whereas knockdown of ATF3 by small interference RNA blocked KLF6-induced
apoptosis. KLF6 mutants derived from clinical prostate cancers failed to activate
the ATF3 promoter and were unable to induce apoptosis. Furthermore, stress
conditions (exposure to staurosporine and hypoxia induced by sodium azide) caused
significant increase in ATF3 expression and induced apoptosis, whereas knockdown 
of KLF6 by small interference RNA blocked the increase of ATF3 as well as the
induction of apoptosis in these conditions. Thus, ATF3 is a key mediator of
KLF6-induced apoptosis in prostate cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2573052
PMID: 18755691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Endocrinology. 2008 Dec;149(12):6311-25. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0251. Epub 2008 Aug
21.

Expression of the transcriptional repressor ATF3 in gonadotrophs is regulated by 
Egr-1, CREB, and ATF2 after gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor stimulation.

Mayer SI(1), Dexheimer V, Nishida E, Kitajima S, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Building 44,
University of Saarland Medical Center, D-66421 Homburg, Germany.

Stimulation of GnRH receptors enhances expression of activating transcription
factor (ATF) 3 in a pituitary gonadotroph cell line. The signaling pathway
requires elevated cytosolic Ca2+ levels and activation of ERK and c-Jun
N-terminal protein kinase. The signaling cascade was blocked by overexpression of
either MAPK phosphatase (MKP)-1 or MAPK phosphatase-5 that dephosphorylate
nuclear ERK and c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase. In addition, ATF3 biosynthesis
was impaired after lentiviral-mediated expression of a constitutively active
mutant of calcineurin A. Thus, MKP-1, MKP-5, and calcineurin may function as
shut-off devices for GnRH receptor signaling. Expression of dominant-negative
mutants of early growth response protein (Egr)-1, cAMP response element binding
protein (CREB), and ATF2 blocked the biosynthesis of ATF3, indicating that these 
transcription factors connect the intracellular signaling cascade elicited by
activation of GnRH receptors with transcription of the ATF3 gene. This view was
corroborated by chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealing that Egr-1
and the phosphorylated forms of CREB and ATF2 bound to the 5'-upstream region of 
the ATF3 gene in buserelin-stimulated gonadotrophs. Together the data indicate
that the ATF3 gene is a bona fide target gene of Egr-1, CREB, and ATF2 in
gonadotrophs. Moreover, we show that in gonadotrophs ATF3 bound to its own
promoter under physiological conditions. The analysis of a lentiviral-transmitted
ATF3 promoter/luciferase reporter gene, embedded into the chromatin of the cells,
revealed that ATF3 blocked the activity of its own promoter. We additionally
identified the chromogranin B gene as bona fide target gene of ATF3 in
gonadotrophs.

PMID: 18719024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Neurosci. 2008 Aug 20;28(34):8489-501. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2552-08.2008.

Differential implication of proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 in the
development of cephalic versus extracephalic neuropathic pain in rats.

Latrémolière A(1), Mauborgne A, Masson J, Bourgoin S, Kayser V, Hamon M, Pohl M.

Author information: 
(1)Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, Faculté de Médecine Pierre et Marie 
Curie, Site Pitié-Salpêtrière, Institut Fédératif de Recherche 70 des
Neurosciences, Unité Mixte de Recherche S677, F-75013 Paris, France.
allodynie@hotmail.com

Responses resulting from injury to the trigeminal nerve exhibit differences
compared with those caused by lesion of other peripheral nerves. With the aim of 
elucidating the physiopathological mechanisms underlying cephalic versus
extracephalic neuropathic pain, we determined the time course expression of
proinflammatory cytokines interleukin-6 (IL-6) and IL-1beta, neuronal injury
(ATF3), macrophage/microglial (OX-42), and satellite cells/astrocyte (GFAP)
markers in central and ganglion tissues in rats that underwent unilateral chronic
constriction injury (CCI) to either infraorbital nerve (IoN) (cephalic area) or
sciatic nerve (SN) (extracephalic area). Whereas CCI induced microglial
activation in both models, we observed a concomitant upregulation of IL-6 and
ATF3 in the ipsilateral dorsal horn of the lumbar cord in SN-CCI rats but not in 
the ipsilateral spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve (Sp5c) in IoN-CCI rats.
Preemptive treatment with minocycline (daily administration of 20 mg/kg, i.p.,
for 2 weeks) partially prevented pain behavior and microglial activation in
SN-CCI rats but was ineffective in IoN-CCI rats. We show that IL-6 can upregulate
OX-42 and ATF3 expression in cultured microglia and neurons from spinal cord,
respectively, as well as in the dorsal horn after acute intrathecal
administration of the cytokine. We propose that IL-6 could be one of the
promoters of the signaling cascade leading to abnormal pain behavior in SN-CCI
but not IoN-CCI rats. Our data further support the idea that different
pathophysiological mechanisms contribute to the development of cephalic versus
extracephalic neuropathic pain.

PMID: 18716207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Pain. 2008 Nov;9(11):1036-48. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2008.06.006. Epub 2008 Aug
16.

Partial infraorbital nerve ligation as a model of trigeminal nerve injury in the 
mouse: behavioral, neural, and glial reactions.

Xu M(1), Aita M, Chavkin C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195-7280, USA. xum@u.washington.edu

Trigeminal nerve damage often leads to chronic pain syndromes including
trigeminal neuralgia, a severely debilitating chronic orofacial pain syndrome.
Options for treatment of neuropathic pain are limited in effectiveness and new
approaches based on a better understanding of the underlying pathologies are
required. Partial ligation has been shown to effectively mimic many of the
qualities of human neuropathic pain syndromes. We have devised a mouse model of
trigeminal neuralgia using a partial infraorbital nerve ligation (pIONL) that
induces persistent pain behaviors and morphological changes in the brainstem. We 
found that the pIONL effectively induced mechanical allodynia lasting for more
than 3 weeks. Cell proliferation (bromodeoxyuridine), activation of astrocytes
and microglia in the ipsilateral caudal medulla, and persistent satellite cell
reaction in the ipsilateral ganglion were observed. Neurochemical markers
calcitonin gene-related peptide, substance P were decreased in medullary dorsal
horn ipsilateral to the injury side, whereas substance P receptor NK1 expression 
was increased after 8 days. Nerve injury marker ATF3 was markedly increased in
ipsilateral trigeminal ganglion neurons at 8 days after pIONL. The data indicate 
that partial trigeminal injury in mice produces many persistent anatomical
changes in neuropathic pain, as well as mechanical allodynia.PERSPECTIVE: This
study describes the development of a new mouse model of trigeminal neuropathic
pain. Our goal is to devise better treatments of trigeminal pain, and this will
be facilitated by characterization of the underlying cellular and molecular
neuropathological mechanisms in genetically designed mice.

PMCID: PMC2632609
PMID: 18708302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Dec;1780(12):1441-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2008.07.010. Epub 2008 Jul 28.

Molecular mechanism for neuro-protective effect of prosaposin against oxidative
stress: its regulation of dimeric transcription factor formation.

Ochiai T(1), Takenaka Y, Kuramoto Y, Kasuya M, Fukuda K, Kimura M, Shimeno H,
Misasi R, Hiraiwa M, Soeda S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Fukuoka
University, 8-19-1 Nanakuma, Jonan-ku, Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan.

Prosaposin triggers G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR)-mediated protein kinase B
(Akt)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylation cascades to
exert its neurotrophic and myelinotrophic activity capable of preventing neural
cell death and promoting neural proliferation and glial differentiation. In the
present study, we investigated the down-stream neurotrophic signaling mechanism
of prosaposin by which rat pheochromocytoma (PC-12) cells are protected from cell
death induced by oxidative stress. When PC-12 cells were exposed to H2O2, the
cells underwent abrupt shrinkage followed by apoptosis. Prosaposin treatment at
as low as 1 nM protected PC-12 cells from cell death by the oxidative stress with
the activation of an ERK phosphorylation cascade. Simultaneously, prosaposin
blocked the oxidative stress induced-Akt phosphorylation that acts on the
down-stream of caspase-3 activation. A MEK inhibitor, PD98059, or a
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor, LY294002, abolished the survival 
effect of prosaposin on the oxidative stress-induced cell death. Furthermore,
prosaposin blocked the oxidative stress-induced phosphorylations of c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 stress-activated protein kinase. We further
investigated the effect of prosaposin treatment on the phosphorylation of
activating protein-1 (AP-1) complex components, c-Jun and activating
transcription factor (ATF)-3. Western blot analysis demonstrated that prosaposin 
treatment at 100 ng/ml decreased the levels of c-Jun and ATF-3 induced by H2O2
stimulation. Our results suggest that prosaposin aids survival of PC-12 cells
from oxidative stress not only by reducing the phosphorylation levels of JNK and 
p38, but also by regulating the c-Jun/AP-1 pathway.

PMID: 18706485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008 Oct 10;594(1-3):77-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.07.045.
Epub 2008 Jul 31.

Demonstration of elevation and localization of Rho-kinase activity in the brain
of a rat model of cerebral infarction.

Yano K(1), Kawasaki K, Hattori T, Tawara S, Toshima Y, Ikegaki I, Sasaki Y, Satoh
S, Asano T, Seto M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pharmacology, Asahi Kasei Pharma, Shizuoka, Japan.

Evidence that Rho-kinase is involved in cerebral infarction has accumulated.
However, it is uncertain whether Rho-kinase is activated in the brain parenchyma 
in cerebral infarction. To answer this question, we measured Rho-kinase activity 
in the brain in a rat cerebral infarction model. Sodium laurate was injected into
the left internal carotid artery, inducing cerebral infarction in the ipsilateral
hemisphere. At 6 h after injection, increase of activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) and c-Fos was found in the ipsilateral hemisphere, suggesting that
neuronal damage occurs. At 0.5, 3, and 6 h after injection of laurate, Rho-kinase
activity in extracts of the cerebral hemispheres was measured by an ELISA method.
Rho-kinase activity in extracts of the ipsilateral hemisphere was significantly
increased compared with that in extracts of the contralateral hemisphere at 3 and
6 h but not 0.5 h after injection of laurate. Next, localization of Rho-kinase
activity was evaluated by immunohistochemical analysis in sections of cortex and 
hippocampus including infarct area 6 h after injection of laurate. Staining for
phosphorylation of myosin-binding subunit (phospho-MBS) and myosin light chain
(phospho-MLC), substrates of Rho-kinase, was elevated in neuron and blood vessel,
respectively, in ipsilateral cerebral sections, compared with those in
contralateral cerebral sections. These findings indicate that Rho-kinase is
activated in neuronal and vascular cells in a rat cerebral infarction model, and 
suggest that Rho-kinase could be an important target in the treatment of cerebral
infarction.

PMID: 18703046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Pain. 2008 Oct 31;139(3):632-43. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2008.06.018. Epub 2008 Aug
12.

Genetic deletion of synapsin II reduces neuropathic pain due to reduced glutamate
but increased GABA in the spinal cord dorsal horn.

Schmidtko A(1), Luo C, Gao W, Geisslinger G, Kuner R, Tegeder I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Pharmakologie, Klinikum der Johann Wolfgang Goethe
Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

The synaptic vesicle protein synapsin II is specifically expressed in synaptic
terminals of primary afferent nociceptive neurons and regulates transmitter
release in the spinal cord dorsal horn. Here, we assessed its role in nerve
injury-evoked molecular and behavioral adaptations in models of peripheral
neuropathic pain using mice genetically lacking synapsin II. Deficiency of
synapsin II resulted in reduced mechanical and cold allodynia in two models of
peripheral neuropathic pain. This was associated with decreased glutamate release
in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord upon sciatic nerve injury or capsaicin
application onto the sciatic nerve and reduced calcium signals in spinal cord
slices upon persistent activation of primary afferents. In addition, the
expression of the vesicular glutamate transporters, VGLUT1 and VGLUT2, was
strongly reduced in synapsin II knockout mice in the spinal cord. Conversely,
synapsin II knockout mice showed a stronger and longer-lasting increase of GABA
in lamina II of the dorsal horn after nerve injury than wild type mice. These
results suggest that synapsin II is involved in the regulation of glutamate and
GABA release in the spinal cord after nerve injury, and that a imbalance between 
glutamatergic and GABAergic synaptic transmission contributes to the
manifestation of neuropathic pain.

PMID: 18701217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Fertil Steril. 2009 Aug;92(2):748-55. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2008.06.030. Epub
2008 Aug 9.

Activating transcription factor 3 gene expression suggests that tissue stress
plays a role in leiomyoma development.

Payson M(1), Malik M, Siti-Nur Morris S, Segars JH, Chason R, Catherino WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Uniformed Services University of the 
Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 20814-4799, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether expression of the stress response gene ATF3 and
related members of activator protein complex-1, cJun and cFos, were altered in
leiomyoma compared with myometrium, and whether this difference might correlate
with leiomyoma size or race.
DESIGN: Laboratory study.
SETTING: University hospital.
PATIENT(S): Fifteen women undergoing hysterectomy for symptomatic leiomyoma.
INTERVENTION(S): Tissue procurement, RNA isolation, reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction, real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase (RT-PCR)
chain reaction, immunohistochemistry, Western blot.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Expression of mRNA and protein in leiomyoma and
patient-matched myometrium.
RESULT(S): mRNA transcripts of ATF3 were decreased in leiomyoma compared with
matched myometrium by both RT-PCR and real-time RT-PCR. The decrease was greater 
than fivefold in a majority of samples. The reduction seen in ATF3 mRNA
expression did not show a correlation with race and leiomyoma size. Surprisingly,
immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis demonstrated an elevation of ATF3 
protein expression by a mean of 2.9-fold. Transcripts of related AP-1 genes, cJun
and cFos, were significantly decreased by a mean of -29.57 for cJun and -23.78
for cFos, but there was no significant change in protein expression of the two
transcription factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Alterations in ATF3 gene expression resemble the response to
mechanical and ischemic stress reported in other tissues. Results suggested that 
ATF3 protein expression was increased in leiomyoma, and may reflect increased
tissue stress.

PMCID: PMC4130340
PMID: 18692824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Jul;6(7):1232-49. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-0297.

Role of activating transcription factor 3 on TAp73 stability and apoptosis in
paclitaxel-treated cervical cancer cells.

Oh YK(1), Lee HJ, Jeong MH, Rhee M, Mo JW, Song EH, Lim JY, Choi KH, Jo I, Park
SI, Gao B, Kwon Y, Kim WH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomedical Sciences, NIH, Seoul 122-701, Korea.

Taxol (paclitaxel) is a potent anticancer drug that has been found to be
effective against several tumor types, including cervical cancer. However, the
exact mechanism underlying the antitumor effects of paclitaxel is poorly
understood. Here, paclitaxel induced the apoptosis of cervical cancer HeLa cells 
and correlated with the enhanced activation of caspase-3 and TAp73, which was
strongly inhibited by TAp73beta small interfering RNA (siRNA). In wild-type
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3)-overexpressed cells, paclitaxel enhanced
apoptosis through increased alpha and beta isoform expression of TAp73; however, 
these events were attenuated in cells containing inactive COOH-terminal-deleted
ATF3 [ATF3(DeltaC)] or ATF3 siRNA. In contrast, paclitaxel-induced ATF3
expression did not change in TAp73beta-overexpressed or TAp73beta
siRNA-cotransfected cells. Furthermore, paclitaxel-induced ATF3 translocated into
the nucleus where TAp73beta is expressed, but not in ATF3(DeltaC) or TAp73beta
siRNA-transfected cells. As confirmed by the GST pull-down assay, ATF3 bound to
the DNA-binding domain of p73, resulting in the activation of p21 or Bax
transcription, a downstream target of p73. Overexpression of ATF3 prolonged the
half-life of TAp73beta by inhibiting its ubiquitination and thereby enhancing its
transactivation and proapoptotic activities. Additionally, ATF3 induced by
paclitaxel potentiated the stability of TAp73beta, not its transcriptional level.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses show that TAp73beta and ATF3 are recruited
directly to the p21 and Bax promoter. Collectively, these results reveal that
overexpression of ATF3 potentiates paclitaxel-induced apoptosis of HeLa cells, at
least in part, by enhancing TAp73beta's stability and its transcriptional
activity. The investigation shows that ATF3 may function as a tumor-inhibiting
factor through direct regulatory effects on TAp73beta, suggesting a functional
link between ATF3 and TAp73beta.

PMCID: PMC3783268
PMID: 18644986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Int J Androl. 2009 Jun;32(3):187-97. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2605.2008.00899.x. Epub 
2008 Jul 11.

Is hypospadias a genetic, endocrine or environmental disease, or still an
unexplained malformation?

Kalfa N(1), Philibert P, Sultan C.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Hormonologie, Hôpital Lapeyronie, France.

Hypospadias is one of the most frequent genital malformations in the male newborn
and results from an abnormal penile and urethral development. This process
requires a correct genetic programme, time- and space-adapted cellular
differentiation, complex tissue interactions, and hormonal mediation through
enzymatic activities and hormonal transduction signals. Any disturbance in these 
regulations may induce a defect in the virilization of the external genitalia and
hypospadias. This malformation thus appears to be at the crossroads of various
mechanisms implicating genetic and environmental factors. The genes of penile
development (HOX, FGF, Shh) and testicular determination (WT1, SRY) and those
regulating the synthesis [luteinizing hormone (LH) receptor] and action of
androgen (5alpha reductase, androgen receptor) can cause hypospadias if altered. 
Several chromosomal abnormalities and malformative syndromes include hypospadias,
from anterior to penoscrotal forms. More recently, CXorf6 and ATF3 have been
reported to be involved. Besides these genomic and hormonal factors, multiple
substances found in the environment can also potentially interfere with male
genital development because of their similarity to hormones. The proportion of
hypospadias cases for which an aetiology is detected varies with the authors but 
it nevertheless remains low, especially for less severe cases. An interaction
between genetic background and environment is likely.

PMID: 18637150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Pain. 2008 Nov;9(11):999-1005. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2008.05.010. Epub 2008 Jul 
10.

Dermatomal scratching after intramedullary quisqualate injection: correlation
with cutaneous denervation.

Brewer KL(1), Lee JW, Downs H, Oaklander AL, Yezierski RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina
University, Greenville, North Carolina 27834, USA. brewerk@ecu.edu

Comment in
    J Pain. 2008 Nov;9(11):973-4.

Central nervous system lesions cause peripheral dysfunctions currently attributed
to central cell death that compromises function of intact peripheral nerves.
Injecting quisqualate (QUIS) into the rat spinal cord models spinal cord injury
(SCI) and causes at-level scratching and self-injury. Such overgrooming was
interpreted to model pain until patients with self-injurious scratching after SCI
reported itch motivated scratching that was painless because of sensory loss.
Because self-injurious scratching is difficult to explain by central mechanisms
alone, we hypothesized that QUIS injections damage peripheral axons of at-level
afferents. QUIS was injected into thoracic spinal cords of 18 Long-Evans rats.
Animals were killed 3 days after overgrooming began or 14 days after injection.
Spinal cord lesions were localized and DRG-immunolabeled for ATF-3. At-level and 
control skin samples were PGP9.5-immunabeled to quantify axons. Eighty-four
percent of QUIS rats overgroomed. Skin in these regions had lost two-thirds of
epidermal innervation as compared with controls (P < .001). Rats that overgroomed
had 47% less axon-length than nongrooming rats (P = .006). The presence of ATF-3 
immunolabeled neurons within diagnosis-related groups of QUIS rats indicated
death of afferent cell bodies. Overgrooming after QUIS injections may not be due 
entirely to central changes. As in humans, self-injurious neuropathic scratching 
appeared to require loss of protective pain sensations in addition to peripheral 
denervation.PERSPECTIVE: This study suggests that intramedullary injection of
quisqualic acid in rats causes death of at-level peripheral as well as central
neurons. Self-injurious dermatomal scratching that develops in spinal-injured
rats may reflect neuropathic itch and loss of protective pain sensations.

PMCID: PMC3128346
PMID: 18619906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2008;40(12):2865-79. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2008.06.003. 
Epub 2008 Jun 20.

Decreased ER-associated degradation of alpha-TCR induced by Grp78 depletion with 
the SubAB cytotoxin.

Lass A(1), Kujawa M, McConnell E, Paton AW, Paton JC, Wójcik C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine-Evansville, Evansville, IN 47712, USA.

HeLa cells stably expressing the alpha chain of T-cell receptor (alphaTCR), a
model substrate of ER-associated degradation (ERAD), were used to analyze the
effects of BiP/Grp78 depletion by the SubAB cytotoxin. SubAB induced XBP1
splicing, followed by JNK phosphorylation, eIF2alpha phosphorylation,
upregulation of ATF3/4 and partial ATF6 cleavage. Other markers of ER stress,
including elements of ERAD pathway, as well as markers of cytoplasmic stress,
were not induced. SubAB treatment decreased absolute levels of alphaTCR, which
was caused by inhibition of protein synthesis. At the same time, the half-life of
alphaTCR was extended almost fourfold from 70 min to 210 min, suggesting that BiP
normally facilitates ERAD. Depletion of p97/VCP partially rescued SubAB-induced
depletion of alphaTCR, confirming the role of VCP in ERAD of alphaTCR. It
therefore appears that ERAD of alphaTCR is driven by at least two different
ATP-ase systems located at two sides of the ER membrane, BiP located on the
lumenal side, while p97/VCP on the cytoplasmic side. While SubAB altered cell
morphology by inducing cytoplasm vacuolization and accumulation of lipid
droplets, caspase activation was partial and subsided after prolonged incubation.
Expression of CHOP/GADD153 occurred only after prolonged incubation and was not
associated with apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2583149
PMID: 18611445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Sep 15;17(18):2849-62. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn182. Epub 2008 Jun
25.

A novel mouse model with impaired dynein/dynactin function develops amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS)-like features in motor neurons and improves lifespan in
SOD1-ALS mice.

Teuling E(1), van Dis V, Wulf PS, Haasdijk ED, Akhmanova A, Hoogenraad CC,
Jaarsma D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus MC, PO Box 2040, 3000CA Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative condition
characterized by progressive motor neuron degeneration and muscle paralysis.
Genetic evidence from man and mouse has indicated that mutations in the
dynein/dynactin motor complex are correlated with motor neuron degeneration. In
this study, we have generated transgenic mice with neuron-specific expression of 
Bicaudal D2 N-terminus (BICD2-N) to chronically impair dynein/dynactin function. 
Motor neurons expressing BICD2-N showed accumulation of dynein and dynactin in
the cell body, Golgi fragmentation and several signs of impaired retrograde
trafficking: the appearance of giant neurofilament swellings in the proximal
axon, reduced retrograde labelling by tracer injected in the muscle and delayed
expression of the injury transcription factor ATF3 after axon transection.
Despite these abnormalities, BICD2-N mice did not develop signs of motor neuron
degeneration and motor abnormalities. Interestingly, the BICD2-N transgene
increased lifespan in 'low copy' SOD1-G93A ALS transgenic mice. Our findings
indicate that impaired dynein/dynactin function can explain several pathological 
features observed in ALS patients, but may be beneficial in some forms of ALS.

PMID: 18579581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Cell Sci. 2008 Jul 15;121(Pt 14):2308-18. doi: 10.1242/jcs.026062. Epub 2008
Jun 17.

Initiation and execution of lipotoxic ER stress in pancreatic beta-cells.

Cunha DA(1), Hekerman P, Ladrière L, Bazarra-Castro A, Ortis F, Wakeham MC, Moore
F, Rasschaert J, Cardozo AK, Bellomo E, Overbergh L, Mathieu C, Lupi R, Hai T,
Herchuelz A, Marchetti P, Rutter GA, Eizirik DL, Cnop M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, 
Belgium.

Free fatty acids (FFA) cause apoptosis of pancreatic beta-cells and might
contribute to beta-cell loss in type 2 diabetes via the induction of endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) stress. We studied here the molecular mechanisms implicated in
FFA-induced ER stress initiation and apoptosis in INS-1E cells, FACS-purified
primary beta-cells and human islets exposed to oleate and/or palmitate. Treatment
with saturated and/or unsaturated FFA led to differential ER stress signaling.
Palmitate induced more apoptosis and markedly activated the IRE1, PERK and ATF6
pathways, owing to a sustained depletion of ER Ca(2+) stores, whereas the
unsaturated FFA oleate led to milder PERK and IRE1 activation and comparable ATF6
signaling. Non-metabolizable methyl-FFA analogs induced neither ER stress nor
beta-cell apoptosis. The FFA-induced ER stress response was not modified by high 
glucose concentrations, suggesting that ER stress in primary beta-cells is
primarily lipotoxic, and not glucolipotoxic. Palmitate, but not oleate, activated
JNK. JNK inhibitors reduced palmitate-mediated AP-1 activation and apoptosis.
Blocking the transcription factor CHOP delayed palmitate-induced beta-cell
apoptosis. In conclusion, saturated FFA induce ER stress via ER Ca(2+) depletion.
The IRE1 and resulting JNK activation contribute to beta-cell apoptosis. PERK
activation by palmitate also contributes to beta-cell apoptosis via CHOP.

PMCID: PMC3675788
PMID: 18559892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Biomed Mater. 2008 Jun;3(2):025017. doi: 10.1088/1748-6041/3/2/025017. Epub 2008 
Jun 3.

PEG attachment to osteoblasts enhances mechanosensitivity.

Hamamura K(1), Weng Y, Zhao J, Yokota H, Xie D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Fluid flow induces proliferation and differentiation of osteoblasts, and fibrous 
structure like a primary cilium on a cell surface contributes to flow sensing and
flow-driven gene regulation. We address a question: Does attachment of synthetic 
polymers on a cell surface enhance mechanosensitivity of osteoblasts? Using MC3T3
osteoblast cells (C4 clone) and a PEG polymer, one of whose termini was
covalently linked to a succinimidyl succinate group (functionalized PEG-PEGSS),
we examined attachment of PEGSS to osteoblasts and evaluated its effects on the
mRNA expression of stress-responsive genes. AFM images exhibited globular PEGSS
conformation of approximately 100 nm in size, and SEM images confirmed the
attachment of a cluster of pancake-like PEGSS molecules on the osteoblast
surface. Compared to control cells incubated with unfunctionalized PEG, real-time
PCR revealed that RNA upregulation of c-fos, egr1, ATF3 and Cox2 genes was
magnified in the cells incubated with PEGSS. These results support a PEG-induced 
increase in mechanosensitivity of osteoblasts and indicate that the described
approach would be useful to accelerate growth and development of osteoblasts for 
bone repair and tissue engineering.

PMID: 18523342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Neuroreport. 2008 Jun 11;19(9):987-90. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e328302f4ec.

Nerve compression induces activating transcription factor 3 in neurons and
Schwann cells in diabetic rats.

Dahlin LB(1), Stenberg L, Luthman H, Thomsen NO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
Lars.Dahlin@med.lu.se

Expression of transcription factor ATF3 in sensory neurons in dorsal root
ganglion and in Schwann cells in sciatic nerve of diabetic (BB and Goto-Kakizaki 
rats; experimental models of types 1 and 2 diabetes, respectively) and healthy
rats were examined by immunocytochemistry after nerve compression (silicone tube)
for 3, 6 or 14 days. ATF3-stained sensory neurons in dorsal root ganglia and
Schwann cells at compression site were more frequent in diabetic BB rats.
Decompression of nerves in Goto-Kakizaki rats did not reduce number of
ATF3-stained cells. Diabetes (BB; i.e. type 1) confers on the peripheral nerve an
increased susceptibility to nerve compression indicated by an increased
expression of stained ATF3 neurons and Schwann cells.

PMID: 18521006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Cell Death Differ. 2008 Sep;15(9):1472-80. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2008.74. Epub 2008
May 30.

Hif-2alpha mediates UV-induced apoptosis through a novel ATF3-dependent death
pathway.

Turchi L(1), Aberdam E, Mazure N, Pouysségur J, Deckert M, Kitajima S, Aberdam D,
Virolle T.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U898, Nice F-06107, France.

In this study, we describe a novel activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3)-dependent death pathway triggered by ultraviolet (UV) irradiation. We
demonstrate that ATF3 contributes to UV-induced apoptosis through the regulation 
of hypoxia inducible factor (Hif)-2alpha expression, which in turn induces the
expression of proapoptotic genes, such as Caspase7 or TRAIL (tumor necrosis
factor (ligand) superfamily, member 10). Gain of function of Hif-2alpha as well
as ATF3 is sufficient to trigger cell death, whereas loss of function of both
proteins drastically inhibits UV-induced apoptosis. Repression of Hif-2alpha
strongly impairs ATF3-mediated death, providing evidences that Hif-2alpha is the 
major death effector of ATF3. In addition, Hif-1alpha, already known as a
proapoptotic gene, upon UV irradiation, is not able to compensate for the lack of
Hif-2alpha expression, thereby confirming the major contribution of Hif-2alpha in
UV-mediated cell death. We further demonstrate that this cascade of gene
activation depends on p38 and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activity. Impairment 
of such a pathway is likely to contribute to oncogenesis by promoting survival of
cells that could accumulate severe chromosomal alterations.

PMID: 18511933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Kidney Int. 2008 Sep;74(5):613-21. doi: 10.1038/ki.2008.206. Epub 2008 May 28.

Urinary exosomal transcription factors, a new class of biomarkers for renal
disease.

Zhou H(1), Cheruvanky A, Hu X, Matsumoto T, Hiramatsu N, Cho ME, Berger A,
Leelahavanichkul A, Doi K, Chawla LS, Illei GG, Kopp JB, Balow JE, Austin HA 3rd,
Yuen PS, Star RA.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Diagnostics and Therapeutics Unit, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Urinary exosomes are excreted from all nephron segments and constitute a rich
source of intracellular kidney injury biomarkers. To study whether they contain
transcription factors, we collected urine from two acute kidney injury models
(cisplatin or ischemia-reperfusion), two podocyte injury models
(puromycin-treated rats or podocin-Vpr transgenic mice) and from patients with
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, acute kidney injury and matched controls.
Exosomes were isolated by differential centrifugation and found to contain
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and Wilms Tumor 1 (WT-1) proteins
detected by Western blot. These factors were found in the concentrated exosomal
fraction, but not in whole urine. ATF3 was continuously present in urine exosomes
of the rat models following acute injury at times earlier than the increase in
serum creatinine. ATF3 was found in exosomes isolated from patients with acute
kidney injury but not from patients with chronic kidney disease or controls.
Urinary WT-1 was present in animal models before significant glomerular sclerosis
and in 9/10 patients with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis but not in 8
controls. Our findings suggest that transcription factor ATF3 may provide a novel
renal tubular cell biomarker for acute kidney injury while WT-1 may detect early 
podocyte injury. Measurement of urinary exosomal transcription factors may offer 
insight into cellular regulatory pathways.

PMCID: PMC2562924
PMID: 18509321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Neurosci Methods. 2008 Jul 15;172(1):43-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.04.013.
Epub 2008 Apr 22.

Chronic constriction injury of the infraorbital nerve in the rat using modified
syringe needle.

Kernisant M(1), Gear RW, Jasmin L, Vit JP, Ohara PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California San Francisco, 513 Parnassus
Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143, United States.

Here we report a method for performing a chronic constriction injury (CCI) of the
infraorbital nerve (ION) in the rat as a component of a chronic pain model. The
surgical approach to the ION is described together with the use of a modified
dental syringe needle that simplifies placing two chromic gut ligatures around
the ION. This method makes the surgical procedure easier, the nerve injury more
consistent across animals and reduces secondary damage to the ION and surrounding
tissue. Pain behavior testing together with immunostaining for markers of nerve
injury in the spinal trigeminal nucleus show the suitability of this procedure as
a model of orofacial pain.

PMCID: PMC2497464
PMID: 18501433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Toxicol Lett. 2008 May 30;178(3):202-9. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2008.03.015. Epub
2008 Apr 8.

Enhanced TGF-beta1 is involved in 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)
induced oxidative stress in C57BL/6 mouse testis.

Jin MH(1), Hong CH, Lee HY, Kang HJ, Han SW.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

2,3,7,8-Tedtrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is one of the most toxic endocrine
disruptors and has been reported to induce oxidative stress in the reproductive
organs. However, the mechanism by which TCDD induces oxidative stress is unclear.
The aim of this study is to examine the role of the general cytokine, TGF-beta1, 
in TCDD-induced oxidative stress in the male reproductive system. To examine the 
effect of TCDD on antioxidant enzyme activity, we administered TCDD orally to
C57BL/6 mice at 1 microgkg/day for 4 days. Using Smad2-siRNA, we examined the
involvement of Smad and non-Smad pathways in TCDD-induced oxidative stress. We
also measured the mRNA levels of typical antioxidant enzymes (superoxide
dismutase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase) and analyzed the activation of
TGF-beta1, and the downstream signals, Smad2, Smad4, transcription factors
(c-Jun, ATF3), and three major MAPKs (JNK, ERK, p38). After TCDD treatment, the
mRNA levels of antioxidant enzymes (superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione
peroxidase) were significantly decreased. In addition, TGF-beta1 activity
increased and the receptor-activated protein, Smad2, was activated while Smad4
was not. The levels of major transcription factors, c-Jun and ATF3, and the
regulator of these transcription factors, MAPK, were also increased by TCDD
administration. The mRNA levels of the 3 antioxidant enzymes in the Smad2-siRNA
and TCDD co-treated group were higher than that of the TCDD-only treated group
but still decreased when compared to control. C-Jun and ATF3 levels were also
increased in Smad2-siRNA and TCDD co-treated testes compared to control. However,
the levels of c-Jun and ATF3 were lower than those in the group treated with TCDD
only. Of the three MAPKs which showed increase in expression after TCDD
treatment, p38 was the only one that showed a decrease with Smad2 inhibition,
while both ERK and JNK expression were unaffected. In conclusion, we found that
the activated TGF-beta1-Smad pathway is involved in TCDD-induced oxidative
stress. Furthermore, the effects of TCDD on the testes are caused by the
coordinated action of both Smad and non-Smad pathways.

PMID: 18467041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Blood. 2008 Jul 15;112(2):330-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-09-112870. Epub 2008 May
1.

ATF4-dependent transcription is a key mechanism in VEGF up-regulation by oxidized
phospholipids: critical role of oxidized sn-2 residues in activation of unfolded 
protein response.

Oskolkova OV(1), Afonyushkin T, Leitner A, von Schlieffen E, Gargalovic PS, Lusis
AJ, Binder BR, Bochkov VN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology and Thrombosis Research, Center for
Biomolecular Medicine and Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria.

We have shown previously that oxidized phospholipids (OxPLs), known to accumulate
in atherosclerotic vessels, stimulate angiogenesis via induction of autocrine
mediators, such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). We now address the 
pathways mediating up-regulation of VEGF in human endothelial cells treated with 
OxPLs. Analysis of structure-function relationship using individual species of
OxPLs demonstrated a close relation between induction of VEGF and activation of
the unfolded protein response (UPR). Inducers of UPR up-regulated VEGF, whereas
inhibition of UPR by chemical chaperones or knock-down of cochaperone HTJ-1
inhibited elevation of VEGF mRNA induced by OxPLs. OxPLs induced protein
expression of activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4), an important effector of 
UPR. Expression levels of VEGF in OxPL-treated cells strongly correlated with
induction of the ATF4 target genes ATF3 and TRB3. Knocking down ATF4 was
paralleled by loss of VEGF induction by OxPLs. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
demonstrated that OxPLs stimulated binding of ATF4 to a regulatory site in the
VEGFA gene. Taken together, these data characterize UPR and more specifically its
ATF4 branch as an important mechanism mediating up-regulation of VEGF by OxPLs,
and allow hypothesizing that the UPR cascade might play a role in pathologic
angiogenesis in atherosclerotic plaques.

PMCID: PMC2442744
PMID: 18451308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Physiol Genomics. 2008 Jun 12;34(1):112-26. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00239.2007. Epub 2008 Apr 29.

The in vivo gene expression signature of oxidative stress.

Han ES(1), Muller FL, Pérez VI, Qi W, Liang H, Xi L, Fu C, Doyle E, Hickey M,
Cornell J, Epstein CJ, Roberts LJ, Van Remmen H, Richardson A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, University of Tulsa, Tulsa, Oklahoma, USA.

How higher organisms respond to elevated oxidative stress in vivo is poorly
understood. Therefore, we measured oxidative stress parameters and gene
expression alterations (Affymetrix arrays) in the liver caused by elevated
reactive oxygen species induced in vivo by diquat or by genetic ablation of the
major antioxidant enzymes CuZn-superoxide dismutase (Sod1) and glutathione
peroxidase-1 (Gpx1). Diquat (50 mg/kg) treatment resulted in a significant
increase in oxidative damage within 3-6 h in wild-type mice without any
lethality. In contrast, treatment of Sod1(-/-) or Gpx1(-/-) mice with a similar
concentration of diquat resulted in a significant increase in oxidative damage
within an hour of treatment and was lethal, i.e., these mice are extremely
sensitive to the oxidative stress generated by diquat. The expression response to
elevated oxidative stress in vivo does not involve an upregulation of classic
antioxidant genes, although long-term oxidative stress in Sod1(-/-) mice leads to
a significant upregulation of thiol antioxidants (e.g., Mt1, Srxn1, Gclc,
Txnrd1), which appears to be mediated by the redox-sensitive transcription factor
Nrf2. The main finding of our study is that the common response to elevated
oxidative stress with diquat treatment in wild-type, Gpx1(-/-), and Sod1(-/-)
mice and in untreated Sod1(-/-) mice is an upregulation of p53 target genes (p21,
Gdf15, Plk3, Atf3, Trp53inp1, Ddit4, Gadd45a, Btg2, Ndrg1). A retrospective
comparison with previous studies shows that induction of these p53 target genes
is a conserved expression response to oxidative stress, in vivo and in vitro, in 
different species and different cells/organs.

PMCID: PMC2532791
PMID: 18445702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2008 May;67(5):456-69. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e318170f892.

Knocking down galectin 1 in human hs683 glioblastoma cells impairs both
angiogenesis and endoplasmic reticulum stress responses.

Le Mercier M(1), Mathieu V, Haibe-Kains B, Bontempi G, Mijatovic T, Decaestecker 
C, Kiss R, Lefranc F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology, Institute of Pharmacy, Free University of Brussels, 
Brussels, Belgium.

Galectin (Gal) 1 is a hypoxia-regulated proangiogenic factor that also directly
participates in glioblastoma cell migration. To determine how Gal-1 exerts its
proangiogenic effects, we investigated Gal-1 signaling in the human Hs683
glioblastoma cell line. Galectin 1 signals through the endoplasmic reticulum
transmembrane kinase/ribonuclease inositol-requiring 1alpha, which regulates the 
expression of oxygen-regulated protein 150. Oxygen-regulated protein 150 controls
vascular endothelial growth factor maturation. Galectin 1 also modulates the
expression of 7 other hypoxia-related genes (i.e. CTGF, ATF3, PPP1R15A, HSPA5,
TRA1, and CYR61) that are implicated in angiogenesis. Decreasing Gal-1 expression
in Hs683 orthotopic xenografts in mouse brains by siRNA administration impaired
endoplasmic reticulum stress and enhanced the therapeutic benefits of the
proautophagic drug temozolomide. These results suggest that decreasing Gal-1
expression (e.g. through brain delivery of nonviral infusions of anti-Gal-1 siRNA
in patients) can represent an additional therapeutic strategy for glioblastoma.

PMID: 18431251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Eur J Endocrinol. 2008 May;158(5):729-39. doi: 10.1530/EJE-07-0793.

Activating transcription factor 3: a hormone responsive gene in the etiology of
hypospadias.

Beleza-Meireles A(1), Töhönen V, Söderhäll C, Schwentner C, Radmayr C, Kockum I, 
Nordenskjöld A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76
Stockholm, Sweden.

INTRODUCTION: Hypospadias is a common inborn error of the genital development,
whose complex etiology remains elusive. Defects of the androgen metabolism and
activity have been found in a subset of boys with hypospadias. Moreover, the
balance between androgens and estrogens seems to be important to the proper male 
genital development. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), an estrogen
responsive gene, has been reported to be expressed during sexual development and 
up-regulated in hypospadic genital skin. We investigated ATF3 as a candidate gene
for hypospadias.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Genotyping of eight-tagged single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNP)s was performed in 330 boys with hypospadias and in 380 healthy controls.
Screening for mutations in ATF3 was conducted in a subset of boys with
hypospadias. ATF3 expression was evaluated in the foreskin of boys with
hypospadias and in healthy controls and in the human fetal genitalia by
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Three common SNPs, spanning a region of about 16 kb in intron 1 of ATF3,
are associated with hypospadias. These SNPs are not linked and their effects are 
independent. The combination of the three risk SNPs yields the highest
significance. Mutation screening identified the gene variant c536A>G in one
patient and c817C>T in the 3'-UTR in two other patients. ATF3 expression was
evidenced in the developing male urethra.
CONCLUSIONS: ATF3 gene variants influence the risk of hypospadias. Its hormonal
responsiveness may underlie this risk effect. But also other ATF3-dependent
biological aspects, such as cell survival and death, response to stress stimuli, 
or the control of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions, may be of importance.

PMID: 18426833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jun 13;370(4):641-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.04.003. Epub 2008 Apr 10.

AM251 suppresses the viability of HepG2 cells through the AMPK (AMP-activated
protein kinase)-JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase)-ATF3 (activating transcription
factor 3) pathway.

Lee YM(1), Uhm KO, Lee ES, Kwon J, Park SH, Kim HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Korea University College of Medicine, 126-1, 5 ga,
Anam-dong, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-701, South Korea.

AM251, a cannabinoid antagonist, has various biological activities. In this
study, we found that AM251 suppressed the viability of hepatoma HepG2 cells and
also increased phosphorylation of JNK (c-jun N-terminal kinase) and ATF3
(activating transcription factor 3). In addition, AM251 phosphorylated AMPK
(AMP-activated protein kinase) in a time and dose-dependent manner. Inhibition of
AMPK blocked AM251-induced JNK/ATF3 phosphorylation. Expression of AMPK or
treatment with AICAR (5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxy-amide-1-d-ribofuranoside), an
AMPK activator, activated the JNK/ATF3 pathways. Together, these results suggest 
that AM251 may have anti-tumor effects in hepatoma through activation of the
AMPK-JNK-ATF3 signal pathway.

PMID: 18406347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2008 Apr;65(4):395-407. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.65.4.395.

A discriminating messenger RNA signature for bipolar disorder formed by an
aberrant expression of inflammatory genes in monocytes.

Padmos RC(1), Hillegers MH, Knijff EM, Vonk R, Bouvy A, Staal FJ, de Ridder D,
Kupka RW, Nolen WA, Drexhage HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus Medical Center, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

CONTEXT: Mood disturbances are associated with an activated inflammatory response
system.
OBJECTIVE: To identify a discriminating and coherent expression pattern of
proinflammatory genes in monocytes of patients with bipolar disorder.
DESIGN: A quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) case-control gene
expression study on purified monocytes of bipolar patients, the offspring of
bipolar patients, and healthy control participants after having selected 22
discriminating inflammatory genes using whole genome analyses.
SETTING: Academic research setting in The Netherlands.
PATIENTS: Forty-two bipolar patients with 25 healthy controls, 54 offspring of a 
bipolar parent (13 had a mood disorder and 3 developed one during follow-up), and
70 healthy children underwent Q-PCR.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Inflammatory gene expression levels in monocytes.
RESULTS: We detected in the monocytes of bipolar patients a coherent mutually
correlating set (signature) of 19 aberrantly expressed (P < .01) messenger RNAs
of inflammatory (PDE4B, IL1B, IL6, TNF, TNFAIP3, PTGS2, and PTX3), trafficking
(CCL2, CCL7, CCL20, CXCL2, CCR2, and CDC42), survival (BCL2A1 and EMP1), and
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway (MAPK6, DUSP2, NAB2, and ATF3) genes.
Twenty-three of 42 bipolar patients (55%) had a positive signature test result vs
7 of 38 healthy controls (18%) (positive test result: positivity for PDE4B, ie, a
messenger RNA 1 SD higher than the mean level found in healthy controls, plus 25%
of the other genes with similar positive findings). Positive signature test
results were also present in 11 of 13 offspring with a mood disorder (85%), 3 of 
3 offspring developing a mood disorder (100%), and 17 of 38 euthymic offspring
(45%) vs 13 of 70 healthy children (19%). Lithium carbonate and antipsychotic
treatment downregulated the gene expression of most inflammatory genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The monocytes of a large proportion of bipolar patients and
offspring of bipolar parents showed an inflammatory gene expression signature.
This coherent set of genes opens new avenues for biomarker development with
possibilities for disease prediction in individuals genetically at risk and for
the subclassification of bipolar patients who could possibly benefit from
anti-inflammatory treatment.

PMID: 18391128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Physiol Genomics. 2008 May 13;33(3):361-72. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00139.2007. Epub 2008 Apr 1.

Liver gene expression analysis reveals endoplasmic reticulum stress and metabolic
dysfunction in SCD1-deficient mice fed a very low-fat diet.

Flowers MT(1), Keller MP, Choi Y, Lan H, Kendziorski C, Ntambi JM, Attie AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA. mflowers@biochem.wisc.edu

We previously reported that mice deficient in stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 (Scd1)
and maintained on a very low-fat (VLF) diet for 10 days developed severe loss of 
body weight, hypoglycemia, hypercholesterolemia, and many cholestasis-like
phenotypes. To better understand the metabolic changes associated with these
phenotypes, we performed microarray analysis of hepatic gene expression in chow- 
and VLF-fed female Scd1+/+ and Scd1-/- mice. We identified an extraordinary
number of differentially expressed genes (>4,000 probe sets) in the VLF Scd1-/-
relative to both VLF Scd1+/+ and chow Scd1-/- mice. Transcript levels were
reduced for genes involved in detoxification and several facets of fatty acid
metabolism including biosynthesis, elongation, desaturation, oxidation,
transport, and ketogenesis. This pattern is attributable to the decreased mRNA
abundance of several genes encoding key transcription factors, including
LXRalpha, RXRalpha, FXR, PPARalpha, PGC-1beta, SREBP1c, ChREBP, CAR, DBP, TEF,
and HLF. A robust induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is indicated by 
enhanced splicing of XBP1, increased expression of the stress-induced
transcription factors CHOP and ATF3, and elevated expression of several genes
involved in the integrated stress and unfolded protein response pathways. The
gene expression profile is also consistent with induction of an acute
inflammatory response and macrophage recruitment. These results highlight the
importance of monounsaturated fatty acid synthesis for maintaining metabolic
homeostasis in the absence of sufficient dietary unsaturated fat and point to a
novel cellular nutrient-sensing mechanism linking fatty acid availability and/or 
composition to the ER stress response.

PMID: 18381840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Atherosclerosis. 2008 Dec;201(2):281-8. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2008.02.014. Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Acute hypoxia to endothelial cells induces activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) expression that is mediated via nitric oxide.

Chen SC(1), Liu YC, Shyu KG, Wang DL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Endothelial cells (ECs) play an important role in hypoxia-induced vascular
disorders. We investigated the acute hypoxia effect on endothelial expression of 
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a stress-inducible transcription factor
playing significant roles in cellular responses to stress. Bovine aortic ECs were
subjected to acute hypoxia (1% O(2), pO(2)=8 mmHg) and ATF3 expression was
examined. ECs exposed to hypoxia transiently induced ATF3 expression. A transient
increase in the activation of c-Jun-NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) in ECs was observed; however, only ECs
pretreated with a specific inhibitor to JNK suppressed the hypoxia-induced ATF3
expression. ECs exposed to acute hypoxia transiently increased endothelial nitric
oxide (eNOS) activity. Pre-treating ECs with a specific inhibitor to eNOS
(l-NAME) or PI3-kinase significantly inhibited the hypoxia-induced JNK activation
and ATF3 expression. ATF3 induction has been shown to inhibit matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) expression. Consistently, ECs exposed to hypoxia
attenuated the MMP-2 expression. This hypoxia-attenuated MMP-2 expression can be 
rescued by pre-treating ECs with an inhibitor of eNOS. These results suggest that
the ATF3 induction by acute hypoxia is mediated by nitric oxide and the JNK
pathway in ECs. Our findings provide a molecular basis for the mechanism in which
ECs respond to acute hypoxia.

PMID: 18377912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2008 May;294(5):E910-7. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00607.2007. Epub 2008 Mar 11.

Effect of acute physiological hyperinsulinemia on gene expression in human
skeletal muscle in vivo.

Coletta DK(1), Balas B, Chavez AO, Baig M, Abdul-Ghani M, Kashyap SR, Folli F,
Tripathy D, Mandarino LJ, Cornell JE, Defronzo RA, Jenkinson CP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes, Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health
Science Centre, San Antonio, TX, USA. richardsond2@uthscsa.edu

This study was undertaken to test the hypothesis that short-term exposure (4 h)
to physiological hyperinsulinemia in normal, healthy subjects without a family
history of diabetes would induce a low grade inflammatory response independently 
of glycemic status. Twelve normal glucose tolerant subjects received a 4-h
euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp with biopsies of the vastus lateralis muscle.
Microarray analysis identified 121 probe sets that were significantly altered in 
response to physiological hyperinsulinemia while maintaining euglycemia. In
normal, healthy human subjects insulin increased the mRNAs of a number of
inflammatory genes (CCL2, CXCL2 and THBD) and transcription factors (ATF3,
BHLHB2, HES1, KLF10, JUNB, FOS, and FOSB). A number of other genes were
upregulated in response to insulin, including RRAD, MT, and SGK. CITED2, a known 
coactivator of PPARalpha, was significantly downregulated. SGK and CITED2 are
located at chromosome 6q23, where we previously detected strong linkage to
fasting plasma insulin concentrations. We independently validated the mRNA
expression changes in an additional five subjects and closely paralleled the
results observed in the original 12 subjects. A saline infusion in healthy,
normal glucose-tolerant subjects without family history of diabetes demonstrated 
that the genes altered during the euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp were due to
hyperinsulinemia and were unrelated to the biopsy procedure per se. The results
of the present study demonstrate that insulin acutely regulates the levels of
mRNAs involved in inflammation and transcription and identifies several candidate
genes, including HES1 and BHLHB2, for further investigation.

PMCID: PMC3581328
PMID: 18334611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. BMC Immunol. 2008 Mar 5;9:7. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-9-7.

The Innate Immune Database (IIDB).

Korb M(1), Rust AG, Thorsson V, Battail C, Li B, Hwang D, Kennedy KA, Roach JC,
Rosenberger CM, Gilchrist M, Zak D, Johnson C, Marzolf B, Aderem A, Shmulevich I,
Bolouri H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, 1441 North 34thStreet, Seattle, Washington
98103-8904, USA. mkorb@systemsbiology.org

BACKGROUND: As part of a National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
funded collaborative project, we have performed over 150 microarray experiments
measuring the response of C57/BL6 mouse bone marrow macrophages to toll-like
receptor stimuli. These microarray expression profiles are available freely from 
our project web site http://www.innateImmunity-systemsbiology.org. Here, we
report the development of a database of computationally predicted transcription
factor binding sites and related genomic features for a set of over 2000 murine
immune genes of interest. Our database, which includes microarray co-expression
clusters and a host of web-based query, analysis and visualization facilities, is
available freely via the internet. It provides a broad resource to the research
community, and a stepping stone towards the delineation of the network of
transcriptional regulatory interactions underlying the integrated response of
macrophages to pathogens.
DESCRIPTION: We constructed a database indexed on genes and annotations of the
immediate surrounding genomic regions. To facilitate both gene-specific and
systems biology oriented research, our database provides the means to analyze
individual genes or an entire genomic locus. Although our focus to-date has been 
on mammalian toll-like receptor signaling pathways, our database structure is not
limited to this subject, and is intended to be broadly applicable to immunology. 
By focusing on selected immune-active genes, we were able to perform
computationally intensive expression and sequence analyses that would currently
be prohibitive if applied to the entire genome. Using six complementary
computational algorithms and methodologies, we identified transcription factor
binding sites based on the Position Weight Matrices available in TRANSFAC. For
one example transcription factor (ATF3) for which experimental data is available,
over 50% of our predicted binding sites coincide with genome-wide chromatin
immnuopreciptation (ChIP-chip) results. Our database can be interrogated via a
web interface. Genomic annotations and binding site predictions can be
automatically viewed with a customized version of the Argo genome browser.
CONCLUSION: We present the Innate Immune Database (IIDB) as a community resource 
for immunologists interested in gene regulatory systems underlying innate
responses to pathogens. The database website can be freely accessed at
http://db.systemsbiology.net/IIDB.

PMCID: PMC2268913
PMID: 18321385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Allergy. 2008 Apr;63(4):461-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2007.01621.x.

Comparison of expression profiles induced by dust mite in airway epithelia
reveals a common pathway.

Vroling AB(1), Jonker MJ, Breit TM, Fokkens WJ, van Drunen CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Airway epithelial cells have shown to be active participants in the
defense against pathogens by producing signaling and other regulatory molecules
in response to the encounter.
METHODS: In previous manuscripts, we have studied the effect of house dust mite
(HDM) extract on both an epithelial cell-line (H292) and primary nasal epithelial
cell. When we compare these responses we conclude that the H292 cells more
closely resemble nasal epithelium of healthy controls (share 107 probe-sets) than
of allergic individuals (share 17 probe-sets).
RESULTS: Interestingly, probably because of an absent intraindividual variation
between samples, more probe-sets (8280) change expression significantly in H292
than in either healthy (555) or allergic (401) epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: A direct comparison of all the responses in these epithelial cells
reveals a core-response to HDM of just 29 genes. These genes (CCL20, IL-8, CXCL2,
CXCL1, IL-1B, AREG, TNFAIP3, HBEGF, PTGS2, BMP2, LDLR, PLAUR, PLAU, NFKB2, NFKB1,
JUN, ATF3, EGR1, NPC1, TICAM1, EPHA2, CTGF, DUSP1, SPRY1, TLR-3, complement
factor C3, IVNS1ABP, SerpinB3, and PSAT1) have described links with allergy or
inflammation and may even describe the well-established relationship between
viral infections and allergic exacerbations or allergy development.

PMID: 18315734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008 Jun 1;229(2):172-83. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2008.01.009. Epub 2008 Jan 29.

Evidence of galectin-1 involvement in glioma chemoresistance.

Le Mercier M(1), Lefranc F, Mijatovic T, Debeir O, Haibe-Kains B, Bontempi G,
Decaestecker C, Kiss R, Mathieu V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology, Institute of Pharmacy, Free University of Brussels
(ULB), Brussels, Belgium.

Glioblastomas (GBMs) are resistant to apoptosis but less so to autophagy; a fact 
that may at least partly explain the therapeutic benefits of the pro-autophagic
drug temozolomide in the treatment of GBM patients. Galectin-1 (Gal1) whose
expression is stimulated by hypoxia is a potent modulator of GBM cell migration
and a pro-angiogenic molecule. Hypoxia is also known to confer cancer cells with 
resistance to chemotherapy and radiotherapy and to modulate the unfolded protein 
response (UPR) during endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. The present study
investigates whether decreasing Gal1 expression (by means of a siRNA approach) in
human Hs683 GBM cells increases their sensitivity to pro-autophagic or
pro-apoptotic drugs. The data reveal that temozolomide, the standard treatment
for glioma patients, increases Gal1 expression in Hs683 cells both in vitro and
in vivo. However, reducing Gal1 expression in these cells by siRNA increases the 
anti-tumor effects of various chemotherapeutic agents, in particular temozolomide
both in vitro and in vivo. This decrease in Gal1 expression in Hs683 cells does
not induce apoptotic or autophagic features, but is found to modulate p53
transcriptional activity and decrease p53-targeted gene expression including
DDIT3/GADD153/CHOP, DUSP5 ATF3 and GADD45A. The decrease in Gal1 expression also 
impairs the expression levels of seven other genes implicated in chemoresistance:
ORP150, HERP, GRP78/Bip, TRA1, BNIP3L, GADD45B and CYR61, some of which are
located in the ER and whose expression is also known to be modified by hypoxia.
This novel facet of Gal1 involvement in glioblastoma biology may be amenable to
therapeutic manipulation.

PMID: 18313712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 9;283(19):13148-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M702164200. Epub 2008 
Feb 28.

Fibronectin type I repeat is a nonactivating ligand for EphA1 and inhibits
ATF3-dependent angiogenesis.

Masuda J(1), Usui R, Maru Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, 8-1 Kawada-cho, 
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.

ATF3 stimulated promoter activity of EphA1 by 3.4-fold in ATF3-dependent
angiogenesis in vitro. Although tyrosine kinase activation of EphA1 was
dispensable, binding of EphA1 to fibronectin through its type I repeat played an 
essential role in the angiogenesis. Recombinant proteins containing fibronectin
10th to 12th type I repeat (I 10-12) but not I 12 could inhibit the angiogenesis 
in vitro by competitively targeting EphA1 with the full-length fibronectin.
However, I 12 acquired a higher affinity toward EphA2 with K(d) 18 nm and
inhibited vascular endothelial growth factor-dependent angiogenic invasion in a
Matrigel plug assay.

PMID: 18308734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Neurosci. 2008 Feb 27;28(9):2025-32. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5273-07.2008.

Induction of activating transcription factors (ATFs) ATF2, ATF3, and ATF4 in the 
nucleus accumbens and their regulation of emotional behavior.

Green TA(1), Alibhai IN, Unterberg S, Neve RL, Ghose S, Tamminga CA, Nestler EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9070, USA.

Previous research has shown that cAMP response element (CRE) binding protein
(CREB) in the nucleus accumbens gates behavioral responses to emotional stimuli. 
For example, overexpression of CREB decreases anxiety, sucrose preference, and
sensitivity to drugs of abuse and increases depression-like behavior, whereas
blocking CREB via overexpression of inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) or
other dominant-negative inhibitors of CRE-mediated transcription has the opposite
effects. However, CREB and ICER are but two members of a larger family of leucine
zipper-containing transcription factors composed of multiple products of the
creb, crem (cAMP response element modulator), and atf (activating transcription
factor) genes. We demonstrate here that ATF2, ATF3, and ATF4 are each robustly
induced in the nucleus accumbens and dorsal striatum by restraint stress or by
amphetamine administration. In contrast, little induction is seen for ATF1 or
CREM. Using viral-mediated gene transfer, we show that ATF2 overexpression in
nucleus accumbens produces increases in emotional reactivity and
antidepressant-like responses, a behavioral phenotype similar to that caused by
dominant-negative antagonists of CREB. In contrast, ATF3 or ATF4 overexpression
in nucleus accumbens decreases emotional reactivity and increases depression-like
behavior, consistent with the behavioral phenotype induced by CREB. Because
amphetamine and stress induce ATF2, ATF3, and ATF4 in nucleus accumbens, and
overexpression of these transcription factors in this brain region in turn alters
behavioral responsiveness to amphetamine and stress, our findings support novel
roles for these ATF family members in regulating emotional behavior.

PMID: 18305237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Physiol Genomics. 2008 Apr 22;33(2):218-29. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00263.2007. Epub 2008 Feb 19.

HepG2/C3A cells respond to cysteine deprivation by induction of the amino acid
deprivation/integrated stress response pathway.

Lee JI(1), Dominy JE Jr, Sikalidis AK, Hirschberger LL, Wang W, Stipanuk MH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, 
USA.

To further define genes that are differentially expressed during cysteine
deprivation and to evaluate the roles of amino acid deprivation vs. oxidative
stress in the response to cysteine deprivation, we assessed gene expression in
human hepatoma cells cultured in complete or cysteine-deficient medium. Overall, 
C3A cells responded to cysteine deprivation by activation of the eukaryotic
initiation factor (eIF)2alpha kinase-mediated integrated stress response to
inhibit global protein synthesis; increased expression of genes containing amino 
acid response elements (ASNS, ATF3, CEBPB, SLC7A11, and TRIB3); increased
expression of genes for amino acid transporters (SLC7A11, SLC1A4, and SLC3A2),
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (CARS), and, to a limited extent, amino acid
metabolism (ASNS and CTH); increased expression of genes that act to suppress
growth (STC2, FOXO3A, GADD45A, LNK, and INHBE); and increased expression of
several enzymes that favor glutathione synthesis and maintenance of protein thiol
groups (GCLC, GCLM, SLC7A11, and TXNRD1). Although GCLC, GCLM, SLC7A11, HMOX, and
TXNRD1 were upregulated, most genes known to be upregulated via oxidative stress 
were not affected by cysteine deprivation. Because most genes known to be
upregulated in response to eIF2alpha phosphorylation and activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4) synthesis were differentially expressed in response to cysteine
deprivation, it is likely that many responses to cysteine deprivation are
mediated, at least in part, by the general control nondepressible 2
(GCN2)/ATF4-dependent integrated stress response. This conclusion was supported
by the observation of similar differential expression of a subset of genes in
response to leucine deprivation. A consequence of sulfur amino acid restriction
appears to be the upregulation of the cellular capacity to cope with oxidative
and chemical stresses via the integrated stress response.

PMID: 18285520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Feb 19;105(7):2544-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0712182105. Epub 2008 Feb 11.

ATF3 regulates MCMV infection in mice by modulating IFN-gamma expression in
natural killer cells.

Rosenberger CM(1), Clark AE, Treuting PM, Johnson CD, Aderem A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, 1441 North 34th Street, Seattle, WA 98103, USA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a negative regulator of
proinflammatory cytokine expression in macrophages, and ATF3-deficient mice are
more susceptible to endotoxic shock. Here, we demonstrate that ATF3 interacts
with a cis-regulatory element of the IFN-gamma gene in natural killer (NK) cells,
and that ATF3null NK cells show increased transcription and secretion of
IFN-gamma. NK cell-derived IFN-gamma has previously been demonstrated to be
protective against murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) infection, and we show here that
ATF3null mice exhibit decreased hepatic viral load and reduced liver
histopathology upon challenge with MCMV. Reconstitution of NK-deficient mice with
ATF3null NK cells more effectively controlled MCMV infection than mice
reconstituted with WT cells, indicating that ATF3 acts within NK cells to
regulate antiviral responses.

PMCID: PMC2268173
PMID: 18268321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. DNA Repair (Amst). 2008 Mar 1;7(3):487-96. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2007.12.004.
Epub 2008 Jan 30.

ATF3 and Fra1 have opposite functions in JNK- and ERK-dependent DNA damage
responses.

Hamdi M(1), Popeijus HE, Carlotti F, Janssen JM, van der Burgt C,
Cornelissen-Steijger P, van de Water B, Hoeben RC, Matsuo K, van Dam H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300
RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

JNK and ERK MAP kinases regulate cellular responses to genotoxic stress in a cell
type and cell context-dependent manner. However, the factors that determine and
execute JNK- and ERK-controlled stress responses are only partly known. In this
study, we investigate the roles of the AP-1 components ATF3 and Fra1 in JNK- and 
ERK-dependent cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. We show that the anti-cancer drug 
cisplatin or UV light activates both JNK and ERK in human glioblastoma cells
lacking functional p53. Inhibition experiments of JNK or ERK activities revealed 
that the ERK pathway strongly promotes cisplatin- and UV-induced apoptosis in
these glioblastoma cells. Furthermore, JNK but not ERK is required for ATF3
induction, and both ERK and JNK are necessary for post-transcriptional induction 
of Fra1 in response to cisplatin or UV. Knock-down of ATF3 and Fra1 results in
increased and decreased cisplatin-induced apoptosis, respectively, indicating
that ATF3 is an anti-apoptotic JNK effector and Fra1 is a pro-apoptotic ERK/JNK
effector. Knock-down experiments also revealed that ATF3 and Fra1, respectively, 
enhance and reduce S-phase arrest through differential modulation of the
Chk1-Cdk2 pathway. Thus, we identify novel reciprocal functions of ATF3 and Fra1 
in JNK- and ERK-dependent DNA damage responses.

PMID: 18249159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Feb;19(2):217-24. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2005111155. Epub 2008
Jan 30.

ATF3 protects against renal ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Yoshida T(1), Sugiura H, Mitobe M, Tsuchiya K, Shirota S, Nishimura S, Shiohira
S, Ito H, Nobori K, Gullans SR, Akiba T, Nitta K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine IV, Tokyo Women's Medical University, 8-1
Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-city, Tokyo, Japan 162-8666. tyoshida@kc.twmu.ac.jp

Oxidative stress-induced cell death plays a major role in the progression of
ischemic acute renal failure. Using microarrays, we sought to identify a
stress-induced gene that may be a therapeutic candidate. Human proximal tubule
(HK2) cells were treated with hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and RNA was applied to an 
Affymetrix gene chip. Five genes were markedly induced in a parallel
time-dependent manner by cluster analysis, including activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3), p21(WAF1/CiP1) (p21), CHOP/GADD153, dual-specificity protein
phosphatase, and heme oxygenase-1. H2O2 rapidly induced ATF3 approximately
12-fold in HK2 cells and approximately 6.5-fold in a mouse model of renal
ischemia-reperfusion injury. Adenovirus-mediated expression of ATF3 protected HK2
cells against H2O2-induced cell death, and this was associated with a decrease of
p53 mRNA and an increase of p21 mRNA. Moreover, when ATF3 was overexpressed in
mice via adenovirus-mediated gene transfer, ischemia-reperfusion injury was
reduced. In conclusion, ATF3 plays a protective role in renal
ischemia-reperfusion injury and the mechanism of the protection may involve
suppression of p53 and induction of p21.

PMCID: PMC2396738
PMID: 18235102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Pain. 2008 Mar;9(3):280-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2007.11.013. Epub 2008 Jan 28.

Differential Changes in TRPV1 expression after trigeminal sensory nerve injury.

Kim HY(1), Park CK, Cho IH, Jung SJ, Kim JS, Oh SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Program in Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience,
School of Dentistry and Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University,
Seoul, Korea.

We have recently demonstrated that inferior alveolar nerve and mental nerve
(branches of the mandibular nerve) injury from rats serves as a valid trigeminal 
neuropathic pain model. In these animals, we found that neuronal loss of
trigeminal ganglion (TG) was not correlated with pain hypersensitivity. In this
study, we examined changes of transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1)
expression in the injured and uninjured TG neurons using immunohistochemical
analysis at 3 days after surgery, the time point where we observed significant
pain hypersensitivity. Injured neurons were identified by positive
immunoreactivity for activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3). ATF3
immunoreactivity was exclusively observed in the nuclei of subpopulation of
ipsilateral mandibular TG neurons, whereas no ATF3 expression was found in the
naive and contralateral TG neurons. Interestingly, the expression of TRPV1 was
increased in the uninjured ipsilateral maxillary TG neurons as well as in the
uninjured ipsilateral mandibular TG neurons. The upregulation of TRPV1 and ATF3
expression returned to the basal level at 60 days after surgery. Our results
demonstrate that trigeminal sensory nerve injury induced differential changes in 
TRPV1 expression of the injured and uninjured TG neurons. The upregulation of
TRPV1 in uninjured TG neurons may play an important role in pain hypersensitivity
after trigeminal nerve injury.PERSPECTIVE: The TRPV1 is a well-known pain
transducer molecule and plays crucial roles in the perception of inflammatory and
thermal pain. This article presents that TRPV1 expression was increased in
uninjured neurons rather than injured neurons after peripheral nerve injury. The 
upregulation of TRPV1 in uninjured neurons may be associated with the development
of neuropathic pain. TRPV1 might be a potential target for the treatment of
neuropathic pain.

PMID: 18226965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Free Radic Biol Med. 2008 Mar 15;44(6):1097-107. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2007.12.009. Epub 2007 Dec 23.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress induced by aqueous extracts of cigarette smoke in
3T3 cells activates the unfolded-protein-response-dependent PERK pathway of cell 
survival.

Hengstermann A(1), Müller T.

Author information: 
(1)Philip Morris Research Laboratories GmbH, Fuggerstr. 3, D-51149 Cologne,
Germany.

Cigarette smoke (CS) generally places severe stress on cells, as reflected by
gene expression profiling and pathway analysis, which, among other effects, also 
suggested activation of the unfolded protein response pathway triggered by the
stressed endoplasmic reticulum (ER stress). Here, we present data indicating that
noncytotoxic concentrations of aqueous extracts of CS induce a distinct ER stress
response in immortalized nontransformed Swiss 3T3 cells, primarily by activating 
the PERK pathway of global protein synthesis inhibition. Activation of PERK and
PERK-dependent signaling by aqueous extracts of CS was demonstrated by (i) the
inhibition of protein synthesis, (ii) the phosphorylation of PERK and its
substrate eIF2alpha, (iii) the activation of ATF4, and (iv) the expression of
ATF4-dependent target genes chop, gadd34, BiP, and atf3. Within the dose range
tested, all effects appeared to be transient in nature, while the periods of
recovery from ER stress were clearly concentration dependent. In contrast to
these data and to the effects seen with thapsigargin (used as positive control), 
only minor effects were observed for the activation of xbp-1, a common target of 
the other two canonical sensors of ER stress, i.e., ATF6 and IRE1. In mechanistic
terms, neither the disruption of energy levels nor a contribution of arylating
quinones played a major role under the experimental conditions tested. Notably
however, the effects of aqueous extracts of CS on the ER could be mimicked in the
presence of acrolein at CS-relevant concentrations, indicating that CS interferes
with proper ER function, presumably due mainly to changes in cellular redox
homeostasis. Since ER stress has been linked to diseases that are also related to
CS exposure, these data are relevant in the discussion of a general molecular
mechanism of CS-induced disease.

PMID: 18206657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cancer Res. 2008 Jan 15;68(2):364-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2170.

Activating transcription factor 3 is a novel repressor of the nuclear factor
erythroid-derived 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)-regulated stress pathway.

Brown SL(1), Sekhar KR, Rachakonda G, Sasi S, Freeman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology and Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

The transcription factor nuclear factor erythroid-derived 2-related factor 2
(Nrf2) regulates induction of an extensive cellular stress response network when 
complexed with the cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CBP) at antioxidant
response elements (ARE) located in the promoter region of target genes.
Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) can repress Nrf2-mediated signaling in a
manner that is not well understood. Here, we show that ATF3-mediated suppression 
is a consequence of direct ATF3-Nrf2 protein-protein interactions that result in 
displacement of CBP from the ARE. This work establishes ATF3 as a novel repressor
of the Nrf2-directed stress response pathway.

PMID: 18199529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Neurochem. 2008 May;105(4):1300-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05226.x. Epub
2008 Jan 10.

Inhibition of ATF-3 expression by B-Raf mediates the neuroprotective action of
GW5074.

Chen HM(1), Wang L, D'Mello SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, TX 75083, USA.

GW5074 a brain-permeable 3' substituted indolone, protects neurons from death in 
culture and in an in vivo paradigm of neurodegeneration. Using low potassium (LK)
induced apoptosis of cerebellar granule neurons, we report here that the
protective action of GW5074 is mediated through the activation of B-Raf.
Over-expression of a kinase-dead form of B-Raf blocks the ability of GW5074 to
neuroprotect, whereas over-expression of active forms of B-Raf protect even in
the absence of GW5074. Although mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) and
extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK) are activated by GW5074,
pharmacological inhibition of MEK-ERK signaling by U0126 or PD98059 does not
reduce neuroprotection suggesting that B-Raf signals through a non-canonical
signaling pathway. GeneChip microarray analyses identified activating
transcription factor-3 (ATF-3) as a gene whose expression is induced by LK but
that is negatively regulated by GW5074. Forced inhibition of ATF-3 expression
using siRNA protects neurons against LK-induced apoptosis, whereas the
over-expression of ATF-3 blocks GW5074-mediated neuroprotection. Not
unexpectedly, expression of active B-Raf inhibits the apoptosis-associated
increase in ATF-3 expression. We extended our work to include three other 3'
substituted indolones - a commercially available inhibitor of RNA-dependent
protein kinase and two novel compounds designated as SK4 and SK6. Like GW5074,
RNA-dependent protein kinase inhibitor, SK4, and SK6 all inhibited c-Raf in vitro
but activated B-Raf in neuronal cultures. All four compounds also inhibited ATF-3
expression. Taken together our results indicate that all four indolones mediate
neuroprotection by a common mechanism which involves B-Raf activation, and that a
downstream target of B-Raf is ATF-3.

PMID: 18194435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Neurochem. 2008 May;105(4):1198-211. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05222.x.
Epub 2008 Jan 10.

Gene expression profiling in brain following acute systemic hypertonicity: novel 
genes possibly involved in osmoadaptation.

Maallem S(1), Wierinckx A, Lachuer J, Kwon MH, Tappaz ML.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 433, Neurobiologie Experimentale et Physiopathologie, Faculté de 
Médecine RTH Laennec, Rue Guillaume Paradin, Lyon, Cedex, France.

In brain osmoprotective genes known to be involved in cellular osmoadaptation to 
hypertonicity, as well as the related transcription factor tonicity-responsive
enhancer binding protein (TonEBP) are only expressed in some cell subsets. In the
search for other genes possibly involved in osmoadaptation of brain cells we have
analyzed, through microarray, the transcriptional profile of forebrain from rats 
subjected to 45 min, 90 min, and 6 h systemic hypertonicity. Microarray data were
validated by quantitative real-time PCR. Around 23 000 genes gave a reliable
hybridization signal. The number of genes showing a higher expression increased
from around 15 (45 min) up to nearly 200 (6 h). Among about 30 immediate early
genes (IEGs) encoding transcription factors, only Atf3, Verge, and Klf4 showed a 
rapid increased expression. TonEBP-mRNA tissue level and TonEBP-mRNA labeling in 
neurons remained unchanged whereas TonEBP labeling was rapidly increased in
neurons. Sodium-dependent neutral amino acid transporter-2 (SNAT2) encoded by
gene Slc38a2 showed a delayed increased expression. The rapid tonicity-induced
activation of Atf3, Verge, and Klf4 may regulate genes involved in
osmoadaptation. Nfat5 encoding TonEBP is not an IEG and the early
tonicity-induced expression of TonEBP in neurons may result from translational
activation. Increased expression of sodium-dependent neutral amino-acid
transporter 2 may lead to the cellular accumulation of amino acids for adaptation
to hypertonicity.

PMID: 18194432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 14;283(11):6988-96. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M707514200. Epub 2008 
Jan 11.

Neuronal injury-inducible gene is synergistically regulated by ATF3, c-Jun, and
STAT3 through the interaction with Sp1 in damaged neurons.

Kiryu-Seo S(1), Kato R, Ogawa T, Nakagomi S, Nagata K, Kiyama H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Osaka City University, Graduate School
of Medicine, 1-4-3 Asahimachi, Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

Nerve injury requires the expression of large ensembles of genes. The key
molecular mechanism for this gene transcription regulation in injured neurons is 
poorly understood. Among many nerve injury-inducible genes, the gene encoding
damage-induced neuronal endopeptidase (DINE) showed most marked expression
response to various kinds of nerve injuries in central and peripheral nervous
system neurons. This unique feature led us to examine the promoter region of the 
DINE gene and clarify both the injury-responsive element within the promoter and 
its related transcriptional machinery. This study showed that DINE promoter was
activated by leukemia inhibitory factor and nerve growth factor withdrawal, which
were pivotal for the up-regulation of DINE mRNA after nerve injury. The
injury-inducible transcription factors such as activating transcription factor 3 
(ATF3), c-Jun, and STAT3, which were located at the downstream of leukemia
inhibitory factor and nerve growth factor withdrawal, seemed to be involved in
the activation of the DINE promoter. Surprisingly, these transcription factors
did not bind to the DINE promoter directly. Instead, the general transcription
factor, Sp1, bound to a GC box within the promoter. ATF3, c-Jun, and STAT3
interacted with Sp1 and are associated with the GC box region of the DINE gene in
injured neurons. These findings suggested that Sp1 recruit ATF3, c-Jun, and STAT3
to obtain the requisite synergistic effect. Of these transcription factors, ATF3 
may be the most critical, because ATF3 is specifically expressed after nerve
injury.

PMID: 18192274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Eur J Pain. 2008 Aug;12(6):790-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpain.2007.11.009. Epub 2008
Jan 9.

Reduced thermal hyperalgesia and enhanced peripheral nerve injury after hind paw 
inflammation in mice lacking the serotonin-transporter.

Palm F(1), Mössner R, Chen Y, He L, Gerlach M, Bischofs S, Riederer P, Lesch KP, 
Sommer C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Würzburg, Neurologische Klinik der
Universität, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany.

Mice lacking the serotonin-transporter (5-HTT-/- mice) develop reduced thermal
hyperalgesia after nerve injury, concomitant with reduced serotonin (5-HT) levels
in nervous tissue. Here we investigated pain behaviour in 5-HTT-/- mice compared 
to their wild type littermates after hind paw inflammation induced by complete
Freund's adjuvant (CFA). We used standard tests for pain behaviour, high
performance liquid chromatography for measurement of 5-HT, and
immunohistochemistry of hind paw skin tissue and L5 dorsal root ganglia (DRG) to 
measure local inflammation and nerve injury. After intraplantar CFA injection,
hyperalgesia to heat was attenuated in 5-HTT-/- mice compared to wild type mice. 
Their 5-HT levels in nervous and adrenal tissue were reduced. An intraplantar
injection of 5-HT four days after CFA transiently brought withdrawal latencies of
5-HTT-/- mice down to the level of wild type mice, thus rescuing the phenotype
and supporting the role of 5-HT in the development of CFA-induced thermal
hyperalgesia. The density of intraepidermal nerve fibres in plantar skin after
CFA injection was reduced to a higher degree in 5-HTT-/- mice than in wild type
mice, suggesting greater peripheral nerve injury in the knock-out mice during
hind paw inflammation. Accordingly, a higher number of injured DRG neurons was
identified by activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) staining in 5-HTT-/- mice 
after CFA. We conclude that the phenotype of 5-HTT-/- mice leads to reduced
inflammatory pain due to reduced tissue 5-HT levels and to greater peripheral
nerve injury after inflammation. Human variants of the 5-HTT genotypes might be
part of the factors determining the extent of nerve injury and hyperalgesia in
inflammation.

PMID: 18187350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Neuroscience. 2008 Feb 6;151(3):771-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.10.057.
Epub 2007 Dec 4.

Activating transcription factor 3 up-regulated by c-Jun NH(2)-terminal
kinase/c-Jun contributes to apoptosis induced by potassium deprivation in
cerebellar granule neurons.

Mei Y(1), Yuan Z, Song B, Li D, Ma C, Hu C, Ching YP, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen
University, 74 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou 510080, China.

Cerebellar granule neurons (CGNs) depend on potassium depolarization for survival
and undergo apoptosis when deprived of depolarizing concentration of potassium.
Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a stress-inducible protein, belongs to 
the ATF/CREB family of transcription factors family and is involved in cell
growth and apoptosis. However, the role of ATF3 in neuronal apoptosis remains
unknown. Here, we showed that ATF3 was up-regulated under potassium deprivation
in CGNs, and this induction was preceded by a rapid and sustained activation of
c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase/c-Jun signaling pathway, which plays a fundamental
role in neuronal apoptosis. Furthermore, ATF3 up-regulation was abolished by
inhibition of JNK or knockdown of c-Jun. Finally, knockdown of ATF3 by RNA
interference protected CGNs from potassium deprivation-induced apoptosis. Taken
together, our results indicate that ATF3 is a downstream target of JNK/c-Jun
pathway and contributes to apoptosis induced by potassium deprivation in rat
CGNs.

PMID: 18178318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Biomaterials. 2008 Apr;29(10):1377-87. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2007.11.049.
Epub 2007 Dec 27.

Differential gene expression involved in oxidative stress response caused by
triethylene glycol dimethacrylate.

Schweikl H(1), Hiller KA, Eckhardt A, Bolay C, Spagnuolo G, Stempfl T, Schmalz G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Operative Dentistry and Periodontology, University of
Regensburg, D-93042 Regensburg, Germany. helmut.schweikl@klinik.uni-regensburg.de
<helmut.schweikl@klinik.uni-regensburg.de>

Triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA) is a comonomer that is released from
dental resin-based materials into hydrophilic solvents. The compound reduces cell
vitality, and causes genotoxicity in mammalian cells in vitro. Here, we used gene
expression profiling, combined with pathway analysis tools, to identify the
molecular events associated with TEGDMA cytotoxicity in human fibroblasts using
Affymetrix HG-U133A 2.0 GeneChip arrays. Increased ROS production and a cell
cycle delay caused by 3mm TEGDMA after a 6h exposure were related to a cell
response at the transcriptional level. The predominant biological processes
associated with the genes that were differentially expressed in untreated and
treated cell cultures included oxidative stress, cellular growth, proliferation
and morphology, cell death, gene expression as well as DNA replication and
repair. The most significantly upregulated genes were GEM (17-fold), KLHL24,
DDIT4, TGIF, DUSP5 and ATF3, which are all related to the regulation of the cell 
structure, stress response, and cell proliferation. TXNIP was the most
downregulated transcript (five-fold), whose gene product regulates the cellular
redox balance. The downregulation of NRG1, ASPM, FBXO5, and PLK2 is linked to the
regulation of cell proliferation and cell structure. The underlying mechanisms of
the up- and downregulation of genes seem to be activated by the production of
ROS, and the related regulation of the cellular redox balance disturbed in the
presence of TEGDMA appears to be of the utmost importance. The coordinated
induction of genes coding for oxidative stress response and antioxidant proteins 
is a critical mechanism of protection against TEGDMA-induced cell damage.

PMID: 18164055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Diabetes. 2008 Mar;57(3):635-44. Epub 2007 Dec 5.

The repression of IRS2 gene by ATF3, a stress-inducible gene, contributes to
pancreatic beta-cell apoptosis.

Li D(1), Yin X, Zmuda EJ, Wolford CC, Dong X, White MF, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Center for Molecular
Neurobiology, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

OBJECTIVE: beta-Cell failure is an essential component of all types of diabetes, 
and the insulin receptor substrate 2 (IRS2) branch of signaling plays a key role 
in beta-cell survival and function. We tested the hypothesis that activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a stress-inducible proapoptotic gene,
downregulates the expression of IRS2 in beta-cells.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We used both the gain- and loss-of-function
approaches to test the effects of ATF3 on IRS2 gene expression. We also analyzed 
the binding of ATF3 to the IRS2 promoter by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
and the transcription of the IRS2 gene by polymerase II occupancy assay.
Furthermore, we tested the ability of IRS2 to alleviate the proapoptotic effects 
of ATF3 in cultured beta-cells and in transgenic mice using the rat insulin
promoter to drive the transgenes.
RESULTS: Expression of ATF3 is sufficient to reduce IRS2 gene expression; in
contrast, knockdown or knockout of ATF3 reduces the ability of stress signals to 
downregulate IRS2 expression. ATF3 binds to the IRS2 promoter in vivo, and the
binding of ATF3 correlates with decreased IRS2 gene transcription. Functionally, 
expression of IRS2 protects beta-cells from ATF3-induced apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: IRS2 is a target gene of ATF3, and its repression by ATF3
contributes, at least partly, to the apoptosis induced by ATF3. Because ATF3 is a
stress-inducible gene, our work provides a direct link to explain how
environmental stress factors can modulate IRS2 gene transcription.

PMID: 18057093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Biochem J. 2008 Mar 15;410(3):473-84.

Deprivation of protein or amino acid induces C/EBPbeta synthesis and binding to
amino acid response elements, but its action is not an absolute requirement for
enhanced transcription.

Thiaville MM(1), Dudenhausen EE, Zhong C, Pan YX, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Nutritional
Sciences, and Shands Cancer Center, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

A nutrient stress signalling pathway is triggered in response to protein or amino
acid deprivation, namely the AAR (amino acid response), and previous studies have
shown that C/EBPbeta (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta) expression is
up-regulated following activation of the AAR. DNA-binding studies, both in vitro 
and in vivo, have revealed increased C/EBPbeta association with AARE (AAR
element) sequences in AAR target genes, but its role is still unresolved. The
present results show that in HepG2 human hepatoma cells, the total amount of
C/EBPbeta protein, both the activating [LAP* and LAP (liver-enriched activating
protein)] and inhibitory [LIP (liver-enriched inhibitory)] isoforms, was
increased in histidine-deprived cells. Immunoblotting of subcellular fractions
and immunostaining revealed that most of the C/EBPbeta was located in the
nucleus. Consistent with these observations, amino acid limitation caused an
increase in C/EBPbeta DNA-binding activity in nuclear extracts and chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed an increase in C/EBPbeta binding to the AARE region 
in vivo, but at a time when transcription from the target gene was declining. A
constant fraction of the basal and increased C/EBPbeta protein was phosphorylated
on Thr(235) and the phospho-C/EBPbeta did bind to an AARE. Induction of
AARE-enhanced transcription was slightly greater in C/EBPbeta-deficient MEFs
(mouse embryonic fibroblasts) or C/EBPbeta siRNA (small interfering RNA)-treated 
HepG2 cells compared with the corresponding control cells. Transient expression
of LAP*, LAP or LIP in C/EBPbeta-deficient fibroblasts caused suppression of
increased transcription from an AARE-driven reporter gene. Collectively, the
results demonstrate that C/EBPbeta is not required for transcriptional activation
by the AAR pathway but, when present, acts in concert with ATF3 (activating
transcription factor 3) to suppress transcription during the latter stages of the
response.

PMCID: PMC3589902
PMID: 18052938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Exp Neurol. 2008 Jan;209(1):268-78. Epub 2007 Oct 13.

Axotomy-induced dopaminergic neurodegeneration is accompanied with c-Jun
phosphorylation and activation transcription factor 3 expression.

Song DY(1), Yang YC, Shin DH, Sugama S, Kim YS, Lee BH, Joh TH, Cho BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Eulji University School of Medicine,
Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

Accumulating evidence has shown that both phosphorylated c-Jun (pc-Jun) and
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) were upregulated in a variety of tissue 
injuries and proposed to play an important role in cell death/survival. To
elucidate the significance and functional role of these immediate-early genes
during neuronal damage in the central nervous system, we examined temporal and
spatial profiles of pc-Jun and ATF3 in dopaminergic neurons of the substantia
nigra (SN) following transection of the medial forebrain bundle (MFB) in adult
rats. Morphological characteristics of pc-Jun-positive dopaminergic neurons as
well as microglial reaction in response to the axotomy-induced neurodegeneration 
were also investigated. Following MFB transection, both c-Jun phosphorylation and
ATF3 were found in the nuclei of tyrosine hydroxylase-immunoreactive (TH-ir)
neurons of the ipsilateral SN, but not in those of the contralateral SN. In the
ipsilateral SN, the number of pc-Jun- and ATF3-positive nuclei was increased by
5-7 days post-lesion, and then progressively decreased probably due to the loss
of neurons. Retrograde tracing with FluoroGold (FG) in hemi-axotomized rat brain 
demonstrated that none of the intact, unaxotomized (FG-ir) neurons was
pc-Jun-positive, indicating phosphorylation of c-Jun occurs only in axotomized
neurons. Concomitant co-localization of pc-Jun and ATF3 in the same TH-ir neuron 
was also demonstrated by triple immunofluorescence labeling. Many TH-ir neurons
that underwent various steps of consecutive neurodegenerative changes retained
pc-Jun in the condensed or fragmented nuclei. Moreover, numerous activated
microglia, identified by both phagocytic (ED1) and MHC II (OX6) markers, closely 
apposed to these neurons throughout the entire neurodegenerative process,
suggesting that they are actively phagocytosing dying neurons. Taken together,
these results support the idea that pc-Jun and its putative dimeric partner ATF3 
may be closely participating in axotomy-induced neurodegeneration.

PMID: 18036593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Neuroscience. 2007 Dec 19;150(4):887-97. Epub 2007 Oct 18.

Activating transcription factor 3 induction in sympathetic neurons after axotomy:
response to decreased neurotrophin availability.

Hyatt Sachs H(1), Schreiber RC, Shoemaker SE, Sabe A, Reed E, Zigmond RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid
Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4975, USA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is induced in a high proportion of
axotomized sensory and motor neurons after sciatic nerve transection. In the
present study, we looked at the expression of this factor in the superior
cervical ganglion (SCG) after axotomy and after other manipulations that induce
certain aspects of the cell body response to axotomy. Sympathetic ganglia from
intact rats and mice exhibit only a very occasional neuronal nucleus with
activating transcription factor 3-like immunoreactivity (ATF3-IR); however, as
early as 6 h and as late as 3 weeks postaxotomy, many of the neurons showed
intense ATF3-IR. A second population of cells had smaller and generally less
intensely stained nuclei, and at least some of these cells were satellite cells. 
Lesions distal to the SCG induced by administration of 6-hydroxydopamine or
unilateral removal of the salivary glands produced increases in ATF3-IR similar
to those seen after proximal axotomy, indicating that this response is not
strictly dependent on the distance of the lesion from the cell body. Two proposed
signals for triggering ATF3 expression were examined: reduction in nerve growth
factor (NGF) availability and induction of the cytokine leukemia inhibitory
factor (LIF). While administration of an antiserum raised against NGF to intact
animals induced ATF3-IR, induction of ATF3-IR after axotomy was not reduced in
LIF null mutant mice. Since axotomy, 6-hydroxydopamine, and sialectomy are known 
to decrease the concentration of NGF in the SCG, our data suggest that these
decreases in NGF lead to increases in ATF3-IR. Furthermore, since the number of
neurons in the SCG expressing ATF3-IR was greater after axotomy than after
antiserum against NGF treatment, this raises the possibility that decreased NGF
is not the only process regulating ATF3 expression after axotomy.

PMID: 18031939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2007 Nov-Dec;10(6):446-54.

Estradiol upregulates activating transcription factor 3, a candidate gene in the 
etiology of hypospadias.

Liu B(1), Lin G, Willingham E, Ning H, Lin CS, Lue TF, Baskin LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Hypospadias is a penile developmental abnormality that may partly result from in 
utero exposure to estrogenic compounds. Expression of activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3) is elevated in human foreskin tissue from hypospadic patients,
and in utero exposure to ethinyl estradiol (17-EE) causes ATF3 upregulation in a 
hypospadias mouse model. We investigated the effects of in vitro exposure to EE
on ATF3 expression and promoter activity in human foreskin fibroblasts using
immunocytochemistry, quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR), western blot, 
and the luciferase activity assay. Immunocytochemistry showed peak positive
staining at 2 hours after 0.5 to 3 hours of EE treatment (0.1 microM). Western
blot showed significantly increased ATF3 protein expression (P = 0.006) after EE 
exposure. ATF3 mRNA, as evaluated using reverse transcriptase PCR and TaqMan
real-time PCR, also increased (P = 0.146). In addition, the luciferase activity
assay showed that ATF3 promoter activity was significantly enhanced after 1 hour 
of EE exposure (P < 0.0001). Thus, EE upregulates ATF3 expression in fibroblasts 
in vitro, consistent with our previous results with human tissue and in vivo
mouse models. ATF3 is involved in the TGF-beta epithelial-mesenchymal signaling
pathway, and its involvement in hypospadias suggests that ATF3 plays a role in
development of this anomaly as a result of exposure to estrogenic compounds. Its 
potential involvement in other manifestations of developmental endocrine
disruption is worth investigating.

PMID: 18001166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Physiol Genomics. 2008 Jan 17;32(2):207-18. Epub 2007 Nov 13.

Gene profiling of skeletal muscle in an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mouse
model.

Gonzalez de Aguilar JL(1), Niederhauser-Wiederkehr C, Halter B, De Tapia M, Di
Scala F, Demougin P, Dupuis L, Primig M, Meininger V, Loeffler JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U692, Laboratoire
de Signalisations Moléculaires et Neurodégénérescence, Strasbourg, France.
gonzalez@neurochem.ustrasbg.fr

Muscle atrophy is a major hallmark of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the
most frequent adult-onset motor neuron disease. To define the full set of
alterations in gene expression in skeletal muscle during the course of the
disease, we used the G86R superoxide dismutase-1 transgenic mouse model of ALS
and performed high-density oligonucleotide microarrays. We compared these data to
those obtained by axotomy-induced denervation. A major set of gene regulations in
G86R muscles resembled those of surgically denervated muscles, but many others
appeared specific to the ALS condition. The first significant transcriptional
changes appeared in a subpopulation of mice before the onset of overt clinical
symptoms and motor neuron death. These early changes affected genes involved in
detoxification (e.g., ALDH3, metallothionein-2, and thioredoxin-1) and
regeneration (e.g., BTG1, RB1, and RUNX1) but also tissue degradation (e.g.,
C/EBPdelta and DDIT4) and cell death (e.g., ankyrin repeat domain-1, CDKN1A,
GADD45alpha, and PEG3). Of particular interest, metallothionein-1 and -2, ATF3,
cathepsin-Z, and galectin-3 genes appeared, among others, commonly regulated in
both skeletal muscle (our present data) and spinal motor neurons (as previously
reported) of paralyzed ALS mice. The importance of these findings is twofold.
First, they designate the distal part of the motor unit as a primary site of
disease. Second, they identify specific gene regulations to be explored in the
search for therapeutic strategies that could alleviate disease before motor
neuron death manifests clinically.

PMID: 18000159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Int J Mol Med. 2007 Dec;20(6):829-35.

Microarray analysis of insulin-regulated gene expression in the liver: the use of
transgenic mice co-expressing insulin-siRNA and human IDE as an animal model.

Jee S(1), Hwang D, Seo S, Kim Y, Kim C, Kim B, Shim S, Lee S, Sin J, Bae C, Lee
B, Jang M, Kim M, Yim S, Jang I, Cho J, Chae K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Animal Resources Team, National Institute of Toxicological
Research, Korea FDA, Seoul 122-704, Korea.

To characterize the changes in global gene expression in the livers of
H1/siRNAinsulin-CMV/hIDE transgenic (Tg) mice in response to the reduced
bioavailability of insulin, total RNA extracted from the livers of 20-week-old Tg
and non-Tg mice was converted to cDNA, labeled with biotin and hybridized to
oligonucleotide microarrays. The microarray results were confirmed by a real-time
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Two hundred and fifty-one and 73
genes were up- and down-regulated, respectively by insulin in
H1/siRNAinsulin-CMV/hIDE Tg mice compared to the controls. Genes encoding for
physiological processes, extracellular defense response and response to biotic
stimuli were significantly over-represented in the up-regulated group. Among the 
down-regulated transcripts, those encoding for extracellular matrix proteins were
dramatically over-represented, followed by those related to monooxygenase and
oxidoreductase activities. The major genes in the up-regulated categories
included Egr1, Saa2, Atf3, DNAJB1 and cCL2, whereas those in the down-regulated
categories were Cyp17a1, Adn, Gadd45g, Eno3 and Moxd1. These results indicate
that the microarray analysis identifies several gene functional groups and
individual genes that respond to a sustained reduction in the insulin levels in
the livers of Tg mice. These results also suggest that microarray testing is a
useful tool for the better understanding of insulin-regulated diabetes-related
diseases.

PMID: 17982690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Cancer Lett. 2007 Dec 18;258(2):230-40. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Berberine, a natural isoquinoline alkaloid, induces NAG-1 and ATF3 expression in 
human colorectal cancer cells.

Piyanuch R(1), Sukhthankar M, Wandee G, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA.

Berberine is known to possess a wide variety of pharmacological activities,
including pro-apoptotic activity. However, its molecular targets are not
elucidated at present. NAG-1 and ATF3 are induced by several dietary compounds
associated with pro-apoptotic activity. Berberine induces cell growth arrest,
apoptosis, NAG-1, and ATF3 in human colorectal cancer cells. ATF3 induction by
berberine is mediated in a p53-dependent manner, whereas NAG-1 induction by
berberine is mediated by multiple signaling pathways. Our results suggest that
berberine facilitates apoptosis and that NAG-1 and ATF3 expression plays an
important role in berberine-induced apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2171032
PMID: 17964072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Endocrinology. 2008 Feb;149(2):783-92. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

3', 5'-cyclic adenosine 5'-monophosphate response element-dependent
transcriptional regulation of the secretogranin II gene promoter depends on
gonadotropin-releasing hormone-induced mitogen-activated protein kinase
activation and the transactivator activating transcription factor 3.

Xie J(1), Roberson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Previous studies demonstrated that GnRH-induced secretogranin II (SgII) promoter 
regulation required a consensus cAMP response element (CRE) and protein kinase
A/CRE binding protein. The present studies examined the role of additional
components of the GnRH signaling network on SgII promoter activity with
particular attention devoted to CRE-dependent gene regulation. Disruption of the 
SgII CRE by mutagenesis resulted in inhibition of GnRH agonist (GnRHa) induction 
of this promoter in alphaT3-1 cells. Pharmacological and dominant-negative
inhibition of the ERK and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling pathways
revealed that GnRHa-induced SgII promoter activity required functional JNK and
ERK modules. Combined inhibition of both pathways nearly abolished GnRHa-induced 
SgII promoter activity. Specific induction of the ERK cascade alone using
overexpression of Raf-CAAX was not sufficient to activate the SgII gene promoter.
In contrast, overexpression of the catalytic domain of the more pleiotropic MAPK 
activator, MAPK/ERK kinase-1, was sufficient to induce SgII promoter activity.
The effect(s) of mitogen-activated protein/ERK kinase-1 on SgII promoter activity
was CRE dependent and was reversed by the combined pharmacological inhibition of 
both JNK and ERK modules. CRE DNA binding studies demonstrated the recruitment of
activating transcription factor (ATF)-3 and c-Jun to the CRE after administration
of GnRHa to alphaT3-1 cells. Specific small interfering RNA knockdown of ATF3
reduced ATF3 DNA binding and the effect of GnRHa on the SgII promoter. These
studies support the conclusion that MAPK signaling and ATF3 action are essential 
for full SgII promoter activation by GnRHa through a canonical CRE. Moreover, we 
suggest that within the GnRH signaling network, CRE-dependent gene regulation in 
general may be mediated primarily through the immediate early response gene ATF3.

PMCID: PMC2219298
PMID: 17962349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Oncogene. 2008 Apr 3;27(15):2118-27. Epub 2007 Oct 22.

A potential dichotomous role of ATF3, an adaptive-response gene, in cancer
development.

Yin X(1), Dewille JW, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)The Ohio State Biochemistry Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 
USA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a member of the ATF/cyclic AMP
response element-binding family of transcription factors. We present evidence
that ATF3 has a dichotomous role in cancer development. By both gain- and
loss-of-function approaches, we found that ATF3 enhances apoptosis in the
untransformed MCF10A mammary epithelial cells, but protects the aggressive
MCF10CA1a cells and enhances its cell motility. Array analyses indicated that
ATF3 upregulates the expression of several genes in the tumor necrosis factor
pathway in the MCF10A cells but upregulates the expression of several genes
implicated in tumor metastasis, including TWIST1, fibronectin (FN)-1, plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1, urokinase-type plasminogen activator, caveolin-1 and Slug,
in the MCF10CA1a cells. We present evidence that ATF3 binds to the endogenous
promoters and regulates the transcription of the TWIST1, FN-1, Snail and Slug
genes. Furthermore, conditioned medium experiments indicated that ATF3 has a
paracrine/autocrine effect, consistent with its upregulation of genes encoding
secreted factors. Finally, ATF3 gene copy number is >2 in approximately 80% of
the breast tumors examined (N=48) and its protein level is elevated in
approximately 50% of the tumors. These results provided a correlative argument
that it is advantageous for the malignant cancer cells to express ATF3,
consistent with its oncogenic roles suggested by the MCF10CA1a cell data.

PMID: 17952119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Pain. 2007 Dec 5;132(3):321-31. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

Neuropathic changes in equine laminitis pain.

Jones E(1), Viñuela-Fernandez I, Eager RA, Delaney A, Anderson H, Patel A,
Robertson DC, Allchorne A, Sirinathsinghji EC, Milne EM, MacIntyre N, Shaw DJ,
Waran NK, Mayhew J, Fleetwood-Walker SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, R(D)SVS, The University of
Edinburgh, Roslin, Midlothian EH25 9RG, United Kingdom.

Laminitis is a common debilitating disease in horses that involves painful
disruption of the lamellar dermo-epidermal junction within the hoof. This
condition is often refractory to conventional anti-inflammatory analgesia and
results in unremitting pain, which in severe cases requires euthanasia. The
mechanisms underlying pain in laminitis were investigated using quantification of
behavioural pain indicators in conjunction with histological studies of
peripheral nerves innervating the hoof. Laminitic horses displayed consistently
altered or abnormal behaviours such as increased forelimb lifting and an
increased proportion of time spent at the back of the box compared to normal
horses. Electron micrographic analysis of the digital nerve of laminitic horses
showed peripheral nerve morphology to be abnormal, as well as having reduced
numbers of unmyelinated (43.2%) and myelinated fibers (34.6%) compared to normal 
horses. Sensory nerve cell bodies innervating the hoof, in cervical, C8 dorsal
root ganglia (DRG), showed an upregulated expression of the neuronal injury
marker, activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3) in both large
NF-200-immunopositive neurons and small neurons that were either peripherin- or
IB4-positive. A significantly increased expression of neuropeptide Y (NPY) was
also observed in myelinated afferent neurons. These changes are similar to those 
reported in other neuropathic pain states and were not observed in the C4 DRG of 
laminitic horses, which is not associated with innervation of the forelimb. This 
study provides novel evidence for a neuropathic component to the chronic pain
state associated with equine laminitis, indicating that anti-neuropathic
analgesic treatment may well have a role in the management of this condition.

PMID: 17935886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2007 Dec;293(6):F1858-64. Epub 2007 Oct 3.

Vasopressin receptor subtype 2 activation increases cell proliferation in the
renal medulla of AQP1 null mice.

Cai Q(1), McReynolds MR, Keck M, Greer KA, Hoying JB, Brooks HL.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Physiology, College of Medicine, 1501 N. Campbell Ave., Univ. of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724-5051, USA.

Aquaporin (AQP) 1 null mice have a defect in the renal concentrating gradient
because of their inability to generate a hyperosmotic medullary interstitium. To 
determine the effect of vasopressin on renal medullary gene expression, in the
absence of high local osmolarity, we infused 1-deamino-8-d-arginine vasopressin
(dDAVP), a V(2) receptor (V(2)R)-specific agonist, in AQP1 null mice for 7 days. 
cDNA microarray analysis was performed on the renal medullary tissue, and 5,140
genes of the possible 12,000 genes on the array were included in the analysis. In
the renal medulla of AQP1 null mice, 245 transcripts were identified as increased
by dDAVP infusion and 200 transcripts as decreased (1.5-fold or more).
Quantitative real-time PCR measurements confirmed the increases seen for cyclin
D1, early growth response gene 1, and activating transcription factor 3, genes
associated with changes in cell cycle/growth. Changes in mRNA expression were
correlated with changes in protein expression by semiquantitative immunoblotting;
cyclin D1 and ATF3 were increased significantly in abundance following dDAVP
infusion in the renal medulla of AQP1 null mice (161 and 461%, respectively). A
significant increase in proliferation of medullary collecting ducts cells,
following V(2)R activation, was identified by proliferating cell nuclear antigen 
immunohistochemistry; colocalization studies with AQP2 indicated that the
increase in proliferation was primarily observed in principal cells of the inner 
medullary collecting duct (IMCD). V(2)R activation, via dDAVP, increased AQP2 and
AQP3 protein abundance in the cortical collecting ducts of AQP1 null mice.
However, V(2)R activation did not increase AQP2 protein abundance in the IMCD of 
AQP1 null mice.

PMID: 17913837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Physiol Genomics. 2007 Nov 14;31(3):544-53. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

Trans-10, cis-12 conjugated linoleic acid activates the integrated stress
response pathway in adipocytes.

LaRosa PC(1), Riethoven JJ, Chen H, Xia Y, Zhou Y, Chen M, Miner J, Fromm ME.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska
68588-0665, USA.

Trans-10, cis-12 conjugated linoleic acid (t10c12 CLA) causes fat loss in mouse
white adipose tissue (WAT) and adipocytes in culture. The early transcriptome
changes in treated WAT and 3T3-L1 adipocytes were analyzed using high-density
microarrays to better characterize the signaling pathways responding to t10c12
CLA. Gene expression responses between 4 and 24 h after treatment showed a common
set of early gene expression changes indicative of an integrated stress response 
(ISR). The responses of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes treated with t10c12 CLA or
adipocytes treated with the cis-9, trans-11 isomer of CLA did not show the ISR,
indicating the effect is specific to adipocytes responding to t10c12 CLA. Western
blot analysis found increased phosphorylation of eIF2 alpha and increased
production of ATF4 confirming at least part of the response to t10c12 CLA is
mediated through the ISR pathway. Immunofluorescence microscopy found that the
cell type expressing ATF3, an indicator of the ISR, was early stage adipocytes
containing oil droplets but lacking the abundant levels of fatty acid binding
protein-4 (FABP4) (AP2) found in mature adipocytes. Our data suggests that the
ISR precedes and is possibly the cause of the later induction of proinflammatory 
cytokines observed in t10c12 CLA treated adipocytes. The release of
proinflammatory cytokines may explain how the ISR in early stage adipocytes
causes lipid loss in mature adipocytes.

PMID: 17878318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Diabetes. 2007 Dec;56(12):2973-81. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Essential role of mitochondrial function in adiponectin synthesis in adipocytes.

Koh EH(1), Park JY, Park HS, Jeon MJ, Ryu JW, Kim M, Kim SY, Kim MS, Kim SW, Park
IS, Youn JH, Lee KU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Ulsan College of Medicine,
Poongnap-dong, Songpa-ku, Seoul 138-736, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Adiponectin is an important adipocytokine that improves insulin action
and reduces atherosclerotic processes. The plasma adiponectin level is
paradoxically reduced in obese individuals, but the underlying mechanism is
unknown. This study was undertaken to test the hypothesis that mitochondrial
function is linked to adiponectin synthesis in adipocytes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We examined the effects of rosiglitazone and the
measures that increase or decrease mitochondrial function on adiponectin
synthesis. We also examined the molecular mechanism by which changes in
mitochondrial function affect adiponectin synthesis.
RESULTS: Adiponectin expression and mitochondrial content in adipose tissue were 
reduced in obese db/db mice, and these changes were reversed by the
administration of rosiglitazone. In cultured adipocytes, induction of increased
mitochondrial biogenesis (via adenoviral overexpression of nuclear respiratory
factor-1) increased adiponectin synthesis, whereas impairment in mitochondrial
function decreased it. Impaired mitochondrial function increased endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, and agents causing mitochondrial or ER stress reduced
adiponectin transcription via activation of c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) and
consequent induction of activating transcription factor (ATF)3. Increased
mitochondrial biogenesis reversed all of these changes.
CONCLUSIONS: Mitochondrial function is linked to adiponectin synthesis in
adipocytes, and mitochondrial dysfunction in adipose tissue may explain decreased
plasma adiponectin levels in obesity. Impaired mitochondrial function activates a
series of mechanisms involving ER stress, JNK, and ATF3 to decrease adiponectin
synthesis.

PMID: 17827403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2007 Sep;39(9):1522-8.

Short-term exercise does not increase ER stress protein expression in cardiac
muscle.

Murlasits Z(1), Lee Y, Powers SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Physiology and Kinesiology, Center for Exercise Science,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA. zmurlasits@hhp.ufl.edu

PURPOSE: Both short-term (three to five consecutive days) and long-term (weeks to
months) endurance exercise training provides cardioprotection against
ischemia-reperfusion (IR)-induced injury. However, the mechanisms responsible for
exercise-induced cardioprotection are not well understood. Emerging evidence
indicates that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) damage contributes to IR-induced
myocardial injury. It follows that exercise-induced expression of ER stress
proteins could serve as the mediators of exercise-induced cardioprotection
against IR injury. Hence, these experiments tested the hypothesis that exercise
training is associated with an increase in ER stress proteins in the heart.
METHODS: Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats (N=13) were habituated to treadmill
running for 5 d, followed by five 60-min exercise bouts (approximately 70% of
VO2max) on consecutive days. Infarct area resulting from IR was determined by a
standard histological (triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC)) method. Cardiac
levels of ER stress proteins Grp78, Grp94, and calreticulin were analyzed via
Western blot. Moreover, we determined myocardial levels of heat shock protein 72 
(HSP72) along with ER proteins associated with cellular injury, including CHOP,
caspase 12, Puma, Noxa, and ATF3.
RESULTS: Our exercise protocol resulted in cardioprotection as evidenced by
reduced infarct size (P<0.05) and increased myocardial HSP72 levels (+227%;
P<0.01) in the exercise-trained animals. Nonetheless, exercise training did not
increase (P>0.05) cardiac levels of the ER stress proteins, Grp78, Grp94, and
calreticulin. Moreover, exercise did not alter myocardial levels of CHOP, caspase
12, Puma, Noxa, or ATF3.
CONCLUSION: These data reveal that short-term exercise training does not elevate 
ER stress proteins in the heart. Hence, the cardioprotective effect of short-term
exercise training does not seem to be linked to ER stress adaptation.

PMID: 17805084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2007 Sep;39(9):1515-21.

Aerobic exercise bout effects on gene transcription in the rat soleus.

McKenzie MJ(1), Goldfarb AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Exercise and Sport Science, University of North Carolina at
Greensboro, Greensboro, NC 27402, USA.

PURPOSE: This study was designed to identify changes in gene transcription that
occur in the soleus muscle of untrained, 10-wk-old rats after a single aerobic
exercise bout, and to identify which families of genes are most likely affected.
METHODS: Rats were either run for 2 h and killed 1 h after exercise, or they
remained sedentary and were killed at a matched time. Soleus muscles from each
animal were examined using DNA microarrays, four genes related to RONS were
analyzed by PCR, and two proteins were checked by Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: The microarray identified 52 genes significantly altered by the
exercise. The major gene families altered were metabolism, apoptosis, muscle
contraction, transcription/cell signaling, tissue generation, and inflammation.
Real-time PCR was performed on four genes (NFkappaB, TNFalpha, Atf3, and Mgst1), 
and the results from PCR analysis agreed with the microarray results. NFkappaB
and TNFalpha were unaltered, whereas Atf3 was upregulated and Mgst1 was
downregulated in the exercised soleus muscles. NFkappaB protein level was not
different between the two groups, whereas Atf3 protein level was elevated in the 
exercise group according to Western blot analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that 1 h after a 2-h run at approximately 65% of 
VO2max, the soleus muscle undergoes significant gene-transcript changes. Also,
the genes examined with the real-time PCR matched the microarray results and the 
measured protein concentration concentrations agreed with gene-transcript data at
the 1-h postexercise time point.

PMID: 17805083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Immunol. 2007 Sep 15;179(6):3622-30.

Negative regulation of TLR-signaling pathways by activating transcription
factor-3.

Whitmore MM(1), Iparraguirre A, Kubelka L, Weninger W, Hai T, Williams BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3) is rapidly induced by LPS in mouse
macrophages and regulates TLR4 responses. We show that ATF3 is rapidly induced by
various TLRs in mouse macrophages and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (DCs), as well
as plasmacytoid and myeloid subsets of human DCs. In primary macrophages from
mice with a targeted deletion of the atf3 gene (ATF3-knockout (KO)),
TLR-stimulated levels of IL-12 and IL-6 were elevated relative to responses in
wild-type macrophages. Similarly, targeted deletion of atf3 correlated with
enhanced responsiveness of myeloid DCs to TLR activation as measured by IL-12
secretion. Ectopic expression of ATF3 antagonized TLR-stimulated IL-12p40
activation in a reporter assay. In vivo, CpG-oligodeoxynucleotide, a TLR9
agonist, given i.p. to ATF3-KO mice resulted in enhanced cytokine production from
splenocytes. Furthermore, while ATF3-KO mice challenged with a sublethal dose of 
PR8 influenza virus were delayed in body weight recovery in comparison to wild
type, the ATF3-KO mice showed higher titers of serum neutralizing Ab against PR8 
5 mo postinfection. Thus, ATF3 behaves as a negative regulatory transcription
factor in TLR pathways and, accordingly, deficiency in atf3 alters responses to
immunological challenges in vivo. ATF3 dysregulation merits further exploration
in diseases such as type I diabetes and cancer, where altered innate immunity has
been implicated in their pathogenesis.

PMID: 17785797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 9;282(45):33210-7. Epub 2007 Aug 31.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 opens chromatin structure of interleukin-6
promoter to facilitate binding of an activator or a repressor.

Inouye S(1), Fujimoto M, Nakamura T, Takaki E, Hayashida N, Hai T, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube, Japan.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) not only regulates expression of heat
shock genes in response to elevated temperature, but is also involved in
developmental processes by regulating genes such as cytokine genes. However, we
did not know how HSF1 regulates non-heat shock genes. Here, we show that
constitutive HSF1 binding to the interleukin (IL)-6 promoter is necessary for its
maximal induction by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation in mouse embryo
fibroblasts and peritoneal macrophages. Lack of HSF1 inhibited LPS-induced in
vivo binding of an activator NF-kappaB and a repressor ATF3 to IL-6 promoter.
Neither NF-kappaB nor ATF3 binds to the IL-6 promoter in unstimulated HSF1-null
cells even if they were overexpressed. Treatment with histone deacetylase
inhibitor or a DNA methylation inhibitor restored LPS-induced IL-6 expression in 
HSF1-null cells, and histone modification enzymes were recruited on the IL-6
promoter in the presence of HSF1. Consistently, chromatin structure of the IL-6
promoter in the presence of HSF1 was more open than that in its absence. These
results indicate that HSF1 partially opens the chromatin structure of the IL-6
promoter for an activator or a repressor to bind to it, and provides a novel
mechanism of gene regulation by HSF1.

PMID: 17766920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Eur J Cancer. 2007 Nov;43(16):2404-12. Epub 2007 Aug 30.

Green tea catechin (-)-epicatechin gallate induces tumour suppressor protein ATF3
via EGR-1 activation.

Cho KN(1), Sukhthankar M, Lee SH, Yoon JH, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Tennessee, 2407 River Drive, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA.

Epicatechin gallate (ECG) is the third major catechin component in green tea, but
it shows strong biological activity in some aspects, including apoptosis, cell
growth inhibition, and membrane transport system in various cells. We previously 
reported that ECG induces activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), which is
involved in pro-apoptosis in HCT-116 cells. In this report, we present a
molecular mechanism by which ECG induces ATF3 expression at the transcriptional
level. We found that Sp3 contributed to the basal expression of the ATF3 gene,
whereas EGR-1 played an important role in ECG-induced ATF3 expression in HCT-116 
cells, as assessed by EMSA and co-transfection experiments. These results
suggested that EGR-1, a tumour suppressor protein, could substantiate ECG's role 
of ATF3 expression in human colorectal cancer cells. We also found that
pro-oxidant activity of ECG contributed to ECG-induced ATF3 expression.

PMCID: PMC2174270
PMID: 17764926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Scand J Plast Reconstr Surg Hand Surg. 2007;41(4):158-66.

Induction of activating transcription factor 3 after different sciatic nerve
injuries in adult rats.

Kataoka K(1), Kanje M, Dahlin LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

Staining by activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a neuronal marker of nerve 
injury, was examined by immunocytochemistry in neurons and Schwann cells after
crush or transection (regeneration inhibited) of rat sciatic nerve. ATF3
immunoreactivity peaked in neurons after three days and then gradually subsided
to normal within 12 weeks after the crush. The response lasted somewhat longer
and declined over time in spinal cord neurons but not in those of dorsal root
ganglia (DRG) after transection, indicating a differential regulation of sensory 
and motor neurons. ATF3 expression was more pronounced in Schwann cells, and
remained longer after transection, implying that to some extent regenerating
axons produce signals that reduce ATF3 expression in Schwann cells. However, even
after transection without repair (no contact with regenerating axons), ATF3
expression in Schwann cells in the distal segment decreased over time suggesting 
that regenerating axons are not entirely responsible for the down-regulation.
These findings have clinical implications on when it is worthwhile to reconstruct
nerve injuries.

PMID: 17701728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Cancer Res. 2007 Aug 15;67(16):7929-36.

Farnesol-induced apoptosis in human lung carcinoma cells is coupled to the
endoplasmic reticulum stress response.

Joo JH(1), Liao G, Collins JB, Grissom SF, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, LRB, National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences, NIH, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Farnesol (FOH) and other isoprenoid alcohols induce apoptosis in various
carcinoma cells and inhibit tumorigenesis in several in vivo models. However, the
mechanisms by which they mediate their effects are not yet fully understood. In
this study, we show that FOH is an effective inducer of apoptosis in several lung
carcinoma cells, including H460. This induction is associated with activation of 
several caspases and cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). To obtain
insight into the mechanism involved in FOH-induced apoptosis, we compared the
gene expression profiles of FOH-treated and control H460 cells by microarray
analysis. This analysis revealed that many genes implicated in endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress signaling, including ATF3, DDIT3, HERPUD1, HSPA5, XBP1,
PDIA4, and PHLDA1, were highly up-regulated within 4 h of FOH treatment,
suggesting that FOH-induced apoptosis involves an ER stress response. This was
supported by observations showing that treatment with FOH induces splicing of
XBP1 mRNA and phosphorylation of eIF2alpha. FOH induces activation of several
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways, including p38,
MAPK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) kinase (MEK)-ERK, and c-jun
NH2-terminal kinase (JNK). Inhibition of MEK1/2 by U0126 inhibited the induction 
of ER stress response genes. In addition, knockdown of the MEK1/2 and JNK1/2
expression by short interfering RNA (siRNA) effectively inhibited the cleavage of
caspase-3 and PARP and apoptosis induced by FOH. However, only MEK1/2 siRNAs
inhibited the induction of ER stress-related genes, XBP1 mRNA splicing, and
eIF2alpha phosphorylation. Our results show that FOH-induced apoptosis is coupled
to ER stress and that activation of MEK1/2 is an early upstream event in the
FOH-induced ER stress signaling cascade.

PMID: 17699800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 12;282(41):29748-56. Epub 2007 Aug 14.

Activation of the integrated stress response regulates lovastatin-induced
apoptosis.

Niknejad N(1), Morley M, Dimitroulakos J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Ottawa Health Research Institute, Ontario K1H 
8L6, Canada.

Lovastatin, a potent inhibitor of mevalonate synthesis, can readily induce
apoptosis in a subset of human tumor types including head and neck squamous cell 
carcinomas (HNSCC). We recently identified activation of transcription factor
(ATF) 4 as a lovastatin induced gene in HNSCC cells. ATF4 plays a significant
role in regulating cellular responses to a wide variety of stress inducers known 
as the integrated stress response (ISR). These cell stresses lead to the
phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) 2alpha shutting down global
protein translation. However, the translation of ATF4 is enhanced. In this study,
lovastatin treatment induced eIF2alpha phosphorylation and inhibited global
protein translation. ATF4 expression was induced followed by increased ATF3 and
CHOP expression, targets of ATF4 activity, in SCC25 HNSCC cells. In CHOP(-/-)
murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), lovastatin-induced apoptosis was attenuated 
indicating a role for CHOP in this response. Furthermore, the eIF2alpha kinase
GCN2 mediates lovastatin induction of ATF4 and lovastatin-induced apoptosis was
also attenuated in GCN2(-/-) MEFs. The pro-drug version of lovastatin has
potential proteasome inhibitory activity and recently a variety of well
established proteasome inhibitors were shown to activate the ISR. In this study, 
neither the pro-drug nor the active forms of lovastatin had any significant
effect on proteasome activity. Therefore, lovastatin, by targeting mevalonate
synthesis, is a potent inducer of the ISR through a novel and as yet unrecognized
mechanism.

PMID: 17699156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Brain Res. 2007 Sep 7;1168:46-59. Epub 2007 Jul 17.

An evolving cellular pathology occurs in dorsal root ganglia, peripheral nerve
and spinal cord following intravenous administration of paclitaxel in the rat.

Peters CM(1), Jimenez-Andrade JM, Kuskowski MA, Ghilardi JR, Mantyh PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic & Biological Sciences, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Paclitaxel (Taxol) is a frontline antineoplastic agent used to treat a variety of
solid tumors including breast, ovarian, or lung cancer. The major dose limiting
side effect of paclitaxel is a peripheral sensory neuropathy that can last days
to a lifetime. To begin to understand the cellular events that contribute to this
neuropathy, we examined a marker of cell injury/regeneration (activating
transcription factor 3; ATF3), macrophage hyperplasia/hypertrophy; satellite cell
hypertrophy in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and sciatic nerve as well as
astrocyte and microglial activation within the spinal cord at 1, 4, 6 and 10 days
following intravenous infusion of therapeutically relevant doses of paclitaxel.
At day 1 post-infusion, there was an up-regulation of ATF3 in a subpopulation of 
large and small DRG neurons and this up-regulation was present through day 10. In
contrast, hypertrophy of DRG satellite cells, hypertrophy and hyperplasia of
CD68(+) macrophages in the DRG and sciatic nerve, ATF3 expression in S100beta(+) 
Schwann cells and increased expression of the microglial marker (CD11b) and the
astrocyte marker glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) in the spinal cord were
not observed until day 6 post-infusion. The present results demonstrate that
using the time points and markers examined, DRG neurons show the first sign of
injury which is followed days later by other neuropathological changes in the
DRG, peripheral nerve and dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Understanding the
cellular changes that generate and maintain this neuropathy may allow the
development of mechanism-based therapies to attenuate or block this frequently
painful and debilitating condition.

PMCID: PMC2042964
PMID: 17698044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Neurochem. 2007 Sep;102(5):1703-12.

Minimal role for activating transcription factor 3 in the oligodendrocyte
unfolded protein response in vivo.

Sharma R(1), Jiang H, Zhong L, Tseng J, Gow A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, USA.

To further our goal of identifying and characterizing the functions of major
components of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in oligodendrocytes, the gene
encoding the activator of transcription factor 3 protein (ATF3) has been ablated 
in mice expressing mutant forms of the Proteolipid protein 1 (Plp1) gene and the 
phenotype of double mutants characterized at several levels. Mature
oligodendrocytes in Plp1 mutant mice undergo UPR-induced cell stress, induce ATF3
expression and exhibit a greater propensity to die by apoptosis, which is
consistent with pro-death function of ATF3 proposed from in vitro studies.
However, we find that the absence of ATF3 has no effect on the levels of
apoptosis in Plp1 mutants. Furthermore, we find that oligodendrocyte function
appears normal in Atf3(-/-) mice and that motor coordination and neural
communication are similarly unaffected. Accordingly, we conclude that ATF3, at
best, plays a minor role in UPR signaling and its expression is more likely
induced by the UPR as a secondary event in oligodendrocytes that is unrelated to 
cell death.

PMID: 17697053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. BMC Genomics. 2007 Aug 13;8:273.

Mapping of oxidative stress responses of human tumor cells following photodynamic
therapy using hexaminolevulinate.

Cekaite L(1), Peng Q, Reiner A, Shahzidi S, Tveito S, Furre IE, Hovig E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Rikshopitalet - Radiumhospitalet Medical Center, 
0310 Oslo, Norway. linac@rr-research.no

BACKGROUND: Photodynamic therapy (PDT) involves systemic or topical
administration of a lesion-localizing photosensitizer or its precursor, followed 
by irradiation of visible light to cause singlet oxygen-induced damage to the
affected tissue. A number of mechanisms seem to be involved in the protective
responses to PDT, including activation of transcription factors, heat shock
proteins, antioxidant enzymes and apoptotic pathways.
RESULTS: In this study, we address the effects of a destructive/lethal
hexaminolevulinate (HAL) mediated PDT dose on the transcriptome by using
transcriptional exon evidence oligo microarrays. Here, we confirm deviations in
the steady state expression levels of previously identified early defence
response genes and extend this to include unreported PDT inducible gene groups,
most notably the metallothioneins and histones. HAL-PDT mediated stress also
altered expression of genes encoded by mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Further, we
report PDT stress induced alternative splicing. Specifically, the ATF3
alternative isoform (deltaZip2) was up-regulated, while the full-length variant
was not changed by the treatment. Results were independently verified by two
different technological microarray platforms. Good microarray, RT-PCR and Western
immunoblotting correlation for selected genes support these findings.
CONCLUSION: Here, we report new insights into how destructive/lethal PDT alters
the transcriptome not only at the transcriptional level but also at
post-transcriptional level via alternative splicing.

PMCID: PMC2045114
PMID: 17692132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Neurotoxicology. 2007 Nov;28(6):1092-8. Epub 2007 May 21.

Nucleolar enlargement, nuclear eccentricity and altered cell body immunostaining 
characteristics of large-sized sensory neurons following treatment of rats with
paclitaxel.

Jamieson SM(1), Liu JJ, Connor B, Dragunow M, McKeage MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology, The University of
Auckland, New Zealand.

Paclitaxel-induced sensory neuropathy is a problematic side-effect of cancer
chemotherapy. Previous studies in rodents have shown paclitaxel treatment to have
many effects on different parts of the peripheral nervous system, but those
responsible for its bothersome clinical side-effects are still unclear. In the
current study, we sought to obtain information about the involvement of sensory
neurons in paclitaxel neurotoxicity at the level of the dorsal root ganglion.
Rats were treated with a clinically relevant dose of paclitaxel (87.5mg/m(2)
weekly for a total of nine doses) to induce a sensory neuropathy; then their L5
dorsal root ganglia were studied by morphometry and immunohistochemistry.
Paclitaxel treatment was generally well tolerated, and slowed conduction velocity
and prolonged conduction latencies in the peripheral sensory nerves without
altering conduction in the central or motor pathways of the H-reflex arc. In the 
L5 dorsal root ganglion, nucleolus size and the number of neurons with eccentric 
nuclei were increased only in a subpopulation of dorsal root ganglion neurons
with cell body cross-sectional areas greater than 1750 microm(2), which made up
less than 10% of the total population. Paclitaxel treatment increased
immunohistochemical staining for activating transcription factor-3 (ATF-3), c-Jun
and neuropeptide Y (NPY) but only in a small percentage of neuronal cell bodies
and mainly in those with large cell bodies. In conclusion, we have demonstrated
that nucleolar enlargement, nuclear eccentricity, ATF-3, c-Jun and NPY are
neuronal markers of paclitaxel-induced sensory neuropathy, however, these
axotomy-like cell body reactions are infrequent and occur in mainly large-sized
sensory neurons.

PMID: 17686523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Neurosci. 2007 Jul 25;27(30):7911-20.

ATF3 increases the intrinsic growth state of DRG neurons to enhance peripheral
nerve regeneration.

Seijffers R(1), Mills CD, Woolf CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neural Plasticity Research Group, Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care, 
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown,
Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Peripheral axons of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons, but not their central
axons in the dorsal columns, regenerate after injury. However, if the neurons are
conditioned by a peripheral nerve injury into an actively growing state, the rate
of peripheral axonal growth is accelerated and the injured central axons begin to
regenerate. The growth-promoting effects of conditioning injuries have two
components, increased axonal growth and a reduced response to inhibitory myelin
cues. We have examined which transcription factors activated by peripheral axonal
injury may mediate the conditioning effect by regulating expression of effectors 
that increase the intrinsic growth state of the neurons. Activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3) is a prime candidate because it is induced in all injured DRG
neurons after peripheral, but not central, axonal damage. To investigate if ATF3 
promotes regeneration, we generated transgenic mice that constitutively express
this transcription factor in non-injured adult DRG neurons. The rate of
peripheral nerve regeneration was enhanced in the transgenic mice to an extent
comparable to that produced by a preconditioning nerve injury. The expression of 
some growth-associated genes, such as SPRR1A, but not others like GAP-43, was
increased in the non-injured neurons. ATF3 increased DRG neurite elongation when 
cultured on permissive substrates but did not overcome the inhibitory effects of 
myelin or promote central axonal regeneration in the spinal cord in vivo. We
conclude that ATF3 contributes to nerve regeneration by increasing the intrinsic 
growth state of injured neurons.

PMID: 17652582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Nutr Cancer. 2007;58(2):239-46.

Alterations of metastasis-related genes identified using an oligonucleotide
microarray of genistein-treated HCC1395 breast cancer cells.

Lee WY(1), Huang SC, Tzeng CC, Chang TL, Hsu KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yung Kung Campus, Chi MeiMedical Center, Tainan, 710,
Taiwan. 7707@so-net.net.tw

Genistein, one of the major isoflavones, potently inhibits the growth and
metastasis of breast cancer. However, the precise molecular mechanism in
metastasis inhibition is not clear. We investigated the effect of genistein in
HCC1395 cells, a cell line derived from an early-stage primary breast cancer.
Genistein dose dependently both decreased cell viability and inhibited the
invasion potential. We used human oligonucleotide microarrays to determine the
gene expression profile altered by genistein treatment. TFPI-2, ATF3, DNMT1, and 
MTCBP-1, which inhibit invasion and metastasis, were upregulated, and MMP-2,
MMP-7, and CXCL12, which promote invasion and metastasis, were downregulated. We 
used quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction to verify the microarray
data at the mRNA level. We conclude that genistein-induced alternations of gene
expression involving metastasis may be exploited for devising chemopreventive and
therapeutic strategies, particularly for early-stage breast cancer.

PMID: 17640171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Int J Cancer. 2007 Nov 1;121(9):2073-83.

The growth inhibitory effect of actein on human breast cancer cells is associated
with activation of stress response pathways.

Einbond LS(1), Su T, Wu HA, Friedman R, Wang X, Ramirez A, Kronenberg F,
Weinstein IB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA. le2012@columbia.edu

Previous studies indicate that the triterpene glycoside actein from the herb
black cohosh inhibits growth of human breast cancer cells. This study seeks to
identify genes altered in human breast cancer cells by treatment with actein,
using gene expression analysis. We treated MDA-MB-453 human breast cancer cells
with actein at 2 doses, 20 or 40 microg/mL, for 6 or 24 hr. We identified 5 genes
that were activated after each of the treatments that are known to play a role in
cellular responses to diverse stresses, including the DNA damage and unfolded
protein responses. In addition, four genes that mediate the integrated stress
response (ISR), including activating transcription factor 4, were induced under
at least one of the 4 treatment conditions. We used hierarchical clustering to
define clusters comprising patterns of gene expression. Two ISR genes, activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and DNA damage- inducible transcript 3, and lipid
biosynthetic genes were activated after exposure to actein at 40 microg/mL for 6 
hr, whereas the cell cycle genes cyclin E2 and cell division cycle 25A were
repressed. Our results suggest that actein induces 2 phases of the ISR, the
survival phase and the apoptotic phase, depending on the dose and duration of
treatment. We confirmed the results of gene expression analysis with real-time
RT-PCR for 18 selected genes and Western blot analysis for ATF3. Since actein
activated transcription factors that enhance apoptosis, and repressed cell cycle 
genes, it may be useful in the prevention and therapy of breast cancer.

Copyright (c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17621630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Virus Res. 2007 Dec;130(1-2):10-7. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Coxsackievirus B3 modulates cell death by downregulating activating transcription
factor 3 in HeLa cells.

Hwang HY(1), Kim JY, Lim JY, Chung SK, Nam JH, Park SI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Intractable Disease, Center for Biomedical Sciences, National
Institute of Health, 194 Tongillo, Eunpyeong-gu, Seoul 122-701, Republic of
Korea.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is an early-induced gene involved in
diverse cellular functions in response to various stresses including viral
infection. Here we observed marked reduction of ATF3 by coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3) 
infection and investigated the regulation and functional role of ATF3 in HeLa
cells for the understanding of biological significance of ATF3 downregulation.
CVB3 infection markedly reduced ATF3 expression at mRNA and protein levels in
parallel with p53 degradation, and preservation of p53 expression rescued CVB3
infection-induced ATF3 downregulation. ATF3 overexpression stimulated apoptotic
cell death following CVB3 infection, accompanying with augmentation of CVB3
infection-induced eIF2alpha phosphorylation. However, ATF3 overexpression did not
affect viral protein production but promoted virus progeny release. Taken
together, our results suggest that ATF3 is under control of p53 in part and that 
the ATF3 downregulation via p53 degradation may contribute to effective viral
production as a modulation mechanism of CVB3 infection-induced cell death.

PMID: 17599613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Pain. 2008 Mar;135(1-2):119-30. Epub 2007 Jun 21.

Characterization of a model of persistent postoperative pain evoked by
skin/muscle incision and retraction (SMIR).

Flatters SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pain Research Center - MRB611, Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and
Pain Medicine, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 75 Francis
Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA. sflatters@zeus.bwh.harvard.edu

Various surgical procedures, e.g. thoracotomy and inguinal hernia repair,
frequently evoke persistent pain lasting for many months following the initial
surgery. The essential prolonged tissue retraction required during such surgeries
may account for the persistence and high incidence of postoperative pain in these
patient populations. This study describes a new rat model of persistent
postoperative pain evoked by skin/muscle incision and retraction (SMIR), akin to 
a clinical procedure. Under anaesthesia, skin and superficial muscle of the
medial thigh were incised and a small pair of retractors inserted. This tissue
was retracted for 1h causing potential stretch of the saphenous nerve. SMIR
surgery evoked persistent significant mechanical hypersensitivity to von Frey
stimulation of the plantar ipsilateral hindpaw, compared to either pre-surgery
responses or concurrent responses of sham-operated rats. SMIR-evoked mechanical
hypersensitivity was observed by postoperative day 3, most prominent between
postoperative days 10 and 13, persisted until at least postoperative day 22 and
had dissipated by postoperative day 32. Overall, mechanical sensitivity of the
SMIR contralateral paw and the sham ipsilateral paw did not significantly change 
from pre-surgery responses. SMIR did not evoke significant heat hyperalgesia or
cold allodynia. Light microscopy of saphenous nerve sections did not show
degeneration or oedema in the saphenous nerve at, or proximally or distally to,
the surgical site. In addition, very little to no degeneration was detected with 
ATF3 staining in DRG from SMIR-operated rats. These data suggest that prolonged
retraction of superficial tissue evokes a persistent pain syndrome that is not
driven by neuronal damage.

PMCID: PMC2278124
PMID: 17590272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Brain Res. 2007 Jul 23;1159:119-23. Epub 2007 May 23.

Activating transcription factor 3 immunoreactivity identifies small populations
of axotomized neurons in rat cervical sympathetic ganglia after transection of
the preganglionic cervical sympathetic trunk.

Zigmond RE(1), Vaccariello SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid
Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4975, USA. rez@case.edu

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) has been proposed as a marker for
injured neurons. Thus, while undetectable normally in sensory, motor, or
sympathetic neurons, ATF3-like immunoreactivity (ATF3-IR) is readily detectable
in such cells after axotomy. Here we examined ATF3-IR in the superior cervical
ganglion (SCG) and the middle and inferior cervical ganglia (MICG) after
transection of the predominantly preganglionic cervical sympathetic trunk (CST). 
The purpose of the study was to determine whether neurons in the SCG would
exhibit ATF3-IR after decentralization and, if they did not, whether the
induction of ATF3-IR was sensitive enough to identify the small numbers of
neurons in the SCG and MICG that project their axons into the CST. Following
transection of the CST, the majority of deafferented neurons in the SCG showed no
ATF3-IR; however, a small group of neurons in both the SCG and MICG were labeled,
and the location of the labeled neurons within these ganglia corresponded to that
of neurons axotomized by this procedure. Furthermore, the ATF3-positive neurons
in the MICG could be retrogradely labeled from the transected CST. In addition, a
large number of smaller cells were labeled in the SCG, though not in the MICG,
and some of these cells were double labeled with an antiserum to the glial
protein S-100. These data indicate that, after transection of the CST, neuronal
labeling in the SCG and MICG is restricted to axotomized neurons but that in
addition there is extensive labeling of glial cells associated with anterograde
degeneration within the SCG.

PMCID: PMC2965021
PMID: 17583680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cell Biochem Funct. 2008 Mar-Apr;26(2):179-84.

The effect of cardiac ischemic preconditioning on rat left ventricular gene
expression profile.

Canatan H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait
University, Safat, Kuwait. canatan@hsc.edu.kw

Ischemic preconditioning (IPC) is a phenomenon where heart is rendered more
resistant to subsequent ischemia-reperfusion (I-R)-induced injury by one or more 
brief episodes of I-R. The mechanisms responsible for cardio-protective effects
of IPC are not well characterized. The objective of the study was to characterize
gene expression profiles in the left ventricle of male Wistar rat hearts exposed 
to I-R or IPC followed by I-R. Group 1 included hearts that were only perfused
for 30 min. Group 2 included hearts that underwent 30 min perfusion followed by
40 min I and 30 min R. Group 3 comprised 30 min perfused hearts that were
subjected to IPC (5 min I + 10 min R + 5 min I + 10 min R) followed by I-R. Total
RNAs were isolated from left ventricular tissues. Codelink gene expression system
(GE Healthcare) was used for cRNA target preparation, hybridization of
microarrays (Rat UniSet 10 K CodeLink bioarrays, GE Healthcare) and detection.
Microarrays were scanned with Affymetrix 428 Array scanner. Data analyses were
carried out with GeneSifter microarray data analysis software. We determined a
total of 140 transcripts (> or =2-fold change) whose expressions were changed (44
up-regulated and 96 down-regulated) accompanying to I-R injury compared to
perfused only hearts. Twenty-three transcripts including Ryr3, Crk, Dio1, Npy1r, 
Ptpra, Cyp51 that were down-regulated by I-R injury, were up-regulated by cardiac
IPC. IPC down-regulated the expression of several transcripts including Atf3
(activating transcription factor 3), carboxypeptidase A1 (Cpa1), Slc38a4, Blk
which were up-regulated by I-R. In conclusion, evaluation of global gene
expression profiling via microarray-based technologies provides a molecular
portrait of cardiac IPC of the left ventricular tissue of rat heart.

Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 17562528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Nat Immunol. 2007 Jun;8(6):569-77. Epub 2007 May 13.

Activation of the lectin DC-SIGN induces an immature dendritic cell phenotype
triggering Rho-GTPase activity required for HIV-1 replication.

Hodges A(1), Sharrocks K, Edelmann M, Baban D, Moris A, Schwartz O, Drakesmith H,
Davies K, Kessler B, McMichael A, Simmons A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Human Immunology Unit, Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2007 Jun;8(6):556-8.

DC-SIGN, a C-type lectin expressed on dendritic cells (DCs), can sequester human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) virions in multivesicular bodies. Here, using
large-scale gene expression profiling and tyrosine-phosphorylated proteome
analyses, we characterized signaling mediated by DC-SIGN after activation by
either HIV or a DC-SIGN-specific antibody. Activation of DC-SIGN resulted in
downregulation of genes encoding major histocompatibility complex class II,
Jagged 1 and interferon-response molecules and upregulation of the gene encoding 
transcription factor ATF3. Phosphorylated proteome analysis showed that HIV- or
antibody-stimulated DC-SIGN signaling was mediated by the Rho guanine
nucleotide-exchange factor LARG and led to increased Rho-GTPase activity.
Activation of LARG in DCs exposed to HIV was required for the formation of
virus-T cell synapses. Thus, HIV sequestration by and stimulation of DC-SIGN
helps HIV evade immune responses and spread to cells.

PMID: 17496896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Nat Clin Pract Urol. 2007 May;4(5):270-9.

Candidate genes and their response to environmental agents in the etiology of
hypospadias.

Willingham E(1), Baskin LS.

Author information: 
(1)Austin, TX 78746, USA. ejwillingham@austin.rr.com

The molecular events that lead to isolated hypospadias remain largely unknown,
and the etiology of this common congenital anomaly seems to be multifactorial. We
have explored the response of several candidate genes to environmental agents
that cause hypospadias in a mouse model. Here, we provide an overview of current 
findings in relation to candidate genes and their response to environmental
agents, including the results of genomic analyses of both mouse and human
tissues. In addition to steroid-hormone receptors, one gene of specific interest 
is activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3). We hypothesize a potential mechanism
of action for ATF3 and other identified genes, including TGF-B.

PMID: 17483812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Microbiol Res. 2009;164(2):180-90. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Relationship of IL-8 production and the CagA status in AGS cells infected with
Helicobacter pylori exposed to low pH and activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3).

Zhang Y(1), Takeuchi H, Nishioka M, Morimoto N, Kamioka M, Kumon Y, Sugiura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Kochi University School of
Medicine, Oko-cho, Nankoku-city, Japan.

We examined the kinetics of IL-8 production and CagA status in AGS infected with 
Helicobacter pylori, 26695 (Western CagA-type), HPK5 (Eastern CagA-type) and
isogenic cagA-disrupted mutants, exposed to different pH (pH 6 and pH 3). IL-8
was produced in the early and late phases after infection in CagA-dependent and
-independent manners, respectively, irrespective of CagA-type. The wild-type
exposed to low pH tremendously reduced IL-8 level at early phase, but restored
with urea, suggesting that low pH exerted the kinetics of H. pylori-induced IL-8 
production in CagA-dependent manner and urea was necessary for effective
induction. CagA and phosphorylated CagA increased time-dependently after
infection. Phosphorylated CagA from 26695, but not HPK5, rapidly peaked,
consistent with the kinetics of IL-8 induction and appearance of hummingbird
phenotype. ATF3 transcripts peaked late phase by wild-type, however, induced in
two peaks early and late phases by cagA-disrupted mutants, indicating that
different CagA-type proteins altered ATF3 induction in the infected cells.

PMID: 17449233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Urol. 2007 May;177(5):1939-46.

Up-regulation of estrogen responsive genes in hypospadias: microarray analysis.

Wang Z(1), Liu BC, Lin GT, Lin CS, Lue TF, Willingham E, Baskin LS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Urology, Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: An unexplained increase in the incidence of hypospadias has been
reported, and yet to our knowledge the molecular events and their regulation
leading to hypospadias remain unknown, although environmental compounds capable
of endocrine activity are suspected. We screened on a global scale abnormalities 
in gene expression in human hypospadiac tissue compared to those in
nonhypospadiac tissue. Additionally, microarray analysis of tissue from a pair of
fraternal twins, including 1 with and 1 without hypospadias, served as a control 
for genetic variability. We hypothesized that gene expression would differ
between hypospadiac vs nonhypospadiac tissue and fraternal twin data would show
patterns similar to those of group data on hypospadiac and nonhypospadiac tissue.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Microarray analysis was performed on tissue from patients 
with and without hypospadias, and from a pair of fraternal twins, including 1
with and 1 without hypospadias. Analysis incorporated the expression of 22,000
genes.
RESULTS: We found significant differences in gene expression, specifically with a
group of genes, including CYR61, CTGF, ATF3 and GADD45beta, known to be
responsive to estrogen or to interact with estrogen receptor.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide support for the hypothesis that endocrine
active environmental compounds may contribute to the development of hypospadias. 
Additionally, regulation of these genes may have a role in formation of the
urethra.

PMID: 17437852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Pain. 2007 Dec 15;133(1-3):47-63. Epub 2007 Apr 12.

Pharmacological, behavioural and mechanistic analysis of HIV-1 gp120 induced
painful neuropathy.

Wallace VC(1), Blackbeard J, Pheby T, Segerdahl AR, Davies M, Hasnie F, Hall S,
McMahon SB, Rice AS.

Author information: 
(1)Pain Research Group, Department of Anaesthetics, Pain Medicine and Intensive
Care, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, Chelsea and Westminster
Hospital Campus, 369 Fulham Road, London SW10 9NH, UK.

A painful neuropathy is frequently observed in people living with human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). The HIV coat protein, glycoprotein 120
(gp120), implicated in the pathogenesis of neurological disorders associated with
HIV, is capable of initiating neurotoxic cascades via an interaction with the
CXCR4 and/or CCR5 chemokine receptors, which may underlie the pathogenesis of
HIV-associated peripheral neuropathic pain. In order to elucidate the mechanisms 
underlying HIV-induced painful peripheral neuropathy, we have characterised
pathological events in the peripheral and central nervous system following
application of HIV-1 gp120 to the rat sciatic nerve. Perineural HIV-1 gp120
treatment induced a persistent mechanical hypersensitivity (44% decrease from
baseline), but no alterations in sensitivity to thermal or cold stimuli, and
thigmotactic (anxiety-like) behaviour in the open field. The mechanical
hypersensitivity was sensitive to systemic treatment with gabapentin, morphine
and the cannabinoid WIN 55,212-2, but not with amitriptyline. Immunohistochemical
studies reveal: decreased intraepidermal nerve fibre density, macrophage
infiltration into the peripheral nerve at the site of perineural HIV-1 gp120;
changes in sensory neuron phenotype including expression of activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in 27% of cells, caspase-3 in 25% of cells,
neuropeptide Y (NPY) in 12% of cells and galanin in 13% of cells and a spinal
gliosis. These novel findings suggest that this model is not only useful for the 
elucidation of mechanisms underlying HIV-1-related peripheral neuropathy but may 
prove useful for preclinical assessment of drugs for the treatment of HIV-1
related peripheral neuropathic pain.

PMCID: PMC2706950
PMID: 17433546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Exp Neurol. 2007 Jun;205(2):347-59. Epub 2007 Feb 21.

Electrical stimulation promotes sensory neuron regeneration and growth-associated
gene expression.

Geremia NM(1), Gordon T, Brushart TM, Al-Majed AA, Verge VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Cameco MS/Neuroscience Research Center
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon City Hospital, Saskatchewan, Canada.

Brief electrical stimulation enhances the regenerative ability of axotomized
motor [Nix, W.A., Hopf, H.C., 1983. Electrical stimulation of regenerating nerve 
and its effect on motor recovery. Brain Res. 272, 21-25; Al-Majed, A.A., Neumann,
C.M., Brushart, T.M., Gordon, T., 2000. Brief electrical stimulation promotes the
speed and accuracy of motor axonal regeneration. J. Neurosci. 20, 2602-2608] and 
sensory [Brushart, T.M., Jari, R., Verge, V., Rohde, C., Gordon, T., 2005.
Electrical stimulation restores the specificity of sensory axon regeneration.
Exp. Neurol. 194, 221-229] neurons. Here we examined the parameter of duration of
stimulation on regenerative capacity, including the intrinsic growth programs, of
sensory neurons. The effect of 20 Hz continuous electrical stimulation on the
number of DRG sensory neurons that regenerate their axons was evaluated following
transection and surgical repair of the femoral nerve trunk. Stimulation was
applied proximal to the repair site for 1 h, 3 h, 1 day, 7 days or 14 days at the
time of nerve repair. Following a 21-day regeneration period, DRG neurons that
regenerated axons into the muscle and cutaneous sensory nerve branches were
retrogradely identified. Stimulation of 1 h led to a significant increase in DRG 
neurons regenerating into cutaneous and muscle branches when compared to 0 h
(sham) stimulation or longer periods of stimulation. Stimulation for 1 h also
significantly increased the numbers of neurons that regenerated axons beyond the 
repair site 4 days after lesion and was correlated with a significant increase in
expression of growth-associated protein 43 (GAP-43) mRNA in the regenerating
neurons at 2 days post-repair. An additional indicator of heightened plasticity
following 1 h stimulation was elevated expression of brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF). The effect of brief stimulation on enhancing sensory and
motoneuron regeneration holds promise for inducing improved peripheral nerve
repair in the clinical setting.

PMID: 17428474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2007 Apr 15;32(8):857-63.

Axonal growth potential of lumbar dorsal root ganglion neurons in an organ
culture system: response of nerve growth factor-sensitive neurons to neuronal
injury and an inflammatory cytokine.

Aoki Y(1), An HS, Takahashi K, Miyamoto K, Lenz ME, Moriya H, Masuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Rush Medical College at Rush University
Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

STUDY DESIGN: The axonal growth potential of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons
in an organ culture system was investigated.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the effects of neuronal injury and tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) on the axonal growth potential of 2 types of nociceptive
DRG neurons: nerve growth factor (NGF)-sensitive and glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF)-sensitive neurons.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Nerve ingrowth into the disc is recognized to be one 
of the causes of discogenic pain. Almost all of these disc-innervating neurons
are NGF-sensitive. The axonal growth potential of NGF-sensitive neurons has not
been investigated.
METHODS: Adult Sprague-Dawley rats were used for immunohistochemistry (n = 7) and
cell viability studies (n = 6). Bilateral L3-L5 DRGs, which were successfully
removed without damage, were noncultured or cultured in serum-free medium
containing TNF-alpha at 0, 0.01, 0.1, and 1 ng/mL for 48 hours (n = 5, each
treatment). The DRGs were then immunostained for activating transcription factor 
3 (ATF3, a marker for injured neurons) or double-stained for growth-associated
protein 43 (GAP-43, a marker for axonal growth) with calcitonin gene-related
peptide (CGRP, a marker for NGF-sensitive neurons) or isolectin B4 (IB4, a marker
for GDNF-sensitive neurons). Cell viability was assessed by a lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) assay and an MTS assay (n = 6, each treatment).
RESULTS: Immunoreactive evidence of injured neurons (ATF3 positive) was
frequently observed in cultured DRGs, but never in noncultured DRGs. The
percentage of neurons exhibiting axonal growth potential (GAP-43 immunoreactive) 
was significantly higher for NGF-sensitive neurons than for GDNF-sensitive
neurons at any concentration of TNF-alpha. More than 95% of the cultured neurons 
were viable.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that the cultured DRG neurons exhibit pathologic
changes similar to those found in injured neurons. NGF-sensitive neurons, which
include disc-innervating neurons, may have a greater potential to extend their
axons in response to neuronal injury under pathologic conditions in the presence 
of TNF-alpha than GDNF-sensitive neurons.

PMID: 17426629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2007 Jun;321(3):830-8. Epub 2007 Mar 1.

Transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 agonists cause endoplasmic reticulum
stress and cell death in human lung cells.

Thomas KC(1), Sabnis AS, Johansen ME, Lanza DL, Moos PJ, Yost GS, Reilly CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
UT 84112, USA.

Transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) is a calcium-selective ion
channel expressed in human lung cells. We show that activation of the
intracellular subpopulation of TRPV1 causes endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and
cell death in human bronchial epithelial and alveolar cells. TRPV1 agonist
(nonivamide) treatment caused calcium release from the ER and altered the
transcription of growth arrest- and DNA damage-inducible transcript 3 (GADD153), 
GADD45alpha, GRP78/BiP, ATF3, CCND1, and CCNG2) in a manner comparable with
prototypical ER stress-inducing agents. The TRPV1 antagonist
N-(4-tert-butylbenzyl)-N'-(1-[3-fluoro-4-(methylsulfonylamino)-phenyl]ethyl)thiou
rea (LJO-328) inhibited mRNA responses and cytotoxicity. EGTA and ruthenium red
inhibited cell surface TRPV1 activity, but they did not prevent ER stress gene
responses or cytotoxicity. Cytotoxicity paralleled eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 2, subunit 1 (EIF2alpha) phosphorylation and the induction of
GADD153 mRNA and protein. Transient overexpression of GADD153 caused cell death
independent of agonist treatment, and cells selected for stable overexpression of
a GADD153 dominant-negative mutant exhibited reduced sensitivity. Salubrinal, an 
inhibitor of ER stress-induced cytotoxicity via the EIF2alphaK3/EIF2alpha
pathway, or stable overexpression of the EIF2alpha-S52A dominant-negative mutant 
also inhibited cell death. Treatment of the TRPV1-null human embryonic kidney 293
cell line with TRPV1 agonists did not initiate ER stress responses. Likewise,
n-benzylnonanamide, an inactive analog of nonivamide, failed to cause ER calcium 
release, an increase in GADD153 expression, and cytotoxicity. We conclude that
activation of ER-bound TRPV1 and stimulation of GADD153 expression via the
EIF2alphaK3/EIF2alpha pathway represents a common mechanism for cytotoxicity by
cell-permeable TRPV1 agonists. These findings are significant within the context 
of lung inflammatory diseases where elevated concentrations of endogenous TRPV1
agonists are probably produced in sufficient quantities to cause TRPV1 activation
and lung cell death.

PMID: 17332266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Mol Carcinog. 2007 Jun;46(6):476-87.

Epidermal hyperplasia and oral carcinoma in mice overexpressing the transcription
factor ATF3 in basal epithelial cells.

Wang A(1), Arantes S, Conti C, McArthur M, Aldaz CM, MacLeod MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

ATF3 is a highly conserved eukaryotic transcription factor that is ubiquitously
upregulated transcriptionally during cellular responses to a variety of stresses,
in particular DNA damage. However, the role of ATF3 in the DNA damage response is
unclear. Transgenic mice that overexpress human ATF3 in basal epithelial cells
under the control of the bovine keratin 5 (K5) promoter were constructed and
characterized for epidermal alterations. Strong, nuclear expression of the
exogenous ATF3 protein was seen in basal cells of the epidermis, hair follicles, 
and oral mucosa. Hyperplastic changes in the K5-expressing, outer root sheath
(ORS) cells of the hair follicle were observed in young mice, resulting in
multiple layers of ORS cells in the mature follicle and large aberrantly shaped
follicles. Mild hyperplasia of the interfollicular epidermis was also noted,
increasing with age. However, no epidermal tumors were identified in BK5.ATF3
mice observed for 16 mo. At 16 mo of age, most transgenic mice exhibited
multi-focal areas of hyperplasia and dysplasia in the oral mucosa, with cellular 
atypia and underlying acute inflammatory changes. Neoplastic lesions were also
seen in the oral cavity of BK5.ATF3 mice, including oral squamous cell carcinoma 
(60% incidence) and basal cell tumors with follicular differentiation (70%
incidence), but not in non-transgenic FVB/N littermates. Heterogeneous nuclear
expression (or stabilization) of p53 protein was seen in some oral dysplasias,
with a patchy distribution primarily in the least differentiated layers of the
lesions. This represents the first indication that ATF3 may have oncogenic
properties in epithelial cells.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17295236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Eur J Neurosci. 2007 Jan;25(2):362-72.

The characteristics of neuronal injury in a static compression model of spinal
cord injury in adult rats.

Huang WL(1), George KJ, Ibba V, Liu MC, Averill S, Quartu M, Hamlyn PJ, Priestley
JV.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Centre, Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Queen Mary
University of London, UK. w.huang@qmul.ac.uk

Studies of spinal cord injury using contusion (impact) injury paradigms have
shown that neuronal death is an acute event that is largely over within 24 h.
However, much less is known about cell death following compression injury,
despite compression being a key component of natural spinal injuries. We have
therefore used neuronal nuclei (NeuN) immunostaining to examine the
spatiotemporal pattern of neuronal loss after static compression injury in adult 
rats. 3D reconstruction was used to reveal the full effect of the injury.
Neuronal loss at the injury epicentre, assessed by NeuN immunostaining, amounted 
to 44% at 1 day but increased to 73% at 3 days and 81% at 1 month. Neuronal loss 
was also seen 5 mm rostral and caudal to the epicentre, but was not significant
until 3 days. NeuN loss was greatest in the ventral horns and in the intermediate
grey matter, with the lateral dorsal horns relatively spared. Cystic cavities
formed after injury, but were not evident until 4 weeks and were small in size.
In contrast to the slow profile of neuronal loss, the compression injury also
evoked a transient expression of activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3) and
activated c-Jun in neurons. ATF3 expression peaked at 3 days and declined at 7
days. Our spatiotemporal analysis of compression injury shows that neuronal loss 
is much more protracted than in contusion injury, and highlights the potential
for neuroprotective strategies. This study is also the first indication of ATF3
involvement in spinal cord injury.

PMID: 17284176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Pain. 2007 Apr;128(3):272-82. Epub 2007 Feb 2.

Structural pathology in a rodent model of osteoarthritis is associated with
neuropathic pain: increased expression of ATF-3 and pharmacological
characterisation.

Ivanavicius SP(1), Ball AD, Heapy CG, Westwood FR, Murray F, Read SJ.

Author information: 
(1)In Vivo Pharmacology, AstraZeneca, Alderley Park, Mereside, Cheshire SK10 4TG,
UK.

Intra-articular injection of mono-iodoacetate (MIA) in the rat knee joint induces
a histopathology with similarities to osteoarthritis (OA). Typically, a synovitis
(days 1-3) is observed followed by thinning of articular cartilage and subsequent
lesion of subchondral bone at days 8-14 onwards. Behaviourally, weight-bearing
asymmetry is observed, which is sensitive to anti-inflammatory pharmacology at
early but not later (days 14+) time points. As subchondral bone is densely
innervated, an intriguing possibility is that focal bone pathology may cause
neuropathy in this model. In male Wistar rats, activating transcription factor
(ATF)-3-immunofluorescence was used as a marker of nerve injury in lumber (L)4
and L5 dorsal root ganglia of the ipsilateral knee. Significantly increased
ATF-3-immunoreactivity following MIA treatment was measured in L5 on days 8 and
14 (P<0.05, Kruskal-Wallis and Mann-Whitney U-test), compared to saline controls.
Furthermore, in an additional study animals were orally dosed vehicle (5 ml/kg), 
naproxen (0.3-10 mg/kg), celecoxib (1-10 mg/kg), amitriptyline (3-30 mg/kg) and
gabapentin (10-100mg/kg) and evaluated for weight-bearing asymmetry on days 14,
21 and 28 post-MIA. Significant resolution of weight-bearing was observed at high
and intermediate doses of amitriptyline and gabapentin at all time points
(P<0.05, ANOVA, post-hoc Bonferroni's, vs pre-dose measurements). Transient and
weak effects were observed with naproxen (10mg/kg) on days 14 and 28, whereas
celecoxib showed no significant effects. Collectively, these data suggest that
this putative model of OA is associated with an early phase neuropathy in the L5 
innervation territory of the knee.

PMID: 17276007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. BMC Bioinformatics. 2007 Jan 10;8:8.

Least-squares methods for identifying biochemical regulatory networks from noisy 
measurements.

Kim J(1), Bates DG, Postlethwaite I, Heslop-Harrison P, Cho KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Engineering, University of Leicester, Leicester, LE1 7RH, UK.
jrk7@le.ac.uk <jrk7@le.ac.uk>

BACKGROUND: We consider the problem of identifying the dynamic interactions in
biochemical networks from noisy experimental data. Typically, approaches for
solving this problem make use of an estimation algorithm such as the well-known
linear Least-Squares (LS) estimation technique. We demonstrate that when
time-series measurements are corrupted by white noise and/or drift noise, more
accurate and reliable identification of network interactions can be achieved by
employing an estimation algorithm known as Constrained Total Least Squares
(CTLS). The Total Least Squares (TLS) technique is a generalised least squares
method to solve an overdetermined set of equations whose coefficients are noisy. 
The CTLS is a natural extension of TLS to the case where the noise components of 
the coefficients are correlated, as is usually the case with time-series
measurements of concentrations and expression profiles in gene networks.
RESULTS: The superior performance of the CTLS method in identifying network
interactions is demonstrated on three examples: a genetic network containing four
genes, a network describing p53 activity and mdm2 messenger RNA interactions, and
a recently proposed kinetic model for interleukin (IL)-6 and (IL)-12b messenger
RNA expression as a function of ATF3 and NF-kappaB promoter binding. For the
first example, the CTLS significantly reduces the errors in the estimation of the
Jacobian for the gene network. For the second, the CTLS reduces the errors from
the measurements that are corrupted by white noise and the effect of neglected
kinetics. For the third, it allows the correct identification, from noisy data,
of the negative regulation of (IL)-6 and (IL)-12b by ATF3.
CONCLUSION: The significant improvements in performance demonstrated by the CTLS 
method under the wide range of conditions tested here, including different levels
and types of measurement noise and different numbers of data points, suggests
that its application will enable more accurate and reliable identification and
modelling of biochemical networks.

PMCID: PMC1793997
PMID: 17212835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Gene Expr. 2006;13(3):191-203.

Gene expression profile of B 16(F10) murine melanoma cells exposed to hypoxic
conditions in vitro.

Olbryt M(1), Jarzab M, Jazowiecka-Rakus J, Simek K, Szala S, Sochanik A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Poland. molbryt@io.gliwice.pl

Hypoxia is an important feature of tumor microenvironment, exerting far-reaching 
effects on cells and contributing to cancer progression. Previous studies have
established substantial differences in hypoxia response between various cell
lines. Investigating this phenomenon in melanoma cells contributes to a better
understanding of cell lineage-specific hypoxia response and could point out novel
hypoxia-regulated genes. We investigated transcriptional activity of B 16(F10)
murine melanoma cells cultured for 24 h under hypoxic (nominal 1% O2, 15 samples 
including controls) and hypoxia-mimicking conditions (cobalt chloride, 100 or 200
microM, 6 samples including controls). Gene expression profiles were analyzed
using MG-U74Av2 oligonucleotide microarrays. Data analysis revealed 2541
probesets (FDR <5%) for 1% oxygen experiment and 364 probesets (FDR <5%) for
cobalt chloride, which showed differences in expression levels. Analysis of
hypoxia-regulated genes (true hypoxia, 1% O2) by stringent Family-Wise Error Rate
estimation indicated 454 significantly changed transcripts (p < 0.05). The most
upregulated genes were Lgals3, Selenbpl, Nppb (more than ten-fold increase). We
observed significant differences in expression levels of genes regulating
glycolysis (Pfkp, Hk2, Aldo3, Eno2), apoptosis (Bnip3, Bnip31, Cdknla),
transcription (Bhlhb2, Sap30, Atf3, Mxil), angiogenesis (Vegfa, Adm, Anxa2,
Ctgf), adhesion (Pkp2, Itga4, Mcam), migration (Cnn2, Tmsb4x), and other
processes. Both true hypoxia and hypoxia mimicry induced HIF-1-regulated genes.
However, unsupervised analysis (Singular Value Decomposition) revealed distinct
differences in gene expression between these two experimental conditions.
Contrary to hypoxia, cobalt chloride caused suppression of gene expression rather
than stimulation, especially concerning transcripts related to proliferation,
immune response, DNA repair, and melanin biosynthesis.

PMID: 17193925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Brain Behav Immun. 2007 Jul;21(5):599-616. Epub 2006 Dec 21.

Immune cell involvement in dorsal root ganglia and spinal cord after chronic
constriction or transection of the rat sciatic nerve.

Hu P(1), Bembrick AL, Keay KA, McLachlan EM.

Author information: 
(1)Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute, Randwick, NSW 2031, Australia.

Chronic constriction injury (CCI) of the sciatic nerve in rodents produces
mechanical and thermal hyperalgesia and is a common model of neuropathic pain.
Here we compare the inflammatory responses in L4/5 dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) and
spinal segments after CCI with those after transection and ligation at the same
site. Expression of ATF3 after one week implied that 75% of sensory and 100% of
motor neurones had been axotomized after CCI. Macrophage invasion of DRGs and
microglial and astrocytic activation in the spinal cord were qualitatively
similar but quantitatively distinct between the lesions. The macrophage and glial
reactions around neurone somata in DRGs and ventral horn were slightly greater
after transection than CCI while, in the dorsal horn, microglial activation
(using markers OX-42(for CD11b) and ED1(for CD68)) was greater after CCI. In
DRGs, macrophages positive for OX-42(CD11b), CD4, MHC II and ED1(CD68) more
frequently formed perineuronal rings beneath the glial sheath of ATF3+ medium to 
large neurone somata after CCI. There were more invading MHC II+ macrophages
lacking OX-42(CD11b)/CD4/ED1(CD68) after transection. MHC I was expressed in DRGs
and in spinal sciatic territories to a similar extent after both lesions. CD8+
T-lymphocytes aggregated to a greater extent both in DRGs and the dorsal horn
after CCI, but in the ventral horn after transection. This occurred mainly by
migration, additional T-cells being recruited only after CCI. Some of these were 
probably CD4+. It appears that inflammation of the peripheral nerve trunk after
CCI triggers an adaptive immune response not seen after axotomy.

PMID: 17187959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Cancer Res. 2006 Dec 15;66(24):11983-90.

The tumor metastasis suppressor gene Drg-1 down-regulates the expression of
activating transcription factor 3 in prostate cancer.

Bandyopadhyay S(1), Wang Y, Zhan R, Pai SK, Watabe M, Iiizumi M, Furuta E,
Mohinta S, Liu W, Hirota S, Hosobe S, Tsukada T, Miura K, Takano Y, Saito K,
Commes T, Piquemal D, Hai T, Watabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Southern Illinois
University School of Medicine, Springfield, Illinois 62794, USA.

The tumor metastasis suppressor gene Drg-1 has been shown to suppress metastasis 
without affecting tumorigenicity in immunodeficient mouse models of prostate and 
colon cancer. Expression of Drg-1 has also been found to have a significant
inverse correlation with metastasis or invasiveness in various types of human
cancer. However, how Drg-1 exerts its metastasis suppressor function remains
unknown. In the present study, to elucidate the mechanism of action of the Drg-1 
gene, we did a microarray analysis and found that induction of Drg-1
significantly inhibited the expression of activating transcription factor (ATF)
3, a member of the ATF/cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein family of
transcription factors. We also showed that Drg-1 attenuated the endogenous level 
of ATF3 mRNA and protein in prostate cancer cells, whereas Drg-1 small
interfering RNA up-regulated the ATF3 expression. Furthermore, Drg-1 suppressed
the promoter activity of the ATF3 gene, indicating that Drg-1 regulates ATF3
expression at the transcriptional level. Our immunohistochemical analysis on
prostate cancer specimens revealed that nuclear expression of ATF3 was inversely 
correlated to Drg-1 expression and positively correlated to metastases.
Consistently, we have found that ATF3 overexpression promoted invasiveness of
prostate tumor cells in vitro, whereas Drg-1 suppressed the invasive ability of
these cells. More importantly, overexpression of ATF3 in prostate cancer cells
significantly enhanced spontaneous lung metastasis of these cells without
affecting primary tumorigenicity in a severe combined immunodeficient mouse
model. Taken together, our results strongly suggest that Drg-1 suppresses
metastasis of prostate tumor cells, at least in part, by inhibiting the invasive 
ability of the cells via down-regulation of the expression of the ATF3 gene.

PMID: 17178897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Apr;292(4):G1123-32. Epub 2006 Dec 
14.

Mice lacking the transcription factor Mist1 exhibit an altered stress response
and increased sensitivity to caerulein-induced pancreatitis.

Kowalik AS(1), Johnson CL, Chadi SA, Weston JY, Fazio EN, Pin CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, 
Canada.

Several animal models have been developed to investigate the pathobiology of
pancreatitis, but few studies have examined the effects that altered pancreatic
gene expression have in these models. In this study, the sensitivity to
secretagogue-induced pancreatitis was examined in a mouse line that has an
altered acinar cell environment due to the targeted deletion of Mist1. Mist1 is
an exocrine specific transcription factor important for the complete
differentiation and function of pancreatic acinar cells. Mice lacking the Mist1
gene [Mist1 knockout (KO) mice] exhibit cellular disorganization and functional
defects in the exocrine pancreas but no gross morphological defects. Following
the induction of pancreatitis with caerulein, a CCK analog, we observed elevated 
serum amylase levels, necrosis, and tissue damage in Mist1 KO mice, indicating
increased pancreatic damage. There was also a delay in the regeneration of acinar
tissue in Mist1 KO animals. Molecular profiling revealed an altered activation of
stress response genes in Mist1 KO pancreatic tissue compared with wild-type (WT) 
tissue following the induction of pancreatitis. In particular, Western blot
analysis for activating transcription factor 3 and phosphorylated eukaryotic
initiation factor 2alpha (eIF2alpha), mediators of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress, indicated limited activation of this pathway in Mist1 KO animals compared
with WT controls. Conversely, Mist1 KO pancreatic tissue exhibits increased
expression of growth arrest and DNA damage inducible 34 protein, an inhibitor of 
eIF2alpha phosphorylation, before and after the induction of pancreatitis. These 
finding suggest that activation of the ER stress pathway is a protective event in
the progression of pancreatitis and highlight the Mist1 KO mouse line as an
important new model for studying the molecular events that contribute to the
sensitivity to pancreatic injury.

PMID: 17170023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Endocrinology. 2007 Mar;148(3):1266-77. Epub 2006 Dec 7.

2-methoxyestradiol induces mammary gland differentiation through
amphiregulin-epithelial growth factor receptor-mediated signaling: molecular
distinctions from the mammary gland of pregnant mice.

Huh JI(1), Qiu TH, Chandramouli GV, Charles R, Wiench M, Hager GL, Catena R,
Calvo A, LaVallee TM, Desprez PY, Green JE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation and Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Building 41, 41 Medlars Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

Levels of 2-methoxyestradiol (2ME(2)), an endogenous metabolite of estradiol, are
highly elevated during late stages of pregnancy when mammary glands have
differentiated with the formation of alveolar structures producing milk proteins.
Based upon our previous demonstration that 2ME(2) induces mammary ductal dilation
associated with expression of mammary differentiation markers when administered
to transgenic mice that spontaneously develop mammary cancer, we studied the
effects of 2ME(2) on normal mammary gland development. The results of this study 
demonstrate that 2ME(2) can induce a partial differentiation of normal mammary
glands in virgin mice, as evidenced by the appearance of limited numbers of
alveolar cells and significantly increased expression of the differentiation
markers beta-casein and whey acidic protein. 2ME(2)-induced differentiation is
associated with inhibition of expression of inhibitor of differentiation 1 (Id-1)
in normal mammary epithelial cells through elements in the 5'-flanking region of 
the Id-1 gene. Microarray analysis revealed that 2ME(2)-induced differentiation
of the mammary gland shares some significant similarities in gene expression with
that of mammary glands from late-stage pregnancy, including elevated expression
of many milk protein differentiation markers. However, several genes are
differentially regulated between 2ME(2)-treated mammary glands and differentiated
mammary glands through pregnancy. Significantly, amphiregulin, ATF3, serpine2,
and SOX6 were up-regulated in 2ME(2)-treated mammary glands but not in mammary
glands from pregnant mice. Using the SCp2 differentiation cell line system, we
demonstrate that 2ME(2) induces differentiation through the down-regulation of
Id-1 and up-regulation of amphiregulin. Administration of amphiregulin to SCp2
cells induced differentiation, whereas inhibition of 2ME(2)-induced expression of
amphiregulin by small interfering RNA blocked differentiation. Estrogen
receptor-negative SCp2 cells differentiate in response to 2ME(2), but not
estradiol, suggesting that 2ME(2) operates through an estrogen
receptor-independent mechanism. These data demonstrate that 2ME(2) can induce a
partial differentiation of the mammary gland through mechanisms that differ from 
those normally used during pregnancy.

PMID: 17158205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Oct;1080:97-109.

The role of basic leucine zipper protein-mediated transcription in physiological 
and pathological myocardial hypertrophy.

Kehat I(1), Hasin T, Aronheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Technion, Israel Institute of Technology, Rappaport Family Institute in the
Medical Sciences, the B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, Israel 31096.
ikehat@tx.technion.ac.il

Accumulating evidence suggests that nuclear transcription factors from the basic 
leucine zipper (bZIP) family play an important role in cardiac development and
function. This class includes the CREB/ATF family of transcription factors,
namely CREB, cAMP response element modulator (CREM), ATF, and the related AP-1
and C/EBP families. An effort has been made to elucidate the role of specific
bZIP members in the heart. Unfortunately, little insight could be gained from
knockout experiments, either due to embryonic lethal phenotypes or functional
compensation by other bZIP family members. Surprisingly, cardiac overexpression
of several inhibitory transcription factors from the bZIP family, such as a
nonphosphorylatable form of CREB (CREB(ser133)), a nonfunctional isoform of CREM,
or ATF3 resulted in massive atrial dilatation. In order to try and characterize
this pathway we have expressed the potent bZIP inhibitory protein, Jun
dimerization protein 2 (JDP2), specifically in the mouse heart in a temporally
controlled manner. Expression of JDP2 resulted in massive biatrial dilatation;
loss of connexin 40 (Cx40), connexin43 (Cx43), and myosin light chain 2 (MLC2a)
expression; atrioventricular defects in conduction; and a lethal phenotype. All
these effects were independent of any developmental events acquired during
adulthood, and were totally reversible upon abolishing the bZIP inhibition. The
results of this article suggest that bZIP inhibition is sufficient to cause
atrial dilation, that this dilatation is acquired postnatally, and that it is
reversible upon the relief of inhibition. Thus, bZIP repressors may serve as
novel drug targets for the prevention of atrial dilatation a major risk of atrial
fibrillation (AF).

PMID: 17132778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Cell Signal. 2007 Apr;19(4):772-81. Epub 2006 Nov 28.

Activated stress response pathways within multicellular aggregates utilize an
autocrine component.

Jack GD(1), Cabrera MC, Manning ML, Slaughter SM, Potts M, Helm RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.

Multicellular aggregates (spheroids) of primary human foreskin fibroblasts
(HFF-2) and a glioblastoma cell line (T98G) entered and exited from long term (2 
weeks) metabolic arrest utilizing an autocrine response. Cytokine production
(specifically IFN-gamma) activated a Gadd45alpha/p38 pathway that led to
increased AP-1 (c-jun and ATF3) transcription factor levels, augmenting cytokine 
production in an autocrine fashion. Whereas HFF-2 aggregates were capable of
surviving long term arrest and recovery during NF-kappaB inhibition independent
of JNK activation, T98G aggregates were not. Such endogenous processes are not
easily observed with adherent monolayer cell culturing systems, strongly
suggesting that more emphasis needs to be placed on determining the operational
signal transduction cascades within multicellular aggregates. Extracellular
inputs such as spheroid formation, arrest, and regrowth as monolayers invoke
intracellular signaling responses converging at the AP-1 transcription factor
level. Variations in responses are both cell type and transformation state
dependent and require an autocrine cytokine component. The data are discussed in 
relation to the wounding response and avascular tumor growth mechanisms.

PMID: 17127033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Scand J Plast Reconstr Surg Hand Surg. 2006;40(6):321-8.

End-to-side nerve repair induces nuclear translocation of activating
transcription factor 3.

Bontioti E(1), Dahlin LB, Kataoka K, Kanje M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö/Hand Surgery, Malmö University Hospital,
Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.

We wanted to find out if any of three different types of manipulations: a piece
of muscle or nerve put parallel to a nerve; an epineurial window made, or sutures
inserted into a nerve, or both; or pieces of nerve sutured to an epineurial
window end-to-side to the musculocutaneous or sciatic nerve, resulted in
activation of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in neurons and in
non-neuronal cells. ATF3, a marker of cell activation, was investigated by
immunocytochemistry one week after manipulation. A piece of nerve or muscle
parallel to a nerve did not induce ATF3 locally in the nerve and induced ATF3
only rarely in neurons. In contrast, an epineurial window or insertion of
sutures, or both, with or without attachment of a piece of nerve placed
end-to-side, induced robust ATF3 expression. We conclude that an injury to a
peripheral nerve trunk associated with end-to-side nerve repair, activates
neurons and non-neuronal cells and may contribute to sprouting of axons into the 
nerve attached end-to-side.

PMID: 17118896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 15;66(22):10891-901.

Oncostatin M (OSM) cytostasis of breast tumor cells: characterization of an OSM
receptor beta-specific kernel.

Underhill-Day N(1), Heath JK.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Growth Factor Group, School of Biosciences, University of
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, United Kingdom. N.UnderhillDay@bham.ac.uk

The interleukin-6 cytokine oncostatin M (OSM) induces potent growth-inhibitory
and morphogenic responses in several different tumor cell types, highlighting the
importance of OSM signaling mechanisms as targets for therapeutic intervention.
The specific molecular pathways involved are not well understood, as OSM can
signal through two separate heterodimeric receptor complexes, glycoprotein 130
(gp130)/leukemia inhibitory factor receptor (LIFR) alpha and gp130/OSM receptor
beta (OSMRbeta). In this investigation, we used a LIFR antagonist to help resolve
signaling responses and identify patterns of gene expression elicited by the
different receptor complexes. OSM-induced biological effects on breast
tumor-derived cell lines were specifically mediated through the gp130/OSMRbeta
complex. Each cytokine tested exhibited differential signaling capability and
manifested both shared and unique patterns of gene activation, emphasizing
compositional differences in activator protein-1 transcription factor activity
and expression. In particular, OSM strongly activated the c-Jun NH(2)-terminal
kinase (JNK) serine/threonine kinase and downstream components, including
activating transcription factor (ATF)/cyclic AMP-responsive element binding
protein family member, ATF3. JNK/stress-activated protein kinase kinase
inhibition abrogated cell morphogenesis induced by OSM, indicating an important
role for this pathway in OSM specificity. These findings identify a core
signaling/transcriptional mechanism specific to the OSMRbeta in breast tumor
cells.

PMID: 17108126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 15;66(22):10750-9.

Mutant p53 protects cells from 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced death
by attenuating activating transcription factor 3 induction.

Buganim Y(1), Kalo E, Brosh R, Besserglick H, Nachmany I, Rais Y, Stambolsky P,
Tang X, Milyavsky M, Shats I, Kalis M, Goldfinger N, Rotter V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.

Mutations in p53 are ubiquitous in human tumors. Some p53 mutations not only
result in loss of wild-type (WT) activity but also grant additional functions,
termed "gain of function." In this study, we explore how the status of p53
affects the immediate response gene activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in
the 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-protein kinase C (PKC) pathway. We
show that high doses of TPA induce ATF3 in a WT p53-independent manner
correlating with PKCs depletion and cell death. We show that cells harboring
mutant p53 have attenuated ATF3 induction and are less sensitive to TPA-induced
death compared with their p53-null counterparts. Mutagenesis analysis of the ATF3
promoter identified the regulatory motifs cyclic AMP-responsive element binding
protein/ATF and MEF2 as being responsible for the TPA-induced activation of ATF3.
Moreover, we show that mutant p53 attenuates ATF3 expression by two complementary
mechanisms. It interacts with the ATF3 promoter and influences its activity via
the MEF2 site, and additionally, it attenuates transcriptional expression of the 
ATF3 activator MEF2D. These data provide important insights into the molecular
mechanisms that underlie mutant p53 gain of function.

PMID: 17108111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Feb;292(2):G667-77. Epub 2006 Nov
9.

Induction of early response genes in trypsin inhibitor-induced pancreatic growth.

Guo L(1), Sans MD, Gurda GT, Lee SH, Ernst SA, Williams JA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, Univ of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0622, USA.

Endogenous CCK release induced by a synthetic trypsin inhibitor, camostat,
stimulates pancreatic growth; however, the mechanisms mediating this growth are
not well established. Early response genes often couple short-term signals with
long-term responses. To study their participation in the pancreatic growth
response, mice were fasted for 18 h and refed chow containing 0.1% camostat for
1-24 h. Expression of 18 early response genes were evaluated by quantitative PCR;
mRNA for 17 of the 18 increased at 1, 2, 4, or 8 h. Protein expression for c-jun,
c-fos, ATF-3, Egr-1, and JunB peaked at 2 h. Nuclear localization was confirmed
by immunohistochemistry of c-fos, c-jun, and Egr-1. Refeeding regular chow
induced only a small increase of c-jun and none in c-fos expression. JNKs and
ERKs were activated 1 h after camostat feeding as was the phosphorylation of
c-jun and ATF-2. AP-1 DNA binding evaluated by EMSA showed a significant increase
1-2 h after camostat feeding with participation of c-jun, c-fos, ATF-2, ATF-3,
and JunB shown by supershift. The CCK antagonist IQM-95,333 blocked camostat
feeding-induced c-jun and c-fos expression by 67 and 84%, respectively, and AP-1 
DNA binding was also inhibited. In CCK-deficient mice, the maximal response of
c-jun induction and AP-1 DNA binding were reduced by 64 and 70%, respectively.
These results indicate that camostat feeding induces a spectrum of early response
gene expression and AP-1 DNA binding and that these effects are mainly CCK
dependent.

PMID: 17095753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Toxicology. 2006 Dec 7;228(2-3):299-309. Epub 2006 Sep 29.

Toxicoproteomic investigation of the molecular mechanisms of
cycloheximide-induced hepatocellular apoptosis in rat liver.

Kumagai K(1), Ando Y, Kiyosawa N, Ito K, Kawai R, Yamoto T, Manabe S, Teranishi
M.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Safety Research Labs., Sankyo Co., Ltd., 717 Horikoshi, Fukuroi,
Shizuoka 437-0065, Japan. kumawind@sankyo.co.jp <kumawind@sankyo.co.jp>

C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) is a transcriptional factor and is induced under 
conditions such as the unfolded protein response or amino acid starvation. A
previous study showed that the transcriptional level of CHOP was highly increased
in rat liver in which hepatocellular apoptosis was induced by cycloheximide (CHX)
treatment. Here, we investigated the relationship between hepatocellular
apoptosis and CHOP-mediated apoptotic pathway, and studied the mechanisms of
induction of CHOP gene in the liver of rats treated with CHX. Male F344 rats were
treated intravenously with 6mg/kg CHX, and sacrificed at 1, 2 and 6h after the
treatment. In the gene expression assay using quantitative RT-PCR, the genes
related to CHOP-mediated apoptosis such as the C/EBPbeta, ATF3 and ATF4 genes
were significantly increased corresponding to the induction of hepatocellular
apoptosis in rats treated with CHX. However the GRP78/Bip gene, which serves as a
representative marker for the unfolded protein response, did not change after the
treatment. Toxicoproteomics using two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis 
and mass spectrometry indicated that GRP78/Bip was inactivated by the CHX
treatment. Furthermore, the CHX-treated animals exhibited a significant decrease 
of phosphorylated Akt/PKB (protein kinase B). These results indicate that the
protein synthesis inhibition by CHX induces the CHOP gene through a pathway
similar to that of amino acid starvation, and that Akt/PKB inactivation enhances 
the CHOP-mediated hepatocellular apoptosis.

PMID: 17067731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Biochem J. 2007 Feb 15;402(1):163-73.

A feedback transcriptional mechanism controls the level of the arginine/lysine
transporter cat-1 during amino acid starvation.

Lopez AB(1), Wang C, Huang CC, Yaman I, Li Y, Chakravarty K, Johnson PF, Chiang
CM, Snider MD, Wek RC, Hatzoglou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH 44106-4906, USA.

The adaptive response to amino acid limitation in mammalian cells inhibits global
protein synthesis and promotes the expression of proteins that protect cells from
stress. The arginine/lysine transporter, cat-1, is induced during amino acid
starvation by transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms. It is shown in
the present study that the transient induction of cat-1 transcription is
regulated by the stress response pathway that involves phosphorylation of the
translation initiation factor, eIF2 (eukaryotic initiation factor-2). This
phosphorylation induces expression of the bZIP (basic leucine zipper protein)
transcription factors C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein)-beta and ATF
(activating transcription factor) 4, which in turn induces ATF3. Transfection
experiments in control and mutant cells, and chromatin immunoprecipitations
showed that ATF4 activates, whereas ATF3 represses cat-1 transcription, via an
AARE (amino acid response element), TGATGAAAC, in the first exon of the cat-1
gene, which functions both in the endogenous and in a heterologous promoter. ATF4
and C/EBPbeta activated transcription when expressed in transfected cells and
they bound as heterodimers to the AARE in vitro. The induction of transcription
by ATF4 was inhibited by ATF3, which also bound to the AARE as a heterodimer with
C/EBPbeta. These results suggest that the transient increase in cat-1
transcription is due to transcriptional activation caused by ATF4 followed by
transcriptional repression by ATF3 via a feedback mechanism.

PMCID: PMC1783987
PMID: 17042743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2007 Apr;102(2):157-72. Epub 2006 Oct 13.

Gene expression profiling of breast cancer cells in response to gemcitabine:
NF-kappaB pathway activation as a potential mechanism of resistance.

Hernández-Vargas H(1), Rodríguez-Pinilla SM, Julián-Tendero M, Sánchez-Rovira P, 
Cuevas C, Antón A, Ríos MJ, Palacios J, Moreno-Bueno G.

Author information: 
(1)Breast and Gynaecological Cancer Group, Molecular Pathology Programme, Spanish
National Cancer Centre, Madrid, Spain.

Gemcitabine is a nucleoside analog with clinical relevance in the treatment of
several solid tumors, including breast carcinoma. In spite of its cytotoxic
effect, clinical efficacy is impaired by the development of resistance. We
performed gene expression analysis to shed light into the molecular mechanism of 
action of this drug in two breast cancer cell lines. Activation of genes related 
with cell cycle, cell growth and apoptosis (BNIP3L, CCNG2, DDIT4, TGFB2, TP53BP1,
TP53INP1, and VEGF) was the main finding in the p53-wild type cell line MCF7,
while the p53-non-functional cell line MDA-MB-231 was characterized by the
regulation of NF-kappaB target genes (BIRC3, CXCL1/GRO1, IRAK2, TNF, TNFAIP and
TRAF1). Genes consistently induced (ATF3, CCNG2, CDKN1A, EGR1, INSIG1, and MAF)
or repressed (CCND1 and VGF) in both cell lines, were also found after
gemcitabine treatment. In addition, MDA-MB-231 cells showed a higher basal and
induced NF-kappaB transcriptional activity after treatment with gemcitabine. In
comparison with gemcitabine, gene expression after 5-fluorouracil treatment
showed essentially different profiles in both cell lines. This, in spite of using
equitoxic concentrations producing similar effects on cell cycle. NF-kappaB
transcriptional activity in MDA-MB-231 cells was dependent on IkappaB-alpha
phosphorylation, as shown by functional experiments using the specific inhibitor 
BAY11-7082. Moreover, immunohistochemical analysis of clinical samples of breast 
carcinoma further validated the induction of NF-kappaB expression and IkappaB
down-regulation upon neoadjuvant gemcitabine treatment. Thus, gene expression
patterns, in vitro functional studies and analysis of tissue samples are in
agreement with a role for NF-kappaB pathway in gemcitabine response. Together
with the reported role for NF-kappaB in the induction of resistance to
chemotherapy, our data gives support to clinical strategies combining gemcitabine
with NF-kappaB inhibitors in breast cancer.

PMID: 17039268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Biochem J. 2007 Jan 15;401(2):559-67.

The regulation of ATF3 gene expression by mitogen-activated protein kinases.

Lu D(1), Chen J, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)The Ohio State Biochemistry Program, Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biochemistry, and Center for Molecular Neurobiology, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

ATF3 (activating transcription factor 3) gene encodes a member of the ATF/CREB
(cAMP-response-element-binding protein) family of transcription factors. Its
expression is induced by a wide range of signals, including stress signals and
signals that promote cell proliferation and motility. Thus the ATF3 gene can be
characterized as an 'adaptive response' gene for the cells to cope with extra-
and/or intra-cellular changes. In the present study, we demonstrate that the p38 
signalling pathway is involved in the induction of ATF3 by stress signals.
Ectopic expression of CA (constitutively active) MKK6 [MAPK (mitogen-activated
protein kinase) kinase 6], a kinase upstream of p38, indicated that activation of
the p38 pathway is sufficient to induce the expression of the ATF3 gene.
Inhibition of the pathway indicated that the p38 pathway is necessary for various
signals to induce ATF3, including anisomycin, IL-1beta (interleukin 1beta),
TNFalpha (tumour necrosis factor alpha) and H2O2. Analysis of the endogenous ATF3
gene indicates that the regulation is at least in part at the transcription
level. Specifically, CREB, a transcription factor known to be phosphorylated by
p38, plays a role in this induction. Interestingly, the ERK
(extracellular-signal-regulated kinase) and JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase)/SAPK
(stress-activated protein kinase) signalling pathways are neither necessary nor
sufficient to induce ATF3 in the anisomycin stress paradigm. Furthermore,
analysis of caspase 3 activation indicated that knocking down ATF3 reduced the
ability of MKK6(CA) to exert its pro-apoptotic effect. Taken together, our
results indicate that a major signalling pathway, the p38 pathway, plays a
critical role in the induction of ATF3 by stress signals, and that ATF3 is
functionally important to mediate the pro-apoptotic effects of p38.

PMCID: PMC1820813
PMID: 17014422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Exp Neurol. 2007 Jan;203(1):42-54. Epub 2006 Sep 26.

Intravenous paclitaxel administration in the rat induces a peripheral sensory
neuropathy characterized by macrophage infiltration and injury to sensory neurons
and their supporting cells.

Peters CM(1), Jimenez-Andrade JM, Jonas BM, Sevcik MA, Koewler NJ, Ghilardi JR,
Wong GY, Mantyh PW.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Diagnostic and Biological Sciences, Neuroscience, Psychiatry,
Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Paclitaxel-induced peripheral neuropathy (PN) can be a significant problem for
patients receiving chemotherapeutic regimens for the treatment of breast,
ovarian, and lung cancer as PN can influence the quality of life and survivorship
in these patients. To begin to understand the cellular changes that occur within 
the peripheral and central nervous system as PN develops, we intravenously
infused rats with clinically relevant doses of paclitaxel. Ten days later,
behavioral changes indicative of PN became evident that included mechanical
allodynia, cold hyperalgesia, and deficits in ambulation/coordination. These
behaviors were accompanied by increased expression of activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3; a marker of cellular injury) in a population of
large>medium>small diameter sensory neurons, a population of satellite cells in
the lumbar dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and in myelinating Schwann cells in the
sciatic nerve. In addition, there was an increase in the expression of glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) in DRG satellite cells and an increase in the
number of CD68 positive activated macrophages within the DRG and peripheral
nerve. Within lamina III-IV of the lumbar spinal cord, there was an increase in
OX42 positive microglia. These data suggest that intravenous infusion of
paclitaxel induces a peripheral neuropathy characterized by injury of neuronal
and non-neuronal cells in the peripheral nervous system, macrophage activation in
both the DRG and peripheral nerve, and microglial activation within the spinal
cord. An understanding of the factors involved in the development and maintenance
of PN may lead to mechanism based therapies that prevent/treat PN and thus
improve the survival and quality of life of patients receiving chemotherapy.

PMID: 17005179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Am J Pathol. 2006 Oct;169(4):1376-89.

Tumor cell plasticity in uveal melanoma: microenvironment directed dampening of
the invasive and metastatic genotype and phenotype accompanies the generation of 
vasculogenic mimicry patterns.

Folberg R(1), Arbieva Z, Moses J, Hayee A, Sandal T, Kadkol S, Lin AY, Valyi-Nagy
K, Setty S, Leach L, Chévez-Barrios P, Larsen P, Majumdar D, Pe'er J, Maniotis
AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 840 S. Wood St.,
110 CSN (MC 847), Chicago, IL 60612, USA. rfolberg@uic.edu

The histological detection of laminin-rich vasculogenic mimicry patterns in human
primary uveal melanomas is associated with death from metastases. We therefore
hypothesized that highly invasive uveal melanoma cells forming vasculogenic
mimicry patterns after exposure to a laminin-rich three-dimensional
microenvironment would differentially express genes associated with invasive and 
metastatic behavior. However, we discovered that genes associated with
differentiation (GDF15 and ATF3) and suppression of proliferation (CDKNa1/p21)
were up-regulated in highly invasive uveal melanoma cells forming vasculogenic
mimicry patterns, and genes associated with promotion of invasive and metastatic 
behavior such as CD44, CCNE2 (cyclin E2), THBS1 (thrombospondin 1), and CSPG2
(chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan; versican) were down-regulated. After forming
vasculogenic mimicry patterns, uveal melanoma cells invaded only short distances,
failed to replicate, and changed morphologically from the invasive epithelioid to
the indolent spindle A phenotype. In human tissue samples, uveal melanoma cells
within vasculogenic mimicry patterns assumed the spindle A morphology, and the
expression of Ki67 was significantly reduced in adjacent melanoma cells. Thus,
the generation of vasculogenic mimicry patterns is accompanied by dampening of
the invasive and metastatic uveal melanoma genotype and phenotype and underscores
the plasticity of these cells in response to cues from the microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC1698855
PMID: 17003493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Biochem J. 2007 Jan 1;401(1):299-307.

Activation of the ATF3 gene through a co-ordinated amino acid-sensing response
programme that controls transcriptional regulation of responsive genes following 
amino acid limitation.

Pan YX(1), Chen H, Thiaville MM, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, Shands
Cancer Center and Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College 
of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

Expression of ATF3 (activating transcription factor 3) is induced by a variety of
environmental stress conditions, including nutrient limitation. In the present
study, we demonstrate that the increase in ATF3 mRNA content following amino acid
limitation of human HepG2 hepatoma cells is dependent on transcriptional
activation of the ATF3 gene, through a highly co-ordinated amino acid-responsive 
programme of transcription factor synthesis and action. Studies using transient
over-expression and knockout fibroblasts showed that several ATF and C/EBP
(CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein) family members contribute to ATF3 regulation.
Promoter analysis showed that a C/EBP-ATF composite site at -23 to -15 bp
relative to the transcription start site of the ATF3 gene functions as an AARE
(amino acid response element). Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated that
amino acid limitation increased ATF4, ATF3, and C/EBPbeta binding to the ATF3
promoter, but the kinetics of each was markedly different. Immediately following 
histidine removal, there was a rapid increase in histone H3 acetylation prior to 
an enhancement in ATF4 binding and in histone H4 acetylation. These latter
changes closely paralleled the initial increase in RNA pol II (RNA polymerase II)
binding to the promoter and in the transcription rate from the ATF3 gene. The
increase in ATF3 and C/EBPbeta binding was considerably slower and more closely
correlated with a decline in transcription rate. A comparison of the recruitment 
patterns between ATF and C/EBP transcription factors and RNA polymerase II at the
AARE of several amino acid-responsive genes revealed that a highly co-ordinated
response programme controls the transcriptional activation of these genes
following amino acid limitation.

PMCID: PMC1698690
PMID: 16989641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Neurochem. 2006 Oct;99(1):54-69.

Oxidative stress-triggered unfolded protein response is upstream of intrinsic
cell death evoked by parkinsonian mimetics.

Holtz WA(1), Turetzky JM, Jong YJ, O'Malley KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Oxidative stress is a key player in a variety of neurodegenerative disorders
including Parkinson's disease. Widely used as a parkinsonian mimetic,
6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) generates reactive oxygen species (ROS) as well as
coordinated changes in gene transcription associated with the unfolded protein
response (UPR) and apoptosis. Whether 6-OHDA-induced UPR activation is dependent 
on ROS has not yet been determined. The present study used molecular indicators
of oxidative stress to place 6-OHDA-generated ROS upstream of the appearance of
UPR markers such as activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and phosphorylated
stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK/JNK) signaling molecules. Antioxidants
completely blocked 6-OHDA-mediated UPR activation and rescued cells from
toxicity. Moreover, cytochrome c release from mitochondria was observed after the
appearance of early UPR markers, suggesting that cellular stress pathways are
responsible for its release. Mechanistically, the 6-OHDA-induced UPR was
independent of intracellular calcium changes. Rather, evidence of protein
oxidation was observed before the expression of UPR markers, suggesting that the 
rapid accumulation of damaged proteins triggered cell stress/UPR. Taken together,
6-OHDA-mediated cell death in dopaminergic cells proceeds via ROS-dependent UPR
up-regulation which leads to an interaction with the intrinsic mitochondrial
pathway and downstream caspase activation.

PMID: 16987235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. BMC Mol Biol. 2006 Sep 19;7:30.

The transcription factor ATF3 is upregulated during chondrocyte differentiation
and represses cyclin D1 and A gene transcription.

James CG(1), Woods A, Underhill TM, Beier F.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Group in Skeletal Development and Remodeling, University of Western
Ontario, London, ON, Canada. claudine.james@schulich.uwo.ca

BACKGROUND: Coordinated chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation are
required for normal endochondral bone growth. Transcription factors binding to
the cyclicAMP response element (CRE) are known to regulate these processes. One
member of this family, Activating Transcription Factor 3 (ATF3), is expressed
during skeletogenesis and acts as a transcriptional repressor, but the function
of this protein in chondrogenesis is unknown.
RESULTS: Here we demonstrate that Atf3 mRNA levels increase during mouse
chondrocyte differentiation in vitro and in vivo. In addition, Atf3 mRNA levels
are increased in response to cytochalasin D treatment, an inducer of chondrocyte 
maturation. This is accompanied by increased Atf3 promoter activity in
cytochalasin D-treated chondrocytes. We had shown earlier that transcription of
the cell cycle genes cyclin D1 and cyclin A in chondrocytes is dependent on CREs.
Here we demonstrate that overexpression of ATF3 in primary mouse chondrocytes
results in reduced transcription of both genes, as well as decreased activity of 
a CRE reporter plasmid. Repression of cyclin A transcription by ATF3 required the
CRE in the cyclin A promoter. In parallel, ATF3 overexpression reduces the
activity of a SOX9-dependent promoter and increases the activity of a
RUNX2-dependent promoter.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that transcriptional induction of the Atf3 gene in
maturing chondrocytes results in down-regulation of cyclin D1 and cyclin A
expression as well as activation of RUNX2-dependent transcription. Therefore,
ATF3 induction appears to facilitate cell cycle exit and terminal differentiation
of chondrocytes.

PMCID: PMC1584246
PMID: 16984628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Mol Immunol. 2007 Mar;44(7):1598-605. Epub 2006 Sep 18.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) represses the expression of CCL4 in
murine macrophages.

Khuu CH(1), Barrozo RM, Hai T, Weinstein SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA
94132, USA.

Acute expression of macrophage inflammatory protein-1 beta (also known as CCL4)
promotes beneficial leukocyte recruitment to infected tissues, but chronic
expression of this chemokine contributes to inflammatory disease. CCL4 expression
is controlled largely at the transcriptional level and an ATF/CRE sequence
located in the promoter (-104 to -97bp, relative to the transcriptional start
site) has been identified as a critical cis-acting element. The trans-acting
binding proteins that influence CCL4 transcription via this site are largely
unknown. We investigated whether activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a
member of the ATF/CREB family of transcription factors, binds to the CCL4 ATF/CRE
site in macrophages. Using the electrophoretic mobility shift assay and the
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we found that ATF3 binds to the ATF/CRE site
within the CCL4 promoter in untreated and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated
macrophages. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed that CCL4 mRNA levels in
elicited peritoneal macrophages from ATF3(-/-) mice are significantly higher than
in congenic ATF3(+/+) macrophages under both unstimulated and LPS-stimulated
conditions, suggesting that ATF3 represses transcription of the CCL4 gene.
Consistent with the higher gene expression, ATF3-deficient macrophages secreted
more CCL4 protein than ATF3(+/+) macrophages. Similar results were obtained in
bone-marrow-derived macrophages treated with Toll-like receptor 2, 3, 4 and 5
agonists. Thus, we conclude that ATF3 constitutively binds to the ATF/CRE site in
the CCL4 promoter where it represses basal and pathogen-associated molecular
pattern (PAMP)-stimulated transcription. Consequently, ATF3 appears to be part of
a control mechanism that limits the amount of CCL4 released by macrophages,
preventing excessive inflammation.

PMID: 16982098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Neurochem Res. 2007 Feb;32(2):167-76. Epub 2006 Aug 31.

Genetic background influences UPR but not PLP processing in the rumpshaker model 
of PMD/SPG2.

McLaughlin M(1), Karim SA, Montague P, Barrie JA, Kirkham D, Griffiths IR, Edgar 
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Neurobiology Group, Division of Cell Sciences, Institute of
Comparative Medicine, University of Glasgow, Bearsden, Glasgow, G61 1QH,
Scotland.

Mutations of the proteolipid protein gene (PLP1) cause Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease (PMD) and Spastic paraplegia type 2 (SPG2). The rumpshaker mutation is
associated with mild forms of PMD or SPG2 in man and the identical mutation
occurs in mice, the phenotype depending on genetic background. The mild phenotype
in C3H mice becomes a lethal disease when expressed on the C57BL/6 background.
rumpshaker PLP is synthesised at a similar rate to wild type but is rapidly
degraded by the proteasome. We show that the rates of synthesis, degradation and 
myelin incorporation of PLP/DM20 are similar in mutants on both backgrounds and
therefore differences in PLP processing are unlikely to be the basis of the
phenotypic variation. An unfolded protein response (UPR) is activated in
rumpshaker. Whereas activation of CHOP correlates with phenotypic severity, we
find no difference in the response of BiP and X-box protein1 (Xbp1) between the
two strains.

PMID: 16944321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2006 Sep;11(3):232-40.

Nociceptin and its receptor in rat dorsal root ganglion neurons in neuropathic
and inflammatory pain models: implications on pain processing.

Chen Y(1), Sommer C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Julius-Maximilians-University, Würzburg, Germany.
chen_y@klinik.uni-wuerzburg.de

Nociceptin (NC), by activating its receptor, the opioid receptor-like 1 (ORL1)
receptor, exerts an effect on a number of functions in the nervous system
including locomotion, learning and memory, and processing of pain signals. Data
on the expression of NC and ORL1 receptor in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons
and on its modulation after nerve injury and inflammation are controversial. We
therefore sought to investigate the immunoreactivity (IR) of NC and ORL1 receptor
in DRG neurons in two pain models, a pure neuropathic pain model, namely partial 
sciatic nerve transection (PST), and an inflammatory pain model, complete
Freund's adjuvant (CFA) injection into the hindpaw. In intact DRG neurons, both
NC and ORL1 receptor IR were present in mainly small- and medium-sized neurons,
NC IR in 31% and ORL1 receptor IR in 33% of all neuronal profiles. Both NC and
ORL1 receptor IR were upregulated 7 days after nerve injury (to 56 and 55%) and
inflammation (to 53 and 48%), respectively. Activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3), a neuronal marker of nerve injury, was induced in DRG neurons 7 and 14
days after PST and 7 days after CFA injection. Double labeling with ATF3 revealed
expression of NC and ORL1 receptor in intact as well as in injured primary
afferent neurons. Thus, NC and the ORL1 receptor may be involved in the
modulation of neuropathic and inflammatory pain at the level of the primary
afferent neuron.

PMID: 16930285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Invest Dermatol. 2006 Nov;126(11):2490-506. Epub 2006 Aug 3.

Expression profiling of UVB response in melanocytes identifies a set of
p53-target genes.

Yang G(1), Zhang G, Pittelkow MR, Ramoni M, Tsao H.

Author information: 
(1)Wellman Center for Photomedicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Epidermal melanocytes execute specific physiological programs in response to UV
radiation (UVR) at the cutaneous interface. Many melanocytic responses, including
increased dendrite formation, enhanced melanogenesis/melanization, and cell cycle
arrest impact the ability of melanocytes to survive and to attenuate the UVR
insult. Although some of the molecules that underlie these UVR programs are
known, a coherent view of UVR-induced transcriptional changes is lacking. Using
primary melanocyte cultures, we assessed for UVR-mediated alterations in over
47,000 transcripts using Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 microarrays. From 
the 100 most statistically robust changes in transcript level, there were 84
genes that were suppressed >2.0-fold by UVR; among these transcripts, the
identities of 48 of these genes were known. Similarly, there were 99 genes that
were induced >2.0-fold by UVR; the identity of 57 of these genes were known. We
then subjected these top 100 changes to the Ingenuity Pathway analysis program
and identified a group of p53 targets including the cell cycle regulator CDKN1A
(p21CIP), the WNT pathway regulator DKK1 (dickkopf homolog 1), the receptor
tyrosine kinase EPHA2, growth factor GDF15, ferrodoxin reductase (FDXR),
p53-inducible protein TP53I3, transcription factor ATF3, DNA repair enzyme DDB2, 
and the beta-adrenergic receptor ADBR2. These genes were also found to be
consistently elevated by UVR in six independent melanocyte lines, although there 
were interindividual variations in magnitude. WWOX, whose protein product
interacts and regulates p53 and p73, was found to be consistently suppressed by
UVR. There was also a subgroup of neurite/axonal developmental genes that were
altered in response to UVR, suggesting that melanocytic and neuronal arborization
may share similar mechanisms. When compared to melanomas, the basal levels of
many of these p53-responsive genes were greatly dysregulated. Three
genes--CDKN1A, DDB2 and ADRB2--exhibited a trend towards loss of expression in
melanomas thereby raising the possibility of a linked role in tumorigenesis.
These expression data provide a global view of UVR-induced changes in melanocytes
and, more importantly, generate novel hypotheses regarding melanocyte physiology.

PMID: 16888633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Virology. 2006 Sep 15;353(1):1-5. Epub 2006 Jul 24.

Adenovirus-induced alterations in host cell gene expression prior to the onset of
viral gene expression.

Granberg F(1), Svensson C, Pettersson U, Zhao H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

In this report, we have studied gene expression profiles in human primary lung
fibroblasts (IMR-90) during the very early phase of an adenovirus infection.
Eight out of twelve genes with known functions encoded transcription factors
linked to two major cellular processes; inhibition of cell growth (ATF3, ATF4,
KLF4, KLF6 and ELK3) and immune response (NR4A1 and CEBPB), indicating that the
earliest consequences of an adenovirus infection are growth arrest and induction 
of an immune response. A time course analysis showed that the induction of these 
immediate-early response genes was transient and suppressed after the onset of
the adenovirus early gene expression.

PMID: 16860366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Neurosci Lett. 2006 Sep 11;405(1-2):62-7. Epub 2006 Jul 18.

Sensory neurons and their supporting cells located in the trigeminal, thoracic
and lumbar ganglia differentially express markers of injury following intravenous
administration of paclitaxel in the rat.

Jimenez-Andrade JM(1), Peters CM, Mejia NA, Ghilardi JR, Kuskowski MA, Mantyh PW.

Author information: 
(1)Neurosystems Center, Department of Diagnostic and Biological Sciences,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, United States.

Paclitaxel-induced peripheral neuropathy is a sensory neuropathy that affects
thousands of cancer patients each year as paclitaxel is commonly used to treat
breast, non-small cell lung and ovarian cancer. To begin to define the type and
location of sensory neurons most impacted by paclitaxel, we examined rat
trigeminal ganglion, thoracic and lumbar dorsal root ganglion (DRG) 10 days
following intravenous infusion of clinically relevant doses of paclitaxel. To
define the population of cells injured by paclitaxel, we examined the expression 
of activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3), a marker of cell injury; to define
the hypertrophy of satellite cells, we quantified the expression of the
intermediate filament protein glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP); and to
define the activation of macrophages, we examined the expression of the lysosomal
protein CD68. Intravenous infusion of paclitaxel induced a significant increase
of ATF3 in mainly but not exclusively large and medium sensory neurons in all
sensory ganglia. An increase in both GFAP immunofluorescence in satellite cells
and the number of activated macrophages occurred in lumbar>thoracic>trigeminal
ganglia of paclitaxel-treated rats. This differential expression of cellular
markers suggests that the largest sensory cell bodies with the longest axons are 
the most at risk of being injured by paclitaxel (size and length dependent
pathology). These results provide a pathological basis for the anatomical
distribution of paclitaxel-induced symptoms in patients receiving therapeutic
regimens of paclitaxel.

PMID: 16854522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Med Microbiol. 2006 Aug;55(Pt 8):1009-15.

Gene-expression profiles in gastric epithelial cells stimulated with spiral and
coccoid Helicobacter pylori.

Liu ZF(1), Chen CY, Tang W, Zhang JY, Gong YQ, Jia JH.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Experimental Teratology, Ministry of Education, Shandong
University, 44 WenhuaXi Road, Jinan, China.

Human gastric epithelial immortalized GES-1 cells were infected with spiral and
coccoid Helicobacter pylori. Scanning electron microscopy was used to determine
the ability of the two forms of H. pylori to adhere to GES-1 cells. GES-1 cell
apoptosis induced by coccoid and spiral H. pylori was analysed using flow
cytometry. A cDNA microarray for 22,000 human genes was used to identify the
gene-expression differences in GES-1 cells infected with the two forms of H.
pylori, and the gene expression identified by the cDNA microarray was confirmed
by RT-PCR. Scanning electron microscope observation showed that both coccoid and 
spiral bacteria can adhere to GES-1 cells. After 4 h infection, apoptosis
induction was 27.4% for spiral-form infection and 10.2% for coccoid-form
infection. Of 268 differentially expressed genes identified by cDNA microarray,
166 showed higher expression with the spiral H. pylori infection than with the
coccoid H. pylori infection. To the best of the authors' knowledge, this is the
first report that GES-1 cells infected with spiral H. pylori have higher
expression of cxcl10, ccl11, ccl5, groalpha, TLR5, ATF3, fos, fosl2, gadd45a and 
myc. The cells infected with coccoid H. pylori had higher expression of survivin.
The global profile of gene expression in GES-1 cells infected with coccoid and
spiral H. pylori is described for the first time.

PMID: 16849720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Oncogene. 2007 Jan 11;26(2):284-9. Epub 2006 Jul 17.

Induction of activating transcription factor 3 by anoxia is independent of p53
and the hypoxic HIF signalling pathway.

Ameri K(1), Hammond EM, Culmsee C, Raida M, Katschinski DM, Wenger RH, Wagner E, 
Davis RJ, Hai T, Denko N, Harris AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA. kameri@stanford.edu

Solid tumors often have an inadequate blood supply, which results in large
regions that are subjected to hypoxic or anoxic stress. Hypoxia-inducible
factor-1 (HIF-1) is a transcription factor that regulates much of the
transcriptional response of cells to hypoxia. Activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) is another transcription factor that responds to a variety of stresses and
is often upregulated in cancer. We investigated the regulation of ATF3 by oxygen 
deprivation. ATF3 induction occurred most robustly under anoxia, is common, and
it is not dependent on presence of HIF-1 or p53, but is sensitive to the
inhibition of c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase activation and the antioxidant
N-acetylcystein. ATF3 could also be induced by desferrioxamine but not by the
mitochondrial poison cyanide or the nonspecific 2-oxoglutarate dioxygenase
inhibitor dimethyloxalylglycine. We also show that anoxic ATF3 mRNA is more
stable than normoxic mRNA providing a mechanism for this induction. Thus, this
study demonstrates that the regulation of ATF3 under anoxia is independent of
2-oxoglutarate dioxygenase, HIF-1 and p53, presumably involving multiple
regulatory pathways.

PMID: 16847457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Br J Haematol. 2006 Jul;134(2):145-56.

Gene expression analysis of B-lymphoma cells resistant and sensitive to
bortezomib.

Shringarpure R(1), Catley L, Bhole D, Burger R, Podar K, Tai YT, Kessler B,
Galardy P, Ploegh H, Tassone P, Hideshima T, Mitsiades C, Munshi NC, Chauhan D,
Anderson KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib has shown impressive clinical activity alone 
and in combination with conventional and other novel agents for the treatment of 
multiple myeloma (MM). Although bortezomib is known to be a selective proteasome 
inhibitor, the downstream mechanisms of cytotoxicity and drug resistance are
poorly understood. However, resistance to bortezomib as a single agent develops
in the majority of patients, and activity in other malignancies has been less
impressive. To elucidate mechanisms of bortezomib resistance, we compared
differential gene expression profiles of bortezomib-resistant SUDHL-4 and
bortezomib-sensitive SUDHL-6 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma lines in response to
bortezomib. At concentrations that effectively inhibited proteasome activity,
bortezomib induced apoptosis in SUDHL-6 cells, but not in SUDHL-4 cells. We
showed that overexpression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), ATF4,
ATF5, c-Jun, JunD and caspase-3 is associated with sensitivity to
bortezomib-induced apoptosis, whereas overexpression of heat shock protein
(HSP)27, HSP70, HSP90 and T-cell factor 4 is associated with bortezomib
resistance.

PMID: 16846475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Pancreas. 2006 Jul;33(1):68-76.

Long-term ethanol consumption alters pancreatic gene expression in rats: a
possible connection to pancreatic injury.

Kubisch CH(1), Gukovsky I, Lugea A, Pandol SJ, Kuick R, Misek DE, Hanash SM,
Logsdon CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, 
Houston, TX 77230-1429, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Long-term ethanol consumption does not cause acute pancreatitis but
rather sensitizes the pancreas to subsequent insults. The mechanisms responsible 
for this sensitization are unknown. To determine whether alterations in
pancreatic gene expression might participate in ethanol-mediated sensitization,
we performed gene-profiling analysis.
METHODS: Animals were fed ethanol-containing Lieber-DeCarli or control diet
(pair-fed). After 8 weeks, pancreatic RNA expression was analyzed using
Affimetrix GeneChips. Changes in specific genes were verified using quantitative 
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Long-term ethanol feeding caused a significant alteration of pancreatic 
gene expression. Selection criteria of changes more than 3-fold and P < 0.05
yielded 114 probe sets. Activating transcription factor 3, heat shock protein 70,
heat shock protein 27, and mesotrypsinogen were increased, whereas pancreatitis
associate protein, folate carrier, and metallothionein were decreased.
CONCLUSIONS: Ethanol had a profound effect on pancreatic gene expression. The
genes identified as elevated and reduced in this study may contribute to
pancreatic sensitivity to stress. This study indicates for the first time the
identities of multiple genes whose expression levels are dramatically influenced 
by long-term ethanol feeding. The identified genes may help explain the
relationship between long-term ethanol abuse and pancreatic disease and lead to
possible preventative or therapeutic approaches to ethanol-induced pancreatic
disease.

PMID: 16804415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Physiol Genomics. 2006 Oct 3;27(1):54-64. Epub 2006 Jun 20.

Differential expression profiling of the blind subterranean mole rat Spalax
ehrenbergi superspecies: bioprospecting for hypoxia tolerance.

Avivi A(1), Brodsky L, Nevo E, Band MR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Evolution, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.

The blind subterranean mole rat of the Spalax ehrenbergi superspecies, living
underground and exposed to fluctuating oxygen and carbon dioxide levels, is an
excellent model of hypoxic tolerance. Unique structural and functional
adaptations of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems allow these underground
mammals to survive at severely reduced oxygen tension. Elucidation of the natural
variation and evolutionary changes under hypoxia within this superspecies may
have biomedical applications in ischemic syndromes and cancer. In this study, we 
have compared expression profiles of muscle tissue at normoxic (21%) and hypoxic 
(3%) levels of oxygen concentration between two allospecies of the S. ehrenbergi 
superspecies exhibiting differential hypoxia tolerance in accordance with their
ecological regimes. Profiling was performed by cross-species hybridization using 
a mouse cDNA array containing 15,000 gene elements. Results uncover
species-specific responses to hypoxic stress among numerous genes involved in
angiogenesis, apoptosis, and oxidative stress management. Among the most striking
results are differential expressions of cardiac ankyrin repeat protein (Carp),
activating transcription factor 3 (Atf3), LIM and cysteine-rich domains 1
(Lmcd1), cysteine and glycine-rich protein 2 (Csrp2), and ras homolog gene
family, member B (RhoB). These findings support the hypothesis that allospecies
of the S. ehrenbergi superspecies are variably adapted to fluctuating oxygen
tension. Differences may involve specific metabolic pathways and functional
adaptations at the structural and molecular levels.

PMID: 16788006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Neuroscience. 2006 Sep 15;141(4):1961-9. Epub 2006 Jun 19.

Nerve injury induces the expression of EXT2, a glycosyltransferase required for
heparan sulfate synthesis.

Murakami K(1), Namikawa K, Shimizu T, Shirasawa T, Yoshida S, Kiyama H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Osaka City University Graduate School 
of Medicine, 1-4-3 Asahimachi, Abenoku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

Heparan sulfate proteoglycans, which bear long chains of heparan sulfate
glycosaminoglycan, play significant roles during embryogenesis, including the
formation of the CNS. However, their involvement in nerve regeneration has not
yet been clarified. Here, we found that the mRNA expression of EXT2, one of the
crucial enzymes for heparan sulfate-glycosaminoglycan synthesis, was markedly
up-regulated in injured hypoglossal motor neurons after axotomy. In addition,
immunohistochemical staining with an antibody specific for heparan
sulfate-glycosaminoglycan chains demonstrated increased expression of heparan
sulfate-glycosaminoglycan chains in the injured nucleus. Furthermore, the mRNA
expressions of glypican-1 and syndecan-1, which are both well-known heparan
sulfate proteoglycans, were prominently up-regulated in injured motor neurons.
These results suggest that the biosynthesis of heparan sulfate chains promoted by
EXT2 is activated in injured motor neurons, and that glypican-1 and syndecan-1
are potent candidates for heparan sulfate proteoglycans involved in peripheral
nerve regeneration.

PMID: 16784821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2006 Jun 1;31(13):1433-8.

Exposure of the nucleus pulposus to the outside of the anulus fibrosus induces
nerve injury and regeneration of the afferent fibers innervating the lumbar
intervertebral discs in rats.

Inoue G(1), Ohtori S, Aoki Y, Ozawa T, Doya H, Saito T, Ito T, Akazawa T, Moriya 
H, Takahashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan. gen@rg7.so-net.ne.jp

STUDY DESIGN: Using a retrograde tracing method and immunohistochemistry, we
assessed the expression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a marker of 
nerve injury, and growth-associated protein 43 (GAP-43), a marker of axonal
growth, in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons innervating the lumbar
intervertebral discs in rats.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate ATF3 and GAP-43 expression in DRGs innervating the
intervertebral discs after exposure of the nucleus pulposus to the outside of the
anulus fibrosus.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Degeneration of lumbar intervertebral discs is
considered as a cause of low back pain. We speculated that exposure of the
nucleus pulposus to the outside of the anulus fibrosus may induce nerve injury
and ingrowth into the disc.
METHODS: A neurotracer, Fluoro-Gold (F-G), was applied to the ventral aspect of
L5-L6 intervertebral discs in 20 rats. The rats were classified into 2 groups: an
NP group whose disc was punctured to expose the nucleus pulposus (n = 10) and a
sham-operated group whose anulus fibrosus surface was scratched superficially (n 
= 10). Ten days after surgery, bilateral L1-L5 DRGs were processed for staining
of ATF3 and GAP-43.
RESULTS: In the NP group, 13.9% +/- 2.9% of the F-G-labeled neurons innervating
the discs were positive for ATF3, while 19.3% +/- 2.7% were positive for GAP-43. 
In contrast, in the sham-operated group, only 0.8% +/- 0.4% of the F-G-labeled
neurons were positive for ATF3 while 7.4% +/- 1.7% were positive for GAP-43. The 
percentage of both ATF3-immunoreactive (IR) and GAP-43-IR neurons in the NP group
was significantly higher than in the sham-operated group (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: ATF3-IR and GAP-43-IR neurons were significantly increased in the NP
group. These results suggested that exposure of the nucleus pulposus to the
outside of the anulus fibrosus induced nerve injury and in growth into the discs.
These findings may explain discogenic lower back pain in patients with lumbar
disc degeneration.

PMID: 16741451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Diabetologia. 2006 Aug;49(8):1924-36. Epub 2006 May 31.

Mitochondrial dysfunction induces aberrant insulin signalling and glucose
utilisation in murine C2C12 myotube cells.

Lim JH(1), Lee JI, Suh YH, Kim W, Song JH, Jung MH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolic Disease, Department of Biomedical Science, National
Institute of Health, 5 Nokbun-dong, Eunpyung-gu, Seoul 122-701, South Korea.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mitochondrial dysfunction is considered a critical component in 
the development of diabetes. The aim of this study was to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms involved in the development of insulin resistance and diabetes through
investigation of mitochondrial retrograde signalling.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mitochondrial function of C2C12 myotube cells was impaired
by genetic (ethidium bromide) and metabolic (oligomycin) stress, and changes in
target molecules related to insulin signalling were analysed.
RESULTS: Concomitant with reductions in mitochondrial membrane potential
(DeltaPsim) and ATP synthesis, production of IRS1 and solute carrier family 2
(facilitated glucose transporter), member 4 (SLC2A4, formerly known as GLUT4)
were reduced. Moreover, serine phosphorylation of IRS1 increased, resulting in
decreased tyrosine phosphorylation. This indicates that mitochondrial dysfunction
decreases insulin-stimulated SLC2A4 translocation and glucose uptake.
Mitochondrial stress activated c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) signalling in a Ca(2+)-dependent
manner, and removal of free Ca(2+) by BAPTA-AM, as well as inhibition of JNK and 
p38 MAPK, abrogated mitochondrial stress-induced reductions in IRS1 and SLC2A4
production. Mitochondrial dysfunction after oligomycin treatment significantly
increased levels of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), which represses
Irs1 promoter activity. Removal of the 5' flanking region of Irs1 demonstrated
that the promoter region within 191 bases from the transcription site may be
involved in the transcriptional repression of Irs1 by mitochondrial stress.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We show distinct mitochondrial retrograde signalling,
where Irs1 is downregulated through ATF3 in a Ca(2+)-, JNK- and p38
MAPK-dependent manner, and IRS1 is inactivated. Therefore, mitochondrial
dysfunction causes aberrant insulin signalling and abnormal utilisation of
glucose, as observed in many insulin resistance states.

PMID: 16736133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Auton Neurosci. 2006 Jul 30;128(1-2):96-100. Epub 2006 May 23.

Extracorporeal shockwaves induce the expression of ATF3 and GAP-43 in rat dorsal 
root ganglion neurons.

Murata R(1), Ohtori S, Ochiai N, Takahashi N, Saisu T, Moriya H, Takahashi K,
Wada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, and Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, Chiba Children's Hospital,
Japan. drryokun@yahoo.co.jp

Although extracorporeal shockwave has been applied in the treatment of various
diseases, the biological basis for its analgesic effect remains unclear.
Therefore, we investigated the dorsal root ganglion neurons of rats following
shockwave exposure to the footpad to elucidate its effect on the peripheral
nervous system. We used activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and
growth-associated phosphoprotein (GAP-43) as markers for nerve injury and axonal 
regeneration, respectively. The average number of neurons immunoreactive for ATF3
increased significantly in the treated rats at all experimental time points, with
78.3% of those neurons also exhibiting immunoreactivity for GAP-43. Shockwave
exposure induced injury of the sensory nerve fibers within the exposed area. This
phenomenon may be linked to the desensitization of the exposure area, not the
cause of pain, considering clinical research with a particular absence of painful
adverse effect. Subsequent active axonal regeneration may account for the
reinnervation of exposed area and the amelioration of the desensitization.

PMID: 16716760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2006 May-Jun;32(1-2):143-54. Epub 2006 May 19.

The transcription factor ATF-3 promotes neurite outgrowth.

Seijffers R(1), Allchorne AJ, Woolf CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neural Plasticity Research Group, Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care, 
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129,
USA.

Dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons regenerate after a peripheral nerve injury but
not after injury to their axons in the spinal cord. A key question is which
transcription factors drive the changes in gene expression that increase the
intrinsic growth state of peripherally injured sensory neurons? A prime candidate
is activating transcription factor-3 (ATF-3), a transcription factor that we find
is induced in all DRG neurons after peripheral, but not central axonal injury.
Moreover, we show in adult DRG neurons that a preconditioning peripheral, but not
central axonal injury, increases their growth, correlating closely with the
pattern of ATF-3 induction. Using viral vectors, we delivered ATF-3 to cultured
adult DRG neurons and find that ATF-3 enhances neurite outgrowth. Furthermore,
ATF-3 promotes long sparsely branched neurites. ATF-3 overexpression did not
increase c-Jun expression. ATF-3 may contribute, therefore, to neurite outgrowth 
by orchestrating the gene expression responses in injured neurons.

PMID: 16713293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Mol Cancer. 2006 May 18;5:20.

Cellular response to 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in 5-FU-resistant colon cancer cell
lines during treatment and recovery.

De Angelis PM(1), Svendsrud DH, Kravik KL, Stokke T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Section for Molecular Chemoresistance,
Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet HF, Oslo, Norway. p.d.angelis@medisin.uio.no

BACKGROUND: Treatment of cells with the anti-cancer drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)
causes DNA damage, which in turn affects cell proliferation and survival. Two
stable wild-type TP53 5-FU-resistant cell lines, ContinB and ContinD, generated
from the HCT116 colon cancer cell line, demonstrate moderate and strong
resistance to 5-FU, respectively, markedly-reduced levels of 5-FU-induced
apoptosis, and alterations in expression levels of a number of key cell cycle-
and apoptosis-regulatory genes as a result of resistance development. The aim of 
the present study was to determine potential differential responses to 8 and
24-hour 5-FU treatment in these resistant cell lines. We assessed levels of 5-FU 
uptake into DNA, cell cycle effects and apoptosis induction throughout treatment 
and recovery periods for each cell line, and alterations in expression levels of 
DNA damage response-, cell cycle- and apoptosis-regulatory genes in response to
short-term drug exposure.
RESULTS: 5-FU treatment for 24 hours resulted in S phase arrests, p53
accumulation, up-regulation of p53-target genes on DNA damage response (ATF3,
GADD34, GADD45A, PCNA), cell cycle-regulatory (CDKN1A), and apoptosis-regulatory 
pathways (FAS), and apoptosis induction in the parental and resistant cell lines.
Levels of 5-FU incorporation into DNA were similar for the cell lines. The
pattern of cell cycle progression during recovery demonstrated consistently that 
the 5-FU-resistant cell lines had the smallest S phase fractions and the largest 
G2(/M) fractions. The strongly 5-FU-resistant ContinD cell line had the smallest 
S phase arrests, the lowest CDKN1A levels, and the lowest levels of 5-FU-induced 
apoptosis throughout the treatment and recovery periods, and the fastest recovery
of exponential growth (10 days) compared to the other two cell lines. The
moderately 5-FU-resistant ContinB cell line had comparatively lower apoptotic
levels than the parental cells during treatment and recovery periods and a
recovery time of 22 days. Mitotic activity ceased in response to drug treatment
for all cell lines, consistent with down-regulation of mitosis-regulatory genes. 
Differential expression in response to 5-FU treatment was demonstrated for genes 
involved in regulation of nucleotide binding/metabolism (ATAD2, GNL2, GNL3,
MATR3), amino acid metabolism (AHCY, GSS, IVD, OAT), cytoskeleton organization
(KRT7, KRT8, KRT19, MAST1), transport (MTCH1, NCBP1, SNAPAP, VPS52), and oxygen
metabolism (COX5A, COX7C).
CONCLUSION: Our gene expression data suggest that altered regulation of
nucleotide metabolism, amino acid metabolism, cytoskeleton organization,
transport, and oxygen metabolism may underlie the differential resistance to 5-FU
seen in these cell lines. The contributory roles to 5-FU resistance of some of
the affected genes on these pathways will be assessed in future studies.

PMCID: PMC1524802
PMID: 16709241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Cell Death Differ. 2006 Dec;13(12):2157-9. Epub 2006 May 12.

The protease inhibitor Ucf-101 induces cellular responses independently of its
known target, HtrA2/Omi.

Klupsch K, Downward J.

PMID: 16691211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Nature. 2006 May 11;441(7090):173-8.

Systems biology approaches identify ATF3 as a negative regulator of Toll-like
receptor 4.

Gilchrist M(1), Thorsson V, Li B, Rust AG, Korb M, Roach JC, Kennedy K, Hai T,
Bolouri H, Aderem A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, Washington 98103, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2008 Feb 21;451(7181):1022. Roach, Jared C [added].

The innate immune system is absolutely required for host defence, but,
uncontrolled, it leads to inflammatory disease. This control is mediated, in
part, by cytokines that are secreted by macrophages. Immune regulation is
extraordinarily complex, and can be best investigated with systems approaches
(that is, using computational tools to predict regulatory networks arising from
global, high-throughput data sets). Here we use cluster analysis of a
comprehensive set of transcriptomic data derived from Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-activated macrophages to identify a prominent group of genes that appear to
be regulated by activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a member of the
CREB/ATF family of transcription factors. Network analysis predicted that ATF3 is
part of a transcriptional complex that also contains members of the nuclear
factor (NF)-kappaB family of transcription factors. Promoter analysis of the
putative ATF3-regulated gene cluster demonstrated an over-representation of
closely apposed ATF3 and NF-kappaB binding sites, which was verified by chromatin
immunoprecipitation and hybridization to a DNA microarray. This cluster included 
important cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-12b. ATF3 and Rel (a
component of NF-kappaB) were shown to bind to the regulatory regions of these
genes upon macrophage activation. A kinetic model of Il6 and Il12b messenger RNA 
expression as a function of ATF3 and NF-kappaB promoter binding predicted that
ATF3 is a negative regulator of Il6 and Il12b transcription, and this hypothesis 
was validated using Atf3-null mice. ATF3 seems to inhibit Il6 and Il12b
transcription by altering chromatin structure, thereby restricting access to
transcription factors. Because ATF3 is itself induced by lipopolysaccharide, it
seems to regulate TLR-stimulated inflammatory responses as part of a
negative-feedback loop.

PMID: 16688168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Diabetes. 2006 May;55(5):1342-52.

NFATc4 and ATF3 negatively regulate adiponectin gene expression in 3T3-L1
adipocytes.

Kim HB(1), Kong M, Kim TM, Suh YH, Kim WH, Lim JH, Song JH, Jung MH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolic Diseases, Center for Biomedical Science, National
Institute of Health, 5 Nokbun-dong, Eunpyung-gu, Seoul 122-701, Korea.

Expression of adiponectin decreases with obesity and insulin resistance. At
present, the mechanisms responsible for negatively regulating adiponectin
expression in adipocytes are poorly understood. In this investigation, we
analyzed the effects of 5' serial deletion constructs on the murine adiponectin
promoter. Here, we identified the repressor region located between -472 and -313 
bp of the promoter. Removal of the putative nuclear factor of activated T-cells
(NFATs) binding site increased the promoter activity, and overexpression of
NFATc4 reduced the promoter activity. Treatment with the calcium ionophore
A23187, an activator of NFAT, reduced mRNA as well as promoter activity. The
binding of NFATc4 to the promoter was associated with increased recruitment of
histone deacetylase 1 and reduced acetylation of histone H3 at the promoter site.
In addition, binding of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) to the putative 
activator protein-1 site located adjacent to the NFAT binding site also repressed
the promoter activity. Treatment with thapsigargin, an inducer of ATF3, reduced
both mRNA and promoter activity. Importantly, the binding activities of NFATc4
and ATF3, increased significantly in white adipose tissues of ob/ob and db/db
mice compared with controls. Taken together, this study demonstrates for the
first time that NFATc4 and ATF3 function as negative regulators of adiponectin
gene expression, which may play critical roles in downregulating adiponectin
expression in obesity and type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 16644691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Cardiovasc Res. 2006 Jun 1;70(3):543-54. Epub 2006 Mar 6.

Inhibition of basic leucine zipper transcription is a major mediator of atrial
dilatation.

Kehat I(1), Heinrich R, Ben-Izhak O, Miyazaki H, Gutkind JS, Aronheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine C and Cardiology, Rambam Medical Center,
Haifa, Israel.

OBJECTIVE: Atrial fibrillation is the most prevalent clinically significant
cardiac arrhythmia. Atrial dilatation, a predictor of atrial fibrillation, is
thought to result from increased ventricular pressure. However, the underlying
molecular mechanisms responsible for atrial dilatation are largely unknown. Here 
we sought to examine whether the expression of a basic leucine zipper inhibitor
protein, JDP2, in the heart is sufficient for the generation of atrial
dilatation.
METHODS: A tetracycline-regulated transgene was used to express JDP2 specifically
in the mouse heart. Mice hearts were dissected and subjected to Northern and
Western analysis, or analyzed by ECG recording and echocardiography. Regulation
of gene expression was studied using electromobility shift assays and luciferase 
gene reporter analysis.
RESULTS: Expression of JDP2 resulted in massive bi-atrial dilatation, defects in 
conduction, and a lethal phenotype. These effects were developmentally
independent, acquired during adulthood, and were reversible upon abolishing of
JDP2 expression. Connexin 40 and myosin light chain 2a expression were identified
as potential target genes.
CONCLUSION: Expression of basic leucine zipper transcription inhibitors is
sufficient to results in atrial dilatation. This dilatation is acquired
postnatally and is reversible. Thus, basic leucine zipper transcription
inhibitors may be a relevant therapeutic target for preventing atrial dilatation 
and atrial fibrillation.

PMID: 16631626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Cell Cycle. 2006 May;5(9):926-9. Epub 2006 May 1.

ATF3 regulates the stability of p53: a link to cancer.

Yan C(1), Boyd DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

ATF3 is a member of the ATF/CREB family of transcription factors involved in the 
cellular response to a large variety of stresses including DNA damage. However,
neither the signaling leading to nor the biological significance of its induction
upon stress is well understood. Although it is generally believed that ATF3
exerts its function in the stress response by regulating transcription, to date, 
only a limited number of target genes have been identified. We recently reported 
that ATF3 interacts with the tumor suppressor p53 to increase its stability in
the genotoxic response. While providing the cell a general means of responding to
diverse adverse environment cues, this mechanism confers ATF3 with an ability to 
promote tumor suppressor functions. Conversely, dysfunction of ATF3 impairs the
p53-mediated cellular response to DNA damage, allowing cells to be readily
transformed by oncogenes. Consistent with this notion is the observation of
downregulated ATF3 expression in most human cancers. Therefore, our findings
indicate that ATF3 intersects with p53-associated pathways ensuring genomic
integrity. The ability of ATF3 to stabilize p53-induced pathways thus represents 
a means of effectively countering DNA damage caused by environmental insult the
latter leading to oncogene activation and ultimately malignant transformation.

PMID: 16628010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Int J Cancer. 2006 Sep 15;119(6):1276-84.

Microarray analyses in bladder cancer cells: inhibition of hTERT expression
down-regulates EGFR.

Kraemer K(1), Schmidt U, Fuessel S, Herr A, Wirth MP, Meye A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany.

The human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) contributes to the immortal
phenotype of the majority of cancers. Targeting hTERT by transfection with
antisense oligonucleotides (AS-ODNs) induced immediate growth inhibition in human
bladder cancer (BCa) cells. The molecular basis of the antiproliferative capacity
of hTERT AS-ODNs was investigated by oligonucleotide microarray analyses and was 
compared to effects caused by siRNA-mediated knock-down of hTERT in EJ28 BCa
cells. Two different AS-ODNs -- both down-regulated the expression of hTERT --
changed the expression of different genes mainly involved in stress response
(including EGR1, ATF3 and GDF15), but without an association to telomerase
function. This indicates that the immediate growth inhibition was caused, at
least in part, by off-target effects. In comparison to that the blockade of the
expression of hTERT using 2 different siRNAs was accompanied by the
down-regulation of the oncogenes FOS-like antigen 1 (FOSL1) and epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR), known to be overexpressed in BCa. We show here for the
first time that repression of the hTERT transcript number decreased the
expression of EGFR both at the mRNA and protein levels, suggesting a potential
new function of hTERT in the regulation of EGFR-stimulated proliferation.
Furthermore, the suppression of hTERT by siRNAs caused an enhancement of the
antiproliferative capacity of the chemotherapeutics mitomycin C and cisplatin.
The results presented herein may support the hypothesis that hTERT promotes the
growth of tumor cells by mechanisms independent from telomere lengthening. The
detailed clarification of these processes will shed light on the question,
whether telomerase inhibitors might constitute suitable anticancer tools.

PMID: 16615118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Physiol. 2006 Jun 15;573(Pt 3):775-86. Epub 2006 Apr 13.

Activation of the mTOR signalling pathway is required for pancreatic growth in
protease-inhibitor-fed mice.

Crozier SJ(1), Sans MD, Guo L, D'Alecy LG, Williams JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, The University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. scrozier@umich.edu

Cholecystokinin (CCK)-induced pancreatic growth in mice involves parallel
increases in DNA and protein. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signalling
pathway regulates mRNA translation and its activation is implicated in growth of 
various tissues. The aim of this study was to elucidate whether mTOR activation
is required for pancreatic growth in a mouse model of increased endogenous CCK
release. In mice fed chow containing the synthetic protease inhibitor camostat,
protein synthetic rates and phosphorylation of two downstream targets of mTOR,
eukaryotic initiation factor 4E binding protein 1 (4E-BP1) and the ribosomal
protein S6 (S6), increased in comparison with fasted controls. The
camostat-induced increases in protein synthesis and 4E-BP1 and S6 phosphorylation
were almost totally abolished by administration of the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin 1
h prior to camostat feeding. In contrast, the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and JNK
and the expression of the early response genes c-jun, c-fos, ATF3 and egr-1
induced by camostat feeding were not affected by rapamycin. In mice fed camostat 
for 7 days, the ratio of pancreatic to body weight increased by 143%, but when
rapamycin was administered daily this was reduced to a 22% increase. Changes in
pancreatic mass were paralleled by protein and DNA content following camostat
feeding and rapamycin administration. Moreover, while BrdU incorporation, an
indicator of DNA synthesis, was increased to 448% of control values after 2 days 
of camostat feeding, rapamycin administration completely inhibited this increase.
We conclude that the mTOR signalling pathway is required for CCK-induced cell
division and pancreatic growth.

PMCID: PMC1779746
PMID: 16613881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 7;281(27):18734-45. Epub 2006 Apr 13.

Human gene profiling in response to the active protein kinase, interferon-induced
serine/threonine protein kinase (PKR), in infected cells. Involvement of the
transcription factor ATF-3 IN PKR-induced apoptosis.

Guerra S(1), López-Fernández LA, García MA, Zaballos A, Esteban M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Ciudad
Universitaria de Cantoblanco, E-28049 Madrid, Spain.

The interferon-induced serine/threonine protein kinase (PKR) has an essential
role in cell survival and cell death after viral infection and under stress
conditions, but the host genes involved in these processes are not well defined. 
We used human cDNA microarrays to identify, in infected cells, genes
differentially expressed after PKR expression and analyzed the requirement of
catalytic activity of the enzyme. To express PKR, we used vaccinia virus (VV)
recombinants producing wild type PKR (VV-PKR) and the catalytically inactive
mutant K296R (VV-PKR-K296R). Most regulated genes were classified according to
biological function, including apoptosis, stress, defense, and immune response.
Transcriptional changes detected by microarray analysis were confirmed for
selected genes by quantitative real time reverse transcription PCR. A total of
111 genes were regulated specifically by PKR catalytic activity. Of these, 97
were up-regulated, and 14 were down-regulated. The ATF-3 transcription factor,
involved in stress-induced beta-cell apoptosis, was up-regulated. Activation of
endogenous PKR with a VV mutant lacking the viral protein E3L (VVDeltaE3L), a PKR
inhibitor, triggered an increase in ATF-3 expression that was not observed in
PKR(-/-) cells. Using null cells for ATF-3 and for the p65 subunit of NF-kappaB, 
we showed that induction of apoptosis by PKR at late times of infection was
dependent on ATF-3 expression and regulated by NF-kappaB activation. Here, we
identified human genes selectively induced by expression of active PKR in
infected cells and linked ATF-3 to a novel mechanism used by PKR to induce
apoptosis.

PMID: 16613840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Horm Res. 2006;65(5):217-22. Epub 2006 Mar 28.

Activating transcription factor 3 is estrogen-responsive in utero and upregulated
during sexual differentiation.

Liu B(1), Agras K, Willingham E, Vilela ML, Baskin LS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Study and Treatment of Hypospadias, Department of Urology,
University of California, San Francisco, Calif. 94143, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Synthetic estrogens induce hypospadias, an anomaly of genital
tubercle/urethral development. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), which is
estrogen-responsive in vitro, is upregulated in hypospadiac human tissue. We used
a mouse model of steroid-dependent genital tubercle development to elucidate the 
ontogeny of ATF3 expression and the developmental response of ATF3 in vivo to
estrogen exposure.
METHODS: We used quantitative RT-PCR to assess ontogenic expression of ATF3 and
its response to estrogen treatment in utero. Immunohistochemistry was used to
localize the protein.
RESULTS: Quantitative RT-PCR showed that ATF3 mRNA is upregulated in all
estrogen-exposed fetal genital tubercles compared to controls (p = 0.024),
including specifically in males exposed in utero (p = 0.049). Additionally, its
expression increases significantly during the period of sexual differentiation in
both sexes and significantly correlates with female development (p = 0.004), a
phenomenon that appears to be attributable to higher levels at birth in females. 
The protein localizes in the nucleus, as expected.
CONCLUSIONS: ATF3 is estrogen-responsive in vivo. The response of ATF3 to
estrogenic stimulation in utero at an earlier stage may contribute to urethral
abnormalities observed in estrogen-exposed male fetuses, although it is likely
not the only gene involved, which supports the general understanding that
hypospadias is subject to multifactorial influences. ATF3 may therefore be an
appropriate gene for further investigations in an endocrine context.

PMID: 16569931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Pain. 2006 Jun;122(3):245-57. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

Studies of peripheral sensory nerves in paclitaxel-induced painful peripheral
neuropathy: evidence for mitochondrial dysfunction.

Flatters SJ(1), Bennett GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Anaesthesia Research Unit, McGill University, Montreal, Que., Canada.
sflatters@zeus.bwh.harvard.edu

Paclitaxel chemotherapy frequently induces neuropathic pain during and often
persisting after therapy. The mechanisms responsible for this pain are unknown.
Using a rat model of paclitaxel-induced painful peripheral neuropathy, we have
performed studies to search for peripheral nerve pathology. Paclitaxel-induced
mechano-allodynia and mechano-hyperalgesia were evident after a short delay,
peaked at day 27 and finally resolved on day 155. Paclitaxel- and vehicle-treated
rats were perfused on days 7, 27 and 160. Portions of saphenous nerves were
processed for electron microscopy. There was no evidence of paclitaxel-induced
degeneration or regeneration as myelin structure was normal and the
number/density of myelinated axons and C-fibres was unaltered by paclitaxel
treatment at any time point. In addition, the prevalence of ATF3-positive dorsal 
root ganglia cells was normal in paclitaxel-treated animals. With one exception, 
at day 160 in myelinated axons, total microtubule densities were also unaffected 
by paclitaxel both in C-fibres and myelinated axons. C-fibres were significantly 
swollen following paclitaxel at days 7 and 27 compared to vehicle. The most
striking finding was significant increases in the prevalence of atypical (swollen
and vacuolated) mitochondria in both C-fibres (1.6- to 2.3-fold) and myelinated
axons (2.4- to 2.6-fold) of paclitaxel-treated nerves at days 7 and 27.
Comparable to the pain behaviour, these mitochondrial changes had resolved by day
160. Our data do not support a causal role for axonal degeneration or dysfunction
of axonal microtubules in paclitaxel-induced pain. Instead, our data suggest that
a paclitaxel-induced abnormality in axonal mitochondria of sensory nerves
contributes to paclitaxel-induced pain.

PMCID: PMC1805481
PMID: 16530964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Neurochem. 2006 May;97(3):772-83. Epub 2006 Mar 8.

Spatial and temporal relationship between monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
expression and spinal glial activation following peripheral nerve injury.

Zhang J(1), De Koninck Y.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Neurobiologie cellulaire, Centre de Recherche Université Laval
Robert-Giffard, Québec, Québec, Canada. Ji.Zhang@crulrg.ulaval.ca

Peripheral nerve injury can induce spinal microglial/astrocyte activation.
Substances released by activated glial cells excite spinal nociceptive neurons.
Pharmacological disruption of glial activation or antagonism of substances
released by activated glia prevent or reverse pain hypersensitivity. It is not
known, however, what causes spinal cord glia to shift from a resting to an
activated state. In an attempt to understand the potential role of monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) in triggering spinal glial activation and its
contribution to the development of neuropathic pain, we investigated the effect
of peripheral nerve injury on MCP-1 expression in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and
the spinal cord, and established its temporal relationship with activation of
spinal microglia and astrocytes. We observed that MCP-1 was induced by chronic
constriction of the sciatic nerve in DRG sensory neurons, spinal cord motor
neurons and in the superficial dorsal horn, ipsilateral to the injury. Neuronal
MCP-1 induction was followed by surrounding microglial activation. After peaking 
at day 7 after injury, MCP-1 levels began to decline rapidly and had returned to 
baseline by day 150. In contrast, microglial activation peaked by day 14 and
declined afterwards to reach a lower, yet significantly raised level beyond day
22 and remained increased until the end of the test period. Astrocyte activation 
became detectable later, progressed more slowly and also remained increased until
the end of the test period, in parallel with a decreased nociceptive threshold.
Our results suggest that neuronal MCP-1 may serve as a trigger for spinal
microglial activation, which participates in the initiation of neuropathic pain. 
Delayed, sustained astrocyte activation may participate with microglia in the
persistent phase of pain hypersensitivity.

PMID: 16524371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Urol. 2006 Apr;175(4):1517-22.

The expression of transcription factor activating transcription factor 3 in the
human prostate and its regulation by androgen in prostate cancer.

Pelzer AE(1), Bektic J, Haag P, Berger AP, Pycha A, Schäfer G, Rogatsch H,
Horninger W, Bartsch G, Klocker H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.
alexandre.pelzer@uibk.ac.at

PURPOSE: ATF3 is a member of the basic leucine zipper/cyclic adenosine
monophosphate responsive element binding protein family of transcription factors.
There is overwhelming evidence that it is a stress inducible factor acting in a
signal-type and cell-type dependent manner, and it is involved in cell
proliferation and survival. We found that ATF3 was differently expressed in an in
vitro prostate cancer tumor progression model and we investigated the possible
role of ATF3 in prostate cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: ATF3 up-regulation in vivo/in vitro and androgen
regulation were assessed by immunohistochemistry and immunoblot analysis. Results
after forced ATF3 transfection were evaluated by proliferation assay and cell
cycle analysis.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry and immunoblot analysis revealed ATF3 up-regulation
in prostate cancer in vitro and in vivo, and stimulation of expression by
androgens. Antiandrogen treatment decreased ATF3 expression in androgen sensitive
cells but acted as a stimulator in long-term androgen ablated cells representing 
a model for therapy refractory disease. Expression in tumors increased with
higher Gleason scores and highest expression was observed in samples of therapy
refractory tumor tissue. Forced ATF3 over expression in a prostate cancer cell
line induced cell proliferation and accelerated cell cycle progression from G1 to
S-phase.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide new insight into the role of ATF3 in prostate
cancer development and/or progression. They indicate that ATF3 is an androgen
regulated gene that is highly expressed in prostate tumors and stimulating cell
proliferation. It represents a possible target for prostate cancer therapy.

PMID: 16516039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Physiol Genomics. 2006 May 16;25(3):375-86. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

Ischemic and nephrotoxic acute renal failure are distinguished by their broad
transcriptomic responses.

Yuen PS(1), Jo SK, Holly MK, Hu X, Star RA.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Diagnostics and Therapeutics Unit, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892-1268, USA. py@nih.gov

Acute renal failure (ARF) has a high morbidity and mortality. In animal ARF
models, effective treatments must be administered before or shortly after the
insult, limiting their clinical potential. We used microarrays to identify early 
biomarkers that distinguish ischemic from nephrotoxic ARF or biomarkers that
detect both injury types. We compared rat kidney transcriptomes at 2 and 8 h
after ischemia/reperfusion and after mercuric chloride. Quality control and
statistical analyses were necessary to normalize microarrays from different lots,
eliminate outliers, and exclude unaltered genes. Principal component analysis
revealed distinct ischemic and nephrotoxic trajectories and clear array
groupings. Therefore, we used supervised analysis, t-tests, and fold changes to
compile gene lists for each group, exclusive or nonexclusive, alone or in
combination. There was little network connectivity, even in the largest group.
Some microarray-identified genes were validated by TaqMan assay, ruling out
artifacts. Western blotting confirmed that heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and activating
transcription factor-3 (ATF3) proteins were upregulated; however, unexpectedly,
their localization changed within the kidney. HO-1 staining shifted from cortical
(early) to outer stripe of the outer medulla (late), primarily in detaching
cells, after mercuric chloride but not ischemia/reperfusion. ATF3 staining was
similar, but with additional early transient expression in the outer stripe after
ischemia/reperfusion. We conclude that microarray-identified genes must be
evaluated not only for protein levels but also for anatomical distribution among 
different zones, nephron segments, or cell types. Although protein detection
reagents are limited, microarray data lay a rich foundation to explore
biomarkers, therapeutics, and the pathophysiology of ARF.

PMCID: PMC1502395
PMID: 16507785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Ther. 2006 Jun;13(6):1101-9. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

Reversal of neurochemical changes and pain-related behavior in a model of
neuropathic pain using modified lentiviral vectors expressing GDNF.

Pezet S(1), Krzyzanowska A, Wong LF, Grist J, Mazarakis ND, Georgievska B,
McMahon SB.

Author information: 
(1)The London Pain Consortium, Neurorestoration, The Wolfson Centre for
Age-Related Diseases, King's College London, London SE1 1UL, UK.
sophie.pezet@kcl.ac.uk

In this study, we evaluated the possible use of lentiviral vectors in the
treatment of neuropathic pain. We chose to administer GDNF-expressing vectors
because of the known beneficial effect of this trophic factor in alleviation of
neuropathic pain in adult rodents. Lentiviral vectors expressing either GDNF or
control, green fluorescent protein or beta-galactosidase, were injected
unilaterally into the spinal dorsal horn 5 weeks before a spinal nerve ligation
was induced (or sham surgery for the controls). We observed that intraspinally
administered lentiviral vectors resulted in a large and sustained expression of
transgenes in both neurons and glial cells. Injection of GDNF-expressing viral
vectors induced a significant reduction of ATF-3 up-regulation and IB4
down-regulation in damaged DRG neurons. In addition, it produced a partial but
significant reversal of thermal and mechanical hyperalgesia observed following
the spinal nerve ligation. In conclusion, our study suggests that lentiviral
vectors are efficient tools to induce a marked and sustained expression of
trophic factors in specific areas of the CNS and can, even if with some
limitations, be efficient in the treatment of neuropathic pain.

PMID: 16504588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Exp Neurol. 2006 Jul;200(1):26-37. Epub 2006 Feb 23.

Astrocyte-derived transgene GDNF promotes complete and long-term survival of
adult facial motoneurons following avulsion and differentially regulates the
expression of transcription factors of AP-1 and ATF/CREB families.

Parsadanian A(1), Pan Y, Li W, Myckatyn TM, Brakefield D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Hope Center for Neurological Disorders, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
parsadaniana@neuro.wustl.edu

Glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is a potent survival factor
for motoneurons (MNs). We have previously demonstrated that overexpression of
GDNF in astrocytes of GFAP-GDNF mice promotes long-term survival of neonatal MNs 
after facial nerve axotomy. In the present study, we investigated whether
astrocyte-derived GDNF could also have a neuroprotective effect on adult MNs
following facial nerve avulsion. We also examined avulsion- and GDNF-induced
changes in the expression pattern of several members of the AP-1 and ATF/CREB
families of transcription factors, which are involved in the fate determination
of neurons following injury. We demonstrated that GDNF promotes complete rescue
of avulsed MNs for at least 4 months post-injury. Transgene GDNF significantly
upregulates c-Jun expression in naive MNs, further upregulates injury-induced
c-Jun expression in facial MNs, and results in its activation in most surviving
MNs. No significant changes were found in c-Fos expression. We found that GDNF
has an opposing effect on ATF2 and ATF3 expression. It dramatically downregulates
increased levels of ATF3 in response to injury, whereas the expression of ATF2,
which is normally reduced after injury, is completely preserved in GFAP-GDNF
mice. Our data suggest that maintenance of high levels of ATF2 in injured MNs
could be crucial in modulating c-Jun function, and c-Jun/ATF2 signaling could be 
involved in GDNF-mediated survival of mature MNs.

PMID: 16497298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 15;66(4):2376-84.

Activating transcription factor 3 and early growth response 1 are the novel
targets of LY294002 in a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-independent pathway.

Yamaguchi K(1), Lee SH, Kim JS, Wimalasena J, Kitajima S, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee
37996, USA.

LY294002, a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor, has been widely used 
to study the function of PI3K in cellular responses. Based on its inhibitory
effect on PI3K, LY294002 has been shown to exert antitumorigenic effect in vivo
and in vitro. Here, we report that LY294002 alters early growth response 1
(EGR-1) phosphorylation and subsequently enhances activating transcription factor
3 (ATF3) expression independently of PI3K inhibition. This pathway may be, in
part, responsible for the antitumorigenic effect of LY294002 in human colorectal 
cancer cells. ATF3 expression was increased by LY294002, followed by the
induction of apoptosis in several colorectal cancer cell lines. This is
consistent with results showing that the down-regulation of the ATF3 gene by
small interfering RNA suppressed LY294002-induced apoptosis in HCT-116 cells. On 
the other hand, ATF3 expression was not affected by another PI3K inhibitor,
wortmannin, as well as phosphatase and tensin homologue or dominant-negative Akt 
overexpression. We also found that LY294002 increases ATF3 promoter activity and 
the transactivation is partly mediated by a GC-rich sequence located in the
promoter. EGR-1 binds to the ATF3 promoter as assessed by gel shift assay.
Furthermore, phosphorylated EGR-1 was highly increased in LY294002-treated cells,
indicating that EGR-1 phosphorylation induced by LY294002 may facilitate ATF3
transactivation. Our data suggest that EGR-1 acts as a mediator in
LY294002-induced ATF3 expression via a PI3K-independent pathway. ATF3 and EGR-1
may provide a novel explanation for the antitumorigenic properties of LY294002 in
human colorectal cancer cells.

PMID: 16489044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2006;112(3-4):341F.

Assignment of UCK2, ATF3 and RGS18 from human chromosome 1 to porcine chromosomes
4, 9 and 10 with somatic and radiation hybrid panels.

Aldenhoven J(1), Chen Y, Moran C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Advanced Technologies in Animal Genetics and Reproduction
(Reprogen), Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Sydney, Sydney,
Australia.

PMID: 16484797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 14;281(15):10473-81. Epub 2006 Feb 9.

Activating transcription factor 3, a stress-inducible gene, suppresses
Ras-stimulated tumorigenesis.

Lu D(1), Wolfgang CD, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biochemistry and Center for Molecular Neurobiology, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

ATF3 is a stress-inducible gene that encodes a member of the ATF/CREB family of
transcription factors. Current literature indicates that ATF3 affects cell death 
and cell cycle progression. However, controversies exist, because it has been
demonstrated to be a negative or positive regulator of these processes. We sought
to study the roles of ATF3 in both cell death and cell cycle regulation in the
same cell type using mouse fibroblasts. We show that ATF3 promotes apoptosis and 
cell cycle arrest. Fibroblasts deficient in ATF3 (ATF3(-/-)) were partially
protected from UV-induced apoptosis, and fibroblasts ectopically expressing
ATF3(-/-) under the tet-off system exhibited features characteristic of apoptosis
upon ATF3 induction. Furthermore, ATF3(-/-) fibroblasts transitioned from G(2) to
S phase more efficiently than the ATF3(+/+) fibroblasts, suggesting a growth
arrest role of ATF3. Consistent with the growth arrest and pro-apoptotic roles of
ATF3, ATF3(-) fibroblasts upon Ras transformation exhibited higher growth rate,
produced more colonies in soft agar, and formed larger tumor upon xenograft
injection than the ATF3(+/+) counterparts. ATF3(-/-) cells, either with or
without Ras transformation, had increased Rb phosphorylation and higher levels of
various cyclins. Significantly, ATF3 bound to the cyclin D1 promoter as shown by 
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay and repressed its transcription by a
transcription assay. Taken together, our results indicate that ATF3 promotes cell
death and cell arrest, and suppresses Ras-mediated tumorigenesis. Potential
explanations for the controversy about the roles of ATF3 in cell cycle and cell
death are discussed.

PMID: 16469745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Neurosci. 2006 Jan 25;26(4):1281-92.

Spontaneous pain, both neuropathic and inflammatory, is related to frequency of
spontaneous firing in intact C-fiber nociceptors.

Djouhri L(1), Koutsikou S, Fang X, McMullan S, Lawson SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Medical School, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8
1TD, United Kingdom. L.Djouhri@bristol.ac.uk

Spontaneous pain, a poorly understood aspect of human neuropathic pain, is
indicated in animals by spontaneous foot lifting (SFL). To determine whether SFL 
is caused by spontaneous firing in nociceptive neurons, we studied the following 
groups of rats: (1) untreated; (2) spinal nerve axotomy (SNA), L5 SNA 1 week
earlier; (3) mSNA (modified SNA), SNA plus loose ligation of the adjacent L4
spinal nerve with inflammation-inducing chromic gut; and (4) CFA (complete
Freund's adjuvant), intradermal complete Freund's adjuvant-induced hindlimb
inflammation 1 and 4 d earlier. In all groups, recordings of SFL and of
spontaneous activity (SA) in ipsilateral dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons
(intracellularly) were made. Evoked pain behaviors were measured in nerve injury 
(SNA/mSNA) groups. Percentages of nociceptive-type C-fiber neurons
(C-nociceptors) with SA increased in intact L4 but not axotomized L5 DRGs in SNA 
and mSNA (to 35%), and in L4/L5 DRGs 1-4 d after CFA (to 38-25%). SFL occurred in
mSNA but not SNA rats. It was not correlated with mechanical allodynia, extent of
L4 fiber damage [ATF3 (activation transcription factor 3) immunostaining], or
percentage of L4 C-nociceptors with SA. However, L4 C-nociceptors with SA fired
faster after mSNA (1.8 Hz) than SNA (0.02 Hz); estimated L4 total firing rates
were approximately 5.0 and approximately 0.6 kHz, respectively. Similarly, after 
CFA, faster L4 C-nociceptor SA after 1 d was associated with SFL, whereas slower 
SA after 4 d was not. Thus, inflammation causes L4 C-nociceptor SA and SFL.
Overall, SFL was related to SA rate in intact C-nociceptors. Both L5 degeneration
and chromic gut cause inflammation. Therefore, both SA and SFL/spontaneous pain
after nerve injury (mSNA) may result from cumulative neuroinflammation.

PMID: 16436616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. BMC Neurosci. 2006 Jan 24;7:8.

Effects of lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammation on expression of
growth-associated genes by corticospinal neurons.

Hossain-Ibrahim MK(1), Rezajooi K, MacNally JK, Mason MR, Lieberman AR, Anderson 
PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
London WC1E 6BT, UK. mohammed.hossain-ibrahim@ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Inflammation around cell bodies of primary sensory neurons and
retinal ganglion cells enhances expression of neuronal growth-associated genes
and stimulates axonal regeneration. We have asked if inflammation would have
similar effects on corticospinal neurons, which normally show little response to 
spinal cord injury. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was applied onto the pial surface of
the motor cortex of adult rats with or without concomitant injury of the
corticospinal tract at C4. Inflammation around corticospinal tract cell bodies in
the motor cortex was assessed by immunohistochemistry for OX42 (a microglia and
macrophage marker). Expression of growth-associated genes c-jun, ATF3, SCG10 and 
GAP-43 was investigated by immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridisation.
RESULTS: Application of LPS induced a gradient of inflammation through the full
depth of the motor cortex and promoted c-Jun and SCG10 expression for up to 2
weeks, and GAP-43 upregulation for 3 days by many corticospinal neurons, but had 
very limited effects on neuronal ATF3 expression. However, many glial cells in
the subcortical white matter upregulated ATF3. LPS did not promote sprouting of
anterogradely labelled corticospinal axons, which did not grow into or beyond a
cervical lesion site.
CONCLUSION: Inflammation produced by topical application of LPS promoted
increased expression of some growth-associated genes in the cell bodies of
corticospinal neurons, but was insufficient to promote regeneration of the
corticospinal tract.

PMCID: PMC1403789
PMID: 16433912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Feb;26(3):1087-97.

Oxidative stress-responsive transcription factor ATF3 potentially mediates
diabetic angiopathy.

Okamoto A(1), Iwamoto Y, Maru Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, 8-1 Kawada-cho, 
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.

Previous results of our cDNA microarray analysis to look for genes whose
expression level correlates well with in vitro tubulogenesis by NP31 endothelial 
cells revealed the transcription factor ATF3 known to be responsive to stress
such as reactive oxygen species (ROS). Anti-ATF3 small interfering RNA gave an
inhibitory influence on tube formation by NP31 cells expressing an activated form
of the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (VEGFR-1) kinase. When
expression of ATF3 was regulated under the control of tetracycline system in NP31
cells, they acquired the tubulogenic ability upon ATF3 induction. While ATF3
failed to induce expressions of VEGF and VEGFR, it regulated those of CDK2, CDK4,
p8, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1, integrin alpha1, subunit and matrix
metalloprotease MMP13. In H2O2-stimulated NP31 cells as well as endothelial cells
of glomerulus and aorta of Otsuka-Long-Evans-Tokushima-Fatty diabetic model rats,
concomitantly enhanced expressions of ATF3, PAI-1, and p8 were observed. Given
the proposed hypothesis of the close linkage between diabetic angiopathy and ROS,
those data suggest that ROS-associated diabetic complication may involve
ATF3-mediated pathological angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1347018
PMID: 16428460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Eur J Neurosci. 2006 Jan;23(2):365-73.

ATF3 expression in L4 dorsal root ganglion neurons after L5 spinal nerve
transection.

Shortland PJ(1), Baytug B, Krzyzanowska A, McMahon SB, Priestley JV, Averill S.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Centre, Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Bart's and The
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, 4 Newark Street, Whitechapel, London E1 
2AT, UK. p.j.shortland@qmul.ac.uk

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a widely used marker of damaged
primary sensory neurons that is induced in essentially all dorsal root ganglion
(DRG) neurons by spinal nerve axotomy. Whether such injuries induce its
expression in neurons of adjacent DRGs remains unknown. Following L5 spinal nerve
ligation, experimental but not sham-operated rats develop thermal and mechanical 
hypersensitivity. In the L4 DRG, 11-12% of neurons were ATF3 positive by 1 day
post-surgery, and numbers remain unchanged at 2 weeks. Importantly, sham exposure
of the L5 spinal nerve produced a nearly identical number of ATF3-positive
neurons in the L4 DRG and also a substantial increase in the L5 DRG, with a
similar time-course to experimental animals. There was no correlation between
behaviour and magnitude of ATF3 expression. Co-localization studies with the DRG 
injury markers galanin, neuropeptide Y and nitric oxide synthase (NOS) showed
that approximately 75, 50 and 25%, respectively, of L4 ATF3-positive neurons
co-expressed these markers after L5 transection or sham surgery. Additionally,
increases in galanin and NOS were seen in ATF3-negative neurons in L4. Our
results strongly suggest that the surgical exposure of spinal nerves induces ATF3
in the L4-5 DRG, irrespective of whether the L5 nerve is subsequently cut. This
probably reflects minor damage to the neurons or their axons but nevertheless is 
sufficient to induce phenotypic plasticity. Caution is therefore warranted when
interpreting the phenotypic plasticity of DRG neurons in adjacent ganglia in the 
absence of positive evidence that they are not damaged.

PMID: 16420444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Eur J Neurosci. 2006 Jan;23(1):273-8.

Spinal cord compression and dorsal root injury cause up-regulation of activating 
transcription factor-3 in large-diameter dorsal root ganglion neurons.

Huang WL(1), Robson D, Liu MC, King VR, Averill S, Shortland PJ, Priestley JV.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Centre, Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Queen Mary
University of London, 4 Newark Street, London E1 2AT, UK. w.huang@qmul.ac.uk

Spinal cord injury causes damage to ascending and descending tracts, as well as
to local circuits, but relatively little is known about the effect of such injury
on sensory neurons located within adjoining ganglia. We have therefore used
immunocytochemistry for activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3), a sensitive
marker of axonal damage, in order to examine the effects of spinal cord injury in
rats on dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons. A 50-g static compression injury
applied to the dorsal surface of the T12 thoracic spinal cord led to an
up-regulation of ATF3 that was maximal at 1 day and affected 12-14% of DRG
neurons in ganglia caudal to the injury (T13-L3). A similar response was seen
after a T12 hemisection that transected the dorsal columns except that
compression injury, but not hemisection, also evoked ATF3 expression in ganglia
just rostral to the injury (T10, T11). ATF3 was up-regulated exclusively in DRG
neurons that were of large diameter and immunoreactive for heavy neurofilament.
Small-diameter cells, including the population that binds the lectin Grifffonia
simplicifolia IB4, did not express ATF3 immunoreactivity. A similar pattern of
ATF3 expression was induced by dorsal rhizotomy. The data show for the first time
that ATF3 is up-regulated after spinal cord and dorsal root injury, but that this
up-regulation is confined to the large-diameter cell population.

PMID: 16420436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2006 Jan;38(1):58-62.

Construction and activity assay of the activating transcription factor 3 reporter
vector pATF/CRE-luc.

Xu JQ(1), Deng JL, Wu YS, Fu HY, Wang RH, Zhang J, Lu F, Zhao ZL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an 710032, China.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a member of the activating
transcription factor/cAMP responsive element binding protein (ATF/CREB) family of
transcription factors, is induced by many physiological stresses. To investigate 
the activity of ATF/CREB in cells with physiological stresses, we developed a
practical reporter vector, the plasmid pATF/CRE-luc, bearing activating
transcription factor/cAMP responsive element (ATF/CRE) binding sites. This
plasmid was constructed by inserting three repeats of the ATF/CRE binding element
into the plasmid pG5luc, replacing the GAL-4 binding sites. The plasmids
pACT/ATF3 and pATF/CRE-luc were transfected into HeLa and NIH3T3 cells,
respectively, and the results showed that the expression of luciferase was
increased in a dose-dependent manner on plasmid pACT/ATF3. The data suggested
that the plasmid pATF/CRE-luc could be used as a sensitive and convenient
reporter system of ATF3 activity.

PMID: 16395528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Radiat Res. 2005 Dec;46(4):379-85.

Characterization of ATF3 induction after ionizing radiation in human skin cells.

Koike M(1), Ninomiya Y, Koike A.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Hazards Research Group, National Institute of Radiological Sciences,
Chiba 263-8555, Japan. m_koike@nirs.go.jp

The epidermis is a physiological barrier that protects an organism against
pathogens and chemical or physical damage. The degree of skin injuries caused by 
radiation influences the subsequent survival from and prognosis of such injuries.
Recently, we have identified, using microarray technology, genes regulated by
high-dose radiation exposure in normal human epidermal keratinocytes. Our results
suggest the possible role of ATF3 in the apoptosis pathway in radiation injuries 
caused by high-dose radiation exposure in human skin. In the present study, we
characterized ATF3 induction after X-ray irradiation in normal human skin cells. 
Our results showed that the induction of ATF3 mRNA is rapid, transient, and at
least in part mediated through a transcriptional mechanism after X-irradiation of
normal human keratinocytes. In addition, ATF3 was induced and accumulated in the 
nuclei of keratinocytes upon treatment with an apoptosis inducer, anisomycin. Our
results also suggested that the induction mechanism of ATF3 mRNA by X-irradiation
may be different not only between epidermal keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts,
but also between dermal fibroblasts and lung fibroblasts.

PMID: 16394627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Toxicology. 2006 Feb 15;219(1-3):175-86. Epub 2005 Dec 20.

Molecular mechanism investigation of cycloheximide-induced hepatocyte apoptosis
in rat livers by morphological and microarray analysis.

Ito K(1), Kiyosawa N, Kumagai K, Manabe S, Matsunuma N, Yamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Safety Research Laboratories, Sankyo Co., Ltd., 717 Horikoshi,
Fukuroi, Shizuoka 437-0065, Japan. kazumiit@sankyo.co,jp

Male F344 rats were intravenously treated with 6 mg/kg cycloheximide (CHX), and
microarray analysis was conducted on their livers 1, 2 and 6h after the CHX
treatment. The histopathological examination and serum chemistry results
indicated a mild hepatic cell death 2 and 6h after the CHX treatment,
respectively. Multi-focal hepatocellular necrosis with slight neutrophil
infiltration was observed 6h after the CHX treatment. The TUNEL staining results 
showed that the number of apoptotic hepatocytes was the highest 2h after the CHX 
treatment. Dramatic increases in the mRNA levels of ATF3 and CHOP genes, both of 
which were reported to play roles in the ER stress-mediated apoptosis pathway,
were observed from 1h after the CHX treatment. In addition, increase of GADD45,
p21 and p53 mRNA levels also suggested a time course-related stimulation of
hepatocellular apoptotic signals. These results suggest that the hepatocyte
apoptosis induced by the CHX treatment is triggered by ER stress. The hepatic
mRNA levels of proinflammatory genes, such as TNFalpha, IL-1alpha and beta, were 
also increased 1 and 2h after the CHX treatment, supposedly mediated by the
activated Kupffer cells engulfing the apoptotic hepatocytes.

PMID: 16368179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 17;281(7):4132-41. Epub 2005 Dec 1.

Profiles of growth hormone (GH)-regulated genes reveal time-dependent responses
and identify a mechanism for regulation of activating transcription factor 3 by
GH.

Huo JS(1), McEachin RC, Cui TX, Duggal NK, Hai T, States DJ, Schwartz J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
48109, USA.

In examination of mechanisms regulating metabolic responses to growth hormone
(GH), microarray analysis identified 561 probe sets showing time-dependent
patterns of expression in GH-treated 3T3-F442A adipocytes. Biological functions
significantly over-represented among GH-regulated genes include regulators of
transcription at early times, and lipid biosynthesis, cholesterol biosynthesis,
and mediators of immune responses at later times (48 h). One novel GH-induced
gene encodes activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3). Atf3 mRNA expression and
promoter activity were stimulated by GH. Genes for ATF3 and growth arrest and DNA
damage-inducible gene 45 gamma (GADD45gamma) showed similar time-dependent
patterns of responses to GH, suggesting similar regulatory mechanisms. A
conserved sequence in the promoters of the Atf3 and Gadd45gamma genes contains a 
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) site previously observed in the
Gadd45gamma promoter, suggesting a novel corresponding C/EBP site in the Atf3
promoter. C/EBPbeta was found to bind to the predicted Atf3 C/EBP site, and
C/EBPbeta enhanced the activation of the wild-type Atf3 promoter. Mutation of the
predicted Atf3 C/EBP site disrupted Atf3 promoter activation not only by
C/EBPbeta but also by GH. These findings suggest that GH regulates transcription 
of Atf3 through a mechanism utilizing factors, such as C/EBPbeta, which bind to a
novel C/EBP site.

PMID: 16326703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Eur J Pain. 2006 Feb;10(2):171-6.

Pulsed radiofrequency applied to dorsal root ganglia causes a selective increase 
in ATF3 in small neurons.

Hamann W(1), Abou-Sherif S, Thompson S, Hall S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthetics, Guy's, Kings and St. Thomas' School of Medicine,
Kings College, London SE1 1UL, UK.

BACKGROUND: This is a "proof of concept study" to test the hypothesis that pulsed
radiofrequency, PRF, produces cell stress at the primary afferent level without
signs of overt thermal damage. We assumed that cell stress would result in
impairment of normal function, and used the expression of activating
transcription factor 3, ATF3, as an indicator of cellular "stress".
METHODS: PRF (20 ms of 500-kHz RF pulses, delivered at a rate of 2 Hz; maximum
temperature 42 degrees C) was delivered either to the sciatic nerve of adult rats
in mid thigh, or to the L4 anterior primary ramus just distal to the
intervertebral foramen. Controls were sham-operated or L4 axotomised. All tissues
were examined 14 days after surgery. The percentage of CGRP- or ATF3-positive DRG
neuronal somata was calculated using image analysis software (SigmaScan Pro 4).
RESULTS: ATF3 expression was upregulated in L4 DRG neuronal cell bodies,
irrespective of their size, after axotomy. It was also upregulated significantly 
(p<0.002) and selectively, in small and medium calibre L4 DRG neurons, when PRF
was applied close to the DRG just distal to the intervertebral foramen. PRF did
not produce any obvious cellular changes in the nerve or L4 DRG neurons when
applied to the sciatic nerve in mid-thigh.
CONCLUSION: PRF has a biological effect, unlikely to be related to overt thermal 
damage. It appears to be selective in that it targets the group of neurons whose 
axons are the small diameter C and Adelta nociceptive fibres.

PMID: 16310722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Pediatr Res. 2005 Dec;58(6):1280-3.

Activating transcription factor 3 is up-regulated in patients with hypospadias.

Liu B(1), Wang Z, Lin G, Agras K, Ebbers M, Willingham E, Baskin LS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Study and Treatment of Hypospadias, Department of Urology,
University of California, San Francisco 94143, USA.

Hypospadias is a congenital anomaly of the genitalia characterized by
abnormalities of the urethra and foreskin, with the urethral meatus located in an
abnormal position anywhere from the distal ventral penile shaft to the perineum. 
Because the incidence of hypospadias is approximately 1/200-1/300 live male
births, it is one of the most common congenital malformations, but its etiology
is largely uncharacterized. Genomic analysis of hypospadic tissue indicated a
potential role for activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in the development of
this anomaly. ATF3 may be involved in homeostasis, wound healing, cell adhesion, 
or apoptosis, and normally it is expressed at a steady-state in quiescent cells. 
Additionally, it has been shown to be an estrogen-responsive gene, and the
etiology of hypospadias may be related to in utero exposure to estrogenic or
anti-androgenic compounds. We examined the expression of ATF3 in tissues from 28 
children with hypospadias compared with 20 normal penile skin tissue samples from
elective circumcision. Eighty-six percent of the hypospadias samples were
immunohistochemically positive, compared with 13% of normal tissue samples.
Seventy-five percent of hypospadias samples were positive from in situ
hybridization, compared with 1% of circumcision samples. Our results indicate
that ATF3 is up-regulated in the penile skin tissues of boys with hypospadias,
suggesting a role for this transcription factor in the development of this
abnormality. Because the etiology of hypospadias may include exposure to
estrogenic compounds, the responsiveness of ATF3 to estrogen is also discussed.

PMID: 16306208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 20;281(3):1620-9. Epub 2005 Nov 16.

A splice variant of stress response gene ATF3 counteracts NF-kappaB-dependent
anti-apoptosis through inhibiting recruitment of CREB-binding protein/p300
coactivator.

Hua B(1), Tamamori-Adachi M, Luo Y, Tamura K, Morioka M, Fukuda M, Tanaka Y,
Kitajima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

Activating transcription factor (ATF) 3 plays a role in determining cell fate and
generates a variety of alternatively spliced isoforms in stress response. We have
reported previously that splice variant ATF3deltaZip2, which lacks the leucine
zipper region, is induced in response to various stress stimuli. However, its
biological function has not been elucidated. By using cells treated with tumor
necrosis factor-alpha and actinomycin D or cells overexpressing ATF3deltaZip2, we
showed that ATF3deltaZip2 sensitizes cells to apoptotic cell death in response to
tumor necrosis factor-alpha, at least in part through suppressing nuclear factor 
(NF)-kappaB-dependent transcription of anti-apoptotic genes such as cIAP2 and
XIAP. ATF3deltaZip2 interacts with a p65 (RelA)-cofactor complex containing
CBP/p300 and HDAC1 at NF-kappaB sites of the proximal promoter region of the
cIAP2 gene in vivo and down-regulates the recruitment of CBP/p300. Our study
revealed that ATF3deltaZip2 counteracts anti-apoptotic activity of NF-kappaB, at 
least in part, by displacing positive cofactor CBP/p300 and provides insight into
the mechanism by which ATF3 regulates cell fate through alternative splicing in
stress response.

PMID: 16291753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Carcinogenesis. 2006 May;27(5):972-81. Epub 2005 Nov 14.

Conjugated linoleic acid stimulates an anti-tumorigenic protein NAG-1 in an
isomer specific manner.

Lee SH(1), Yamaguchi K, Kim JS, Eling TE, Safe S, Park Y, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA.

Conjugated linoleic acids (CLAs), naturally occurring fatty acids in ruminant
food products, have anti-tumorigenic and pro-apoptotic properties in animal as
well as in vitro models of cancer. However, the cellular mechanism has not been
fully understood. NAG-1 (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug-activated gene-1)
is induced by several dietary compounds and belongs to a TGF-beta superfamily
gene associated with pro-apoptotic and anti-tumorigenic activities. The present
study was performed to elucidate the molecular mechanism by which CLA stimulates 
anti-tumorigenic activity in human colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. The trans-10,
cis-12-CLA (t10,c12-CLA) repressed cell proliferation and induced apoptosis,
whereas linoleic acid or c9,t11-CLA showed no effect on cell proliferation and
apoptosis. We also found that t10,c12-CLA induced the expression of a
pro-apoptotic gene, NAG-1, in human CRC cells. Inhibition of NAG-1 expression by 
small interference RNA (siRNA) results in repression of t10,c12-CLA-induced
apoptosis. Microarray analysis using t10,c12-CLA-treated HCT-116 cells revealed
that activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) was induced and its expression was 
confirmed by western analysis. The t10,c12-CLA treatment followed by the
overexpression of ATF3 increased NAG-1 promoter activity in HCT-116 cells. We
further provide the evidence that t10,c12-CLA inhibited the phosphorylation of
AKT and the blockage of GSK-3 by siRNA abolished t10,c12-CLA-induced ATF3 and
NAG-1 expression. The current study demonstrates that t10,c12-CLA stimulates
ATF3/NAG-1 expression and subsequently induces apoptosis in an isomer specific
manner. These effects may be through inhibition of AKT/GSK-3beta pathway in human
CRC cells.

PMID: 16286461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Blood. 2006 Mar 15;107(6):2536-9. Epub 2005 Nov 1.

Classical Hodgkin lymphoma is characterized by high constitutive expression of
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), which promotes viability of
Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg cells.

Janz M(1), Hummel M, Truss M, Wollert-Wulf B, Mathas S, Jöhrens K, Hagemeier C,
Bommert K, Stein H, Dörken B, Bargou RC.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology, Oncology, and Tumorimmunology, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular
Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Str 10, 13092 Berlin, Germany. mjanz@mdc-berlin.de

Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells of classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) display
unique characteristics that discriminate cHL from other B-cell lymphomas and
normal B cells. Therefore, comparative gene expression profiling of Hodgkin and
non-Hodgkin B cells could lead to the identification of candidate genes that are 
critical for the pathogenesis of cHL. We performed microarray analysis of Hodgkin
and non-Hodgkin cell lines and identified activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3), a member of the cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB)/ATF
family, as a differentially expressed candidate gene. Extensive analysis of a
large panel of cell lines, primary tumor samples, and normal tissues revealed
that high expression of ATF3 is found in nearly all cases of cHL and is almost
exclusively restricted to it. Selective knock-down of ATF3 by RNA interference
suppressed proliferation and strongly reduced viability of Hodgkin cells. Thus,
overexpression of ATF3 is a molecular hallmark of cHL that contributes to the
malignant growth of HRS cells.

PMID: 16263788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Eur J Neurosci. 2005 Oct;22(8):1881-94.

ATF3 expression precedes death of spinal motoneurons in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis-SOD1 transgenic mice and correlates with c-Jun phosphorylation, CHOP
expression, somato-dendritic ubiquitination and Golgi fragmentation.

Vlug AS(1), Teuling E, Haasdijk ED, French P, Hoogenraad CC, Jaarsma D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus University Rotterdam, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR
Rotterdam, Netherlands.

To obtain insight into the morphological and molecular correlates of motoneuron
degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) mice that express G93A mutant
superoxide dismutase (SOD)1 (G93A mice), we have mapped and characterized 'sick' 
motoneurons labelled by the 'stress transcription factors' ATF3 and
phospho-c-Jun. Immunocytochemistry and in situ hybridization showed that a subset
of motoneurons express ATF3 from a relatively early phase of disease before the
onset of active caspase 3 expression and motoneuron loss. The highest number of
ATF3-expressing motoneurons occurred at symptom onset. The onset of ATF3
expression correlated with the appearance of ubiquitinated neurites. Confocal
double-labelling immunofluorescence showed that all ATF3-positive motoneurons
were immunoreactive for phosphorylated c-Jun. Furthermore, the majority of ATF3
and phospho-c-Jun-positive motoneurons were also immunoreactive for CHOP
(GADD153) and showed Golgi fragmentation. A subset of ATF3 and phosphorylated
c-Jun-immunoreactive motoneurons showed an abnormal appearance characterized by a
number of distinctive features, including an eccentric flattened nucleus,
perikaryal accumulation of ubiquitin immunoreactivity, juxta-nuclear accumulation
of the Golgi apparatus and the endoplasmic reticulum, and intense Hsp70
immunoreactivity. These abnormal cells were not immunoreactive for active caspase
3. We conclude that motoneurons in ALS-SOD1 mice prior to their death and
disappearance experience a prolonged sick phase, characterized by the gradual
accumulation of ubiquitinated material first in the neurites and subsequently the
cell body.

PMID: 16262628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Biochem Soc Trans. 2006 Feb;34(Pt 1):7-11.

Coping with stress: eIF2 kinases and translational control.

Wek RC(1), Jiang HY, Anthony TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. rwek@iupui.edu

In response to environmental stresses, a family of protein kinases phosphorylate 
eIF2 (eukaryotic initiation factor 2) to alleviate cellular injury or
alternatively induce apoptosis. Phosphorylation of eIF2 reduces global
translation, allowing cells to conserve resources and to initiate a
reconfiguration of gene expression to effectively manage stress conditions.
Accompanying this general protein synthesis control, eIF2 phosphorylation induces
translation of specific mRNAs, such as that encoding the bZIP (basic leucine
zipper) transcriptional regulator ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4). ATF4 
also enhances the expression of additional transcription factors, ATF3 and CHOP
(CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein)/GADD153 (growth arrest and
DNA-damage-inducible protein), that assist in the regulation of genes involved in
metabolism, the redox status of the cells and apoptosis. Reduced translation by
eIF2 phosphorylation can also lead to activation of stress-related transcription 
factors, such as NF-kappaB (nuclear factor kappaB), by lowering the steady-state 
levels of short-lived regulatory proteins such as IkappaB (inhibitor of
NF-kappaB). While many of the genes induced by eIF2 phosphorylation are shared
between different environmental stresses, eIF2 kinases function in conjunction
with other stress-response pathways, such as those regulated by mitogen-activated
protein kinases, to elicit gene expression programmes that are tailored for the
specific stress condition. Loss of eIF2 kinase pathways can have important health
consequences. Mice devoid of the eIF2 kinase GCN2 [general control
non-derepressible-2 or EIF2AK4 (eIF2alpha kinase 4)] show sensitivity to
nutritional deficiencies and aberrant eating behaviours, and deletion of PEK
[pancreatic eIF2alpha kinase or PERK (RNA-dependent protein kinase-like
endoplasmic reticulum kinase) or EIF2AK3] leads to neonatal insulin-dependent
diabetes, epiphyseal dysplasia and hepatic and renal complications.

PMID: 16246168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Nov 15;14(22):3507-21. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

Mutant SPTLC1 dominantly inhibits serine palmitoyltransferase activity in vivo
and confers an age-dependent neuropathy.

McCampbell A(1), Truong D, Broom DC, Allchorne A, Gable K, Cutler RG, Mattson MP,
Woolf CJ, Frosch MP, Harmon JM, Dunn TM, Brown RH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Day Laboratory for Neuromuscular Research, Massachusetts General Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, 02129, USA. amccampbell@partners.org

Mutations in enzymes involved in sphingolipid metabolism and trafficking cause a 
variety of neurological disorders, but details of the molecular pathophysiology
remain obscure. SPTLC1 encodes one subunit of serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT), 
the rate-limiting enzyme in sphingolipid synthesis. Mutations in SPTLC1 cause
hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy (type I) (HSAN1), an adult onset,
autosomal dominant neuropathy. HSAN1 patients have reduced SPT activity.
Expression of mutant SPTLC1 in yeast and mammalian cell cultures dominantly
inhibits SPT activity. We created transgenic mouse lines that ubiquitously
overexpress either wild-type (SPTLC1(WT)) or mutant SPTLC1 (SPTLC1(C133W)). We
report here that SPTLC1(C133W) mice develop age-dependent weight loss and mild
sensory and motor impairments. Aged SPTLC1(C133W) mice lose large myelinated
axons in the ventral root of the spinal cord and demonstrate myelin thinning.
There is also a loss of large myelinated axons in the dorsal roots, although the 
unmyelinated fibers are preserved. In the dorsal root ganglia, IB4 staining is
diminished, whereas expression of the injury-induced transcription factor ATF3 is
increased. These mice represent a novel mouse model of peripheral neuropathy and 
confirm the link between mutant SPT and neuronal dysfunction.

PMID: 16210380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. OMICS. 2005 Fall;9(3):266-80.

Revealing transforming growth factor-beta signaling transduction in human kidney 
by gene expression data mining.

Hu G(1), Jain K, Hurle M.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Division, GlaxoSmithKline, King of Prussia, Pennsylvania 19406,
USA. guanghui.2.hu@gsk.com

Tumor growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is a key mediator of glomerular and
tubulointerstitial pathobiology in chronic kidney disease. Its signaling
transduction controls a diverse number of biological processes in a dynamic and
context-dependent manner. We applied a data mining strategy to deconvolute gene
expression patterns across hundreds of microarray data sets to reveal members of 
the TGF-beta signaling network in human kidney. This strategy is composed of
three major steps: (i) select genes known to be involved and expressionally
regulated in TGF-beta signaling as "bait"; (ii) select microarray data sets in
which the bait genes are strongly co-regulated; (iii) identify (or "fish")
additional TGF-beta signaling genes by a non-parametric statistic-based gene
scoring system (NP score). The 40 genes with highest NP scores and significant
permutation p values were selected for in silico validation, and used to identify
a network, in which 35 of these genes were found to be connected by literature-
derived relationships. Transcription factors were found to be enriched in the top
list. Among them, activated transcription factor 3 (ATF3) had the highest NP
score, and was proposed to play a pivotal role in TGF-beta signaling in human
kidney. Finally, we implemented a non-parametric pathway ranking (NPPR) tool
(Mootha et al., 2003) to rank pathways and identified canonical biological
pathways associated with the down-stream of TGF-beta signaling.

PMID: 16209640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Feb;206(2):526-36.

Long term metabolic arrest and recovery of HEK293 spheroids involves NF-kappaB
signaling and sustained JNK activation.

Jack GD(1), Garst JF, Cabrera MC, DeSantis AM, Slaughter SM, Jervis J, Brooks AI,
Potts M, Helm RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech Center for Genomics, Virginia Tech, 
Blacksburg, Virginia, USA.

Erratum in
    J Cell Physiol. 2006 Dec;209(3):1055. Mead, E Andrew [removed].

Understanding how cells withstand a depletion of intracellular water is relevant 
to the study of longevity, aging, and quiescence because one consequence of
air-drying is metabolic arrest. After removal of medium, HEK293 spheroids with
intracellular water content of approximately 65% survived partial vacuum, with
antistatic control, for weeks in the dark at 25 degrees C. In contrast, only a
limited exposure of monolayers to air was lethal; the mitochondrion being a
target of this stress. The pathways activated during the long-term arrest and
recovery of spheroids depended on both NF-kappaB signaling and sustained JNK
activation. A cyclical cascade, presumably originating from an intercellular
stress signal, led to endogenous cytokine production (TNF-alpha, IL-1b, and IL-8)
and propagation of the cellular stress signal through the co-activation of
NF-kappaB and JNK. Increased levels of downstream pathway signaling members,
specifically Gadd45beta, c-jun, and ATF3 were observed, as was activation of
c-jun (phosphorylation). Activation of these pathways permit cells to survive
long-term storage and recovery because chemical inhibition of both NF-kappaB
nuclear translocation and JNK phosphorylation led to cell death. The capacity of 
an immortalized cell to enter, and then exit, a state of long-term quiescence,
without genetic or chemical intervention, has implications for the study of cell 
transformation. In addition, the ability to monitor the relevant signaling
pathways at endogenous levels, from effector to transcriptional regulator,
emphasizes the utility of multicellular aggregate models in delineating stress
response pathways.

Copyright (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16155929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Pain. 2005 Oct;117(3):462-72.

Pressure and stretch mechanosensitivity of peripheral nerve fibres following
local inflammation of the nerve trunk.

Dilley A(1), Lynn B, Pang SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E
6BT, UK. a.dilley@ucl.ac.uk

Patients with non-specific limb pain often show signs of nerve
mechanosensitivity, i.e. local tenderness over nerve trunks and pain in response 
to limb movements that cause nerve stretch. In such patients a nerve lesion is
not apparent, and it has been suggested that local neural inflammation may be a
key factor. The present study examines the extent to which nerve fibres in
regions of local inflammation respond to small stretches, and whether functional 
changes occur throughout the primary afferent neurone. A local neuritis was
induced in adult rats by wrapping oxidised cellulose saturated in complete
Freund's adjuvant (CFA) around the peroneal or sciatic nerves. A small cut was
made in the perineurium of some of the peroneal lesioned animals. A- and C-fibre 
recordings were made 2-10 days post-surgery from filaments dissected proximal to 
the lesion. Local mechanosensitivity was assessed using a glass probe and by
small stretches. Responses to stretch and local pressure were recorded in 7% of
C- and 8% of A-fibres from the peroneal nerve following CFA treatment with the
sheath opened. A smaller proportion of stretch sensitive fibres were seen in
sciatic and peroneal nerves after CFA treatment alone (2% of C- and 3% of
A-fibres), but such fibres were not seen in control preparations. The most
responsive fibres fired to 3% stretch, which is within the range of nerve stretch
seen during normal limb movements. Less than 1% of stretch sensitive fibres had
peripheral fields, indicating that most had probably degenerated distally.

PMCID: PMC1402335
PMID: 16154692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Dec;68(6):1747-56. Epub 2005 Sep 8.

A novel group of genes regulates susceptibility to antineoplastic drugs in highly
tumorigenic breast cancer cells.

Mallory JC(1), Crudden G, Oliva A, Saunders C, Stromberg A, Craven RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Biomedical Pharmacology, Markey Cancer Center,
MS-305 University of Kentucky Medical Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, 
Kentucky 40536, USA.

Doxorubicin is an anthracycline antibiotic used for cancer chemotherapy. The
utility of doxorubicin is limited by its inability to kill all of the cells
within a tumor and by resistant cells emerging from the treated population. We
have screened for genes that regulate doxorubicin susceptibility in highly
tumorigenic breast cancer cells by cDNA microarray and RNA interference (RNAi)
analysis, and we have identified genes associated with both proliferation and
cell cycle arrest after doxorubicin treatment. We confirmed that MDA-MB-231 cells
treated with doxorubicin induce the expression of carbonic anhydrase II (CAII),
inhibitor of differentiation/DNA binding 2 (Id2), activating transcription factor
3 (Atf3), and the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 55-kDa regulatory subunit p55PIK.
These genes were induced at different times and with varying specificities to
different chemotherapeutic drugs. In addition to being induced at the
transcriptional level, the CAII and clusterin proteins were elevated after
doxorubicin treatment. CAII, Id2, p55PIK, and clusterin were not altered by
doxorubicin in MCF-7 cells, a weakly tumorigenic cell line used in previous
studies of doxorubicin-regulated gene expression. By inhibiting gene expression
using RNAi, we found that CAII and clusterin increase cell survival after
doxorubicin treatment, whereas Id2 increases susceptibility to doxorubicin. Our
results support a model in which highly tumorigenic breast cancer cells induce a 
transcriptional response to doxorubicin that is distinct from less malignant
cells. The induced genes regulate drug susceptibility positively and negatively
and may be novel targets for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 16150928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Exp Neurol. 2005 Nov;196(1):184-94. Epub 2005 Aug 29.

The Janus role of c-Jun: cell death versus survival and regeneration of neonatal 
sympathetic and sensory neurons.

Lindwall C(1), Kanje M.

Author information: 
(1)Lund University, Department of Cell and Organism Biology, Animal Physiology
Building, Helgonavägen 3B, SE-223 62 Lund, Sweden. charlotta.lindwall@cob.lu.se

We investigated the functional outcome of c-Jun activation in sympathetic and
sensory neurons of neonatal rat superior cervical ganglion (SCG) and dorsal root 
ganglion (DRG), respectively. Distinctly different roles of c-Jun activation have
been suggested for these two types of neurons. In dissociated sympathetic
neurons, c-Jun has been demonstrated to promote apoptosis, whereas in sensory
neurons it stimulates axonal outgrowth. In organ-cultured ganglia, we found that 
c-Jun was activated within 24 h of explantation in both types of neurons, and
that the JNK inhibitor SP600125 could mitigate this response. In both types of
neurons, c-Jun activation was also reduced by NGF treatment. Inhibition of c-Jun 
activation did not affect the viability of sympathetic neurons, whereas the
number of apoptotic sensory neurons increased. Furthermore, inhibition of c-Jun
reduced axonal outgrowth from both SCG and DRG. Thus, in organ culture, c-Jun
activation may be required for axonal outgrowth and, at least in sensory neurons,
it promotes survival. The role of ATF3, a neuronal marker of injury and a c-Jun
dimerization partner, was also examined. We found an ATF3 induction in both SCG
and DRG neurons, a response, which was reduced by JNK inhibition. The reduction
of ATF3 upon JNK inhibition was much larger in DRG than in SCG, a result which
might account for the higher number of apoptotic neurons in JNK inhibitor exposed
DRG. Taken together, and contrary to our expectations, neonatal sympathetic and
sensory neurons seem to respond to axonal injury similarly with respect to c-Jun 
activation, and in no case was this activation pro-apoptotic.

PMID: 16126201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Carcinogenesis. 2006 Feb;27(2):319-27. Epub 2005 Aug 19.

Low pH induces co-ordinate regulation of gene expression in oesophageal cells.

Duggan SP(1), Gallagher WM, Fox EJ, Abdel-Latif MM, Reynolds JV, Kelleher D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Trinity
Centre for Health Sciences, St James's Hospital, Dublin 8, Ireland.
spduggan@tcd.ie

The development of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) is known to be a
causative risk factor in the evolution of adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus. The
major component of this reflux is gastric acid. However, the impact of low pH on 
gene expression has not been extensively studied in oesophageal cells. This study
utilizes a transcriptomic and bioinformatic approach to assess regulation of gene
expression in response to low pH. In more detail, oesophageal adenocarcinoma cell
lines were exposed to a range of pH environments. Affymetrix microarrays were
used for gene-expression analysis and results were validated using cycle
limitation and real-time RT-PCR analysis, as well as northern and western
blotting. Comparative promoter transcription factor binding site (TFBS) analysis 
(MatInspector) of hierarchically clustered gene-expression data was employed to
identify the elements which may co-ordinately regulate individual gene clusters. 
Initial experiments demonstrated maximal induction of EGR1 gene expression at pH 
6.5. Subsequent array experimentation revealed significant induction of gene
expression from such functional categories as DNA damage response (EGR1-4, ATF3) 
and cell-cycle control (GADD34, GADD45, p57). Changes in expression of EGR1,
EGR3, ATF3, MKP-1, FOSB, CTGF and CYR61 were verified in separate experiments and
in a variety of oesophageal cell lines. TFBS analysis of promoters identified
transcription factors that may co-ordinately regulate gene-expression clusters,
Cluster 1: Oct-1, AP4R; Cluster 2: NF-kB, EGRF; Cluster 3: IKRS, AP-1F. Low pH
has the ability to induce genes and pathways which can provide an environment
suitable for the progression of malignancy. Further functional analysis of the
genes and clusters identified in this low pH study is likely to lead to new
insights into the pathogenesis and therapeutics of GORD and oesophageal cancer.

PMID: 16113055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 14;280(41):34609-16. Epub 2005 Aug 17.

Interaction of RNA-binding proteins HuR and AUF1 with the human ATF3 mRNA
3'-untranslated region regulates its amino acid limitation-induced stabilization.

Pan YX(1), Chen H, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, and
Shands Cancer Center, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville,
Florida 32610, USA.

ATF3 expression is induced in cells exposed to a variety of stress conditions,
including nutrient limitation. Here we demonstrated that the mechanism by which
the ATF3 mRNA content is increased following amino acid limitation of human HepG2
hepatoma cells is mRNA stabilization. Analysis of ATF3 mRNA turnover revealed
that the half-life was increased from about 1 h in control cells to greater than 
8 h in the histidine-deprived state, demonstrating mRNA stabilization in response
to nutrient deprivation. Treatment of HepG2 cells with thapsigargin, which causes
endoplasmic reticulum stress, also increased the half-life of ATF3 mRNA. HuR is
an RNA-binding protein that regulates both the stability and cytoplasmic/nuclear 
localization of mRNA species containing AU-rich elements. Another RNA-binding
protein, AUF1, regulates target mRNA molecules by enhancing their decay. Amino
acid limitation caused a slightly elevated mRNA level for HuR and AUF1 mRNA. The 
nuclear HuR protein content was unchanged, and AUF1 protein increased slightly
after amino acid limitation, whereas the cytoplasmic levels of both HuR and AUF1 
protein increased. Immunoprecipitation of HuR-RNA complexes followed by reverse
transcriptase-PCR analysis showed that HuR interacted with ATF3 mRNA in vivo and 
that this interaction increased following amino acid limitation. In contrast, the
interaction of AUF1 with the ATF3 mRNA is decreased in histidine-deprived cells
relative to control cells. Suppression of HuR expression by RNA interference
partially blocked the accumulation of ATF3 mRNA following amino acid deprivation.
The results demonstrated that coordinated regulation of mRNA stability by HuR and
AUF1 proteins contributes to the observed increase in ATF3 expression following
amino acid limitation.

PMCID: PMC3600371
PMID: 16109718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Sci China C Life Sci. 2005 Jun;48(3):256-62.

Interaction of restin with transcription factors.

Wu Y(1), Lu F, Qi Y, Wang R, Zhang J, Lu Z, Zhao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an 710032, China.

Restin, a member of melanoma-associated antigen superfamily gene, was first
cloned from differentiated leukemia cell induced by all trans-retinoic acid, and 
was able to inhibit cell proliferation, but the molecular mechanism was not
clear. Since Restin was localized in cell nucleus, and its homolog member, Necdin
(neuronal growth suppressor factor), could interact with transcription factors
p53 and E2F1, we proposed that Restin might also function as Necdin through
interacting with some transcription factors. In this study, transcription factors
p53, AP1, ATFs and E2Fs were cloned and used in the mammalian two-hybrid system
to identify their interaction with Restin. The results showed that only ATF3 had 
a strong interaction with Restin. It is interesting to know that ATF3 was an
important transcription factor for G1 cell cycle initiation in physiological
stress response. It was possible that the inhibition of cell proliferation by
Restin might be related with the inhibition of ATF3 activity.

PMID: 16092758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2005 Nov;315(2):668-77. Epub 2005 Aug 3.

Transcriptional regulation of activating transcription factor 3 involves the
early growth response-1 gene.

Bottone FG Jr(1), Moon Y, Alston-Mills B, Eling TE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina, USA.

Previously, our laboratory identified activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) as
up-regulated by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs using microarray analysis of
mRNA from human colorectal cancer cells treated with sulindac sulfide. ATF3 is a 
transcription factor involved in cell growth, apoptosis, and invasion and is
induced by a variety of anticancer and dietary compounds. However, the regulation
of ATF3 by anticancer agents is not known. The promoter of ATF3 contains several 
transcription factor binding sites. We identified three putative Egr-1 binding
sites in the promoter of ATF3 and report for the first time that the molecular
mechanism responsible for the transcriptional regulation of ATF3 by two divergent
pharmaceutical compounds, sulindac sulfide and troglitazone, involved the early
growth response gene-1 (Egr-1). For example, overexpression of Egr-1 protein
induced ATF3 mRNA 3.5-fold and transcriptional activity of an ATF3 promoter
construct more than 20-fold. ATF3 and Egr-1 mRNA and protein and ATF3 promoter
activity were induced by these compounds, whereas induction of ATF3 by these
compounds was blocked by Egr-1 small interfering RNA. Sulindac sulfide and
troglitazone regulated ATF3 promoter activity, which was suppressed when the two 
Egr-1 sites were mutated. These compounds induced phosphorylation of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase1/2 (Erk1/2), whereas a dominant-negative
inhibitor of mitogen-activate protein kinase kinase (MEK) 1 blocked the induction
of ATF3. The MEK1/2 inhibitor PD98059 (2'-amino-3'-methoxyflavone) blocked the
induction of ATF3 and Egr-1 mRNA expression and ATF3 promoter activity by these
compounds. Therefore, this is a novel first report demonstrating that the
expression of ATF3 occurs via Egr-1 downstream of Erk1/2.

PMID: 16079301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Cell Sci. 2005 Aug 1;118(Pt 15):3471-85.

Wounding activates p38 map kinase and activation transcription factor 3 in
leading keratinocytes.

Harper EG(1), Alvares SM, Carter WG.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview Avenue, Seattle, WA
98109, USA.

Quiescent epidermis anchors to laminin 5 in the basement membrane via integrin
alpha6beta4. Wounding elevates expression of laminin 5, generating leading
keratinocytes (LKs) that migrate via beta1 integrins. Laminin 5 was evaluated as 
a regulator of cell signaling, and mRNA and protein expression in LKs. An in
vitro wound model was developed based on suspension and re-adhesion of quiescent 
human keratinocytes (HKs). DNA microarrays identified multiple mRNAs elevated 1.5
hours after suspension and re-adhesion including activation transcription factor 
3 (ATF3). In vitro and in vivo, levels of ATF3 protein elevate in nuclei of LKs, 
but not in nuclei of the following cells, 2 hours after suspension or wounding
but decline by 12-18 hours post injury. Significantly, null defects in laminin 5 
or integrin beta4 that inhibit anchorage chronically elevate ATF3 in vivo. This
suggests that adhesion to laminin 5, but not other ligands, suppresses
activation. On suspension, ATF3 and other transcripts in the microarrays are
elevated by phosphorylated p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (P-p38), a stress
kinase that regulates mRNA and cell motility. Inhibition of P-p38 with SB203580
prevents phosphorylation of ATF2, a transcription factor for ATF3 in LKs.
Re-adhesion to laminin 5 via alpha6beta4 dephosphorylates P-p38 and suppresses
ATF3 protein relative to cells in suspension. Thus, wounding of quiescent HKs
disrupts laminin 5 adhesion to activate p38, generating mRNA transcripts that
define LKs. Adhesion to deposits of laminin 5 via alpha6beta4 suppresses P-p38
and activation mRNAs including ATF3. Defects in laminin 5 and alpha6beta4 sustain
P-p38 with probable pathological effects on transcription and migration.

PMID: 16079289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Pain. 2005 Sep;117(1-2):145-53.

Relationship between sodium channel NaV1.3 expression and neuropathic pain
behavior in rats.

Lindia JA(1), Köhler MG, Martin WJ, Abbadie C.

Author information: 
(1)Merck Research Laboratories, Department of Pharmacology, P.O. Box 2000,
Rahway, NJ 07065, USA.

A multitude of voltage-gated sodium channel subtypes (NaV1) are expressed in
primary sensory neurons where they influence excitability via their role in the
generation and propagation of action potentials. Peripheral nerve injury alters
the expression of several NaV1subtypes, but among these only NaV1.3 is
up-regulated in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons. The increased expression of
NaV1.3 implicates this subtype in the development and maintenance of neuropathic 
pain, but its contribution to neuropathic pain behavior has not been examined.
Using the spared nerve injury (SNI) model, we found that peripheral nerve lesion 
increased NaV1.3-like immunoreactivity (-LI) in DRG neurons and that mechanical
allodynia was partially alleviated following oral administration of two NaV1
blockers, mexiletine (30 and 100 mg/kg, p.o.) and lamotrigine (30 and 100 mg/kg, 
p.o.). Intrathecal administration of antisense oligonucleotides (4 days)
selective for NaV1.3 decreased NaV1.3 immunostaining in the DRG by 50% in the SNI
model, but did not attenuate mechanical or cold allodynia. Moreover, we found
that only 18% of NaV1.3 positive neurons also expressed activated transcription
factor-3 (ATF3), a marker of injured neurons. We then selectively axotomized a
cutaneous nerve (sural) and a muscle nerve (gastrocnemius) in order to identify
if NaV1.3 up-regulation is dependent on cutaneous and/or muscle afferent
activation and found that the numbers of neurons expressing NaV1.3 was
proportional to the magnitude of the injury, but independent of the nature of
innervation. These results suggest that NaV1.3 increases in primary sensory
neurons that are not directly damaged in response to injury. Thus, although
NaV1.3 is up-regulated in a subpopulation of DRG neurons after injury, reduction 
in the expression of NaV1.3 subtype alone is not sufficient to influence the
NaV1-dependent behavioral hypersensitivity associated with nerve injury.

PMID: 16061326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Neurobiol Dis. 2006 Jan;21(1):18-28. Epub 2005 Jul 22.

Effect of hypoxic preconditioning on brain genomic response before and following 
ischemia in the adult mouse: identification of potential neuroprotective
candidates for stroke.

Tang Y(1), Pacary E, Fréret T, Divoux D, Petit E, Schumann-Bard P, Bernaudin M.

Author information: 
(1)The M.I.N.D. Institute and Department of Neurology, University of California
at Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

The aim of the present study is to better understand oxygen-sensitive adaptative 
pathways underlying the hypoxic preconditioning-induced protection of the brain
against ischemia. Using oligonucleotide microarrays, we examined the brain
genomic response of adult mice following hypoxia preconditioning (8% O2 for 1 or 
6 h of hypoxia with reoxygenation 12, 18, 24 h or 72 h) and ischemia (6 h),
preceeded (tolerant state) or not, by preconditioning. Real-time PCR was used to 
validate the results. Most gene expression increases occurred during hypoxia,
including those of HIF-1-dependent genes (RTP801, AM, VEGF, p21, GLUT-1), early
response genes (IER3) and transcriptional factors (ATF3, C/EBPdelta). A second
wave of changes occurred 24 h after reoxygenation (S100A5, TH, Calretinin, PBX3).
A third one occurred during ischemia itself, revealing that hypoxic
preconditioning modifies the brain genomic response to ischemia. In addition, we 
show that some identical genes are overexpressed by hypoxia in both neonatal and 
adult brains (VEGF, EPO, GLUT-1, AM, MTs, C/EBPdelta).

PMID: 16040250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Biochem J. 2005 Nov 1;391(Pt 3):649-58.

Amino-acid limitation induces transcription from the human C/EBPbeta gene via an 
enhancer activity located downstream of the protein coding sequence.

Chen C(1), Dudenhausen E, Chen H, Pan YX, Gjymishka A, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, and
Shands Cancer Center, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 
32610, USA.

For animals, dietary protein is critical for the nutrition of the organism and,
at the cellular level, protein nutrition translates into amino acid availability.
Amino acid deprivation triggers the AAR (amino acid response) pathway, which
causes enhanced transcription from specific target genes. The present results
show that C/EBPbeta (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta) mRNA and protein
content were increased following the deprivation of HepG2 human hepatoma cells of
a single amino acid. Although there was a modest increase in mRNA half-life
following histidine limitation, the primary mechanism for the elevated
steady-state mRNA was increased transcription. Transient transfection documented 
that C/EBPbeta genomic fragments containing the 8451 bp 5' upstream of the
transcription start site did not contain amino-acid-responsive elements. However,
deletion analysis of the genomic region located 3' downstream of the protein
coding sequence revealed that a 93 bp fragment contained an amino-acid-responsive
activity that functioned as an enhancer. Exogenous expression of ATF4 (activating
transcription factor 4), known to activate other genes through amino acid
response elements, caused increased transcription from reporter constructs
containing the C/EBPbeta enhancer in cells maintained in complete amino acid
medium. Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated that RNA polymerase II is
bound at the C/EBPbeta promoter and at the 93 bp regulatory region in vivo,
whereas ATF4 binds to the enhancer region only. Immediately following amino acid 
removal, the kinetics of binding for ATF4, ATF3, and C/EBPbeta itself to the 93
bp regulatory region were similar to those observed for the amino-acid-responsive
asparagine synthetase gene. Collectively the findings show that expression of
C/EBPbeta, which contributes to the regulation of amino-acid-responsive genes, is
itself controlled by amino acid availability through transcription.

PMCID: PMC1276966
PMID: 16026328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Scand J Plast Reconstr Surg Hand Surg. 2005;39(2):65-72.

Induction of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) by peripheral nerve
compression.

Isacsson A(1), Kanje M, Dahlin LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hand Surgery, Malmö University Hospital Malmö, Sweden.

Nuclear translocation of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), used as a
marker for neuronal injury, was studied by immunocytochemistry in sensory neurons
in dorsal root ganglia and locally along the sciatic nerve after severe chronic
nerve compression in rats. In compressed nerves (application of a narrow silicone
tube), ATF3 immunoreactivity was seen in the nucleus of sensory neurons and in
Schwann cells below the compression at two and four weeks. Removal of the
silicone tube (decompression) at two weeks did not affect the number of
ATF3-positive cell nuclei in dorsal root ganglia. No ATF3 immunoreactivity was
found in undamaged nerves on the other side. Functional variables (toe spreading 
and muscle force) were impaired at two weeks, with partial improvement at four
weeks. Nerve compression induces nuclear translocation of ATF3, a transcription
factor associated with survival and regeneration of sensory neurons. The response
is related to duration of compression and partly correlated to function.

PMID: 16019731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. EMBO J. 2005 Jul 20;24(14):2590-601. Epub 2005 Jun 30.

Stress response gene ATF3 is a target of c-myc in serum-induced cell
proliferation.

Tamura K(1), Hua B, Adachi S, Guney I, Kawauchi J, Morioka M, Tamamori-Adachi M, 
Tanaka Y, Nakabeppu Y, Sunamori M, Sedivy JM, Kitajima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute and Laboratory 
of Genome Structure and Regulation, School of Biomedical Science, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

The c-myc proto-oncogene encodes a transcription factor that promotes cell cycle 
progression and cell proliferation, and its deficiency results in severely
retarded proliferation rates. The ATF3 stress response gene encodes a
transcription factor that plays a role in determining cell fate under stress
conditions. Its biological significance in the control of cell proliferation and 
its crosstalk regulation, however, are not well understood. Here, we report that 
the serum response of the ATF3 gene expression depends on c-myc gene and that the
c-Myc complex at ATF/CREB site of the gene promoter plays a role in mediating the
serum response. Intriguingly, ectopic expression of ATF3 promotes proliferation
of c-myc-deficient cells, mostly by alleviating the impeded G1-phase progression 
observed in these cells, whereas ATF3 knockdown significantly suppresses
proliferation of wild-type cells. Our study demonstrates that ATF3 is downstream 
of the c-Myc signaling pathway and plays a role in mediating the cell
proliferation function of c-Myc. Our results provide a novel insight into the
functional link of the stress response gene ATF3 and the proto-oncogene c-myc.

PMCID: PMC1176468
PMID: 15990869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Radiat Res. 2005 Jun;46(2):173-84.

Identification of Skin injury-related genes induced by ionizing radiation in
human keratinocytes using cDNA microarray.

Koike M(1), Shiomi T, Koike A.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Hazards Research Group, National Institute of Radiological Sciences,
Chiba, Japan. m_koike@nirs.go.jp

The skin is an external organ that is most frequently exposed to radiation.
High-dose radiation initiates and promotes skin cancer and acute radiation
injury. It is important to investigate the influence of high-dose radiation
exposure on the skin at the molecular level to understand acute radiation injury.
To identify genes that are associated with injury caused by high-dose radiation
exposure of the skin, we used microarray technology to examine the effect of
irradiation on approximately 1000 genes in normal human epidermal keratinocytes
at 3 h postirradiation with a cytotoxic dose of X-ray (5 Gy). We found that 16
and 59 genes were up- and down-regulated respectively in the keratinocytes.
Several apoptosis-related genes, for example, BAK and TSC-22, and
anti-proliferative genes, for example, BTG-1 and BTG-3, were up-regulated. We
focused on ATF3 because ATF3 is induced most strongly by X-irradiation, and its
function in keratinocytes is unknown. The induction of the ATF3 mRNA and protein 
in keratinocytes following X-ray was confirmed by RT-PCR and western blot
analysis. ATF3 was also induced and accumulated within the nuclei of
keratinocytes after X-ray irradiation in vivo and in vitro. Exogenous EYFP-ATF3
also accumulated within the nuclei of keratinocytes. In the transient expression 
assay, EYFP-ATF3, but not EYFP, induced apoptosis in keratinocytes. Taken
together, these results suggest that ATF3 plays a role in apoptosis in
keratinocytes and is associated with skin injury caused by ionizing radiation.

PMID: 15988135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Pain. 2005 Aug;116(3):257-63.

Intraneural injection of interleukin-1beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha into
rat sciatic nerve at physiological doses induces signs of neuropathic pain.

Zelenka M(1), Schäfers M, Sommer C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 11,
D-97080 Würzburg, Germany.

Proinflammatory cytokines are mediators of inflammatory and neuropathic pain.
Here, we investigated pain-related behavior in rats after intraneural injection
of different doses of rat recombinant interleukin-1beta (rrIL-1beta) and tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (rrTNF) into the sciatic nerve. Doses ranged between 0.25
and 2500pg/ml for rrIL-1beta and 0.25-250pg/ml for rrTNF. Thermal hyperalgesia as
measured according to the Hargreaves method was most prominent with 2.5pg/ml of
rrIL-1beta or rrTNF. Mechanical allodynia as assessed using von Frey hairs was
seen consistently with 2.5pg/ml of rrIL-1beta and 0.25-2.5pg/ml of rrTNF. Higher 
and lower doses had no significant effect on pain-related behavior. Morphometric 
analysis of semithin sections of the sciatic nerve 10 days after the injections
revealed no significant fiber loss. The fiber size distribution was not
significantly altered by any of the treatments. Particularly with injections of
rrIL-1beta, an increase of epineurial macrophages was observed at all doses. The 
immunohistochemical expression of cellular markers of neuronal damage (activating
transcription factor 3) or activation (phosphorylated p38 mitogen-activated
kinase, NF-kappa B p65) in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) tended to increase with both
cytokine injections. However, this did not reflect the extent of behavioral
changes. In summary, we found a bell-shaped dose-response curve for the algesic
effects of rrIL-1beta and rrTNF, peaking at doses equivalent to those of
endogenous cytokines released locally after nerve injury. The absence of
corresponding morphological changes in nerves supports the concept of a
functional effect of the cytokines at these doses.

PMID: 15964142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Oct;19(10):2624-38. Epub 2005 Jun 16.

Transcript profiling of immediate early genes reveals a unique role for
activating transcription factor 3 in mediating activation of the glycoprotein
hormone alpha-subunit promoter by gonadotropin-releasing hormone.

Xie J(1), Bliss SP, Nett TM, Ebersole BJ, Sealfon SC, Roberson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

Recent studies profiling immediate early gene responses to GnRH in the LbetaT2
gonadotrope cell model revealed increased expression of numerous genes including 
activating transcription factor (ATF) 3. The present studies demonstrate similar 
results with GnRH administration in vivo in ovariectomized mice. In this model,
ATF3 mRNA was markedly up-regulated at 20, 40, and 60 min after in vivo
administration of a GnRH analog. In alphaT3-1 gonadotrope cells, ATF3 mRNA and
protein were induced by GnRH in a manner consistent with in vivo observations.
Pharmacological studies implicated a combined role for the activities of protein 
kinase C isozymes, ERK and c-Jun N-terminal kinase, in modulating ATF3
expression. The role of ATF3 was further investigated in the activation of the
human glycoprotein hormone alpha-subunit gene promoter. GnRH induced the
alpha-subunit promoter-luciferase reporter approximately 16-fold, and this
induction was completely abolished with mutations in the dual cAMP response
elements (CREs) or the combined inhibition of GnRH-induced ERK and c-Jun
N-terminal kinase. GnRH induced recruitment of ATF3, c-Jun, and c-Fos to the dual
CREs. Overexpression and specific knockdown of ATF3 by small inhibitory RNA
implicate a functional role for ATF3 in mediating activation of the alpha-subunit
gene promoter. These studies provide clear evidence that ATF3 is a key immediate 
early gene induced by GnRH administration in vivo and in the alphaT3-1
gonadotrope cell model. These studies support the conclusion that the dual CREs
of the human alpha-subunit promoter are the target of GnRH-induced MAPK
regulation through ATF3.

PMID: 15961508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. EMBO J. 2005 Jul 6;24(13):2425-35. Epub 2005 Jun 2.

Activating transcription factor 3, a stress sensor, activates p53 by blocking its
ubiquitination.

Yan C(1), Lu D, Hai T, Boyd DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is rapidly induced by diverse
environmental insults including genotoxic stress. We report herein that its
interaction with p53, enhanced by genotoxic stress, stabilizes the tumor
suppressor thereby augmenting functions of the latter. Overexpression of ATF3
(but not a mutated ATF3 protein (Delta102-139) devoid of its p53-binding region) 
prevents p53 from MDM2-mediated degradation and leads to increased transcription 
from p53-regulated promoters. ATF3, but not the Delta102-139 protein, binds the
p53 carboxy-terminus and diminishes its ubiquitination and nuclear export.
Genotoxic-stressed ATF3-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts, or cells in which ATF3 
was reduced by small interference RNA, show inefficient p53 induction and
impaired apoptosis compared with wild-type cells. ATF3-null cells (but not
wild-type cells), which poorly accumulate p53, are transformed by oncogenic Ras. 
Thus, ATF3 is a novel stress-activated regulator of p53 protein
stability/function providing the cell with a means of responding to a wide range 
of environmental insult, thus maintaining DNA integrity and protecting against
cell transformation.

PMCID: PMC1173153
PMID: 15933712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Jun;29(2):269-82.

Retrograde axonal transport of JNK signaling molecules influence injury induced
nuclear changes in p-c-Jun and ATF3 in adult rat sensory neurons.

Lindwall C(1), Kanje M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Organism Biology, Lund University, Helgonavägen 3B
SE-223 62 Lund, Sweden. charlotta.lindwall@cob.lu.se

In the present study, we investigated if the previously observed JNK-mediated
activation of c-Jun and induction of ATF3 could be ascribed to axonal transport
of JNK signaling components, or if axonal transport of the transcription factors 
themselves contributes to the nuclear changes in injured sensory neurons. We
observed retrograde axonal transport of a number of JNK upstream kinases in
ligated rat sciatic nerve. In these preparations, axonal transport of JNK/p-JNK, 
the JNK scaffolding protein JIP, and the transcription factors ATF3 and
ATF2/p-ATF2 was also found. No or little retrograde transport of c-Jun and
p-c-Jun was found, whereas an anterograde transport of Hsp27, a protein
previously reported in the context of p-c-Jun and ATF3, was observed. In separate
experiments, we found that in vitro inhibition of axonal transport or axonal
inhibition of JNK reduced the number of p-c-Jun- and ATF3-positive neuronal
nuclei. The results suggest that retrograde axonal transport of JNK signaling
components contributes to the injury induced c-Jun phosphorylation and ATF3
induction.

PMID: 15911351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Cancer Ther. 2005 May;4(5):814-23.

Transcriptional signature of Ecteinascidin 743 (Yondelis, Trabectedin) in human
sarcoma cells explanted from chemo-naive patients.

Martínez N(1), Sánchez-Beato M, Carnero A, Moneo V, Tercero JC, Fernández I,
Navarrete M, Jimeno J, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Programme, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas,
C/ Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, E-28029 Madrid, Spain.

Ecteinascidin 743 (ET-743; Yondelis, Trabectedin) is a marine anticancer agent
that induces long-lasting objective remissions and tumor control in a subset of
patients with pretreated/resistant soft-tissue sarcoma. Drug-induced tumor
control is achievable in 22% of such patients, but there is no clear indication
of the molecular features correlated with clinical sensitivity/resistance to
ET-743. Nine low-passage, soft-tissue sarcoma cell lines, explanted from
chemo-naive patients with different patterns of sensitivity, have been profiled
with a cDNA microarray containing 6,700 cancer-related genes. The molecular
signature of these cell lines was analyzed at baseline and at four different
times after ET-743 exposure. The association of levels of TP53 mutation and TP73 
expression with ET-743 sensitivity and cell cycle kinetics after treatment was
also analyzed. Gene expression profile analysis revealed up-regulation of 86
genes and down-regulation of 244 genes in response to ET-743. The ET-743 gene
expression signature identified a group of genes related with cell cycle control,
stress, and DNA-damage response (JUNB, ATF3, CS-1, SAT, GADD45B, and ID2) that
were up-regulated in all the cell lines studied. The transcriptional signature 72
hours after ET-743 administration, associated with ET-743 sensitivity, showed a
more efficient induction of genes involved in DNA-damage response and apoptosis, 
such as RAD17, BRCA1, PAR4, CDKN1A, and P53DINP1, in the sensitive cell line
group. The transcriptional signature described here may lead to the
identification of ET-743 downstream mediators and transcription regulators and
the proposal of strategies by which ET-743-sensitive tumors may be identified.

PMID: 15897246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Mol Cancer Ther. 2005 May;4(5):693-703.

The anti-invasive activity of cyclooxygenase inhibitors is regulated by the
transcription factor ATF3 (activating transcription factor 3).

Bottone FG Jr(1), Moon Y, Kim JS, Alston-Mills B, Ishibashi M, Eling TE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, NIH, P.O. Box 12233, 111 T.W. Alexander Drive, Research Triangle
Park, NC 27709, USA.

We previously showed that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) such as
sulindac sulfide, which has chemopreventive activity, modulate the expression of 
several genes detected by microarray analysis. Activating transcription factor 3 
(ATF3) was selected for further study because it is a transcription factor
involved in cell proliferation, apoptosis, and invasion, and its expression is
repressed in human colorectal tumors as compared with normal adjacent tissue. In 
this report, we show that ATF3 mRNA and protein expression are up-regulated in
HCT-116 human colorectal cancer cells following treatment with NSAIDs,
troglitazone, diallyl disulfide, and resveratrol. To ascertain the biological
significance of ATF3, we overexpressed full-length ATF3 protein in the sense and 
antisense orientations. Overexpression of ATF3 in the sense orientation decreased
focus formation in vitro and reduced the size of mouse tumor xenografts by 54% in
vivo. Conversely, overexpression of antisense ATF3 was protumorigenic in vitro,
however, not in vivo. ATF3 in the sense orientation did not modulate apoptosis,
indicating another mechanism is involved. With microarray analysis, several genes
relating to invasion and metastasis were identified by ATF3 overexpression and
were confirmed by real-time reverse transcription-PCR, and several of these genes
were modulated by sulindac sulfide, which inhibited invasion in these cells.
Furthermore, overexpression of ATF3 inhibited invasion to a similar degree as
sulindac sulfide treatment, whereas antisense ATF3 increased invasion. In
conclusion, ATF3 represents a novel mechanism in which NSAIDs exert their
anti-invasive activity, thereby linking ATF3 and its gene regulatory activity to 
the biological activity of these compounds.

PMID: 15897233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2005 May-Jun;7(5-6):639-48.

Microarray expression profiling identifies early signaling transcripts associated
with 6-OHDA-induced dopaminergic cell death.

Holtz WA(1), Turetzky JM, O'Malley KL.

Author information: 
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, Anatomy and Neurobiology Department,
St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The parkinsonian mimetic 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) has been shown to cause
transcriptional changes associated with cellular stress and the unfolded protein 
response. As these cellular sequelae depend on upstream signaling events, the
present study used functional genomics and proteomic approaches to aid in
deciphering toxin-mediated regulatory pathways. Microarray analysis of RNA
collected from multiple time points following 6-OHDA treatment was combined with 
data mining and clustering techniques to identify distinct functional subgroups
of genes. Notably, stress-induced transcription factors such as ATF3, ATF4, CHOP,
and C/EBP beta were robustly up-regulated, yet exhibited unique kinetic patterns.
Genes involved in the synthesis and modification of proteins (various tRNA
synthetases), protein degradation (e.g., ubiquitin, Herpud1, Sqstm1), and
oxidative stress (Hmox1, Por) could be subgrouped into distinct kinetic profiles 
as well. Realtime PCR and/or two-dimensional electrophoresis combined with
western blotting validated data derived from microarray analyses. Taken together,
these data support the notion that oxidative stress and protein dysfunction play 
a role in Parkinson's disease, as well as provide a time course for many of the
molecular events associated with 6-OHDA neurotoxicity.

PMID: 15890008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Exp Neurol. 2005 May;193(1):85-100.

Tumor-induced injury of primary afferent sensory nerve fibers in bone cancer
pain.

Peters CM(1), Ghilardi JR, Keyser CP, Kubota K, Lindsay TH, Luger NM, Mach DB,
Schwei MJ, Sevcik MA, Mantyh PW.

Author information: 
(1)Neurosystems Center and Department of Preventive Sciences, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Bone is the most common site of chronic pain in patients with metastatic cancer. 
What remains unclear are the mechanisms that generate this pain and why bone
cancer pain can be so severe and refractory to treatment with opioids. Here we
show that following injection and confinement of NCTC 2472 osteolytic tumor cells
within the mouse femur, tumor cells sensitize and injure the unmyelinated and
myelinated sensory fibers that innervate the marrow and mineralized bone. This
tumor-induced injury of sensory nerve fibers is accompanied by an increase in
ongoing and movement-evoked pain behaviors, an upregulation of activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and galanin by sensory neurons that innervate the
tumor-bearing femur, upregulation of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and
hypertrophy of satellite cells surrounding sensory neuron cell bodies within the 
ipsilateral dorsal root ganglia (DRG), and macrophage infiltration of the DRG
ipsilateral to the tumor-bearing femur. Similar neurochemical changes have been
described following peripheral nerve injury and in other non-cancerous
neuropathic pain states. Chronic treatment with gabapentin did not influence
tumor growth, tumor-induced bone destruction or the tumor-induced neurochemical
reorganization that occurs in sensory neurons or the spinal cord, but it did
attenuate both ongoing and movement-evoked bone cancer-related pain behaviors.
These results suggest that even when the tumor is confined within the bone, a
component of bone cancer pain is due to tumor-induced injury to primary afferent 
nerve fibers that innervate the tumor-bearing bone. Tumor-derived, inflammatory, 
and neuropathic mechanisms may therefore be simultaneously driving this chronic
pain state.

PMID: 15817267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Circulation. 2005 Apr 12;111(14):1738-46. Epub 2005 Apr 4.

Mouse model of SCN5A-linked hereditary Lenègre's disease: age-related conduction 
slowing and myocardial fibrosis.

Royer A(1), van Veen TA, Le Bouter S, Marionneau C, Griol-Charhbili V, Léoni AL, 
Steenman M, van Rijen HV, Demolombe S, Goddard CA, Richer C, Escoubet B,
Jarry-Guichard T, Colledge WH, Gros D, de Bakker JM, Grace AA, Escande D,
Charpentier F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U533, Institut du Thorax, Faculté de Médecine, Nantes, France.

BACKGROUND: We have previously linked hereditary progressive cardiac conduction
defect (hereditary Lenègre's disease) to a loss-of-function mutation in the gene 
encoding the main cardiac Na+ channel, SCN5A. In the present study, we
investigated heterozygous Scn5a-knockout mice (Scn5a+/- mice) as a model for
hereditary Lenègre's disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In Scn5a+/- mice, surface ECG recordings showed age-related 
lengthening of the P-wave and PR- and QRS-interval duration, coinciding with
previous observations in patients with Lenègre's disease. Old but not young
Scn5a+/- mice showed extensive fibrosis of their ventricular myocardium, a
feature not seen in wild-type animals. In old Scn5a+/- mice, fibrosis was
accompanied by heterogeneous expression of connexin 43 and upregulation of
hypertrophic markers, including beta-MHC and skeletal alpha-actin. Global
connexin 43 expression as assessed with Western blots was similar to wild-type
mice. Decreased connexin 40 expression was seen in the atria. Using pangenomic
microarrays and real-time PCR, we identified in Scn5a+/- mice an age-related
upregulation of genes encoding Atf3 and Egr1 transcription factors.
Echocardiography and hemodynamic investigations demonstrated conserved cardiac
function with aging and lack of ventricular hypertrophy.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that Scn5a+/- mice convincingly recapitulate the
Lenègre's disease phenotype, including progressive impairment with aging of
atrial and ventricular conduction associated with myocardial rearrangements and
fibrosis. Our work provides the first demonstration that a monogenic ion channel 
defect can progressively lead to myocardial structural anomalies.

PMID: 15809371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Neurosci. 2005 Mar 23;25(12):3126-31.

Selective blockade of the capsaicin receptor TRPV1 attenuates bone cancer pain.

Ghilardi JR(1), Röhrich H, Lindsay TH, Sevcik MA, Schwei MJ, Kubota K, Halvorson 
KG, Poblete J, Chaplan SR, Dubin AE, Carruthers NI, Swanson D, Kuskowski M,
Flores CM, Julius D, Mantyh PW.

Author information: 
(1)Neurosystems Center and Department of Preventive Sciences, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Cancer colonization of bone leads to the activation of osteoclasts, thereby
producing local tissue acidosis and bone resorption. This process may contribute 
to the generation of both ongoing and movement-evoked pain, resulting from the
activation of sensory neurons that detect noxious stimuli (nociceptors). The
capsaicin receptor TRPV1 (transient receptor potential vanilloid subtype 1) is a 
cation channel expressed by nociceptors that detects multiple pain-producing
stimuli, including noxious heat and extracellular protons, raising the
possibility that it is an important mediator of bone cancer pain via its capacity
to detect osteoclast- and tumor-mediated tissue acidosis. Here, we show that
TRPV1 is present on sensory neuron fibers that innervate the mouse femur and
that, in an in vivo model of bone cancer pain, acute or chronic administration of
a TRPV1 antagonist or disruption of the TRPV1 gene results in a significant
attenuation of both ongoing and movement-evoked nocifensive behaviors.
Administration of the antagonist had similar efficacy in reducing early,
moderate, and severe pain-related responses, suggesting that TRPV1 may be a novel
target for pharmacological treatment of chronic pain states associated with bone 
cancer metastasis.

PMID: 15788769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Neuroscience. 2005;132(1):183-91.

Induction of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and -2 in dorsal root ganglion
neurons after peripheral nerve injury.

Yamanaka H(1), Obata K, Fukuoka T, Dai Y, Kobayashi K, Tokunaga A, Noguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Hyogo College of Medicine, 1-1
Mukogawa-cho, Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan.

We have previously found that tissue type and urokinase type plasminogen
activators (tPA and uPA) are induced in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons after
peripheral axotomy and that tPA plays crucial roles in generating neuropathic
pain. Here we examined whether the plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and -2
(PAI-1 and PAI-2) mRNA, endogenous inhibitors of tPA and uPA, are induced in the 
DRG following sciatic nerve transection. L4 and L5 DRG sections were examined
using in situ hybridization histochemistry. The results showed that both PAI-1
and PAI-2 mRNA were up-regulated in DRG neurons within 1 day, and peaked at 1-3
days, after injury. Reduction of these mRNA was observed from 7 days after
injury. The precise expression patterns of PAI-1 and PAI-2 mRNA at 3 days after
axotomy revealed that PAI-1 mRNA was observed in predominantly small neurons,
while much of the PAI-2 mRNA was expressed in large neurons. Double-labeling
analysis of these mRNAs with activated transcription factor 3, known as an injury
marker, revealed that most PAI-1 and PAI-2 mRNAs was induced in injured neurons. 
Co-expression of PAI-1, 2 with tPA and uPA in DRG neurons suggests that these
inhibitors may act in an autocrine manner to modulate extracellular proteolytic
activity after nerve injury.

PMID: 15780477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. FEBS Lett. 2005 Mar 14;579(7):1732-40.

Expression profiling of the estrogen responsive genes in response to
phytoestrogens using a customized DNA microarray.

Ise R(1), Han D, Takahashi Y, Terasaka S, Inoue A, Tanji M, Kiyama R.

Author information: 
(1)InfoGenes Co., Ltd., Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan.

Here, we examined phytoestrogens, isoflavones (genistein, daidzein, glycitein,
biochanin A and ipriflavone), flavones (chrysin, luteolin and apigenin),
flavonols (kaempferol and quercetin), and a coumestan, a flavanone and a chalcone
(coumestrol, naringenin and phloretin, respectively) by means of a DNA microarray
assay. A total of 172 estrogen responsive genes were monitored with a customized 
DNA microarray and their expression profiles for the above phytoestrogens were
compared with that for 17beta-estradiol (E2) using correlation coefficients, or R
values, after a correlation analysis by linear regression. While R values
indicate the similarity of the response by the genes, we also examined the genes 
by cluster analysis and by their specificity to phytoestrogens (specific to
genistein, daidzein or glycitein) or gene functions. Several genes were selected 
from p53-related genes (CDKN1A, TP53I11 and CDC14), Akt2-related genes (PRKCD,
BRCA1, TRIB3 and APPL), mitogen-activated protein kinase-related genes (RSK and
SH3BP5), Ras superfamily genes (RAP1GA1, RHOC and ARHGDIA) and AP-1 family and
related genes (RIP140, FOS, ATF3, JUN and FRA2). We further examined the extracts
from two local crops of soy beans (Kuro-daizu or Mochi-daizu) by comparing the
gene expression profiles with those of E2 or phytoestrogens as a first step in
utilizing the expression profiles for various applications.

PMID: 15757668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Jun;67(6):1909-19. Epub 2005 Mar 8.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress links dyslipidemia to inhibition of proteasome
activity and glucose transport by HIV protease inhibitors.

Parker RA(1), Flint OP, Mulvey R, Elosua C, Wang F, Fenderson W, Wang S, Yang WP,
Noor MA.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic and Cardiovascular Discovery Biology, Bristol-Myers Squibb
Pharmaceutical Research Institute, 311 Pennington-Rocky Hill Road, Pennington, NJ
08534, USA. rex.parker@bms.com

The lipid and metabolic disturbances associated with human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) protease inhibitor therapy in AIDS have stimulated interest in developing
new agents that minimize these side effects in the clinic. The underlying
explanation of mechanism remains enigmatic, but a recently described link between
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and dysregulation of lipid metabolism suggests 
a provocative integration of existing and emerging data. We provide new evidence 
from in vitro models indicating that proteasome inhibition and differential
glucose transport blockade by protease inhibitors are proximal events eliciting
an ER stress transcriptional response that can regulate lipogenic pathways in
hepatocytes or adipocytes. Proteasome activity was inhibited in vitro by several 
protease inhibitors at clinically relevant (micromolar) levels. In the intact
cells, protease inhibitors rapidly elicited a pattern of gene expression
diagnostic of intracellular proteasome inhibition and activation of an ER stress 
response. This included induction of transcription factors GADD153, ATF4, and
ATF3; amino acid metabolic enzymes; proteasome components; and certain ER
chaperones. In hepatocyte lines, the ER stress response was closely linked to
moderate increases in lipogenic and cholesterogenic gene expression. However, in 
adipocytes where GLUT4 was directly inhibited by some protease inhibitors,
time-dependent suppression of lipogenic genes and triglyceride synthesis was
observed in coordination with the ER stress response. These results further link 
ER stress to dyslipidemia and contribute to a unifying mechanism for the
pathophysiology of protease inhibitor-associated lipodystrophy, helping explain
differences in clinical metabolic profiles among protease inhibitors.

PMID: 15755908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Exp Neurol. 2005 Apr;192(2):340-7.

Upregulation of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) by intrinsic CNS neurons
regenerating axons into peripheral nerve grafts.

Campbell G(1), Hutchins K, Winterbottom J, Grenningloh G, Lieberman AR, Anderson 
PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. g.campbell@ucl.ac.uk

The expression of the transcription factor ATF3 in the brain was examined by
immunohistochemistry during axonal regeneration induced by the implantation of
pieces of peripheral nerve into the thalamus of adult rats. After 3 days, ATF3
immunoreactivity was present in many cells within approximately 500 mum of the
graft. In addition, ATF3-positive cell nuclei were found in the thalamic
reticular nucleus (TRN) and medial geniculate nuclear complex (MGN), from which
most regenerating axons originate. CNS cells with ATF3-positive nuclei were
predominantly neurons and did not show signs of apoptosis. The number of
ATF3-positive cells had declined by 7 days and further by 1 month after grafting 
when most ATF3-positive cells were found in the TRN and MGN. 14 days or more
after grafting, some ATF3-positive nuclei were distorted and may have been
apoptotic. In some experiments of 1 month duration, neurons which had regenerated
axons to the distal ends of grafts were retrogradely labeled with DiAsp.
ATF3-positive neurons in these animals were located in regions of the TRN and MGN
containing retrogradely labeled neurons and the great majority were also labeled 
with DiAsp. SCG10 and c-Jun were found in neurons in the same regions as
retrogradely labeled and ATF3-positive cells. Thus, ATF3 is transiently
upregulated by injured CNS neurons, but prolonged expression is part of the
pattern of gene expression associated with axonal regeneration. The co-expression
of ATF3 with c-jun suggests that interactions between these transcription factors
may be important for controlling the program of gene expression necessary for
regeneration.

PMID: 15755551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Endocrinology. 2005 Jun;146(6):2716-25. Epub 2005 Feb 24.

Blockade of rapid versus prolonged extracellularly regulated kinase 1/2
activation has differential effects on insulin-induced gene expression.

Keeton AB(1), Bortoff KD, Franklin JL, Messina JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Molecular and Cellular Pathology, Volker 
Hall, G019, 1670 University Boulevard, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama 35294-0019, USA.

In the present work, insulin's regulation of expression of activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF-3), the putative transcription factor proline-rich
induced protein (Pip)92, and insulin-inducible gene-1 (Insig-1) (an ER resident
protein involved in regulation of sterol-responsive element-binding protein 1
activation) have been examined in a liver-derived cell line (rat H4IIE hepatoma
cells). We report that: 1) insulin-induced transcription of ATF-3, Pip92, and
Insig-1 required MEK-ERK activation; 2) insulin-induced transcription of ATF-3
and Pip92 reached maximum levels within 15 min and was blocked by wortmannin but 
not LY294002; 3) in contrast, the maximum level of insulin-induced transcription 
of Insig-1 was delayed and was not blocked by either wortmannin or LY294002; 4)
insulin activated ERK1/2 in two distinct phases, a rapid peak and a later
plateau; 5) the delayed plateau phase of insulin-induced ERK1/2 activation was
partially phosphatidylinositol 3-OH-kinase dependent; and 6) however, the rapid, 
insulin-induced peak of ERK1/2 activation was blocked by wortmannin but not
LY294002.

PMID: 15731359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Mol Cancer Ther. 2005 Feb;4(2):233-41.

Gene expression profiling identifies activating transcription factor 3 as a novel
contributor to the proapoptotic effect of curcumin.

Yan C(1), Jamaluddin MS, Aggarwal B, Myers J, Boyd DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The antitumor effect of curcumin (diferuloylmethane) is well established.
However, there have been no unbiased studies to identify novel molecular targets 
of this compound. We therefore undertook a gene expression profiling study to
identify novel targets of curcumin. A cDNA array comprised of 12,625 probes was
used to compare total RNA extracted from curcumin-treated and untreated MDA-1986 
cells for differential gene expression. We identified 202 up-regulated mRNAs and 
505 transcripts decreased > or =2-fold. The proapoptotic activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3) was induced >4-fold. Two negative regulators of growth control
[antagonizer of myc transcriptional activity (Mad) and p27kip1] were induced 68- 
and 3-fold, respectively. Additionally, two dual-activity phosphatases (CL 100
and MKP-5), which inactivate the c-jun-NH2-kinases, showed augmented expression, 
coinciding with reduced expression of the upstream activators of c-jun-NH2-kinase
(MEKK and MKK4). Of the repressed genes, the expression of Frizzled-1 (Wnt
receptor) was most strongly attenuated (8-fold). Additionally, two genes
implicated in growth control (K-sam, encoding the keratinocyte growth factor
receptor, and HER3) as well as the E2F-5 transcription factor, which regulates
genes controlling cell proliferation, also showed down-regulated expression.
Considering its role in apoptosis, we determined the contribution of ATF3 to the 
antitumor effect of curcumin. Curcumin-treated MDA-1986 cells showed a rapid,
dose-dependent increase in ATF3/mRNA protein. Moreover, expression of an
exogenous ATF3 cDNA synergized with curcumin in inducing apoptosis. Thus, we have
identified several putative, novel molecular targets of curcumin and showed that 
one, (ATF3) contributes to the proapoptotic effects of this compound.

PMID: 15713895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Hum Reprod. 2005 Apr;20(4):852-63. Epub 2005 Feb 10.

Gene expression studies provide clues to the pathogenesis of uterine leiomyoma:
new evidence and a systematic review.

Arslan AA(1), Gold LI, Mittal K, Suen TC, Belitskaya-Levy I, Tang MS, Toniolo P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Department of Environmental Medicine,
Department of Pathology and Department of Medicine, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. akhmea01@med.nyu.edu

BACKGROUND: Uterine leiomyomas are extremely common and a major cause of pelvic
pain, bleeding, infertility, and the leading indication for hysterectomy.
Familial and epidemiological studies provide compelling evidence that genetic
alterations play an important role in leiomyoma development.
METHODS: Using Affymetrix U133A GeneChip we analysed expression profiles of
22,283 genes in paired samples of leiomyoma and adjacent normal myometrium. We
compared our results with previously published data on gene expression in uterine
leiomyoma and identified the overlapping gene alterations.
RESULTS: We detected 80 genes with average differences of > or = 2-fold and false
discovery rates of < 5% (14 overexpressed and 66 underexpressed). A comparative
analysis including eight previous gene expression studies revealed eight
prominent genes (ADH1, ATF3, CRABP2, CYR61, DPT, GRIA2, IGF2, MEST) identified by
at least five different studies, eleven genes (ALDH1, CD24, CTGF, DCX, DUSP1,
FOS, GAGEC1, IGFBP6, PTGDS, PTGER3, TYMS) reported by four studies, twelve genes 
(ABCA, ANXA1, APM2, CCL21, CDKN1A, CRMP1, EMP1, ESR1, FY, MAP3K5, TGFBR2, TIMP3) 
identified by three studies, and 40 genes reported by two different studies.
CONCLUSIONS: Review of gene expression data revealed concordant changes in genes 
regulating retinoid synthesis, IGF metabolism, TGF-beta signaling and
extracellular matrix formation. Gene expression studies provide clues to the
relevant pathways of leiomyoma development.

PMID: 15705628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Mar 4;328(1):63-9.

Indole-3-carbinol and 3,3'-diindolylmethane induce expression of NAG-1 in a
p53-independent manner.

Lee SH(1), Kim JS, Yamaguchi K, Eling TE, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Carcinogenesis, Department of Pathobiology,
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996,
USA.

Indole-3-carbinol (I3C), present in cruciferous vegetables, and its major in vivo
product 3,3'-diindolylmethane (DIM), have been reported to suppress cancer
development. However, the responsible molecular mechanisms are not fully
understood. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-activated gene-1 (NAG-1) is a
TGF-beta superfamily gene associated with pro-apoptotic and anti-tumorigenic
activities. The present study was performed to investigate whether I3C and DIM
influence NAG-1 expression and to provide the potential molecular mechanism of
their effects on anti-tumorigenesis. The I3C repressed cell proliferation and
induced NAG-1 expression in a concentration-dependent manner. In addition, DIM
increased the expression of NAG-1 as well as activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3), and the induction of ATF3 was earlier than that of NAG-1. The DIM
treatment increased luciferase activity of NAG-1 in HCT-116 cells transfected
with NAG-1 promoter construct. The results suggest that I3C represses cell
proliferation through up-regulation of NAG-1 and that ATF3 may play a pivotal
role in DIM-induced NAG-1 expression in human colorectal cancer cells.
Furthermore, the mixture of I3C with resveratrol enhances NAG-1 expression,
suggesting the synergistic effect of these two unrelated compounds on NAG-1
expression.

PMID: 15670751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Free Radic Biol Med. 2005 Feb 1;38(3):375-87.

Smad3-ATF3 signaling mediates TGF-beta suppression of genes encoding Phase II
detoxifying proteins.

Bakin AV(1), Stourman NV, Sekhar KR, Rinehart C, Yan X, Meredith MJ, Arteaga CL, 
Freeman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY
14263, USA. andrei.bakin@roswellpark.org

This study provides evidence that in mammary epithelial cells the pluripotent
cytokine TGF-beta1 repressed expression of multiple genes involved in Phase II
detoxification. GCLC, the gene that encodes the catalytic subunit of the enzyme
glutamate cysteine ligase, the rate-limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of
glutathione, was used as a molecular surrogate for investigating the mechanisms
by which TGF-beta suppressed Phase II gene expression. TGF-beta was found to
suppress luciferase reporter activity mediated by the human GCLC proximal
promoter, as well as reporter activity mediated by the GCLC antioxidant response 
element, ARE4. TGF-beta downregulated expression of endogenous GCLC mRNA and GCLC
protein. TGF-beta suppression of the Phase II genes correlated with a decrease in
cellular glutathione and an increase in cellular reactive oxygen species. Ectopic
expression of constitutively active Smad3E was sufficient to inhibit both
reporters in the absence of TGF-beta, whereas dominant negative Smad3A blocked
TGF-beta suppression. Smad3E suppressed Nrf2-mediated activation of the GCLC
reporter. We demonstrate that TGF-beta increased ATF3 protein levels, as did
transient overexpression of Smad3E. Ectopic expression of ATF3 was sufficient to 
suppress the GCLC reporter activity, as well as endogenous GCLC expression. These
results demonstrate that Smad3-ATF3 signaling mediates TGF-beta repression of
ARE-dependent Phase II gene expression and potentially provide critical insight
into mechanisms underlying TGF-beta1 function in carcinogenesis, tissue repair,
and fibrosis.

PMID: 15629866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2005 Jan;38(1):103-17. Epub 2004 Dec 8.

Molecular dynamics of the compensatory response to myocardial infarct.

LaFramboise WA(1), Bombach KL, Dhir RJ, Muha N, Cullen RF, Pogozelski AR, Turk D,
George JD, Guthrie RD, Magovern JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Allegheny General Hospital, Drexel
University School of Medicine, 320 East North Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15212, USA. 
laframboisewa@upmc.edu

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2005 Apr;38(4):547-50.

Myocardial infarct via occlusion of the left anterior descending coronary in rats
caused overriding depression in transcription, signal transduction, inflammation 
and extracellular matrix pathways in the infarct zone within 24 h. In contrast,
remote zone gene expression was reciprocally activated during the immediate
post-infarct period. Infarct zone signal transduction occurred primarily through 
TGFbeta1 induction while the remote zone exhibited elevated WNT, NOTCH, GPCR and 
transmembrane signaling. A minimal day 1 acute phase, inflammatory response was
detected in the infarct zone while interleukins (IL1alpha, IL1beta, IL6,
IL12alpha, IL18) and the TNFalpha superfamily were activated in the remote zone. 
Different cytochrome subsets were activated in each left ventricular region on
day 1 while anti-oxidant genes were elevated only in the remote zone. The infarct
zone exhibited mixed early transcription factor activation across all binding
domains with a balance favoring constitutive gene activation and differentiation 
pathways as opposed to cell proliferation. In contrast, the remote zone exhibited
activation of extensive developmental transcription factors involved in
specification of cell phenotype, tissue-specific interactions and
position-specific cell proliferation on day 1. The day 28 infarct zone response
mirrored the day 1 remote zone response including activation of genes associated 
with matrix remodeling (metallothionein and metalloproteinase 9, 12, 23), as well
as genes associated with cell proliferation and phenotype specification (MYC,
EGR2, ATF3, HOXA1) recapitulating developmental histogenesis programs.

PMID: 15623427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Exp Neurol. 2005 Jan;191(1):211-22.

Modulation of muscle spindle innervation by neurotrophin-3 following nerve
injury.

Taylor MD(1), Holdeman AS, Weltmer SG, Ryals JM, Wright DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Erratum in
    Exp Neurol. 2005 Aug;194(2):557-9.

Muscle spindles monitor changes in muscle length and are innervated by groups Ia 
and II sensory axons as well as gamma motor axons. Ia sensory axons respond to
neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), which plays an important role in sculpting proprioceptive 
development. Previously, transgenic mice were generated that overexpress NT-3 in 
muscle (mlc/NT-3 mice). These mice have alterations in proprioceptive elements
due to the developmental actions of NT-3 and neuroprotective effects on Ia axons 
following nerve injury (Taylor, M.D., Vancura, R., Williams, J.M., Riekhof, J.T.,
Taylor, B.K., Wright, D.E., 2001. Overexpression of neurotrophin-3 in skeletal
muscle alters normal and injury-induced limb control. Somatosens. Motor Res. 18
(4), 286-294.) Here, we investigated the actions of NT-3 on each class of injured
axons innervating spindles and explored the mechanisms by which NT-3 acts.
Immunohistochemical assessment of muscle spindle innervation following crush
revealed that the degeneration of Ia axons innervating spindles in mlc/NT-3 mice 
was substantially reduced, and overall spindle innervation by group II and gamma 
fibers was greatly improved at later stages. Mlc/NT-3 mice also displayed a
significant reduction in the expression of the injury-induced transcription
factor ATF3 by retrogradely labeled muscle afferent neurons. The effects of
transgenic NT-3 overexpression on spindle innervation could be mimicked if
wild-type mice were treated intramuscularly with recombinant NT-3 prior to but
not following injury, suggesting that NT-3's actions were due to preexposure to
NT-3. This view was supported by in vitro experiments in which large DRG neurons 
from mlc/NT-3 mice grew significantly longer neurites than wild-type neurons. The
results reveal that improved Ia-spindle interactions after injury may enhance
spindle innervation by group II and gamma fibers. Finally, exposure of muscle
afferent fibers to NT-3 prior to injury alters axonal responses both in vitro and
in vivo.

PMID: 15589528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Eur J Neurosci. 2004 Dec;20(11):2881-95.

Differential activation of MAPK in injured and uninjured DRG neurons following
chronic constriction injury of the sciatic nerve in rats.

Obata K(1), Yamanaka H, Dai Y, Mizushima T, Fukuoka T, Tokunaga A, Noguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Hyogo College of Medicine, 1-1
Mukogawa-cho, Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan.

To investigate the intracellular signal transduction pathways involved in the
pathophysiological mechanisms of neuropathic pain after partial nerve injury, we 
examined the activation of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK)
and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG)
in the chronic constriction injury (CCI) model. The CCI induced an increase in
the phosphorylation of ERK in predominantly injured medium-sized and large-sized 
DRG neurons and in satellite glial cells. Treatment with the MAPK kinase 1/2
inhibitor, U0126, suppressed CCI-induced mechanical allodynia and partially
reversed the increase in neuropeptide Y (NPY) expression in damaged DRG neurons. 
In contrast, the CCI induced the activation of p38, mainly in uninjured
small-to-medium-diameter DRG neurons and in satellite glial cells. The p38
inhibitor, SB203580, reversed the CCI-induced heat hyperalgesia and also the
increase in brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression in intact DRG
neurons. On the other hand, the nerve growth factor (NGF)-induced increase in
BDNF expression in small-to-medium-diameter neurons was reversed by SB203580,
whereas the anti-NGF-induced increase in NPY in medium-sized and large-sized
neurons was partially blocked by U0126. Taken together, our results demonstrate
that the activation of ERK and p38 and also the changes in NPY and BDNF
expression may occur in different populations of DRG neurons after CCI, partially
through alterations in the target-derived NGF. These changes in injured and
intact primary afferents are likely to have a substantial role in pathological
states, and MAPK pathways in nociceptors may be potential targets for the
development of novel analgesics.

PMID: 15579142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2004 Dec;9(4):242-54.

Diabetes-induced expression of activating transcription factor 3 in mouse primary
sensory neurons.

Wright DE(1), Ryals JM, McCarson KE, Christianson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. dwright@kumc.edu

Diabetic neuropathy (DN) is a complication of diabetes that affects the distal
terminals of lengthy-projecting sensory axons. To determine whether
diabetes-induced axonal degeneration induces gene expression similar to nerve
injury, the expression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) by primary
sensory neurons was examined in an experimental mouse model of DN. Diabetes was
induced using streptozotocin in C57BL/6 mice, and ATF3 expression in lumbar
dorsal root ganglia was assessed at different time points and correlated with the
markers of unmyelinated and myelinated neuronal populations. ATF expression was
first evident 3 weeks after diabetes induction in both small unmyelinated and
large myelinated neurons, but it was more prevalent in larger neurons. At 6
weeks, ATF3 was expressed by neurons among smaller size ranges, but this shift
occurred principally within myelinated populations. The retrograde labeling of
neurons innervating the flank and paw skin using Fluoro-Gold labeled appropriate 
percentages of ATF3-positive neurons at 3 weeks, suggesting ATF3 is expressed by 
neurons capable of transporting substances. However, the percentage of
double-labeled neurons was substantially reduced at 6 weeks, suggesting this
capacity decreases during disease progression. Finally, behavioral responses to
noxious cutaneous stimuli were assessed. Although no differences to radiant heat 
were observed, diabetic mice developed severe mechanical hypoalgesia 4-5 weeks
after diabetes induction. These results demonstrate that the diabetes-induced
damage of sensory axons can induce the expression of genes linked to peripheral
nerve injury and may identify neurons undergoing nerve damage. Finally, the
ability to detect sensory deficits in diabetic mice occurs after the expression
of injury-related gene ATF3, suggesting that nerve damage may be underway prior
to the appearance of behavioral deficits.

PMID: 15574137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Neurochem. 2004 Nov;91(4):956-64.

Expression of damage-induced neuronal endopeptidase (DINE) mRNA in peri-infarct
cortical and thalamic neurons following middle cerebral artery occlusion.

Ohba N(1), Kiryu-Seo S, Maeda M, Muraoka M, Ishii M, Kiyama H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
City University, Abeno-ku, Osaka, Japan.

Damage-induced neuronal endopeptidase (DINE) is a unique nerve-injury associated 
molecule, which was recently identified in a peripheral nerve injury model. The
aim of this study was to determine the expression profiles and distribution of
DINE in adult rats after middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion. Focal cerebral
ischemia induced late-onset and prolonged expression of DINE mRNA in the
peri-infarct cortex and specific nuclei of thalamus. Double labeling using
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization revealed that DINE mRNA was
exclusively expressed in cells that were positive to a neuronal marker NeuN.
Previously established knowledge on neuroanatomical fiber connection suggests
that DINE mRNA was expressed in areas projecting their axons to or through the
core region of the infarction. This unique expression profile was similar to that
of activating transcription factor-3 (ATF-3), which is a marker of nerve-injured 
neuron. More than 98% of ATF-3 immunoreactive neurons simultaneously expressed
DINE mRNA, suggesting that DINE expression is observed in injured neurons of CNS 
as well as PNS. Since DINE expression promotes antioxidant activity, our results 
suggest that DINE may act as a neuroprotective molecule in neurons under ischemic
insult.

PMID: 15525349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2004 Nov;27(3):267-79.

Inhibition of c-Jun phosphorylation reduces axonal outgrowth of adult rat nodose 
ganglia and dorsal root ganglia sensory neurons.

Lindwall C(1), Dahlin L, Lundborg G, Kanje M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Organism Biology, Lund University, SE-223 62 Lund,
Sweden. charlotta.lindwall@cob.lu.se

The role of c-Jun activation for survival and regeneration of sensory neurons is 
unclear. Here we report that c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)-mediated c-Jun
activation is important for axonal outgrowth of sensory neurons in rat nodose and
dorsal root ganglia (DRG). Peripheral severance of the vagus or the sciatic nerve
resulted in a massive and rapid, but transient increase of the activated JNK
(p-JNK) in neuronal nuclei, followed by c-Jun phosphorylation and activating
transcription factor-3 (ATF3) induction. JNK inhibition by the selective JNK
inhibitors SP600125 and (D)-JNKI1 did not affect neuronal survival in explanted
or dissociated ganglia, but dramatically reduced axonal outgrowth, c-Jun
activation, and ATF3 induction. Using retrograde labeling, we demonstrated that
activated c-Jun (p-c-Jun) and ATF3 were associated with regenerative neurons.
Taken together, our results suggest that JNK-mediated c-Jun activation is one of 
the first cell body reactions in response to nerve injury and that this
activation and subsequent ATF3 induction are associated with axonal outgrowth.

PMID: 15519242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Cell Physiol. 2004 Dec;201(3):349-58.

G protein-coupled receptor agonist-stimulated expression of ATF3/LRF-1 and c-myc 
and comitogenic effects in hepatocytes do not require EGF receptor
transactivation.

Nilssen LS(1), Odegård J, Thoresen GH, Molven A, Sandnes D, Christoffersen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, N-0316
Oslo, Norway. l.d.s.nilssen@labmed.uio.no

Several agonists acting on G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) enhance the
mitogenic effect of epidermal growth factor (EGF) in rat hepatocytes, through
mechanisms that have only partially been clarified. Results in various cells have
led to the idea that a major mechanism for GPCR-mediated stimulation of cell
growth is transactivation of receptor tyrosine kinases, particularly the EGF
receptor (EGFR), leading to rapid phosphorylation of the EGFR and activation of
downstream signaling pathways. In the present study cultured rat hepatocytes were
exposed to various GPCR agonists, including vasopressin, angiotensin II (Ang.II),
norepinephrine, or prostaglandin F(2 alpha) (PGF(2 alpha)). None of these agents 
increased the phosphorylation of the EGFR or the docking protein Shc.
Furthermore, we examined the effect of the GPCR agonists on the expression of two
early response genes believed to be involved in growth activation. The GPCR
agonists increased the mRNA expression of c-myc, and also of activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3)/liver regeneration factor-1 (LRF-1), which is a
novel finding. Finally, the selective EGFR inhibitor AG1478 did not suppress the 
activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) or the induction
of c-myc or ATF3/LRF-1 by the GPCR agonists, and did not prevent the comitogenic 
effects induced by these agents, while it blocked the effect of EGF on these
responses. The results suggest that GPCR agonists induce expression of ATF3/LRF-1
and c-myc and exert comitogenic effects through mechanisms that do not require
EGFR transactivation.

PMID: 15389557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 3;279(49):50829-39. Epub 2004 Sep 22.

Amino acid deprivation induces the transcription rate of the human asparagine
synthetase gene through a timed program of expression and promoter binding of
nutrient-responsive basic region/leucine zipper transcription factors as well as 
localized histone acetylation.

Chen H(1), Pan YX, Dudenhausen EE, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, and
Shands Cancer Center, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville,
Florida 32610, USA.

Expression of human asparagine synthetase (ASNS), which catalyzes asparagine and 
glutamate biosynthesis, is transcriptionally induced following amino acid
deprivation. Previous overexpression and electrophoresis mobility shift analysis 
showed the involvement of the transcription factors ATF4, C/EBPbeta, and ATF3-FL 
through the nutrient-sensing response element-1 (NSRE-1) within the ASNS
promoter. Amino acid deprivation caused an elevated mRNA level for ATF4,
C/EBPbeta, and ATF3-FL, and the present study established that the nuclear
protein content for ATF4 and ATF3-FL were increased during amino acid limitation,
whereas C/EBPbeta-LIP declined slightly. The total amount of C/EBPbeta-LAP
protein was unchanged, but changes in the distribution among multiple
C/EBPbeta-LAP forms were observed. Overexpression studies established that ATF4, 
ATF3-FL, and C/EBPbeta-LAP could coordinately modulate the transcription from the
human ASNS promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated that amino acid
deprivation increased ATF3-FL, ATF4, and C/EBPbeta binding to the ASNS promoter
and enhanced promoter association of RNA polymerase II, TATA-binding protein, and
TFIIB of the general transcription machinery. A time course revealed a markedly
different temporal order of interaction between these transcription factors and
the ASNS promoter. During the initial 2 h, there was a 20-fold increase in ATF4
binding and a rapid increase in histone H3 and H4 acetylation, which closely
paralleled the increased transcription rate of the ASNS gene, whereas the
increase in ATF3-FL and C/EBPbeta binding was considerably slower and more
closely correlated with the decline in transcription rate between 2 and 6 h. The 
data suggest that ATF3-FL and C/EBPbeta act as transcriptional suppressors for
the ASNS gene to counterbalance the transcription rate activated by ATF4
following amino acid deprivation.

PMID: 15385533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Carcinogenesis. 2004 Dec;25(12):2425-32. Epub 2004 Aug 12.

Epicatechin gallate-induced expression of NAG-1 is associated with growth
inhibition and apoptosis in colon cancer cells.

Baek SJ(1), Kim JS, Jackson FR, Eling TE, McEntee MF, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Carcinogenesis, Department of Pathobiology,
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, 2407 River Drive,
Knoxville, TN 37996, USA. sbaek2@utk.edu

There is persuasive epidemiological and experimental evidence that dietary
polyphenolic plant-derived compounds have anticancer activity. Many laboratories,
including ours, have reported such an effect in cancers of the gastrointestinal
tract, lung, skin, prostate and breast. The catechins are a group of polyphenols 
found in green tea, which is one of the most commonly consumed beverages in the
world. While the preponderance of the data strongly indicates significant
antitumorigenic benefits from the green tea catechins, the potential molecular
mechanisms involved remain obscure. We found that green tea components induce
apoptosis via a TGF-beta superfamily protein, NAG-1 (Non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drug Activated Gene). In this report, we show that ECG is the
strongest NAG-1 inducer among the tested catechins and that treatment of HCT-116 
cells results in an increasing G(1) sub-population, and cleavage of poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), consistent with apoptosis. In contrast, other
catechins do not significantly induce NAG-1 expression, PARP cleavage or
morphological changes at up to a 50-microM concentration. Furthermore, we provide
evidence that ECG induces the ATF3 transcription factor, followed by NAG-1
induction at the transcriptional level in a p53-independent manner. The data
generated by this study will help elucidate mechanisms of action for components
in green tea and this information may lead to the design of more effective
anticancer agents and informed clinical trials.

PMID: 15308587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Mol Cancer Res. 2004 Jul;2(7):403-16.

Interleukin-10 induced activating transcription factor 3 transcriptional
suppression of matrix metalloproteinase-2 gene expression in human prostate
CPTX-1532 Cells.

Stearns ME(1), Kim G, Garcia F, Wang M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Drexel University, MS 435, 15th 
and Vine Streets, Philadelphia, PA 19085, USA. stearnsm1@aol.com

Aberrant expression of the 72-kDa type IV collagenase [matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP)-2] is implicated in the invasion and angiogenesis process of malignant
tumors. We investigated the effects of interleukin (IL)-10 on MMP-2 expression in
CPTX-1532 human prostate tumor cells. Our results demonstrate that IL-10
significantly inhibited MMP-2 transcription and protein expression induced by a
phorbol ester, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate. The inhibitory effects of IL-10
on MMP-2 expression correlated with the suppression of MMP-2 promoter activity.
To determine the mechanism of IL-10 action, we examined IL-10-dependent promoter 
activity with luciferase constructs from a 2-kbp promoter region of the human
MMP-2 gene. We functionally characterized the promoter fragments by transient
transfection experiments with CPTX-1532 cells. The experiments revealed that a
cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB) consensus domain was identified
upstream of the 5' transcriptional start site, which was highly responsive to
IL-10-dependent down-regulation of promoter luciferase activity. Electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays combined with antibody "supershift assays" confirmed the
data from the luciferase assays. Immunoblot assays of activating transcription
factor (ATF) 3 immunoprecipitates with tyrosine specific antibodies revealed that
IL-10 stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of ATF3 to activate binding to the CREB
domain and suppress MMP-2 expression. Studies with stable, IL-10 transfected
CPTX-1532 subclones further showed that IL-10 failed to suppress MMP-2 expression
in ATF3-deficient CPTX-1532 cells, where the ATF3 mRNA was destroyed with a
DNAzyme oligonucleotide targeting the 5' region of the mRNA. Finally,
reconstitution of ATF3 successfully restored the inhibitory effects of IL-10 on
MMP-2 gene expression. Taken together, these data demonstrate the critical role
of tyrosine phosphorylated ATF3 and the CREB consensus domain in IL-10
suppression of MMP-2 gene expression in primary human prostate tumor cells.

PMID: 15280448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Eur J Neurosci. 2004 Jul;20(1):14-28.

Decrease of Hsp25 protein expression precedes degeneration of motoneurons in
ALS-SOD1 mice.

Maatkamp A(1), Vlug A, Haasdijk E, Troost D, French PJ, Jaarsma D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, EE12.10, Erasmus University Rotterdam, PO Box
1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

We have investigated the expression of Hsp25, a heat shock protein constitutively
expressed in motoneurons, in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) mice that
express G93A mutant SOD1 (G93A mice). Immunocytochemistry and Western blotting
showed that a decrease of Hsp25 protein expression occurred in motoneurons of
G93A mice prior to the onset of motoneuron death and muscle weakness. This
decrease in Hsp25 expression also preceded the appearance of SOD1 aggregates as
identified by cellulose acetate filtration and Western blot analysis. In contrast
to Hsp25 protein levels, Hsp25 mRNA as determined by in situ hybridization and
RT-PCR, remained unchanged. This suggests that the decrease in Hsp25 protein
levels occurs post-transcriptionally. In view of the cytoprotective properties of
Hsp25 and the temporal relationship between decreased Hsp25 expression and the
onset of motoneuron death, it is feasible that reduced Hsp25 concentration
contributes to the degeneration of motoneurons in G93A mice. These data are
consistent with the idea that mutant SOD1 may reduce the availability of the
protein quality control machinery in motoneurons.

PMID: 15245475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 10;279(37):38797-802. Epub 2004 Jul 1.

Adenylyl cyclase type VI gene transfer reduces phospholamban expression in
cardiac myocytes via activating transcription factor 3.

Gao MH(1), Tang T, Guo T, Sun SQ, Feramisco JR, Hammond HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, USA.

Cardiac-directed expression of adenylyl cyclase type VI (AC(VI)) increases
stimulated cAMP production, improves heart function, and increases survival in
cardiomyopathy. In contrast, pharmacological agents that increase intracellular
levels of cAMP have detrimental effects on cardiac function and survival. We
wondered whether effects that are independent of cAMP might be responsible for
these salutary outcomes associated with AC(VI) expression. We therefore conducted
a series of experiments focused on how gene transcription is influenced by AC(VI)
in cultured neonatal rat cardiac myocytes, with a particular focus on genes that 
might influence cardiac function. We found that overexpression of AC(VI)
down-regulated mRNA and protein expression of phospholamban, an inhibitor of the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase. We determined that the cAMP-responsive-like
element in the phospholamban (PLB) promoter was critical for down-regulation by
AC(VI). Overexpression of AC(VI) did not alter the expression of CREB, CREM,
ATF1, ATF2, or ATF4 proteins. In contrast, overexpression of AC(VI) increased
expression of ATF3 protein, a suppressor of transcription. Following AC(VI) gene 
transfer, when cardiac myocytes were stimulated with isoproterenol or NKH477, a
water-soluble forskolin analog that directly stimulates AC, expression of ATF3
protein was increased even more, which correlated with reduced expression of PLB.
We then showed that AC(VI)-induced ATF3 protein binds to the cAMP-responsive-like
element on the PLB promoter and that overexpression of ATF3 in cardiac myocytes
inhibits PLB promoter activity. These findings indicate that AC(VI) has effects
on gene transcription that are not directly dependent on cAMP generation.

PMID: 15231818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord. 2004 Mar;5(1):16-21.

Long term proteasome inhibition does not preferentially afflict motor neurons in 
organotypical spinal cord cultures.

Vlug AS(1), Jaarsma D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus MC, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Ubiquitinated inclusions are a constant feature of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS). It has been hypothesised that these inclusions reflect overload or failure
of the ubiquitin-proteasome system, and that this failure contributes to the
degeneration of motor neurons. In the present study we have examined the effect
of low concentrations of proteasome inhibitors on protein aggregation and
viability of neurons in organotypical spinal cord cultures. We found a
dose-dependent degeneration of neurons after a one-week exposure to the
proteasome inhibitors lactacystin and epoxomicin. Neuronal degeneration was
associated with an increase in poly-ubiquitination, consistent with failure of
the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Proteasome inhibition caused degeneration of
both motor neurons and interneurons, and no difference in survival between motor 
neurons and interneurons was observed. Since protein aggregation may particularly
play a role in ALS patients with superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) mutations, we have
compared the effect of proteasome inhibition between spinal cord cultures from
non-transgenic and SOD1(G93A) transgenic mice. There was no difference between
the viability of motor neurons from transgenic and non-transgenic mice.

PMID: 15204019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jul;24(13):5721-32.

Role for activating transcription factor 3 in stress-induced beta-cell apoptosis.

Hartman MG(1), Lu D, Kim ML, Kociba GJ, Shukri T, Buteau J, Wang X, Frankel WL,
Guttridge D, Prentki M, Grey ST, Ron D, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Center for Molecular
Neurobiology, Ohio State University, Columbus, USA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a stress-inducible gene and encodes a
member of the ATF/CREB family of transcription factors. However, the
physiological significance of ATF3 induction by stress signals is not clear. In
this report, we describe several lines of evidence supporting a role of ATF3 in
stress-induced beta-cell apoptosis. First, ATF3 is induced in beta cells by
signals relevant to beta-cell destruction: proinflammatory cytokines, nitric
oxide, and high concentrations of glucose and palmitate. Second, induction of
ATF3 is mediated in part by the NF-kappaB and Jun N-terminal
kinase/stress-activated protein kinase signaling pathways, two stress-induced
pathways implicated in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Third, transgenic mice
expressing ATF3 in beta cells develop abnormal islets and defects secondary to
beta-cell deficiency. Fourth, ATF3 knockout islets are partially protected from
cytokine- or nitric oxide-induced apoptosis. Fifth, ATF3 is expressed in the
islets of patients with type 1 or type 2 diabetes, and in the islets of nonobese 
diabetic mice that have developed insulitis or diabetes. Taken together, our
results suggest ATF3 to be a novel regulator of stress-induced beta-cell
apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC480886
PMID: 15199129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2004 May 19;124(2):199-203.

Over expression of ATF-3 protects rat hippocampal neurons from in vivo injection 
of kainic acid.

Francis JS(1), Dragunow M, During MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, University of Auckland School 
of Medicine, Auckland, New Zealand.

ATF-3 is a member of the ATF superfamily of transcription factors and is strongly
associated with episodes of cellular stress. We demonstrate an association
between increases in ATF-3 protein and resistance to exitotoxic cell death in
vivo. Intra-hippocampal injection of kainic acid elicited a robust increase in
endogenous ATF-3 within kainate-resistant cells of the dentate gyrus, while
overexpression of exogenous ATF-3 was found to protect vulnerable CA3 neurons
from the same insult. These results suggest a positive contribution to neuronal
survival in the context of stress-induced death, and support an anti-apoptotic
role for ATF-3 in the brain.

PMID: 15135228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. BMC Neurosci. 2004 Mar 4;5:9.

ATF3 upregulation in glia during Wallerian degeneration: differential expression 
in peripheral nerves and CNS white matter.

Hunt D(1), Hossain-Ibrahim K, Mason MR, Coffin RS, Lieberman AR, Winterbottom J, 
Anderson PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. david.hunt@ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Many changes in gene expression occur in distal stumps of injured
nerves but the transcriptional control of these events is poorly understood. We
have examined the expression of the transcription factors ATF3 and c-Jun by
non-neuronal cells during Wallerian degeneration following injury to sciatic
nerves, dorsal roots and optic nerves of rats and mice, using
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: Following sciatic nerve injury--transection or transection and
reanastomosis--ATF3 was strongly upregulated by endoneurial, but not perineurial 
cells, of the distal stumps of the nerves by 1 day post operation (dpo) and
remained strongly expressed in the endoneurium at 30 dpo when axonal regeneration
was prevented. Most ATF3+ cells were immunoreactive for the Schwann cell marker, 
S100. When the nerve was transected and reanastomosed, allowing regeneration of
axons, most ATF3 expression had been downregulated by 30 dpo. ATF3 expression was
weaker in the proximal stumps of the injured nerves than in the distal stumps and
present in fewer cells at all times after injury. ATF3 was upregulated by
endoneurial cells in the distal stumps of injured neonatal rat sciatic nerves,
but more weakly than in adult animals. ATF3 expression in transected sciatic
nerves of mice was similar to that in rats. Following dorsal root injury in adult
rats, ATF3 was upregulated in the part of the root between the lesion and the
spinal cord (containing Schwann cells), beginning at 1 dpo, but not in the dorsal
root entry zone or in the degenerating dorsal column of the spinal cord.
Following optic nerve crush in adult rats, ATF3 was found in some cells at the
injury site and small numbers of cells within the optic nerve displayed weak
immunoreactivity. The pattern of expression of c-Jun in all types of nerve injury
was similar to that of ATF3.
CONCLUSION: These findings raise the possibility that ATF3/c-Jun heterodimers may
play a role in regulating changes in gene expression necessary for preparing the 
distal segments of injured peripheral nerves for axonal regeneration. The absence
of the ATF3 and c-Jun from CNS glia during Wallerian degeneration may limit their
ability to support regeneration.

PMCID: PMC400733
PMID: 15113454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Mol Pharmacol. 2004 May;65(5):1130-40.

Nitric oxide inhibits matrix metalloproteinase-2 expression via the induction of 
activating transcription factor 3 in endothelial cells.

Chen HH(1), Wang DL.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

Nitric oxide (NO) has been shown to inhibit migration of cells in which various
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are involved. The underlying molecular
mechanisms of this inhibition remain elusive. Endothelial cells (ECs)
constitutively produce MMP-2. The effect of NO on MMP-2 expression was examined. 
A dose-dependent inhibition of MMP-2 mRNA level was demonstrated in ECs treated
with NO. ECs infected with adenovirus carrying endothelial NO synthase (Ade-NOS) 
reduced MMP-2 expression. The inhibitory effect of NO on MMP-2 expression was a
transcriptional event because NO reduced MMP-2 promoter activity. NO treatment of
ECs consequently suppressed MMP-2 secretion revealed by zymographic assay.
Functional analysis of MMP-2 promoter (1716 base pairs) indicated that the
p53-binding site (-1659 to -1629) was crucial for MMP-2 promoter activity.
Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) has been reported to act as a
transcriptional repressor for p53. ECs treated with NO induced ATF3 expression.
Consistently, Ade-NOS-infected ECs showed an increase of ATF3 level. Moreover,
ECs either over-expressed ATF3 or, when treated with an ATF3 activator (MG-132;
carbobenzoxy-l-leucyl-l-leucyl-l-leucinal), resulted in a repression of MMP-2
promoter activity. Because of MMP-2 suppression by NO, ECs treated with NO
inhibited endothelial migration, a phenomenon similar to that of ECs treated with
MMP-2 antibody or MG-132. These results indicate that NO-attenuating endothelial 
migration is mediated at least in part by its reduction of MMP-2 expression via
the up-regulation of ATF3. This study provides a molecular basis that supports
the notion that NO acts as a negative regulator in endothelial migration.

PMID: 15102941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Eur J Neurosci. 2004 Mar;19(6):1437-45.

NGF and GDNF ameliorate the increase in ATF3 expression which occurs in dorsal
root ganglion cells in response to peripheral nerve injury.

Averill S(1), Michael GJ, Shortland PJ, Leavesley RC, King VR, Bradbury EJ,
McMahon SB, Priestley JV.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Centre, Bart's & The London School of Medicine & Dentistry, Queen
Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, UK.
s.a.averrill@qmul.ac.uk

Activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3) is a member of the ATF/CREB
transcription factor superfamily and is induced in dorsal root ganglion (DRG)
cells after nerve injury. In order to study the regulation of ATF3, we have
examined the effect of nerve growth factor (NGF) and glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF) on ATF3 expression. In untreated rats, sciatic nerve
transection induced ATF3 immunoreactivity in 82% of L4 DRG cells at 14 days after
axotomy. Intrathecal delivery of NGF or GDNF for 2 weeks commencing immediately
after injury reduced the ATF3 expression to 35 and 23% of DRG cells,
respectively. Cell size analysis indicated that NGF had protected a population of
mainly small- to medium-sized cells, but that the GDNF had protected a population
of both small and large cells. This effect was confirmed by double labelling for 
P2X(3), CGRP and 200 kDa neurofilament, markers for small peptide-poor cells,
peptide-rich cells and large cells, respectively. Thus GDNF reduced the
percentage of ATF3-immunoreactive P2X(3) cells from 70 to 4%, and the percentage 
of ATF3-immunoreactive neurofilament cells from 63 to 24%. NGF was less effective
than GDNF in reducing ATF3 expression in these cell types, but reduced the
percentage of ATF3-immunoreactive CGRP cells from 10% to < 1%. These results show
that ATF3 expression in specific populations of DRG cells can be modulated by
exogenous supplementation of specific trophic factors, and suggest that ATF3
expression may normally be induced by the loss of target-derived NGF and GDNF.

PMID: 15066140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2004 Feb;24(2):107-18.

Global effect of PEG-IFN-alpha and ribavirin on gene expression in PBMC in vitro.

Taylor MW(1), Grosse WM, Schaley JE, Sanda C, Wu X, Chien SC, Smith F, Wu TG,
Stephens M, Ferris MW, McClintick JN, Jerome RE, Edenberg HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.
taylor@indiana.edu

Using oligonucleotide microarrays, we have examined the expression of 22,000
genes in peripheral blood cells treated with pegylated interferon-alpha2b
(PEG-IFN-alpha) and ribavirin. Treatment with ribavirin had very little effect on
gene expression, whereas treatment with PEG-IFN-alpha had a dramatic effect,
modulating the expression of approximately 1000 genes (at p < 0.001). In addition
to genes previously reported to be induced by type I or type II IFNs, many novel 
genes were found to be upregulated, including transcription factors, such as
ATF3, ATF4, properdin, a key regulator of the complement pathway, a homeobox gene
(HESX1), and an RNA editing enzyme (apobec3). Chemokines CXCL10 and CXCL11 were
upregulated, whereas CXCL5 was downregulated. Cytokines interleukin-15 (IL-15)
and IL-18 were also significantly induced, whereas IL-1alpha and IL-1beta were
downregulated. Most other interleukins were not affected. The results of the
microarrays were confirmed by kinetic real-time PCR. These data indicate that IFN
treatment causes upregulation of genes associated with the stress response,
apoptosis, and signaling, and an equal number of genes are downregulated,
including those associated with protein synthesis, specific cytokines and
chemokines and other biosynthetic functions.

PMID: 14980075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;24(3):1365-77.

Activating transcription factor 3 is integral to the eukaryotic initiation factor
2 kinase stress response.

Jiang HY(1), Wek SA, McGrath BC, Lu D, Hai T, Harding HP, Wang X, Ron D, Cavener 
DR, Wek RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

In response to environmental stress, cells induce a program of gene expression
designed to remedy cellular damage or, alternatively, induce apoptosis. In this
report, we explore the role of a family of protein kinases that phosphorylate
eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2) in coordinating stress gene responses. We
find that expression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a member of the
ATF/CREB subfamily of basic-region leucine zipper (bZIP) proteins, is induced in 
response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress or amino acid starvation by a
mechanism requiring eIF2 kinases PEK (Perk or EIF2AK3) and GCN2 (EIF2AK4),
respectively. Increased expression of ATF3 protein occurs early in response to
stress by a mechanism requiring the related bZIP transcriptional regulator ATF4. 
ATF3 contributes to induction of the CHOP transcriptional factor in response to
amino acid starvation, and loss of ATF3 function significantly lowers
stress-induced expression of GADD34, an eIF2 protein phosphatase regulatory
subunit implicated in feedback control of the eIF2 kinase stress response.
Overexpression of ATF3 in mouse embryo fibroblasts partially bypasses the
requirement for PEK for induction of GADD34 in response to ER stress, further
supporting the idea that ATF3 functions directly or indirectly as a
transcriptional activator of genes targeted by the eIF2 kinase stress pathway.
These results indicate that ATF3 has an integral role in the coordinate gene
expression induced by eIF2 kinases. Given that ATF3 is induced by a very large
number of environmental insults, this study supports involvement of eIF2 kinases 
in the coordination of gene expression in response to a more diverse set of
stress conditions than previously proposed.

PMCID: PMC321431
PMID: 14729979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Genes Cells. 2004 Jan;9(1):59-70.

TNFalpha-induced ATF3 expression is bidirectionally regulated by the JNK and ERK 
pathways in vascular endothelial cells.

Inoue K(1), Zama T, Kamimoto T, Aoki R, Ikeda Y, Kimura H, Hagiwara M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

ATF3 (Activating transcription factor 3), a member of the CREB/ATF family, can be
induced by stress and growth factors in mammalian cells, and is thought to play
an important role in the cardiovascular system. However, little is currently
known about how the induction of ATF3 is regulated, except that the JNK pathway
is involved. Here, we investigated the differential roles of the MAPK pathways
involved in TNFalpha (tumour necrosis factor alpha)-induced ATF3 expression in
vascular endothelial cells. In human umbilical vein endothelial cells, the
expression of constitutively active MKK7 (MAPK kinase 7) increased the number of 
ATF3-positive cells, and dominant negative MKK7 suppressed the TNFalpha-induced
expression of ATF3, indicating a requirement for the JNK pathway. In contrast,
the expression of constitutively active or dominant negative MEK1/2 (MAPK/ERK
kinase 1/2) suppressed or enhanced TNFalpha-mediated induction of ATF3,
respectively. In support of this, the MEK1/2 specific inhibitor U0126 enhanced
the expression of ATF3 induced by TNFalpha. Furthermore, the ERK pathway inhibits
the TNFalpha-mediated induction of ATF3 mRNA, but not its stability, suggesting
the involvement of ERK activity in the transcriptional regulation of the ATF3
gene. Our results suggest that TNFalpha-induced ATF3 gene expression is
bidirectionally regulated by the JNK and ERK pathways in vascular endothelial
cells.

PMID: 14723708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 Dec 12;120(1):38-45.

ATF3 enhances c-Jun-mediated neurite sprouting.

Pearson AG(1), Gray CW, Pearson JF, Greenwood JM, During MJ, Dragunow M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology, The University of
Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand.

The AP-1 transcription factor c-Jun is induced in axotomized neurons of the
peripheral and central nervous systems, and in both cases upregulation of c-Jun
expression has been correlated with axonal regeneration. More recently there has 
been interest in the c-Jun-related bZIP transcription factor, ATF3, and its
function in neurons. ATF3 is also induced in nerve cells in response to axotomy
and there is a correlation between increased ATF3 expression and upregulation of 
c-Jun in surviving neurons. Moreover, c-Jun is able to induce expression of ATF3.
We investigated the effect of co-expressing c-Jun and ATF3 in two neuronal-like
cell lines to model transcriptional events occurring in axotomized neurons
undergoing regeneration. We show that expression of ATF3 with c-Jun significantly
enhances c-Jun-mediated neurite sprouting, and that this phenotype is most likely
mediated by a physical association of these two transcription factors. Our
results suggest that a program of axonal regeneration is initiated when both
c-Jun and ATF3 are upregulated in neurons in response to axotomy.

PMID: 14667575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Carcinogenesis. 2004 Mar;25(3):349-57. Epub 2003 Nov 21.

Gene modulation by Cox-1 and Cox-2 specific inhibitors in human colorectal
carcinoma cancer cells.

Bottone FG Jr(1), Martinez JM, Alston-Mills B, Eling TE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, PO Box 12233, 111 T.W. Alexander 
Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

Cox-1 and Cox-2 specific inhibitors exert chemo-preventative activity. However,
the exact mechanisms for this activity remain unclear. Increasing evidence
suggests that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs regulate gene expression,
which may be responsible, in part, for this activity. In this study, human
colorectal carcinoma HCT-116 cells were treated with the Cox-1 specific inhibitor
SC-560 and the Cox-2 specific inhibitor SC-58125 to evaluate their ability to
induce apoptosis, inhibit cell proliferation, inhibit growth on soft agar and
modulate gene expression. The Cox-1 specific inhibitor, SC-560 significantly
induced apoptosis and inhibited the growth of HCT-116 cells on soft agar, an in
vitro assay for tumorigenicity. SC-58125 moderately induced apoptosis and
inhibited growth on soft agar at higher concentrations than were required for
SC-560. Previously, we reported that the potent chemo-preventative drug sulindac 
sulfide altered the expression of eight genes including several transcription
factors that may be linked to this drug's chemo-preventative activity. HCT-116
cells were treated with various concentrations of SC-560 or SC-58125 and changes 
in the expression of these eight genes were determined by real-time reverse
transcription- polymerase chain reaction. SC-560 modulated mRNA expression of the
eight genes studied. In contrast, SC-58125 required approximately 5-10-fold
higher concentrations to achieve similar degrees of gene modulation in six of
eight genes. Changes in protein expression by SC-560 also occurred for five of
these genes with antibodies available (NAG-1, ATF3, C/EBPbeta, MAD2 and MSX1). In
conclusion, this is the first report to suggest that like sulindac sulfide, the
Cox-1 specific inhibitor SC-560 appears to elicit chemo-preventative activity by 
altering gene expression, while the chemo-preventative effects of SC-58125 are
complex and probably work through these and other mechanisms, such as the
inhibition of Cox-2.

PMID: 14633654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Neurotrauma. 2003 Oct;20(10):907-27.

Gene expression profile changes are commonly modulated across models and species 
after traumatic brain injury.

Natale JE(1), Ahmed F, Cernak I, Stoica B, Faden AI.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centers for Genetic Medicine and Neuroscience, Children's National
Medical Center, Washington, D.C., USA.

Brain trauma is a major cause of morbidity and mortality, both in adult and
pediatric populations. Much of the functional deficit derives from delayed cell
death resulting from induction of neurotoxic factors that overwhelm endogenous
neuroprotective responses. To identify the potential molecular mechanisms
underlying such delayed responses, we compared gene expression patterns using
high-density oligonucleotide arrays at 4, 8, 24, and 72 h after moderate levels
of lateral fluid percussion-induced brain injury in rats and lateral controlled
cortical impact injury in mice (a total of 47 profiles). Expression of 82 genes
in 12 functional categories was significantly changed in both species after
trauma. The largest number of gene expression changes were found in the
functional groups related to inflammation (17%), transcription regulation (16%), 
and cell adhesion/extracellular matrix (15%). Fifty percent of genes similarly
altered across models had not been previously implicated in traumatic brain
injury. Of particular interest were expression changes in genes linked to
neurodegeneration, such as ATF3 and lysosomal membrane glycoprotein 2, and to
neuroprotection including lipocortin 1, calponin 3, gelsolin, Id-1, and p45
NF-E2. Gene expression profiling across species and models may help identify
candidate molecular pathways induced by brain injury, some of which may provide
novel targets for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 14588109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Neuroscience. 2003;121(3):815-24.

Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor normalizes neurochemical changes in
injured dorsal root ganglion neurons and prevents the expression of experimental 
neuropathic pain.

Wang R(1), Guo W, Ossipov MH, Vanderah TW, Porreca F, Lai J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Arizona, Tucson 85724, USA.

Erratum in
    Neuroscience. 2004;126(1):247.

Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is necessary for the
development of sensory neurons, and appears to be critical for the survival of
dorsal root ganglion (DRG) cells that bind the lectin IB4. Intrathecal infusion
of GDNF has been shown to prevent and reverse the behavioral expression of
experimental neuropathic pain arising from injury to spinal nerves. This effect
of GDNF has been attributed to a blockade of the expression of the voltage gated,
tetrodotoxin-sensitive sodium channel subtype, Na(V)1.3, in the injured DRG. Here
we report that GDNF given intrathecally via osmotic-pump to nerve-injured rats
(L5/L6 spinal nerve ligation) prevented the changes in a variety of neurochemical
markers in the DRG upon injury. They include a loss of binding of IB4,
downregulation of the purinergic receptor P2X(3), upregulation of galanin and
neuropeptide Y immunoreactivity in large diameter DRG cells, and expression of
the transcription factor ATF3. GDNF infusion concomitantly prevented the
development of spinal nerve ligation-induced tactile hypersensitivity and thermal
hyperalgesia. These observations suggest that high dose, exogenous GDNF has a
broad neuroprotective role in injured primary afferent. The receptor(s) that
mediates these effects of GDNF is not known. GDNF's ability to block neuropathic 
pain states is not likely to be specific to Na(V)1.3 expression.

PMID: 14568039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 Oct 21;118(1-2):156-9.

Activating transcription factor 3 mRNA is upregulated in primary cultures of
trigeminal ganglion neurons.

Dussor GO(1), Price TJ, Flores CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, The University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, TX 78229, USA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) has been used in as a marker of nerve
injury in primary sensory neurons. The purpose of the present studies was to
determine whether primary sensory ganglia in culture express ATF3 and, thus, an
injured phenotype. At all time points post-plating (1 h-14 days), neurons in
culture expressed ATF3 compared to undetectable expression in native ganglia. In 
addition, NGF was unable to rescue this injured phenotype. Thus, sensory neurons 
in culture represent a potential model of injured neurons.

PMID: 14559366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Oct 31;310(4):1168-74.

Rapid and preferential induction of ATF3 transcription in response to low doses
of UVA light.

Abe T(1), Oue N, Yasui W, Ryoji M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Department of Bioresources, Hiroshima
Prefectural University, 562 Nanatsuka, Shobara, Hiroshima 727-0023, Japan.

Long-wavelength UV light (UVA) is known to induce transcription of various genes 
in the cell and to cause a variety of pathological or protective responses in the
skin. To find additional UVA-responsive genes, human skin-derived fibroblasts
were exposed to UVA under non- or partially lethal conditions, and the effects of
UVA on the transcriptional profile were examined by using DNA microarray and
RT-PCR. Transcription of several genes including those already known to be
UVA-responsive was induced to a significant extent under 50% lethal conditions of
exposure. Among those, ATF3 was the most sensitive and its transcription was
increased 10-fold within 1h. Even at a non-lethal dose of UVA (8J/cm(2)), it was 
increased 8-fold, if cells were cultured for 3h post-exposure. Typical
immediate-early genes such as c-fos and c-jun were not affected at this dose. We 
thus suggest that ATF3 could be a key regulator for a variety of cellular
responses in the skin, particularly to low doses of UVA.

PMID: 14559238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Neuroscience. 2003;121(2):441-50.

Expression of auxiliary beta subunits of sodium channels in primary afferent
neurons and the effect of nerve injury.

Takahashi N(1), Kikuchi S, Dai Y, Kobayashi K, Fukuoka T, Noguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Hyogo college of Medicine, 1-1
Mukogawa-cho, Nishinomiya City, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan.

Multiple voltage-gated sodium channels are the primary mediators of cell
excitability. They are multimers that consist of the pore-forming alpha subunit
and auxiliary beta subunits. Although ion permeability and voltage sensing are
primarily determined by the alpha subunit, beta subunits are important modulators
of sodium channel function. The purpose of this study was to assess the effect of
axotomy on the expression of beta subunits (beta(1), beta(2) and beta(3)) and
coexpression of Na(v)1.3 and beta(3) subunits in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG). 
We used sciatic nerve transection models or spared nerve injury (SNI) models in
the rat. In reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis, there were 
no significant differences between contralateral and ipsilateral DRGs of beta(1) 
and beta(2) mRNA 3 days after axotomy. beta(3) mRNA expression in ipsilateral
DRGs increased significantly compared with contralateral DRGs 3 days after
axotomy. In in situ hybridization histochemistry, beta(1) mRNA was predominantly 
expressed in medium- to large-size neurons, whereas beta(2) mRNA was expressed in
small- to large-size neurons. There were no significant differences in beta(1)
and beta(2) mRNA between contralateral and ipsilateral DRGs 3 days after axotomy.
In contrast, beta(3) mRNA was mainly expressed in small neurons and occasionally 
in medium- to large-size neurons, and beta(3) mRNA expression in small c-type
neurons in ipsilateral DRGs was increased significantly compared with
contralateral DRGs. We examined beta(3) mRNA expression with one of alpha
subunits, Na(v)1.3-ir, in DRG neurons after axotomy using the double labeling
method. We found a high percentage of coexpression in injured DRG neurons:
83.6+/-2.8% of neurons expressing beta(3) mRNA were labeled for Na(v)1.3-ir;
70.1+/-3.1% of Na(v)1.3-ir neurons expressed beta(3) mRNA. We also examined the
expression of beta(3) mRNA in DRG neurons in the SNI model, a neuropathic pain
model. We used activating transcription factor 3 to identify axotomized neurons, 
and found that beta(3) mRNA up-regulation occurred mainly in axotomized neurons
in the neuropathic pain model. These data strongly suggest that beta(3)
expression in injured DRG neurons following axotomy might be an important
pathomechanism of post-nerve injury pain in primary sensory neurons.

PMID: 14522002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Virol. 2003 Oct;77(20):11006-15.

Strategic attack on host cell gene expression during adenovirus infection.

Zhao H(1), Granberg F, Elfineh L, Pettersson U, Svensson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, S-751 85 Uppsala,
Sweden. Hongxing.Zhao@genpat.uu.se

To understand the interaction between the virus and its host, we used three
sources of cDNA microarrays to examine the expression of 12,309 unique genes at 6
h postinfection of HeLa cells with high multiplicities of adenovirus type 2.
Seventy-six genes with significantly changed expression ratios were identified,
suggesting that adenovirus only modulates expression of a limited set of cellular
genes. Quantitative real-time PCR analyses on selected genes were performed to
confirm the microarray results. Significantly, a pronounced transcriptional
activation by the promiscuous E1A-289R transcriptional activator was not
apparent. Instead, promoter sequences in 45% of the upregulated genes harbored a 
potential E2F binding site, suggesting that the ability of the amino-terminal
domain of E1A to regulate E2F-dependent transcription may be a major pathway for 
regulation of cellular gene expression. CDC25A was the only upregulated gene
directly involved in cell cycle control. In contrast, several genes implicated in
cell growth arrest were repressed. The transforming growth factor beta
superfamily was specifically affected in the expression of both the upstream
ligand and an intracellular regulator. In agreement with previous reports,
adenovirus also targeted the innate immune response by downregulating several
cytokines, including CLL2, CXCL1, and interleukin-6. Finally, stress response
genes encoding GADD45B, ATF3, and TP53AP1 were upregulated. Importantly, we also 
found a novel countermeasure-activation of the apoptosis inhibitor survivin.

PMCID: PMC224976
PMID: 14512549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Oncogene. 2003 Sep 25;22(41):6408-23.

Adipocyte-secreted factors synergistically promote mammary tumorigenesis through 
induction of anti-apoptotic transcriptional programs and proto-oncogene
stabilization.

Iyengar P(1), Combs TP, Shah SJ, Gouon-Evans V, Pollard JW, Albanese C, Flanagan 
L, Tenniswood MP, Guha C, Lisanti MP, Pestell RG, Scherer PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Mammary epithelial cells are embedded in a unique extracellular environment to
which adipocytes and other stromal cells contribute. Mammary epithelial cells are
critically dependent on this milieu for survival. However, it remains unknown
which adipocyte-secreted factors are required for the survival of the mammary
epithelia and what role these adipokines play in the process of ductal carcinoma 
tumorigenesis. Here, we take a systematic molecular approach to investigate the
multiple ways adipocytes and adipokines can uniquely influence the
characteristics and phenotypic behavior of malignant breast ductal epithelial
cells. Microarray analysis and luciferase reporter assays indicate that
adipokines specifically induce several transcriptional programs involved in
promoting tumorigenesis, including increased cell proliferation (IGF2, FOS, JUN, 
cyclin D1), invasive potential (MMP1, ATF3), survival (A20, NFkappaB), and
angiogenesis. One of the key changes in the transformed ductal epithelial cells
associated with the cell cycle involves the induction of NFkappaB (five-fold) and
cyclin D1 (three-fold). We show that by regulating the transcription of these
molecules, the synergistic activity of adipocyte-derived factors can potentiate
MCF-7 cell proliferation. Furthermore, compared to other stromal cell-secreted
factors, the full complement of adipokines shows an unparalleled ability to
promote increased cell motility, migration, and the capacity for angiogenesis.
Adipocyte-secreted factors can affect tumorigenesis by increasing the
stabilization of pro-oncogenic factors such as beta-catenin and CDK6 as a result 
of a reduction in the gene expression of their inhibitors (i.e. p18). An in vivo 
coinjection system using 3T3-L1 adipocytes and SUM159PT cells effectively
recapitulates the host-tumor interactions in primary tumors. Type VI collagen, a 
soluble extracellular matrix protein abundantly expressed in adipocytes, is
further upregulated in adipocytes during tumorigenesis. It promotes GSK3beta
phosphorylation, beta-catenin stabilization, and increased beta-catenin activity 
in breast cancer cells and may critically contribute towards tumorigenesis when
not counterbalanced by other factors.

PMID: 14508521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Pain. 2003 Sep;105(1-2):185-95.

Neonatal inflammation and primary afferent terminal plasticity in the rat dorsal 
horn.

Walker SM(1), Meredith-Middleton J, Cooke-Yarborough C, Fitzgerald M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Malet Place, London WC1E 6BT, UK. swalker@anatomy.usyd.edu.au

Abnormal or excessive activity related to pain and injury in early life may alter
normal synaptic development and lead to changes in somatosensory processing. The 
aim of the current study was to define the critical factors that determine
long-term plasticity in spinal cord afferent terminals following neonatal
inflammation. Hindpaw inflammation was produced in neonatal rat pups with 5 or 25
microl 2% carrageenan, and 5 or 25 microl complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA). All
groups displayed a clear inflammatory response that recovered in 2 weeks in all
but the 25 microl CFA group, who had persistent chronic inflammation confirmed by
histological examination of the paw at 8 weeks. The 25 microl CFA group was also 
the only group that displayed a significant expansion of the sciatic and
saphenous nerve terminal field in lamina II of the dorsal horn at 8 weeks, using 
wheat-germ agglutinin-horse radish peroxidase transganglionic labelling. This
effect was not accompanied by changes in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) cell number, 
expression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), or alterations in
calcitonin gene related peptide (CGRP) or isolectin B4 binding; and was not
mimicked by partial nerve damage. No long-term change in mechanical or thermal
behavioural sensory thresholds was seen in any group. Lower dose CFA caused an
acute, reversible expansion of terminal fields in lamina II in neonatal animals, 
while CFA did not produce this effect in adults. The duration and effect of
neonatal inflammation is therefore dependent on the type and volume of
inflammatory agent used. The expansion of afferent terminals in lamina II
following neonatal CFA inflammation is maintained into adulthood if the
inflammation is also maintained, as seen following 25 microl CFA. This effect is 
not seen in adult animals, emphasising the plasticity of the nervous system early
in development.

PMID: 14499435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Leg Med (Tokyo). 2003 Mar;5 Suppl 1:S275-7.

Changes in mRNA expression patterns for cytokines in blood leukocytes of a rat
tourniquet model.

Abe S(1), Mizusawa I, Kanno K, Yabashi A, Honda T, Suto M, Kuraya M, Hiraiwa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Legal Medicine, Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine,
1 Hikarigaoka, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan. sumiko@fmu.ac.jp

We examined changes in mRNA expression patterns for proinflammatory cytokines and
growth factors in blood samples after application of a tourniquet to the rat hind
limb. Slight upregulations of interferon (IFN)-gamma, macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) and transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 mRNA
began at 2h after tourniquet application and were short-lived. The levels of
activating transcription factor (ATF)-3, a stress-inducible gene, had increased
at 1h after tourniquet application. No significant expression of interleukin
(IL)-6 mRNA was observed in most samples. There were no significant temporal
changes in the levels of IL-1beta, cardiotrophin (CT)-1 mRNA compared to the
control levels, but, downregulation of gp130, a receptor of the IL-6 family,
began at 1h after tourniquet application. Nerve growth factor (NGF) mRNA
gradually increased and reached a significantly high level at 4h after
application of the tourniquet. Gene expression induction in blood leukocytes
occurred soon after application of the tourniquet and was short-lived. The
transient mRNA expressions probably trigger secondary events that may be
beneficial to wound repair and regeneration.

PMID: 12935609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Leg Med (Tokyo). 2003 Mar;5 Suppl 1:S271-4.

Expression of cytokines, neurotrophins, neurotrophin receptors and NOS mRNA in
dorsal root ganglion of a rat tourniquet model.

Mizusawa I(1), Abe S, Kanno K, Yabashi A, Honda T, Suto M, Hiraiwa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Legal Medicine, Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine,
1 Hikarigaoka, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan. mizusawa@fmu.ac.jp

We studied temporal changes in mRNA expression patterns for nitric oxide synthase
(NOS), cytokines, neurotrophins and neurotrophin receptors in the dorsal root
ganglion (DRG) of the rat, after application of a tourniquet to the hind limb.
Collapsed myelin and degenerated axons were observed in the tourniquet segment of
the sciatic nerve. Gene expression level of inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) and neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) was significantly increased in
ipsilateral DRG samples at 4h after application of the tourniquet but not in the 
contralateral or control DRG samples. Upregulation of tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha, activating transcription factor (ATF)-3 and neurotrophin-3 (NT3)
expressions began at 1h after application of the tourniquet in ipsilateral DRGs. 
It is likely that transient expression of these molecules triggers secondary
events that may be beneficial to wound repair and regeneration.

PMID: 12935608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Eur J Neurosci. 2003 Aug;18(4):789-802.

Corticospinal neurons up-regulate a range of growth-associated genes following
intracortical, but not spinal, axotomy.

Mason MR(1), Lieberman AR, Anderson PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. matthew.mason@ucl.ac.uk

The failure of some CNS neurons to up-regulate growth-associated genes following 
axotomy may contribute to their failure to regenerate axons. We have studied gene
expression in rat corticospinal neurons following either proximal (intracortical)
or distal (spinal) axotomy. Corticospinal neurons were retrogradely labelled with
cholera toxin subunit B prior to intracortical lesions or concomitantly with
spinal lesions. Alternate sections of forebrain were immunoreacted for cholera
toxin subunit B or processed for mRNA in situ hybridization for ATF3, c-jun,
GAP-43, CAP-23, SCG10, L1, CHL1 or krox-24, each of which has been associated
with axotomy or axon regeneration in other neurons. Seven days after
intracortical axotomy, ATF3, c-jun, GAP-43, SCG10, L1 and CHL1, but not CAP-23 or
krox-24, were up-regulated by layer V pyramidal neurons, including identified
corticospinal neurons. The maximum distance between the lesion and the neuronal
cell bodies that up-regulated genes varied between 300 and 500 microm. However,
distal axotomy failed to elicit changes in gene expression in corticospinal
neurons. No change in expression of any molecule was seen in the neocortex 1 or 7
days after corticospinal axotomy in the cervical spinal cord. The expression of
GAP-43, CAP-23, L1, CHL1 and SCG10 was confirmed to be unaltered after this type 
of injury in identified retrogradely labelled corticospinal neurons. Thus, while 
corticospinal neuronal cell bodies fail to respond to spinal axotomy, these cells
behave like regeneration-competent neurons, up-regulating a wide range of
growth-associated molecules if axotomized within the cerebral cortex.

PMID: 12925005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 3;278(40):38402-12. Epub 2003 Jul 24.

Amino acid deprivation and endoplasmic reticulum stress induce expression of
multiple activating transcription factor-3 mRNA species that, when overexpressed 
in HepG2 cells, modulate transcription by the human asparagine synthetase
promoter.

Pan Y(1), Chen H, Siu F, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Centers for Mammalian
Genetics and Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Gainesville, Florida 32610-0245, USA.

Transcription from the ASNS (asparagine synthetase) gene is increased in response
to either amino acid (amino acid response) or glucose (endoplasmic reticulum
stress response) deprivation. These two independent pathways converge on the same
set of genomic cis-elements within the ASNS promoter, referred to as
nutrient-sensing response element-1 and -2. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis provides the first in vivo evidence for activating transcription factor 
(ATF)-3 binding to the proximal ASNS promoter containing the nutrient-sensing
response element-1 sequence. Overexpression of the full-length ATF3 protein
caused a concentration-dependent biphasic response in ASNS promoter-driven
transcription. Both amino acid limitation and activation of the endoplasmic
reticulum stress response by glucose deprivation caused an increase in ATF3 mRNA 
content. However, reverse transcriptase-PCR analysis revealed that the increase
in the ATF3 mRNA species detected by Northern analysis actually encoded both
full-length ATF3 and two predicted truncated ATF3 isoforms (ATF3deltaZip2c and
ATF3deltaZip3). Based on sequence analysis, one of the predicted truncated
proteins (ATF3deltaZip3) is likely incapable of binding DNA; and yet, exogenous
expression of the cDNA enhanced starvation-induced or ATF4-activated ASNS
transcription, possibly by sequestering corepressor proteins. Collectively, the
results provide evidence for a potential role of multiple predicted ATF3 isoforms
in the transcriptional regulation of the ASNS gene in response to nutrient
deprivation.

PMID: 12881527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 Jul 23;115(2):147-56.

Biphasic expression of activating transcription factor-3 in neurons after
cerebral infarction.

Ohba N(1), Maeda M, Nakagomi S, Muraoka M, Kiyama H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
City University, 1-4-3 Asahimachi, Abeno-ku, Osaka, 545-8585 Japan.

It has been demonstrated that some of immediate early genes such as c-Jun are
induced immediately and transiently following focal cerebral ischemia. Here we
newly characterize the activating transcription factor (ATF)-3 as a focal
ischemia associated immediate early gene. Using in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry, we compared the expression profile of ATF-3 with those of
ATF-2 and c-Jun after middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion. Focal cerebral
ischemia induced two temporal and spatial patterns of ATF-3 expression. Early and
transient induction of ATF-3 mRNA was observed in the core and margins of the
cortex immediately after MCA occlusion. Late-onset and prolonged expression of
ATF-3 mRNA and its protein were specifically identified in the peri-infarct
cortex and thalamus where neurons survive at least 1 month. The expression
profiles of ATF-3 and c-Jun were virtually similar, but c-Jun expression was also
observed in other regions of the brain in control rats. Expression of ATF-2 was
ubiquitously seen in neuronal cells throughout the brain in normal rats, but was 
suppressed in ischemic regions. Double immunohistochemical labeling revealed
concurrent expression of ATF-3 and phospho-c-Jun in neurons. We conclude that the
transcription factor ATF-3 is a suitable marker of neurons subjected to ischemic 
insult directly and indirectly, and that cooperative works of ATF-3 and c-Jun may
be crucial triggers of various transcriptional responses to the ischemic insult.

PMID: 12877985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Oncogene. 2003 Jul 3;22(27):4235-42.

Induction of ATF3 by ionizing radiation is mediated via a signaling pathway that 
includes ATM, Nibrin1, stress-induced MAPkinases and ATF-2.

Kool J(1), Hamdi M, Cornelissen-Steijger P, van der Eb AJ, Terleth C, van Dam H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Genetics and Chemical Mutagenesis, Leiden University
Medical Centre, Wassenaarseweg 72, 2333AL Leiden, The Netherlands.

Exposure of human cells to genotoxic agents induces various signaling pathways
involved in the execution of stress- and DNA-damage responses. Inappropriate
functioning of the DNA-damage response to ionizing radiation (IR) is associated
with the human diseases ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) and Nijmegen Breakage
syndrome (NBS). Here, we show that IR efficiently induces Jun/ATF transcription
factor activity in normal human diploid fibroblasts, but not in fibroblasts
derived from A-T and NBS patients. IR was found to enhance the expression of
c-Jun and, in particular, ATF3, but, in contrast to various other stress stimuli,
did not induce the expression of c-Fos. Using specific inhibitors, we found that 
the ATM- and Nibrin1-dependent activation of ATF3 does neither require p53 nor
reactive oxygen species, but is dependent on the p38 and JNK MAPkinases. Via
these kinases, IR activates ATF-2, one of the transcription factors acting on the
atf3 promoter. The activation of ATF-2 by IR resembles ATF-2 activation by
certain growth factors, since IR mainly induced the second step of ATF-2
phosphorylation via the stress-inducible MAPkinases, phosphorylation of Thr69. As
IR does not enhance ATF-2 phosphorylation in ATM and Nibrin1-deficient cells,
both ATF-2 and ATF3 seem to play an important role in the protective response of 
human cells to IR.

PMID: 12833146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Neurosci. 2003 Jun 15;23(12):5187-96.

Expression of the activating transcription factor 3 prevents c-Jun N-terminal
kinase-induced neuronal death by promoting heat shock protein 27 expression and
Akt activation.

Nakagomi S(1), Suzuki Y, Namikawa K, Kiryu-Seo S, Kiyama H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Osaka City University, Graduate School
of Medicine, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is induced and functions both as a
cellular response to stress and to stimulate proliferation in multiple tissues.
However, in the nervous system ATF3 is expressed only in injured neurons. Here we
reveal a function of ATF3 in neurons under death stress. Overexpression of ATF3
by adenovirus inhibits the mitogen-activated kinase kinase kinase 1 (MEKK1)-c-Jun
N-Terminal Kinase (JNK)-induced apoptosis and induces neurite elongation via Akt 
activation in PC12 cells and superior nerve ganglion neurons. A DNA microarray
study reveals that ATF3 expression and JNK activation induce expression of the
heat shock protein 27 (Hsp27). Immunoprecipitation analysis and promoter assay
for Hsp27 expression suggest that both ATF3 and c-Jun are necessary for
transcriptional activation of Hsp27. Hsp27 expression significantly inhibits
JNK-induced apoptosis as well as Akt activation in PC12 cells and superior
cervical ganglion neurons. We conclude that the combination of ATF3 and c-Jun
induces the anti-apoptotic factor Hsp27, which directly or indirectly activates
Akt, and thereby possibly inhibits apoptosis and induces nerve elongation. Our
results suggest that ATF3- and c-Jun-induced Hsp27 expression is a novel survival
response in neurons under death stress such as nerve injury.

PMID: 12832543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 29;278(35):32899-904. Epub 2003 Jun 18.

Regulation of proglucagon transcription by activated transcription factor (ATF) 3
and a novel isoform, ATF3b, through the cAMP-response element/ATF site of the
proglucagon gene promoter.

Wang J(1), Cao Y, Steiner DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Chicago,
Illinois 60637, USA.

Glucagon, the second major glucose-regulated hormone in the control of glucose
homeostasis, functions as a counter-regulator to insulin and is specifically
produced by the pancreatic alpha cells. Its excessive biosynthesis and secretion 
is associated with diabetes mellitus. The expression of the proglucagon gene has 
been demonstrated to be regulated by a cAMP-dependent pathway through
cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) and possibly other transcription
factors bound to its cAMP-response element (CRE)/activated transcription factor
(ATF) site. Elsewhere we have shown that ATF3, a member of the ATF/CREB subfamily
of the basic leucine zipper domain proteins, is expressed predominantly in the
alpha cells of the pancreatic islets. In our attempts to further dissect the role
of ATF3 proteins in alpha cells, we have identified and characterized a novel
alternatively spliced form, ATF3b, and have compared the specific binding ability
of ATF3 and ATF3b on the CRE/ATF motif of the proglucagon promoter. Our findings 
indicate the existence of a novel mechanism by which the transcription of the
proglucagon gene is regulated in response to cAMP signals, in addition to CREB
and in relation to glucose fluctuations in pancreatic alpha cells.

PMID: 12815047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Neurosci. 2003 May 15;23(10):4117-26.

Differential activation of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase in
primary afferent neurons regulates brain-derived neurotrophic factor expression
after peripheral inflammation and nerve injury.

Obata K(1), Yamanaka H, Dai Y, Tachibana T, Fukuoka T, Tokunaga A, Yoshikawa H,
Noguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Hyogo College of Medicine,
Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan.

To investigate the intracellular signal transduction pathways involved in
regulating the gene expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in
primary afferent neurons, we examined the activation of extracellular
signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK) in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons after
peripheral inflammation and sciatic nerve transection. Peripheral inflammation
induced an increase in the phosphorylation of ERK, mainly in tyrosine kinase
A-containing small-to-medium-diameter DRG neurons. The treatment of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase 1/2 inhibitor U0126 reversed the
pain hypersensitivity and the increase in phosphorylated-ERK (p-ERK) and BDNF in 
DRG neurons induced by complete Freund's adjuvant. On the other hand, axotomy
induced the activation of ERK mainly in medium-and large-sized DRG neurons and in
satellite glial cells. U0126 suppressed the axotomy-induced autotomy behavior and
reversed the increase in p-ERK and BDNF. The intrathecal application of nerve
growth factor (NGF) induced an increase in the number of p-ERK-and BDNF-labeled
cells, mainly small neurons, and the application of anti-NGF induced an increase 
in p-ERK and BDNF in some medium-to-large-diameter DRG neurons. The activation of
MAPK in the primary afferents may occur in different populations of DRG neurons
after peripheral inflammation and axotomy, respectively, through alterations in
the target-derived NGF. These changes, including the changes in BDNF expression, 
might be involved in the pathophysiological changes in primary afferent neurons.

PMID: 12764099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Mol Cell. 2003 Apr;11(4):915-26.

A self-enabling TGFbeta response coupled to stress signaling: Smad engages stress
response factor ATF3 for Id1 repression in epithelial cells.

Kang Y(1), Chen CR, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Genome-wide transcriptional profiling of human epithelial cells revealed that
repression of Id inhibitors of differentiation (Id1, Id2, and Id3) is a general
feature of the TGFbeta cytostatic program. Opposite responses of Id1 to TGFbeta
and the related factor BMP are dictated by the specific ability of the TGFbeta
mediator, Smad3, to activate expression of stress response factor ATF3 and then
recruit this factor to the Id1 promoter. Thus, a Smad3-mediated primary gene
response, ATF3 induction, enables Smad3 to participate in an ATF3-mediated,
secondary gene response. As a common target of TGFbeta/Smad signals and stress
signals via p38 kinase, ATF3 additionally serves to channel synergy between these
pathways in the response of epithelial cells to stress and injury.

PMID: 12718878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Physiol Genomics. 2003 Jun 24;14(1):59-72.

Pancreatic gene expression during the initiation of acute pancreatitis:
identification of EGR-1 as a key regulator.

Ji B(1), Chen XQ, Misek DE, Kuick R, Hanash S, Ernst S, Najarian R, Logsdon CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109,
USA.

We hypothesized that genes expressed in pancreatic acinar cells during the
initiation of acute pancreatitis determine the severity of the disease.
Therefore, we utilized microarrays to identify those genes commonly induced in
rat pancreatic acinar cells within 1-4 h in two in vivo models, caerulein and
taurocholate administration. This strategy yielded 51 known genes representing a 
complex array of molecules, including those that are likely to either reduce or
increase the severity of the disease. Novel genes identified in the current study
included ATF3, BRF1, C/EBPbeta, CGRP, EGR-1, ephrinA1, villin2, ferredoxin,
latexin, lipocalin, MKP-1, NGFI-B, RhoA, tissue factor (TF), and syndecan. To
validate these microarray results, the role of EGR-1 was further investigated
using quantitative RT-PCR, Western blotting, and immunocytochemistry. EGR-1
expression occurred within acinar cells and correlated with the development of
caerulein-induced acute pancreatitis in rats. Furthermore, the levels of the
inflammation-related genes MCP-1, PAI, TF, IL-6, and ICAM-1 and the extent of
lung inflammation were reduced during the initiation of caerulein-induced acute
pancreatitis in EGR-1-deficient mice. Thus this study identified EGR-1 and
several other novel genes likely to be important in the development and severity 
of acute pancreatitis.

PMID: 12709512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Carcinogenesis. 2003 Feb;24(2):225-34.

Response of human mammary epithelial cells to DNA damage induced by BPDE:
involvement of novel regulatory pathways.

Wang A(1), Gu J, Judson-Kremer K, Powell KL, Mistry H, Simhambhatla P, Aldaz CM, 
Gaddis S, MacLeod MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Science Park-Research Division, PO Box 389, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.

The responses of a line of normal human mammary epithelial cells, HME87, to
treatment with the ultimate carcinogen benzo[a]pyrene diol epoxide (BPDE) were
analyzed using a directed gene expression analysis technique, RAGE. Under
conditions where cell number was decreased by 50% 24 or 48 h post-treatment, flow
cytometry demonstrated no establishment of a G(1)/S arrest nor induction of
apoptosis; cells continued to enter S phase from G(1) for at least 24 h but were 
blocked at G(2)/M. Using the RAGE technique, changes in gene expression were
assayed for over 1000 genes, and multiple time-point data were collected for
approximately 90 genes. In accord with the cell cycle studies, expression of the 
p21-WAF1 gene, the major mediator of p53-dependent G(1)/S arrest, did not
increase until 24 h post-treatment. The expression of other target genes for
transactivation by p53 was increased at early time points, including GADD45, an
effector of the G(2)/M checkpoint, and WIP1. Analyses of proteins in treated
cells indicated that p53 was phosphorylated at Ser15 but not at Ser20 within 30
min of treatment, and this correlated with an increase in the total amount of p53
protein. Significant expression changes were noted in a number of transcription
factor genes, including ATF3 and E2A, genes that have not been previously
connected to a response to DNA damage involving bulky chemical adducts. In
addition, expression of the XPC gene was induced by BPDE treatment; the XPC
product is thought to be involved in recognition of DNA damage by the nucleotide 
excision repair system.

PMID: 12584171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Pain. 2003 Jan;101(1-2):65-77.

Contribution of injured and uninjured dorsal root ganglion neurons to pain
behavior and the changes in gene expression following chronic constriction injury
of the sciatic nerve in rats.

Obata K(1), Yamanaka H, Fukuoka T, Yi D, Tokunaga A, Hashimoto N, Yoshikawa H,
Noguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Hyogo College of Medicine, 1-1
Mukogawa-cho, Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan.

Neuropathic pain models, such as the chronic constriction injury (CCI) model, are
partial nerve injury models where there exist both intact and injured peripheral 
axons. Recent studies suggested that dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons with
intact axons also show the alteration of excitability and gene expression and
might have some role in the pathophysiological mechanisms of neuropathic pain.
The incidence of pain-related behavior after the CCI is unstable and variable. In
the present study, we used activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) expression as
a neuronal injury marker, and analyzed a relationship between the number of
axotomized neurons and the incidence of pain-related behavior. We divided all
rats into three groups according to the percentage of ATF3-immunoreactive (IR)
neurons, group 1 (<12.5%), group 2 (12.5-25%), and group 3 (>25%). We found that 
rats in groups 2 and 3 showed thermal hyperalgesia, whereas only the rats in
group 2 developed tactile allodynia from the third day to the fourteenth day
after surgery. Rats in group 1 did not show thermal hyperalgesia or tactile
allodynia. The DRG neurons in group 2 contained ATF3-IR neurons mainly in medium-
and large-sized neurons. In order to investigate brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF) and gamma-aminobutyric acid(A)-receptor (GABA(A)-R) regulation in
both intact and injured primary afferent neurons after the CCI, we used a
double-labeling method with immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization, as
well as double immunofluorescent staining. The CCI induced an increased number of
BDNF-labeled neurons in the ipsilateral DRG and the increase in BDNF expression
was observed mainly in small- and medium-sized neurons that were mainly
ATF3-negative. On the other hand, the number of GABA(A)-Rgamma2 subunit
mRNA-positive neurons decreased in the ipsilateral DRG and GABA(A)-R- and
ATF3-labeled neurons rarely overlapped. These changes in molecular phenotype in
intact and injured primary afferents may be involved in the pathophysiological
mechanisms of neuropathic pain produced by partial nerve injury.

PMID: 12507701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 21;278(8):5920-8. Epub 2002 Dec 17.

Characterization of the transforming growth factor-beta 1-induced apoptotic
transcriptome in FaO hepatoma cells.

Coyle B(1), Freathy C, Gant TW, Roberts RA, Cain K.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Toxicology Unit, University of Leicester, Leicester
LE1 9HN, United Kingdom.

We have previously shown that transforming growth factor-beta(1)
(TGF-beta(1))-induced apoptosis in FaO hepatoma cells is mediated by cytochrome c
release, apoptosome formation, and caspase activation. Although TGF-beta(1) acts 
via the SMAD signaling pathway to initiate de novo gene transcription, little is 
known about the downstream gene targets that are involved in the regulation of
apoptosis. Therefore, in this study, we used in-house microarrays (approximately 
5500 genes) to identify pathway-specific gene clustering in TGF-beta(1)-treated
cells. A total of 142 genes showed time-dependent changes in expression during
TGF-beta(1)-induced apoptosis. The polycaspase inhibitor
benzyloxycarbonyl-VAD-fluoromethyl ketone, which, on its own, had no effect on
gene transcription, blocked TGF-beta(1)-induced cell death and significantly
altered the expression of 261 genes, including 185 down-regulated genes. Cluster 
analysis identified up-regulation of early response genes (0-4 h) encoding for
the extracellular matrix and cytoskeleton, including the pro-apoptotic CTGF gene,
and delayed response genes (8-16 h), including pro-apoptotic genes. A second
delayed response cluster (44 genes) was also observed when TGF-beta(1)-induced
caspase activation was blocked by benzyloxycarbonyl-VAD-fluoromethyl ketone. This
cluster included genes encoding stress-related proteins (e.g. Jun, ATF3, TAB1,
and TANK), suggesting that their up-regulation may be in response to secondary
necrosis. Finally, we identified an early response set of nine down-regulated
genes that are involved in antioxidant defense. We propose that the regulation of
these genes by TGF-beta(1) could provide a molecular mechanism for the observed
elevation in reactive oxygen species after TGF-beta(1) treatment and may
represent the primary mechanism through which TGF-beta(1) initiates apoptosis.

PMID: 12488458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2003 Apr;284(4):F743-52. Epub 2002 Nov 26.

Heme activates the heme oxygenase-1 gene in renal epithelial cells by stabilizing
Nrf2.

Alam J(1), Killeen E, Gong P, Naquin R, Hu B, Stewart D, Ingelfinger JR, Nath KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Ochsner Clinic Foundation, New Orleans
70121, USA. jalam@ochsner.org

The mechanism of heme oxygenase-1 gene (ho-1) activation by heme in immortalized 
rat proximal tubular epithelial cells was examined. Analysis of the ho-1 promoter
identified the heme-responsive sequences as the stress-response element (StRE),
multiple copies of which are present in two enhancer regions, E1 and E2.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays identified Nrf2, MafG, ATF3, and Jun and
Fos family members as StRE-binding proteins; binding of Nrf2, MafG, and ATF3 was 
increased in response to heme. Dominant-negative mutants of Nrf2 and Maf, but not
of c-Fos and c-Jun, inhibited basal and heme-induced expression of an
E1-controlled luciferase gene. Heme did not affect the transcription activity of 
Nrf2, dimerization between Nrf2 and MafG, or the level of MafG, but did stimulate
expression of Nrf2. Heme did not influence the level of Nrf2 mRNA but increased
the half-life of Nrf2 protein from approximately 10 min to nearly 110 min. These 
results indicate that heme promotes stabilization of Nrf2, leading to
accumulation of Nrf2. MafG dimers that bind to StREs to activate the ho-1 gene.

PMID: 12453873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Nutr. 2002 Nov;132(11):3314-24.

Diindolylmethane alters gene expression in human keratinocytes in vitro.

Carter TH(1), Liu K, Ralph W Jr, Chen D, Qi M, Fan S, Yuan F, Rosen EM, Auborn
KJ.

Author information: 
(1)North Shore-Long Island Jewish Research Institute, Manhasset, NY 11030, USA.

Indole-3-carbinol (I3C) and its dimer 3,3'-diindolylmethane (DIM), obtained from 
dietary consumption of cruciferous vegetables, have multiple biochemical
activities. Both compounds have been effective clinically in treating
precancerous lesions of the cervix and laryngeal papillomas, pathologies with a
human papillomavirus (HPV) component. Using cDNA microarrays, we examined early
changes in gene expression after treatment with 100 micro mol/L DIM in C33A and
CaSki cervical cancer cells and in an immortalized human epithelial cell line
(HaCat), as well as in normal human foreskin keratinocytes (HFK). Multiple
analyses were done after treating C33A cells for 6 h; other analyses included 4- 
and 12-h treatments of C33A and 6-h treatments of CaSki, HaCat and HFK cells. DIM
consistently altered the expression of >100 genes at least twofold. Many of the
stimulated genes encode transcription factors and proteins involved in signaling,
stress response and growth. Results were comparable between transformed cells
with and without integrated HPV sequences, and many of the same genes were
induced in these cancer-derived cells and in noncancer cells. Eight genes
encoding bZip proteins were among the most consistently and robustly induced,
including the stress-associated immediate early gene GADD153 (>50 fold in C33A)
and nuclear factor-interleukin 6 (NF-IL6), also known as c/EBPbeta, (>5 fold in
C33A), which has been shown to reduce expression of HPV oncogenes. Induction of
GADD153, NF-IL6 and ATF3 was confirmed by Western analysis. In functional
analyses, DIM not only suppressed transcription of a luciferase gene driven by
the HPV11 upstream regulatory region (URR) in C33A, CaSki, HaCat and HFK cells
from >2-fold to 37-fold depending on the type of cells, but also reduced
endogenous transcription of HPV16 oncogenes to undetectable levels in CaSki cells
as determined by an RNase protection assay. Ectopic expression of GADD153 or
NF-IL6 suppressed transcription in a dose-dependent manner driven by the HPV11
URR in C33A, CaSki, HaCat and HFK cells. These results identify unexpected ways
in which dietary I3C and DIM invoke cellular responses and are consistent with a 
potential antiviral effect of DIM on keratinocytes, but they do not explain the
differential sensitivity of transformed keratinocytes to apoptosis by DIM.

PMID: 12421845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Am J Pathol. 2002 Nov;161(5):1743-8.

Changes in differential gene expression because of warm ischemia time of radical 
prostatectomy specimens.

Dash A(1), Maine IP, Varambally S, Shen R, Chinnaiyan AM, Rubin MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.

The expression of thousands of genes can be monitored simultaneously using cDNA
microarray technology. This technology is being used to understand the complexity
of human disease. One significant technical concern regards potential alterations
in gene expression because of the effect of tissue ischemia. This study evaluates
the increase in the differential gene expression because of tissue processing
time. To evaluate differential gene expression because of ischemia time, prostate
samples were divided into five time points (0, 0.5, 1, 3, and 5 hours). Each time
point consisted of a homogeneous mixture of 12 to 15 prostate tissue cubes (5
mm(3)). These tissues were maintained at room temperature until at the assigned
time point the tissue was placed in OCT, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, and
stored at -80 degrees C until RNA extraction. RNA from each time point was
hybridized against an aliquot of 0 time point RNA from the same prostate. Four
prostate glands were used in parallel studies. M-A plots were graphed to compare 
variability between time point sample hybridizations. Statistical Analysis of
Microarray software was used to identify genes overexpressed at the 1-hour time
point versus the 0-hour time with statistically significance. Microarray analysis
revealed only a small percentage of genes (<0.6%) from more than 9000 to
demonstrate overexpression at the 1-hour time point. Among the 41 statistically
significant named overexpressed genes at the 1-hour time point were early growth 
response 1 (EGR1), jun B proto-oncogene (jun B), jun D proto-oncogene (jun D),
and activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3). Genes previously associated with
prostate cancer did not have significantly altered expression with ischemia time.
Increased EGR1 protein expression was confirmed by Western blot analysis.
Microarray technology has opened the possibility of evaluating the expression of 
a multitude of genes simultaneously, however, the interpretation of this complex 
data needs to be assessed circumspectly using refined statistical methods.
Because RNA expression represents the tissue response to insults such as
ischemia, and is also sensitive to degradation, investigators need be mindful of 
confounding artifacts secondary to tissue processing. All attempts should be made
to process tissue rapidly to ensure that the microarray gene profile accurately
represents the state of the cells and confirmatory studies should be performed
using alternative methods (eg, Northern blot analysis, Western blot,
immunohistochemistry).

PMCID: PMC1850797
PMID: 12414521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002 Oct;34(10):1387-97.

ATF3 inhibits doxorubicin-induced apoptosis in cardiac myocytes: a novel
cardioprotective role of ATF3.

Nobori K(1), Ito H, Tamamori-Adachi M, Adachi S, Ono Y, Kawauchi J, Kitajima S,
Marumo F, Isobe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Activating transcription factor (ATF) 3, a member of the ATF/cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP)-responsive element binding protein (ATF/CREB) family of
transcription factors, is induced by a wide range of stress stimuli. Although the
ATF3 homodimer is known to repress transcription of several genes, its precise
biological roles are still unclear. In this study, we investigated the functional
role of ATF3 in doxorubicin (DOX=adriamycin)-treated neonatal rat cardiac
myocytes. DOX rapidly activated JNK and c-Jun and induced ATF3 at both mRNA and
protein level. Adenovirus-mediated expression of ATF3 protected cardiomyocytes
from DOX-induced apoptosis, as determined by flow cytometry, cell viability, and 
TUNEL assay. It was further shown that p53, one of the apoptosis-inducing
transcription factors, was downregulated in the ATF3-overexpressing
cardiomyocytes. These results strongly suggest that ATF3 may function as a
cytoprotective transcription factor in DOX-treated cardiac myocytes, at least in 
part, owing to downregulation of p53. ATF3 may be a novel therapeutic target that
protects cardiac myocytes from DOX-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 12392999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Oncogene. 2002 Oct 24;21(49):7488-96.

ATF3 induction following DNA damage is regulated by distinct signaling pathways
and over-expression of ATF3 protein suppresses cells growth.

Fan F(1), Jin S, Amundson SA, Tong T, Fan W, Zhao H, Zhu X, Mazzacurati L, Li X, 
Petrik KL, Fornace AJ Jr, Rajasekaran B, Zhan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania PA 15213, USA.

Mammalian cells have a remarkable diverse repertoire of response to genotoxic
stress that damage DNA. Cellular responses to DNA damaging agents will initially 
exhibit gene induction, which is regulated by complex mechanism(s) and probably
involves multiple signaling pathways. In this paper, we demonstrate that
induction of ATF3 protein, a member of the ATF/CREB family of transcription
factors, by ionizing radiation (IR) requires normal cellular p53 function. In
contrast, induction of ATF3 after UV radiation (UV) or Methyl methanesulphonate
(MMS) is independent of p53 status. Induction of ATF3 by DNA damage is rapid,
transient, and through a transcriptional mechanism. The ATF3 promoter is induced 
by UV and MMS, but not by IR. In addition, ATF3 promoter can be activated by
MEKK1, an upstream activator of the ERK and JNK kinase pathway, but not induced
following p53 expression. Those results indicate that regulation of ATF3
induction after DNA damage utilizes both the p53-dependent and -independent
pathways, and may also involve MAP kinase signaling pathways. Using the
tetracycline-inducible system (tet-off), we have found that over-expression of
ATF3 protein moderately suppresses cell growth. Interestingly, over-expression of
ATF3 protein is able to slow down progression of cells from G1 to S phase,
indicating that ATF3 protein might play a negative role in the control of cell
cycle progression.

PMID: 12386811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Oct 11;297(5):1302-10.

Transcriptional activation of the human stress-inducible transcriptional
repressor ATF3 gene promoter by p53.

Zhang C(1), Gao C, Kawauchi J, Hashimoto Y, Tsuchida N, Kitajima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, 113-8510, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is an immediate early response gene that
is induced in cells exposed to a variety of stress stimuli. In this report, upon 
exposure of cells to ultraviolet (UV) or proteasome inhibitor MG132, ATF3 protein
was induced more efficiently in cells with intact p53 allele than in those with
null mutant p53 allele. In Saos-2 cells harboring the temperature-sensitive
mutant p53(Val-138), the expression of ATF3 gene was more significant at
permissive temperature of 32.5 degrees C than at non-permissive 37.5 degrees C.
Reporter assay of the human ATF3 gene promoter identified two p53-responsive
elements at -379 to -370 and -351 to -342 from the transcriptional start site.
These elements were capable of conferring p53 responsiveness to a heterologous
promoter and specifically bound p53 protein in electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. Furthermore, ATF3 gene promoter was more significantly activated by UV in 
cells with wild p53 allele. These results clearly show that the human ATF3 gene
is one of the target genes directly activated by p53 and may suggest a functional
link between stress-inducible transcriptional repressor ATF3 and p53.

PMID: 12372430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Biochem J. 2002 Dec 15;368(Pt 3):939-45.

Differential targeting of the stress mitogen-activated protein kinases to the
c-Jun dimerization protein 2.

Katz S(1), Aronheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, 7
Efron St. Bat Galim, The Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096,
Israel.

The mitogen-activated kinases are structurally related proline-directed
serine/threonine kinases that phosphorylate similar phosphoacceptor sites and
yet, in vivo, they exhibit stringent substrate specificity. Specific targeting
domains (kinase docking domains) facilitate kinase-substrate interaction and play
a major role in substrate specificity determination. The c-Jun N-terminal kinase 
(JNK) consensus docking domain comprises of a KXXK/RXXXXLXL motif located in the 
delta-domain of the c-Jun N-terminal to the phosphoacceptor site. The c-Jun
dimerization protein 2 is phosphorylated by JNK on Thr-148. Activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a basic leucine zipper protein which is highly
homologous to c-Jun dimerization protein 2 (JDP2), especially within the
threonine/proline phosphoacceptor site, Thr-148. Nevertheless, ATF3 does not
serve as a JNK substrate in vitro or in vivo. Using ATF3 and JDP2 protein
chimaeras, we mapped the JNK-docking domain within JDP2. Although a JNK consensus
putative docking site is located within the JDP2 leucine zipper motif, this
domain does not function to recruit JNK to JDP2. A novel putative docking domain 
located C-terminally to the JDP2 phosphoacceptor site was identified. This
domain, when fused to the ATF3 heterologous phosphoacceptor site, can direct its 
phosphorylation by JNK. In addition, although the novel JNK-docking domain was
found to be necessary for p38 phosphorylation of JDP2 on Thr-148, it was not
sufficient to confer JDP2 phosphorylation by the p38 kinase.

PMCID: PMC1223036
PMID: 12225289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2002 Sep 15;405(2):265-74.

Multiple basic-leucine zipper proteins regulate induction of the mouse heme
oxygenase-1 gene by arsenite.

Gong P(1), Stewart D, Hu B, Vinson C, Alam J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Ochsner Clinic Foundation, 1516 Jefferson
Highway, New Orleans, LA 70121, USA.

The mechanism of heme oxygenase-1 (ho-1) gene activation by arsenite was
examined. Arsenite-stimulated expression of a ho-1 promoter/luciferase chimera in
a dose-dependent manner in mouse hepatoma (Hepa) cells. Mutation analyses
identified the arsenite-responsive sequence as the stress-response element
(StRE), which resembles the binding sites for the AP-1 superfamily of
basic-leucine zipper factors. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays, up to
seven specific StRE-protein complexes were routinely detected using extracts from
untreated Hepa cells whereas a single complex was typically observed after
treatment with arsenite. Antibody "supershift" experiments identified Nrf2, JunD,
and ATF3 in control complexes and the amount of these factors increased
significantly in the arsenite-induced complex. MafG, ATF2, FosB, and JunB were
also detected in the arsenite complex. Activation of a StRE-dependent luciferase 
gene by arsenite was inhibited to varying degrees by dominant-negative mutants of
Nrf2, MafK, c-Fos, and CREB but most strongly with the latter. Together, these
results implicate multiple basic-leucine zipper transcription factors in ho-1
gene activation by arsenite.

PMID: 12220541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Neurosci. 2002 Sep 1;22(17):7493-501.

Dynamic pattern of reg-2 expression in rat sensory neurons after peripheral nerve
injury.

Averill S(1), Davis DR, Shortland PJ, Priestley JV, Hunt SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Queen Mary University of London, London, E1 4NS,
United Kingdom.

The 16 kDa pancreatitis-associated protein Reg-2 has recently been shown to
facilitate the regeneration of motor and sensory neurons after peripheral nerve
injury in the adult rat. Reg-2 has also been shown to be a neurotrophic factor
that is an essential intermediate in the pathways through which CNTF supports the
survival of motor neurons during development. Here we report the dynamic
expression of Reg-2 in rat sensory neurons after peripheral nerve injury. Reg-2
is normally not expressed by dorsal root ganglion (DRG) cells, but we show, using
immunocytochemistry, that Reg-2 is rapidly upregulated in DRG cells after sciatic
nerve transection and after 24 hr recovery is expressed almost exclusively in
small-diameter neurons that bind the lectin Griffonia simplicifolia IB4 and
express the purinoceptor P2X3. However, by 7 d after axotomy, Reg-2 is expressed 
in medium to large neurons and coexists partly with the neuropeptides galanin and
neuropeptide Y, which are also upregulated after peripheral nerve transection. At
this time point, Reg-2 is no longer expressed in small neurons, and there is no
colocalization with IB4 binding neurons, demonstrating a shift in Reg-2
expression from one subset of DRG neurons to another. We also show by double
labeling for activating transcription factor 3, a transcription factor that is
upregulated after nerve injury, that Reg-2 expression occurs predominantly in
axotomized DRG cells but that a small percentage of uninjured DRG cells also
upregulate Reg-2. The selective expression within IB4/P2X3 cells, and the dynamic
shift from small to large cells, is unique among DRG peptides and suggests that
Reg-2 has a distinctive role in the injury response.

PMID: 12196572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 11;277(41):39025-34. Epub 2002 Aug 2.

Transcriptional repressor activating transcription factor 3 protects human
umbilical vein endothelial cells from tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced
apoptosis through down-regulation of p53 transcription.

Kawauchi J(1), Zhang C, Nobori K, Hashimoto Y, Adachi MT, Noda A, Sunamori M,
Kitajima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, the Department
of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a transcriptional repressor that is
rapidly induced in cells exposed to a wide range of stress stimuli. To clarify
the role of ATF3 in determining cell fate, we overexpressed it in human umbilical
vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) by adenovirus-mediated gene transfer. ATF3
protected these cells from tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha-induced apoptosis,
as measured by flow cytometric analysis, trypan blue exclusion assay, and
cleavage of procaspase 3 and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Northern blot and
nuclear run on assay showed that the transcription of tumor suppressor gene p53
was down-regulated in the ATF3-overexpressing cells. In the transient expression 
assay, ATF3 suppressed the p53 gene promoter activity through its specific
binding to an atypical AP-1 element, PF-1 site, in the p53 gene promoter.
Furthermore, the cell-protecting effect of ATF3 was remarkably reduced in
p53-deficient cells. These results demonstrate that overexpression of ATF3
suppresses TNF-alpha-induced cell death of HUVECs, at least in part, through
down-regulating the transcription of p53 gene. ATF3 may function as a cell
survival factor of endothelial cells during vascular inflammation and
atherogenesis.

PMID: 12161427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Jun 1;30(11):2398-406.

An alternatively spliced isoform of transcriptional repressor ATF3 and its
induction by stress stimuli.

Hashimoto Y(1), Zhang C, Kawauchi J, Imoto I, Adachi MT, Inazawa J, Amagasa T,
Hai T, Kitajima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute and Graduate
School, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-8510, Japan.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a member of the ATF/CREB family of
transcription factors and its expression is increased by various
pathophysiological conditions and in several cancer cells. In this study, we
describe two alternatively spliced ATF3DeltaZip mRNAs: ATF3DeltaZip2a and
ATF3DeltaZip2b. Both variants encoded the same truncated protein of 135 amino
acids, which lacked the leucine zipper domain and was incapable of binding to the
ATF/CRE motif. The ATF3DeltaZip2 protein was shown to be localized in the nuclei 
and counteracted the transcriptional repression by the full-length ATF3. Western 
blot analysis showed that ATF3DeltaZip2 was expressed in cells exposed to A23187.
Further study showed that, similar to the full-length ATF3, the expression of
ATF3DeltaZip2 was induced by a wide range of stress stimuli. However, its
expression was not detectable in cancer cells that constitutively over-expressed 
ATF3. Taken together, our results suggest that ATF3DeltaZip2, a protein derived
from alternatively spliced mRNAs, is induced by various stress signals and may
modulate the activity of the full-length ATF3 protein during stress response.

PMCID: PMC117192
PMID: 12034827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2002 Apr;16 Suppl 2:145-57.

Screening of gene expression profiles in gastric epithelial cells induced by
Helicobacter pylori using microarray analysis.

Sepulveda AR(1), Tao H, Carloni E, Sepulveda J, Graham DY, Peterson LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15213-2582, USA.
sepulvedaar@msx.upmc.edu

BACKGROUND: H. pylori infection is a major risk factor in gastric cancer
development. The availability of cDNA microarrays creates the unprecedented
opportunity to examine simultaneously dynamic changes of multiple pathways
affected by H. pylori infection.
AIM: In this study we examined broad patterns of gene expression induced by H.
pylori in the gastric cancer cell line 1739-CRL AGS cells in culture using the
U95A microarray.
METHODS: H. pylori were cocultured with AGS cells for 4, 12, 24 and 48 h. Total
RNA was extracted and after labelling was used for detection of genes represented
in the human U95A microarray set. Data analyses were performed using GeneChip and
CLUSFAVOR software.
RESULTS: Nearly 6000 genes present in the array were expressed by AGS cells. We
report approximately 200 genes that showed the most marked changes. Our studies
confirm the up-regulation of c-jun, jun-B, c-fos and cyclin D1 by H. pylori. We
report for the first time the induction of the serine threonine kinase pim-1 and 
ATF3 by H. pylori infection of AGS cells.
CONCLUSIONS: In this microarray analysis of gene expression induced by H. pylori 
in gastric epithelial cells, we identified a large number of unsuspected genes
affected by H. pylori. Further, we show that unsupervised hierarchical cluster
analysis can provide useful insight into the possible contribution of genes in
specific pathways, based on their profile of expression.

PMID: 11966535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Acta Otolaryngol. 2002 Mar;122(2):161-7.

Expression of activating transcription factor 3 and growth-associated protein 43 
in the rat geniculate ganglion neurons after chorda tympani injury.

Tsuzuki K(1), Noguchi K, Mohri D, Yasuno H, Umemoto M, Shimobayashi C, Fukazawa
K, Sakagami M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Hyogo College of Medicine, Japan.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the degree of damage in the geniculate 
ganglion and its target organ as a result of chorda tympani (CT) injury. We
performed unilateral transection of the rat CT and examined expression of the
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a neuronal injury marker, and the
growth-associated protein 43 (GAP-43), a regeneration-associated molecule. The
mean proportion of ATF3-immunoreactive (ir) neurons in the geniculate ganglion
was approximately 32% at 3 days after CT injury, but these neurons were never
detected in the naive ganglion. Using in situ hybridization, the mean percentage 
of GAP-43 mRNA-labeled neurons (signal : noise ratio > or = 10) was observed to
have increased significantly to approximately 60% for 1-7 days after CT injury,
while that in the naive ganglion was < 15%. The results of morphological studies 
using scanning electron microscopy and immunohistochemistry indicated that
atrophic change and reduction of protein gene-product 9.5-ir fibers in the
denervated papillae, mainly in the intragemmal region, were observed after CT
injury. Increase in GAP-43 mRNA, suggesting CT axonal regeneration, may have a
role in recovery from taste disorders. However, this regenerative process may be 
involved in abnormal activity in the axotomized neurons or the adjacent intact
neurons and so one must not disregard the existence of injured geniculate
ganglions when considering the treatment of diseases that cause CT injury.

PMID: 11936907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 31;277(22):20020-5. Epub 2002 Mar 26.

The roles of ATF3 in liver dysfunction and the regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxykinase gene expression.

Allen-Jennings AE(1), Hartman MG, Kociba GJ, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a member of the ATF/cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein family of transcription factors, is a transcriptional
repressor, and the expression of its corresponding gene, ATF3, is induced by many
stress signals. In this report, we demonstrate that transgenic mice expressing
ATF3 in the liver had symptoms of liver dysfunction such as high levels of serum 
bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, alanine transaminase, aspartate transaminase,
and bile acids. In addition, these mice had physiological responses consistent
with hypoglycemia including a low insulin:glucagon ratio in the serum and reduced
adipose tissue mass. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicated that ATF3
bound to the ATF/cAMP-responsvie element site derived from the promoter of the
gene encoding the gluconeogenic enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK).
Furthermore, transient transfection assays indicated that ATF3 repressed the
activity of the PEPCK promoter. Taken together, our results are consistent with
the model that the expression of ATF3 in the liver results in defects in glucose 
homeostasis by repressing gluconeogenesis. Because ATF3 is a stress-inducible
gene, these mice may provide a model to investigate the molecular mechanisms of
some stress-associated liver diseases.

PMID: 11916968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Diabetes. 2002 Apr;51(4):977-87.

Expression profiling of palmitate- and oleate-regulated genes provides novel
insights into the effects of chronic lipid exposure on pancreatic beta-cell
function.

Busch AK(1), Cordery D, Denyer GS, Biden TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, St. Vincent's Hospital, Sydney,
Australia.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2011 Oct;60(10):2455-6.

Chronic lipid exposure is implicated in beta-cell dysfunction in type 2 diabetes.
We therefore used oligonucleotide arrays to define global alterations in gene
expression in MIN6 cells after 48-h pretreatment with oleate or palmitate.
Altogether, 126 genes were altered > or =1.9-fold by palmitate, 62 by oleate, and
46 by both lipids. Importantly, nine of the palmitate-regulated genes are known
to be correspondingly changed in models of type 2 diabetes. A tendency toward
beta-cell de-differentiation was also apparent with palmitate: pyruvate
carboxylase and mitochondrial glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase were
downregulated, whereas lactate dehydrogenase and fructose 1,6-bisphosphatases
were induced. Increases in the latter (also seen with oleate), along with
glucosamine-phosphate N-acetyl transferase, imply upregulation of the hexosamine 
biosynthesis pathway in palmitate-treated cells. However, palmitate also
increased expression of calcyclin and 25-kDa synaptosomal-associated protein
(SNAP25), which control distal secretory processes. Consistent with these
findings, secretory responses to noncarbohydrate stimuli, especially palmitate
itself, were upregulated in palmitate-treated cells (much less so with oleate).
Indeed, glucose-stimulated secretion was slightly sensitized by chronic palmitate
exposure but inhibited by oleate treatment, whereas both lipids enhanced basal
secretion. Oleate and palmitate also induced expression of chemokines (MCP-1 and 
GRO1 oncogene) and genes of the acute phase response (serum amyloid A3).
Increases in transcriptional modulators such as ATF3, CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein-beta (C/EBPbeta), C/EBPdelta, and c-fos were also seen. The results
highlight links between regulated gene expression and phenotypic alterations in
palmitate versus oleate-pretreated beta-cells.

PMID: 11916915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Atherosclerosis. 2002 Apr;161(2):281-91.

Expression of transcriptional repressor ATF3/LRF1 in human atherosclerosis:
colocalization and possible involvement in cell death of vascular endothelial
cells.

Nawa T(1), Nawa MT, Adachi MT, Uchimura I, Shimokawa R, Fujisawa K, Tanaka A,
Numano F, Kitajima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University Graduate School, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-8510, Japan.

Vascular endothelial cell death contributes to the progression of atherosclerotic
lesion, and several transcriptional regulators are involved in the process.
Activating transcription factor 3/liver regenerating factor-1 (ATF3/LRF-1), a
stress-inducible transcriptional repressor, was shown to be highly expressed in
vascular endothelial cells and macrophages of human atherosclerotic lesions by
immunohistological assay. The expression was colocalized in these cells which
were positive for TdT-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) and annexin V.
Treatment of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) by tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-alpha, oxidized low density lipoprotein (oxLDL), and
lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) rapidly induced ATF3/LRF-1, which showed an
increased DNA binding to the consensus ATF/CRE sequence by supershift of gel
shift assay. Flow cytometry analysis and immunostaining analysis with TUNEL assay
showed that ATF3/LRF-1 was highly expressed in cell death induced by these
agents. Moreover, antisense ATF3/LRF-1 cDNA partly suppressed the cell death
induced by TNF-alpha, oxLDL, and LPC. From these results, it is indicated that
ATF3/LRF-1 is one of the immediate early response genes in vascular endothelial
cells in response to atherogenic stimuli, and may play a role in the endothelial 
cell death associated with atherogenesis.

PMID: 11888510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 29;277(13):10804-12. Epub 2002 Jan 15.

ATF3 represses 72-kDa type IV collagenase (MMP-2) expression by antagonizing
p53-dependent trans-activation of the collagenase promoter.

Yan C(1), Wang H, Boyd DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030.

The murine homologue of the ATF3 transcription factor increases tumor metastases 
but, surprisingly, represses 72-kDa type IV metalloproteinase (MMP-2) expression.
The current study describes a novel mechanism by which ATF3 regulates
transcription. Progressive deletions of the MMP-2 promoter indicated a 38-base
pair region (-1659/-1622) necessary for the ATF3-mediated repression. This region
lacked CREB/AP-1 motifs but contained a consensus p53 motif shown previously to
regulate MMP-2 expression. The activity of a p53 response element-driven
luciferase reporter was reduced in ATF3-expressing HT1080 clones. Although MMP-2 
promoter activity was not repressed by ATF3 in p53-deficient Saos-2 cells, p53
re-expression increased MMP-2 promoter activity and restored the sensitivity to
ATF3. The activity of a GAL4-driven reporter in HT1080 cells co-expressing the
full-length p53 sequence fused to the GAL4 DNA binding domain was diminished by
ATF3. p53-ATF3 protein-protein interactions were demonstrated both in vivo and in
vitro. Cell cycle analysis, performed as an independent assay of p53 function,
revealed that gamma-irradiation-induced slowed G(2)/M cell cycle progression
(attributable to p53) was countered by ATF3. Thus, ATF3 represses MMP-2
expression by decreasing the trans-activation of this gene by p53.

PMID: 11792711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Dec 7;289(3):718-24.

Activation of JNK and transcriptional repressor ATF3/LRF1 through the IRE1/TRAF2 
pathway is implicated in human vascular endothelial cell death by homocysteine.

Zhang C(1), Kawauchi J, Adachi MT, Hashimoto Y, Oshiro S, Aso T, Kitajima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

Endothelial cell injury underlies an increased occurrence of thromboembolic
vascular disease in hereditary hyperhomocysteinemia. We have previously shown
that homocysteine causes activation of c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) and
activating transcription factor 3/liver regenerating factor 1 (ATF3/LRF1) and
induces apoptosis in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). In this
study, the activation of JNK and ATF3 in HUVECs was mediated by the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) resident transmembrane kinase IRE1alpha and beta, which sense and 
transduce signal of the accumulationj of unfolded proteins in the ER. Moreover,
dominant negative mutants of tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 2
and mitogen-activated kinase kinase 4 and 7, as well as antisense ATF3 cDNA,
inhibited cell death by homocysteine. These results indicate that the activation 
of JNK and ATF3 through the ER stress of homocysteine plays a role in the
homocysteine-induced cell death. The JNK-ATF3 pathway may be implicated in
endothelial cell injury associated with hereditary hyperhomocysteinemia.

(c) 2001 Elsevier Science.

PMID: 11726207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Oncol Res. 2001;12(8):343-6.

ATF3 gene regulates cell form and migration potential of HT29 colon cancer cells.

Ishiguro T(1), Nagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, University of Tokyo, Japan.

We formally reported that ATF3 gene regulated HT29 colon cancer cell metastasis
through cell adhesion and invasion. We report here our findings that, on wound
filling assay, the ATF3 antisense oligonucleotide changed cell form to a rounder 
shape and suppressed the cell migration ability of HT29, although FACScan
analysis showed that it had no effect on the cell cycle. The growing area of HT29
cells treated with the antisense oligonucleotide decreased, compared with that
treated with the sense oligonucleotide. These factors were thought to relate to
adhesion and invasion of HT29 cells, hence they influenced metastatic potential.

PMID: 11589305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 14;276(50):47195-201. Epub 2001 Oct 1.

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor-coupled gene network organization.

Wurmbach E(1), Yuen T, Ebersole BJ, Sealfon SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029,
USA.

An early gene cDNA microarray was developed to study genes that are regulated
immediately following gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) receptor activation. 
956 selected candidate genes were printed in triplicate, a t statistic-based
regulation algorithm was used for data analysis, and the response to GnRH in a
time course from 1 to 6 h was determined. Measurements were highly reproducible
within arrays, between arrays, and between experiments. Accuracy and algorithm
reliability were established by real-time polymerase chain reaction assays of 60 
genes. Gene changes ranging from 1.3- to 31-fold on the microarray were confirmed
by real-time polymerase chain reaction. Many of the genes were found to be highly
regulated. The regulated genes identified were all elevated at 1 h of treatment
and returned nearly or completely to baseline levels of expression by 3 h of
treatment. This broad, robust, and transient transcriptional response to constant
GnRH exposure includes modulators of signal transduction (e.g. Rgs2 and IkappaB),
cytoskeletal proteins (e.g. gamma-actin), and transcription factors (e.g. c-Fos, 
Egr1, and LRG21). The interplay of the activators, repressors, and feedback
inhibitors identified embodies a combinatorial code to direct the activity of
specific downstream secondary genes.

PMID: 11581274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Am J Pathol. 2001 Aug;159(2):639-50.

Transgenic mice with cardiac-specific expression of activating transcription
factor 3, a stress-inducible gene, have conduction abnormalities and contractile 
dysfunction.

Okamoto Y(1), Chaves A, Chen J, Kelley R, Jones K, Weed HG, Gardner KL, Gangi L, 
Yamaguchi M, Klomkleaw W, Nakayama T, Hamlin RL, Carnes C, Altschuld R, Bauer J, 
Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a member of the CREB/ATF family of
transcription factors. Previously, we demonstrated that the expression of the
ATF3 gene is induced by many stress signals. In this report, we demonstrate that 
expression of ATF3 is induced by cardiac ischemia coupled with reperfusion
(ischemia-reperfusion) in both cultured cells and an animal model. Transgenic
mice expressing ATF3 under the control of the alpha-myosin heavy chain promoter
have atrial enlargement, and atrial and ventricular hypertrophy. Microscopic
examination showed myocyte degeneration and fibrosis. Functionally, the
transgenic heart has reduced contractility and aberrant conduction.
Interestingly, expression of sorcin, a gene whose product inhibits the release of
calcium from sarcoplasmic reticulum, is increased in these transgenic hearts.
Taken together, our results indicate that expression of ATF3, a stress-inducible 
gene, in the heart leads to altered gene expression and impaired cardiac
function.

PMCID: PMC1850558
PMID: 11485922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Gene. 2001 Jul 25;273(1):1-11.

The molecular biology and nomenclature of the activating transcription
factor/cAMP responsive element binding family of transcription factors:
activating transcription factor proteins and homeostasis.

Hai T(1), Hartman MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Neurobiotechnology Center, 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. hai.2@osu.edu

The mammalian ATF/CREB family of transcription factors represents a large group
of basic region-leucine zipper (bZip) proteins which was originally defined in
the late 1980s by their ability to bind to the consensus ATF/CRE site 'TGACGTCA'.
Over the past decade, cDNA clones encoding identical or homologous proteins have 
been isolated by different laboratories and given different names. These proteins
can be grouped into subgroups according to their amino acid similarity. In this
review, we will briefly describe the classification of these proteins with a
historical perspective of their nomenclature. We will then review three members
of the ATF/CREB family of proteins: ATF3, ATF4 and ATF6. We will address four
issues for each protein: (a) homologous proteins and alternative names, (b) dimer
formation with other bZip proteins, (c) transcriptional activity, and (d)
potential physiological functions. Although the name Activating Transcription
Factor (ATF) implies that they are transcriptional activators, some of these
proteins are transcriptional repressors. ATF3 homodimer is a transcriptional
repressor and ATF4 has been reported to be either an activator or a repressor. We
will review the reports on the transcriptional activities of ATF4, and propose
potential explanations for the discrepancy. Although the physiological functions 
of these proteins are not well understood, some clues can be gained from studies 
with different approaches. When the data are available, we will address the
following questions. (a) How is the expression (at the mRNA level or protein
level) regulated? (b) How are the transcriptional activities regulated? (c) What 
are the interacting proteins (other than bZip partners)? (d) What are the
consequences of ectopically expressing the gene (gain-of-function) or deleting
the gene (loss-of-function)? Although answers to these questions are far from
being complete, together they provide clues to the functions of these ATF
proteins. Despite the diversity in the potential functions of these proteins, one
common theme is their involvement in cellular responses to extracellular signals,
indicating a role for these ATF proteins in homeostasis.

PMID: 11483355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Cell Physiol. 2001 Sep;188(3):352-8.

Involvement of transcriptional repressor ATF3 in acceleration of caspase protease
activation during DNA damaging agent-induced apoptosis.

Mashima T(1), Udagawa S, Tsuruo T.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research,
Kami-Ikebukuro, Toshima-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

DNA topoisomerase inhibitors are effective chemotherapeutic agents on several
solid tumor cells. They induce a specific signaling cascade that executes an
active cell death process (apoptosis), including caspase activation, and the
blockage of the signaling is associated with drug-resistance of tumor cells.
However, little is known about the initial signal transduction induced by the
agents. In the present study, we screened genes that are initially upregulated in
caspase-independent manner. We found that the activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) protein, a repressor of cyclic-AMP responsive element (CRE)-dependent
transcription, was strongly induced among CRE-BP/ATF members and subsequently
accumulated in nuclei following camptothecin or etoposide treatment. During
induction of apoptosis, the accumulation and the nuclear translocation of ATF3
coincided with the activation of caspase protease and were not inhibited by the
broad caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-fmk, indicating that ATF3 induction is not a
downstream event of caspase activation. When stably or transiently overexpressed,
ATF3 markedly accelerated the drug-induced apoptosis and enhanced caspase
protease activation. ATF3 strongly downregulated CRE-dependent transcription,
while ATF3 did not affect the expression levels of Bcl-2, Bcl-x, or Bax. Our
present results indicate that ATF3 plays a critical role in accelerating caspase 
protease activation and apoptosis. Since CRE-dependent transcription functions as
cell survival signaling, ATF3 could control the upstream signaling of apoptosis
by repressing CRE-dependent gene expression of cell survival factors.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11473362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Oncogene. 2001 Apr 26;20(18):2225-34.

DNA microarrays identification of primary and secondary target genes regulated by
p53.

Kannan K(1), Amariglio N, Rechavi G, Jakob-Hirsch J, Kela I, Kaminski N, Getz G, 
Domany E, Givol D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

The transcriptional program regulated by the tumor suppressor p53 was analysed
using oligonucleotide microarrays. A human lung cancer cell line that expresses
the temperature sensitive murine p53 was utilized to quantitate mRNA levels of
various genes at different time points after shifting the temperature to 32
degrees C. Inhibition of protein synthesis by cycloheximide (CHX) was used to
distinguish between primary and secondary target genes regulated by p53. In the
absence of CHX, 259 and 125 genes were up or down-regulated respectively; only 38
and 24 of these genes were up and down-regulated by p53 also in the presence of
CHX and are considered primary targets in this cell line. Cluster analysis of
these data using the super paramagnetic clustering (SPC) algorithm demonstrate
that the primary genes can be distinguished as a single cluster among a large
pool of p53 regulated genes. This procedure identified additional genes that
co-cluster with the primary targets and can also be classified as such genes. In 
addition to cell cycle (e.g. p21, TGF-beta, Cyclin E) and apoptosis (e.g. Fas,
Bak, IAP) related genes, the primary targets of p53 include genes involved in
many aspects of cell function, including cell adhesion (e.g. Thymosin,
Smoothelin), signaling (e.g. H-Ras, Diacylglycerol kinase), transcription (e.g.
ATF3, LISCH7), neuronal growth (e.g. Ninjurin, NSCL2) and DNA repair (e.g. BTG2, 
DDB2). The results suggest that p53 activates concerted opposing signals and
exerts its effect through a diverse network of transcriptional changes that
collectively alter the cell phenotype in response to stress.

PMID: 11402317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 20;276(29):27272-80. Epub 2001 May 24.

Activating transcription factor 3 induces DNA synthesis and expression of cyclin 
D1 in hepatocytes.

Allan AL(1), Albanese C, Pestell RG, LaMarre J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario N1G
2W1, Canada.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is an early response gene that is
induced rapidly during in vivo situations of cellular growth such as liver
regeneration. However, neither the physiological function nor the potential
target genes of this transcription factor related to cellular proliferation have 
been identified in the liver or other tissues. We demonstrate here that
endogenous ATF3 mRNA expression is rapidly induced up to 4-fold upon mitogenic
stimulation of quiescent Hepa 1-6 mouse hepatoma cells. Overexpression of
exogenous ATF3 results in a significant, dose-dependent increase in DNA synthesis
of up to 140% over control cells. ATF3-transfected cells also display
significantly higher rates of [(3)H]thymidine incorporation in comparison with
nontransfected controls in the presence of serum. Northern blot analysis and
co-transfection experiments demonstrate that overexpression of ATF3 enhances
cyclin D1 mRNA expression and activates the cyclin D1 promoter 2.5-fold when
activating protein-1 (AP-1) and cyclic AMP response element (CRE) sites within
the promoter are intact. ATF3-mediated promoter activation is reduced to 1.3-fold
and 1.6-fold respectively when the AP-1 or CRE sites are mutated, and mutation of
both sites simultaneously leads to the complete abrogation of promoter
activation. Furthermore, DNA-binding studies demonstrate that ATF3 binds directly
to the AP-1 site within the cyclin D1 promoter. These results indicate that ATF3 
expression stimulates hepatocellular proliferation, suggesting that this effect
is mediated, at least in part, by the ATF3-dependent activation of cyclin D1
transcription.

PMID: 11375399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 3;276(31):29507-14. Epub 2001 May 22.

The roles of ATF3 in glucose homeostasis. A transgenic mouse model with liver
dysfunction and defects in endocrine pancreas.

Allen-Jennings AE(1), Hartman MG, Kociba GJ, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Ohio State Biochemistry
Program, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a member of the ATF/cAMP-response
element-binding protein family of transcription factors. It is a transcriptional 
repressor, and the expression of its corresponding gene is induced by stress
signals in a variety of tissues, including the liver. In this report, we
demonstrate that ATF3 is induced in the pancreas by partial pancreatectomy,
streptozotocin treatment, and ischemia coupled with reperfusion. Furthermore,
ATF3 is induced in cultured islet cells by oxidative stress. Interestingly,
transgenic mice expressing ATF3 in the liver and pancreas under the control of
the transthyretin promoter have defects in glucose homeostasis and perinatal
lethality. We present evidence that expression of ATF3 in the liver represses the
expression of genes encoding gluconeogenic enzymes. Furthermore, expression of
ATF3 in the pancreas leads to abnormal endocrine pancreas and reduced numbers of 
hormone-producing cells. Analyses of embryos indicated that the ATF3 transgene is
expressed in the ductal epithelium in the developing pancreas, and the transgenic
pancreas has fewer mitotic cells than the non-transgenic counterpart, providing a
potential explanation for the reduction of endocrine cells. Because ATF3 is a
stress-inducible gene, these mice may represent a model to investigate the
molecular mechanisms for some stress-associated diseases.

PMID: 11371557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Oncol Res. 2000;12(4):181-3.

Expression of the ATF3 gene on cell lines and surgically excised specimens.

Ishiguro T(1), Nagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Japan. ti227241@monbu.go.jp

TI-241 (ATF3 homologue gene) is a metastasis-associated gene that is expressed at
higher levels in the high-metastatic mouse B16 melanoma subline B16-FIO than in
the low-metastatic clone Fl. We studied ATF3 expression in established cell lines
of human colon and stomach cancer and surgically excised human colon cancer. ATF3
was expressed at higher levels in the cell lines that were established from
metastatic sites than in those from original tumor sites. Also ATF3 was expressed
at higher levels in tumor specimens than in adjacent normal mucosa. especially in
the tumors that had invaded the lymphatic ducts and/or the vessels, while there
was not a significant relationship hetween its expression and the other
pathological features. As metastasis is the most important factor in determining 
prognosis, these results show the potential for ATF3 in making the prognosis.

PMID: 11341467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Oncogene. 2001 Mar 1;20(9):1135-41.

Transcription factor ATF3 partially transforms chick embryo fibroblasts by
promoting growth factor-independent proliferation.

Perez S(1), Vial E, van Dam H, Castellazzi M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Virologie Humaine, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale (INSERM-U412), Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon
Cedex 07, France.

Activating Transcription Factor 3 (ATF3) is a member of the bZip family of
transcription factors. Previous studies in mammalian cells suggested that like
other bZip family members e.g. Jun and Fos, ATF3 might play a role in the control
of cell proliferation and participate in oncogenic transformation. To investigate
this putative ATF3 function directly, the rat ATF3 protein was compared with
v-Jun for its ability to transform primary cultures of chick embryo fibroblasts
(CEFs). Like CEFs accumulating v-Jun, CEFs accumulating the ATF3 protein
displayed a typical, fusiform morphology, associated with an enhanced capacity to
grow in medium with reduced amount of serum. However, in contrast to
v-Jun-transformed CEFs, the ATF3 overexpressing cells could not promote colony
formation from single cells in agar. Partial transformation induced by ATF3 was
found to be associated with repression of multiple cellular genes that are also
down-regulated by v-Jun, including those coding for the extracellular components 
fibronectin, decorin, thrombospondin 2, and the pro-apoptotic protein Par-4.
These data demonstrate that, at least in primary avian cells, rat ATF3 possesses 
an intrinsic oncogenic potential. Moreover, the results suggest that ATF3 might
induce growth factor independence by down-regulating a subset of the genes
repressed by v-Jun.

PMID: 11314051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Pain. 2001 Apr;91(3):351-60.

Differential regulation of P2X(3) mRNA expression by peripheral nerve injury in
intact and injured neurons in the rat sensory ganglia.

Tsuzuki K(1), Kondo E, Fukuoka T, Yi D, Tsujino H, Sakagami M, Noguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Hyogo College of Medicine, 1-1
Mukogawa-cho, Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan. noguchi@hyo-med.ac.jp

The P2X(3) receptor is a ligand-gated cation channel activated by the binding of 
extracellular adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP), an agent that has been suggested
to have a role in the nociceptive pathway after tissue and nerve injury. After
peripheral nerve injury, both down regulation and up regulation of the P2X(3)
receptor in sensory ganglion neurons have been observed. The purpose of this
study was to examine the precise regulation of P2X(3) mRNA expression in primary 
sensory neurons after nerve injury. We used two nerve injury models in the rat,
the transection of the tibial and common peroneal nerves and the transection of
the infraorbital nerve, and observed dorsal root ganglion (DRG) and trigeminal
ganglion neurons, respectively. P2X(3) mRNA in both neuron populations was
detected by in situ hybridization with an oligonucleotide probe that was
confirmed by Northern blot analysis. To identify axotomized neurons, we examined 
the expression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), which is regarded as 
a neuronal-injury marker, using immunohistochemistry. In the DRG, the mean
percentage of P2X(3) mRNA-labeled neurons relative to the total number of neurons
increased from 32.7% in the naive rats to 42.7% at 3 days after injury. The mean 
percentage of P2X(3) mRNA-labeled neurons in ATF3 immunoreactive (ir) neurons was
29.5% at 3 postoperative days, which gradually decreased to 11.2% at 28 days
after injury. In the trigeminal ganglion, the mean percentage of P2X(3)
mRNA-labeled neurons was 36.9% at 3 days after injury, versus 26.0% in the naive 
rats. In the ATF3-ir neurons, the mean percentage of P2X(3) mRNA-labeled neurons 
was 25.3% at 1 postoperative day and was reduced to 6.1% at 28 postoperative
days. The finding that P2X(3) mRNA in ATF3-ir neurons decreased significantly
after injury indicates that axotomized neurons decreased the expression of P2X(3)
mRNA, despite the increase in P2X(3) mRNA relative to the total number of sensory
ganglion neurons. These data strongly suggest that P2X(3) mRNA expression
increases in intact neurons and that P2X(3) mRNA in intact neurons may play a
role in the pathomechanism of post-nerve injury in primary sensory neurons.

PMID: 11275393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 15;276(24):20858-65. Epub 2001 Mar 26.

Identification of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) as an Nrf2-interacting
protein. Implication for heme oxygenase-1 gene regulation.

He CH(1), Gong P, Hu B, Stewart D, Choi ME, Choi AM, Alam J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Nrf2 regulates expression of genes encoding enzymes with antioxidant (e.g. heme
oxygenase-1 (HO-1)) or xenobiotic detoxification (e.g. NAD(P)H:quinone
oxidoreductase, glutathione S-transferase) functions via the stress- or
antioxidant-response elements (StRE/ARE). Nrf2 heterodimerizes with small Maf
proteins, but the role of such dimers in gene induction is controversial, and
other partners may exist. By using the yeast two-hybrid assay, we identified
activating transcription factor (ATF) 4 as a potential Nrf2-interacting protein. 
Association between Nrf2 and ATF4 in mammalian cells was confirmed by
co-immunoprecipitation and mammalian two-hybrid assays. Furthermore, Nrf2.ATF4
dimers bound to an StRE sequence from the ho-1 gene. CdCl(2), a potent inducer of
HO-1, increased expression of ATF4 in mouse hepatoma cells, and detectable
induction of ATF4 protein preceded that of HO-1 (30 min versus 2 h). A
dominant-negative mutant of ATF4 inhibited basal and CdCl(2)-stimulated
expression of a StRE-dependent/luciferase fusion construct (pE1-luc) in hepatoma 
cells but only basal expression in mammary epithelial MCF-7 cells. A dominant
mutant of Nrf2 was equally inhibitory in both cell types in the presence or
absence of CdCl(2). These results indicate that ATF4 regulates basal and
CdCl(2)-induced expression of the ho-1 gene in a cell-specific manner and
possibly in a complex with Nrf2.

PMID: 11274184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Jpn J Cancer Res. 2000 Nov;91(11):1126-33.

Nonrandom chromosomal imbalances in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cell
lines: possible involvement of the ATF3 and CENPF genes in the 1q32 amplicon.

Pimkhaokham A(1), Shimada Y, Fukuda Y, Kurihara N, Imoto I, Yang ZQ, Imamura M,
Nakamura Y, Amagasa T, Inazawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Comment in
    Jpn J Cancer Res. 2000 Nov;91(11):inside front cover.

Using comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), we investigated copy number
aberrations in 29 esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESC) cell lines. All lines 
displayed numerous chromosome imbalances. The most frequent losses were observed 
on chromosome 18q (65.5%), Xp (48. 3%), 3p (44.8%), 4q (44.8%), 8p (41.4%), 11q23
- 25 (34.5%) and 4p (27.6%), whereas the most common copy number gains were noted
at 8q (86.2%), 3q (82.8%), 5p (69%), 7p (69%), 20q (65.5%), 9q (55.2%), 11q
(55.2%), 1q (48.3%), Xq (44.8%) and 18p (37.9%). High-level gains (HLGs) were
detected at 3q26 (9 cases), 8q23 (6 cases), 5p14 - 15 (6 cases), 18p11.2 - 11.3
(6 cases), 3q27 - 28 (5 cases), 5p13 (3 cases), 7p14 - 15 (3 cases), 20q12 - 13
(3 cases), 11q13 (3 cases), 14q21 (2 cases), 20p11.2 (2 cases), 13q32 (2 case),
and 1q32 (1 case). Among them, HLGs of 1q32 have been reported in other types of 
cancer, including glioblastoma and breast cancers. We successfully narrowed down 
the smallest common amplicon involving 1q-gain to the genomic segment between
D1S414 and D1S2860 by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Southern and
northern blot analysis clearly demonstrated that ATF3, human activating
transcription factor-3 and CENPF, centromere protein F, mapped within this
region, were significantly amplified and over-expressed in 1q32 amplicon.

PMID: 11092977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Blood. 2000 Sep 15;96(6):2140-8.

Homocysteine-responsive ATF3 gene expression in human vascular endothelial cells:
activation of c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase and promoter response element.

Cai Y(1), Zhang C, Nawa T, Aso T, Tanaka M, Oshiro S, Ichijo H, Kitajima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Activating transcription factor (ATF) 3 is a member of ATF/cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP)-responsive element binding protein (ATF/CREB) family of
transcription factors and functions as a stress-inducible transcriptional
repressor. To understand the stress-induced gene regulation by homocysteine, we
investigated activation of the ATF3 gene in human endothelial cells. Homocysteine
caused a rapid induction of ATF3 at the transcriptional level. This induction was
preceded by a rapid and sustained activation of c-Jun NH(2)-terminal
kinase/stress-activated protein kinase (JNK/SAPK), and dominant negative
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 4 and 7 abolished these effects. The
effect of homocysteine appeared to be specific, because cysteine or homocystine
had no appreciable effect, but it was mimicked by dithiothreitol and
beta-mercaptoethanol as well as tunicamycin. The homocysteine effect was not
inhibited by an active oxygen scavenger. Deletion analysis of the 5' flanking
sequence of the ATF3 gene promoter revealed that one of the major elements
responsible for the induction by homocysteine is an ATF/cAMP responsive element
(CRE) located at -92 to -85 relative to the transcriptional start site. Gel
shift, immunoprecipitation, and cotransfection assays demonstrated that a complex
(or complexes) containing ATF2, c-Jun, and ATF3 increased binding to the ATF/CRE 
site in the homocysteine-treated cells and activated the ATF3 gene expression,
while ATF3 appeared to repress its own promoter. These data together suggested a 
novel pathway by which homocysteine causes the activation of JNK/SAPK and
subsequent ATF3 expression through its reductive stress. Activation of JNK/SAPK
and ATF3 expression in response to homocysteine may have a functional role in
homocysteinemia-associated endothelial dysfunction.

PMID: 10979959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Jpn J Cancer Res. 2000 Aug;91(8):833-6.

Inhibitory effect of ATF3 antisense oligonucleotide on ectopic growth of HT29
human colon cancer cells.

Ishiguro T(1), Nagawa H, Naito M, Tsuruo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

ATF3 is a transcription factor belonging to the Jun / Fos family whose mouse
homologue (TI-241) was isolated, using the differential screening method, from
B16 mouse melanoma cells as a blood-borne metastasis-associated gene. Here we
show the tumorigenicity-inhibiting effect of an antisense oligonucleotide
designed to reduce the expression of ATF3 in HT29 colon cancer cells. HT29 cells 
were reported to metastasize to the skin after intravenous inoculation. The
antisense oligonucleotide inhibited cell attachment to the collagen-coated floor 
of the plates and invasion of HT29 cells in vitro, which are thought to be two
important factors in the process of cancer metastasis and ectopic tumor growth.
While the antisense oligonucleotide had no effect on cell growth of HT29 cells in
vitro, mice that were inoculated subcutaneously with HT29 cells and treated with 
the antisense oligonucleotide survived longer than the control mice due to the
inhibition of tumor growth in vivo. These show that ATF3 plays an important role 
in the ectopic growth / metastasis of HT29 colon cancer cells.

PMID: 10965025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Aug 28;275(2):406-11.

Repression of TNF-alpha-induced E-selectin expression by PPAR activators:
involvement of transcriptional repressor LRF-1/ATF3.

Nawa T(1), Nawa MT, Cai Y, Zhang C, Uchimura I, Narumi S, Numano F, Kitajima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Medical Research
Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, 113-8510, Japan.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) activators were shown to
inhibit the expression of E-selectin of human vascular endothelial cells in
response to tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). Troglitazone, pioglitazone, 
alpha-clofibrate, and 15-deoxy-Delta12,14-prostaglandin J2 all inhibited the
TNF-alpha-stimulated E-selectin gene transcription in reporter assay. To further 
clarify the underlying transcriptional regulation, nuclear factor(s) that binds
to the nuclear factor-endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule 1 (NF-ELAM1) site
of the E-selectin gene promoter was investigated. The activators caused a
significant induction of liver regenerating factor 1 (LRF1)/activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3), which bound to the NF-ELAM1 site and repressed the
TNF-alpha-induced E-selectin gene expression. From these data, the effect of PPAR
activators was mediated, in part, through the induction of LRF1/ATF3. This might 
provide a novel molecular mechanism of anti-inflammatory effect of PPAR
activators.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10964678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2000 Aug;41(9):2412-21.

Injury-specific expression of activating transcription factor-3 in retinal
ganglion cells and its colocalized expression with phosphorylated c-Jun.

Takeda M(1), Kato H, Takamiya A, Yoshida A, Kiyama H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Asahikawa Medical College, Hokkaido, Japan.

PURPOSE: To ascribe activating transcription factor (ATF)-3 as a specifically
induced transcription factor after ON injury and to describe its putative role as
a modulator of c-Jun transactivation.
METHODS: The adult rat optic nerve was crushed intraorbitally, and expression
profiles of ATF-3, ATF-2, and phosphorylated c-Jun (p-c-Jun) were examined by
immunohistochemistry and ISH. Western blot analysis for ATF-3 and -2 were also
performed. Furthermore, colocalized detection of c-Jun mRNA with ATF-2 or -3 was 
attempted with a combined method of simultaneous immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization.
RESULTS: In response to optic nerve injury, substantial expression of ATF-3 as
well as that of p-c-Jun was observed in the retinal ganglion cells, whereas no
expression of ATF-3 was seen in other noninjured retinal cells. In contrast,
ATF-2 was normally expressed abundantly in both retinal ganglion cells and
displaced amacrine cells, but expression dropped in retinal ganglion cells after 
nerve injury. The expression profiles of ATF-2 and -3 after optic nerve injury
were confirmed by Western blot analysis. A higher degree of colocalization was
observed for ATF-3 and c-Jun than the modest codetection for ATF-2 and c-Jun.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcription factor ATF-3 is specifically induced upon optic
nerve injury and colocalizes with p-c-Jun in surviving ganglion cells. These
findings suggest that both ATF-3 and c-Jun are crucial to trigger various
transcriptional responses and may act synergistically during the survival phase
of the optic nerve in the injury model.

PMID: 10937548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Oncogene. 2000 Jun 8;19(25):2913-20.

Proteasome inhibitor induced gene expression profiles reveal overexpression of
transcriptional regulators ATF3, GADD153 and MAD1.

Zimmermann J(1), Erdmann D, Lalande I, Grossenbacher R, Noorani M, Fürst P.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Pharma AG, Oncology Research, WKL-125.13.14, CH-4002 Basel,
Switzerland.

The ubiquitin/proteasome pathway has been implicated in a wide variety of
cellular processes and the number of substrates degraded by the proteasome is
impressive. Most prominently, the stability of a large number of transcription
factors is regulated by ubiquitination. To elucidate pathways regulated by the
proteasome, gene expression profiles were generated, comparing changes of mRNA
expression of 7900 genes from the UniGene collection upon exposure of cells to
the proteasome inhibitors Lactacystin, Lactacystin-beta-lactone or MG132 by means
of microarray based cDNA hybridization. The three profiles were very similar, but
differed significantly from a gene expression profile generated with the histone 
deacetylase inhibitor Trapoxin A, indicating that the observed alterations were
indeed due to proteasome inhibition. Two of the most prominently induced genes
encoded the growth arrest and DNA damage inducible protein Gadd153 and the
activating transcription factor ATF3, both transcription factors of the
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) family. A third gene encoded for the
transcriptional repressor and c-Myc antagonist Mad1. Our results suggest that
proteasome inhibition leads to upregulation of specific members of transcription 
factor families controlling cellular stress response and proliferation. Oncogene 
(2000).

PMID: 10871842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 2;275(22):16865-70.

Transcriptional autorepression of the stress-inducible gene ATF3.

Wolfgang CD(1), Liang G, Okamoto Y, Allen AE, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Ohio State Neurobiotechnology Center and
the Ohio State Biochemistry Program, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210,
USA.

Previously, we demonstrated that ATF3 (activating transcription factor-3) is a
stress-inducible gene, and the protein it encodes is a transcriptional repressor.
In this report, we present evidence suggesting that ATF3 represses the
transcription of its own gene. Interestingly, efficient repression requires a
consensus ATF/cAMP-responsive element site in the promoter and a previously
unidentified ATF3-binding site immediately downstream from the TATA box. Although
this new site resembles the known ATF/cAMP-responsive element sequences at the
flanking sequence, it differs from them at the center key residues. These
observations indicate that ATF3 can tolerate variations in the center of the
binding sites if the flanking sequences are favorable. The repression of the ATF3
promoter by its own gene product provides a mechanistic explanation, at least in 
part, for the transient expression pattern of the ATF3 gene upon stress
induction.

PMID: 10748147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2000 Feb;15(2):170-82.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) induction by axotomy in sensory and
motoneurons: A novel neuronal marker of nerve injury.

Tsujino H(1), Kondo E, Fukuoka T, Dai Y, Tokunaga A, Miki K, Yonenobu K, Ochi T, 
Noguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Hyogo College of Medicine, 1-1
Mukogawa-cho, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, 663-8501, Japan.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a member of ATF/CREB family of
transcription factors, is induced in a variety of stressed tissue. ATF3 regulates
transcription by binding to DNA sites as a homodimer or heterodimer with Jun
proteins. The purpose of this study was to examine the expression and regulation 
of ATF3 after axonal injury in neurons in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and spinal
cord. In naive rats, ATF3 was not expressed in the DRG and spinal cord. Following
the cut of peripheral nerve, ATF3 was immediately induced in virtually all DRG
neurons and motoneurons that were axotomized, and the time course of induction
was dependent on the distance between the injury site and the cell body. Double
labeling using immunohistochemistry revealed that the population of DRG neurons
expressing ATF3 included those expressing c-jun, and in motoneurons ATF3 and
c-jun were concurrently expressed after axotomy. In contrast to c-jun, ATF3 was
not induced transsynaptically in spinal dorsal horn neurons. We conclude that
ATF3 is specifically induced in sensory and motoneurons in the spinal cord
following nerve injury and should be regarded as an unique neuronal marker of
nerve injury in the nervous system.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10673325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Dec 23;1489(2-3):293-302.

Scanning gene expression during neuronal cell death evoked by nerve growth factor
depletion.

Mayumi-Matsuda K(1), Kojima S, Nakayama T, Suzuki H, Sakata T.

Author information: 
(1)Shionogi Institute for Medical Science, Shionogi and Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan.

Depletion of nerve growth factor (NGF) from differentiated, neuronal PC12 cells
causes a form of programmed cell death that stems from the attenuation of NGF
receptor signaling and the resultant expression of certain genes required for
cell death. To better understand the associated molecular events, we surveyed the
changes in gene expression in PC6-3 cells, a subline of PC12, caused by depletion
of NGF. Using restriction landmark cDNA scanning, we assessed the expression
patterns of as many as 15,000 gene species, and 30 genes were isolated whose
expression was altered in the absence of NGF. Of the 20 genes up-regulated in the
absence of NGF, including transcription factor LRF-1/ATF3, most were also
up-regulated during the programmed death of cortical neurons caused by Ca2+
ionophore. Their function may thus be a general feature of programmed neuronal
cell death. In contrast, with one exception, expression of down-regulated genes
was NGF-dependent and therefore diminished in the absence of NGF but unaffected
by Ca2+ ionophore. These findings confirm that global investigation of the
features of up- and down-regulated genes should add substantially to our
understanding of the regulation of programmed neuronal cell death and the
mechanisms involved.

PMID: 10673030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Virol. 2000 Jan;74(1):83-90.

Different regions of hepatitis B virus X protein are required for enhancement of 
bZip-mediated transactivation versus transrepression.

Barnabas S(1), Andrisani OM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
Indiana 47907, USA.

The hepatitis B virus X protein (pX) interacts directly with the bZip
transactivator CREB and the bZip repressors ICERIIgamma and ATF3, increasing
their DNA-binding affinity in vitro and their transcriptional efficacy in vivo.
However, the mechanism of bZip-pX interaction and of the pX-mediated increase in 
the bZip transcriptional efficacy remains to be understood. In this study with
deletion mutants of pX, we delineated a 67-amino-acid region spanning residues 49
to 115 required for direct CREB, ATF3, and ICER IIgamma interaction in vitro and 
in vivo and increased bZip/CRE binding in vitro. Transient transfections of the
pX deletion mutants in AML12 hepatocytes demonstrate that pX(49-115) is as
effective as the full-length pX in enhancing the ATF3- and ICERIIgamma-mediated
transrepression. However, this pX region is inactive in increasing the
transactivation efficacy of CREB; additional amino acid residues present in
pX(49-140) are required to mediate the increased transactivation efficacy of CREB
in vivo. This requirement for different regions of pX in affecting CREB
transactivation suggests that amino acid residues 115 to 140 integrate additional
events in effecting pX-mediated transactivation, such as concomitant interactions
with select components of the basal transcriptional apparatus.

PMCID: PMC111516
PMID: 10590094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Gene Expr. 1999;7(4-6):321-35.

ATF3 and stress responses.

Hai T(1), Wolfgang CD, Marsee DK, Allen AE, Sivaprasad U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Ohio State University, Columbus 43210,
USA. hai.2@osu.edu

The purpose of this review is to discuss ATF3, a member of the ATF/CREB family of
transcription factors, and its roles in stress responses. In the introduction, we
briefly describe the ATF/CREB family, which contains more than 10 proteins with
the basic region-leucine zipper (bZip) DNA binding domain. We summarize their DNA
binding and heterodimer formation with other bZip proteins, and discuss the
nomenclature of these proteins. Over the years, identical or homologous cDNA
clones have been isolated by different laboratories and given different names. We
group these proteins into subgroups according to their amino acid similarity; we 
also list the alternative names for each member, and clarify some potential
confusion in the nomenclature of this family of proteins. We then focus on ATF3
and its potential roles in stress responses. We review the evidence that the mRNA
level of ATF3 greatly increases when the cells are exposed to stress signals. In 
animal experiments, the signals include ischemia, ischemia coupled with
reperfusion, wounding, axotomy, toxicity, and seizure; in cultured cells, the
signals include serum factors, cytokines, genotoxic agents, cell death-inducing
agents, and the adenoviral protein E1A. Despite the overwhelming evidence for its
induction by stress signals, not much else is known about ATF3. Preliminary
results suggest that the JNK/SAPK pathway is involved in the induction of ATF3 by
stress signals; in addition, IL-6 and p53 have been demonstrated to be required
for the induction of ATF3 under certain conditions. The consequences of inducing 
ATF3 during stress responses are not clear. Transient transfection and in vitro
transcription assays indicate that ATF3 represses transcription as a homodimer;
however, ATF3 can activate transcription when coexpressed with its heterodimeric 
partners or other proteins. Therefore, it is possible that, when induced during
stress responses, ATF3 activates some target genes but represses others,
depending on the promoter context and cellular context. Even less is understood
about the physiological significance of inducing ATF3. We will discuss our
preliminary results and some reports by other investigators in this regard.

PMID: 10440233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Oncogene. 1999 Jun 17;18(24):3666-72.

Fluorescent cDNA microarray hybridization reveals complexity and heterogeneity of
cellular genotoxic stress responses.

Amundson SA(1), Bittner M, Chen Y, Trent J, Meltzer P, Fornace AJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA.

The fate of cells exposed to ionizing radiation (IR) may depend greatly on
changes in gene expression, so that an improved view of gene induction profiles
is important for understanding mechanisms of checkpoint control, repair and cell 
death following such exposures. We have used a quantitative fluorescent cDNA
microarray hybridization approach to identify genes regulated in response to
7-irradiation in the p53 wild-type ML-1 human myeloid cell line. Hybridization of
the array to fluorescently-labeled RNA from treated and untreated cells was
followed by computer analysis to derive relative changes in expression levels of 
the genes present in the array, which agreed well with actual quantitative
changes in expression. Forty-eight sequences, 30 not previously identified as
IR-responsive, were significantly regulated by IR. Induction by IR and other
stresses of a subset of these genes, including the previously characterized CIP1/
WAF1, MDM2 and BAX genes, as well as nine genes not previously reported to be
IR-responsive, was examined in a panel of 12 human cell lines. Responses varied
widely in cell lines with different tissues of origin and different genetic
backgrounds, highlighting the importance of cellular context to genotoxic stress 
responses. Two of the newly identified IR-responsive genes, FRA-1 and ATF3,
showed a p53-associated component to their IR-induction, and this was confirmed
both in isogenic human cell lines and in mouse thymus. The majority of the
IR-responsive genes, however, showed no indication of p53-dependent regulation,
representing a potentially important class of stress-responsive genes in leukemic
cells.

PMID: 10380890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Biochem J. 1999 Apr 1;339 ( Pt 1):135-41.

Complexes containing activating transcription factor
(ATF)/cAMP-responsive-element-binding protein (CREB) interact with the
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)-ATF composite site to regulate Gadd153
expression during the stress response.

Fawcett TW(1), Martindale JL, Guyton KZ, Hai T, Holbrook NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression and Aging Section, Laboratory of Biological Chemistry, NIA,
National Institutes of Health, 5600 Nathan Shock Drive, Box 12, Baltimore, MD
21224-6825, USA.

Gadd153, also known as chop, encodes a member of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein (C/EBP) transcription factor family and is transcriptionally activated by
cellular stress signals. We recently demonstrated that arsenite treatment of rat 
pheochromocytoma PC12 cells results in the biphasic induction of Gadd153 mRNA
expression, controlled in part through binding of C/EBPbeta and two
uncharacterized protein complexes to the C/EBP-ATF (activating transcription
factor) composite site in the Gadd153 promoter. In this report, we identified
components of these additional complexes as two ATF/CREB
(cAMP-responsive-element-binding protein) transcription factors having
differential binding activities dependent upon the time of arsenite exposure.
During arsenite treatment of PC12 cells, we observed enhanced binding of ATF4 to 
the C/EBP-ATF site at 2 h as Gadd153 mRNA levels increased, and enhanced binding 
of ATF3 complexes at 6 h as Gadd153 expression declined. We further demonstrated 
that ATF4 activates, while ATF3 represses, Gadd153 promoter activity through the 
C/EBP-ATF site. ATF3 also repressed ATF4-mediated transactivation and
arsenite-induced activation of the Gadd153 promoter. Our results suggest that
numerous members of the ATF/CREB family are involved in the cellular stress
response, and that regulation of stress-induced biphasic Gadd153 expression in
PC12 cells involves the ordered, sequential binding of multiple transcription
factor complexes to the C/EBP-ATF composite site.

PMCID: PMC1220137
PMID: 10085237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Oncogene. 1999 Jan 14;18(2):377-84.

Differential regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinases by
microtubule-binding agents in human breast cancer cells.

Shtil AA(1), Mandlekar S, Yu R, Walter RJ, Hagen K, Tan TH, Roninson IB, Kong AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Illinois 
at Chicago 60607, USA.

Drug design targeted at microtubules has led to the advent of some potent
anti-cancer drugs. In the present study, we demonstrated that microtubule-binding
agents (MBAs) taxol and colchicine induced immediate early gene (c-jun and ATF3) 
expression, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis in the human breast cancer cell line
MCF-7. To elucidate the signal transduction pathways that mediate such biological
activities of MBAs, we studied the involvement of mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinases. Treatment with taxol, colchicine, or other MBAs (vincristine,
podophyllotoxin, nocodazole) stimulated the activity of c-jun N-terminal kinase 1
(JNK1) in MCF-7 cells. In contrast, p38 was activated only by taxol and none of
the MBAs changed the activity of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 2 
(ERK2). Activation of JNK1 or p38 by MBAs occurred subsequent to the
morphological changes in the microtubule cytoskeleton induced by these compounds.
Furthermore, baccatine III and beta-lumicolchicine, inactive analogs of taxol and
colchicine, respectively, did not activate JNKI or p38. These results suggest
that interactions between microtubules and MBAs are essential for the activation 
of these kinases. Pretreatment with the antioxidants N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC),
ascorbic acid or vitamin E, blocked H2O2- or doxorubicin-induced JNKI activity,
but had no effect on JNKI activation by MBAs, excluding a role for oxidative
stress. However, BAPTA/AM, a specific intracellular Ca2+ chelator, attenuated
JNK1 activation by taxol but not by colchicine, and had no effect on microtubule 
changes induced by taxol. Thus, stabilization or depolymerization of microtubules
may regulate JNK1 activity via distinct downstream signaling pathways. The
differential activation of MAP kinases opens up a new avenue for addressing the
mechanism of action of antimicrotubule drugs.

PMID: 9927194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 22;274(4):2327-36.

Differential immediate early gene expression in conditional hepatitis B virus
pX-transforming versus nontransforming hepatocyte cell lines.

Tarn C(1), Bilodeau ML, Hullinger RL, Andrisani OM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
Indiana 47907, USA.

We report construction and characterization of tetracycline-controlled hepatitis 
B virus pX-expressing hepatocyte (AML12) cell lines. These cell lines were
constructed in AML12 clonal isolates (clones 3 and 4), which express
constitutively the tetracycline-controlled transactivator. Since pX is implicated
in HCC, this immortalized hepatocyte model system was used to investigate the
mechanism of pX in transformation. Clonal isolates of 3pX and 4pX lineages
display conditional synthesis of pX mRNA and protein and a 2-fold increase in
growth saturation density following tetracycline removal, implicating pX in
monolayer overgrowth. Interestingly, only 3pX clones display pX-dependent
anchorage independence. Clone 3 lineages express hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
and hepatocyte-specific marker genes; clone 4 lineages express hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1beta and reduced levels of hepatocyte-specific marker genes, suggesting
the importance of the differentiated hepatocyte in pX-mediated oncogenic
transformation. Importantly, 3pX and 4pX lineages display differential expression
of immediate early genes c-fos and ATF3. The pX-transforming 3pX lineage displays
early, pX-dependent induction of ATF3 and prolonged induction of c-fos. The
nontransforming 4pX cells display an absence of pX-dependent ATF3 induction and
transient induction of c-fos. Our results support the direct link of pX
expression to oncogenic transformation in 3pX lineage clones and underscore the
advantage of this conditional cellular model system for studying mechanisms of
pX-mediated oncogenesis.

PMID: 9890999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Exp Cell Res. 1998 Feb 25;239(1):93-103.

Activation of the rat cyclin A promoter by ATF2 and Jun family members and its
suppression by ATF4.

Shimizu M(1), Nomura Y, Suzuki H, Ichikawa E, Takeuchi A, Suzuki M, Nakamura T,
Nakajima T, Oda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
Japan.

Cyclin A plays an essential role in the G1 to S phase transition in the cell
cycle. The expression of cyclin A is restrained during G0 and G1, but steeply
induced at the G1/S boundary. Analysis of the rat cyclin A promoter elements with
the 5' sequential deletion derivatives of the promoter fused to the luciferase
cDNA indicated that the ATF/CRE motif primarily determines the inducibility at
G1/S. Gel shift analysis of the complex formed at the ATF/CRE site indicated that
the complex was not formed with the G0/G1 cell extract, but maximally formed with
the late-G1 cell extract. The complex was supershifted by anti-JunD antibody, and
Western blot analysis of the immune complexes prepared with anti-JunD antibody
revealed the presence of ATF2, suggesting heterodimerization of JunD with ATF2.
The cyclin A promoter in a reporter plasmid was activated by nearly 10-fold in
quiescent rat 3Y1 cells by cotransfection with the expression of plasmids
encoding ATF2 and Jun family members. In contrast, cotransfection with the ATF4
expression plasmid suppressed the promoter activation mediated by ATF2 and Jun
family members. The expression of Jun family members during G1 to S progression
was induced biphasically in early and late G1 and the level of JunD increased
markedly at the G1/S, while that of ATF family members was gradually increased
along with the G1 to S progression. These results indicate that the cyclin A
promoter activity is regulated, at least in part, by relative amounts of the ATF 
and Jun family members.

PMID: 9511728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Nov;17(11):6700-7.

gadd153/Chop10, a potential target gene of the transcriptional repressor ATF3.

Wolfgang CD(1), Chen BP, Martindale JL, Holbrook NJ, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, Ohio State University, Columbus 43210, USA.

Recently, we demonstrated that the function of ATF3, a stress-inducible
transcriptional repressor, is negatively regulated by a bZip protein,
gadd153/Chop10. In this report, we present evidence that ATF3 can repress the
expression of its own inhibitor, gadd153/Chop10. First, ATF3 represses a
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene driven by the gadd153/Chop10
promoter when assayed by a transfection assay in vivo and a transcription assay
in vitro. Second, the gadd153/Chop10 promoter contains two functionally important
binding sites for ATF3: an AP-1 site and a C/EBP-ATF composite site, a previously
unidentified binding site for ATF3. The absence of either site reduces the
ability of ATF3 to repress the promoter. Third, overexpression of ATF3 by
transient transfection results in a reduction of the endogenous gadd153/Chop10
mRNA level. Fourth, as described previously, ATF3 is induced in the liver upon
CCl4 treatment. Intriguingly, we show in this report that gadd153/Chop10 mRNA is 
not present in areas where ATF3 is induced. Taken together, these results
strongly suggest that ATF3 represses the expression of gadd153/Chop10. The mutual
negative regulation between ATF3 and gadd153/Chop10 is discussed.

PMCID: PMC232524
PMID: 9343434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 15;272(33):20684-90.

The hepatitis B virus X protein enhances the DNA binding potential and
transcription efficacy of bZip transcription factors.

Barnabas S(1), Hai T, Andrisani OM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
Indiana 47907, USA.

The hepatitis B virus X protein interacts with the basic-region, leucine zipper
protein (bZip) domain of cAMP response element-binding protein increasing its
affinity for the cAMP response element site in vitro and its transcriptional
efficacy in vivo (Williams, J. S., and Andrisani, O. M. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U. S. A. 92, 3819-3823). Here we examine pX interactions with bZip
transcription factors ATF3, gadd153/Chop10, ICER IIgamma, and NF-IL6. We
demonstrate direct interactions in vitro between pX and the bZip proteins tested.
In contrast MyoD and Gal4(1-147) fail to interact with pX. We also demonstrate by
the mammalian two-hybrid assay the direct interaction of pX with cAMP response
element- binding protein, ICER IIgamma, ATF3, and NF-IL6 in hepatocytes. In
addition, pX increases the DNA binding potential of bZip proteins for their
cognate DNA-binding site in vitro. In transient transfections in hepatocytes
(AML12 cell line), pX increases the transcriptional efficacy of the bZip
transcription factors. NF-IL6-mediated transcriptional activation is enhanced
3-fold by pX. Most interestingly, pX augments the repression mediated by bZip
repressors ATF3 and ICER IIgamma, by 6- and 7-fold, respectively, demonstrating
for the first time the involvement of pX in gene repression. We conclude that pX 
is an enhancer of the DNA binding potential of bZip transcription factors,
thereby increasing the transactivation or repression efficacy of bZip-responsive 
genes.

PMID: 9252388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 8;272(32):19943-50.

Tissue-specific pattern of stress kinase activation in ischemic/reperfused heart 
and kidney.

Yin T(1), Sandhu G, Wolfgang CD, Burrier A, Webb RL, Rigel DF, Hai T, Whelan J.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corp., Summit, New Jersey 07901, USA.

In this report we investigate the molecular mechanisms that contribute to tissue 
damage following ischemia and ischemia coupled with reperfusion
(ischemia/reperfusion) in the rat heart and kidney. We observe the activation of 
three stress-inducible mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases in these tissues: 
p38 MAP kinase and the 46- and 55-kDa isoforms of Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK46
and JNK55). The heart and kidney show distinct time courses in the activation of 
p38 MAP kinase during ischemia but no activation of either JNK46 or JNK55. These 
two tissues also respond differently to ischemia/reperfusion. In the heart we
observe activation of JNK55 and p38 MAP kinase, whereas in the kidney all three
kinases are active. We also examined the expression pattern of two
stress-responsive genes, c-Jun and ATF3. Our results indicate that in the heart
both genes are induced by ischemia and ischemia/reperfusion. However, in the
kidney c-Jun and ATF3 expression is induced only by ischemia/reperfusion. To
correlate these molecular events with tissue damage we examined DNA laddering, a 
common marker of apoptosis. A significant increase in DNA laddering was evident
in both heart and kidney following ischemia/reperfusion and correlated with the
pattern of kinase activation, supporting a link between stress kinase activation 
and apoptotic cell death in these tissues.

PMID: 9242662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 Aug;8(8):913-20.

Characterization of a nuclear factor that binds juxtaposed with ATF3/Jun on a
composite response element specifically mediating induced transcription in
response to an epidermal growth factor/Ras/Raf signaling pathway.

Nilsson M(1), Ford J, Bohm S, Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience at Novum, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge, Sweden.

We have previously identified a 20-bp sequence that mediates induced
transcription in response to EGF, Ras, and Raf but not after TPA or UV
stimulation. This composite response element, present in a long terminal repeat
of a member within the VL30 family of retrotransposons, contains an AP-1-like
site that cooperates in function with a juxtaposed sequence unrelated to known
transcription factor-binding sites. Using in vitro translated proteins, we here
demonstrate that the AP-1-like site preferentially binds ATF3/c-Jun and ATF3/JunD
heterodimers. Results from a functional analysis indicate that the ATF3/c-Jun
heterodimer, together with factors interacting with the 3' element, are most
likely the important mediators of the response because overexpression of JunD,
alone or in combination with ATF3, abolishes Ras-induced transcription. Partial
purification by phosphocellulose and DNA-affinity chromatography in combination
with Southwestern analyses reveals a 52-kDa protein that specifically binds to
the sequence juxtaposed to the AP-1-like site. Scatchard analyses show that this 
sequence, TTAGTTAC, forms two different complexes with K(d)s of 1.9 x 10(-10) and
2.3 x 10(-9) M, respectively. Together, these results suggest that EGF/Ras/Raf
induces transcription via combined activation of ATF3/c-Jun and a 52-kDa nuclear 
factor, whereas JunD acts as a repressor of this response.

PMID: 9269900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Cancer Lett. 1996 Oct 1;107(1):73-81.

Adriamycin activates c-jun N-terminal kinase in human leukemia cells: a relevance
to apoptosis.

Yu R(1), Shtil AA, Tan TH, Roninson IB, Kong AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmacodynamics, College of Pharmacy,
University of Illinois at Chicago 60607, USA.

We studied the activation of c-jun N-terminal kinase 1 (JNK 1) and extracellular 
signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK 1/2) of mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) family by adriamycin (ADR) in the human T cell leukemia line, H9. ADR
caused an elevation of JNK1 activity at sublethal or lethal concentrations;
however, at lower doses, ADR did not activate JNK1. The induction of JNK1 peaked 
at 4 h of treatment (about ten-fold over the control), and was sustained up to 5 
h post-treatment. This induction preceded the onset of apoptosis, as determined
by morphological features and internucleosomal degradation of DNA. Upon treatment
of cells with JNK1-inducing doses, ADR caused an elevation of steady-state levels
of c-jun and ATF3 mRNAs, as measured by RT-PCR. In contrast, the activity of ERK 
1/2 remained unchanged throughout the treatments, indicating that members of MAPK
family are differentially regulated in ADR-treated cells. A possible role of JNK1
activation in ADR-induced apoptosis is discussed.

PMID: 8913269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Mol Immunol. 1996 Aug;33(11-12):989-98.

Identification of a lipopolysaccharide inducible transcription factor in murine
macrophages.

Drysdale BE(1), Howard DL, Johnson RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research Service, Baltimore VA Medical Center, MD 21201, USA.

To study macrophage genes activated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) we have
constructed a cDNA library using the mouse macrophage cell line, RAW 264.7. By
differential screening, a gene, designated LRG-21, was identified that showed
nucleic acid sequence homology to rat liver regenerating factor-1 (LRF-1) and
human activating transcription factor-3 (ATF3). Both LRG-21 and LRF-1 are
transcribed within an hour following stimulation and in the absence of protein
synthesis. The predicted protein sequence of LRG-21 consists of 181 amino acids
with a molecular weight of 20.7 kDa. All three sequences contain basic and
leucine zipper regions characteristic of the c-Fos and c-Jun family of
transcription factors, but the remainder of the sequences are unrelated to this
family. Recombinant LRG-21 has been shown to bind to a phorbol ester promoter
element. Additional experiments have shown that LRG-21 is also induced by
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and by interleukin-4 (IL-4) in both RAW264.7 cells
and murine peritoneal macrophages. Based on these observations, it is likely that
LRG-21 plays an important role in macrophage activation.

PMID: 8960123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Biol Chem. 1996 Mar 29;271(13):7508-15.

Synergistic induction of osteocalcin gene expression: identification of a
bipartite element conferring fibroblast growth factor 2 and cyclic AMP
responsiveness in the rat osteocalcin promoter.

Boudreaux JM(1), Towler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are important regulators of calvarial osteoblast
growth and differentiation. We have studied the regulation of the
osteoblast-specific gene osteocalcin (OC) by FGF2 in phenotypically immature
MC3T3-E1 calvarial osteoblastic cells. FGF2 markedly induces OC mRNA accumulation
in MC3T3-E1 cells in the presence of forskolin (FSK). Similarly, OC promoter
activity (luciferase reporter) is up-regulated 6-10-fold by FGF2/FSK or by
FGF2/8-bromo cyclic AMP. Half-maximal induction of OC promoter activity occurs at
1 nM FGF2. By 5' deletion analysis and dinucleotide point mutations, we map one
component of this FGF2/FSK response to a GCAGTCA motif in the region -144 to -138
relative to the OC transcription initiation site. The OC promoter region -154 to 
-90 confers FGF2/FSK responsiveness on the Rous sarcoma virus minimal promoter.
By 3' and internal deletion analyses, the region between -90 to -99 is also found
to be necessary for FGF2/FSK synergy (encodes a PuGGTCA motif previously
identified as a component of FSK induction). A DNA binding activity that
recognizes the region -148 to -125 of the rat OC promoter is induced in crude
nuclear extracts from MC3T3-E1 cells treated with FGF2 or FGF2/FSK. This binding 
activity is sequence-specific and does not recognize the TCAGTCA DNA cognate of
AP1. Members of the ATF, Fos, and Jun family are not immunologically detected in 
this inducible DNA binding activity. However, transient co-expression of ATF3 but
not ATF2 selectively attenuates the FGF2 component of induction. Thus, a novel
FGF2-regulated DNA-protein interaction in the OC promoter participates in the
transcriptional control of OC expression by FGF and cyclic AMP in MC3T3-E1
calvarial osteoblasts.

PMID: 8631781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Oncogene. 1996 Mar 7;12(5):1025-32.

Altered AP-1/ATF complexes in adenovirus-E1-transformed cells due to
EIA-dependent induction of ATF3.

Hagmeyer BM(1), Duyndam MC, Angel P, de Groot RP, Verlaan M, Elfferich P, van der
Eb A, Zantema A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Carcinogenesis, Leiden University, The Netherlands.

The adenovirus (Ad) E1A proteins alter the expression level and activity of
AP-1/ATF transcription factors. Previously we have shown that in AdE1-transformed
cells cJun is hyperphosphorylated in its N-terminal transactivation domain, which
parallels enhanced transactivation function. To find out whether the interaction 
between cJun and other cellular proteins is altered, we have searched for
proteins which would physically associate with cJun. In this report we show that 
in AdE1-transformed cells cJun specifically associates with two proteins of 21
and 23 kD. These proteins are not expressed at detectable levels in the parental 
cells or in cells transformed by oncogenes other than AdE1. The cJun-associated
proteins represent different forms of the bZIP transcription factor ATF3, the
human homolog of rat LRF1. The expression of ATF3 is induced in AdE1-transformed 
cells and is a direct effect of the expression of E1A. Through induction of ATF3 
expression and the subsequent formation of cJun/ATF3 heterodimers, E1A alters the
repertoire of AP-1/ATF factors and may thereby redirect the corresponding
gene-expression program. Since the induction of ATF3 is a function of sequences
within the transforming 12S-ElA protein, cJun/ATF3 complexes might be involved in
establishing cellular transformation by AdE1A.

PMID: 8649793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Mar;16(3):1157-68.

Analysis of ATF3, a transcription factor induced by physiological stresses and
modulated by gadd153/Chop10.

Chen BP(1), Wolfgang CD, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, Ohio State University, Columbus, 43210, USA.

We demonstrate that ATF3, a member of the ATF/CREB family of transcription
factors, is induced in a variety of stressed tissues: mechanically injured liver,
toxin-injured liver, blood-deprived heart, and postseizure brain. We also
demonstrate that an ATF3-interacting protein, gadd153/Chop10, forms a
nonfunctional heterodimer with ATF3: the heterodimer, in contrast to the ATF3
homodimer, does not bind to the ATF/cyclic AMP response element consensus site
and does not repress transcription. Interestingly, ATF3 and gadd153/Chop10 are
expressed in inverse but overlapping manners during the liver's response to
carbon tetrachloride (CCl4): the level of gadd153/Chop10 mRNA is high in the
normal liver and greatly decreases upon CCl4 treatment; the level of ATF3 mRNA,
on the other hand, is low in the normal liver and greatly increases upon CCl4
treatment. We hypothesize that in nonstressed liver, gadd153/Chop10 inhibits the 
limited amount of ATF3 by forming an inactive heterodimer with it, whereas in
CCl4-injured liver, the synthesis of gadd153/Chop10 is repressed, allowing the
induced ATF3 to function.

PMCID: PMC231098
PMID: 8622660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 19;271(3):1695-701.

ATF3 gene. Genomic organization, promoter, and regulation.

Liang G(1), Wolfgang CD, Chen BP, Chen TH, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, Ohio State University, Columbus 43210, USA.

ATF3 gene, which encodes a member of the activating transcription factor/cAMP
responsive element binding protein (ATF/CREB) family of transcription factors, is
induced by many physiological stresses. As a step toward understanding the
induction mechanisms, we isolated the human ATF3 gene and analyzed its genome
organization and 5'-flanking region. We found that the human ATF3 mRNA is derived
from four exons distributed over 15 kilobases. Sequence analysis of the
5'-flanking region revealed a consensus TATA box and a number of transcription
factor binding sites including the AP-1, ATF/CRE, NF-kappa B, E2F, and Myc/Max
binding sites. As another approach to understanding the mechanisms by which the
ATF3 gene is induced by stress signals, we studied the regulation of the ATF3
gene in tissue culture cells by anisomycin, an approach that has been used to
study the stress responses in tissue culture cells. We showed that anisomycin at 
a low concentration activates the ATF3 promoter and stabilizes the ATF3 mRNA.
Significantly, co-transfection of DNAs expressing ATF2 and c-Jun activates the
ATF3 promoter. A possible mechanism implicating the C-Jun NH2-terminal
kinase/stress-activated protein kinase (JNK/SAPK) stress-inducible signaling
pathway in the induction of the ATF3 gene is discussed.

PMID: 8576171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Biol Chem. 1995 May 19;270(20):12210-8.

Activated Ha-Ras but not TPA induces transcription through binding sites for
activating transcription factor 3/Jun and a novel nuclear factor.

Nilsson M(1), Toftgård R, Bohm S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Nutrition and Toxicology, Karolinska Institute, NOVUM, Huddinge,
Sweden.

We report the identification of a 20-base pair sequence mediating induced
transcription in response to an activated Ha-ras gene and epidermal growth factor
(EGF) but not 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate stimulation. This
signal-specific nuclear target is present in the long terminal repeat of a mouse 
VL30 retrotransposon expressed in epidermis. Functional studies and in vitro
binding analyses using cultured keratinocytes (Balb/MK) reveal that the response 
element is composed of two cooperating sequence motifs in juxtaposed position,
both of which are targets for induced binding activity 1-2 h after EGF
stimulation. Of many different activating transcription factor/cAMP-responsive
element binding protein/activating protein 1 factors tested, one part of the
sequence selectively binds endogenous proteins immunologically related to
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and Jun isotypes. The other sequence is 
a target for a nuclear factor showing binding specificity unrelated to factors
known to mediate EGF- or ras-induced transcription as determined by its sequence 
specificity and by antibody experiments. This component has been characterized
and partially purified by gel filtration chromatography and velocity
centrifugation revealing a Stokes radius of 43.6 A and a sedimentation
coefficient of 9.7 S in solution. Based on these parameters, a molecular mass of 
178,000 Da was calculated. The results indicate that the specific binding of
ATF3/Jun and a previously uncharacterized factor account for signal-specific
transcription in response to EGF or an activated Ha-ras gene in a cell type in
which the cooperative action of an activated Ha-ras gene and
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate cause tumor growth.

PMID: 7744871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jul;14(7):4958-74.

Novel interactions between human T-cell leukemia virus type I Tax and activating 
transcription factor 3 at a cyclic AMP-responsive element.

Low KG(1), Chu HM, Schwartz PM, Daniels GM, Melner MH, Comb MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown 02129.

Human proenkephalin gene transcription is transactivated by human T-cell leukemia
virus type I (HTLV-I) Tax in human Jurkat T lymphocytes. This transactivation was
further enhanced in Jurkat cells treated with concanavalin A, cyclic AMP, or
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate. Deletion and cis-element transfer analyses 
of the human proenkephalin promoter identified a cyclic AMP-responsive AP-1
element (-92 to -86) as both necessary and sufficient to confer Tax-dependent
transactivation. Different AP-1 or cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding protein 
(CREB)/activating transcription factor (ATF) proteins which bind this element
were expressed in murine teratocarcinoma F9 cells to identify those capable of
mediating Tax-dependent transactivation of human proenkephalin gene
transcription. Although CREB, c-Fos, c-Jun, and JunD did not have significant
effects, JunB inhibited the Tax-dependent transactivation. In contrast, ATF3
dramatically induced Tax-dependent transactivation, which was further enhanced by
protein kinase A. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays with recombinant fusion
proteins expressed and purified from bacteria indicate that the DNA-binding
activity of ATF3 is also dramatically enhanced by Tax. Chimeric fusion proteins
consisting of the DNA-binding domain of the yeast transcription factor Gal4 and
the amino-terminal domain (residues 1 to 66) of ATF3 were able to mediate
Tax-dependent transactivation of a Gal4-responsive promoter, which suggests a
direct involvement of this region of ATF3. Recombinant fusion proteins of
glutathione S-transferase with either the amino- or carboxy-terminal (residues
139 to 181) domain of ATF3 were able to specifically interact with Tax.
Furthermore, specific antisera directed against Tax coimmunoprecipitated ATF3
only in the presence of Tax.

PMCID: PMC358868
PMID: 8007991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jun 3;269(22):15819-26.

ATF3 and ATF3 delta Zip. Transcriptional repression versus activation by
alternatively spliced isoforms.

Chen BP(1), Liang G, Whelan J, Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, Ohio State University, Columbus 43210.

ATF3 is a member of the mammalian activating transcription factor/cAMP responsive
element binding protein (ATF/CREB) family of transcription factors. In this
report, we demonstrate that, contrary to the implication of its name, ATF3
represses rather than activates transcription from promoters with ATF sites. We
also present evidence suggesting that one possible mechanism by which ATF3
represses transcription is to stabilize inhibitory co-factors at the promoter. In
addition, we describe a naturally occurring, alternatively spliced, form of ATF3:
ATF3 delta Zip. ATF3 delta Zip lacks the leucine zipper domain and does not bind 
to DNA. In contrast to ATF3, ATF3 delta Zip stimulates transcription, presumably 
by sequestering inhibitory co-factors away from the promoter. It is possible that
ATF3 delta Zip is a physiologically important regulator and that it, together
with ATF3, regulates the expression of specific target genes.

PMID: 7515060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Nov;13(11):7180-90.

Cyclic AMP-independent ATF family members interact with NF-kappa B and function
in the activation of the E-selectin promoter in response to cytokines.

Kaszubska W(1), Hooft van Huijsduijnen R, Ghersa P, DeRaemy-Schenk AM, Chen BP,
Hai T, DeLamarter JF, Whelan J.

Author information: 
(1)Glaxo Institute for Molecular Biology, Geneva, Switzerland.

We previously reported that NF-kappa B and a complex we referred to as NF-ELAM1
play a central role in cytokine-induced expression of the E-selectin gene. In
this study we identify cyclic AMP (cAMP)-independent members of the ATF family
binding specifically to the NF-ELAM1 promoter element. The NF-ELAM1 element
(TGACATCA) differs by a single nucleotide substitution from the cAMP-responsive
element consensus sequence. We demonstrate that this sequence operates in a
cAMP-independent manner to induce transcription and thus define it as a
non-cAMP-responsive element (NCRE). We show that ATFa is a component of the
NF-ELAM1 complex and its overexpression activates the E-selectin promoter. In
addition, ATFa, ATF2, and ATF3 interact directly with NF-kappa B in vitro,
linking two unrelated families of transcription factors in a novel
protein-protein interaction. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the ability of
overexpressed NF-kappa B to transactivate the E-selectin promoter in vivo is
dependent on the NF-ELAM1 complex. Our results suggest that a direct interaction 
between ATFs and NF-kappa B is, at least in part, the mechanism by which these
factors specifically regulate E-selectin promoter activity.

PMCID: PMC364779
PMID: 7692236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


