
1. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Mar 21. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.5023. [Epub ahead of print]

CGRP may regulate bone metabolism through stimulating osteoblast differentiation 
and inhibiting osteoclast formation.

He H(1), Chai J(1), Zhang S(1), Ding L(1), Yan P(1), Du W(1), Yang Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial and Head and Neck Surgery, Daping Hospital and
Research Institute of Surgery, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing
400042, P.R. China. (2)Department of Oncology, Cancer Center, Daping Hospital and
Research Institute of Surgery, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing
400042, P.R. China.

Calcitonin-gene-related peptide (CGRP) is a neuropeptide, which is widely
distributed throughout the central and peripheral nervous systems. Numerous
mechanisms underlying the action of CGRP in osteoblast-associated cells have been
suggested for bone growth and metabolism. The present study was designed to
closely investigate the osteoblast- and osteoclast-associated mechanisms of the
effect of CGRP administration on bone metabolism in primary osteoblasts. Primary 
osteoblasts were obtained from newborn rabbit calvaria and incubated with
different concentrations of human CGRP (hCGRP), hCGRP and hCGRP (8-37), or
without treatment as a control. Intracellular calcium (Ca2+) and cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) were detected following treatment, as well as the expression
levels of osteoblast differentiation markers, including activating transcription 
factor-4 (ATF4) and osteocalcin (OC), and receptor activator of nuclear factor <U+03BA>B
ligand (RANKL) and osteoprotegerin (OPG). The isolated primary osteoblasts were
found to stain positively for ALP. hCGRP treatment had no significant effect on
transient intracellular Ca2+ in the osteoblasts. Treatment of the osteoblasts
with hCGRP led to elevations in the expression levels of cAMP, ATF4 and OPG, and 
downregulation in the expression of RANKL, in a dose-dependent manner. These
effects were markedly reversed by the addition of hCGRP (8-37). The results of
the present study demonstrated that CGRP administration not only stimulated
osteoblast differentiation, as demonstrated by upregulated expression levels of
ATF4 and OC in the hCGRP-treated osteoblasts, but also inhibited
OPG/RANKL-regulated osteoclastogenesis. CGRP may act as a modulator of bone
metabolism through osteoblast and osteoclast-associated mechanisms, which result 
in osteoblast formation with subsequent activation of bone formation.

PMID: 27035229  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2016 Mar 24:1-6. [Epub ahead of print]

Fibroblast growth factor 21 induction by activating transcription factor 4 is
regulated through three amino acid response elements in its promoter region.

Maruyama R(1), Shimizu M(1), Li J(1), Inoue J(1), Sato R(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Applied Biological Chemistry , Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan.

Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) is an endocrine growth factor, a regulator of
fatty acids and glucose metabolism. Recently, it has been reported that FGF21
expression is regulated by activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a
transcription factor activated by various stimuli such as endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress. ATF4 binds to the amino acid response element (AARE), a binding site
for ATF4, in the promoter region of the target genes. The two response elements
for ATF4 (AARE1 and AARE2) have been reported in the promoter region of FGF21
gene. In this study, we found a novel response element, located upstream of AARE1
and AARE2, essential for a promoter activation of FGF21. When this DNA sequence, 
named AARE3, was mutated, the promoter activation by ATF4 or ER stress was
strongly decreased. Our results showed that the FGF21 promoter contains three
response elements for ATF4, suggesting that FGF21 is a sensitive target of ATF4.

PMID: 27010621  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. BMC Biochem. 2016 Mar 24;17(1):8. doi: 10.1186/s12858-016-0060-2.

Altered activity patterns of transcription factors induced by endoplasmic
reticulum stress.

Jiang S(1), Zhang E(2), Zhang R(2), Li X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Signosis Inc., 1700 Wyatt Drive, Suite #10-12, Santa Clara, CA, 95054, USA.
(2)Saratoga High School, 20300 Herriman Ave, Saratoga, CA, 95070, USA.
(3)Signosis Inc., 1700 Wyatt Drive, Suite #10-12, Santa Clara, CA, 95054, USA.
jasonli@signosisinc.com.

BACKGROUND: The endoplasmic-reticulum (ER) responds to the burden of unfolded
proteins in its lumen by activating intracellular signal transduction pathways,
also known as the unfolded protein response (UPR). Many signal transduction
events and transcription factors have been demonstrated to be associated with ER 
stress. The process in which ER stress affects or interacts with other pathways
is still a progressing topic that is not completely understood. Identifying new
transcription factors associated with ER stress pathways provides a platform to
comprehensively characterize mechanism and functionality of ER.
METHODS: We utilized a transcription factor (TF) activation plate array to
profile the TF activities which were affected by ER stress induced by
pharmacological agents, thapsigargin (TG) and tunicamycin (TM) at 1 h, 4 h, 8 h
and 16 h respectively, in MiaPACA2 cells. The altered activity patterns were
analyzed and validated using gel shift assays and cell-based luciferase reporter 
assay.
RESULTS: The study has not only confirmed previous findings, which the TFs
including ATF4, ATF6, XBP, NFkB, CHOP and AP1, were activated by ER stress, but
also found four newly discovered TFs, NFAT, TCF/LEF were activated, and PXR was
repressed in response of ER stress. Different patterns of TF activities in
MiaPaCa2 were demonstrated upon TM or TG treatment in the time course
experiments. The altered activities of TFs were confirmed using gel shift assays 
and luciferase reporter vectors.
CONCLUSION: This study utilized a TF activation array technology to identify four
new TFs, HIF, NFAT, TCF/LEF and PXR that were changed in their activity as a
result of ER stress induced by TG and TM. The TF activity patterns were
demonstrated to be diverse in response to the duration of TG or TM treatment.
These new findings will facilitate further unveiling the complex mechanisms of
the ER stress process and associated diseases.

PMCID: PMC4806502
PMID: 27009139  [PubMed - in process]


4. Free Radic Res. 2016 Mar 22:1-22. [Epub ahead of print]

The p-eIF2a/ATF4 pathway links endoplasmic reticulum stress to autophagy
following the production of reactive oxygen species in mouse spermatocyte-derived
cells exposed to Dibutyl phthalate.

Zhang G(1), Ling X(1), Liu K(1), Wang Z(1), Zou P(1), Gao J(1), Cao J(1), Ao
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Toxicology, College of Preventive Medicine, Third Military
Medical University , Chongqing, 400038 , China.

Dibutyl phthalate (DBP) is a widely used plasticizer that has been shown to
induce germ cell apoptosis-related testicular atrophy and cause reproductive
toxicity. Our previous results indicated that endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-activated autophagy served as a self-defense mechanism against DBP-induced
germ cell apoptosis. However, the specific pathways that link ER stress and
autophagy remain unclear. Here, we showed that exposure to DBP enhanced
autophagic <U+FB02>ux in mouse spermatocyte-derived GC-2 cells and that the eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2a)/activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) 
pathway mediated ER stress-related autophagy independent of the mTOR and Beclin-1
pathways. Moreover, we demonstrated that DBP treatment led to the generation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and that the inhibition of ROS by melatonin
abrogated both ER stress and autophagy. The results indicated that excessive ROS 
production might be involved in DBP-induced ER stress and autophagy in GC-2
cells. Thus, ROS may serve as upstream mediators of ER stress and autophagy in
DBP-treated GC-2 cells.

PMID: 27002192  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Autophagy. 2016 Mar 17:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Activation of the EIF2AK4-EIF2A/eIF2a-ATF4 pathway triggers autophagy response to
Crohn disease-associated adherent-invasive Escherichia coli infection.

Bretin A(1,)(2), Carrière J(1,)(2), Dalmasso G(1,)(2), Bergougnoux A(1,)(2),
B'chir W(3), Maurin AC(3), Müller S(4), Seibold F(5), Barnich N(1,)(2), Bruhat
A(3), Darfeuille-Michaud A(1,)(2), Nguyen HT(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a UMR 1071 Inserm, University of Auvergne , Clermont-Ferrand 63001 , France.
(2)b INRA USC 2018 , Clermont-Ferrand 63000 , France. (3)c INRA Theix, Human
nutrition unit (UNH) , Saint-Genes-Champanelle 63122 , France. (4)d Department of
Clinical Research , Division of Gastroenterology and Cytometry Laboratory,
University of Bern , Bern , Switzerland. (5)e Department of Gastroenterology ,
Spital Tiefenau , Bern , Switzerland.

The intestinal mucosa of Crohn disease (CD) patients is abnormally colonized by
adherent-invasive E. coli (AIEC). Upon AIEC infection, autophagy is induced in
host cells to restrain bacterial intracellular replication. The underlying
mechanism, however, remains unknown. Here, we investigated the role of the
EIF2AK4-EIF2A/eIF2a-ATF4 pathway in the autophagic response to AIEC infection. We
showed that infection of human intestinal epithelial T84 cells with the AIEC
reference strain LF82 activated the EIF2AK4-EIF2A-ATF4 pathway, as evidenced by
increased phospho-EIF2AK4, phospho-EIF2A and ATF4 levels. EIF2AK4 depletion
inhibited autophagy activation in response to LF82 infection, leading to
increased LF82 intracellular replication and elevated pro-inflammatory cytokine
production. Mechanistically, EIF2AK4 depletion suppressed the LF82-induced ATF4
binding to promoters of several autophagy genes including MAP1LC3B, BECN1,
SQSTM1, ATG3 and ATG7, and this subsequently inhibited transcription of these
genes. LF82 infection of wild-type (WT), but not eif2ak4(-/-), mice activated the
EIF2AK4-EIF2A-ATF4 pathway, inducing autophagy gene transcription and autophagy
response in enterocytes. Consequently, eif2ak4(-/-) mice exhibited increased
intestinal colonization by LF82 bacteria and aggravated inflammation compared to 
WT mice. Activation of the EIF2AK4-EIF2A-ATF4 pathway was observed in ileal
biopsies from patients with noninflamed CD, and this was suppressed in inflamed
CD, suggesting that a defect in the activation of this pathway could be one of
the mechanisms contributing to active disease. In conclusion, we show that
activation of the EIF2AK4-EIF2A-ATF4 pathway upon AIEC infection serves as a host
defense mechanism to induce functional autophagy to control AIEC intracellular
replication.

PMID: 26986695  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Int J Oncol. 2016 Mar 15. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3441. [Epub ahead of print]

Tanshinone IIA induces TRAIL sensitization of human lung cancer cells through
selective ER stress induction.

Kim EO(1), Kang SE(2), Im CR(3), Lee JH(1), Ahn KS(2), Yang WM(2), Um JY(2), Lee 
SG(1), Yun M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Korean Medicine Clinical Trial Center, Kyung Hee University Korean Medicine
Hospital, Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Science in Korean
Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of 
Applied Korean Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea.

Although tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a
promised anticancer medicine targeting only the tumor, most cancers show
resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. For this reason, new therapeutic
strategies to overcome the TRAIL resistance are required for more effective tumor
treatment. In the present study, potential of tanshinone IIA as a TRAIL
sensitizer was evaluated in human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. NSCLC
cells showed resistance to TRAIL-mediated cell death, but combination treatment
of Tanshinone IIA and TRAIL synergistically decreased cell viability and
increased apoptosis in TRAIL-resistant NSCLC cells. Tanshinone IIA greatly
induced death receptor 5 (DR5), but not death receptor 4 (DR4). Furthermore, DR5 
knockdown attenuated the combination treatment of tanshinone IIA with
TRAIL-mediated cell death in human NSCLC cells. Tanshinone IIA also increased
CHOP and activated the PERK-ATF4 pathway suggesting that tanshinone IIA increased
DR5 and CHOP by activating the PERK-ATF4 pathway. Tanshinone IIA also
downregulated phosphorylation of STAT3 and expression of survivin. Taken
together, these results indicate that tanshinone IIA increases TRAIL-induced cell
death via upregulating DR5 and downregulating survivin mediated by, respectively,
selective activation of PERK/ATF4 and inhibition of STAT3, suggesting
combinatorial intervention of tanshinone IIA and TRAIL as a new therapeutic
strategy for human NSCLC.

PMID: 26983803  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2016 Mar 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Bis(maltolato)oxovanadium(IV) (BMOV) Attenuates Apoptosis in High Glucose-Treated
Cardiac Cells and Diabetic Rat Hearts by Regulating the Unfolded Protein
Responses (UPRs).

Cong XQ(1), Piao MH(2), Li Y(3), Xie L(4), Liu Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Bethune First Hospital of Jilin University, 71
Xinmin St., Chaoyang District, ChangChun, 130021, China.
congxiaoqiang@hotmail.com. (2)Department of Anesthesiology, Bethune First
Hospital of Jilin University, 71 Xinmin St., Chaoyang District, Changchun, Jilin,
130021, China. (3)The People's Hospital of Jilin Province, Changchun, 130021,
China. (4)School of Public Health, Jilin University, Changchun, 130021, China.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS)-induced unfolded protein response (UPR) and
the subsequent cell deaths are essential steps in the pathogenesis of diabetic
cardiomyopathy (DCM), a main cause of diabetics' morbidity and mortalities. The
bis(maltolato)oxovanadium(IV) (BMOV), a potent oral vanadium complex with
anti-diabetic properties and insulin-mimicking effects, was shown to improve
cardiac dysfunctions in diabetic models. Here, we examined the effects of BMOV on
UPR pathway protein expression and apoptotic cell deaths in both high
glucose-treated cardiac H9C2 cells and in the hearts of diabetic rats. We show
that in both the high glucose-treated cardiac cells and in the hearts of
streptozotocin (STZ) diabetic rats, there was an overall activation of the UPR
signaling, including both apoptotic (e.g., the cascades of PERK/EIf2a/ATF4/CHOP
and of IRE1/caspase 12/caspase 3) and pro-survival (GRP78 and XBP1) signaling. A 
high amount of apoptotic cell deaths was also detected in both diabetic
conditions. The administration of BMOV suppressed both the apoptotic and
pro-survival UPR signaling and significantly attenuated apoptotic cell deaths in 
both conditions. The overall suppression of UPR signaling by BMOV suggests that
the drug protects diabetic cardiomyopathy by counteracting reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Our findings lend support to
promote the use of BMOV in the treatment of diabetic heart diseases.

PMID: 26983714  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 16. pii: clincanres.2254.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Neddylation Inhibition Activates the Extrinsic Apoptosis Pathway through
ATF4-CHOP-DR5 Axis in Human Esophageal Cancer Cells.

Chen P(1), Hu T(1), Liang Y(2), Li P(1), Chen X(3), Zhang J(3), Ma Y(1), Hao
Q(1), Wang J(4), Zhang P(2), Zhang Y(5), Zhao H(6), Yang S(1), Yu J(7), Jeong
LS(8), Qi H(9), Yang M(9), Hoffman RM(10), Dong Z(11), Jia L(12).

Author information: 
(1)College of Basic Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou University. (2)Cancer Institute, 
Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center. (3)College of Basic Medical Sciences,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou University. (4)Department of Pathology, Linzhou
Cancer Hospital. (5)Shanghai Shines Clinical Laboratories, Inc., Shanghai Shines 
Clinical Laboratories, Inc. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Laboratory of
Molecular Biology of Huadong Hospital, Fudan University. (7)College of Pharmacy, 
Seoul National University. (8)College of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Seoul
National University. (9)Cancer Therapy, AntiCancer Biotech Beijing Co. (10)N/A,
AntiCancer Inc. (11)Sino-British Research Centre for Molecular Oncology,
Zhengzhou University. (12)Cancer Institute, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer
Center ljjia@fudan.edu.cn.

PURPOSE: Targeting protein neddylation pathway has become an attractive
anticancer strategy; however, the role of death receptor-mediated extrinsic
apoptosis during treatment remained to be determined.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The activation of extrinsic apoptosis and its role in
MLN4924 treatment of human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) were
evaluated both in vitro and in vivo. The expression of the components of
extrinsic apoptotic pathway was determined by immunoblotting analysis and
down-regulated by siRNA silencing for mechanistic studies.
RESULTS: Pharmaceutical or genetic inactivation of neddylation pathway induced
Death Receptor 5 (DR5)-mediated apoptosis and led to the suppression of ESCC in
murine models. Mechanistically, neddylation inhibition stabilized activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a Cullin-Ring E3 ligase (CRL) substrate.
Transcription factor CHOP was subsequently transactivated by ATF4 and further
induced the expression of DR5 to activate caspase-8 and induce extrinsic
apoptosis. Moreover, the entire neddylation pathway was hyperactivated in ESCC
and was negatively associated with patient overall survival.
CONCLUSION: Our findings highlight a critical role of ATF4-CHOP-DR5 axis-mediated
extrinsic apoptosis in neddylation-targeted cancer therapy and support the
clinical investigation of neddylation inhibitors (e.g. MLN4924) for the treatment
of ESCC, a currently treatment-resistant disease with neddylation
hyperactivation.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26983464  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. J Physiol Biochem. 2016 Mar 15. [Epub ahead of print]

Maternal obesity alters endoplasmic reticulum homeostasis in offspring pancreas.

Soeda J(1), Mouralidarane A(1), Cordero P(1), Li J(1), Nguyen V(1), Carter R(1), 
Kapur SR(1), Pombo J(2), Poston L(2), Taylor PD(2), Vinciguerra M(3,)(4,)(5),
Oben JA(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Liver and Digestive Health, University College London, London,
UK. (2)Division of Women's Health, King's College London, London, UK.
(3)Institute for Liver and Digestive Health, University College London, London,
UK. m.vinciguerra@ucl.ac.uk. (4)International Clinical Research Center (ICRC),
Center for Translational Medicine (CTM), St. Anne's University Hospital, Brno,
Czech Republic. m.vinciguerra@ucl.ac.uk. (5)Centro Studi Fegato (CSF)-Liver
Research Center, Fondazione Italiana Fegato, Trieste, Italy.
m.vinciguerra@ucl.ac.uk. (6)Institute for Liver and Digestive Health, University 
College London, London, UK. j.oben@ucl.ac.uk. (7)Department of Gastroenterology
and Hepatology, Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital, NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. 
j.oben@ucl.ac.uk.

The prevalence of non-alcoholic fatty pancreas disease (NAFPD) is increasing in
parallel with obesity rates. Stress-related alterations in endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER), such as the unfolded protein response (UPR), are associated with obesity.
The aim of this study was to investigate ER imbalance in the pancreas of a mice
model of adult and perinatal diet-induced obesity. Twenty female C57BL/6J mice
were assigned to control (Con) or obesogenic (Ob) diets prior to and during
pregnancy and lactation. Their offspring were weaned onto Con or Ob diets up to
6 months post-partum. Then, after sacrifice, plasma biochemical analyses, gene
expression, and protein concentrations were measured in pancreata. Offspring of
Ob-fed mice had significantly increased body weight (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and plasma leptin
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and decreased insulin (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) levels. Maternal obesogenic diet
decreased the total and phosphorylated Eif2a and increased spliced X-box binding 
protein 1 (XBP1). Pancreatic gene expression of downstream regulators of UPR
(EDEM, homocysteine-responsive endoplasmic reticulum-resident (HERP), activating 
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP)) and
autophagy-related proteins (LC3BI/LC3BII) were differently disrupted by
obesogenic feeding in both mothers and offspring (from p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.1 to p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001).
Maternal obesity and Ob feeding in their offspring alter UPR in NAFPD, with
involvement of proapoptotic and autophagy-related markers. Upstream and
downstream regulators of PERK, IRE1a, and ATF6 pathways were affected differently
following the obesogenic insults.

PMID: 26979740  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2016 Mar 11:ajpgi.00052.2016. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00052.2016. [Epub ahead of print]

General control nonderepressible kinase 2 (GCN2) deletion predisposes to
asparaginase-associated pancreatitis in mice.

Phillipson-Weiner L(1), Mirek ET(2), Wang Y(1), McAuliffe WG(1), Wek RC(3),
Anthony TG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Rutgers University. (2)Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey. (3)Indiana
University School of Medicine. (4)Rutgers University tracy.anthony@rutgers.edu.

Treatment with the anti-leukemic agent asparaginase can induce acute pancreatitis
but the pathophysiology remains obscure. In the liver of mice, the eIF2 kinase
GCN2 is essential for mitigating metabolic stress caused by asparaginase. Herein 
we determined the consequences of asparaginase treatment on the pancreata of mice
with GCN2 intact (WT) or deleted (<U+0394>Gcn2). Mean pancreas weights in <U+0394>Gcn2 mice
treated with asparaginase for 8 d were increased (P<0.05) above all other groups.
Histological examination revealed acinar cell swelling and altered staining of
zymogen granules in <U+0394>Gcn2 but not WT mice. Oil red O staining and measurement of 
pancreas triglycerides excluded lipid accumulation as contributing to acini
appearance. Instead, transmission electron microscopy revealed dilatation of the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and accumulation of autophagic vacuoles in the
pancreas of <U+0394>Gcn2 mice treated with asparaginase. Consistent with the idea that
loss of GCN2 in pancreas exposed to asparaginase induced ER stress, there was
increased phosphorylation of PERK and its substrate eIF2 in the pancreas of
asparaginase-treated <U+0394>Gcn2 mice. In addition, mRNA expression of PERK-target
genes, Atf4, Atf3, Atf6, Fgf21, Hspa5 and sXbp1, were elevated in the pancreas of
asparaginase-treated <U+0394>Gcn2 mice accompanied by increased pancreas mass.
Furthermore, genetic markers of oxidative stress (Sirt1), inflammation (Tnfa) and
pancreatic injury (Pap) were elevated in asparaginase-treated <U+0394>Gcn2 but not WT
mice. These data indicate that loss of GCN2 predisposes the exocrine pancreas
toward a maladaptive ER stress response and autophagy during asparaginase
treatment, and represent a genetic basis for development of
asparaginase-associated pancreatitis.

Copyright © 2016, American Journal of Physiology- Gastrointestinal and Liver
Physiology.

PMID: 26968207  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2016 Mar 11:1-6. [Epub ahead of print]

Searching for novel ATF4 target genes in human hepatoma cells by microarray
analysis.

Maruyama R(1), Shimizu M(1), Ishijima T(1), Nakai Y(2), Inoue J(1), Sato R(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural 
and Life Sciences , The University of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan. (2)b Institute for
Food Sciences , Hirosaki University , Aomori , Japan.

Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is a transcription factor with an
important biological activity. ATF4 is induced by various stresses, such as
endoplasmic reticulum stress, through the phosphorylation of eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2a. ATF4 is also involved in lipid metabolism. In
the present study, we performed a microarray experiment to identify new ATF4
target genes, particularly those involved in lipid metabolism, and identified
C12orf39, CSTA, and CALCB as novel ATF4 target genes. An amino acid response
element (AARE) as an ATF4-binding site is present in the promoter regions of
these genes. In a detailed analysis using luciferase assay, we showed that ATF4
activated C12orf39 promoter activity and that this activation was diminished by
deletion or mutation of the AARE sequence in the promoter region. Our results
suggest that C12orf39, CSTA, and CALCB are novel ATF4 target genes and that
C12orf39 promoter activity is activated by ATF4 through AARE.

PMID: 26967115  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Antiviral Res. 2016 Mar 8;130:1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2016.03.006. [Epub
ahead of print]

Novel dengue virus inhibitor 4-HPR activates ATF4 independent of protein kinase
R-like Endoplasmic Reticulum Kinase and elevates levels of eIF2a phosphorylation 
in virus infected cells.

Fraser JE(1), Wang C(1), Chan KW(2), Vasudevan SG(2), Jans DA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Signaling Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (2)Program in
Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore,
Singapore. (3)Nuclear Signaling Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. Electronic 
address: david.jans@monash.edu.

Infections by dengue virus (DENV) are increasing worldwide, with an urgent need
for effective anti-DENV agents. We recently identified N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)
retinamide (4-HPR), an anti-DENV agent effective against all 4 serotypes of DENV 
in cell culture, and in a lethal mouse model for DENV infection (Fraser et al.,
2014b). Although identified as an inhibitor of DENV non-structural protein 5
(NS5) recognition by host nuclear import proteins, the precise impact and mode of
action of 4-HPR in effecting DENV clearance remains to be defined. Significantly,
concurrent with decreased viral RNA and infectious DENV in 4-HPR-treated cells,
we previously observed specific up-regulation of transcripts representing the
Protein Kinase R-like Endoplasmic Reticulum Kinase (PERK) arm of the unfolded
protein response (UPR) pathway upon 4-HPR addition. Here we pursue these findings
in detail, examining the role of specific PERK pathway components in DENV
clearance. We demonstrate that 4-HPR-induced nuclear localization of Activating
Transcription Factor 4 (ATF4), a pathway component downstream from PERK, occurs
in a PERK-independent manner, implying activation instead occurs through
Integrated Stress Response (ISR) kinases. Significantly, ATF4 does not appear to 
be required for the antiviral activity of 4-HPR, suggesting transcriptional
events induced by ATF4 do not drive the 4-HPR-induced antiviral state. Instead,
we demonstrate that 4-HPR induces phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 2a (eIF2a), a target of ISR kinases which controls translation 
attenuation, and confirm the importance of phosphorylated-eIF2a in DENV infection
using guanabenz, a specific inhibitor of eIF2a dephosphorylation. This study
provides the first detailed insight into the cellular effects modulated by 4-HPR 
in DENV-infected cells, critical to progressing 4-HPR towards the clinic.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26965420  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 9. pii: jbc.M115.706481. [Epub ahead of print]

Different roles of negative and positive components of the circadian clock in
oncogene-induced neoplastic transformation.

Katamune C(1), Koyanagi S(1), Shiromizu S(1), Matsunaga N(1), Shimba S(2),
Shibata S(3), Ohdo S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Kyushu University, Japan; (2)Nihon University, Japan; (3)Waseda University,
Japan. (4)Kyushu University, Japan; ohdo@phar.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

In mammals, circadian rhythms in physiological function are generated by a
molecular oscillator driven by transcriptional-translational feedback loop
consisting of negative and positive regulators. Disruption of this circadian
clock machinery is thought to increase the risk of cancer development, but the
potential contributions of each component of circadian clock to oncogenesis have 
been little explored. Here we reported that negative and positive transcriptional
regulators of circadian feedback loop had different roles in oncogene-induced
neoplastic transformation. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) prepared from mice 
deficient in negative circadian clock regulators, Period2 (Per2) or
Cryptochrome1/2 (Cry1/2), were prone to transformation induced by co-expression
of H-Ras(V12) and SV40 large T antigen (SV40LT). By contrast, MEFs prepared from 
mice deficient in positive circadian clock regulators, Bmal1 or Clock, showed
resistance to oncogene-induced transformation. In Per2 mutant and Cry1/2-null
cells, the introduction of oncogenes induced expression of ATF4, a potent
repressor of cell senescence-associated proteins p16INK4a and p19ARF. Elevated
levels of ATF4 were sufficient to suppress expression of these proteins and drive
oncogenic transformation. Conversely, in Bmal1-null and Clock mutant cells, the
expression of ATF4 did not induced by oncogene introduction, which allowed
constitutive expression of p16INK4a and p19ARF triggering cellular senescence.
Although genetic ablation of either negative or positive transcriptional
regulators of the circadian clock leads to disrupted rhythmicity in physiological
functions, our findings define their different contributions to neoplastic
cellular transformation.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26961881  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Mol Biol Cell. 2016 Mar 9. pii: mbc.E16-01-0039. [Epub ahead of print]

Transcription factor ATF4 directs basal and select induced gene expression in the
unfolded protein response and cholesterol metabolism in liver.

Fusakio ME(1), Willy JA(1), Wang Y(2), Mirek ET(2), Baghdadi RJ(2), Adams CM(3), 
Anthony TG(4), Wek RC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202 United States. (2)Department of Nutritional
Sciences, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901 United States.
(3)Departments of Internal Medicine and Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, The 
University of Iowa, and the Iowa City Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Iowa City,
Iowa 52246, United States. (4)Department of Nutritional Sciences, Rutgers
University, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901 United States rwek@iu.edu
tracy.anthony@rutgers.edu. (5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202 United States 
rwek@iu.edu tracy.anthony@rutgers.edu.

Disturbances in protein folding and membrane compositions in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) elicit the unfolded protein response (UPR). Three UPR sensory
proteins, PERK (PEK/EIF2AK3), IRE1, and ATF6 are each activated by ER stress.
PERK phosphorylation of eIF2 represses global protein synthesis, lowering influx 
of nascent polypeptides into the stressed ER, coincident with preferential
translation of ATF4 (CREB2). In cultured cells, ATF4 induces transcriptional
expression of genes directed by the PERK arm of the UPR, including genes involved
in amino acid metabolism, resistance to oxidative stress, and the proapoptotic
transcription factor CHOP (GADD153/DDIT3). In this study, we characterized whole 
body and tissue-specific ATF4 knockout mice and show in liver exposed to ER
stress that ATF4 is not required for CHOP expression, but rather ATF6 is a
primary inducer. RNA-Seq analysis indicated that ATF4 was responsible for a small
portion of the PERK-dependent UPR genes and revealed a requirement for expression
of ATF4 for expression of genes involved in oxidative stress response basally and
cholesterol metabolism both basally and under stress. Consistent with this
pattern of gene expression, loss of ATF4 resulted in enhanced oxidative damage,
and increased free cholesterol in liver under stress accompanied by lowered
cholesterol in sera.

© 2016 by The American Society for Cell Biology.

PMID: 26960794  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Mol Neurobiol. 2016 Mar 10. [Epub ahead of print]

IL-22 Impedes the Proliferation of Schwann cells: Transcriptome Sequencing and
Bioinformatics Analysis.

Xu S(1), Ao J(2), Gu H(3), Wang X(4), Xie C(4), Meng D(1), Wang L(5), Liu M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, 200433, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and
Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200032, China. (3)Department of
Transfusion, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai,
200433, China. (4)Department of Neurology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, 200433, China. (5)Med-X Research Insitute of
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200030, China. LishanWangfh@163.com.
(6)Department of Neurology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, 200433, China. lciryuan@163.com.

Schwann cells (SCs) proliferation is crucial for nerve regeneration following
nerve injury. This study aims to investigate effects of interleukin-22 (IL-22) on
SCs proliferation in vitro, as well as the corresponding mechanism. Rat SCs were 
treated with 100 ng/ml rat IL-22 for 48 h, and cell proliferation and apoptosis
were detected using fluorescent staining and flow cytometry. After transcriptome 
sequencing, raw reads were filtered and mapped to reference genome rn5. Then,
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and long non-coding RNAs (DElncRNAs)
between IL-22 and control groups were identified (tool: Cuffdiff). Functional and
pathway enrichment analyses were performed (tool: GOFunction), and
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed (tool: STRING and
Cytoscape). Furthermore, Pearson's correlations between DEGs and DElncRNAs were
analyzed, and regulatory network of DEGs, DElncRNAs, and transcription factors
(TFs) was constructed. IL-22 significantly inhibited proliferation (p
value<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and promoted apoptosis of Schwann cells. Totally, 932 DEGs and 118 
DElncRNAs were identified, among which Ccl2 and Ccna2 were hub genes in PPI
network. Up-regulated DEGs were enriched in apoptosis related terms, whereas
down-regulated DEGs were enriched in proliferation related terms. DElncRNAs like 
NONRATT023505, NONRATG020400, and NONRATT022748 were correlated with multiple
DEGs enriched in cell cycle and division. Moreover, up-regulated TFs Egr1, Cebpd,
and Atf4 play crucial roles in regulatory network, and NONRATG020400-Cebpd-Ccl2, 
NONRATT023505/NONRATT022748-Atf4-Ccna2, and
NONRATT022748-Egr1-Id1/Aldoc/Eno2/F3/Serpine1 regulatory pathways were identified
in SCs after IL-22 treatment. IL-22 might influence SCs proliferation and
apoptosis via regulating lncRNA-TF-gene pathways in SCs. However, more studies
are required to confirm these results.

PMID: 26960328  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 9;11(3):e0150357. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150357.
eCollection 2016.

Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and Autophagy in Homocystinuria Patients with
Remethylation Defects.

Martínez-Pizarro A(1), Desviat LR(1), Ugarte M(1), Pérez B(1), Richard E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, Centro de Biología
Molecular-SO UAM-CSIC, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Campus de Cantoblanco,
28049 Madrid / Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras
(CIBERER), Madrid, IDIPaz, Spain.

Proper function of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria is crucial for
cellular homeostasis, and dysfunction at either site as well as perturbation of
mitochondria-associated ER membranes (MAMs) have been linked to neurodegenerative
and metabolic diseases. Previously, we have observed an increase in ROS and
apoptosis levels in patient-derived fibroblasts with remethylation disorders
causing homocystinuria. Here we show increased mRNA and protein levels of Herp,
Grp78, IP3R1, pPERK, ATF4, CHOP, asparagine synthase and GADD45 in
patient-derived fibroblasts suggesting ER stress and calcium perturbations in
homocystinuria. In addition, overexpressed MAM-associated proteins (Grp75, s-1R
and Mfn2) were found in these cells that could result in mitochondrial calcium
overload and oxidative stress increase. Our results also show an activation of
autophagy process and a substantial degradation of altered mitochondria by
mitophagy in patient-derived fibroblasts. Moreover, we have observed that
autophagy was partially abolished by antioxidants suggesting that ROS participate
in this process that may have a protective role. Our findings argue that
alterations in Ca2+ homeostasis and autophagy may contribute to the development
of this metabolic disorder and suggest a therapeutic potential in homocystinuria 
for agents that stabilize calcium homeostasis and/or restore the proper function 
of ER-mitochondria communications.

PMCID: PMC4784912
PMID: 26959487  [PubMed - in process]


17. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 3. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7904. [Epub ahead of print]

Chemical chaperon 4-phenylbutyrate protects against the endoplasmic reticulum
stress-mediated renal fibrosis in vivo and in vitro.

Liu SH(1,)(2,)(3), Yang CC(1), Chan DC(4,)(5,)(6), Wu CT(1), Chen LP(7), Huang
JW(4), Hung KY(4), Chiang CK(1,)(4,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Toxicology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of Medical Research, China
Medical University Hospital, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of Geriatrics and Gerontology, National
Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Superintendent's Office, National 
Taiwan University Hospital, Chu-Tung Branch, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Department of
Dentistry, Taipei Chang Gang Memorial Hospital, Chang Gang University, Taipei,
Taiwan. (8)Department of Integrated Diagnostics & Therapeutics, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Renal tubulointerstitial fibrosis is the common and final pathologic change of
kidney in end-stage renal disease. Interesting, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
is known to contribute to the pathophysiological mechanisms during the
development of renal fibrosis. Here, we investigated the effects of chemical
chaperon sodium 4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA) on renal fibrosis in vivo and in vitro. 
In a rat unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) model, 4-PBA mimicked endogenous
ER chaperon in the kidneys and significantly reduced glucose regulated protein 78
(GRP78), CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) homologous protein (CHOP),
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), and phosphorylated JNK protein
expressions as well as restored spliced X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1)
expressions in the kidneys of UUO rats. 4-PBA also attenuated the increases of
a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA), connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) protein
expressions, tubulointerstitial fibrosis, and apoptosis in the kidneys of UUO
rats. Moreover, transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß markedly increased ER
stress-associated molecules, profibrotic factors, and apoptotic markers in the
renal tubular cells (NRK-52E), all of which could be significantly counteracted
by 4-PBA treatment. 4-PBA also diminished TGF-ß-increased CTGF promoter activity 
and CTGF mRNA expression in NRK-52E cells. Taken together, our results indicated 
that 4-PBA acts as an ER chaperone to ameliorate ER stress-induced renal tubular 
cell apoptosis and renal fibrosis.

PMID: 26959118  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 4. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7919. [Epub ahead of print]

Nickel chloride (NiCl2) induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress by activating
UPR pathways in the kidney of broiler chickens.

Guo H(1), Cui H(1,)(2), Peng X(1,)(2), Fang J(1,)(2), Zuo Z(1,)(2), Deng
J(1,)(2), Wang X(1,)(2), Wu B(1), Chen K(1), Deng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Diseases and Environmental Hazards of Sichuan
Province, Yaan, Sichuan, China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Sichuan
Agricultural University, Yaan, Sichuan, China.

It has been known that overexposure to Ni can induce nephrotoxicity. However, the
mechanisms of underlying Ni nephrotoxicity are still elusive, and also Ni- and Ni
compound-induced ER stress has been not reported in vivo at present. Our aim was 
to use broiler chickens as animal model to test whether the ER stress was induced
and UPR was activated by NiCl2 in the kidney using histopathology,
immunohistochemistry and qRT-PCR. Two hundred and eighty one-day-old broiler
chickens were divided into 4 groups and fed on a control diet and the same basal 
diet supplemented with 300 mg/kg, 600mg/kg and 900mg/kg of NiCl2 for 42 days. We 
found that dietary NiCl2 in excess of 300 mg/kg induced ER stress, which was
characterized by increasing protein and mRNA expression of ER stress markers,
e.g., GRP78 and GRP94. Concurrently, all the three UPR pathways were activated by
dietary NiCl2. Firstly, the PERK pathway was activated by increasing eIF2a and
ATF4 mRNA expression. Secondly, the IRE1 pathway was activated duo to increase in
IRE1 and XBP1 mRNA expression. And thirdly, the increase of ATF6 mRNA expression 
suggested that ATF6 pathway was activated. The findings clearly demonstrate that 
NiCl2 induces the ER stress through activating PERK, IRE1 and ATF6 UPR pathways, 
which is proved to be a kind of molecular mechanism of Ni- or/and Ni
compound-induced nephrotoxicity.

PMID: 26956054  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Sci Transl Med. 2016 Mar 2;8(328):328ra29. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aac6008.

Therapeutic targeting of oxygen-sensing prolyl hydroxylases abrogates
ATF4-dependent neuronal death and improves outcomes after brain hemorrhage in
several rodent models.

Karuppagounder SS(1), Alim I(1), Khim SJ(1), Bourassa MW(1), Sleiman SF(1), John 
R(2), Thinnes CC(3), Yeh TL(3), Demetriades M(3), Neitemeier S(4), Cruz D(5),
Gazaryan I(1), Killilea DW(6), Morgenstern L(7), Xi G(8), Keep RF(8), Schallert
T(9), Tappero RV(10), Zhong J(1), Cho S(1), Maxfield FR(5), Holman TR(11),
Culmsee C(4), Fong GH(12), Su Y(13), Ming GL(13), Song H(13), Cave JW(1),
Schofield CJ(3), Colbourne F(2), Coppola G(14), Ratan RR(15).

Author information: 
(1)Sperling Center for Hemorrhagic Stroke Recovery, Burke Medical Research
Institute, White Plains, NY 10605, USA. Feil Family Brain and Mind Research
Institute, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY 10065, USA. 
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2E9,
Canada. (3)Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, OX1 3TA Oxford, UK.
(4)Institut fuer Pharmakologie and Klinische Pharmazie, Phillips-Universitaet
Marburg, D 35032 Marburg, Germany. (5)Department of Biochemistry, Weill Medical
College of Cornell University, New York, NY 10065, USA. (6)Children's Hospital of
Oakland, Oakland, CA 94609, USA. (7)Department of Neurology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (8)Department of Neurosurgery, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (9)Department of Psychology, University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. (10)Photon Sciences Directorate,
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA. (11)Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Department, University of California at Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA 
95064, USA. (12)Center for Vascular Biology, University of Connecticut Health
Center, Farmington, CT 06030, USA. (13)Institute for Cell Engineering, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (14)Department
of Psychiatry, University of California at Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(15)Sperling Center for Hemorrhagic Stroke Recovery, Burke Medical Research
Institute, White Plains, NY 10605, USA. Feil Family Brain and Mind Research
Institute, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY 10065, USA. 
rrr2001@med.cornell.edu.

Disability or death due to intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) is attributed to blood 
lysis, liberation of iron, and consequent oxidative stress. Iron chelators bind
to free iron and prevent neuronal death induced by oxidative stress and
disability due to ICH, but the mechanisms for this effect remain unclear. We show
that the hypoxia-inducible factor prolyl hydroxylase domain (HIF-PHD) family of
iron-dependent, oxygen-sensing enzymes are effectors of iron chelation. Molecular
reduction of the three HIF-PHD enzyme isoforms in the mouse striatum improved
functional recovery after ICH. A low-molecular-weight hydroxyquinoline inhibitor 
of the HIF-PHD enzymes, adaptaquin, reduced neuronal death and behavioral
deficits after ICH in several rodent models without affecting total iron or zinc 
distribution in the brain. Unexpectedly, protection from oxidative death in vitro
or from ICH in vivo by adaptaquin was associated with suppression of activity of 
the prodeath factor ATF4 rather than activation of an HIF-dependent prosurvival
pathway. Together, these findings demonstrate that brain-specific inactivation of
the HIF-PHD metalloenzymes with the blood-brain barrier-permeable inhibitor
adaptaquin can improve functional outcomes after ICH in several rodent models.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26936506  [PubMed - in process]


20. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 2;6:22538. doi: 10.1038/srep22538.

Sestrin2 is induced by glucose starvation via the unfolded protein response and
protects cells from non-canonical necroptotic cell death.

Ding B(1), Parmigiani A(1), Divakaruni AS(2), Archer K(3), Murphy AN(2), Budanov 
AV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Goodwin Research Laboratories,
Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA. 
(2)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics, Goodwin Research Laboratories, Massey
Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

Sestrin2 is a member of a family of stress responsive proteins, which controls
cell viability via antioxidant activity and regulation of the mammalian target of
rapamycin protein kinase (mTOR). Sestrin2 is induced by different stress insults,
which diminish ATP production and induce energetic stress in the cells. Glucose
is a critical substrate for ATP production utilized via glycolysis and
mitochondrial respiration as well as for glycosylation of newly synthesized
proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi. Thus, glucose starvation
causes both energy deficiency and activation of ER stress followed by the
unfolding protein response (UPR). Here, we show that UPR induces Sestrin2 via
ATF4 and NRF2 transcription factors and demonstrate that Sestrin2 protects cells 
from glucose starvation-induced cell death. Sestrin2 inactivation sensitizes
cells to necroptotic cell death that is associated with a decline in ATP levels
and can be suppressed by Necrostatin 7. We propose that Sestrin2 protects cells
from glucose starvation-induced cell death via regulation of mitochondrial
homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4773760
PMID: 26932729  [PubMed - in process]


21. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2016 Feb 28;41(2):127-33. doi:
10.11817/j.issn.1672-7347.2016.02.003.

[Expression of LXR-ß in human gastric cancer tissue and the effect of GW3965 on
the proliferation of gastric cancer cell line SGC-7901].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Wang R(1), Li R(1), Wen Q(1), Peng K(1), Tan X(1), Chen Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha 410008, China.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the expression of liver X receptor-ß (LXR-ß) in human
gastric cancer tissue, and to explore the effect of GW3965, an agonist of LXRs,
on proliferation of gastric cancer cell line SGC-7901.<U+2029>
METHODS: The immunohistochemical assay was used to detect the expression of
LXR-ß, activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) in gastric cancer tissues and the
corresponding pericarcinoma tissues in 114 patients. Real-time quantitative PCR
and Western blot were used to determine mRNA and protein levels of ATF4 and
ATP-binding cassette 1(ABCA1), one of the downstream target genes of LXRs, in
SGC-7901 cells with or without GW3965 treatment. Cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8)
assay was performed to detect cell proliferation. The expression of ATF4 was
silenced by short hairpin RNA (shRNA).<U+2029>
RESULTS: The expressions of LXR-ß and ATF-4 were obviously down-regulated in the 
gastric cancer tissues than that in the corresponding pericarcinoma tissues (both
P<0.05). Compared with the control cells, GW3965 treatment inhibited
proliferation of SGC-7901 cells and up-regulated ATF4 and ABCA1 expressions (both
P<0.05). Knockdown of ATF4 can reverse the antiproliferative effect of GW3965 on 
SGC-7901 cells.<U+2029>
CONCLUSION: The expression of LXR-ß is decreased in human gastric cancer tissues,
and activation of LXRs by GW3965 could inhibit the proliferation of SGC-7901
cells via ATF4.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 26932209  [PubMed - in process]


22. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 22. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7601. [Epub ahead of print]

Endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated induction of SESTRIN 2 potentiates cell
survival.

Saveljeva S(1,)(2), Cleary P(1,)(2), Mnich K(1,)(2), Ayo A(1,)(2), Pakos-Zebrucka
K(1,)(2), Patterson JB(3), Logue SE(1,)(2), Samali A(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Apoptosis Research Centre, NUI Galway, Ireland. (2)School of Natural Sciences,
NUI Galway, Ireland. (3)MannKind Corporation, Valencia, California, USA.

Upregulation of SESTRIN 2 (SESN2) has been reported in response to diverse
cellular stresses. In this study we demonstrate SESTRIN 2 induction following
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. ER stress-induced increases in SESTRIN 2
expression were dependent on both PERK and IRE1/XBP1 arms of the unfolded protein
response (UPR). SESTRIN 2 induction, post ER stress, was responsible for mTORC1
inactivation and contributed to autophagy induction. Conversely, knockdown of
SESTRIN 2 prolonged mTORC1 signaling, repressed autophagy and increased ER
stress-induced cell death. Unexpectedly, the increase in ER stress-induced cell
death was not linked to autophagy inhibition. Analysis of UPR pathways identified
prolonged eIF2a, ATF4 and CHOP signaling in SESTRIN 2 knockdown cells following
ER stress. SESTRIN 2 regulation enables UPR derived signals to indirectly control
mTORC1 activity shutting down protein translation thus preventing further
exacerbation of ER stress.

PMID: 26930721  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. Phytomedicine. 2016 Feb 15;23(2):174-80. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2015.12.011. Epub 
2016 Jan 4.

Cryptotanshinone deregulates unfolded protein response and eukaryotic initiation 
factor signaling in acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells.

Wu CF(1), Seo EJ(1), Klauck SM(2), Efferth T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, 
Johannes Gutenberg University, Staudinger Weg 5, 55128 Mainz, Germany. (2)Working
Group Cancer Genome Research, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and German
Cancer Consortium (DKTK), National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 460, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Department of Pharmaceutical 
Biology, Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, Johannes Gutenberg University,
Staudinger Weg 5, 55128 Mainz, Germany. Electronic address: efferth@uni-mainz.de.

BACKGROUND: Unfolded protein responses (UPR) determine cell fate and are
recognized as anticancer targets. In a previous research, we reported that
cryptotanshinone (CPT) exerted cytotoxic effects toward acute lymphoblastic
leukemia cells through mitochondria-mediated apoptosis.
PURPOSE: In the present study, we further investigated the role of UPR in
CPT-induced cytotoxicity on acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells by applying tools 
of pharmacogenomics and bioinformatics.
METHODS: Gene expression profiling was performed by mRNA microarray
hybridization. Potential transcription factor binding motifs were identified in
the promoter regions of the deregulated genes by Cistrome software. Molecular
docking on eIF-4A and PI3K was performed to investigate the inhibitory activity
of CPT on translation initiation.
RESULTS: CPT regulated genes related to UPR and eIF2 signaling pathways. The
DNA-Damage-Inducible Transcript 3 (DDIT3) gene, which is activated as consequence
of UPR malfunction during apoptosis, was induced and validated by in vitro
experiments. Transcription factor binding motif analysis of the
microarrary-retrieved deregulated genes in the promoter region emphasized the
relevance of transcription factors, such as ATF2, ATF4 and XBP1, regulating UPR
and cell apoptosis. Molecular docking suggested inhibitory effects of CPT by
binding to eIF-4A and PI3K providing evidence for a role of CPT's in the
disruption of protein synthesis.
CONCLUSION: CPT triggered UPR and inhibited protein synthesis via eIF-mediated
translation initiation, potentially supporting CPT-induced cytotoxic effects
toward acute leukemia cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26926179  [PubMed - in process]


24. J Neuroinflammation. 2016 Feb 29;13(1):52. doi: 10.1186/s12974-016-0521-y.

Heme oxygenase-1 promotes neuron survival through down-regulation of neuronal
NLRP1 expression after spinal cord injury.

Lin WP(1), Xiong GP(2), Lin Q(3), Chen XW(4), Zhang LQ(5), Shi JX(6), Ke QF(7),
Lin JH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital, Fujian
Medical University, Quanzhou, 362000, China. okoklwp@126.com. (2)Hepatology Unit,
Xiamen Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Xiamen, 361009, China.
8137605@qq.com. (3)Department of Human Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, School 
of Basic Medical Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, 350108, China.
opopop_009@163.com. (4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, the First Affiliated
Hospital, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, 350004, China. 390036557@qq.com.
(5)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital, Fujian
Medical University, Fuzhou, 350004, China. 605564497@qq.com. (6)Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital, Fujian Medical University,
Quanzhou, 362000, China. 14137921@qq.com. (7)Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
the Second Affiliated Hospital, Fujian Medical University, Quanzhou, 362000,
China. qingfengke55@126.com. (8)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, the First
Affiliated Hospital, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, 350004, China.
jianhua0918@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the mechanisms underlying neuronal death in spinal cord
injury (SCI) and developing novel therapeutic approaches for SCI-induced damage
are critical for functional recovery. Here we investigated the role of heme
oxygenase-1 (HO-1) in neuroprotection after SCI.
METHODS: Adeno-associated virus expressing HO-1 was prepared and injected into
rat spinal cords before SCI model was performed. HO-1 expression, inflammasome
activation, and the presence of inflammatory cytokines were determined by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction, immunohistological staining, immunoblot, 
and immunoprecipitation. Neuronal apoptosis was assessed by terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling. The hindlimb locomotor
function was evaluated for extent of neurologic damage. In an in vitro model,
hydrogen peroxide was used to induce similar inflammasome activation in cultured 
primary spinal cord neurons, followed by evaluation of above parameters with or
without transduction of HO-1-expressing adeno-associated virus.
RESULTS: Endogenous HO-1 expression was found in spinal cord neurons after SCI in
vivo, in association with the expression of Nod-like receptor protein 1 (NLRP1)
and the formation of NLRP1 inflammasomes. Administration of HO-1-expressing
adeno-associated virus effectively decreased expression of NLRP1, therefore
alleviating NLRP1 inflammasome-induced neuronal death and improving functional
recovery. In the in vitro model, exogenous HO-1 expression protected neurons from
hydrogen peroxide-induced neuronal death by inhibiting NLRP1 expression. In
addition, HO-1 inhibited expression of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), 
which is a transcription factor regulating NLRP1 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: HO-1 protects spinal cord neurons after SCI through inhibiting NLRP1
inflammasome formation.

PMCID: PMC4772494
PMID: 26925775  [PubMed - in process]


25. Ren Fail. 2016 May;38(4):622-8. doi: 10.3109/0886022X.2016.1149774. Epub 2016 Feb
28.

Regulation of eIF2a expression and renal interstitial fibrosis by resveratrol in 
rat renal tissue after unilateral ureteral obstruction.

Zhang C(1), Zhou Y(1), Zhou Y(1), Lu Y(2), Wang D(1).

Author information: 
(1)a College of Pharmacy , Harbin University of Commerce , Harbin , China ; (2)b 
Heilongjiang Songhuajiang Pharmaceutical Limited , Harbin , China.

Purpose This study was performed to assess the effect of resveratrol on the
expression of eukaryotic initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) and activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) in renal tissues of rats with unilateral ureteral
obstruction (UUO). Methods Using UUO animal model, after 14 days of surgery,
pathological changes were detected by HE staining, renal tubular damage index,
renal interstitial collagen deposition area were evaluated by Masson staining, in
situ cell apoptosis in renal tissue was analyzed by TUNEL assay, and protein
expression of eIF2a and ATF4 in renal tissue was analyzed using western blot
detection. Results After comparison of the treatment groups with model group, we 
observed that the degree of renal tubular damage, relative area of renal
interstitial collagen and eIF2a, ATF4 protein expression were also significantly 
reduced (p<0.05, p <U+2009><0.01) in the high-dose resveratrol group. Conclusion
Resveratrol can reduce the level of eIF2a protein expression, which further
reduces the ATF4 levels.

PMID: 26923138  [PubMed - in process]


26. BMC Gastroenterol. 2016 Feb 25;16(1):25. doi: 10.1186/s12876-016-0442-3.

Niclosamide induced cell apoptosis via upregulation of ATF3 and activation of
PERK in Hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Weng S(1,)(2,)(3), Zhou L(4), Deng Q(5), Wang J(6), Yu Y(7), Zhu J(8), Yuan
Y(9,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Engineering Research Center of Cell and Therapeutic Antibody, Ministry of
Education, School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Rd,
Biology and Pharmacy Building, suite 6-208, Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic
of China. wengshunyan@hotmail.com. (2)The Shanghai Municipality Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Biotechnology, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, 800 Dongchuan Rd, Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China.
wengshunyan@hotmail.com. (3)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Rd, Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of
China. wengshunyan@hotmail.com. (4)The Shanghai Municipality Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Biotechnology, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, 800 Dongchuan Rd, Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China.
Abang1212@sjtu.edu.cn. (5)The Shanghai Municipality Key Laboratory of Veterinary 
Biotechnology, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
800 Dongchuan Rd, Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China.
dengqingemma@sjtu.edu.cn. (6)Engineering Research Center of Cell and Therapeutic 
Antibody, Ministry of Education, School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, 800 Dongchuan Rd, Biology and Pharmacy Building, suite 6-208,
Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China. Wangjiaxian1993@foxmail.com. (7)The
Shanghai Municipality Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, School of
Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Rd,
Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China. Yanyu@sjtu.edu.cn. (8)Engineering
Research Center of Cell and Therapeutic Antibody, Ministry of Education, School
of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Rd, Biology and
Pharmacy Building, suite 6-208, Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China.
JianweiZ@SJTU.EDU.CN. (9)Engineering Research Center of Cell and Therapeutic
Antibody, Ministry of Education, School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, 800 Dongchuan Rd, Biology and Pharmacy Building, suite 6-208,
Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China. yunsheng@sjtu.edu.cn. (10)The
Shanghai Municipality Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, School of
Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Rd,
Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China. yunsheng@sjtu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of most common and aggressive
human malignancies in the world, especially, in eastern Asia, and its mortality
is very high at any phase. We want to investigate mechanism of niclosamide
inducing cell apoptosis in HCC.
METHODS: Two hepatoma cell lines were used to evaluate activity of niclosamide
inducing cell apoptosis and study its mechanism. Quantitative real-time PCR and
western blotting were used in analysis of genes expression or protein active
regulated by niclosamide.
RESULTS: Niclosamide remarkably induced cell apoptosis in hepatoma cells.
Furthermore, our study revealed that RNA-dependent protein kinase-like kinase
(PERK) is activated and its expression is up-regulated in HCC cells which are
exposed to niclosamide. niclosamide also significantly increase activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3), activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein (CHOP) expression in HCC cells.
It's suggested that the function of niclosamide was abrogated by PERK inhibitor
or absent ATF3. Expression of PERK and CHOP is correlated with ATF3 level in the 
cells.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our results indicate that ATF3 plays an integral role
in ER stress activated and cell apoptosis induced by niclosamide in HCC cells. In
this study, the new mechanism of niclosamide as anti-cancer we investigated, too.

PMCID: PMC4766699
PMID: 26917416  [PubMed - in process]


27. Science. 2016 Feb 12;351(6274):728-33. doi: 10.1126/science.aad0489.

mTORC1 induces purine synthesis through control of the mitochondrial
tetrahydrofolate cycle.

Ben-Sahra I(1), Hoxhaj G(1), Ricoult SJ(1), Asara JM(2), Manning BD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School of
Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Division of Signal Transduction, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases,
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
bmanning@hsph.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Science. 2016 Feb 12;351(6274):670-1.

In response to growth signals, mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1)
stimulates anabolic processes underlying cell growth. We found that mTORC1
increases metabolic flux through the de novo purine synthesis pathway in various 
mouse and human cells, thereby influencing the nucleotide pool available for
nucleic acid synthesis. mTORC1 had transcriptional effects on multiple enzymes
contributing to purine synthesis, with expression of the mitochondrial
tetrahydrofolate (mTHF) cycle enzyme methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 2
(MTHFD2) being closely associated with mTORC1 signaling in both normal and cancer
cells. MTHFD2 expression and purine synthesis were stimulated by activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), which was activated by mTORC1 independent of its
canonical induction downstream of eukaryotic initiation factor 2a eIF2a
phosphorylation. Thus, mTORC1 stimulates the mTHF cycle, which contributes
one-carbon units to enhance production of purine nucleotides in response to
growth signals.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4786372 [Available on 2016-08-12]
PMID: 26912861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Viruses. 2016 Feb 20;8(2). pii: E56. doi: 10.3390/v8020056.

Porcine Circovirus 2 Deploys PERK Pathway and GRP78 for Its Enhanced Replication 
in PK-15 Cells.

Zhou Y(1), Qi B(2), Gu Y(3), Xu F(4), Du H(5), Li X(6), Fang W(7).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine,
Institute of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310058, China. yszhou@zju.edu.cn. (2)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of
Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Institute of Preventive Veterinary Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. qibaozhu@yeah.net. (3)Zhejiang
Provincial Key Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Institute of
Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.
guzi.123@163.com. (4)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary 
Medicine, Institute of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou 310058, China. flying0926@126.com. (5)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory
of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Institute of Preventive Veterinary Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. huahuadu@zju.edu.cn. (6)Zhejiang
Provincial Key Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Institute of
Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.
xlli@zju.edu.cn. (7)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary
Medicine, Institute of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou 310058, China. whfang@zju.edu.cn.

Porcine circovirus type 2 (PCV2) infection induces autophagy and apoptosis. These
cellular responses could be connected with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. It 
remains unknown if PCV2 induces ER stress and if autophagy or apoptosis is
primary to PCV2 infection or secondary responses following ER stress. Here, we
demonstrate that PCV2 triggered unfolded protein response (UPR) in PK-15 cells by
activating the PERK/eIF2a pathway without concomitant activation of IRE1 or ATF6.
Since ATF4 and CHOP were induced later than PERK/eIF2a, it is clear that
persistent PCV2 infection could lead to selective activation of PERK via the
PERK-eIF2a-ATF4-CHOP axis. Therefore, PERK activation could be part of the
pro-apoptotic signaling via induced expression of CHOP by PCV2. Since PERK
inhibition by GSK2606414 or RNA silencing or suppression of eIF2a
dephosphorylation by salubrinal limited viral replication, we suppose that PCV2
deploys UPR to enhance its replication. Over-expression of GRP78 or treatment
with tauroursodeoxycholic acid could enhance viral capsid expression and/or viral
titers, indicating that these chaperones, endogenous or exogenous, could help
correct folding of viral proteins. Our findings provide the first evidence that
ER stress plays a role in the pathogenesis of PCV2 infection probably as part of 
autophagic and apoptotic responses.

PMCID: PMC4776210
PMID: 26907328  [PubMed - in process]


29. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 24;6:21709. doi: 10.1038/srep21709.

Activation of the unfolded protein response promotes axonal regeneration after
peripheral nerve injury.

Oñate M(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Catenaccio A(1,)(2), Martínez G(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Armentano
D(5), Parsons G(5), Kerr B(6), Hetz C(1,)(3,)(4,)(7), Court FA(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Geroscience Center for Brain Health and Metabolism, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Millenium Nucleus for Regenerative Biology, Faculty of Biology, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. (3)Biomedical Neuroscience
Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile. (4)Program 
of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Center for
Molecular Studies of the Cell, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology, Genzyme Corporation, 49 New York Avenue,
Framingham, MA 01701, USA. (6)Centro de Estudios Científicos, Valdivia, Chile.
(7)Department of Immunology and Infectious diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston MA, USA.

Although protein-folding stress at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is emerging as 
a driver of neuronal dysfunction in models of spinal cord injury and
neurodegeneration, the contribution of this pathway to peripheral nerve damage
remains poorly explored. Here we targeted the unfolded protein response (UPR), an
adaptive reaction against ER stress, in mouse models of sciatic nerve injury and 
found that ablation of the transcription factor XBP1, but not ATF4, significantly
delay locomotor recovery. XBP1 deficiency led to decreased macrophage
recruitment, a reduction in myelin removal and axonal regeneration. Conversely,
overexpression of XBP1s in the nervous system in transgenic mice enhanced
locomotor recovery after sciatic nerve crush, associated to an improvement in key
pro-regenerative events. To assess the therapeutic potential of UPR manipulation 
to axonal regeneration, we locally delivered XBP1s or an shRNA targeting this
transcription factor to sensory neurons of the dorsal root ganglia using a gene
therapy approach and found an enhancement or reduction of axonal regeneration in 
vivo, respectively. Our results demonstrate a functional role of specific
components of the ER proteostasis network in the cellular changes associated to
regeneration and functional recovery after peripheral nerve injury.

PMCID: PMC4764858
PMID: 26906090  [PubMed - in process]


30. Mol Endocrinol. 2016 Apr;30(4):446-54. doi: 10.1210/me.2015-1255. Epub 2016 Feb
22.

CHOP Contributes to, But Is Not the Only Mediator of, IAPP Induced ß-Cell
Apoptosis.

Gurlo T(1), Rivera JF(1), Butler AE(1), Cory M(1), Hoang J(1), Costes S(1),
Butler PC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Larry L. Hillblom Islet Research Center, Department of Medicine, David Geffen 
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095-7073.

The islet in type 2 diabetes is characterized by ß-cell loss, increased ß-cell
apoptosis, and islet amyloid derived from islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP). When 
protein misfolding protective mechanisms are overcome, human IAPP (h-IAPP) forms 
membrane permeant toxic oligomers that induce ß-cell dysfunction and apoptosis.
In humans with type 2 diabetes (T2D) and mice transgenic for h-IAPP, endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) stress has been inferred from nuclear translocation of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP), an established mediator
of ER stress. To establish whether h-IAPP toxicity is mediated by ER stress, we
evaluated diabetes onset and ß-cell mass in h-IAPP transgenic (h-TG) mice with
and without deletion of CHOP in comparison with wild-type controls. Diabetes was 
delayed in h-TG CHOP(-/-) mice, with relatively preserved ß-cell mass and
decreased ß-cell apoptosis. Deletion of CHOP attenuates dysfunction of the
autophagy/lysosomal pathway in ß-cells of h-TG mice, uncovering a role for CHOP
in mediating h-IAPP-induced dysfunction of autophagy. As deletion of CHOP delayed
but did not prevent h-IAPP-induced ß-cell loss and diabetes, we examined
CHOP-independent stress pathways. JNK, a target of the IRE-1pTRAF2 complex, and
the Bcl-2 family proapoptotic mediator BIM, a target of ATF4, were comparably
activated by h-IAPP expression in the presence and absence of CHOP. Therefore,
although these studies affirm that CHOP is a mediator of h-IAPP-induced ER
stress, it is not the only one. Therefore, suppression of CHOP alone is unlikely 
to be a durable therapeutic strategy to protect against h-IAPP toxicity because
multiple stress pathways are activated.

PMID: 26900721  [PubMed - in process]


31. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 22;6:21565. doi: 10.1038/srep21565.

A microRNA-mediated decrease in eukaryotic initiation factor 2a promotes cell
survival during PS-341 treatment.

Jiang L(1), Zang D(1), Yi S(1), Li X(1), Yang C(1), Dong X(1), Zhao C(1), Lan
X(1), Chen X(1), Liu S(1), Liu N(1,)(2), Huang H(1), Shi X(1), Wang X(1,)(3), Liu
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab of Respiratory Disease, Protein Modification and Degradation
Lab, Department of Pathophysiology, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangdong
510182, People's Republic of China. (2)Guangzhou Research Institute of
Cardiovascular Disease, the Second Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510260, People's Republic of China. (3)Division 
of Basic Biomedical Sciences, Sanford School of Medicine of the University of
South Dakota, Vermillion, South Dakota 57069, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRs) play pivotal roles in carcinogenesis and endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) that performs the folding, modification and trafficking of proteins targeted
to the secretory pathway. Cancer cells often endure ER stress during tumor
progression but use the adaptive ER stress response to gain survival advantage.
Here we report: (i) A group of miRs, including miR-30b-5p and miR-30c-5p, are
upregulated by proteasome inhibitor PS-341 treatment, in HepG2 and MDA-MB-453
cells. (ii) Two representative PS-341-induced miRs: miR-30b-5p and miR-30c-5p are
found to promote cell proliferation and anti-apoptosis in both tumor cells. (iii)
eIF2a is confirmed as the congenerous target of miR-30b-5p and miR-30c-5p,
essential to the anti-apoptotic function of these miRs. (iv) Upregulation of
miR-30b-5p or miR-30c-5p, which occurs latter than the increase of phosphorylated
eIF2a (p-eIF2a) in the cell under ER stress, suppresses the p-eIF2a/ATF4/CHOP
pro-apoptotic pathway. (v) Inhibition of the miR-30b-5p or miR-30c-5p sensitizes 
the cancer cells to the cytotoxicity of proteasome inhibition. In conclusion, we 
unravels a new miRs-based mechanism that helps maintain intracellular
proteostasis and promote cell survival during ER stress through upregulation of
miR-30b-5p and miR-30c-5p which target eIF2a and thereby inhibit the
p-eIF2a/ATF4/CHOP pro-apoptotic pathway, identifying miR-30b-5p and miR-30c-5p as
potentially new targets for anti-cancer therapies.

PMCID: PMC4761930
PMID: 26898246  [PubMed - in process]


32. Clin Hypertens. 2015 Jul 8;21:13. doi: 10.1186/s40885-015-0018-5. eCollection
2015.

Angiotensin II induces endoplasmic reticulum stress in podocyte, which would be
further augmented by PI3-kinase inhibition.

Ha TS(1), Park HY(1), Seong SB(1), Ahn HY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Chungbuk National University, 1
Chungdae-ro, Seowon-gu, Cheongju, 361-240 South Korea. (2)Department of
Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Chungbuk National University, 1 Chungdae-ro,
Seowon-gu, Cheongju, 361-240 South Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Angiotensin II (Ang II) contributes to the pathological process of 
vascular structures, including renal glomeruli by hemodynamic and nonhemodynamic 
direct effects. On renal effects, Ang II plays an important role in the
development of proteinuria and glomerulosclerosis by the modification of podocyte
molecules and cell survival. In the present study, we investigated the effect of 
Ang II on endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in podocytes.
METHODS: We cultured mouse podocytes with increasing doses of Ang II and
evaluated ER stress markers by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Ang II increased Bip protein, an ER chaperone, in a dose-dependent
manner at 24 h, which was ameliorated by losartan, an angiotensin II type 1
receptor antagonist. Ang II also increased ER stress markers, such as
phospho-PERK, phospho-eIF2a, and ATF4 proteins of podocyte, significantly in a
dose-dependent manner at 24 h. Increased phospho-PERK and ATF4 proteins were
further augmented by phosphoinositide 3 (PI3)-kinase inhibitor, LY294002, which
suggested that Ang II could induce podocyte ER stress of PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 axis via
PI3-kinase pathway.
DISCUSSION: These studies suggest that Ang II could induce podocyte ER stress of 
PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 axis via PI3-kinase pathway, which would contribute to the
development of podocyte injury induced by Ang II, and the augmentation of
PI3-kinase would be a therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC4750790
PMID: 26893923  [PubMed]


33. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 17. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7448. [Epub ahead of print]

Cinacalcet inhibits neuroblastoma tumor growth and upregulates cancer-testis
antigens.

Rodríguez-Hernández CJ(1), Mateo-Lozano S(1), García M(1), Casalà C(1), Briansó
F(2), Castrejón N(1), Rodríguez E(1), Suñol M(3), Carcaboso AM(1), Lavarino
C(1,)(4), Mora J(1,)(4), de Torres C(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Tumor Biology Laboratory, Institut de Recerca Pediàtrica -
Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Statistics and Bioinformatics Unit, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute,
Barcelona, Spain. (3)Department of Pathology, Institut de Recerca Pediàtrica -
Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Oncology, Institut de Recerca Pediàtrica - Hospital Sant Joan de
Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.

The calcium-sensing receptor is a G protein-coupled receptor that exerts
cell-type specific functions in numerous tissues and some cancers. We have
previously reported that this receptor exhibits tumor suppressor properties in
neuroblastoma. We have now assessed cinacalcet, an allosteric activator of the
CaSR approved for clinical use, as targeted therapy for this developmental tumor 
using neuroblastoma cell lines and patient-derived xenografts (PDX) with
different MYCN and TP53 status. In vitro, acute exposure to cinacalcet induced
endoplasmic reticulum stress coupled to apoptosis via ATF4-CHOP-TRB3 in
CaSR-positive, MYCN-amplified cells. Both phenotypes were partially abrogated by 
phospholipase C inhibitor U73122. Prolonged in vitro treatment also promoted
dose- and time-dependent apoptosis in CaSR-positive, MYCN-amplified cells and,
irrespective of MYCN status, differentiation in surviving cells. Cinacalcet
significantly inhibited tumor growth in MYCN-amplified xenografts and reduced
that of MYCN-non amplified PDX. Morphology assessment showed fibrosis in
MYCN-amplified xenografts exposed to the drug. Microarrays analyses revealed
up-regulation of cancer-testis antigens (CTAs) in cinacalcet-treated
MYCN-amplified tumors. These were predominantly CTAs encoded by genes mapping on 
chromosome X, which are the most immunogenic. Other modulated genes upon
prolonged exposure to cinacalcet were involved in differentiation, cell cycle
exit, microenvironment remodeling and calcium signaling pathways. CTAs were
up-regulated in PDX and in vitro models as well. Moreover, progressive increase
of CaSR expression upon cinacalcet treatment was seen both in vitro and in vivo. 
In summary, cinacalcet reduces neuroblastoma tumor growth and up-regulates CTAs. 
This effect represents a therapeutic opportunity and provides surrogate
circulating markers of neuroblastoma response to this treatment.

PMID: 26893368  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2016 Feb 19. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201500750. [Epub ahead of
print]

Dietary compound a-asarone alleviates ER stress-mediated apoptosis in
7ß-hydroxycholesterol-challenged macrophages.

Park SH(1), Kang MK(1), Choi YJ(1), Kim YH(1), Antika LD(1), Lim SS(1), Kang
YH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food science and Nutrition, Hallym University, Chuncheon,
200-702, Korea.

SCOPE: Prolonged endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has lost the function of
protein folding capacity and the ER accumulation of unfolded proteins that
eventually triggers apoptosis. Oxysterols are emerging as contributing factors in
atherogenesis known to involve macrophage apoptosis. This study determined the
inhibitory effect of a-asarone present in purple perilla, on
7ß-hydroxycholesterol-induced macrophage apoptosis, targeting against ER stress
signaling pathway.
METHODS AND RESULTS: J774A1 murine macrophages were exposed to 28 µM
7ß-hydroxycholesterol and treated with 1-10 µM a-asarone. Macrophage apoptosis
and ER stress were examined by and a-Asarone blocked
7ß-hydroxycholesterol-induced DNA fragmentation and apoptosome formation.
Immunoblotting showed that the oxysterol activated the ER transmembrane resident 
kinases of IRE1a, PERK and ATF4 and triggered caspase-12 signaling cascades,
which was reversed by a-asarone. Additionally, 7ß-hydroxycholesterol activated
TRAF2-ASK1-JNK1/2 complex following the IRE1a activation, and a-asarone blunted
such IRE1a-mediated pathway. Real-time PCR and dual-luciferase reporter analyses 
revealed that a-asarone reduced transcriptional activation of ER
stress-responsive genes including XBP1 and CHOP by 7ß-hydroxycholesterol.
Finally, a-asarone disturbed oxysterol-elicited signaling of PERK and ATF4
responsible for CHOP induction.
CONCLUSION: a-Asarone blocked 7ß-hydroxycholesterol-induced macrophage apoptosis 
through allaying ER stress-specific signaling involving caspase activation and
CHOP induction. a-Asarone was an anti-atherosclerotic agent antagonizing ER
stress-mediated macrophage apoptosis by 7ß-hydroxycholesterol. This article is
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26893256  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


35. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 19;6:21145. doi: 10.1038/srep21145.

Icariin displays anticancer activity against human esophageal cancer cells via
regulating endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated apoptotic signaling.

Fan C(1), Yang Y(2), Liu Y(3), Jiang S(4), Di S(1), Hu W(2), Ma Z(1), Li T(2),
Zhu Y(1), Xin Z(2), Wu G(2), Han J(5), Li X(1), Yan X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical
University, 1 Xinsi Road, Xi'an 710038, China. (2)Department of Biomedical
Engineering, The Fourth Military Medical University, 169 Changle West Road, Xi'an
710032, China. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Guangdong Provincial Corps
Hospital of Chinese People's Armed Police Forces, Guangzhou Medical University,
268 Yanling Road, Guangzhou 510507, China. (4)Department of Aerospace Medicine,
The Fourth Military Medical University, 169 Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032,
China. (5)Department of Ophthalmology, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military
Medical University, 1 Xinsi Road, Xi'an 710038, China.

In this study, we investigated the antitumor activity of icariin (ICA) in human
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) in vitro and in vivo and explored the
role of endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) signaling in this activity. ICA
treatment resulted in a dose- and time-dependent decrease in the viability of
human EC109 and TE1 ESCCs. Additionally, ICA exhibited strong antitumor activity,
as evidenced by reductions in cell migration, adhesion, and intracellular
glutathione (GSH) levels and by increases in the EC109 and TE1 cell apoptotic
index, Caspase 9 activity, reactive oxygen species (ROS) level, and nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase activity. Furthermore, ICA
treatments upregulated the levels of ERS-related molecules (p-PERK, GRP78, ATF4, 
p-eIF2a, and CHOP) and a pro-apoptotic protein (PUMA) and simultaneously
downregulated an anti-apoptotic protein (Bcl2) in the two ESCC cell lines. The
downregulation of ERS signaling using eIF2a siRNA desensitized EC109 and TE1
cells to ICA treatment, and the upregulation of ERS signaling using thapsigargin 
sensitized EC109 and TE1 cells to ICA treatment. In summary, ERS activation may
represent a mechanism of action for the anticancer activity of ICA in ESCCs, and 
the activation of ERS signaling may represent a novel therapeutic intervention
for human esophageal cancer.

PMCID: PMC4759694
PMID: 26892033  [PubMed - in process]


36. Mol Neurobiol. 2016 Feb 18. [Epub ahead of print]

Pharmacological Inhibition of PERK Attenuates Early Brain Injury After
Subarachnoid Hemorrhage in Rats Through the Activation of Akt.

Yan F(1), Cao S(1), Li J(1), Dixon B(2), Yu X(1), Chen J(1), Gu C(1), Lin W(1),
Chen G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, NO.88 Jiefang road, 310009, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Basic Sciences, Division of Physiology, Loma Linda University,
School of Medicine, Loma Linda, CA, USA. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, The
Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, NO.88
Jiefang road, 310009, Hangzhou, China. d-chengao@zju.edu.cn.

Neuronal apoptosis is a central pathological process in subarachnoid hemorrhage
(SAH)-induced early brain injury. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress was reported 
to have a vital role in the pathophysiology of neuronal apoptosis in the brain.
The present study was designed to investigate the potential effects of ER stress 
and its downstream signals in early brain injury after SAH. One hundred
thirty-four rats were subjected to an endovascular perforation model of SAH. The 
RNA-activated protein kinase-like ER kinase (PERK) inhibitor GSK2606414 and the
Akt inhibitor MK2206 were injected intracerebroventricularly. SAH grade,
neurologic scores, and brain water content were measured 72 h after subarachnoid 
hemorrhage. Expression of PERK and its downstream signals, Akt, Bcl-2, Bax, and
cleaved caspase-3, were examined using Western blot analysis. Specific cell types
that expressed PERK were detected with double immunofluorescence staining.
Neuronal cell death was demonstrated with terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
(TdT)-mediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL). Our results showed that the
expression of p-PERK and its downstream targets, p-eIF2a and ATF4, increased
after SAH and peaked at 72 h after SAH. PERK was expressed mostly in neurons. The
inhibition of PERK with GSK2606414 reduced p-PERK, p-eIF2a, and ATF4 expression. 
Furthermore, GSK2606414 treatment increased p-Akt levels and the Bcl-2/Bax ratio 
as well as decreased cleaved caspase-3 expression and neuronal death, thereby
improving neurological deficits at 72 h after SAH. The selective Akt inhibitor
MK2206 abolished the beneficial effects of GSK2606414. PERK, the major transducer
of ER stress, is involved in neuronal apoptosis after SAH. The inhibition of PERK
reduces early brain injury via Akt-related anti-apoptosis pathways. PERK may
serve as a promising target for future therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 26887383  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


37. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 12. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7349. [Epub ahead of print]

Multi-kinase inhibitors can associate with heat shock proteins through their
NH2-termini by which they suppress chaperone function.

Booth L(1), Shuch B(2,)(3), Albers T(4), Roberts JL(1), Tavallai M(1), Proniuk
S(5), Zukiwski A(5), Wang D(6), Chen CS(6), Bottaro D(3), Ecroyd H(7), Lebedyeva 
IO(4), Dent P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA. (2)Urologic and Diagnostic Radiology, Yale
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8058, USA. (3)Urologic Oncology Branch,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)Department of Chemistry
and Physics, Augusta University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA. (5)Arno Therapeutics,
Flemington, NJ 08822, USA. (6)Molecular and Translational Science, United States 
Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, School of Pharmacy, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (7)School of Biological Sciences and
Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute, University of Wollongong, NSW
2522, Australia.

We performed proteomic studies using the GRP78 chaperone-inhibitor drug AR-12
(OSU-03012) as bait. Multiple additional chaperone and chaperone-associated
proteins were shown to interact with AR-12, including: GRP75, HSP75, BAG2; HSP27;
ULK-1; and thioredoxin. AR-12 down-regulated in situ immuno-fluorescence
detection of ATP binding chaperones using antibodies directed against the
NH2-termini of the proteins but only weakly reduced detection using antibodies
directed against the central and COOH portions of the proteins. Traditional
SDS-PAGE and western blotting assessment methods did not exhibit any alterations 
in chaperone detection. AR-12 altered the sub-cellular distribution of chaperone 
proteins, abolishing their punctate speckled patterning concomitant with changes 
in protein co-localization. AR-12 inhibited chaperone ATPase activity, which was 
enhanced by sildenafil; inhibited chaperone - chaperone and chaperone - client
interactions; and docked in silico with the ATPase domains of HSP90 and of HSP70.
AR-12 combined with sildenafil in a GRP78 plus HSP27 -dependent fashion to
profoundly activate an eIF2a/ATF4/CHOP/Beclin1 pathway in parallel with
inactivating mTOR and increasing ATG13 phosphorylation, collectively resulting in
formation of punctate toxic autophagosomes. Over-expression of [GRP78 and HSP27] 
prevented: AR-12 -induced activation of ER stress signaling and maintained mTOR
activity; AR-12 -mediated down-regulation of thioredoxin, MCL-1 and c-FLIP-s; and
preserved tumor cell viability. Thus the inhibition of chaperone protein
functions by AR-12 and by multi-kinase inhibitors very likely explains why these 
agents have anti-tumor effects in multiple genetically diverse tumor cell types.

PMID: 26887051  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


38. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Nov 15;8(11):21635-40. eCollection 2015.

Atorvastatin up-regulates TRIB3 independent of ATF4-CHOP pathway in
atherosclerotic patients.

Bi SJ(1), Wang CY(2), Zhang J(1), Lv ZP(1), Li YX(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Second Hospital of Shandong University Ji'nan
250033, Shandong Province, China. (2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Second
Hospital of Shandong University Ji'nan 250033, Shandong Province, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Second Hospital of Shandong University Ji'nan 250033,
Shandong Province, China.

BACKGROUND: Macrophage apoptosis triggered by endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
contributes much to atherosclerosis, especially plaque vulnerability. Activating 
transcription factor 4 (ATF4)-CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) homologous
protein (CHOP)-Tribbles 3 (TRIB3) pathway is closely related to the ER stress.
This study aimed to investigate the effect of atorvastatin on the ATF4-CHOP-TRIB3
pathway.
METHODS: Forty-seven patients were randomized into 80-mg and 20-mg atorvastatin
group. Follow-up was performed at weeks 6 and 12, and complete blood chemistry,
lipid assay and detection of 5 target genes (tumor protein 53, ATF4, C/EBP, CHOP 
and TRIB3) in monocytes/macrophages were conducted. Furthermore, the interaction 
between dosage and duration of therapy was evaluated.
RESULTS: After 12-week therapy, patients in both groups experienced significant
reductions in ATF4 (P=0.038) and C/EBP (P=0.003) expressions. Tumor protein 53
(P=0.015) and TRIB3 (P=0.045) expressions increased markedly in 80-mg
atorvastatin group. However, there was no significant difference in CHOP
expression at three time-points and between atorvastatin groups. Moreover, there 
was no interaction between dosage and duration of therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Atorvastatin has an effect on ER stress through ATF4-CHOP pathway.
Atorvastatin at a high dose is more likely to increase TRIB3 expression, but this
warrants further investigation.

PMCID: PMC4723962
PMID: 26885117  [PubMed]


39. Sci Signal. 2016 Feb 16;9(415):ra18. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aac4374.

ONC201 kills solid tumor cells by triggering an integrated stress response
dependent on ATF4 activation by specific eIF2a kinases.

Kline CL(1), Van den Heuvel AP(2), Allen JE(3), Prabhu VV(1), Dicker DT(1),
El-Deiry WS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology Division and Penn State Hershey Cancer Institute, Penn
State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. Laboratory of Translational
Oncology and Experimental Cancer Therapeutics, Department of Hematology/Oncology 
and Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA
19111, USA. (2)Hematology/Oncology Division and Penn State Hershey Cancer
Institute, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA.
(3)Hematology/Oncology Division and Penn State Hershey Cancer Institute, Penn
State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. Oncoceutics Inc., Hummelstown,
PA 17036, USA. (4)Hematology/Oncology Division and Penn State Hershey Cancer
Institute, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. Laboratory of 
Translational Oncology and Experimental Cancer Therapeutics, Department of
Hematology/Oncology and Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 
Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA. wafik.eldeiry@fccc.edu.

ONC201 (also called TIC10) is a small molecule that inactivates the cell
proliferation- and cell survival-promoting kinases Akt and ERK and induces cell
death through the proapoptotic protein TRAIL. ONC201 is currently in early-phase 
clinical testing for various malignancies. We found through gene expression and
protein analyses that ONC201 triggered an increase in TRAIL abundance and cell
death through an integrated stress response (ISR) involving the transcription
factor ATF4, the transactivator CHOP, and the TRAIL receptor DR5. ATF4 was not
activated in ONC201-resistant cancer cells, and in ONC201-sensitive cells,
knockdown of ATF4 or CHOP partially abrogated ONC201-induced cytotoxicity and
diminished the ONC201-stimulated increase in DR5 abundance. The activation of
ATF4 in response to ONC201 required the kinases HRI and PKR, which phosphorylate 
and activate the translation initiation factor eIF2a. ONC201 rapidly triggered
cell cycle arrest, which was associated with decreased abundance of cyclin D1,
decreased activity of the kinase complex mTORC1, and dephosphorylation of the
retinoblastoma (Rb) protein. The abundance of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis
protein (XIAP) negatively correlated with the extent of apoptosis in response to 
ONC201. These effects of ONC201 were independent of whether cancer cells had
normal or mutant p53. Thus, ONC201 induces cell death through the coordinated
induction of TRAIL by an ISR pathway.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26884600  [PubMed - in process]


40. Sci Signal. 2016 Feb 16;9(415):ra17. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aac4380.

ATF4 induction through an atypical integrated stress response to ONC201 triggers 
p53-independent apoptosis in hematological malignancies.

Ishizawa J(1), Kojima K(2), Chachad D(1), Ruvolo P(1), Ruvolo V(1), Jacamo RO(1),
Borthakur G(1), Mu H(1), Zeng Z(1), Tabe Y(3), Allen JE(4), Wang Z(5), Ma W(5),
Lee HC(5), Orlowski R(5), Sarbassov dos D(6), Lorenzi PL(7), Huang X(8), Neelapu 
SS(5), McDonnell T(9), Miranda RN(9), Wang M(5), Kantarjian H(10), Konopleva
M(1), Davis RE(11), Andreeff M(12).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Hematology and Therapy, Department of Leukemia,
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Section
of Molecular Hematology and Therapy, Department of Leukemia, University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Division of Hematology,
Respiratory Medicine and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Saga University, Saga 
840-8502, Japan. (3)Section of Molecular Hematology and Therapy, Department of
Leukemia, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. 
Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Juntendo University School of
Medicine, Tokyo 113-8431, Japan. (4)Oncoceutics Inc., Hummelstown, PA 19104, USA.
(5)Department of Lymphoma/Myeloma, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (6)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology,
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(7)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (8)Department of Biostatistics,
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(9)Department of Hematopathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (10)Department of Leukemia, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (11)Department of
Lymphoma/Myeloma, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
77030, USA. mandreef@mdanderson.org redavis1@mdanderson.org. (12)Section of
Molecular Hematology and Therapy, Department of Leukemia, University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. mandreef@mdanderson.org
redavis1@mdanderson.org.

The clinical challenge posed by p53 abnormalities in hematological malignancies
requires therapeutic strategies other than standard genotoxic chemotherapies.
ONC201 is a first-in-class small molecule that activates p53-independent
apoptosis, has a benign safety profile, and is in early clinical trials. We found
that ONC201 caused p53-independent apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in cell lines 
and in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) samples from
patients; these included samples from patients with genetic abnormalities
associated with poor prognosis or cells that had developed resistance to the
nongenotoxic agents ibrutinib and bortezomib. Moreover, ONC201 caused apoptosis
in stem and progenitor AML cells and abrogated the engraftment of leukemic stem
cells in mice while sparing normal bone marrow cells. ONC201 caused changes in
gene expression similar to those caused by the unfolded protein response (UPR)
and integrated stress responses (ISRs), which increase the translation of the
transcription factor ATF4 through an increase in the phosphorylation of the
translation initiation factor eIF2a. However, unlike the UPR and ISR, the
increase in ATF4 abundance in ONC201-treated hematopoietic cells promoted
apoptosis and did not depend on increased phosphorylation of eIF2a. ONC201 also
inhibited mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling, likely
through ATF4-mediated induction of the mTORC1 inhibitor DDIT4. Overexpression of 
BCL-2 protected against ONC201-induced apoptosis, and the combination of ONC201
and the BCL-2 antagonist ABT-199 synergistically increased apoptosis. Thus, our
results suggest that by inducing an atypical ISR and p53-independent apoptosis,
ONC201 has clinical potential in hematological malignancies.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4815038 [Available on 2016-08-16]
PMID: 26884599  [PubMed - in process]


41. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 9. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7276. [Epub ahead of print]

Inverse agonist of estrogen-related receptor a suppresses the growth of triple
negative breast cancer cells through ROS generation and interaction with multiple
cell signaling pathways.

Wu YM(1), Chen ZJ(2), Jiang GM(3), Zhang KS(4), Qiao-Liu(1), Liang SW(1), Zhou
Y(1), Huang HB(2), Du J(1), Wang HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial and Biochemical Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China. (2)Department of
Pharmacy, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology 
in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou
510060, China. (3)Hunan Cancer Hospital and The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of
Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha 410013, China.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou 510120, China.

There is an urgent clinical need for targeted therapy approaches for
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients. Increasing evidences suggested
that the expression of estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERRa) was correlate with 
unfavorable clinical outcomes of breast cancer patients. We here show that
inhibition of ERRa by its inverse agonist XCT-790 can suppress the proliferation,
decrease G2/M phases, and induce mitochondrial-related apoptosis of TNBC cells.
XCT-790 elevates the proteins related to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress such
as ATF4/6, XBT-1 and CHOP. It also increases the expression of growth inhibition 
related proteins such as p53 and p21. Further, XCT-790 can increase the
generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in TNBC cells mainly through
inhibition of SOD1/2. While ROS scavenger NAC abolishes XCT-790 induced ER-stress
and growth arrest. XCT-790 treatment can rapidly activate the signal molecules
including ERK1/2, p38-MAPK, JNK, Akt, p65, and I<U+03BA>Ba, while NAC attenuates effects
of XCT-790 induced phosphorylation of ERK1/2, p38-MAPK and Akt. Further, the
inhibitors of ERK1/2, JNK, Akt, and NF-<U+03BA>B attenuate XCT-790 induced ROS
generation. These data suggest that AKT/ROS and ERK/ROS positive feedback loops, 
NF-<U+03BA>B/ROS, and ROS/p38-MAPK, are activated in XCT-790 treated TNBC cells. In vivo
experiments show that XCT-790 significantly suppresses the growth of MDA-MB-231
xenograft tumors, which is associated with up regulation of p53, p21, ER-stress
related proteins while down regulation of bcl-2. The present discovery makes
XCT-790 a promising candidate drug and lays the foundation for future development
of ERRa-based therapies for TNBC patients.

PMID: 26871469  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


42. J Gen Virol. 2016 Feb 11. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.000426. [Epub ahead of print]

Regulation of de novo Translation of Host Cells by Manipulation of PERK/PKR and
GADD34-PP1 Activity during Newcastle Disease Virus Infection.

Liao Y(1), Gu F(2), Mao X(3), Niu Q(4), Wang H(5), Sun Y(6), Song C(7), Qiu X(8),
Tan L(9), Ding C(10).

Author information: 
(1)1Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute. (2)2Shanghai Veterinary Research
Institute. (3)3Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute. (4)4Shanghai Veterinary
Research Institute. (5)5Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute. (6)6Shanghai
Veterinary Research Institute. (7)7Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute.
(8)8Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute. (9)9Shanghai Veterinary Research
Institute. (10)10Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute.

Viral infections result in cellular stress responses, which can trigger protein
translation shutoff via phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha
(eIF2a). Newcastle disease virus (NDV) causes severe disease in poultry and
selectively kills human tumor cells. In this report, we determined that infection
of HeLa human cervical cancer cells and DF-1 chicken fibroblast cells with NDV
maintained protein at early infection time 0-12 h.p.i. (hour post infection) and 
gradually inhibited global protein translation at late infection time 12-24
h.p.i.. Mechanistic studies showed that translation inhibition at late infection 
time was accompanied by phosphorylation of eIF2a, a checkpoint of translation
initiation. Meanwhile, eIF2a kinase PKR was upregulated and activated by
phosphorylation, another eIF2a kinase PERK was phosphorylated and cleaved into
two fragments. Pharmacological inhibition experiment revealed that only PKR
activity was required for eIF2a phosphorylation, suggesting that recognition of
viral dsRNA by PKR were responsible for translation shutoff. High level of
phospho-eIF2a led to preferential translation of transcription factor ATF4 and an
increase in GADD34 expression. Functionally, GADD34, in conjunction with PP1,
dephosphorylates eIF2 and restore protein translation, benefiting virus protein
synthesis. However, PP1 was degraded at late infection time, functionally
counteracting the up-regulation of GADD34. Taken together, our data supported
that NDV-induced translation shutoff at late infection time was attributed to
sustaining phosphorylation of eIF2a, which is mediated by continual activation of
PKR and degradation of PP1.

PMID: 26869028  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


43. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2016 Feb 10:ajpcell.00226.2015. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00226.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Down-regulation of miR-384-5p Attenuates Rotenone-induced Neurotoxicity in
Dopaminergic SH-SY5Y Cells Through Inhibiting Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress.

Jiang M(1), Yun Q(2), Shi F(3), Niu G(4), Gao Y(4), Xie S(4), Yu S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Chinese PLA General Hospital. (2)Inner Mongolia People's Hospital. (3)Inner
Mongolia Chinese Medicine Hospital. (4)Affiliated Hospital of Inner Mongolia
Medical University. (5)Chinese PLA General Hospital shengyuanyubj@sina.com.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been linked to the pathogenesis of
Parkinson's disease (PD). However, the role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in this process
involved in PD remains poorly understood. In this study, we investigated the role
of miR-384-5p in an in vitro model of PD using dopaminergic SH-SY5Y cells treated
with rotenone. We found that miR-384-5p was persistently induced by rotenone in
neurons. Also, the inhibition of miR-384-5p significantly suppressed
rotenone-induced neurotoxicity, while overexpression of miR-384-5p aggravated
rotenone-induced neurotoxicity. Through bioinformatics and the dual-luciferase
reporter assay, miR-384-5p was found to directly target the 3'-UTR of glucose
regulated protein 78 (GRP78), the master regulator of ER stress sensors.
Quantitative polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting analysis showed that 
miR-384-5p negatively regulated the expression of GRP78. Inhibition of miR-384-5p
remarkably suppressed rotenone-evoked ER stress which was evident by a reduction 
in the phosphorylation of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and
inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1a). The downstream target genes of ER stress
including CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein (CHOP) and X
box-binding protein-1 (XBP-1) were also decreased by the miR-384-5p inhibitor. In
contrast, overexpression of miR-384-5p enhanced ER stress signaling. In addition,
knockdown of GRP78 significantly abrogated the inhibitory effect of miR-384-5p
inhibitors on cell apoptosis and ER stress signaling. Moreover, we observed a
significant increase of miR-384-5p expression in primary neurons induced by
rotenone. Taken together, our results suggested that miR-384-5p mediated ER
stress by negatively regulating GRP78 and that miR-384-5p inhibition might be a
novel and promising approach for the treatment of PD.

Copyright © 2016, American Journal of Physiology - Cell Physiology.

PMID: 26864693  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


44. J Neuroinflammation. 2016 Feb 9;13(1):33. doi: 10.1186/s12974-016-0501-2.

Cocaine-mediated induction of microglial activation involves the ER stress-TLR2
axis.

Liao K(1), Guo M(2), Niu F(3), Yang L(4), Callen SE(5), Buch S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, 985880 Nebraska
Medical Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 68198, USA.
ke.liao@unmc.edu. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience,
985880 Nebraska Medical Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE,
68198, USA. minglei.guo@unmc.edu. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental 
Neuroscience, 985880 Nebraska Medical Center, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE, 68198, USA. fang.niu@unmc.edu. (4)Department of Pharmacology
and Experimental Neuroscience, 985880 Nebraska Medical Center, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 68198, USA. lu.yang@unmc.edu. (5)Department
of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, 985880 Nebraska Medical Center,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 68198, USA. scallen@unmc.edu.
(6)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, 985880 Nebraska
Medical Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 68198, USA.
sbuch@unmc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Neuroinflammation associated with advanced human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV)-1 infection is often exacerbated by chronic cocaine abuse. Cocaine
exposure has been demonstrated to mediate up-regulation of inflammatory mediators
in in vitro cultures of microglia. The molecular mechanisms involved in this
process, however, remain poorly understood. In this study, we sought to explore
the underlying signaling pathways involved in cocaine-mediated activation of
microglial cells.
METHODS: BV2 microglial cells were exposed to cocaine and assessed for toll-like 
receptor (TLR2) expression by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR),
western blot, flow cytometry, and immunofluorescence staining. The mRNA and
protein levels of cytokines (TNFa, IL-6, MCP-1) were detected by qPCR and ELISA, 
respectively; level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production was examined by
the Image-iT LIVE Green ROS detection kit; activation of endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-stress pathways were detected by western blot. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay was employed to discern the binding of activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4) with the TLR2 promoter. Immunoprecipitation followed by western
blotting with tyrosine antibody was used to determine phosphorylation of TLR2.
Cocaine-mediated up-regulation of TLR2 expression and microglial activation was
validated in cocaine-injected mice.
RESULTS: Exposure of microglial cells to cocaine resulted in increased expression
of TLR2 with a concomitant induction of microglial activation. Furthermore, this 
effect was mediated by NADPH oxidase-mediated rapid accumulation of ROS with
downstream activation of the ER-stress pathways as evidenced by the fact that
cocaine exposure led to up-regulation of pPERK/peIF2a/ATF4 and TLR2. The novel
role of ATF4 in the regulation of TLR2 expression was confirmed using genetic and
pharmacological approaches.
CONCLUSIONS: xThe current study demonstrates that cocaine-mediated activation of 
microglia involves up-regulation of TLR2 through the ROS-ER stress-ATF4-TLR2
axis. Understanding the mechanism(s) involved in cocaine-mediated up-regulation
of ROS-ER stress/TLR2 expression and microglial activation could have
implications for the development of potential therapeutic targets aimed at
resolving neuroinflammation in cocaine abusers.

PMCID: PMC4748483
PMID: 26860188  [PubMed - in process]


45. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 9;6:20036. doi: 10.1038/srep20036.

Dietary soy and meat proteins induce distinct physiological and gene expression
changes in rats.

Song S(1), Hooiveld GJ(2), Li M(1), Zhao F(1), Zhang W(3), Xu X(1), Muller M(4), 
Li C(1), Zhou G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Meat Processing and Quality Control, MOE; Key Laboratory of 
Animal Products Processing, MOA; Jiang Synergetic Innovation Center of Meat
Processing and Quality Control; Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, 
P.R. China. (2)Nutrition, Metabolism and Genomics Group, Division of Human
Nutrition, Wageningen University, Wageningen, the Netherlands. (3)Key Laboratory 
of Human Function Genomics Jiangsu Province, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
210029, P.R. China. (4)Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia Norwich,
Norwich, UK.

This study reports on a comprehensive comparison of the effects of soy and meat
proteins given at the recommended level on physiological markers of metabolic
syndrome and the hepatic transcriptome. Male rats were fed semi-synthetic diets
for 1 wk that differed only regarding protein source, with casein serving as
reference. Body weight gain and adipose tissue mass were significantly reduced by
soy but not meat proteins. The insulin resistance index was improved by soy, and 
to a lesser extent by meat proteins. Liver triacylglycerol contents were reduced 
by both protein sources, which coincided with increased plasma triacylglycerol
concentrations. Both soy and meat proteins changed plasma amino acid patterns.
The expression of 1571 and 1369 genes were altered by soy and meat proteins
respectively. Functional classification revealed that lipid, energy and amino
acid metabolic pathways, as well as insulin signaling pathways were regulated
differently by soy and meat proteins. Several transcriptional regulators,
including NFE2L2, ATF4, Srebf1 and Rictor were identified as potential key
upstream regulators. These results suggest that soy and meat proteins induce
distinct physiological and gene expression responses in rats and provide novel
evidence and suggestions for the health effects of different protein sources in
human diets.

PMCID: PMC4746574
PMID: 26857845  [PubMed - in process]


46. J Neurotrauma. 2016 Feb 4. [Epub ahead of print]

ATF6a deletion modulates the ER stress response after spinal cord injury but does
not affect locomotor recovery.

Saraswat Ohri S(1,)(2), Hetman M(3,)(4,)(5), Whittemore SR(6,)(1,)(3,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)University of Louisville, Kentucky Spinal Cord Injury Research Center,
Louisville, Kentucky, United States. (2)University of Louisville, Neurological
Surgery, Louisville, Kentucky, United States ; s0sara03@exchange.louisville.edu. 
(3)University of Louisville, Neurological Surgery, Louisville, Kentucky, United
States. (4)University of Louisville, Pharmacology & Toxicology, Louisville,
Kentucky, United States. (5)University of Louisville, Anatomical Sciences &
Neurobiology, Louisville, Kentucky, United States ; m0hetm01@louisville.edu.
(6)Louisville, Kentucky, United States. (7)University of Louisville, Anatomical
Sciences & Neurobiology, Louisville, Kentucky, United States ;
swhittemore@louisville.edu.

The endoplasmic reticulum stress response (ERSR) is activated in a variety of
neurodegenerative diseases and/or traumatic injuries. Subsequent restoration of
ER homeostasis may contribute to improvement in the functional outcome of these
diseases. We recently demonstrated improvements in hindlimb locomotion after
spinal cord injury (SCI) and implicated oligodendrocyte survival as a potential
mechanism using genetic and pharmacological inhibition of the PERK-CHOP arm of
the ERSR. Here, we investigated the contribution of activating transcription
factor-6 (ATF6), an ERSR signaling effector comprising the second arm of ERSR, in
the pathogenesis of SCI. In contrast to what was seen after attenuation of
PERK-CHOP signaling, genetic ablation of ATF6 results in modulation of ERSR and
decreased survival in oligodendrocyte precursor cells against ER stress.
Furthermore, ATF6 loss delays the ERSR after SCI, potentiates PERK-ATF4-CHOP
signaling and fails to improve locomotor deficits. These data suggest that
deleting ATF6 levels is unlikely to be a viable therapeutic target to improve
functional recovery after SCI.

PMID: 26842780  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


47. J Agric Food Chem. 2016 Feb 24;64(7):1528-39. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.5b05864. Epub
2016 Feb 11.

Crude Saponins of Panax notoginseng Have Neuroprotective Effects To Inhibit
Palmitate-Triggered Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress-Associated Apoptosis and Loss of
Postsynaptic Proteins in Staurosporine Differentiated RGC-5 Retinal Ganglion
Cells.

Wang DD, Zhu HZ, Li SW, Yang JM, Xiao Y, Kang QR, Li CY, Zhao YS, Zeng Y(1), Li
Y(1), Zhang J, He ZD, Ying Y.

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University , Kunming 650000, 
China.

Increased apoptosis of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) contributes to the gradual
loss of retinal neurons at the early phase of diabetic retinopathy (DR). There is
an urgent need to search for drugs with neuroprotective effects against apoptosis
of RGCs for the early treatment of DR. This study aimed to investigate the
neuroprotective effects of saponins extracted from Panax notoginseng, a
traditional Chinese medicine, on apoptosis of RGCs stimulated by palmitate, a
metabolic factor for the development of diabetes and its complications, and to
explore the potential molecular mechanism. We showed that crude saponins of P.
notoginseng (CSPN) inhibited the increased apoptosis and loss of postsynaptic
protein PSD-95 by palmitate in staurosporine-differentiated RGC-5 cells.
Moreover, CSPN suppressed palmitate-induced reactive oxygen species generation
and endoplasmic reticulum stress-associated eIF2a/ATF4/CHOP and caspase 12
pathways. Thus, our findings address the potential therapeutic significance of
CSPN for the early stage of DR.

PMID: 26832452  [PubMed - in process]


48. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2016 Apr;36(4):655-62. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.115.307087. Epub 2016 Jan 28.

Aminoacyl-Transfer RNA Synthetase Deficiency Promotes Angiogenesis via the
Unfolded Protein Response Pathway.

Castranova D(1), Davis AE(1), Lo BD(1), Miller MF(1), Paukstelis PJ(1), Swift
MR(1), Pham VN(1), Torres-Vázquez J(1), Bell K(1), Shaw KM(1), Kamei M(1),
Weinstein BM(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Program in Genomics of Differentiation, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD (D.C., 
A.E.D., B.D.L., M.F.M., M.R.S., V.N.P., J.T.-V., K.B., K.M.S., M.K., B.M.W.); and
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, College of Computer, Mathematical, and 
Natural Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park (P.J.P.). (2)From the
Program in Genomics of Differentiation, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD (D.C., A.E.D.,
B.D.L., M.F.M., M.R.S., V.N.P., J.T.-V., K.B., K.M.S., M.K., B.M.W.); and
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, College of Computer, Mathematical, and 
Natural Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park (P.J.P.). bw96w@nih.gov.

OBJECTIVE: Understanding the mechanisms regulating normal and pathological
angiogenesis is of great scientific and clinical interest. In this report, we
show that mutations in 2 different aminoacyl-transfer RNA synthetases, threonyl
tRNA synthetase (tars(y58)) or isoleucyl tRNA synthetase (iars(y68)), lead to
similar increased branching angiogenesis in developing zebrafish.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: The unfolded protein response pathway is activated by
aminoacyl-transfer RNA synthetase deficiencies, and we show that unfolded protein
response genes atf4, atf6, and xbp1, as well as the key proangiogenic ligand
vascular endothelial growth factor (vegfaa), are all upregulated in tars(y58) and
iars(y68) mutants. Finally, we show that the protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic 
reticulum kinase-activating transcription factor 4 arm of the unfolded protein
response pathway is necessary for both the elevated vegfaa levels and increased
angiogenesis observed in tars(y58) mutants.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that endoplasmic reticulum stress acts as a
proangiogenic signal via unfolded protein response pathway-dependent upregulation
of vegfaa.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4808418 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26821951  [PubMed - in process]


49. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 26. pii: jbc.M115.707174. [Epub ahead of print]

Megakaryocytic Maturation in Response to Shear Flow is Mediated by the Activator 
Protein 1 (AP-1) Transcription Factor via Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK)
Mechanotransduction.

Luff SA(1), Papoutsakis ET(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Delaware, United States. (2)University of Delaware, United
States papoutsakis@dbi.udel.edu.

Megakaryocytes (Mks) are exposed to shear flow as they migrate from the bone
marrow hematopoietic compartment into circulation to release pro/preplatelets
into circulating blood. Shear forces promote DNA synthesis, polyploidization, and
maturation in Mks, and platelet biogenesis. To investigate mechanisms underlying 
these Mk responses to shear, we carried out transcriptional analysis on immature 
and mature stem cell-derived Mks exposed to physiological shear. In immature (d9)
Mks, shear exposure upregulated genes related to growth and Mk maturation, while 
in mature (d12) Mks, it upregulated genes involved in apoptosis and intracellular
transport. Following shear-flow exposure, six AP-1 transcripts (ATF4, JUNB, JUN, 
FOSB, FOS, and JUND) were upregulated at d9 and two AP-1 proteins (JunD and
c-Fos) were upregulated both at d9 and d12. We show that Mitogen-Activated
Protein Kinase (MAPK) signaling is linked to both the shear-stress response and
Activator Protein 1 (AP-1) upregulation. c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)
phosphorylation increased significantly following shear stimulation, while JNK
inhibition reduced shear-induced JunD expression. Although p38 phosphorylation
did not increase following shear flow, its inhibition reduced shear-induced JunD 
and c-Fos expression. JNK inhibition reduced fibrinogen binding of d9 and d12
platelet-like particles (PLPs) and P-selectin expression at d12 PLPs, while p38
inhibition reduced fibrinogen binding of d12 PLPs. AP-1 expression correlated
with increased Mk DNA synthesis and polyploidization, which might explain the
observed impact of shear on Mks. To sum, we show that Mk exposure to shear forces
results in JNK activation, AP-1 upregulation, and downstream transcriptional
changes that promote maturation of immature Mks and platelet biogenesis in mature
Mks.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26814129  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


50. EMBO J. 2016 Mar 1;35(5):479-95. doi: 10.15252/embj.201593428. Epub 2016 Jan 25.

TFEB and TFE3 are novel components of the integrated stress response.

Martina JA(1), Diab HI(1), Brady OA(1), Puertollano R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Physiology Center, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Cell Biology and Physiology 
Center, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA puertolr@mail.nih.gov.

To reestablish homeostasis and mitigate stress, cells must activate a series of
adaptive intracellular signaling pathways. The participation of the transcription
factors TFEB and TFE3 in cellular adaptation to starvation is well established.
Here, we show that TFEB and TFE3 also play an important role in the cellular
response to ER stress. Treatment with ER stressors causes translocation of TFEB
and TFE3 to the nucleus in a process that is dependent on PERK and calcineurin
but not on mTORC1. Activated TFEB and TFE3 enhance cellular response to stress by
inducing direct transcriptional upregulation of ATF4 and other UPR genes. Under
conditions of prolonged ER stress, TFEB and TFE3 contribute to cell death, thus
revealing an unexpected role for these proteins in controlling cell fate. This
work evidences a broader role of TFEB and TFE3 in the cellular response to stress
than previously anticipated and reveals an integrated cooperation between
different cellular stress pathways.

Published 2016. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMCID: PMC4772850 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26813791  [PubMed - in process]


51. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2016 Mar;37(3):354-67. doi: 10.1038/aps.2015.136. Epub 2016
Jan 25.

Berberine protects rat heart from ischemia/reperfusion injury via activating
JAK2/STAT3 signaling and attenuating endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Zhao GL(1), Yu LM(2), Gao WL(1), Duan WX(2), Jiang B(1), Liu XD(1), Zhang B(1),
Liu ZH(2), Zhai ME(2), Jin ZX(2), Yu SQ(2), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, General Hospital, Ningxia Medical
University, Yinchuan 750004, China. (2)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery,
Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, China.

AIM: Berberine (BBR), an isoquinoline-derived alkaloid isolated from Rhizoma
coptidis, exerts cardioprotective effects. Because endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress plays a pivotal role in myocardial ischemia/reperfusion (MI/R)-induced
apoptosis, it was interesting to examine whether the protective effects of BBR
resulted from modulating ER stress levels during MI/R injury, and to define the
signaling mechanisms in this process.
METHODS: Male rats were treated with BBR (200 mg·kg(-1)·d(-1), ig) for 2 weeks,
and then subjected to MI/R surgery. Cardiac dimensions and function were assessed
using echocardiography. Myocardial infarct size and apoptosis was examined. Total
serum LDH levels and CK activities, superoxide production, MDA levels and the
antioxidant SOD activities in heart tissue were determined. An in vitro study was
performed on cultured rat embryonic myocardium-derived cells H9C2 exposed to
simulated ischemia/reperfusion (SIR). The expression of apoptotic, ER
stress-related and signaling proteins were assessed using Western blot analyses.
RESULTS: Pretreatment with BBR significantly reduced MI/R-induced myocardial
infarct size, improved cardiac function, and suppressed myocardial apoptosis and 
oxidative damage. Furthermore, pretreatment with BBR suppressed MI/R-induced ER
stress, evidenced by down-regulating the phosphorylation levels of myocardial
PERK and eIF2a and the expression of ATF4 and CHOP in heart tissues. Pretreatment
with BBR also activated the JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway in heart tissues, and
co-treatment with AG490, a specific JAK2/STAT3 inhibitor, blocked not only the
protective effects of BBR, but also the inhibition of BBR on MI/R-induced ER
stress. In H9C2 cells, treatment with BBR (50 µmol/L) markedly reduced
SIR-induced cell apoptosis, oxidative stress and ER stress, which were abolished 
by transfection with JAK2 siRNA.
CONCLUSION: BBR ameliorates MI/R injury in rats by activating the AK2/STAT3
signaling pathway and attenuating ER stress-induced apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC4775848
PMID: 26806299  [PubMed - in process]


52. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 9;7(6):7329-42. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6940.

Crosstalk between ATF4 and MTA1/HDAC1 promotes osteosarcoma progression.

Zeng H(1), Zhang JM(1), Du Y(1,)(2), Wang J(1), Ren Y(1), Li M(1), Li H(1), Cai
Z(1), Chu Q(3), Yang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.R. China. (2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
The Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016,
P.R. China. (3)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital of Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.R. China.

The stress response gene activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is involved in 
metastatic behavior and cellular protection. Here we show that ATF4 is
upregulated in osteosarcoma (OS) cell lines and patient clinical samples as
compared to matched non-tumor tissue. Overexpression of ATF4 in OS cells promoted
cell proliferation, migration and lung metastasis. Furthermore, the expression of
ATF4 was markedly reduced in metastasis associated protein (MTA1) or histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) knockdown OS cells, but MTA1 overexpression increased the
stability and activity of ATF4 protein via ATF4 deacetylation by HDAC1. ATF4 in
turn enhanced the expression of MTA1 and HDAC1 at the transcription level,
suggesting a positive feedback loop between ATF4 and MTA1/HDAC1. Clinically, the 
level of ATF4 was positively correlated with that of MTA1 in OS. Mice injected
with ATF4-overexpressing cells exhibited a higher rate of tumor growth, and the
average weight of these tumors was ~90% greater than the controls. Taken
together, these data establish a direct correlation between ATF4-induced OS
progression and MTA1/HDAC1-associated metastasis, and support the potential
therapeutic value of targeting ATF4 in the treatment of OS.

PMID: 26797758  [PubMed - in process]


53. Front Pharmacol. 2016 Jan 12;6:319. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00319. eCollection
2015.

Altered Expression of Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Associated Genes in
Hippocampus of Learned Helpless Rats: Relevance to Depression Pathophysiology.

Timberlake MA 2nd(1), Dwivedi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurobiology, The University of
Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham AL, USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is an evolutionarily conserved defensive
mechanism that is used by cells to correct misfolded proteins that accumulate in 
the endoplasmic reticulum. These proteins are misfolded as a result of physical
stress on a cell and initiate a host of downstream effects that govern processes 
ranging from inflammation to apoptosis. To examine whether UPR system plays a
role in depression, we examined the expression of genes that are part of the
three different pathways for UPR activation, namely GRP78, GRP94, ATF6, XBP-1,
ATF4, and CHOP using an animal model system that distinguishes vulnerability
(learned helpless, LH) from resistance (non-learned helpless, NLH) to develop
depression. Rats were exposed to inescapable shock on days 1 and 7 and were
tested for escape latency on day 14. Rats not given shock but tested for escape
latency were used as tested control (TC). Plasma corticosterone (CORT) levels
were measured. Expression levels of various UPR associated genes were determined 
in hippocampus using qPCR. We found that the CORT level was higher in LH rats
compared with TC and NLH rats. Expression of GRP78, GRP94, ATF6, and XBP-1 were
significantly upregulated in LH rats compared with TC or NLH rats, whereas NLH
rats did not show such changes. Expression levels of ATF4 and CHOP showed trends 
toward upregulation but were not significantly altered in LH or NLH group. Our
data show strong evidence of altered UPR system in depressed rats, which could be
associated with development of depressive behavior.

PMCID: PMC4709448
PMID: 26793110  [PubMed]


54. J Virol. 2016 Jan 20;90(7):3558-72. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02827-15.

Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis Virus Induces Apoptosis through the Unfolded
Protein Response Activation of EGR1.

Baer A(1), Lundberg L(1), Swales D(2), Waybright N(2), Pinkham C(1), Dinman
JD(3), Jacobs JL(4), Kehn-Hall K(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biodefense and Infectious Diseases, School of Systems
Biology, George Mason University, Manassas, Virginia, USA. (2)MRIGlobal, Global
Health Security, Rockville, Maryland, USA. (3)University of Maryland, Department 
of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, College Park, Maryland, USA.
(4)MRIGlobal, Global Health Security, Rockville, Maryland, USA
jjacobs@mriglobal.org kkehnhal@gmu.edu. (5)National Center for Biodefense and
Infectious Diseases, School of Systems Biology, George Mason University,
Manassas, Virginia, USA jjacobs@mriglobal.org kkehnhal@gmu.edu.

Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV) is a previously weaponized
arthropod-borne virus responsible for causing acute and fatal encephalitis in
animal and human hosts. The increased circulation and spread in the Americas of
VEEV and other encephalitic arboviruses, such as eastern equine encephalitis
virus and West Nile virus, underscore the need for research aimed at
characterizing the pathogenesis of viral encephalomyelitis for the development of
novel medical countermeasures. The host-pathogen dynamics of VEEV Trinidad
donkey-infected human astrocytoma U87MG cells were determined by carrying out RNA
sequencing (RNA-Seq) of poly(A) and mRNAs. To identify the critical alterations
that take place in the host transcriptome following VEEV infection, samples were 
collected at 4, 8, and 16 h postinfection and RNA-Seq data were acquired using an
Ion Torrent PGM platform. Differential expression of interferon response, stress 
response factors, and components of the unfolded protein response (UPR) was
observed. The protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK) arm of 
the UPR was activated, as the expression of both activating transcription factor 
4 (ATF4) and CHOP (DDIT3), critical regulators of the pathway, was altered after 
infection. Expression of the transcription factor early growth response 1 (EGR1) 
was induced in a PERK-dependent manner. EGR1(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs) demonstrated lower susceptibility to VEEV-induced cell death than isogenic
wild-type MEFs, indicating that EGR1 modulates proapoptotic pathways following
VEEV infection. The influence of EGR1 is of great importance, as neuronal damage 
can lead to long-term sequelae in individuals who have survived VEEV
infection.IMPORTANCE: Alphaviruses represent a group of clinically relevant
viruses transmitted by mosquitoes to humans. In severe cases, viral spread
targets neuronal tissue, resulting in significant and life-threatening
inflammation dependent on a combination of virus-host interactions. Currently
there are no therapeutics for infections cause by encephalitic alphaviruses due
to an incomplete understanding of their molecular pathogenesis. Venezuelan equine
encephalitis virus (VEEV) is an alphavirus that is prevalent in the Americas and 
that is capable of infecting horses and humans. Here we utilized next-generation 
RNA sequencing to identify differential alterations in VEEV-infected astrocytes. 
Our results indicated that the abundance of transcripts associated with the
interferon and the unfolded protein response pathways was altered following
infection and demonstrated that early growth response 1 (EGR1) contributed to
VEEV-induced cell death.

Copyright © 2016 Baer et al.

PMID: 26792742  [PubMed - in process]


55. Free Radic Biol Med. 2016 Mar;92:39-49. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.01.005.
Epub 2016 Jan 12.

miR-214 protects erythroid cells against oxidative stress by targeting ATF4 and
EZH2.

Gao M(1), Liu Y(2), Chen Y(3), Yin C(1), Chen JJ(4), Liu S(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research
Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100085, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and
Ecotoxicology, Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100085, China; Key Laboratory of Ion Beam Bioengineering, Hefei
Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Anhui Province,
Hefei, Anhui 230031, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry
and Ecotoxicology, Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China; Department of Urology, The Second
Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin Institute of Urology, Tianjin
300211, China. (4)Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (5)State Key Laboratory
of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research Center for
Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China.
Electronic address: sjliu@rcees.ac.cn.

Nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2) like 2 (Nrf2) is a key regulator in
protecting cells against stress by targeting many anti-stress response genes.
Recent evidence also reveals that Nrf2 functions partially by targeting
mircroRNAs (miRNAs). However, the understanding of Nrf2-mediated cytoprotection
through miRNA-dependent mechanisms is largely unknown. In the current study, we
identified a direct Nrf2 targeting miRNA, miR-214, and demonstrated a protective 
role of miR-214 in erythroid cells against oxidative stresses generated by
radiation, excess iron and arsenic (As) exposure. miR-214 expression was
transcriptionally repressed by Nrf2 through a canonical antioxidant response
element (ARE) within its promoter region, and this repression is ROS-dependence. 
The suppression of miR-214 by Nrf2 could antagonize oxidative stress-induced cell
death in erythroid cells by two ways. First, miR-214 directly targeted ATF4, a
crucial transcriptional factor involved in anti-stress responses, down regulation
of miR-214 releases the repression of ATF4 translation and leads to increased
ATF4 protein content. Second, miR-214 was able to prevent cell death by targeting
EZH2, the catalytic core component of PRC2 complex that is responsible for
tri-methylation reaction at lysine 27 (K27) of histone 3 (H3) (H3K27me3), by
which As-induced miR-214 reduction resulted in an increased global H3K27me3 level
and a compromised overexpression of a pro-apoptotic gene Bim. These two pathways 
downstream of miR-214 synergistically cooperated to antagonize erythroid cell
death upon oxidative stress. Our combined data revealed a protective role of
miR-214 signaling in erythroid cells against oxidative stress, and also shed new 
light on Nrf2-mediated cytoprotective machinery.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26791102  [PubMed - in process]


56. Phytother Res. 2016 Jan 20. doi: 10.1002/ptr.5563. [Epub ahead of print]

c-Jun N-terminal Kinase-Dependent Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Pathway is
Critically Involved in Arjunic Acid Induced Apoptosis in Non-Small Cell Lung
Cancer Cells.

Joo H(1), Lee HJ(2), Shin EA(2), Kim H(2), Seo KH(3), Baek NI(3), Kim B(2), Kim
SH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of East West Medical Science, Graduate School of East West Medical 
Science, Kyung Hee University, Suwon, South Korea. (2)College of Korean Medicine,
Kyung Hee University, Seoul, 130-701, South Korea. (3)Graduate School of
Biotechnology and Department of Oriental Medicine Biotechnology, Kyung Hee
University, Yongin, 446-701, South Korea.

Though arjunic acid, a triterpene isolated from Terminalia arjuna, was known to
have antioxidant, antiinflammatory, and cytotoxic effects, its underlying
antitumor mechanism still remains unclear so far. Thus, in the present study, the
molecular antitumor mechanism of arjunic acid was examined in A549 and H460
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. Arjunic acid exerted cytotoxicity by
3-[4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2, 5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay and
significantly increased sub-G1 population in A549 and H460 cells by cell cycle
analysis. Consistently, arjunic acid cleaved poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP),
activated Bax, and phosphorylation of c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK), and also
attenuated the expression of pro-caspase-3 and Bcl-2 in A549 and H460 cells.
Furthermore, arjunic acid upregulated the expression of endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress proteins such as IRE1 a, ATF4, p-eIF2a, and C/EBP homologous protein 
(CHOP) in A549 and H460 cells. Conversely, CHOP depletion attenuated the increase
of sub-G1 population by arjunic acid, and also JNK inhibitor SP600125 blocked the
cytotoxicity and upregulation of IRE1 a and CHOP induced by arjunic acid in A549 
and H460 cells. Overall, our findings suggest that arjunic acid induces apoptosis
in NSCLC cells via JNK mediated ER stress pathway as a potent chemotherapeutic
agent for NSCLC.

Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26787261  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


57. Nat Commun. 2016 Jan 20;7:10330. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10330.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress drives proteinuria-induced kidney lesions via
Lipocalin 2.

El Karoui K(1,)(2), Viau A(1), Dellis O(3), Bagattin A(4), Nguyen C(1), Baron
W(1), Burtin M(1), Broueilh M(1), Heidet L(5), Mollet G(5), Druilhe A(1),
Antignac C(5), Knebelmann B(1), Friedlander G(1,)(2), Bienaimé F(1,)(2),
Gallazzini M(1), Terzi F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mechanisms and Therapeutic Strategies of Chronic Kidney Disease, INSERM
U1151-CNRS UMR 8253, Université Paris Descartes, Institut Necker Enfants Malades,
Département « Croissance et Signalisation », Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, 149 
Rue de Sèvres, Paris 75015, France. (2)Service d'Explorations Fonctionnelles,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, 149 Rue de
Sèvres, Paris 75015, France. (3)UMR-S 757 INSERM, Université Paris Sud 11, Rue
des Adèles, Orsay 91405, France. (4)INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR 8104, Université Paris
Descartes, Institut Cochin, Paris, France. (5)INSERM U1163, Université Paris
Descartes, Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, 149 Rue de Sèvres,
Paris 75015, France.

In chronic kidney disease (CKD), proteinuria results in severe tubulointerstitial
lesions, which ultimately lead to end-stage renal disease. Here we identify
4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA), a chemical chaperone already used in humans, as a
novel therapeutic strategy capable to counteract the toxic effect of proteinuria.
Mechanistically, we show that albumin induces tubular unfolded protein response
via cytosolic calcium rise, which leads to tubular apoptosis by Lipocalin 2
(LCN2) modulation through ATF4. Consistent with the key role of LCN2 in CKD
progression, Lcn2 gene inactivation decreases ER stress-induced apoptosis,
tubulointerstitial lesions and mortality in proteinuric mice. More importantly,
the inhibition of this pathway by PBA protects kidneys from morphological and
functional degradation in proteinuric mice. These results are relevant to human
CKD, as LCN2 is increased in proteinuric patients. In conclusion, our study
identifies a therapeutic strategy susceptible to improve the benefit of RAS
inhibitors in proteinuria-induced CKD progression.

PMCID: PMC4735759
PMID: 26787103  [PubMed - in process]


58. Cell Rep. 2016 Jan 26;14(3):506-19. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.053. Epub 2016 
Jan 7.

KDM4C and ATF4 Cooperate in Transcriptional Control of Amino Acid Metabolism.

Zhao E(1), Ding J(2), Xia Y(3), Liu M(3), Ye B(2), Choi JH(4), Yan C(5), Dong
Z(6), Huang S(7), Zha Y(8), Yang L(9), Cui H(10), Ding HF(11).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Institute of Sericulture and 
System Biology, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China; Cancer Center,
Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.
(2)Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA. (3)Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia
Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA; Insititute of Translational
Neuroscience and Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Yichang, Three
Gorges University College of Medicine, Yichang 443000, China. (4)Cancer Center,
Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA;
Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia
Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA. (5)Cancer Center, Medical College of 
Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA. (6)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy,
Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.
(7)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida College of
Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA. (8)Insititute of Translational Neuroscience
and Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Yichang, Three Gorges
University College of Medicine, Yichang 443000, China. (9)State Key Laboratory of
Silkworm Genome Biology, Institute of Sericulture and System Biology, Southwest
University, Chongqing 400715, China. (10)State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome 
Biology, Institute of Sericulture and System Biology, Southwest University,
Chongqing 400715, China. Electronic address: hcui@swu.edu.cn. (11)Cancer Center, 
Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA;
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA; Department of Pathology,
Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.
Electronic address: hding@gru.edu.

The histone lysine demethylase KDM4C is often overexpressed in cancers primarily 
through gene amplification. The molecular mechanisms of KDM4C action in
tumorigenesis are not well defined. Here, we report that KDM4C transcriptionally 
activates amino acid biosynthesis and transport, leading to a significant
increase in intracellular amino acid levels. Examination of the serine-glycine
synthesis pathway reveals that KDM4C epigenetically activates the pathway genes
under steady-state and serine deprivation conditions by removing the repressive
histone modification H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) trimethylation. This action of KDM4C
requires ATF4, a transcriptional master regulator of amino acid metabolism and
stress responses. KDM4C activates ATF4 transcription and interacts with ATF4 to
target serine pathway genes for transcriptional activation. We further present
evidence for KDM4C in transcriptional coordination of amino acid metabolism and
cell proliferation. These findings suggest a molecular mechanism linking
KDM4C-mediated H3K9 demethylation and ATF4-mediated transactivation in
reprogramming amino acid metabolism for cancer cell proliferation.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4731315
PMID: 26774480  [PubMed - in process]


59. Biochem Pharmacol. 2016 Mar 15;104:8-18. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2016.01.002. Epub
2016 Jan 14.

Dehydroeffusol inhibits gastric cancer cell growth and tumorigenicity by
selectively inducing tumor-suppressive endoplasmic reticulum stress and a
moderate apoptosis.

Zhang B(1), Han H(2), Fu S(1), Yang P(1), Gu Z(1), Zhou Q(3), Cao Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, School of
Biology and Basic Medical Sciences, Suzhou Institute of Chinese Materia Medica,
2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology, University, Key Laboratory of
Thrombosis and Hemostasis, Ministry of Health, Soochow University, Suzhou,
Jiangsu 215123, PR China. (2)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Jiangsu Institute of
Hematology, School of Biology and Basic Medical Sciences, Suzhou Institute of
Chinese Materia Medica, 2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology,
University, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis, Ministry of Health,
Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, PR China. Electronic address:
hhy2469@126.com. (3)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Jiangsu Institute of
Hematology, School of Biology and Basic Medical Sciences, Suzhou Institute of
Chinese Materia Medica, 2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology,
University, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis, Ministry of Health,
Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, PR China. Electronic address:
zhouqs@suda.edu.cn. (4)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Jiangsu Institute of
Hematology, School of Biology and Basic Medical Sciences, Suzhou Institute of
Chinese Materia Medica, 2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology,
University, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis, Ministry of Health,
Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, PR China. Electronic address:
hunancao@163.com.

Gastric cancer is ranked as the third leading cause of cancer-related death in
the world. Although extensive efforts have been made in recent decades to treat
gastric cancer with various anticancer drugs, effective anti-gastric cancer
therapeutics to cure the disease are still lacking in the clinics. Therefore,
potent novel anti-gastric cancer drugs are greatly needed. In this study, we
explored a novel anti-gastric cancer agent from a medicinal herb named Juncus
effusus and found that the active component dehydroeffusol (DHE), a small
molecular phenanthrene, effectively inhibited gastric cancer cell proliferation
and tumorigenesis by inducing tumor suppressive endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
and by triggering moderate apoptosis. Mechanistic studies revealed that DHE
selectively activated the intracellular tumor suppressive stress response by
promoting the overexpression of the key ER stress marker DNA damage-inducible
transcript 3 (DDIT3), through upregulation of activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4). Concurrently, DHE suppressed the expression of the cell survival and ER
stress marker glucose regulated protein of molecular mass 78 (GRP78) via
downregulation of the transcription factor ATF6. In addition, DHE markedly
activated the stress response signaling pathway MEKK4-MKK3/6-p38-DDIT3, but
significantly inhibited ERK signaling. Our data suggest that DHE inhibits gastric
cancer cell growth and tumorigenicity through selectively inducing a robust tumor
suppressive ER stress response and a moderate apoptosis response. Therefore, DHE 
may provide a novel drug candidate for further development of potential
anti-gastric cancer therapeutics.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26774454  [PubMed - in process]


60. Cell Cycle. 2016 Jan 2;15(1):64-71. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1120929.

Mitochondrial dysfunction induces SESN2 gene expression through Activating
Transcription Factor 4.

Garaeva AA(1,)(2), Kovaleva IE(3), Chumakov PM(2), Evstafieva AG(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Bioengineering and Bioinformatics , Lomonosov Moscow State
University , Moscow , Russia. (2)b Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology,
Russian Academy of Sciences , Moscow , Russia. (3)c Belozersky Institute of
Physico-Chemical Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State University , Moscow , Russia.

We found that inhibitors of mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes III
(myxothiazol) and I (piericidin A) in some epithelial carcinoma cell lines induce
transcription of the p53-responsive SESN2 gene that plays an important role in
stress response and homeostatic regulation. However, the effect did not depend on
p53 because i) there was no induction of p53 after the treatment with piericidin 
A; ii) after the treatment with myxothiazol the peak of SESN2 gene upregulation
occurred as early as 5h, before the onset of p53 activation (13h); iii) a
supplementation with uridine that abolishes the p53 activation in response to
myxothiazol did not abrogate the induction of SESN2 transcripts; iv) in the p53
negative HCT116 p53 -/- cells SESN2 transcription could be also induced by
myxothiazol. In response to the respiratory chain inhibitors we observed an
induction of ATF4, the key transcription factor of the integrated stress response
(ISR). We found that the induction of SESN2 transcripts could be prevented by the
ISR inhibitory small molecule ISRIB. Also, by inhibiting or overexpressing ATF4
with specific shRNA or ATF4-expressing constructs, respectively, we have
confirmed the role of ATF4 in the SESN2 gene upregulation induced by
mitochondrial dysfunction. At a distance of 228 bp upstream from the SESN2
transcription start site we found a candidate sequence for the ATF4 binding site 
and confirmed its requirement for the induction of SESN2 in luciferase reporter
experiments. We suggest that the upregulation of SESN2 by mitochondrial
dysfunction provides a homeostatic feedback that attenuates biosynthetic
processes during temporal losses of energy supply from mitochondria thereby
assisting better adaptation and viability of cells in hostile environments.

PMID: 26771712  [PubMed - in process]


121. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 10;10(9):e0136340. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136340.
eCollection 2015.

A Novel Microtubule-Disrupting Agent Induces Endoplasmic Reticular
Stress-Mediated Cell Death in Human Hepatocellular Carcinoma Cells.

Ho CT(1), Chang YJ(2), Yang LX(3), Wei PL(2), Liu TZ(4), Liu JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan; School of Medical Laboratory Science and
Biotechnology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Translational
Research Laboratory, Cancer Center, Taipei Medical University and Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Surgery, Taipei Medical University and Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Radiobiology Laboratory, California Pacific Medical Center
Research Institute, San Francisco, CA, United States of America; St. Mary's
Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, United States of America. (4)Translational
Research Laboratory, Cancer Center, Taipei Medical University and Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Here, we present evidence of a novel microtubule-disrupting agent,
N-deacetyl-N-(chromone-2-carbonyl)-thiocolchicine (TCD), exhibiting potent
antitumor activity (with IC50 values in the nanomolar range) against
hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines. Cell cycle analysis revealed that TCD
induced G2/M cell-cycle arrest in a dose- and time-dependent manner in both
Hep-J5 and Mahlavu HCC cell lines. TCD also induced a decrease in mitochondrial
membrane potential (<U+0394><U+03A8>m) and caused DNA damage. Mechanistically, TCD activated
protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticular kinase and several transcription
factors, including activating transcription factor (ATF) 6, ATF4, ATF3, and the
CCAAT-enhancer binding protein homologous protein. These data clearly demonstrate
that the antitumor activity of TCD is mechanistically linked to its capacity to
trigger both intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic cell death via endoplasmic
reticular stress pathway. The potent antitumor activity of TCD was similarly
demonstrated in a hepatocellular carcinoma xenograft model, where 5 and 10 mg/kg 
doses of TCD significantly arrested Hep-J5 and Mahlavu tumor growth. Our finding 
suggests that TCD is a promising therapeutic agent against hepatocellular
carcinoma; further translational assessment of its clinical usage is warranted.

PMCID: PMC4565632
PMID: 26355599  [PubMed - in process]


122. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 9;10(9):e0137582. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137582.
eCollection 2015.

UPR Activation and the Down-Regulation of a-Crystallin in Human High
Myopia-Related Cataract Lens Epithelium.

Yang J(1), Zhou S(2), Gu J(1), Guo M(3), Xia H(4), Liu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology,
Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China; Department
of Ophthalmology, the First People's Hospital of Foshan, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, the Huichang County People's Hospital, Jiangxi,
China. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, Zhaoqing Gaoyao People's Hospital,
Guangdong, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the expression of aA- and aB-crystallin and the unfolded 
protein response in the lens epithelium of patients with high myopia-related
cataracts.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: The central portion of the human anterior lens capsule
together with the adhering epithelial cells, approximately 5 mm in diameter, were
harvested and processed within two hours after cataract surgery from high
myopia-related (spherical equivalent =-10.00 diopters) and age-related cataract
patients or from high myopia but non-cataractous patients (tissue were collected 
from ocular trauma patients with high myopia and lens trauma). Anterior lens
samples from fresh cadaver normal human eyes were used as normal control
(collected within 6 hours from death). Real-time PCR was performed to detect the 
mRNA levels of a-crystallins as well as unfolded protein response (UPR)-related
GRP78, spliced-XBP1, ATF4 and ATF6. Western blot analysis was used to determine
the protein level of a-crystallin, GRP78, p-IRE1a, p-eIF2a and ATF6.
RESULTS: In the lens epithelium of the high myopia-related cataract group and the
age related cataract group, the mRNA and soluble protein expression of aA- and
aB-crystallin were both decreased; additionally, the protein levels of ATF6,
p-eIF2a and p-IRE1a and the gene expression levels of spliced XBP1, GRP78, ATF6
and ATF4 were greatly increased relative to the normal control.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest the significant loss of soluble a-crystallin
and the activation of the UPR in the lens epithelium of patients with high
myopia-related cataract, which may be associated with the cataractogenesis of
high myopia-related cataract.

PMCID: PMC4564188
PMID: 26351848  [PubMed - in process]


123. J Biol Chem. 2015 Oct 16;290(42):25497-511. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.681445. Epub
2015 Sep 3.

Identification and Small Molecule Inhibition of an Activating Transcription
Factor 4 (ATF4)-dependent Pathway to Age-related Skeletal Muscle Weakness and
Atrophy.

Ebert SM(1), Dyle MC(2), Bullard SA(3), Dierdorff JM(3), Murry DJ(4), Fox DK(2), 
Bongers KS(2), Lira VA(5), Meyerholz DK(6), Talley JJ(7), Adams CM(8).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Internal Medicine, the Fraternal Order of Eagles
Diabetes Research Center, and the Iowa City Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Iowa
City, Iowa 52246, and Emmyon, Inc., Coralville, Iowa 52241. (2)From the
Departments of Internal Medicine, the Fraternal Order of Eagles Diabetes Research
Center, and the Iowa City Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Iowa City, Iowa 52246,
and Molecular Physiology and Biophysics. (3)From the Departments of Internal
Medicine, the Fraternal Order of Eagles Diabetes Research Center, and the Iowa
City Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Iowa City, Iowa 52246, and. (4)the College 
of Pharmacy, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242. (5)the Fraternal
Order of Eagles Diabetes Research Center, and Health and Human Physiology, and.
(6)Pathology. (7)Emmyon, Inc., Coralville, Iowa 52241. (8)From the Departments of
Internal Medicine, the Fraternal Order of Eagles Diabetes Research Center, and
the Iowa City Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Iowa City, Iowa 52246, and Emmyon,
Inc., Coralville, Iowa 52241 Molecular Physiology and Biophysics,
christopher-adams@uiowa.edu.

Aging reduces skeletal muscle mass and strength, but the underlying molecular
mechanisms remain elusive. Here, we used mouse models to investigate molecular
mechanisms of age-related skeletal muscle weakness and atrophy as well as new
potential interventions for these conditions. We identified two small molecules
that significantly reduce age-related deficits in skeletal muscle strength,
quality, and mass: ursolic acid (a pentacyclic triterpenoid found in apples) and 
tomatidine (a steroidal alkaloid derived from green tomatoes). Because small
molecule inhibitors can sometimes provide mechanistic insight into disease
processes, we used ursolic acid and tomatidine to investigate the pathogenesis of
age-related muscle weakness and atrophy. We found that ursolic acid and
tomatidine generate hundreds of small positive and negative changes in mRNA
levels in aged skeletal muscle, and the mRNA expression signatures of the two
compounds are remarkably similar. Interestingly, a subset of the mRNAs repressed 
by ursolic acid and tomatidine in aged muscle are positively regulated by
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). Based on this finding, we investigated 
ATF4 as a potential mediator of age-related muscle weakness and atrophy. We found
that a targeted reduction in skeletal muscle ATF4 expression reduces age-related 
deficits in skeletal muscle strength, quality, and mass, similar to ursolic acid 
and tomatidine. These results elucidate ATF4 as a critical mediator of
age-related muscle weakness and atrophy. In addition, these results identify
ursolic acid and tomatidine as potential agents and/or lead compounds for
reducing ATF4 activity, weakness, and atrophy in aged skeletal muscle.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4646196
PMID: 26338703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Vis. 2015 Aug 28;21:955-73. eCollection 2015.

Chromatin features, RNA polymerase II and the comparative expression of lens
genes encoding crystallins, transcription factors, and autophagy mediators.

Sun J(1), Rockowitz S(2), Chauss D(3), Wang P(4), Kantorow M(3), Zheng D(5),
Cvekl A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY. (2)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY. (3)Department of Biomedical Science, Florida Atlantic
University, Boca Raton, FL. (4)Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, NY. (5)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY.

PURPOSE: Gene expression correlates with local chromatin structure. Our studies
have mapped histone post-translational modifications, RNA polymerase II (pol II),
and transcription factor Pax6 in lens chromatin. These data represent the first
genome-wide insights into the relationship between lens chromatin structure and
lens transcriptomes and serve as an excellent source for additional data analysis
and refinement. The principal lens proteins, the crystallins, are encoded by
predominantly expressed mRNAs; however, the regulatory mechanisms underlying
their high expression in the lens remain poorly understood.
METHODS: The formaldehyde-assisted identification of regulatory regions
(FAIRE-Seq) was employed to analyze newborn lens chromatin. ChIP-seq and RNA-seq 
data published earlier (GSE66961) have been used to assist in FAIRE-seq data
interpretation. RNA transcriptomes from murine lens epithelium, lens fibers,
erythrocytes, forebrain, liver, neurons, and pancreas were compared to establish 
the gene expression levels of the most abundant mRNAs versus median gene
expression across other differentiated cells.
RESULTS: Normalized RNA expression data from multiple tissues show that
crystallins rank among the most highly expressed genes in mammalian cells. These 
findings correlate with the extremely high abundance of pol II all across the
crystallin loci, including crystallin genes clustered on chromosomes 1 and 5, as 
well as within regions of "open" chromatin, as identified by FAIRE-seq. The
expression levels of mRNAs encoding DNA-binding transcription factors (e.g.,
Foxe3, Hsf4, Maf, Pax6, Prox1, Sox1, and Tfap2a) revealed that their transcripts 
form "clusters" of abundant mRNAs in either lens fibers or lens epithelium. The
expression of three autophagy regulatory mRNAs, encoding Tfeb, FoxO1, and Hif1a, 
was found within a group of lens preferentially expressed transcription factors
compared to the E12.5 forebrain.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals novel features of lens chromatin, including the
remarkably high abundance of pol II at the crystallin loci that exhibit features 
of "open" chromatin. Hsf4 ranks among the most abundant fiber cell-preferred
DNA-binding transcription factors. Notable transcripts, including Atf4, Ctcf,
E2F4, Hey1, Hmgb1, Mycn, RXRß, Smad4, Sp1, and Taf1 (transcription factors) and
Ctsd, Gabarapl1, and Park7 (autophagy regulators) have been identified with high 
levels of expression in lens fibers, which suggests specific roles in lens fiber 
cell terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4551281
PMID: 26330747  [PubMed - in process]


125. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Nov;36(5):1311-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2331. Epub 2015 Sep 
1.

Duhuo Jisheng decoction inhibits endoplasmic reticulum stress in chondrocytes
induced by tunicamycin through the downregulation of miR-34a.

Liu F(1), Weng X(2), Lin P(2), Zheng C(1), Xu H(1), Liu X(1), Ye H(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Academy of Integrative Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian 350122, P.R. China. (2)College of Pharmacy, Fujian
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian 350122, P.R. China.

Our previous study showed that Duhuo Jisheng decoction (DHJSD) inhibited
chondrocyte apoptosis by the mitochondria-dependent signaling pathway.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is upstream of the mitochondria-dependent
signaling pathway and has been shown to promote chondrocyte apoptosis that occurs
in osteoarthritis (OA). The present study aimed to evaluate whether DHJSD
inhibits the chondrocyte apoptosis by regulating ER stress. DHJSD enhanced the
viability of tunicamycin (TM)-exposed chondrocytes, a model of ER stress-induced 
apoptosis, in a dose- and time-dependent manner, as shown by MTT assay. The
present results showed that DHJSD and sodium 4-phenylbutyrate (PBA), an ER stress
inhibitor, reduced TM-induced chondrocyte apoptosis by
4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole staining. To gain insight into the mechanisms of
DHJSD that are responsible for enhancing the viability and inhibiting TM-induced 
chondrocyte apoptosis, the associated mRNA expressions and protein levels were
detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western 
blot analysis, respectively. The results showed that the expression levels of
Xbp1, Xbp1s and Bcl-2 were increased, and the expression levels of Bip, Atf4,
Chop, Bax, caspase-9 and -3 were decreased in the TM-exposed chondrocytes treated
with DHJSD or PBA compared with that in the TM-exposed chondrocytes. To identify 
the possible mechanisms, the expression of miR-34a was examined by the TaqMan
microRNA assay, and was downregulated in the TM-exposed chondrocytes treated with
DHJSD or PBA compared with that in the TM-exposed chondrocytes. DHJSD inhibits ER
stress in chondrocytes induced by exposure to TM by downregulating miR-34a,
suggesting that DHJSD may be a potential therapeutic agent for OA.

PMID: 26329269  [PubMed - in process]


126. J Pineal Res. 2015 Oct;59(3):376-90. doi: 10.1111/jpi.12269. Epub 2015 Sep 11.

Reduced silent information regulator 1 signaling exacerbates myocardial
ischemia-reperfusion injury in type 2 diabetic rats and the protective effect of 
melatonin.

Yu L(1), Liang H(1), Dong X(1), Zhao G(2), Jin Z(1), Zhai M(1), Yang Y(3), Chen
W(1), Liu J(1), Yi W(1), Yang J(1), Yi D(1), Duan W(1), Yu S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an, China. (2)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery,
General Hospital, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, China. (3)Department of
Biomedical Engineering, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.

Diabetes mellitus (DM) increases myocardial oxidative stress and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. Melatonin confers cardioprotective effect by suppressing
oxidative damage. However, the effect and mechanism of melatonin on myocardial
ischemia-reperfusion (MI/R) injury in type 2 diabetic state are still unknown. In
this study, we developed high-fat diet-fed streptozotocin (HFD-STZ) rat, a
well-known type 2 diabetic model, to evaluate the effect of melatonin on MI/R
injury with a focus on silent information regulator 1 (SIRT1) signaling,
oxidative stress, and PERK/eIF2a/ATF4-mediated ER stress. HFD-STZ treated rats
were exposed to melatonin treatment in the presence or the absence of sirtinol (a
SIRT1 inhibitor) and subjected to MI/R surgery. Compared with nondiabetic
animals, type 2 diabetic rats exhibited significantly decreased myocardial SIRT1 
signaling, increased apoptosis, enhanced oxidative stress, and ER stress.
Additionally, further reduced SIRT1 signaling, aggravated oxidative damage, and
ER stress were found in diabetic animals subjected to MI/R surgery. Melatonin
markedly reduced MI/R injury by improving cardiac functional recovery and
decreasing myocardial apoptosis in type 2 diabetic animals. Melatonin treatment
up-regulated SIRT1 expression, reduced oxidative damage, and suppressed
PERK/eIF2a/ATF4 signaling. However, these effects were all attenuated by SIRT1
inhibition. Melatonin also protected high glucose/high fat cultured H9C2
cardiomyocytes against simulated ischemia-reperfusion injury-induced ER stress by
activating SIRT1 signaling while SIRT1 siRNA blunted this action. Taken together,
our study demonstrates that reduced cardiac SIRT1 signaling in type 2 diabetic
state aggravates MI/R injury. Melatonin ameliorates reperfusion-induced oxidative
stress and ER stress via activation of SIRT1 signaling, thus reducing MI/R damage
and improving cardiac function.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26327197  [PubMed - in process]


127. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Oct 2;465(4):851-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.08.099. Epub 2015 Aug 28.

Nedd4 family interacting protein 1 (Ndfip1) promotes death of pancreatic beta
cells.

Beck A(1), Shatz-Azoulay H(1), Vinik Y(1), Isaac R(1), Boura-Halfon S(1), Zick
Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel. (2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of
Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel. Electronic address: Yehiel.Zick@weizmann.ac.il.

High-throughput siRNA screening was employed to identify novel genes that
regulate cytokine-induced death of pancreatic ß-cells. One of the 'hits' was
Nedd4 family interacting protein 1 (Ndfip1), an adaptor and activator of
Nedd4-family ubiquitin ligases. Silencing of Ndfip1 inhibited cytokine-induced
apoptosis of mouse and human pancreatic islets and promoted glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion. These effects were associated with an increase in the cellular
content of JunB, a potent inhibitor of ER stress and apoptosis. Silencing of
Ndfip1 also increased the expression of ATF4, IRE-1a, and the spliced form of XBP
that govern the unfolded protein response (UPR) and relieve cytokine-induced ER
stress, while overexpression of Ndfip1 exerted opposite effects. These findings
implicate Ndfip1 in the degradation of JunB; inhibition of the UPR and insulin
secretion; and promotion of cytokine-induced death of pancreatic ß-cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26319551  [PubMed - in process]


128. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Nov;1852(11):2339-51. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.08.022. Epub 2015 Aug 28.

TRC8 downregulation contributes to the development of non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis by exacerbating hepatic endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Chang PC(1), Tsai HW(2), Chiang MT(3), Huang PL(4), Shyue SK(5), Chau LY(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic 
address: pochiao@ibms.sinica.edu.tw. (2)Department of Pathology, National
Cheng-Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan. Electronic address:
hungwen@mail.ncku.edu.tw. (3)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica,
Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: tubulin@ibms.sinica.edu.tw. (4)Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
plhinlord@gmail.com. (5)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica,
Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: skshue@ibms.sinica.edu.tw. (6)Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
lyc@ibms.sinica.edu.tw.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is implicated in the pathogenesis of
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). TRC8 is an ER-resident E3 ligase with
roles in modulating lipid and protein biosynthesis. In this study we showed that 
TRC8 expression was downregulated in steatotic livers of patients and mice fed
with a high fat diet (HFD) or a methionine and choline deficient (MCD) diet. To
investigate the impact of TRC8 downregulation on steatosis and the progression to
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), we placed TRC8 knockout (KO) mice and wild 
type (WT) controls on a HFD or MCD diet and the severities of steatosis and NASH 
developed were compared. We found that TRC8 deficiency did not significantly
affect diet-induced steatosis. Nevertheless, MCD diet-induced NASH as
characterized by hepatocyte death, inflammation and fibrosis were exacerbated in 
TRC8-KO mice. The hepatic ER stress response, as evidenced by increased eIF2a
phosphorylation and expression of ATF4 and CHOP, and the level of activated
caspase 3, an apoptosis indicator, were augmented by TRC8 deficiency. The hepatic
ER stress and NASH induced in mice could be ameliorated by adenovirus-mediated
hepatic TRC8 overexpression. Mechanistically, we found that TRC8 deficiency
augmented lipotoxic-stress-induced unfolded protein response in hepatocytes by
attenuating the arrest of protein translation and the misfolded protein
degradation. These findings disclose a crucial role of TRC8 in the maintenance of
ER protein homeostasis and its downregulation in steatotic liver contributes to
the progression of NAFLD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26319415  [PubMed - in process]


129. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Aug 27;6:e1860. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.219.

a-Solanine induces ROS-mediated autophagy through activation of endoplasmic
reticulum stress and inhibition of Akt/mTOR pathway.

Hasanain M(1), Bhattacharjee A(2), Pandey P(1), Ashraf R(1), Singh N(1), Sharma
S(1), Vishwakarma AL(3), Datta D(1,)(4), Mitra K(2,)(4), Sarkar J(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Division, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, India.
(2)Electron Microscopy Unit, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow,
India. (3)Sophisticated Analytical Instruments Facilities, CSIR-Central Drug
Research Institute, Lucknow, India. (4)Academy of Scientific and Innovative
Research, Chennai, India.

a-Solanine is a glycoalkaloid found in species of the nightshade family including
potato. It was primarily reported to have toxic effects in humans. However, there
is a growing body of literature demonstrating in vitro and in vivo anticancer
activity of a-solanine. Most of these studies have shown activation of apoptosis 
as the underlying mechanism in antitumor activity of a-solanine. In this study,
we report a-solanine as a potential inducer of autophagy, which may act
synergistically or in parallel with apoptosis to exert its cytotoxic effect.
Induction of autophagy was demonstrated by several assays including electron
microscopy, immunoblotting of autophagy markers and immunofluorescence for LC3
(microtubule-associated protein 1 (MAP1) light chain-3) puncta.
a-Solanine-induced autophagic flux was demonstrated by additionally
enhanced--turnover of LC3-II and--accumulation of LC3-specific puncta after
co-incubation of cells with either of the autophagolysosome
inhibitors--chloroquine and--bafilomycin A1. We also demonstrated
a-solanine-induced oxidative damage in regulating autophagy where pre-incubation 
of cells with reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger resulted in suppression of 
CM-H2DCFDA (5 (and 6)-chloromethyl-2',7'-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate
acetyl ester) fluorescence as well as decrease in LC3-II turnover. a-Solanine
treatment caused an increase in the expression of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress proteins (BiP, activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6), X-box-binding
protein 1, PERK, inositol-requiring transmembrane kinase/endonuclease 1, ATF4 and
CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)-homologous protein) suggesting activation 
of unfolded protein response pathway. Moreover, we found downregulation of
phosphorylated Akt (Thr308 and Ser473), mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR;
Ser2448 and Ser2481) and 4E-BP1 (Thr37/46) by a-solanine implying suppression of 
the Akt/mTOR pathway. Collectively, our results signify that a-solanine induces
autophagy to exert anti-proliferative activity by triggering ER stress and
inhibiting Akt/mTOR signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4558510
PMID: 26313911  [PubMed - in process]


130. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Nov;31(9):570-84. doi: 10.1089/jop.2014.0076. Epub
2015 Aug 27.

2-Phenyl-APB-144-Induced Retinal Pigment Epithelium Degeneration and Its
Underlying Mechanisms.

Hirai S(1,)(2), Kurashima H(1,)(2), Nakamura D(2), Komatsu T(2), Yasuda Y(2),
Habashita-Obata S(1), Ichikawa S(1), Katsuta O(1), Iwawaki T(3), Kohno K(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Nara Research and Development Center, Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. ,
Ikoma, Nara, Japan . (2)2 Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Genetics, Graduate
School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and Technology , Ikoma, 
Nara, Japan . (3)3 Advanced Scientific Research Leaders Development Unit, Gunma
University , Maebashi, Gunma, Japan .

PURPOSE: To investigate the efficacy of 2-phenyl-APB-144 (APB)-induced
retinopathy in a rat model and its underlying mechanisms, with a particular focus
on retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) degeneration.
METHODS: Electroretinograms (ERGs) were evaluated in APB-administered rats. In
ARPE-19 cells, cathepsin, and autophagy marker LC3 were analyzed by western
blotting or immunohistochemistry. Organelle pH alterations were detected by
Acridine Orange Staining. Endoplasmic reticulum stress-dependent or -independent 
cell death signaling was analyzed by reporter gene assays of activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), immunoglobulin heavy-chain binding protein (BiP), 
inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a), quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction of CHOP mRNA, and the effects of
pharmacological eukaryotic initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) dephosphorylation
inhibitor, Salubrinal. The pharmacological effects of Salubrinal were examined by
fluorophotometry, electrophysiology, and histopathology.
RESULTS: APB-induced ERG amplitude reduction and fluorescein permeability
enhancement into the vitreous body of rats were determined. In ARPE-19 cells,
APB-induced organelle pH alterations, imbalances of procathepsin and cathepsin
expression, the time-dependent accumulation of LC3-II, and the translational
activation of ATF4 were determined. Salubrinal protected against APB-induced cell
death and inhibited ATF4 downstream factor CHOP mRNA induction. In APB-induced
rat retinopathy, systemic Salubrinal alleviated the enhanced fluorescein
permeability into the vitreous body from the RPE, the reductions in ERG
amplitudes, and RPE degeneration.
CONCLUSIONS: Organelle pH alterations and autophagy impairments are involved in
APB-induced RPE cell death. Inhibition of eIF2a dephosphorylation protected the
RPE in vivo and in vitro. These findings suggested that APB-induced retinopathy
is a valuable animal model for exploring the mechanism of RPE-driven retinopathy.

PMCID: PMC4642833 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26313169  [PubMed - in process]


131. Stem Cells. 2016 Jan;34(1):233-45. doi: 10.1002/stem.2187. Epub 2015 Sep 29.

DOT1L Activity Promotes Proliferation and Protects Cortical Neural Stem Cells
from Activation of ATF4-DDIT3-Mediated ER Stress In Vitro.

Roidl D(1,)(2), Hellbach N(1), Bovio PP(1,)(3), Villarreal A(1), Heidrich S(1),
Nestel S(4), Grüning BA(5,)(6), Boenisch U(7), Vogel T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (2)Hermann Staudinger
Graduate School, Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Faculty of Biology, Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Neuroanatomy, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (5)Bioinformatics Group, 
Department of Computer Science, Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany. (6)Pharmaceutical Bioinformatics, Institute of Pharmaceutical Science,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (7)Deep Sequencing
Facility, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg,
Germany.

Growing evidence suggests that the lysine methyltransferase DOT1L/KMT4 has
important roles in proliferation, survival, and differentiation of stem cells in 
development and in disease. We investigated the function of DOT1L in neural stem 
cells (NSCs) of the cerebral cortex. The pharmacological inhibition and
shRNA-mediated knockdown of DOT1L impaired proliferation and survival of NSCs.
DOT1L inhibition specifically induced genes that are activated during the
unfolded protein response (UPR) in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
Chromatin-immunoprecipitation analyses revealed that two genes encoding for
central molecules involved in the ER stress response, Atf4 and Ddit3 (Chop), are 
marked with H3K79 methylation. Interference with DOT1L activity resulted in
transcriptional activation of both genes accompanied by decreased levels of H3K79
dimethylation. Although downstream effectors of the UPR, such as Ppp1r15a/Gadd34,
Atf3, and Tnfrsf10b/Dr5 were also transcriptionally activated, this most likely
occurred in response to increased ATF4 expression rather than as a direct
consequence of altered H3K79 methylation. While stem cells are particularly
vulnerable to stress, the UPR and ER stress have not been extensively studied in 
these cells yet. Since activation of the ER stress program is also implicated in 
directing stem cells into differentiation or to maintain a proliferative status, 
the UPR must be tightly regulated. Our and published data suggest that histone
modifications, including H3K4me3, H3K14ac, and H3K79me2, are implicated in the
control of transcriptional activation of ER stress genes. In this context, the
loss of H3K79me2 at the Atf4- and Ddit3-promoters appears to mark a
point-of-no-return that activates the death program in NSCs. Stem Cells
2016;34:233-245.

© 2015 The Authors STEM CELLS published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of
AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26299268  [PubMed - in process]


132. Biotechnol Lett. 2015 Dec;37(12):2379-86. doi: 10.1007/s10529-015-1938-6. Epub
2015 Aug 23.

Transcriptional and post-transcriptional targeting for enhanced transient gene
expression in CHO cells.

Rajendra Y(1), Hougland MD(1), Schmitt MG(1), Barnard GC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Discovery Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and
Company, Lilly Corporate Center, Indianapolis, IN, 46285, USA. (2)Biotechnology
Discovery Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, Lilly
Corporate Center, Indianapolis, IN, 46285, USA. barnard_gavin_c@lilly.com.

OBJECTIVE: To develop a simple approach to increase titers of transient gene
expression in CHO cells without relying on host cell line engineering as recent
reports suggest that for PEI-mediated transfections, under optimized conditions, 
DNA delivery into cells and nuclei is not the limiting factor.
RESULTS: N, N-Dimethyl acetamide (DMA) was utilized to enhance transcription. To 
target post-transcriptional events, we evaluated the co-expression of various
genes involved in the unfolded protein response, namely XBP1S, ATF4, CHOP and
HSPA5. XBP1S overexpression led to a 15-85 % increase in titer for multiple
therapeutic proteins. Mechanistic studies confirmed that addition of 0.125 % DMA 
increased transgene mRNA levels as expected. However, overexpression of XBP1S had
no effect on transgene mRNA levels, indicating that it influenced
post-transcriptional events. Since DMA and XBP1S targeted different pathways, the
combination of the two approaches led to an additive improvement in protein titer
(150-250 % titer increase).
CONCLUSION: Transcriptional and post-transcriptional pathways of transient gene
expression can be targeted to increase titers without resorting to host cell line
engineering in a simple, short, 7 day production process.

PMID: 26298077  [PubMed - in process]


133. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2015 Jul 6;6(8):877-81. doi: 10.1021/acsmedchemlett.5b00127.
eCollection 2015.

Novel Lobophorins Inhibit Oral Cancer Cell Growth and Induce Atf4- and
Chop-Dependent Cell Death in Murine Fibroblasts.

Cruz PG(1), Fribley AM(2), Miller JR(2), Larsen MJ(1), Schultz PJ(1), Jacob
RT(1), Tamayo-Castillo G(3), Kaufman RJ(4), Sherman DH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Chemical Genomics, Life Sciences Institute and Departments of
Medicinal Chemistry, Chemistry, Microbiology & Immunology, University of Michigan
, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2216, United States. (2)Carmen and Ann Adams
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology and Oncology, and the Karmanos
Cancer Institute Molecular Therapeutics Program, Wayne State University , 2228
Elliman Building, 421 East Canfield, Detroit, Michigan 48201, United States.
(3)Instituto Nacional de Biodiversidad (INBio), Heredia, Costa Rica &
CIPRONA-Escuela de Química, Universidad de Costa Rica (UCR) , 2061-San José,
Costa Rica. (4)Degenerative Disease Research Program, Center for Cancer Research,
Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute , La Jolla, California 92037, 
United States.

As part of the International Cooperative Biodiversity Groups (ICBG) Program, we
were interested in identifying biologically active unfolded protein response
(UPR) inducing compounds from marine microorganisms isolated from Costa Rican
biota. With this aim in mind we have now generated more than 33,000 unique
prefractionated natural product extracts from marine and terrestrial organisms
that have been submitted to the Center of Chemical Genomics (CCG) at the
University of Michigan for high throughput screening (HTS). An effective
complementary cell-based assay to identify novel modulators of UPR signaling was 
used for screening extracts. Active fractions were iteratively subjected to
reverse-phase HPLC chromatographic analysis, and together with lobophorin A, B,
E, and F (1-4), three new lobophorin congeners, designated as CR1 (5), CR2 (6),
and CR3 (7) were isolated. Herein, we report that secondary assays revealed that 
the new lobophorins induced UPR-associated gene expression, inhibited oral
squamous cell carcinoma cell growth, and led to UPR-dependent cell death in
murine embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells.

PMCID: PMC4538430 [Available on 2016-08-13]
PMID: 26288688  [PubMed]


134. Sci Rep. 2015 Aug 18;5:13241. doi: 10.1038/srep13241.

OLA1 regulates protein synthesis and integrated stress response by inhibiting
eIF2 ternary complex formation.

Chen H(1), Song R(2), Wang G(2), Ding Z(2), Yang C(3), Zhang J(4), Zeng Z(5),
Rubio V(2), Wang L(2), Zu N(2), Weiskoff AM(2), Minze LJ(6), Jeyabal PV(2),
Mansour OC(2), Bai L(2), Merrick WC(7), Zheng S(4), Shi ZZ(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Translational Imaging Houston Methodist Research Institute,
Weill Cornell Medical College, Houston, TX 77030, USA [2] Cancer Institute, The
Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang 310009, China. (2)Department of Translational Imaging Houston Methodist 
Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology Houston Methodist Research Institute, Weill
Cornell Medical College, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Cancer Institute, The Second 
Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 
310009, China. (5)Department of Pathology and Genomic Medicine Houston Methodist 
Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(6)Immunobiology Research Center Houston Methodist Research Institute, Weill
Cornell Medical College, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (7)Biochemstry Department, Case 
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Translation is a fundamental cellular process, and its dysregulation can
contribute to human diseases such as cancer. During translation initiation the
eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2) forms a ternary complex (TC) with GTP and
the initiator methionyl-tRNA (tRNAi), mediating ribosomal recruitment of tRNAi.
Limiting TC availability is a central mechanism for triggering the integrated
stress response (ISR), which suppresses global translation in response to various
cellular stresses, but induces specific proteins such as ATF4. This study shows
that OLA1, a member of the ancient Obg family of GTPases, is an eIF2-regulatory
protein that inhibits protein synthesis and promotes ISR by binding eIF2,
hydrolyzing GTP, and interfering with TC formation. OLA1 thus represents a novel 
mechanism of translational control affecting de novo TC formation, different from
the traditional model in which phosphorylation of eIF2a blocks the regeneration
of TC. Depletion of OLA1 caused a hypoactive ISR and greater survival in stressed
cells. In vivo, OLA1-knockdown rendered cancer cells deficient in ISR and the
downstream proapoptotic effector, CHOP, promoting tumor growth and metastasis.
Our work suggests that OLA1 is a novel translational GTPase and plays a
suppressive role in translation and cell survival, as well as cancer growth and
progression.

PMCID: PMC4539610
PMID: 26283179  [PubMed - in process]


135. Curr Med Chem. 2015;22(27):3169-84.

Unfolded Protein Response and PERK Kinase as a New Therapeutic Target in the
Pathogenesis of Alzheimer's Disease.

Rozpedek W, Markiewicz L, Diehl JA, Pytel D, Majsterek I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Military-Medical Faculty,
Medical University of Lodz, Hallera 1, 90-647 Lodz, Poland.
ireneusz.majsterek@umed.lodz.pl.

Recent evidence suggests that the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and
related cognitive loss is due to mutations in the Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP)
gene on chromosome 21 and increased activation of eukaryotic translation
initiation factor-2a (eIF2a) phosphorylation. The high level of misfolded and
unfolded proteins loading in Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) lumen triggers ER stress 
and as a result Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) pathways are activated.
Stress-dependent activation of the protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum 
kinase (PERK) leads to the significant elevation of phospho-eIF2a. That
attenuates general translation and, on the other hand, promotes the preferential 
synthesis of Activating Transcription Factor 4 (ATF4) and secretase ß (BACE1) - a
pivotal enzyme responsible for the initiation of the amyloidogenic pathway
resulting in the generation of the amyloid ß (Aß) variant with high ability to
form toxic senile plaques in AD brains. Moreover, excessive, long-term stress
conditions may contribute to inducing neuronal death by apoptosis as a result of 
the overactivated expression of pro-apoptotic proteins via ATF4. These findings
allow to infer that dysregulated translation, increased expression of BACE1 and
ATF4, as a result of eIF2a phosphorylation, may be a major contributor to
structural and functional neuronal loss resulting in memory impairment. Thus,
blocking PERK-dependent eIF2a phosphorylation through specific, small-molecule
PERK branch inhibitors seems to be a potential treatment strategy for AD
individuals. That may contribute to the restoration of global translation rates
and reduction of expression of ATF4 and BACE1. Hence, the treatment strategy can 
block accelerated ß -amyloidogenesis by reduction in APP cleaving via the
BACE1-dependent amyloidogenic pathway.

PMID: 26282939  [PubMed - in process]


136. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;36(6):2403-17. doi: 10.1159/000430202. Epub 2015 Jul
27.

Lipopolysaccharide Induces Autophagic Cell Death through the PERK-Dependent
Branch of the Unfolded Protein Response in Human Alveolar Epithelial A549 Cells.

Li S(1), Guo L, Qian P, Zhao Y, Liu A, Ji F, Chen L, Wu X, Qian G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Respiratory Disease, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: Alveolar epithelial cell death plays a critical role in the
pathogenesis of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced acute lung injury. Increased
autophagy has a dual effect on cell survival. However, it is not known whether
autophagy promotes death or survival in human alveolar epithelial cells exposed
to LPS.
METHODS: Genetic and pharmacological approaches were used to evaluate the effect 
of autophagy on A549 cell viability upon LPS exposure. The endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) stress and unfolded protein response (UPR) pathways were examined with
immunoblotting studies to further explore underlying mechanisms.
RESULTS: Treatment with LPS (50 µg/ml) led to autophagy activation and decreased 
cell viability in A549 cells. Blocking autophagy via short interfering RNA or
inhibitor significantly decreased, whereas rapamycin increased, the LPS-induced
effect on viability. ER stress was activated in LPS-stimulated A549 cells, and ER
stress inhibitor reduced LPS-induced autophagy. LPS activated only the PERK
pathway and had rarely effect on the ATF6 and IRE1 branches of the UPR in A549
cells. Moreover, the knockdown of PERK and ATF4 attenuated LPS-induced autophagy 
and promoted cell survival.
CONCLUSION: In human alveolar epithelial A549 cells, LPS induces autophagic cell 
death that depends on the activation of the PERK branch of the UPR upon ER
stress.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26279443  [PubMed - in process]


137. Biochem Pharmacol. 2015 Oct 1;97(3):256-68. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2015.08.086. Epub 
2015 Aug 11.

Farnesol activates the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis and the ATF4-ATF3-CHOP
cascade of ER stress in human T lymphoblastic leukemia Molt4 cells.

Joo JH(1), Ueda E(1), Bortner CD(2), Yang XP(1), Liao G(1), Jetten AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Immunity, Inflammation and Disease Laboratory, National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, 111
T.W. Alexander Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. (2)Molecular
Endocrinology Section, Laboratory of Signal Transduction Division of Intramural
Research, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, 111 T.W. Alexander Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,
USA. (3)Cell Biology Section, Immunity, Inflammation and Disease Laboratory,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, 111 T.W. Alexander Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
Electronic address: jetten@niehs.nih.gov.

In this study, we demonstrate that treatment of T lymphoblastic leukemic Molt4
cells with farnesol activates the apoptosome via the intrinsic pathway of
apoptosis. This induction was associated with changes in the level of
intracellular potassium and calcium, the dissipation of the mitochondrial and
plasma membrane potential, release of cytochrome c, activation of several
caspases, and PARP cleavage. The induction of apoptosis by farnesol was inhibited
by the addition of the pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-fmk and by the exogenous
expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl2. Analysis of the gene expression
profiles by microarray analysis revealed that farnesol increased the expression
of several genes related to the unfolded protein response (UPR), including CHOP
and CHAC1. This induction was associated with the activation of the
PERK-eIF2a-ATF3/4 cascade, but not the XBP-1 branch of the UPR. Although farnesol
induced activation of the ERK1/2, p38, and JNK pathways, inhibition of these
MAPKs had little effect on farnesol-induced apoptosis or the induction of
UPR-related genes. Our data indicate that the induction of apoptosis in leukemic 
cells by farnesol is mediated through a pathway that involves activation of the
apoptosome via the intrinsic pathway and induction of the PERK-eIF2a-ATF3/4
cascade in a manner that is independent of the farnesol-induced activation of
MAPKs.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4618488 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26275811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Sep;153(2):285-97. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3536-7. 
Epub 2015 Aug 13.

TMEM33: a new stress-inducible endoplasmic reticulum transmembrane protein and
modulator of the unfolded protein response signaling.

Sakabe I(1), Hu R, Jin L, Clarke R, Kasid UN.

Author information: 
(1)Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center and Georgetown University
Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress leads to activation of the unfolded protein
response (UPR) signaling cascade and induction of an apoptotic cell death,
autophagy, oncogenesis, metastasis, and/or resistance to cancer therapies.
Mechanisms underlying regulation of ER transmembrane proteins PERK, IRE1a, and
ATF6a/ß, and how the balance of these activities determines outcome of the
activated UPR, remain largely unclear. Here, we report a novel molecule
transmembrane protein 33 (TMEM33) and its actions in UPR signaling.
Immunoblotting and northern blot hybridization assays were used to determine the 
effects of ER stress on TMEM33 expression levels in various cell lines. Transient
transfections, immunofluorescence, subcellular fractionation,
immunoprecipitation, and immunoblotting were used to study the subcellular
localization of TMEM33, the binding partners of TMEM33, and the expression of
downstream effectors of PERK and IRE1a. Our data demonstrate that TMEM33 is a
unique ER stress-inducible and ER transmembrane molecule, and a new binding
partner of PERK. Exogenous expression of TMEM33 led to increased expression of
p-eIF2a and p-IRE1a and their known downstream effectors, ATF4-CHOP and XBP1-S,
respectively, in breast cancer cells. TMEM33 overexpression also correlated with 
increased expression of apoptotic signals including cleaved caspase-7 and cleaved
PARP, and an autophagosome protein LC3II, and reduced expression of the autophagy
marker p62. TMEM33 is a novel regulator of the PERK-eIE2a-ATF4 and IRE1-XBP1 axes
of the UPR signaling. Therefore, TMEM33 may function as a determinant of the ER
stress-responsive events in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4559576
PMID: 26268696  [PubMed - in process]


139. Cell Biol Int. 2015 Dec;39(12):1408-17. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10521. Epub 2015 Sep
28.

Valsartan protects HK-2 cells from contrast media-induced apoptosis by inhibiting
endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Peng PA(1), Wang L(1), Ma Q(1), Xin Y(2), Zhang O(1), Han HY(1), Liu XL(1), Ji
QW(1), Zhou YJ(1), Zhao YX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing Institute of Heart Lung and Blood Vessel Disease, The Key Laboratory of
Remodeling-Related Cardiovascular Disease, Ministry of Education, No. 2 Anzhen
Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100029, China. (2)Experimental Center, Beijing 
Institute of Heart Lung and Blood Vessel Disease, The Key Laboratory of
Remodeling-Related Cardiovascular Disease, Ministry of Education, No. 2 Anzhen
Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100029, China.

Contrast-induced acute kidney injury (CI-AKI) is associated with increasing
in-hospital and long-term adverse clinical outcomes in high-risk patients
undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Contrast media (CM)-induced 
renal tubular cell apoptosis is reported to participate in this process by
activating endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. An angiotensin II type 1 receptor
(AT1R) antagonist can alleviate ER stress-induced renal apoptosis in
streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic mice and can reduce CM-induced renal
apoptosis by reducing oxidative stress and reversing the enhancement of bax mRNA 
and the reduction of bcl-2 mRNA, but the effect of the AT1R blocker on ER stress 
in the pathogenesis of CI-AKI is still unknown. In this study, we explored the
effect of valsartan on meglumine diatrizoate-induced human renal tubular cell
apoptosis by measuring changes in ER stress-related biomarkers. The results
showed that meglumine diatrizoate caused significant cell apoptosis by
up-regulating the expression of ER stress markers, including glucose-regulated
protein 78 (GRP78), activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4),
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein (CHOP) and caspase 12, in a
time- and dose-dependent manner, which could be alleviated by preincubation with 
valsartan. In conclusion, valsartan had a potential nephroprotective effect on
meglumine diatrizoate-induced renal cell apoptosis by inhibiting ER stress.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 26248489  [PubMed - in process]


140. J Cell Biochem. 2016 Feb;117(2):500-9. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25301.

TBL2 Associates With ATF4 mRNA Via Its WD40 Domain and Regulates Its Translation 
During ER Stress.

Tsukumo Y(1), Tsukahara S(1), Furuno A(1), Iemura S(2), Natsume T(3), Tomida
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Koto-ku, 
Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. (2)Innovative Drug Development TR Section, Fukushima
Medical University, Fukushima City, Fukushima, 960-1295, Japan. (3)Biomedicinal
Information Research Center, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-0064, Japan.

PKR-like ER-resident kinase (PERK) phosphorylates eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 2<U+2009>a (eIF2a) under endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress; this
results in repression of general translation and induction of specific gene
expression, such as activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). We previously
showed that, upon ER stress, transducin (ß)-like 2 (TBL2) was an ER-localized
transmembrane protein and interacted with PERK and that TBL2 was involved in ATF4
expression and cell survival. Here, we show that TBL2 is able to associate with
ATF4 mRNA and regulate its translation. The RNA-immunoprecipitation analysis
using several TBL2 deletion mutants revealed that the WD40 domain was essential
for association with ATF4 mRNA. Importantly, suppression of TBL2 by knockdown or 
overexpression of the TBL2 mutant with a defective WD40 domain diminished ATF4
induction at the translational level. Thus, our findings indicate that, under ER 
stress, TBL2 participates in ATF4 translation through its association with the
mRNA. J. Cell. Biochem. 117: 500-509, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26239904  [PubMed - in process]


141. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2015 Oct;32(7):677-87. doi: 10.1007/s10585-015-9736-z. Epub 
2015 Aug 2.

Suppression of lung metastases by the CD26/DPP4 inhibitor Vildagliptin in mice.

Jang JH(1), Baerts L(2), Waumans Y(2), De Meester I(2), Yamada Y(1), Limani P(3),
Gil-Bazo I(4), Weder W(1), Jungraithmayr W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital Zurich, Raemistrasse 100,
8091, Zurich, Switzerland. (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, Antwerp,
Belgium. (3)Department of Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, University
Hospital Zurich, Raemistrasse 100, Zurich, Switzerland. (4)Division of Oncology, 
Center for Applied Medical Research, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(5)Division of Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital Zurich, Raemistrasse 100,
8091, Zurich, Switzerland. wolfgang.jungraithmayr@usz.ch.

Metastases rather than primary cancers determine nowadays the survival of
patients. One of the most common primary malignancies is colorectal cancer and
this type of tumor is characterized by a high tendency to spread metastases to
the lung and liver. CD26/DPP4 is a transmembrane molecule with enzymatic
functions which cleaves biologically active peptides. Recently, CD26/DPP4 has
become the focus of cancer research and it was shown that CD26/DPP4-positive
cancer cells display increased metastatic activity. Here, we tested if the
CD26/DPP4-inhibitor Vildagliptin suppresses the development and growth of mouse
colorectal lung metastases. This inhibitor of CD26/DPP4 was employed on mouse
(C57BL/6) colorectal lung metastases, established by intravenous injection of the
syngeneic cell line MC38. For mechanistic analysis, a subcutaneous tumor model
was used. The treatment with Vildagliptin significantly suppressed both, the
incidence and growth of lung metastases. Autophagy markers (LC3, p62, and ATF4)
decreased, apoptosis increased (TUNEL, pH3/Ki-76), and the cell cycle regulator
pCDC2 was inhibited. In conclusion, we here showed an anti-tumor effect of
Vildagliptin via downregulation of autophagy resulting in increased apoptosis and
modulation of the cell cycle. We therefore propose Vildagliptin for the
evaluation as a new therapeutic approach for the treatment of colorectal cancer
lung metastases.

PMID: 26233333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Neurosci. 2015 Jul 29;35(30):10731-49. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0614-15.2015.

Trib3 Is Elevated in Parkinson's Disease and Mediates Death in Parkinson's
Disease Models.

Aimé P(1), Sun X(2), Zareen N(3), Rao A(2), Berman Z(4), Volpicelli-Daley L(5),
Bernd P(2), Crary JF(2), Levy OA(6), Greene LA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Cell Biology and pa2322@cumc.columbia.edu.
(2)Departments of Pathology and Cell Biology and. (3)Biological Sciences and.
(4)College of Dental Medicine, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35233, and. (6)Department of Neurology, Columbia University, New York,
New York 10032.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by the progressive loss of select
neuronal populations, but the prodeath genes mediating the neurodegenerative
processes remain to be fully elucidated. Trib3 (tribbles pseudokinase 3) is a
stress-induced gene with proapoptotic activity that was previously described as
highly activated at the transcriptional level in a 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA)
cellular model of PD. Here, we report that Trib3 immunostaining is elevated in
dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) of human PD
patients. Trib3 protein is also upregulated in cellular models of PD, including
neuronal PC12 cells and rat dopaminergic ventral midbrain neurons treated with
6-OHDA, 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+), or a-synuclein fibrils (aSYN). In the
toxin models, Trib3 induction is substantially mediated by the transcription
factors CHOP and ATF4. Trib3 overexpression is sufficient to promote neuronal
death; conversely, Trib3 knockdown protects neuronal PC12 cells as well as
ventral midbrain dopaminergic neurons from 6-OHDA, MPP+, or aSYN. Mechanism
studies revealed that Trib3 physically interacts with Parkin, a prosurvival
protein whose loss of function is associated with PD. Elevated Trib3 reduces
Parkin expression in cultured cells; and in the SNpc of PD patients, Parkin
levels are reduced in a subset of dopaminergic neurons expressing high levels of 
Trib3. Loss of Parkin at least partially mediates the prodeath actions of Trib3
in that Parkin knockdown in cellular PD models abolishes the protective effect of
Trib3 downregulation. Together, these findings identify Trib3 and its regulatory 
pathways as potential targets to suppress the progression of neuron death and
degeneration in PD.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Parkinson's disease (PD) is the most
common neurodegenerative movement disorder. Current treatments ameliorate
symptoms, but not the underlying neuronal death. Understanding the core
neurodegenerative processes in PD is a prerequisite for identifying new
therapeutic targets and, ultimately, curing this disease. Here, we describe a
novel pathway involving the proapoptotic protein Trib3 in neuronal death
associated with PD. These findings are supported by data from multiple cellular
models of PD and by immunostaining of postmortem PD brains. Upstream, Trib3 is
induced by the transcription factors ATF4 and CHOP; and downstream, Trib3
interferes with the PD-associated prosurvival protein Parkin to mediate death.
These findings establish this new pathway as a potential and promising
therapeutic target for treatment of PD.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3510732-19$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4518050
PMID: 26224857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Cell Biochem. 2016 May;117(5):1078-91. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25289. Epub 2016 Feb 5.

TRAIL-Induced Caspase Activation Is a Prerequisite for Activation of the
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress-Induced Signal Transduction Pathways.

Lee DH(1,)(2), Sung KS(3,)(4), Guo ZS(1), Kwon WT(1), Bartlett DL(1), Oh SC(2),
Kwon YT(4), Lee YJ(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh 15213, Pennsylvania. (2)Division of Oncology/Hematology, Department of
Internal Medicine, Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (3)Center for Pharmacogenetics and Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
School of Pharmacy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh 15261, Pennsylvania.
(4)Protein Metabolism Medical Research Center and Department of Biomedical
Science, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-799, Korea.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, School of Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh 15213, Pennsylvania.

It is well known that tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL)-induced apoptosis can be initially triggered by surface death receptors
(the extrinsic pathway) and subsequently amplified through mitochondrial
dysfunction (the intrinsic pathway). However, little is known about signaling
pathways activated by the TRAIL-induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
response. In this study, we report that TRAIL-induced apoptosis is associated
with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response. Human colorectal carcinoma
HCT116 cells were treated with TRAIL and the ER stress-induced signal
transduction pathway was investigated. During TRAIL treatment, expression of ER
stress marker genes, in particular the BiP (binding immunoglobulin protein) gene,
was increased and activation of the PERK (PKR-like ER kinase)-eIF2a (eukaryotic
initiation factor 2a)-ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4)-CHOP
(CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein homologous protein) apoptotic signal transduction
pathway occurred. Experimental data from use of a siRNA (small interfering RNA)
technique, caspase inhibitor, and caspase-3-deficient cell line revealed that
TRAIL-induced caspase activation is a prerequisite for the TRAIL-induced ER
stress response. TRAIL-induced ER stress was triggered by caspase-8-mediated
cleavage of BAP31 (B cell receptor-associated protein 31). The involvement of the
proapoptotic PERK-CHOP pathway in TRAIL-induced apoptosis was verified by using a
PERK knockout (PERK(-/-) ) mouse embryo fibroblast (MEF) cell line and a
CHOP(-/-) MEF cell line. These results suggest that TRAIL-induced the activation 
of ER stress response plays a role in TRAIL-induced apoptotic death. J. Cell.
Biochem. 117: 1078-1091, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26212606  [PubMed - in process]


144. J Cell Biochem. 2016 Feb;117(2):267-78. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25283.

Hypoxia-Inducible Factor-1: A Critical Player in the Survival Strategy of
Stressed Cells.

Chen S(1), Sang N(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Graduate Program of Biological Sciences, College of 
Arts and Sciences, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (2)Department
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Drexel University College of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (3)Sydney Kimmel Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.

HIF-1 activation has been well known as an adaptive strategy to hypoxia. Recently
it became clear that hypoxia was often accompanied by insufficient supply of
glucose or amino acids as a common result of poor circulation that frequently
occurs in solid tumors and ischemic lesions, creating a mixed nutrient
insufficiency. In response to nutrient insufficiency, stressed cells elicit
survival strategies including activation of AMPK and HIF-1 to cope with the
stress. Particularly, in solid tumors, HIF-1 promotes cell survival and
migration, stimulates angiogenesis, and induces resistance to radiation and
chemotherapy. Interestingly, radiation and some chemotherapeutics are reported to
trigger the activation of AMPK. Here we discuss the recent advances that may
potentially link the stress responsive mechanisms including AMPK activation, ATF4
activation and the enhancement of Hsp70/Hsp90 function to HIF-1 activation.
Potential implication and application of the stress-facilitated HIF-1 activation 
in solid tumors and ischemic disorders will be discussed. A better understanding 
of HIF-1 activation in cells exposed to stresses is expected to facilitate the
design of therapeutic approaches that specifically modulate cell survival
strategy. J. Cell. Biochem. 117: 267-278, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4715696 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26206147  [PubMed - in process]


145. Br J Nutr. 2015 Aug 28;114(4):519-32. doi: 10.1017/S0007114515002172. Epub 2015
Jul 22.

Induction of autophagy through the activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4)-dependent amino acid response pathway in maternal skeletal muscle may
function as the molecular memory in response to gestational protein restriction
to alert offspring to maternal nutrition.

Wang H(1), Wilson GJ(2), Zhou D(1), Lezmi S(2), Chen X(1), Layman DK(1), Pan
YX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition,College of Agricultural,
Consumer and Environmental Sciences, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign,905 South Goodwin Avenue,Urbana,IL61801,USA. (2)Division of
Nutritional Sciences, College of Agricultural, Consumer and Environmental
Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,905 South Goodwin
Avenue,Urbana,IL61801,USA.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the mechanistic basis of protein 
deficiency during pregnancy in mother that is transduced to offspring. To this
end, timed-pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were fed either a control (20 % of energy
from protein) or low-protein (LP, 8 % of energy from protein) diet during
gestation. Tissues were collected after delivery from rat dams, and skeletal
muscle was collected at postnatal day 38 from the offspring. Quantitative RT-PCR 
and Western blot analyses were performed to determine mRNA and protein levels.
Histological analysis was performed to evaluate myofibre size. LP dams gained
significantly less weight during pregnancy, developed muscle atrophy, and had
significantly lower circulating threonine and histidine levels than control dams.
The mRNA expression of the well-known amino acid response (AAR) pathway-related
target genes was increased only in the skeletal muscle of LP dams, as well as the
protein expression levels of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and
phosphorylated eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a (p-eIF2a). The mRNA
expression of autophagy-related genes was significantly increased in the skeletal
muscle of LP dams. Moreover, the mRNA expression of genes involved in both AAR
and autophagy pathways remained elevated and was memorised in the muscle of LP
offspring that consumed a post-weaning control diet. Additionally, the LP diet
increased an autophagy marker, microtubule-associated proteins 1A/1B light chain 
3B (LC3B) protein expression in the skeletal muscle of rat dams, consistent with 
the initiation of autophagy. The LP diet further increased ATF4 binding at the
predicted regions of AAR and autophagy pathway-related genes. Increased binding
of ATF4 unveils the crucial role of ATF4 in the activation of autophagy in
response to protein restriction. Our data suggest that molecular changes in
maternal muscle are memorised in the offspring long after gestational protein
restriction, reinforcing the role of maternal signalling in programming offspring
health.

PMID: 26198178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jul 17;16(7):16275-87. doi: 10.3390/ijms160716275.

Experimental Evidence Shows Salubrinal, an eIF2a Dephosphorylation Inhibitor,
Reduces Xenotoxicant-Induced Cellular Damage.

Matsuoka M(1), Komoike Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene and Public Health I, Tokyo Women's Medical University,
Tokyo 162-8666, Japan. matsuoka@research.twmu.ac.jp. (2)Department of Hygiene and
Public Health I, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.
komoike@research.twmu.ac.jp.

Accumulating evidence indicates that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and the
subsequent unfolded protein response (UPR) are involved in the pathogenesis of
not only the protein misfolding disorders such as certain neurodegenerative and
metabolic diseases, but also in the cytotoxicity of environmental pollutants,
industrial chemicals, and drugs. Thus, the modulation of ER stress signaling
pathways is an important issue for protection against cellular damage induced by 
xenotoxicants. The substance salubrinal has been shown to prevent
dephosphorylation of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 alpha
(eIF2a). The phosphorylation of eIF2a appears to be cytoprotective during ER
stress, because inhibition of the translation initiation activity of eIF2a
reduces global protein synthesis. In addition, the expression of activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a transcription factor that induces the expression
of UPR target genes, is up-regulated through alternative translation. This review
shows that salubrinal can protect cells from the damage induced by a wide range
of xenotoxicants, including environmental pollutants and drugs. The canonical and
other possible mechanisms of cytoprotection by salubrinal from
xenotoxicant-induced ER stress are also discussed.

PMCID: PMC4519949
PMID: 26193263  [PubMed - in process]


147. Mol Cell. 2015 Aug 6;59(3):382-98. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.06.020. Epub 2015
Jul 16.

ERK2 Mediates Metabolic Stress Response to Regulate Cell Fate.

Shin S(1), Buel GR(1), Wolgamott L(2), Plas DR(2), Asara JM(3), Blenis J(4), Yoon
SO(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Department of Cancer Biology, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. (3)Department of
Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (4)Department of Pharmacology, Meyer Cancer Center, Weill 
Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of Cell Biology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
job2064@med.cornell.edu. (5)Department of Pharmacology, Meyer Cancer Center,
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of Cell
Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
say2008@med.cornell.edu.

Insufficient nutrients disrupt physiological homeostasis, resulting in diseases
and even death. Considering the physiological and pathological consequences of
this metabolic stress, the adaptive responses that cells utilize under this
condition are of great interest. We show that under low-glucose conditions, cells
initiate adaptation followed by apoptosis responses using PERK/Akt and MEK1/ERK2 
signaling, respectively. For adaptation, cells engage the ER stress-induced
unfolded protein response, which results in PERK/Akt activation and cell
survival. Sustained and extreme energetic stress promotes a switch to
isoform-specific MEK1/ERK2 signaling, induction of GCN2/eIF2a phosphorylation,
and ATF4 expression, which overrides PERK/Akt-mediated adaptation and induces
apoptosis through ATF4-dependent expression of pro-apoptotic factors including
Bid and Trb3. ERK2 activation during metabolic stress contributes to changes in
TCA cycle and amino acid metabolism, and cell death, which is suppressed by
glutamate and a-ketoglutarate supplementation. Taken together, our results reveal
promising targets to protect cells or tissues from metabolic stress.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4530034 [Available on 2016-08-06]
PMID: 26190261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cancer Sci. 2015 Oct;106(10):1288-95. doi: 10.1111/cas.12743. Epub 2015 Aug 13.

Histidine-rich calcium binding protein promotes growth of hepatocellular
carcinoma in vitro and in vivo.

Liu J(1), Han P(1), Li M(1), Yan W(1), Liu J(2), He J(1), Gong J(1), Wang Y(1),
Tian D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (2)Department of
Ultrasound, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

We have recently shown that the histidine-rich calcium binding protein (HRC)
promotes the invasion and metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In the
current study, we evaluated whether HRC may also affect the growth of HCC. We
found that ectopic expression of HRC obviously enhanced proliferation and colony 
formation, while suppression of HRC exhibited inhibitory effects. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that HRC promoted tumor growth in nude mice. These effects may
result from the ability of HRC to upregulate cyclinD1 and cyclin-dependent kinase
2 (CDK2) expressions and promote G1/S transition. Further study showed that
MEK/ERK signaling pathway was involved in HRC-induced cell proliferation.
Interestingly, overexpression or depletion of HRC revealed its regulation on
endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) and apoptosis, which was partially dependent
on PERK/ATF4/CHOP signaling pathway. In addition, blocking ERS using
4-phenylbutyric acid (4-PBA) not only downregulated the expression of PERK, ATF4 
and CHOP, but also significantly decreased apoptosis induced by HRC silence,
whereas ERS inducer thapsigargin (TG) exerted the opposite effects. Our study
thus demonstrates a role of HRC in promoting HCC growth, besides its role in
inducing HCC metastasis, and highlights HRC as a promising intervention target
for HCC.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4638025
PMID: 26176291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Autophagy. 2015;11(9):1499-519. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1063764.

Disruption of the ribosomal P complex leads to stress-induced autophagy.

Artero-Castro A(1), Perez-Alea M(1), Feliciano A(1), Leal JA(1), Genestar M(1),
Castellvi J(1), Peg V(1), Ramón Y Cajal S(1), Lleonart ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Oncology and Pathology Group ; Pathology Department; Institut de Recerca
Hospital Vall d'Hebron ; Barcelona , Spain.

The human ribosomal P complex, which consists of the acidic ribosomal P proteins 
RPLP0, RPLP1, and RPLP2 (RPLP proteins), recruits translational factors,
facilitating protein synthesis. Recently, we showed that overexpression of RPLP1 
immortalizes primary cells and contributes to transformation. Moreover, RPLP
proteins are overexpressed in human cancer, with the highest incidence in breast 
carcinomas. It is thought that disruption of the P complex would directly affect 
protein synthesis, causing cell growth arrest and eventually apoptosis. Here, we 
report a distinct mechanism by which cancer cells undergo cell cycle arrest and
induced autophagy when RPLP proteins are downregulated. We found that absence of 
RPLP0, RPLP1, or RPLP2 resulted in reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation and
MAPK1/ERK2 signaling pathway activation. Moreover, ROS generation led to
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress that involved the
EIF2AK3/PERK-EIF2S1/eIF2a-EIF2S2-EIF2S3-ATF4/ATF-4- and ATF6/ATF-6-dependent arms
of the unfolded protein response (UPR). RPLP protein-deficient cells treated with
autophagy inhibitors experienced apoptotic cell death as an alternative to
autophagy. Strikingly, antioxidant treatment prevented UPR activation and
autophagy while restoring the proliferative capacity of these cells. Our results 
indicate that ROS are a critical signal generated by disruption of the P complex 
that causes a cellular response that follows a sequential order: first ROS, then 
ER stress/UPR activation, and finally autophagy. Importantly, inhibition of the
first step alone is able to restore the proliferative capacity of the cells,
preventing UPR activation and autophagy. Overall, our results support a role for 
autophagy as a survival mechanism in response to stress due to RPLP protein
deficiency.

PMCID: PMC4590587 [Available on 2016-07-15]
PMID: 26176264  [PubMed - in process]


150. Biometals. 2015 Oct;28(5):891-902. doi: 10.1007/s10534-015-9874-4. Epub 2015 Jul 
15.

Zinc regulates expression of IL-23 p19 mRNA via activation of eIF2a/ATF4 axis in 
HAPI cells.

Doi T(1), Hara H(2), Kajita M(1), Kamiya T(1), Adachi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Pharmaceutics, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, 1-25-4
Daigaku-nishi, Gifu, 501-1196, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Clinical Pharmaceutics,
Gifu Pharmaceutical University, 1-25-4 Daigaku-nishi, Gifu, 501-1196, Japan.
harah@gifu-pu.ac.jp.

Zinc (Zn(2+)) is considered to be one of the factors aggravating brain damage
after cerebral ischemia. Since Zn(2+) activates microglia, immune cells in the
brain, this metal is proposed to modulate neuroinflammatory responses in the
post-ischemic brain. Interleukin (IL)-23 is a heterodimeric cytokine composed of 
the p19 subunit unique to IL-23 and the p40 subunit common to IL-12. IL-23 has
been shown to play a critical role in the progression of ischemic brain injury.
However, whether Zn(2+) participates in the expression of IL-23 in microglia
remains unknown. In this study, we examined the effect of Zn(2+) on IL-23 p19
mRNA expression using rat immortalized microglia HAPI cells. Exposure to Zn(2+)
dose- and time-dependently induced the expression of IL-23 p19 mRNA in HAPI
cells. Inhibitors of MAPK and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways failed to suppress this induction.
Interestingly, we found that Zn(2+) stimulated the phosphorylation of eIF2a and
promoted the nuclear accumulation of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4).
Treatment with salubrinal, an eIF2a dephosphorylation inhibitor, enhanced
Zn(2+)-induced ATF4 accumulation and IL-23 p19 mRNA expression. In addition,
reporter assay using the IL-23 p19 promoter region revealed that ATF4 directly
transactivated IL-23 p19 promoter and that dominant-negative ATF4 suppressed
Zn(2+)-induced activation of IL-23 p19 promoter. Taken together, these findings
suggest that Zn(2+) up-regulates expression of the IL-23 p19 gene via the
eIF2a/ATF4 axis in HAPI cells.

PMID: 26174742  [PubMed - in process]


151. Scand J Immunol. 2015 Nov;82(5):452-9. doi: 10.1111/sji.12341.

Genomewide Histone H3 Lysine 9 Acetylation Profiling in CD4+ T Cells Revealed
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Deficiency in Patients with Acute-on-chronic Liver
Failure.

Jin L(1), Wang K(2), Liu H(3), Chen T(1), Yang Y(1), Ma X(3), Wang J(1), Li Y(4),
Du D(1), Zhao Y(1), He Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, the First Affiliated Hospital of Medical
College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China. (2)Department
of Infectious Diseases, the Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou City, Guangdong Province, China. (3)The Eighth Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi
Province, China. (4)Xi'an children's hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China.

Acute-on-chronic liver failure (ACLF) displayed 'sepsis-like' immune paralysis.
Little is known about the role of CD4+ T lymphocytes, the primary regulator of
innate and adopted immune system, played in ACLF. Acetylation of histone H3
lysine 9 (H3K9ac), a key epigenetic modification, tightly controls gene
transcription. Whether and how does H3K9ac modification regulate CD4+ T cells in 
ACLF remains unclear. PBMCs were isolated from patients with ACLF, immune
tolerance of chronic hepatitis B (CHB-T) and immune active of chronic hepatitis B
(CHB-A). Then, CD4+ T lymphocytes were purified by magnetic microbeads, and the
purity was confirmed by flow cytometry. H3K9ac variations were analysed in CD4+ T
cells using chromatin immunoprecipitation microarray and then confirmed by
quantitative PCR. Whole-genome H3K9 acetylation analyses were conducted by
bioinformatics. A total of 70 genes were differently modified in H3K9ac between
CHB-A and ACLF groups, while 44 genes were differently modified in H3K9ac between
CHB-T and ACLF groups. Clustering algorithm analysis showed patients with ACLF
displayed 'sepsis-like' immune paralysis. Functional analysis showed endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) stress, or downstream pathway-related genes, such as BIP, ATF4,
PER1, CSNK1D, IRF3, BNIP1, AKT1 and UBC, were differentially modified in ACLF. We
profiled H3K9 acetyl modification in CD4+ T lymphocytes from HBV-infected
patients with three different immune states, that is ACLF, immune tolerance and
immune active phases. ACLF displayed 'sepsis-like' immune paralysis. ER stress in
CD4+ T lymphocytes attributed to ACLF. This study provides some useful clues for 
revealing the mechanisms underlying ACLF.

© 2015 The Foundation for the Scandinavian Journal of Immunology.

PMID: 26173605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. FEBS J. 2015 Sep;282(18):3647-58. doi: 10.1111/febs.13369. Epub 2015 Aug 1.

ATF4 mediates necrosis induced by glucose deprivation and apoptosis induced by
2-deoxyglucose in the same cells.

León-Annicchiarico CL(1), Ramírez-Peinado S(1), Domínguez-Villanueva D(1),
Gonsberg A(1), Lampidis TJ(2), Muñoz-Pinedo C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Death Regulation Group, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute
(IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet, Spain. (2)Department of Cell Biology and Sylvester
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL, USA.

Altered metabolism is a hallmark of cancer that opens new therapeutic
possibilities. 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) is a non-metabolizable glucose analog tested
in clinical trials and is frequently used in experimental settings to mimic
glucose starvation. However, in the present study, conducted in a
rhabdomyosarcoma cell line, we find that 2-DG induces classical nuclear apoptotic
morphology and caspase-dependent cell death, whereas glucose deprivation drives
cells toward necrotic cell death. Necrosis induced by glucose deprivation did not
resemble necroptosis or ferroptosis and was not prevented by antioxidants. Both
stimuli promote endoplasmic reticulum stress. Moreover, the transcription factor 
ATF4 is found to mediate both the apoptosis induced by 2-DG and the glycosylation
inhibitor tunicamycin, as well as the necrosis provoked by glucose withdrawal.
Several hexoses partially prevented glucose deprivation-induced necrosis in
rhabdomyosarcoma, although only mannose prevented apoptosis induced by 2-DG. In
both cases, a reduction of cell death was associated with decreased levels of
ATF4. Our results confirm previous data indicating the differential effects of
these two forms with respect to inhibiting glucose metabolism, and they place
endoplasmic reticulum stress as the critical mediator of glucose
starvation-induced cell death.

© 2015 FEBS.

PMID: 26172539  [PubMed - in process]


153. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2015 Jun;19(12):2303-10.

Apigenin inhibits indoxyl sulfate-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress and
anti-proliferative pathways, CHOP and IL-6/p21, in human renal proximal tubular
cells.

Jeon BJ(1), Yang HM, Lyu YS, Pae HO, Ju SM, Jeon BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Korean Medicine, Wonkwang University,
Iksan, Jeonbuk, Republic of Korea. omdjbh@wku.ac.kr.

OBJECTIVE: Indoxyl sulfate (IS) has been reported to induce endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress in tubular cells and to inhibit the cell proliferation via ER stress 
and ERK/IL-6/p21 pathways. This study has investigated the effect of apigenin on 
IS-induced ER stress in immortalized human renal proximal tubular HK-2 cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human Kidney 2 (HK-2) cells were treated with IS (5 mM) in
the absence or presence of apigenin (10 µM) or salubrinal (20 µM) for indicated
times under the serum-free condition. Cell viability was evaluated by MTT assay. 
The levels of protein expression and phosphorylation were evaluated by Western
blot analysis.
RESULTS: In HK-2 cells, apigenin completely inhibited IS-induced ER stress, as
indicated by decreased expression of CHOP, ATF4 and GRP78, although the
phosphorylated level of eIF2a did not decrease. IS-induced expression levels of
IL-6 and p21 proteins were also inhibited by apigenin, with no significant
changes in ERK activation. The suppression of cell proliferation by IS was
abolished by salubrinal, an ER stress inhibitor, but not by apigenin. Apigenin
inhibited the phosphorylation of Akt and GSK-3ß in IS-treated HK-2 cells. The
phosphorylation of GSK-3ß, which was inhibited by apigenin, resulted in
hypo-phosphorylation of retinoblastoma (Rb) protein, which was associated with
the decrease in cyclin D1 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that apigenin may inhibit IS-induced ER stress
and expression of IL-6 and p21 proteins in HK-2 cells. It is most likely that
apigenin, together with its inhibitory effect on ER stress, may also suppress the
cell growth by inducing the loss of Rb phosphorylation, which was associated with
the decrease in cyclin D1 expression by GSK-3ß activation through the inhibition 
of PI3K/Akt pathway.

PMID: 26166660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 10;10(7):e0132420. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132420.
eCollection 2015.

Global Transcriptomic Profiling of Cardiac Hypertrophy and Fatty Heart Induced by
Long-Term High-Energy Diet in Bama Miniature Pigs.

Xia J(1), Zhang Y(2), Xin L(1), Kong S(1), Chen Y(2), Yang S(1), Li K(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Institute of Animal Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, P. R. China. (2)College of
Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, P. R. China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Institute of Animal Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, P. R. China; Agricultural
Genomes Institute at Shenzhen, CAAS, Shenzhen, 518120, P.R. China.

A long-term high-energy diet affects human health and leads to obesity and
metabolic syndrome in addition to cardiac steatosis and hypertrophy. Ectopic fat 
accumulation in the heart has been demonstrated to be a risk factor for heart
disorders, but the molecular mechanism of heart disease remains largely unknown. 
Bama miniature pigs were fed a high-fat, high-sucrose diet (HFHSD) for 23 months.
These pigs developed symptoms of metabolic syndrome and showed cardiac steatosis 
and hypertrophy with a greatly increased body weight (2.73-fold, P<0.01), insulin
level (4.60-fold, P<0.01), heart weight (1.82-fold, P<0.05) and heart volume
(1.60-fold, P<0.05) compared with the control pigs. To understand the molecular
mechanisms of cardiac steatosis and hypertrophy, nine pig heart cRNA samples were
hybridized to porcine GeneChips. Microarray analyses revealed that 1,022 genes
were significantly differentially expressed (P<0.05, =1.5-fold change), including
591 up-regulated and 431 down-regulated genes in the HFHSD group relative to the 
control group. KEGG analysis indicated that the observed heart disorder involved 
the signal transduction-related MAPK, cytokine, and PPAR signaling pathways,
energy metabolism-related fatty acid and oxidative phosphorylation signaling
pathways, heart function signaling-related focal adhesion, axon guidance,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and actin cytoskeleton signaling pathways,
inflammation and apoptosis pathways, and others. Quantitative RT-PCR assays
identified several important differentially expressed heart-related genes,
including STAT3, ACSL4, ATF4, FADD, PPP3CA, CD74, SLA-8, VCL, ACTN2 and FGFR1,
which may be targets of further research. This study shows that a long-term,
high-energy diet induces obesity, cardiac steatosis, and hypertrophy and provides
insights into the molecular mechanisms of hypertrophy and fatty heart to
facilitate further research.

PMCID: PMC4498776
PMID: 26161779  [PubMed - in process]


155. Exp Eye Res. 2015 Sep;138:126-33. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2015.05.016. Epub 2015 Jul 
3.

Deficiency of CC chemokine ligand 2 and decay-accelerating factor causes retinal 
degeneration in mice.

Yu M(1), Kang K(2), Bu P(3), Bell BA(2), Kaul C(2), Qiao JB(3), Sturgill-Short
G(4), Yu X(2), Tarchick MJ(5), Beight C(2), Zhang SX(6), Peachey NS(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmic Research, Cole Eye Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA; Department of Ophthalmology, Cleveland Clinic
Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH,
USA. Electronic address: yum@ccf.org. (2)Department of Ophthalmic Research, Cole 
Eye Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA. (3)Department of 
Ophthalmology, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, IL, USA. (4)Research Service, 
Louis Stokes Cleveland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(5)Department of Ophthalmic Research, Cole Eye Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA; Research Service, Louis Stokes Cleveland Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, USA. (6)Departments of Ophthalmology and
Biochemistry, SUNY-Buffalo and SUNY Eye Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(7)Department of Ophthalmic Research, Cole Eye Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA; Department of Ophthalmology, Cleveland Clinic
Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH,
USA; Research Service, Louis Stokes Cleveland Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Cleveland, OH, USA.

CC chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2) recruits macrophages to reduce inflammatory
responses. Decay-accelerating factor (DAF) is a membrane regulator of the
classical and alternative pathways of complement activation. In view of the link 
between complement genes and retinal diseases, we evaluated the retinal phenotype
of C57BL/6J mice and mice lacking Ccl2 and/or Daf1 at 12 months of age, using
scanning laser ophthalmoscopic imaging, electroretinography (ERG), histology,
immunohistochemistry, and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end
labeling (TUNEL) analysis. In comparison to C57BL/6J mice, mutant mice had an
increased number of autofluorescent foci, with the greatest number in the
Ccl2(-/-)/Daf1(-/-) retina. ERG amplitudes in Ccl2(-/-)/Daf1(-/-), Ccl2(-/-) and 
Daf1(-/-) mice were reduced, with the greatest reduction in Ccl2(-/-)/Daf1(-/-)
mice. TUNEL-positive cells were not seen in C57BL/6J retina, but were prevalent
in the outer and inner nuclear layers of Ccl2(-/-)Daf1(-/-) mice and were present
at reduced density in Ccl2(-/-) or Daf1(-/-) mice. Cell loss was most pronounced 
in the outer and inner nuclear layers of Ccl2(-/-)/Daf1(-/-) mice. The levels of 
the endoplasmic reticulum chaperone GPR78 and transcription factor ATF4 were
significantly increased in the Ccl2(-/-)/Daf1(-/-) retina. In comparison to the
C57BL/6J retina, the phosphorylation of NF-<U+03BA>B p65, p38, ERK and JNK was
significantly upregulated while SIRT1 was significantly downregulated in the
Ccl2(-/-)/Daf1(-/-) retina. Our results suggest that loss of Ccl2 and Daf1 causes
retinal neuronal death and degeneration which is related to increased endoplasmic
reticulum stress, oxidative stress and inflammation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26149093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. BMC Genomics. 2015 Jul 7;16:506. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1656-4.

Arterial endothelial methylome: differential DNA methylation in
athero-susceptible disturbed flow regions in vivo.

Jiang YZ(1), Manduchi E(2), Stoeckert CJ Jr(3), Davies PF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine and Institute for Medicine &
Engineering, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 1010
Vagelos Building, 3340 Smith Walk, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
jyizhou@mail.med.upenn.edu. (2)Department of Genetics and Institute for
Biomedical Informatics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. manduchi@upenn.edu. (3)Department of Genetics and
Institute for Biomedical Informatics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. stoeckrt@upenn.edu. (4)Department of 
Pathology & Laboratory Medicine and Institute for Medicine & Engineering,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 1010 Vagelos Building,
3340 Smith Walk, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. pfd@mail.med.upenn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Atherosclerosis is a heterogeneously distributed disease of arteries 
in which the endothelium plays an important central role. Spatial transcriptome
profiling of endothelium in pre-lesional arteries has demonstrated differential
phenotypes primed for athero-susceptibility at hemodynamic sites associated with 
disturbed blood flow. DNA methylation is a powerful epigenetic regulator of
endothelial transcription recently associated with flow characteristics. We
investigated differential DNA methylation in flow region-specific aortic
endothelial cells in vivo in adult domestic male and female swine.
RESULTS: Genome-wide DNA methylation was profiled in endothelial cells (EC)
isolated from two robust locations of differing patho-susceptibility:--an
athero-susceptible site located at the inner curvature of the aortic arch (AA)
and an athero-protected region in the descending thoracic (DT) aorta. Complete
methylated DNA immunoprecipitation sequencing (MeDIP-seq) identified over 5500
endothelial differentially methylated regions (DMRs). DMR density was
significantly enriched in exons and 5'UTR sequences of annotated genes, 60 of
which are linked to cardiovascular disease. The set of DMR-associated genes was
enriched in transcriptional regulation, pattern specification HOX loci, oxidative
stress and the ER stress adaptive pathway, all categories linked to
athero-susceptible endothelium. Examination of the relationship between DMR and
mRNA in HOXA genes demonstrated a significant inverse relationship between CpG
island promoter methylation and gene expression. Methylation-specific PCR (MSP)
confirmed differential CpG methylation of HOXA genes, the ER stress gene ATF4,
inflammatory regulator microRNA-10a and ARHGAP25 that encodes a negative
regulator of Rho GTPases involved in cytoskeleton remodeling. Gender-specific
DMRs associated with ciliogenesis that may be linked to defects in cilia
development were also identified in AA DMRs.
CONCLUSIONS: An endothelial methylome analysis identifies epigenetic DMR
characteristics associated with transcriptional regulation in regions of
atherosusceptibility in swine aorta in vivo. The data represent the first
methylome blueprint for spatio-temporal analyses of lesion susceptibility
predisposing to endothelial dysfunction in complex flow environments in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4492093
PMID: 26148682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 21;290(34):20904-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.659466. Epub
2015 Jul 1.

Intracellular Bacterial Pathogens Trigger the Formation of U Small Nuclear RNA
Bodies (U Bodies) through Metabolic Stress Induction.

Tsalikis J(1), Tattoli I(2), Ling A(1), Sorbara MT(3), Croitoru DO(1), Philpott
DJ(3), Girardin SE(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology and. (2)From the 
Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology and Immunology, University of
Toronto, Toronto M6G 2T6, Canada. (3)Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto
M6G 2T6, Canada. (4)From the Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology 
and stephen.girardin@utoronto.ca.

Invasive bacterial pathogens induce an amino acid starvation (AAS) response in
infected host cells that controls host defense in part by promoting autophagy.
However, whether AAS has additional significant effects on the host response to
intracellular bacteria remains poorly characterized. Here we showed that
Shigella, Salmonella, and Listeria interfere with spliceosomal U snRNA maturation
in the cytosol. Bacterial infection resulted in the rerouting of U snRNAs and
their cytoplasmic escort, the survival motor neuron (SMN) complex, to processing 
bodies, thus forming U snRNA bodies (U bodies). This process likely contributes
to the decline in the cytosolic levels of U snRNAs and of the SMN complex
proteins SMN and DDX20 that we observed in infected cells. U body formation was
triggered by membrane damage in infected cells and was associated with the
induction of metabolic stresses, such as AAS or endoplasmic reticulum stress.
Mechanistically, targeting of U snRNAs to U bodies was regulated by translation
initiation inhibition and the ATF4/ATF3 pathway, and U bodies rapidly disappeared
upon removal of the stress, suggesting that their accumulation represented an
adaptive response to metabolic stress. Importantly, this process likely
contributed to shape the host response to invasive bacteria because
down-regulation of DDX20 expression using short hairpin RNA (shRNA) amplified
ATF3- and NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent signaling. Together, these results identify a critical 
role for metabolic stress and invasive bacterial pathogens in U body formation
and suggest that this process contributes to host defense.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4543651 [Available on 2016-08-21]
PMID: 26134566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2015 Nov;20(6):927-38. doi: 10.1007/s12192-015-0613-0.
Epub 2015 Jul 2.

Crocin and Quercetin protect HCT116 and HEK293 cells from Zearalenone-induced
apoptosis by reducing endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Ben Salem I(1,)(2), Prola A(3), Boussabbeh M(1,)(2), Guilbert A(3), Bacha H(1),
Abid-Essefi S(4), Lemaire C(3,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Research on Biologically Compatible Compounds (LRSBC), Faculty 
of Dental Medicine, Rue Avicenne, 5019, Monastir, Tunisia. (2)Faculty of Sciences
of Bizerte, Carthage University, Bizerte, Tunisia. (3)INSERM UMR-S 1180, LabEx
LERMIT, Châtenay-Malabry, France. (4)Laboratory for Research on Biologically
Compatible Compounds (LRSBC), Faculty of Dental Medicine, Rue Avicenne, 5019,
Monastir, Tunisia. salwaabid@yahoo.fr. (5)Faculté de Pharmacie, Université
Paris-Sud, Châtenay-Malabry, France. (6)Université de Versailles Saint Quentin en
Yvelines, Versailles, France.

Mycotoxins are considered to be significant contaminants of food and animal feed.
Zearalenone (ZEN) is a non-steroidal estrogenic mycotoxin produced by several
species of Fusarium in cereals and agricultural products. ZEN has been shown to
be cytotoxic, genotoxic, and mutagenic in different cell types. In the present
study, we investigated the involvement of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in
ZEN-mediated toxicity in human intestine (HCT116) and kidney (HEK293) cells and
evaluated the effects of the two common dietary compounds Quercetin (QUER) and
Crocin (CRO). We show that ZEN treatment induces ER stress and activates the
unfolded protein response (UPR) as evidenced by XBP1 mRNA splicing and
upregulation of GRP78, ATF4, GADD34, PDIA6, and CHOP. Activation of the ER stress
response is associated with activation of the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis.
This apoptotic process is characterized by an increase in ROS generation and
lipid peroxidation, a loss of mitochondrial transmembrane potential (<U+0394><U+03A8>m), and an
activation of caspases and DNA damages. We also demonstrate that the antioxidant 
properties of QUER and CRO help to prevent ER stress and reduce ZEN-induced
apoptosis in HCT116 and HEK293 cells. Our results suggest that antioxidant
molecule might be helpful to prevent ZEN-induced ER stress and toxicity.

PMCID: PMC4595428 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26134454  [PubMed - in process]


159. J Vis Exp. 2015 Jun 17;(100):e52799. doi: 10.3791/52799.

Detection of Axonally Localized mRNAs in Brain Sections Using High-Resolution In 
Situ Hybridization.

Baleriola J(1), Jean Y(1), Troy C(1), Hengst U(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University. (2)College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University; uh2112@cumc.columbia.edu.

mRNAs are frequently localized to vertebrate axons and their local translation is
required for axon pathfinding or branching during development and for
maintenance, repair or neurodegeneration in postdevelopmental periods. High
throughput analyses have recently revealed that axons have a more dynamic and
complex transcriptome than previously expected. These analysis, however have been
mostly done in cultured neurons where axons can be isolated from the
somato-dendritic compartments. It is virtually impossible to achieve such
isolation in whole tissues in vivo. Thus, in order to verify the recruitment of
mRNAs and their functional relevance in a whole animal, transcriptome analyses
should ideally be combined with techniques that allow the visualization of mRNAs 
in situ. Recently, novel ISH technologies that detect RNAs at a single-molecule
level have been developed. This is especially important when analyzing the
subcellular localization of mRNA, since localized RNAs are typically found at low
levels. Here we describe two protocols for the detection of axonally-localized
mRNAs using a novel ultrasensitive RNA ISH technology. We have combined RNAscope 
ISH with axonal counterstain using fluorescence immunohistochemistry or
histological dyes to verify the recruitment of Atf4 mRNA to axons in vivo in the 
mature mouse and human brains.

PMCID: PMC4545066 [Available on 2016-06-17]
PMID: 26131922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Jun 1;14(2):5994-6002. doi: 10.4238/2015.June.1.17.

Proapoptotic effects of heme oxygenase-1 inhibitor on Kasumi-1 cells via the
ATF4/CHOP/Ire-1a pathway.

Wei SX(1), Wang YT(2), Chai QX(1), Fang Q(3), Zhang YM(1), Wang JS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Affiliated Hospital of Guiyang Medical College,
Guiyang, China. (2)Department of Blood Transfusion, People's Hospital of Yuxi,
Yuxi, China. (3)Department of Pharmacy, Affiliated Hospital of Guiyang Medical
College, Guiyang, China. (4)Department of Hematology, Affiliated Hospital of
Guiyang Medical College, Guiyang, China jishiwangcn@163.com.

We evaluated the effects of down-regulated heme oxygenase (HO)-1 expression on
the proliferation of the acute myelocytic leukemia Kasumi-1 cell line by using
the HO-1 inhibitor zinc protoporphyrin IX (ZnPPIX) in combination with
daunorubicin (DNR), and evaluated the mechanism. The proliferation rates of cells
treated with 10 mg/mL DNR and 10 mM ZnPPIX individually or in combination for
different time periods were detected using the MTT assay. The apoptotic outcomes 
of the blank control, ZnPPIX, DNR, and ZnPPIX groups in combination with the DNR 
group were detected by flow cytometry. The expression of HO-1, activating
transcription factor 4, CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein homologous protein, and
inositol-requiring enzyme-a mRNA and proteins were detected by fluorescent
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and western blotting,
respectively. Combined administration inhibited the cells most potently and
time-dependently, decreased the expression of HO-1, and significantly increased
the expression of activating transcription factor 4, CCAAT-enhancer-binding
protein homologous protein, and inositol-requiring enzyme-a expression levels.
The cell apoptotic rates in the blank control, DNR, ZnPPIX, and combined
administration groups were 8.32 ± 0.53, 39.16 ± 1.46, 10.46 ± 0.88, and 56.26 ±
2.24%, respectively. Inhibiting HO-1 expression can enhance the damaging effects 
of DNR on Kasumi-1 cells, providing experimental evidence for the improvement of 
therapeutic effects on acute myelocytic leukemia in clinical practice.

PMID: 26125799  [PubMed - in process]


161. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 30;5:11781. doi: 10.1038/srep11781.

Signaling through alternative Integrated Stress Response pathways compensates for
GCN2 loss in a mouse model of soft tissue sarcoma.

Lehman SL(1), Ryeom S(2), Koumenis C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Deparment of Radiation Oncology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 19104. (2)Department of Cancer Biology,
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA 19104.

The tumor microenvironment is characterized by deficiencies in oxygen and
nutrients, such as glucose and amino acids. Activation of the GCN2 arm of the
Integrated Stress Response (ISR) in response to amino acid deprivation is one
mechanism by which tumor cells cope with nutrient stress. GCN2 phosphorylates the
alpha subunit of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF2, leading to
global downregulation of translation to conserve amino acids and initiation of a 
transcriptional program through ATF4 to promote recovery from nutrient
deprivation. Loss of GCN2 results in decreased tumor cell survival in vitro under
amino acid deprivation and attenuated tumor growth in xenograft tumor models.
However, it is not known what effects GCN2 loss has on the growth of
autochthonous tumors that arise in their native microenvironment. Here, we
demonstrate in a genetically engineered mouse model of soft tissue sarcoma that
loss of GCN2 has no effect on tumor growth or animal survival. The sarcomas
displayed compensatory activation of PERK or phospho-eIF2a independent
upregulation of ATF4 in order to maintain ISR signaling, indicating that this
pathway is critical for tumorigenesis. These results have important implications 
for the development and testing of small molecule inhibitors of ISR kinases as
cancer therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4485314
PMID: 26123823  [PubMed - in process]


162. Free Radic Biol Med. 2015 Nov;88(Pt B):205-11. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2015.06.007. Epub 2015 Jun 25.

The antioxidant function of sestrins is mediated by promotion of autophagic
degradation of Keap1 and Nrf2 activation and by inhibition of mTORC1.

Rhee SG(1), Bae SH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Severance Biomedical Science Institute and Yonsei Biomedical Research
Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic of
Korea. Electronic address: rheesg@yuhs.ac. (2)Severance Biomedical Science
Institute and Yonsei Biomedical Research Institute, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
soohanbae@yuhs.ac.

Sestrins 1 to 3 constitute a family of proteins that are induced in mammalian
cells in response to environmental stressors. Despite their apparent lack of
intrinsic catalytic antioxidant activity, Sestrins protect cells from oxidative
stress by lowering intracellular levels of H2O2. Here we review the mechanisms by
which various types of cellular stress induce Sestrin gene transcription as well 
as those underlying the antioxidant function of these proteins. Several
transcriptional factors, including p53, HIF-1, FoxO, C/EBP-ß, ATF4, Nrf2, and
PGC-1a, contribute directly to the transcriptional activation of Sestrin genes in
response to various types of stress. The antioxidant function of Sestrins is
mediated by two main pathways. In one pathway, Sestrins promote the p62-dependent
autophagic degradation of Keap1 and thereby upregulate Nrf2 signaling and the
consequent expression of genes for antioxidant enzymes. In the second pathway,
Sestrins block mTORC1 activation and thereby attenuate reactive oxygen species
accumulation. This inhibition of mTORC1 activity is achieved either via the
AMPK-dependent phosphorylation and activation of TSC2 and consequent inhibition
of the GTPase Rheb or via inhibition of the GTPase Rag and consequent prevention 
of the lysosomal localization of mTORC1 triggered by amino acids. Elucidation of 
how these pathways operate individually or cooperatively under different stress
conditions awaits further study.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26117317  [PubMed - in process]


163. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Aug 1;23(15):4514-21. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.06.011. Epub 
2015 Jun 14.

Identification of 5-nitrofuran-2-amide derivatives that induce apoptosis in
triple negative breast cancer cells by activating C/EBP-homologous protein
expression.

Duan H(1), Li Y(1), Lim HY(2), Wang W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, OK, USA. (2)Free Radical Biology and Aging Program, Oklahoma Medical 
Research Foundation, OK, USA. (3)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program,
Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, OK, USA. Electronic address:
weidong-wang@omrf.org.

The transcription factor C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP) is a key component of
the terminal unfolded protein response (UPR) that mediates unresolvable
endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis. CHOP induction is known to cause 
cancer cell death. Chemicals that induce CHOP expression would thus be valuable
as potential cancer therapeutics and as research tools. Here, we identified
5-nitrofuran-2-amide derivatives as small molecule activators of CHOP expression 
that induced apoptosis in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells. Our
preliminary structure-activity relationship studies indicated that compounds with
an N-phenyl-5-nitrofuran-2-carboxamide skeleton were particularly potent inducers
of TNBC cell apoptosis. The compounds activate CHOP expression via the
PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 branch of the UPR. These results indicate that small molecule
activators of CHOP expression may have therapeutic potential for TNBC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26116180  [PubMed - in process]


164. Chin Med J (Engl). 2015 Jul 5;128(13):1772-7. doi: 10.4103/0366-6999.159353.

Different Eukaryotic Initiation Factor 2Be Mutations Lead to Various Degrees of
Intolerance to the Stress of Endoplasmic Reticulum in Oligodendrocytes.

Chen N, Jiang YW, Hao HJ, Ban TT, Gao K, Zhang ZB, Wang JM, Wu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034,
China.

BACKGROUND: Vanishing white matter disease (VWM), a human autosomal recessive
inherited leukoencephalopathy, is due to mutations in eukaryotic initiation
factor 2B (eIF2B). eIF2B is responsible for the initiation of protein synthesis
by its guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) activity. Mutations of eIF2B
impair GEF activity at different degree. Previous studies implied improperly
activated unfolded protein response (UPR) and endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) 
participated in the pathogenesis of VWM. Autophagy relieves endoplasmic reticulum
load by eliminating the unfolded protein. It is still unknown the effects of
genotypes on the pathogenesis. In this work, UPR and autophagy flux were analyzed
with different mutational types.
METHODS: ERS tolerance, reflected by apoptosis and cell viability, was detected
in human oligodendrocyte cell line transfected with the wild type, or different
mutations of p. Arg113His, p. Arg269FNx01 or p. Ser610-Asp613del in eIF2Be. A
representative UPR-PERK component of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) was
measured under the basal condition and ERS induction. Autophagy was analyzed the 
flux in the presence of lysosomal inhibitors.
RESULTS: The degree of ERS tolerance varied in different genotypes. The truncated
or deletion mutant showed prominent apoptosis cell viability declination after
ERS induction. The most seriously damaged GEF activity of p. Arg269FNx01 group
underwent spontaneous apoptosis. The truncated or deletion mutant showed elevated
ATF4 under basal as well as ERS condition. Decreased expression of LC3-I and
LC3-II in the mutants reflected an impaired autophagy flux, which was more
obvious in the truncated or deletion mutants after ERS induction.
CONCLUSIONS: GEF activities in different genotypes could influence the cell ERS
tolerance as well as compensatory pathways of UPR and autophagy. Oligodendrocytes
with truncated or deletion mutants showed less tolerable to ERS.

PMID: 26112719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Elife. 2015 Jun 25;4:e06821. doi: 10.7554/eLife.06821.

ATF4 licenses C/EBPß activity in human mesenchymal stem cells primed for
adipogenesis.

Cohen DM(1), Won KJ(2), Nguyen N(2), Lazar MA(1), Chen CS(3), Steger DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, United
States. (2)The Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism, Perelman School
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, United States.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, United
States.

A well-established cascade of transcription factor (TF) activity orchestrates
adipogenesis in response to chemical cues, yet how cell-intrinsic determinants of
differentiation such as cell shape and/or seeding density inform this
transcriptional program remain enigmatic. Here, we uncover a novel mechanism
licensing transcription in human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) adipogenically
primed by confluence. Prior to adipogenesis, confluency promotes heterodimer
recruitment of the bZip TFs C/EBPß and ATF4 to a non-canonical C/EBP DNA
sequence. ATF4 depletion decreases both cell-density-dependent transcription and 
adipocyte differentiation. Global profiling in hMSCs and a novel cell-free assay 
reveals that ATF4 requires C/EBPß for genomic binding at a motif distinct from
that bound by the C/EBPß homodimer. Our observations demonstrate that C/EBPß
bridges the transcriptional programs in naïve, confluent cells and early
differentiating pre-adipocytes. Moreover, they suggest that homo- and heterodimer
formation poise C/EBPß to execute diverse and stage-specific transcriptional
programs by exploiting an expanded motif repertoire.

PMCID: PMC4501333
PMID: 26111340  [PubMed - in process]


166. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2015 Sep;1350:61-5. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12822. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

Effect of mitochondrial stress on systemic metabolism.

Lee MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Severans Biomedical Research Institute and Department of Internal Medicine,
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

In our studies investigating the role of autophagy in systemic metabolism, we
found that mitochondrial dysfunction due to autophagy deficiency in insulin
target tissues, such as skeletal muscle or liver, leads to the induction of
fibroblast growth factor (FGF)21 as a mitokine and protection against obesity and
insulin resistance. In the following studies, we observed that metformin, one of 
the most widely used antidiabetic medications, induces mitochondrial stress and
induces FGF21 through a PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 pathway, which may contribute to the
antidiabetic effect of metformin. Amino acid deprivation also induced ATF4 and
FGF21, while the role of mitochondrial dysfunction in this condition is not yet
clear. These results suggest the possibility that mitochondrial stress inducing
an integrated stress response can induce a mitokine response and affect systemic 
metabolism in a non-cell-autonomous manner, in addition to the well-recognized
cell-autonomous role of mitochondrial function in metabolism.

© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 26100439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Oct;1853(10 Pt A):2492-505. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.06.006. Epub 2015 Jun 18.

TRIB3 enhances cell viability during glucose deprivation in HEK293-derived cells 
by upregulating IGFBP2, a novel nutrient deficiency survival factor.

Örd T(1), Örd D(2), Adler P(3), Vilo J(3), Örd T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Estonian Biocentre, Riia 23b, 51010 Tartu, Estonia; Institute of Molecular and
Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Riia 23, 51010 Tartu, Estonia. (2)Estonian
Biocentre, Riia 23b, 51010 Tartu, Estonia. (3)Institute of Computer Science,
University of Tartu, Liivi 2, 50409 Tartu, Estonia. (4)Estonian Biocentre, Riia
23b, 51010 Tartu, Estonia. Electronic address: tord@ebc.ee.

Glucose deprivation occurs in several human diseases, including infarctions and
solid tumors, and leads to cell death. In this article, we investigate the role
of the pseudokinase Tribbles homolog 3 (TRIB3) in the cellular stress response to
glucose starvation using cell lines derived from HEK293, which is highly
glycolytic under standard conditions. Our results show that TRIB3 mRNA and
protein levels are strongly upregulated in glucose-deprived cells via the
induction of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) by the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress sensor kinase PERK. Cell survival in glucose-deficient
conditions is enhanced by TRIB3 overexpression and reduced by TRIB3 knockdown.
Genome-wide gene expression profiling uncovered approximately 40 glucose
deprivation-responsive genes that are affected by TRIB3, including several genes 
involved in signaling processes and metabolism. Based on transcription factor
motif analysis, the majority of TRIB3-downregulated genes are target genes of
ATF4, which TRIB3 is known to inhibit. The gene most substantially upregulated by
TRIB3 is insulin-like growth factor binding protein 2 (IGFBP2). IGFBP2 mRNA and
protein levels are downregulated in cells subjected to glucose deprivation, and
reduced IGFBP2 expression aggravates cell death during glucose deficiency, while 
overexpression of IGFBP2 prolongs cell survival. Moreover, IGFBP2 silencing
abrogates the pro-survival effect of TRIB3. Since TRIB3 augments IGFBP2
expression in glucose-starved cells, the data indicate that IGFBP2 contributes to
the attenuation of cell death by TRIB3. These results implicate TRIB3 and IGFBP2,
both of which are known to be overexpressed in several types of cancers, as
pro-survival modulators of cell viability in nutrient-deficient
microenvironments.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26094770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 19;10(6):e0130705. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130705.
eCollection 2015.

Differences in Unfolded Protein Response Pathway Activation in the Lenses of
Three Types of Cataracts.

Yang J(1), Zhou S(2), Gu J(1), Wang Y(1), Guo M(3), Liu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, The First
People's Hospital of Foshan, Guangdong, China. (3)Department of Ophthalmology,
Huichang County People's Hospital, Jiangxi, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the activation of three unfolded protein response (UPR)
pathways in the lenses of age-related, high myopia-related and congenital
cataracts.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Lens specimens were collected from patients during small
incision cataract surgery. Lenses from young cadaver eyes were collected as
normal controls. Real-time PCR and Western blotting were performed to detect the 
expression of GRP78, p-eIF2a, spliced XBP1, ATF6, ATF4 and p-IRE1a in the lenses 
of normal human subjects and patients with age-related, myopia-related or
congenital cataracts.
RESULTS: In the lenses of the age-related and high myopia-related cataract
groups, the protein levels of ATF6, p-eIF2a and p-IRE1a and the gene expression
levels of spliced XBP1, GRP78, ATF6 and ATF4 were greatly increased.
Additionally, in the congenital cataract group, the protein levels of p-eIF2a and
p-IRE1a and the gene expression levels of spliced XBP1, GRP78 and ATF4 were
greatly increased. However, the protein and gene expression levels of ATF6 were
not up-regulated in the congenital cataract group compared with the normal
control group.
CONCLUSIONS: The UPR is activated via different pathways in the lenses of
age-related, high myopia-related and congenital cataracts. UPR activation via
distinct pathways might play important roles in cataractogenesis mechanisms in
different types of cataracts.

PMCID: PMC4475046
PMID: 26091066  [PubMed - in process]


169. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 18;10(6):e0130635. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130635.
eCollection 2015.

Transcription Factor ATF4 Induces NLRP1 Inflammasome Expression during
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress.

D'Osualdo A(1), Anania VG(2), Yu K(2), Lill JR(2), Kaufman RJ(3), Matsuzawa S(1),
Reed JC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Death and Survival Networks Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research
Institute, La Jolla, California, United States of America. (2)Department of
Protein Chemistry, Genentech Inc, South San Francisco, California, United States 
of America. (3)Degenerative Diseases Research Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical
Research Institute, La Jolla, California, United States of America. (4)Cell Death
and Survival Networks Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La
Jolla, California, United States of America; Pharma Research and Early
Development (pRED), Roche, Basel, Switzerland.

Perturbation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis triggers the ER stress
response (also known as Unfolded Protein Response), a hallmark of many
pathological disorders. However the connection between ER stress and inflammation
remains largely unexplored. Recent data suggest that ER stress controls the
activity of inflammasomes, key signaling platforms that mediate innate immune
responses. Here we report that expression of NLRP1, a core inflammasome
component, is specifically up-regulated during severe ER stress conditions in
human cell lines. Both IRE1a and PERK, but not the ATF6 pathway, modulate NLRP1
gene expression. Furthermore, using mutagenesis, chromatin immunoprecipitation
and CRISPR-Cas9-mediated genome editing technology, we demonstrate that ATF4
transcription factor directly binds to NLRP1 promoter during ER stress. Although 
involved in different types of inflammatory responses, XBP-1 splicing was not
required for NLRP1 induction. This study provides further evidence that links ER 
stress with innate.

PMCID: PMC4472728
PMID: 26086088  [PubMed - in process]


170. Oncol Rep. 2015 Aug;34(2):913-9. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4054. Epub 2015 Jun 11.

Sanguinarine-induced apoptosis in lung adenocarcinoma cells is dependent on
reactive oxygen species production and endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Gu S(1), Yang XC(2), Xiang XY(2), Wu Y(2), Zhang Y(2), Yan XY(2), Xue YN(2), Sun 
LK(2), Shao GG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, First Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun,
Jilin 130021, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pathophysiology, Basic College of
Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China.

Sanguinarine (SAN), an alkaloid isolated from plants of the Papaveraceae family, 
is a compound with multiple biological activities. In the present study, we
explored the anticancer properties of SAN in lung cancer using the human lung
adenocarcinoma cell line SPC-A1. Our results revealed that SAN inhibited SPC-A1
cell growth and induced apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner. We found that SAN
triggered reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, while elimination of ROS by
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) reversed the growth inhibition and apoptosis induced by
SAN. SAN-induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress resulted in the upregulation
of many genes and proteins involved in the unfolded protein response (UPR)
pathway, including glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), p-protein kinase R
(PKR)-like ER kinase (PERK), p-eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a
(eIF2a), activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein homologous protein (CHOP). Blocking ER stress with tauroursodeoxycholic
acid (TUDCA) markedly reduced SAN-induced inhibition of growth and apoptosis.
Furthermore, TUDCA decreased SAN-induced ROS production, and NAC attenuated
SAN-induced GRP78 and CHOP expression. Overall, our data indicate that the
anticancer effects of SAN in lung cancer cells depend on ROS production and ER
stress and that SAN may be a potential agent against lung cancer.

PMID: 26081590  [PubMed - in process]


171. Neurobiol Aging. 2015 Sep;36(9):2509-18. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.05.006. Epub 2015 May 15.

Quercetin reduces eIF2a phosphorylation by GADD34 induction.

Hayakawa M(1), Itoh M(1), Ohta K(1), Li S(1), Ueda M(1), Wang MX(1), Nishida
E(1), Islam S(1), Suzuki C(1), Ohzawa K(1), Kobori M(2), Inuzuka T(3), Nakagawa
T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu,
Japan. (2)National Food Research Institute, National Agriculture and Food
Research Organization, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. (3)Department of Neurology and
Geriatrics, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurobiology, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu,
Japan. Electronic address: tnakagaw@gifu-u.ac.jp.

The production of amyloid ß (Aß) in the brain from Aß precursor protein (APP)
through <U+03B3>-secretase is important for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease
(AD). Our previous studies have demonstrated that autophagy impairment and
endoplasmic reticulum stress increase presenilin 1 expression and enhance
<U+03B3>-secretase activity through the phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) and the translation of activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4). However, the inhibitory molecules for <U+03B3>-secretase are largely
unknown. Here, we demonstrate that the levels of ATF4 expression are increased in
the brain of APP23 AD model mice; furthermore, these levels enhanced in the brain
of APP23 mice crossed with obese and diabetic db/db (Lepr(db/db)) mice. A
polyhydroxylated flavonoid, quercetin, suppressed presenilin 1 expression and Aß 
secretion in autophagy-impaired cells by the induction of growth arrest and DNA
damaged-inducible gene (GADD) 34, which mediates eIF2a dephosphorylation, leading
to decreased ATF4 expression. GADD34 induction was observed in the brain of
wild-type mice, and APP23 mice fed quercetin in their diet. After the long-term
feeding of quercetin, deterioration in memory assessed by freezing behavior was
delayed in APP23 mice. These results indicate that quercetin may reduce eIF2a
phosphorylation and ATF4 expression through GADD34 induction in the brain,
leading to the improvement of memory in aged mice and the delay of deterioration 
in memory at the early stage of AD in AD model mice.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26070242  [PubMed - in process]


172. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Aug;1849(8):966-78. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.06.002.
Epub 2015 Jun 8.

C/EBPß is a transcriptional key regulator of IL-36a in murine macrophages.

Nerlich A(1), Ruangkiattikul N(2), Laarmann K(2), Janze N(2), Dittrich-Breiholz
O(3), Kracht M(4), Goethe R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Microbiology, Department of Infectious Diseases, University of
Veterinary Medicine, Foundation Hannover, 30173 Hannover, Germany. Electronic
address: andreas.nerlich@charite.de. (2)Institute for Microbiology, Department of
Infectious Diseases, University of Veterinary Medicine, Foundation Hannover,
30173 Hannover, Germany. (3)Institute of Biochemistry, Medical School Hannover,
30625 Hannover, Germany. (4)Rudolf -Buchheim-Institute of Pharmacology,
Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, 35392 Giessen, Germany.

Interleukin (IL)-36a - one of the novel members of the IL-1 family of cytokines -
is a potent regulator of dendritic and T cells and plays an important role in
inflammatory processes like experimental skin inflammation in mice and in mouse
models for human psoriasis. Here, we demonstrate that C/EBPß, a transcription
factor required for the selective expression of inflammatory genes, is a key
activator of the Il36A gene in murine macrophages. RNAi-mediated suppression of
C/EBPß expression in macrophages (C/EBPß(low) cells) significantly impaired Il36A
gene induction following challenge with LPS. Despite the presence of five
predicted C/EBP binding sites, luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that
C/EBPß confers responsiveness to LPS primarily through a half-CREC/EBP element
in the proximal Il36A promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that
C/EBPß but not CREB proteins interact with this critical half-CREC/EBP element. 
In addition, overexpression of C/EBPß in C/EBPß(low) cells enhanced the
expression of Il36A whereas CREB-1 had no effect. Finally, chromatin
immunoprecipitation confirmed that C/EBPß but neither CREB-1, ATF-2 nor ATF4 is
directly recruited to the proximal promoter region of the Il36A gene. Together,
these findings demonstrate an essential role of C/EBPß in the regulation of the
Il36A gene via the proximal half-CREC/EBP element in response to inflammatory
stimuli.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26066982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Diabetologia. 2015 Sep;58(9):2181-90. doi: 10.1007/s00125-015-3643-3. Epub 2015
Jun 11.

Enhanced endoplasmic reticulum stress in bone marrow angiogenic progenitor cells 
in a mouse model of long-term experimental type 2 diabetes.

Bhatta M(1), Ma JH, Wang JJ, Sakowski J, Zhang SX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University at Buffalo, State University of New
York, 3435 Main Street, Buffalo, NY, 14214, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Bone marrow-derived circulating angiogenic cells (CACs) play an 
important role in vascular repair. In diabetes, compromised functioning of the
CACs contributes to the development of diabetic retinopathy; however, the
underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. We examined whether endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, which has recently been linked to endothelial injury, is
involved in diabetic angiogenic dysfunction.
METHODS: Flow cytometric analysis was used to quantify bone marrow-derived
progenitors (Lin(-)/c-Kit(+)/Sca-1(+)/CD34(+)) and blood-derived CACs
(Sca-1(+)/CD34(+)) in 15-month-old Lepr (db) (db/db) mice and in their littermate
control (db/+) mice used as a model of type 2 diabetes. Markers of ER stress in
diabetic (db/db) and non-diabetic (db/+) bone marrow-derived early outgrowth
cells (EOCs) and retinal vascular density were measured.
RESULTS: The numbers of bone-marrow progenitors and CACs were significantly
reduced in db/db mice. Vascular density was markedly decreased in the retinas of 
db/db mice, and this was accompanied by vascular beading. Microglial activation
was enhanced, as was the production of hypoxia inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). The production of ER stress markers
(glucose-regulated protein-78 [GRP-78], phosphorylated inositol-requiring
enzyme-1a [p-IRE-1a], phosphorylated eukaryotic translation initiation factor-2a 
[p-eIF2a], activating transcription factor-4 [ATF4], C/EBP homologous protein
[CHOP] and spliced X-box binding protein-1 [XBP1s]) was significantly increased
in bone marrow-derived EOCs from db/db mice. In addition, mouse EOCs cultured in 
high-glucose conditions demonstrated higher levels of ER stress, reduced colony
formation, impaired migration and increased apoptosis, all of which were largely 
prevented by the chemical chaperone 4-phenylbutyrate.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Taken together, our results indicate that diabetes
increases ER stress in bone marrow angiogenic progenitor cells. Thus, targeting
ER stress may offer a new approach to improving angiogenic progenitor cell
function and promoting vascular repair in diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4529381 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26063198  [PubMed - in process]


174. J Bone Miner Metab. 2015 Jun 10. [Epub ahead of print]

Strain differences in the attenuation of bone accrual in a young growing mouse
model of insulin resistance.

Rendina-Ruedy E(1), Graef JL, Davis MR, Hembree KD, Gimble JM, Clarke SL, Lucas
EA, Smith BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, HSci 420 Oklahoma State University,
Stillwater, OK, 74078, USA.

Skeletal fractures are considered a chronic complication of type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM), but the etiology of compromised bone quality that develops over 
time remains uncertain. This study investigated the concurrent alterations in
metabolic and skeletal changes in two mouse strains, a responsive (C57BL/6) and a
relatively resistant (C3H/HeJ) strain, to high-fat diet-induced glucose
intolerance. Four-week-old male C57BL/6 and C3H/HeJ mice were randomized to a
control (Con = 10 % kcal fat) or high-fat (HF = 60 % kcal fat) diet for 2, 8, or 
16 weeks. Metabolic changes, including blood glucose, plasma insulin and leptin, 
and glucose tolerance were monitored over time in conjunction with alterations in
bone structure and turn over. Elevated fasting glucose occurred in both the
C57BL/6 and C3H/HeJ strains on the HF diet at 2 and 8 weeks, but only in the
C57BL/6 strain at 16 weeks. Both strains on the HF diet demonstrated impaired
glucose tolerance at each time point. The C57BL/6 mice on the HF diet exhibited
lower whole-body bone mineral density (BMD) by 8 and 16 weeks, but the C3H/HeJ
strain had no evidence of bone loss until 16 weeks. Analyses of bone
microarchitecture revealed that trabecular bone accrual in the distal femur
metaphysis was attenuated in the C57BL/6 mice on the HF diet at 8 and 16 weeks.
In contrast, the C3H/HeJ mice were protected from the deleterious effects of the 
HF diet on trabecular bone. Alterations in gene expression from the femur
revealed that several toll-like receptor (TLR)-4 targets (Atf4, Socs3, and Tlr4) 
were regulated by the HF diet in the C57BL/6 strain, but not in the C3H/HeJ
strain. Structural changes observed only in the C57BL/6 mice were accompanied
with a decrease in osteoblastogenesis after 8 and 16 weeks on the HF diet,
suggesting a TLR-4-mediated mechanism in the suppression of bone formation. Both 
the C57BL/6 and C3H/HeJ mice demonstrated an increase in osteoclastogenesis after
8 weeks on the HF diet; however, bone turnover was decreased in the C57BL/6 with 
prolonged hyperglycemia. Further investigation is needed to understand how
hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia suppress bone turnover in the context of T2DM 
and the role of TLR-4 in this response.

PMID: 26058493  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


175. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 31;290(31):19121-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.644146. Epub
2015 Jun 8.

Nephron Toxicity Profiling via Untargeted Metabolome Analysis Employing a High
Performance Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry-based Experimental and
Computational Pipeline.

Ranninger C(1), Rurik M(2), Limonciel A(3), Ruzek S(1), Reischl R(1), Wilmes
A(3), Jennings P(3), Hewitt P(4), Dekant W(5), Kohlbacher O(2), Huber CG(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Chemistry and
Bioanalytics, University of Salzburg, 5020 Salzburg, Austria. (2)the Applied
Bioinformatics Group, Center for Bioinformatics, Quantitative Biology Center and 
Department of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Tübingen 72076, Germany. 
(3)the Division of Physiology, Department of Physiology and Medical Physics,
Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck 6020, Austria. (4)Merck KGaA, Merck
Serono, Nonclinical Safety, Darmstadt 64293, Germany, and. (5)the Department of
Toxicology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg 97078, Germany. (6)From the
Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Chemistry and Bioanalytics,
University of Salzburg, 5020 Salzburg, Austria, c.huber@sbg.ac.at.

Untargeted metabolomics has the potential to improve the predictivity of in vitro
toxicity models and therefore may aid the replacement of expensive and laborious 
animal models. Here we describe a long term repeat dose nephrotoxicity study
conducted on the human renal proximal tubular epithelial cell line, RPTEC/TERT1, 
treated with 10 and 35 µmol·liter(-1) of chloroacetaldehyde, a metabolite of the 
anti-cancer drug ifosfamide. Our study outlines the establishment of an automated
and easy to use untargeted metabolomics workflow for HPLC-high resolution mass
spectrometry data. Automated data analysis workflows based on open source
software (OpenMS, KNIME) enabled a comprehensive and reproducible analysis of the
complex and voluminous metabolomics data produced by the profiling approach.
Time- and concentration-dependent responses were clearly evident in the
metabolomic profiles. To obtain a more comprehensive picture of the mode of
action, transcriptomics and proteomics data were also integrated. For toxicity
profiling of chloroacetaldehyde, 428 and 317 metabolite features were detectable 
in positive and negative modes, respectively, after stringent removal of chemical
noise and unstable signals. Changes upon treatment were explored using principal 
component analysis, and statistically significant differences were identified
using linear models for microarray assays. The analysis revealed toxic effects
only for the treatment with 35 µmol·liter(-1) for 3 and 14 days. The most
regulated metabolites were glutathione and metabolites related to the oxidative
stress response of the cells. These findings are corroborated by proteomics and
transcriptomics data, which show, among other things, an activation of the Nrf2
and ATF4 pathways.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4521035 [Available on 2016-07-31]
PMID: 26055719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 2015;61(2):154-60. doi: 10.3177/jnsv.61.154.

Selective Regulation of FGF19 and FGF21 Expression by Cellular and Nutritional
Stress.

Shimizu M(1), Morimoto H, Maruyama R, Inoue J, Sato R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, The University of Tokyo.

Fibroblast growth factor 19 (FGF19) and FGF21 are members of a subfamily of the
FGFs called endocrine FGFs. FGF19 regulates the bile acid synthetic pathway.
FGF19 expression is induced by farnesoid X receptor (FXR), a nuclear hormone
receptor activated by bile acids in the small intestine. FGF21 plays an important
role in lipolysis that occurs in white adipose tissue. FGF21 expression is
stimulated by the nuclear fatty acid receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor a (PPARa) in the liver. FGF19 and FGF21 were recently identified as
targets of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), which is activated in
response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. ATF4 is also activated by
oxidative stress and amino acid deprivation. In this study, we investigated FGF19
and FGF21 expression in response to oxidative stress and amino acid deprivation. 
We found that FGF19 mRNA is induced by oxidative stress inducers in Caco-2 cells,
which are derived from the human intestinal epithelium, and rat intestinal
epithelial IEC6 cells. In contrast, ileal FGF15 expression, the rodent ortholog
of human FGF19, is not increased by oxidative stress. No notable changes in
expression of FGF15/19 took place under amino acid deprivation either in vitro or
in vivo. In contrast, FGF21 expression is induced by oxidative stress and amino
acid deprivation both in vitro and in vivo. These results indicate distinctive
patterns of regulation of FGF19 expression by ER stress, and FGF21 expression by 
ER stress, oxidative stress, and amino acid deprivation through ATF4 activation.

PMID: 26052146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Jul;22(7):1234. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2015.64.

A novel autoregulatory loop between the Gcn2-Atf4 pathway and l-Proline
metabolism controls stem cell identity.

D'Aniello C, Fico A, Casalino L, Guardiola O, Di Napoli G, Cermola F, De Cesare
D, Tatè R, Cobellis G, Patriarca EJ, Minchiotti G.

Erratum for
    Cell Death Differ. 2015 Jul;22(7):1094-105.

PMCID: PMC4572873
PMID: 26051250  [PubMed]


178. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2015 Jul;24(4):345-50. doi:
10.1097/MNH.0000000000000141.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress in kidney function and disease.

Taniguchi M(1), Yoshida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biochemistry, Graduate School of Life Science,
University of Hyogo, Hyogo, Japan.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Recently, a number of papers have reported that endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress is involved in the onset of various kidney diseases, but
the pathological mechanisms responsible have not been clarified. In this review, 
we summarize recent findings on this issue and try to clarify the pathology of ER
stress-induced kidney diseases.
RECENT FINDINGS: ER stress is evoked in various kidney diseases, including
diabetic nephropathy, renal fibrosis, inflammation or osmolar contrast-induced
renal injury, ischemia-reperfusion, genetic mutations of renal proteins,
proteinuria and cyclosporine A treatment. In some cases, chemical chaperones,
such as 4-phenylbutyrate and taurodeoxycholic acid, relieve the symptoms,
indicating that ER stress-induced apoptosis of renal cells is one of the major
causes of certain kidney diseases. Actually, the ER stress response provides
protection against some kidney diseases, although the PERK-ATF4-CHOP pathway of
the ER stress response is proapoptotic in some kidney diseases. The disposal of
unfolded proteins by autophagy is also protective for some ER stress-induced
kidney diseases.
SUMMARY: Because ER stress is a major cause of some kidney diseases, the ER
stress response and autophagy, which deal with unfolded proteins that accumulate 
in the ER, are promising therapeutic targets in acute and chronic kidney
diseases.

PMID: 26050121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jul;35(13):2366. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00404-15.

Correction for Ye et al., Nrf2- and ATF4-Dependent Upregulation of xCT Modulates 
the Sensitivity of T24 Bladder Carcinoma Cells to Proteasome Inhibition.

Ye P(1), Mimura J(1), Okada T(2), Sato H(2), Liu T(1), Maruyama A(1), Ohyama
C(3), Itoh K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stress Response Science, Hirosaki University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Hirosaki, Japan. (2)Department of Food and Applied Life Sciences,
Faculty of Agriculture, Yamagata University, Tsuruoka, Yamagata, Japan.
(3)Department of Urology, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine,
Hirosaki, Japan.

Erratum for
    Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Sep 15;34(18):3421-34.

PMCID: PMC4456444
PMID: 26044038  [PubMed]


180. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 17;290(29):17822-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.636217. Epub
2015 Jun 3.

Coordinated Regulation of the Neutral Amino Acid Transporter SNAT2 and the
Protein Phosphatase Subunit GADD34 Promotes Adaptation to Increased Extracellular
Osmolarity.

Krokowski D(1), Jobava R(2), Guan BJ(2), Farabaugh K(2), Wu J(2), Majumder M(2), 
Bianchi MG(3), Snider MD(4), Bussolati O(3), Hatzoglou M(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Pharmacology and dawid.krokowski@case.edu. (2)From the
Departments of Pharmacology and. (3)the Department of Biomedical,
Biotechnological, and Translational Sciences, University of Parma, 43100 Parma,
Italy. (4)Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University, School of Medicine,
Cleveland, Ohio 44106 and. (5)From the Departments of Pharmacology and
mxh8@case.edu.

Cells respond to shrinkage induced by increased extracellular osmolarity via
programmed changes in gene transcription and mRNA translation. The immediate
response to this stress includes the induction of expression of the neutral amino
acid transporter SNAT2. Increased SNAT2-mediated uptake of neutral amino acids is
an essential adaptive mechanism for restoring cell volume. In contrast,
stress-induced phosphorylation of the a subunit of the translation initiation
factor eIF2 (eIF2a) can promote apoptosis. Here we show that the response to mild
hyperosmotic stress involves regulation of the phosphorylation of eIF2a by
increased levels of GADD34, a regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 1 (PP1). 
The induction of GADD34 was dependent on transcriptional control by the
c-Jun-binding cAMP response element in the GADD34 gene promoter and
posttranscriptional stabilization of its mRNA. This mechanism differs from the
regulation of GADD34 expression by other stresses that involve activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4). ATF4 was not translated during hyperosmotic stress
despite an increase in eIF2a phosphorylation. The SNAT2-mediated increase in
amino acid uptake was enhanced by increased GADD34 levels in a manner involving
decreased eIF2a phosphorylation. It is proposed that the induction of the
SNAT2/GADD34 axis enhances cell survival by promoting the immediate adaptive
response to stress.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4505033 [Available on 2016-07-17]
PMID: 26041779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Transl Med. 2015 Jun 4;13:178. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0536-7.

Anti-dsDNA antibodies induce inflammation via endoplasmic reticulum stress in
human mesangial cells.

Zhang H(1), Zhao C(2,)(3), Wang S(4), Huang Y(5), Wang H(6), Zhao J(7), Yang
N(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University,
58 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou, 510080, China. sysuzhanghui@163.com.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University,
58 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou, 510080, China. zhaochunmei2@163.com.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical 
University, 137 Liyushan South Road, Urumqi, 830054, China. zhaochunmei2@163.com.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University,
58 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou, 510080, China. wangshuang_1115@163.com.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University,
58 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou, 510080, China. zsuhyf@163.com. (6)Department of 
Rheumatology, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 58 Zhongshan
Road II, Guangzhou, 510080, China. wangyue_0814@163.com. (7)Department of
Rheumatology, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 58 Zhongshan
Road II, Guangzhou, 510080, China. sysujijunzhao@163.com. (8)Department of
Rheumatology, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 58 Zhongshan
Road II, Guangzhou, 510080, China. zsuyns@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Anti-dsDNA antibodies play an important role in the pathogenesis of
lupus nephritis (LN). Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is a physical reaction
under stressful condition and can cause inflammation when stimulation is
sustained. This study investigated the roles of ER stress in anti-dsDNA
antibody-induced inflammation response in human mesangial cells (HMCs).
METHOD: Anti-dsDNA antibodies isolated from LN patients were used to stimulate
HMCs. The expression of GRP78, PERK, p-PERK, p-eIF2a, ATF4, p-IRE1a, ATF6 and
CHOP in HMCs was measured by western blot. NF-<U+03BA>B activation was detected by
examining nuclear translocation of NF-<U+03BA>B p65. The expression and production of
IL-1ß, TNF-a and MCP-1 were examined by qPCR and ELISA.
RESULTS: Flow cytometry and cellular ELISA showed that anti-dsDNA antibodies can 
bind to HMCs. The binding was not inhibited by blockage of Fc receptor.
Anti-dsDNA antibody stimulation significantly enhanced the expression of GRP78,
p-PERK, p-eIF2a and ATF4 in HMCs. However, no significant increase in the
expression of p-IRE1a and ATF6 was found. In addition, anti-dsDNA antibodies also
significantly increased the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and upregulated the expression of
IL-1ß, TNF-a and MCP-1, which were suppressed by pretreatment of HMCs with
chemical ER stress inhibitor 4-PBA. Transfection of specific ATF4 siRNA also
significantly reduced the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and expression of proinflammatory
cytokines.
CONCLUSION: Anti-dsDNA antibodies induce NF-<U+03BA>B activation and inflammation in
HMCs via PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 ER stress pathway.

PMCID: PMC4467615
PMID: 26040555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 1;5:10581. doi: 10.1038/srep10581.

Molecular pathway of near-infrared laser phototoxicity involves ATF-4
orchestrated ER stress.

Khan I(1), Tang E(1), Arany P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Regulation and Control Unit, National Institute of Dental and
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda MD.

High power lasers are used extensively in medicine while lower power applications
are popular for optical imaging, optogenetics, skin rejuvenation and a
therapeutic modality termed photobiomodulation (PBM). This study addresses the
therapeutic dose limits, biological safety and molecular pathway of near-infrared
(NIR) laser phototoxicity. Increased erythema and tissue damage were noted in
mice skin and cytotoxicity in cell cultures at phototoxic laser doses involving
generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) coupled with a rise in surface
temperature (>45<U+2009>°C). NIR laser phototoxicity results from Activating
Transcription Factor-4 (ATF-4) mediated endoplasmic reticulum stress and
autophagy. Neutralizations of heat or ROS and overexpressing ATF-4 were noted to 
rescue NIR laser phototoxicity. Further, NIR laser mediated phototoxicity was
noted to be non-genotoxic and non-mutagenic. This study outlines the mechanism of
NIR laser phototoxicity and the utility of monitoring surface temperature and
ATF4 expression as potential biomarkers to develop safe and effective clinical
applications.

PMCID: PMC4450753
PMID: 26030745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Dev Cell. 2015 Jun 8;33(5):507-21. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.04.021. Epub 2015
May 28.

HIF1a Represses Cell Stress Pathways to Allow Proliferation of Hypoxic Fetal
Cardiomyocytes.

Guimarães-Camboa N(1), Stowe J(2), Aneas I(3), Sakabe N(3), Cattaneo P(4),
Henderson L(5), Kilberg MS(6), Johnson RS(7), Chen J(8), McCulloch AD(2), Nobrega
MA(3), Evans SM(9), Zambon AC(10).

Author information: 
(1)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Institute for Biomedical Sciences
Abel Salazar and GABBA Graduate Program, University of Porto, Porto 4050-313,
Portugal. (2)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego,
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (3)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (4)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (5)Department of
Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shands Cancer Center and
Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Gainesville, FL 32160, USA. (7)Department of Physiology, Development and
Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, CB2 3EG Cambridge, UK. (8)Department of
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (9)Skaggs
School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Department of Pharmacology, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Department of Medicine,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic address:
syevans@ucsd.edu. (10)Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Keck Graduate
Institute, Claremont, CA 91711, USA. Electronic address: azambon@kgi.edu.

Transcriptional mediators of cell stress pathways, including HIF1a, ATF4, and
p53, are key to normal development and play critical roles in disease, including 
ischemia and cancer. Despite their importance, mechanisms by which pathways
mediated by these transcription factors interact with one another are not fully
understood. In addressing the controversial role of HIF1a in cardiomyocytes (CMs)
during heart development, we discovered a mid-gestational requirement for HIF1a
for proliferation of hypoxic CMs, involving metabolic switching and a complex
interplay among HIF1a, ATF4, and p53. Loss of HIF1a resulted in activation of
ATF4 and p53, the latter inhibiting CM proliferation. Bioinformatic and
biochemical analyses revealed unexpected mechanisms by which HIF1a intersects
with ATF4 and p53 pathways. Our results highlight previously undescribed roles of
HIF1a and interactions among major cell stress pathways that could be targeted to
enhance proliferation of CMs in ischemia and may have relevance to other
diseases, including cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4509618 [Available on 2016-06-08]
PMID: 26028220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Neuroscience. 2015 Aug 6;300:460-73. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.05.042.
Epub 2015 May 27.

Comparison between single and combined post-treatment with
S-Methyl-N,N-diethylthiolcarbamate sulfoxide and taurine following transient
focal cerebral ischemia in rat brain.

Gharibani P(1), Modi J(2), Menzie J(3), Alexandrescu A(4), Ma Z(5), Tao R(6),
Prentice H(7), Wu JY(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine,
Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, United States; Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21205, United States. Electronic address: pgharibani@gmail.com. (2)Department 
of Biomedical Sciences, Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine, Florida Atlantic 
University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, United States; Center of Complex Systems and
Brain Sciences, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, United States.
Electronic address: jmodi@fau.edu. (3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Charles 
E. Schmidt College of Medicine, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL
33431, United States. Electronic address: jmenzie@fau.edu. (4)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine, Florida Atlantic
University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, United States. Electronic address:
Anamaria.Alexandrescu@nyumc.org. (5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Charles E.
Schmidt College of Medicine, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431,
United States. Electronic address: zma@fau.edu. (6)Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine, Florida Atlantic University,
Boca Raton, FL 33431, United States; Program in Integrative Biology, Florida
Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, United States. Electronic address:
rtao@fau.edu. (7)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Charles E. Schmidt College of
Medicine, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, United States;
Program in Integrative Biology, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL
33431, United States; Center of Complex Systems and Brain Sciences, Florida
Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, United States. Electronic address:
hprentic@fau.edu. (8)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Charles E. Schmidt
College of Medicine, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, United
States; Program in Integrative Biology, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, 
FL 33431, United States; Center of Complex Systems and Brain Sciences, Florida
Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, United States; China Medical
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. Electronic address: jwu@fau.edu.

We have recently reported on the efficacy of an N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)
receptor partial antagonist, S-Methyl-N,N-diethylthiolcarbamate sulfoxide
(DETC-MeSO), in improving outcome following stroke, including reduced infarct
size and calcium influx, suppressing the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-induced apoptosis as well as improving behavioral outcome. DETC-MeSO was
shown to suppress the protein kinase R-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK)
pathway, one of the major ER stress pathways. Several studies including ours have
provided evidence that taurine also has neuroprotective effects through reducing 
apoptosis and inhibiting activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) and inositol
requiring enzyme 1 (IRE-1) pathways. We hypothesized that a combined treatment
with DETC-MeSO and taurine would ameliorate ischemia-induced brain injury by
inhibiting all three ER stress pathways. Twenty four hours following reperfusion 
of a 2-h ischemic stroke, rats received either 0.56-mg/kg DETC-MeSO or 40-mg/kg
of taurine, either alone or in combination, subcutaneously for 4days. Our study
showed that combined DETC-MeSO and taurine, but not DETC-MeSO alone at the dose
used, greatly reduced the infarct size, improved performance on the neuro-score
test and attenuated proteolysis of aII-spectrin. Meanwhile, the level of the
pro-apoptotic protein, Bax, declined and the anti-apoptotic protein, B-cell
lymphoma 2 (BCL-2), expression was markedly increased. Combination therapy
decreased both caspase-12 and caspase-3 activation by preventing the release of
Cytochrome-c from mitochondria, indicating attenuation of apoptosis in ischemic
infarct. Glucose-regulated protein (GRP)78 as a marker of the unfolded protein
response decreased and levels of the key ER stress protein markers p-PERK-ATF4,
p-eIF2a and cleaved-ATF-6 were found to significantly decline. NeuN expression
levels indicated that more neurons were protected in the presence of DETC-MeSO
and taurine. We also showed that combined treatment can prevent gliosis and
increase p-AKT a pro-survival marker in the penumbra. Therefore, we conclude that
combined treatment with both DETC-MeSO and taurine synergistically inhibits all
three ER stress pathways and apoptosis and therefore can be a novel and effective
treatment after ischemic stroke.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26022360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Immunol. 2015 Jul 1;195(1):217-26. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402808. Epub 2015 May
27.

Twist1 and Twist2 Contribute to Cytokine Downregulation following Chronic NOD2
Stimulation of Human Macrophages through the Coordinated Regulation of
Transcriptional Repressors and Activators.

Zheng S(1), Hedl M(1), Abraham C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520
clara.abraham@yale.edu.

Proper regulation of microbial-induced cytokines is critical to intestinal immune
homeostasis. Acute stimulation of nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 2
(NOD2), the Crohn's disease-associated sensor of bacterial peptidoglycan, induces
cytokines. However, chronic NOD2 stimulation in macrophages decreases cytokines
upon pattern recognition receptor (PRR) restimulation; cytokine attenuation to
PRR stimulation is similarly observed in intestinal macrophages. The role for the
transcriptional repressors Twist1 and Twist2 in regulating PRR-induced cytokine
outcomes is poorly understood and has not been reported for NOD2. We found that
Twist1 and Twist2 were required for optimal cytokine downregulation during acute 
and, particularly, chronic NOD2 stimulation of human macrophages. Consistently,
Twist1 and Twist2 expression was increased after chronic NOD2 stimulation; this
increased expression was IL-10 and TGF-ß dependent. Although Twist1 and Twist2
did not coregulate each other's expression, they cooperated to enhance binding to
cytokine promoters after chronic NOD2 stimulation. Moreover, Twist1 and Twist2
contributed to enhance expression and promoter binding of the proinflammatory
inhibitor c-Maf and the transcriptional repressor Bmi1. Restoring c-Maf and Bmi1 
expression in Twist-deficient macrophages restored NOD2-induced cytokine
downregulation. Furthermore, with chronic NOD2 stimulation, Twist1 and Twist2
contributed to the decreased expression and cytokine promoter binding of the
transcriptional activators activating transcription factor 4, C/EBPa, Runx1, and 
Runx2. Knockdown of these transcriptional activators in Twist-deficient
macrophages restored cytokine downregulation after chronic NOD2 stimulation.
Finally, NOD2 synergized with additional PRRs to increase Twist1 and Twist2
expression and Twist-dependent pathways. Therefore, after chronic NOD2
stimulation Twist1 and Twist2 coordinate the regulation of both transcriptional
activators and repressors, thereby mediating optimal cytokine downregulation.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4501480 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26019273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jun 9;112(23):7201-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1421063112. Epub 2015 May 26.

BCL-2 family member BOK promotes apoptosis in response to endoplasmic reticulum
stress.

Carpio MA(1), Michaud M(1), Zhou W(1), Fisher JK(2), Walensky LD(3), Katz SG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520;
(2)Department of Pediatric Oncology and Linde Program in Cancer Chemical Biology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215.
(3)Department of Pediatric Oncology and Linde Program in Cancer Chemical Biology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215
samuel.katz@yale.edu loren_walensky@dfci.harvard.edu. (4)Department of Pathology,
Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520; samuel.katz@yale.edu
loren_walensky@dfci.harvard.edu.

B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2) ovarian killer (BOK) is a BCL-2 family protein with
high homology to the multidomain proapoptotic proteins BAX and BAK, yet Bok(-/-) 
and even Bax(-/-)Bok(-/-) and Bak(-/-)Bok(-/-) mice were reported to have no
overt phenotype or apoptotic defects in response to a host of classical stress
stimuli. These surprising findings were interpreted to reflect functional
compensation among the BAX, BAK, and BOK proteins. However, BOK cannot compensate
for the severe apoptotic defects of Bax(-/-)Bak(-/-) mice despite its widespread 
expression. Here, we independently developed Bok(-/-) mice and found that
Bok(-/-) cells are selectively defective in their response to endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress stimuli, consistent with the predominant subcellular
localization of BOK at the ER. Whereas Bok(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts
exposed to thapsigargin, A23187, brefeldin A, DTT, geldanamycin, or bortezomib
manifested reduced activation of the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway, the death
response to other stimuli such as etoposide, staurosporine, or UV remained fully 
intact. Multiple organs in Bok(-/-) mice exhibited resistance to
thapsigargin-induced apoptosis in vivo. Although the ER stress agents activated
the unfolded protein response, both ATF4 and CHOP activation were diminished in
Bok(-/-) cells and mice. Importantly, BAX and BAK were unable to compensate for
the defective apoptotic response to ER stress observed in SV40-transformed and
primary Bok(-/-) cells, and in vivo. These findings support a selective and
distinguishing role for BOK in regulating the apoptotic response to ER stress,
revealing--to our knowledge--the first bona fide apoptotic defect linked to Bok
deletion.

PMCID: PMC4466744
PMID: 26015568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Clin Invest. 2015 Jul 1;125(7):2592-608. doi: 10.1172/JCI78031. Epub 2015 May
26.

ATF4-dependent induction of heme oxygenase 1 prevents anoikis and promotes
metastasis.

Dey S, Sayers CM, Verginadis II, Lehman SL, Cheng Y, Cerniglia GJ, Tuttle SW,
Feldman MD, Zhang PJ, Fuchs SY, Diehl JA, Koumenis C.

The integrated stress response (ISR) is a critical mediator of cancer cell
survival, and targeting the ISR inhibits tumor progression. Here, we have shown
that activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a master transcriptional effector 
of the ISR, protects transformed cells against anoikis - a specialized form of
apoptosis - following matrix detachment and also contributes to tumor metastatic 
properties. Upon loss of attachment, ATF4 activated a coordinated program of
cytoprotective autophagy and antioxidant responses, including induced expression 
of the major antioxidant enzyme heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1). HO-1 upregulation was
the result of simultaneous activation of ATF4 and the transcription factor NRF2, 
which converged on the HO1 promoter. Increased levels of HO-1 ameliorated
oxidative stress and cell death. ATF4-deficient human fibrosarcoma cells were
unable to colonize the lungs in a murine model, and reconstitution of ATF4 or
HO-1 expression in ATF4-deficient cells blocked anoikis and rescued tumor lung
colonization. HO-1 expression was higher in human primary and metastatic tumors
compared with noncancerous tissue. Moreover, HO-1 expression correlated with
reduced overall survival of patients with lung adenocarcinoma and glioblastoma.
These results establish HO-1 as a mediator of ATF4-dependent anoikis resistance
and tumor metastasis and suggest ATF4 and HO-1 as potential targets for
therapeutic intervention in solid tumors.

PMCID: PMC4563676
PMID: 26011642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 28;6(25):21589-602.

A dominant-negative F-box deleted mutant of E3 ubiquitin ligase, ß-TrCP1/FWD1,
markedly reduces myeloma cell growth and survival in mice.

Sharma R(1), Williams PJ(1), Gupta A(1), McCluskey B(1), Bhaskaran S(1,)(2),
Muñoz S(1,)(3), Oyajobi BO(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA. (2)Current address: Oklahoma
Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. (3)Current address:
Vanderbilt Center for Bone Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN, USA. (4)Cancer Therapy and Research Center, San Antonio, TX, USA.

Treatment of multiple myeloma with bortezomib can result in severe adverse
effects, necessitating the development of targeted inhibitors of the proteasome. 
We show that stable expression of a dominant-negative F-box deleted (â<U+0088><U+0086>F) mutant
of the E3 ubiquitin ligase, SCFß-TrCP/FWD1, in murine 5TGM1 myeloma cells
dramatically attenuated their skeletal engraftment and survival when inoculated
into immunocompetent C57BL/KaLwRij mice. Similar results were obtained in
immunodeficient bg-nu-xid mice, suggesting that the observed effects were
independent of host recipient immune status. Bone marrow stroma offered no
protection for 5TGM1-â<U+0088><U+0086>F cells in cocultures treated with tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF), indicating a cell-autonomous anti-myeloma effect. Levels of p100, I<U+03BA>Ba,
Mcl-1, ATF4, total and cleaved caspase-3, and phospho-ß-catenin were elevated in 
5TGM1-â<U+0088><U+0086>F cells whereas cIAP was down-regulated. TNF also activated caspase-3
and downregulated Bcl-2, correlating with the enhanced susceptibility of
5TGM1-â<U+0088><U+0086>F cells to apoptosis. Treatment of 5TGM1 tumor-bearing mice with a
ß-TrCP1/FWD1 inhibitor, pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC), significantly reduced
tumor burden in bone. PDTC also increased levels of cleaved Mcl-1 and caspase-3
in U266 human myeloma cells, correlating with our murine data and validating the 
development of specific ß-TrCP inhibitors as an alternative therapy to
nonspecific proteasome inhibitors for myeloma patients.

PMCID: PMC4673288
PMID: 26009993  [PubMed - in process]


189. Cell Rep. 2015 Jun 9;11(9):1446-57. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.04.063. Epub 2015 
May 21.

Co-activation of AMPK and mTORC1 Induces Cytotoxicity in Acute Myeloid Leukemia.

Sujobert P(1), Poulain L(1), Paubelle E(2), Zylbersztejn F(2), Grenier A(1),
Lambert M(1), Townsend EC(3), Brusq JM(4), Nicodeme E(4), Decrooqc J(2), Nepstad 
I(5), Green AS(1), Mondesir J(1), Hospital MA(1), Jacque N(1), Christodoulou
A(3), Desouza TA(3), Hermine O(2), Foretz M(6), Viollet B(6), Lacombe C(1),
Mayeux P(1), Weinstock DM(3), Moura IC(2), Bouscary D(1), Tamburini J(7).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1016, Institut Cochin, 75014 Paris, France; CNRS UMR8104, 75014 Paris,
France; Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Médecine Sorbonne Paris Cité,
75005 Paris, France; Equipe Labellisée Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer (LNCC),
75013 Paris, France. (2)INSERM UMR 1163, Laboratory of cellular and molecular
mechanisms of hematological disorders and therapeutic implications, 75015 Paris, 
France; Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, 75015 
Paris, France; CNRS ERL 8254, 75015 Paris, France; Laboratory of Excellence
GR-Ex, 75015 Paris, France. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (4)GlaxoSmithKline
Research Center, 91490 Les Ulis, France. (5)Division for Hematology, Department
of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, N-5021 Bergen, Norway. (6)INSERM
U1016, Institut Cochin, 75014 Paris, France; CNRS UMR8104, 75014 Paris, France;
Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Médecine Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75005 Paris,
France; Laboratory of Excellence GR-Ex, 75015 Paris, France. (7)INSERM U1016,
Institut Cochin, 75014 Paris, France; CNRS UMR8104, 75014 Paris, France;
Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Médecine Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75005 Paris,
France; Equipe Labellisée Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer (LNCC), 75013 Paris,
France. Electronic address: jerome.tamburini@inserm.fr.

AMPK is a master regulator of cellular metabolism that exerts either oncogenic or
tumor suppressor activity depending on context. Here, we report that the specific
AMPK agonist GSK621 selectively kills acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells but
spares normal hematopoietic progenitors. This differential sensitivity results
from a unique synthetic lethal interaction involving concurrent activation of
AMPK and mTORC1. Strikingly, the lethality of GSK621 in primary AML cells and AML
cell lines is abrogated by chemical or genetic ablation of mTORC1 signaling. The 
same synthetic lethality between AMPK and mTORC1 activation is established in
CD34-positive hematopoietic progenitors by constitutive activation of AKT or
enhanced in AML cells by deletion of TSC2. Finally, cytotoxicity in AML cells
from GSK621 involves the eIF2a/ATF4 signaling pathway that specifically results
from mTORC1 activation. AMPK activation may represent a therapeutic opportunity
in mTORC1-overactivated cancers.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26004183  [PubMed - in process]


190. Autophagy. 2015;11(5):812-32. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1034402.

The GST-BHMT assay reveals a distinct mechanism underlying proteasome
inhibition-induced macroautophagy in mammalian cells.

Rui YN(1), Xu Z, Chen Z, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)a The Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine.

By monitoring the fragmentation of a GST-BHMT (a protein fusion of glutathionine 
S-transferase N-terminal to betaine-homocysteine S-methyltransferase) reporter in
lysosomes, the GST-BHMT assay has previously been established as an endpoint,
cargo-based assay for starvation-induced autophagy that is largely nonselective. 
Here, we demonstrate that under nutrient-rich conditions, proteasome inhibition
by either pharmaceutical or genetic manipulations induces similar
autophagy-dependent GST-BHMT processing. However, mechanistically this proteasome
inhibition-induced autophagy is different from that induced by starvation as it
does not rely on regulation by MTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin
[serine/threonine kinase]) and PRKAA/AMPK (protein kinase, AMP-activated, a
catalytic subunit), the upstream central sensors of cellular nutrition and energy
status, but requires the presence of the cargo receptors SQSTM1/p62 (sequestosome
1) and NBR1 (neighbor of BRCA1 gene 1) that are normally involved in the
selective autophagy pathway. Further, it depends on ER (endoplasmic reticulum)
stress signaling, in particular ERN1/IRE1 (endoplasmic reticulum to nucleus
signaling 1) and its main downstream effector MAPK8/JNK1 (mitogen-activated
protein kinase 8), but not XBP1 (X-box binding protein 1), by regulating the
phosphorylation-dependent disassociation of BCL2 (B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2) from
BECN1 (Beclin 1, autophagy related). Moreover, the multimerization domain of
GST-BHMT is required for its processing in response to proteasome inhibition, in 
contrast to its dispensable role in starvation-induced processing. Together,
these findings support a model in which under nutrient-rich conditions,
proteasome inactivation induces autophagy-dependent processing of the GST-BHMT
reporter through a distinct mechanism that bears notable similarity with the
yeast Cvt (cytoplasm-to-vacuole targeting) pathway, and suggest the GST-BHMT
reporter might be employed as a convenient assay to study selective
macroautophagy in mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC4509454 [Available on 2016-05-18]
PMID: 25984893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2015 Jun;74(6):538-46. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0000000000000196.

Activation of the Unfolded Protein Response in Sporadic Inclusion-Body Myositis
but Not in Hereditary GNE Inclusion-Body Myopathy.

Nogalska A(1), D'Agostino C, Engel WK, Cacciottolo M, Asada S, Mori K, Askanas V.

Author information: 
(1)From the USC Neuromuscular Center, Department of Neurology, University of
Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Good Samaritan Hospital, Los
Angeles, California (AN, CDA, WKE, MC, VA); and Department of Biophysics,
Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan (SA, KM).

Muscle fibers in patients with sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM),the most 
common age-associated myopathy, are characterized by autophagic vacuoles and
accumulation of ubiquitinated and congophilic multiprotein aggregates that
contain amyloid-ß and phosphorylated tau. Muscle fibers of autosomal-recessive
hereditary inclusion-body myopathy caused by the GNE mutation (GNE-h-IBM) display
similar pathologic features, except with less pronounced congophilia.
Accumulation of unfolded/misfolded proteins inside the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
lumen leads to ER stress, which elicits the unfolded protein response (UPR) as a 
protective mechanism. Here we demonstrate for the first time that UPR is
activated in s-IBM muscle biopsies, since there was 1) increased activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) protein and increased mRNA of its target C/EBP
homologous protein; 2) cleavage of the ATF6 and increased mRNA of its target
glucose-regulated protein 78; and 3) an increase of the spliced form of X-box
binding protein 1 and increased mRNA of ER degradation-enhancing
a-mannosidase-like protein, target of heterodimer of cleaved ATF6 and spliced
X-box binding protein 1. In contrast, we did not find similar evidence of the UPR
induction in GNE-h-IBM patient muscle, suggesting that different intracellular
mechanisms might lead to similar pathologic phenotypes. Interestingly, cultured
GNE-h-IBM muscle fibers had a robust UPR response to experimental ER stress
stimuli, suggesting that the GNE mutation per se is not responsible for the lack 
of UPR in GNE-h-IBM biopsied muscle.

PMCID: PMC4506930 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25978849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. PLoS One. 2015 May 15;10(5):e0126795. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126795.
eCollection 2015.

A Drosophila Reporter for the Translational Activation of ATF4 Marks Stressed
Cells during Development.

Kang K(1), Ryoo HD(2), Park JE(1), Yoon JH(1), Kang MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Cell Biology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, New York, United States of America.

Eukaryotic cells have evolved signaling pathways that help to restore cellular
homeostasis in response to various physiological or pathological conditions. ATF4
is a transcription factor whose mRNA translation is stimulated in response to
stress-activated eIF2alpha kinases. Established conditions that activate
eIF2alpha phosphorylation and ATF4 translation include excessive stress in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and amino acid deprivation. ATF4 is activated through 
a unique translational activation mechanism that involves multiple upstream open 
reading frames (uORFs) in the 5'-untranslated region (UTR), which is conserved
from yeast to mammals. Taking advantage of this, we developed a translational
activation reporter of ATF4 in Drosophila, in which the dsRed reporter coding
sequence was placed downstream of the Drosophila ATF4 5' UTR. This reporter
remained inactive in most tissues under normal conditions, but showed dsRed
expression when starved, or when challenged with conditions that imposed ER
stress. In normally developing flies, a small number of cell types showed
reporter expression even without exogenous stress, which included the salivary
gland, gut, the male reproductive organ, and the photoreceptor cells, suggestive 
of inherent stress during the normal development of these cell types. These
results establish a new tool to study ATF4-mediated stress response in Drosophila
development and disease.

PMCID: PMC4433282
PMID: 25978358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jul 10;462(4):383-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.04.144. Epub 2015 May 12.

The endoplasmic reticulum-localized protein TBL2 interacts with the 60S ribosomal
subunit.

Tsukumo Y(1), Tsukahara S(1), Furuno A(1), Iemura S(2), Natsume T(2), Tomida
A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, 3-8-31
Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. (2)Biomedicinal Information Research
Center, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology,
Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-0064, Japan. (3)Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese
Foundation for Cancer Research, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan.
Electronic address: akihiro.tomida@jfcr.or.jp.

Transducin (beta)-like 2 (TBL2) is a poorly characterized protein comprising the 
N-terminal transmembrane region and the C-terminal WD40 domain. We previously
showed that TBL2 is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-localized protein that
interacts with PKR-like ER-resident kinase (PERK), and under ER stress, it
mediates protein expression of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). However,
further molecular characterization of TBL2 is useful to better understand the
function of this molecule. Here, we show that TBL2 associates with the eukaryotic
60S ribosomal subunit but not with the 40S subunit. The association of TBL2 with 
the 60S subunit was ER stress independent while the TBL2-PERK interaction
occurred upon ER stress. Immunoprecipitation analysis using TBL2 deletion mutants
revealed that the WD40 domain was essential for the 60S subunit association.
These results could provide an important clue to understanding how TBL2 is
involved in the expression of specific proteins under ER stress conditions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25976671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015 Jun;22(3):319-29. doi: 10.1530/ERC-14-0510.

Carfilzomib is an effective anticancer agent in anaplastic thyroid cancer.

Mehta A(1), Zhang L(2), Boufraqech M(2), Zhang Y(2), Patel D(2), Shen M(2),
Kebebew E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Oncology BranchNational Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USAGeisel School of Medicine at
DartmouthHanover, New Hampshire 03755, USANational Institutes of HealthNational
Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, USA Endocrine
Oncology BranchNational Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USAGeisel School of Medicine at DartmouthHanover, New
Hampshire 03755, USANational Institutes of HealthNational Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (2)Endocrine Oncology
BranchNational Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USAGeisel School of Medicine at DartmouthHanover, New Hampshire
03755, USANational Institutes of HealthNational Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (3)Endocrine Oncology
BranchNational Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USAGeisel School of Medicine at DartmouthHanover, New Hampshire
03755, USANational Institutes of HealthNational Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, USA kebebewe@mail.nih.gov.

Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is one of the most aggressive human malignancies.
Currently, there is no standard or effective therapy for ATC. Drug repurposing
for cancer treatment is an emerging approach for identifying compounds that may
have antineoplastic effects. The aim of this study was to use high-throughput
drug library screening to identify and subsequently validate novel therapeutic
agents with anticancer effects in ATC. We performed quantitative high-throughput 
screening (qHTS) in ATC cell lines (SW-1736, 8505C, and C-643), using a compound 
library of 3282 drugs. qHTS identified 100 compounds that were active in all
three ATC cell lines. Proteasome inhibitors were one of the most active drug
categories according to enrichment analysis. Of the three proteasome inhibitors
screened, a second-generation proteasome inhibitor, carfilzomib, was the most
active. Treatment of ATC cells with carfilzomib significantly inhibited cellular 
proliferation and induced G2/M cell cycle arrest and caspase-dependent apoptosis.
Mechanistically, carfilzomib increased expression of p27 (CDKN1B) and decreased
expression of the anti-apoptotic protein ATF4. Pretreatment with carfilzomib
reduced in vivo metastases (lung, bone, liver, and kidney) and disease
progression, and decreased N-cadherin expression. Carfilzomib treatment of mice
with established, widely metastatic disease significantly increased their
survival, without significant toxicity. Our findings support the use or clinical 
study of carfilzomib as a therapeutic option in patients with advanced and
metastatic ATC.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25972243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Pineal Res. 2015 Sep;59(2):151-62. doi: 10.1111/jpi.12247. Epub 2015 May 26.

Melatonin inhibits autophagy and endoplasmic reticulum stress in mice with carbon
tetrachloride-induced fibrosis.

San-Miguel B(1), Crespo I(1,)(2), Sánchez DI(1), González-Fernández B(1), Ortiz
de Urbina JJ(1), Tuñón MJ(1,)(2), González-Gallego J(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine (IBIOMED), University of León, León, Spain. (2)Centro
de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas
(CIBERehd), León, Spain.

This study aimed to investigate whether inhibition of autophagy and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER stress) associates with the antifibrogenic effect of melatonin in
mice treated with carbon tetrachloride (CCl4 ). Mice received CCl4 5 µL/g body wt
i.p. twice a week for 4 wk or 6 wk. Melatonin was given at 5 or 10 mg/kg/day i.p,
beginning 2 wk after the start of CCl4 administration. Treatment with CCl4
resulted in fibrosis evidenced by the staining of a-smooth muscle actin
(a-SMA)-positive cells. CCl4 induced an autophagic response measured as the
presence of autophagic vesicles, protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3) staining,
conversion of LC3-I to autophagosome-associated LC3-II, changes in expression of 
beclin-1, UV radiation resistance-associated gene (UVRAG), ubiquitin-like
autophagy-related (Atg5), Atg12, Atg16L1, sequestosome 1 (p62/SQSTM1), and
lysosome-associated membrane protein (LAMP)-2, and increased phosphorylation of
the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). There was an increase in the expression
of the ER stress chaperones CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein
(CHOP), immunoglobulin-heavy-chain-binding protein (BiP/GRP78), and 94-kDa
glucose-regulated protein (GRP94), and in the mRNA levels of pancreatic ER kinase
(PERK), activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6), ATF4, inositol-requiring enzyme
1 (IRE1), and spliced X-box-binding protein-1 (XBP1). Phospho-IRE1, ATF6, and
phospho-PERK protein concentration also increased significantly.
Immunohistochemical staining of a-SMA indicated an abrogation of hepatic stellate
cells activation by melatonin. Furthermore, treatment with the indole resulted in
significant inhibition of the autophagic flux and the unfolded protein response. 
Findings from this study give new insight into molecular pathways accounting for 
the protective effect of melatonin in fibrogenesis.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25958928  [PubMed - in process]


196. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2015;843:77-128. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2480-6_4.

Molecular biology of the stress response in the early embryo and its stem cells.

Puscheck EE(1), Awonuga AO, Yang Y, Jiang Z, Rappolee DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ob/Gyn, REI Division, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, MI, USA.

Stress is normal during early embryogenesis and transient, elevated stress is
commonplace. Stress in the milieu of the peri-implantation embryo is a summation 
of maternal hormones, and other elements of the maternal milieu, that signal
preparedness for development and implantation. Examples discussed here are
leptin, adrenaline, cortisol, and progesterone. These hormones signal maternal
nutritional status and provide energy, but also signal stress that diverts
maternal and embryonic energy from an optimal embryonic developmental trajectory.
These hormones communicate endocrine maternal effects and local embryonic effects
although signaling mechanisms are not well understood. Other in vivo stresses
affect the embryo such as local infection and inflammation, hypoxia,
environmental toxins such as benzopyrene, dioxin, or metals, heat shock, and
hyperosmotic stress due to dehydration or diabetes. In vitro, stresses include
shear during handling, improper culture media and oxygen levels,
cryopreservation, and manipulations of the embryo to introduce sperm or
mitochondria. We define stress as any stimulus that slows stem cell accumulation 
or diminishes the ability of cells to produce normal and sufficient parenchymal
products upon differentiation. Thus stress deflects downwards the normal
trajectories of development, growth and differentiation. Typically stress is
inversely proportional to embryonic developmental and proliferative rates, but
can be proportional to induction of differentiation of stem cells in the
peri-implantation embryo. When modeling stress it is most interesting to produce 
a 'runting model' where stress exposures slow accumulation but do not create
excessive apoptosis or morbidity. Windows of stress sensitivity may occur when
major new embryonic developmental programs require large amounts of energy and
are exacerbated if nutritional flow decreases and removes energy from the normal 
developmental programs and stress responses. These windows correspond to zygotic 
genome activation, the large mRNA program initiated at compaction, ion pumping
required for cavitation, the differentiation of the first lineages, integration
with the uterine environment at implantation, rapid proliferation of stem cells, 
and production of certain lineages which require the highest energy and are most 
sensitive to mitochondrial inhibition. Stress response mechanisms insure that
stem cells for the early embryo and placenta survive at lower stress exposures,
and that the organism survives through compensatory and prioritized stem cell
differentiation, at higher stress exposures. These servomechanisms include a
small set of stress enzymes from the 500 protein kinases in the kinome; the part 
of the genome coding for protein kinases that hierarchically regulate the
activity of other proteins and enzymes. Important protein kinases that mediate
the stress response of embryos and their stem cells are SAPK, p38MAPK, AMPK,
PI3K, Akt, MEK1/2, MEKK4, PKA, IRE1 and PERK. These stress enzymes have cytosolic
function in cell survival at low stress exposures and nuclear function in
modifying transcription factor activity at higher stress exposures. Some of the
transcription factors (TFs) that are most important in the stress response are
JunC, JunB, MAPKAPs, ATF4, XBP1, Oct1, Oct4, HIFs, Nrf2/KEAP, NFKB, MT1, Nfat5,
HSF1/2 and potency-maintaining factors Id2, Cdx2, Eomes, Sox2, Nanog, Rex1, and
Oct4. Clearly the stress enzymes have a large number of cytosolic and nuclear
substrates and the TFs regulate large numbers of genes. The interaction of stress
enzymes and TFs in the early embryo and its stem cells are a continuing central
focus of research. In vitro regulation of TFs by stress enzymes leads to
reprogramming of the stem cell when stress diminishes stem cell accumulation.
Since more differentiated product is produced by fewer cells, the process
compensates for fewer cells. Coupled with stress-induced compensatory
differentiation of stem cells is a tendency to prioritize differentiation by
increasing the first essential lineage and decreasing later lineages. These
mechanisms include stress enzymes that regulate TFs and provide stress-specific, 
shared homeostatic cellular and organismal responses of prioritized
differentiation.

PMID: 25956296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Biomolecules. 2015 May 6;5(2):793-807. doi: 10.3390/biom5020793.

The effect of alcohol and hydrogen peroxide on liver hepcidin gene expression in 
mice lacking antioxidant enzymes, glutathione peroxidase-1 or catalase.

Harrison-Findik DD(1), Lu S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology/Hepatology,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.
dharrisonfindik@unmc.edu. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA. sizhao.lu@unmc.edu.

This study investigates the regulation of hepcidin, the key iron-regulatory
molecule, by alcohol and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) in glutathione peroxidase-1
(gpx-1(-/-)) and catalase (catalase(-/-)) knockout mice. For alcohol studies, 10%
ethanol was administered in the drinking water for 7 days. Gpx-1(-/-) displayed
significantly higher hepatic H2O2 levels than catalase(-/-) compared to wild-type
mice, as measured by 2'-7'-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA). The
basal level of liver hepcidin expression was attenuated in gpx-1(-/-) mice.
Alcohol increased H2O2 production in catalase(-/-) and wild-type, but not
gpx-1(-/-), mice. Hepcidin expression was inhibited in alcohol-fed catalase(-/-) 
and wild-type mice. In contrast, alcohol elevated hepcidin expression in
gpx-1(-/-) mice. Gpx-1(-/-) mice also displayed higher level of basal liver CHOP 
protein expression than catalase(-/-) mice. Alcohol induced CHOP and to a lesser 
extent GRP78/BiP expression, but not XBP1 splicing or binding of CREBH to
hepcidin gene promoter, in gpx-1(-/-) mice. The up-regulation of hepatic ATF4
mRNA levels, which was observed in gpx-1(-/-) mice, was attenuated by alcohol. In
conclusion, our findings strongly suggest that H2O2 inhibits hepcidin expression 
in vivo. Synergistic induction of CHOP by alcohol and H2O2, in the absence of
gpx-1, stimulates liver hepcidin gene expression by ER stress independent of
CREBH.

PMCID: PMC4496697
PMID: 25955433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Autophagy. 2015;11(5):729-39. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1017192.

The role of STAT3 in autophagy.

You L(1), Wang Z, Li H, Shou J, Jing Z, Xie J, Sui X, Pan H, Han W.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medical Oncology; Zhejiang University ; Hangzhou , Zhejiang , 
China.

Autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved process in eukaryotes that eliminates
harmful components and maintains cellular homeostasis in response to a series of 
extracellular insults. However, these insults may trigger the downstream
signaling of another prominent stress responsive pathway, the STAT3 signaling
pathway, which has been implicated in multiple aspects of the autophagic process.
Recent reports further indicate that different subcellular localization patterns 
of STAT3 affect autophagy in various ways. For example, nuclear STAT3 fine-tunes 
autophagy via the transcriptional regulation of several autophagy-related genes
such as BCL2 family members, BECN1, PIK3C3, CTSB, CTSL, PIK3R1, HIF1A, BNIP3, and
microRNAs with targets of autophagy modulators. Cytoplasmic STAT3 constitutively 
inhibits autophagy by sequestering EIF2AK2 as well as by interacting with other
autophagy-related signaling molecules such as FOXO1 and FOXO3. Additionally, the 
mitochondrial translocation of STAT3 suppresses autophagy induced by oxidative
stress and may effectively preserve mitochondria from being degraded by
mitophagy. Understanding the role of STAT3 signaling in the regulation of
autophagy may provide insight into the classic autophagy model and also into
cancer therapy, especially for the emerging targeted therapy, because a series of
targeted agents execute antitumor activities via blocking STAT3 signaling, which 
inevitably affects the autophagy pathway. Here, we review several of the
representative studies and the current understanding in this particular field.

PMCID: PMC4509450
PMID: 25951043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Oct;135(10):2502-11. doi: 10.1038/jid.2015.177. Epub 2015
May 7.

Translational Repression Protects Human Keratinocytes from UVB-Induced Apoptosis 
through a Discordant eIF2 Kinase Stress Response.

Collier AE(1), Wek RC(1), Spandau DF(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA. (2)Department of Dermatology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana USA.

This study delineates the mechanisms by which UVB regulates protein synthesis in 
human keratinocytes and the importance of translational control in cell survival.
Translation initiation is regulated by phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation
factor 2 (eIF2-P) that causes decreased global protein synthesis coincident with 
enhanced translation of selected stress-related transcripts, such as activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4). ATF4 is a transcriptional activator of the
integrated stress response (ISR) that has cytoprotective functions as well as
apoptotic signals through the downstream transcriptional regulator C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP; GADD153/DDIT3). We determined that UVB irradiation is a
potent inducer of eIF2-P in keratinocytes, leading to decreased levels of
translation initiation. However, expression of ATF4 or CHOP was not induced by
UVB as compared with traditional ISR activators. The rationale for this
discordant response is that ATF4 mRNA is reduced by UVB, and despite its ability 
to be preferentially translated, there are diminished levels of available
transcript. Forced expression of ATF4 and CHOP protein before UVB irradiation
significantly enhanced apoptosis, suggesting that this portion of the ISR is
deleterious in keratinocytes following UVB. Inhibition of eIF2-P and
translational control reduced viability following UVB that was alleviated by
cycloheximide (CHX), indicating that translation repression through eIF2-P is
central to keratinocyte survival.

PMCID: PMC4567905
PMID: 25950825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2015 Aug;388(8):817-30. doi:
10.1007/s00210-015-1116-3. Epub 2015 May 6.

Salvianolic acid A attenuates TNF-a- and D-GalN-induced ER stress-mediated and
mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis by modulating Bax/Bcl-2 ratio and calcium
release in hepatocyte LO2 cells.

Yan X(1), Jiang Z, Bi L, Yang Y, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preclinical Medicine, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine,
138 Xianlin Rd., Nanjing, 210023, China.

Salvianolic acid (Sal A) is a water-soluble compound extracted from Radix Salvia 
miltiorrhiza (danshen), which has been widely used to treat acute hepatitis and
hepatic damage in traditional Chinese medicine. The aim of the present study was 
to delineate the antiapoptotic signaling pathways involved in Sal A's
hepato-protective action in hepatocyte LO2 cells and to further elucidate the
mechanism by which Sal A elicits the antiapoptotic effects on hepatocytes. Here, 
the study showed that Sal A had antiapoptotic effects on the TNF-a/D-GalN-treated
LO2 cells. Moreover, Western blotting demonstrated that the levels of p-eIF2a,
ATF4, GRP78, CHOP and caspase-4 were markedly decreased in Sal A group.
Additionally, the decrease of the cell mitochondrial membrane permeability and
increase of <U+0394><U+03A8>m were detected in Sal A-treated cells by high-content screening
(HCS) analysis. And the levels of cleaved-caspase-9, cleaved-caspase-3,
apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF), Apaf-1, and Cytc (cyto) were downregulated,
while Cytc (mito) was upregulated by Sal A via Western blotting. Furthermore, the
decreased levels of Bax/Bcl-2 ratio and calcium release were measured in Sal
A-treated cells. In summary, Sal A attenuates TNF-a- and D-GalN-induced both ER
stress and mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis by suppression of Bax/Bcl-2 ratio
and prevention of calcium release, which support the notion that Sal A could be
developed into a novel hepatic protectant.

PMID: 25943027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jun 19;290(25):15878-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.635144. Epub
2015 Apr 30.

Human CHAC1 Protein Degrades Glutathione, and mRNA Induction Is Regulated by the 
Transcription Factors ATF4 and ATF3 and a Bipartite ATF/CRE Regulatory Element.

Crawford RR(1), Prescott ET(1), Sylvester CF(1), Higdon AN(1), Shan J(2), Kilberg
MS(2), Mungrue IN(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Louisiana
State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112 and. (2)the
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shands Cancer Center and Center
for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville,
Florida 32610. (3)From the Department of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans,
Louisiana 70112 and imungr@lsuhsc.edu.

Using an unbiased systems genetics approach, we previously predicted a role for
CHAC1 in the endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway, linked functionally to
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) following treatment with oxidized
phospholipids, a model for atherosclerosis. Mouse and yeast CHAC1 homologs have
been shown to degrade glutathione in yeast and a cell-free system. In this
report, we further defined the ATF4-CHAC1 interaction by cloning the human CHAC1 
promoter upstream of a luciferase reporter system for in vitro assays in HEK293
and U2OS cells. Mutation and deletion analyses defined two major cis DNA elements
necessary and sufficient for CHAC1 promoter-driven luciferase transcription under
conditions of ER stress or ATF4 coexpression: the -267 ATF/cAMP response element 
(CRE) site and a novel -248 ATF/CRE modifier (ACM) element. We also examined the 
ability of the CHAC1 ATF/CRE and ACM sequences to bind ATF4 and ATF3 using
immunoblot-EMSA and confirmed ATF4, ATF3, and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß
binding at the human CHAC1 promoter in the proximity of the ATF/CRE and ACM using
ChIP. To further validate the function of CHAC1 in a human cell model, we
measured glutathione levels in HEK293 cells with enhanced CHAC1 expression.
Overexpression of CHAC1 led to a robust depletion of glutathione, which was
alleviated in a CHAC1 catalytic mutant. These results suggest an important role
for CHAC1 in oxidative stress and apoptosis with implications for human health
and disease.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4505494 [Available on 2016-06-19]
PMID: 25931127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Sci Signal. 2015 Apr 28;8(374):rs5. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aaa0549.

In vivo imaging of the spatiotemporal activity of the eIF2a-ATF4 signaling
pathway: Insights into stress and related disorders.

Chaveroux C(1), Carraro V(1), Canaple L(2), Averous J(1), Maurin AC(1), Jousse
C(1), Muranishi Y(1), Parry L(1), Mesclon F(1), Gatti E(3), Mallet J(4),
Ravassard P(4), Pierre P(3), Fafournoux P(5), Bruhat A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA), UMR 1019 Nutrition
Humaine, Centre de Clermont-Ferrand-Theix, 63122 Saint Genès Champanelle, France.
Université Clermont 1, UFR Médecine, UMR 1019 Nutrition Humaine, 63000
Clermont-Ferrand, France. (2)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, IGFL
UMR 5242 CNRS, ENS Lyon, INRA 1288, UCBL, 69364 Lyon, France. (3)Centre
d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Aix-Marseille Université, U2M, 13288
Marseille, France. INSERM, U1104, 13288 Marseille, France. CNRS, UMR 7280, 13288 
Marseille, France. Institute for Research in Biomedicine (iBiMED) and Aveiro
Health Sciences Program University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal.
(4)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, Biotechnology and Biotherapy
Team, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, 47 Bd. De l'Hôpital, 75013 Paris, France.
(5)Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA), UMR 1019 Nutrition
Humaine, Centre de Clermont-Ferrand-Theix, 63122 Saint Genès Champanelle, France.
Université Clermont 1, UFR Médecine, UMR 1019 Nutrition Humaine, 63000
Clermont-Ferrand, France. alain.bruhat@clermont.inra.fr
pierre.fafournoux@clermont.inra.fr.

The eIF2a-ATF4 pathway is involved in cellular adaptation to stress and is
dysregulated in numerous diseases. Activation of this pathway leads to
phosphorylation of the a subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2a) and
the recruitment of the transcription factor ATF4 (activating transcription factor
4) to specific CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)-ATF response elements
(CAREs) located in the promoters of target genes. To monitor the spatiotemporal
modulation of this pathway in living animals, we generated a novel CARE-driven
luciferase mouse model (CARE-LUC). These transgenic mice enable the investigation
of the eIF2a-ATF4 pathway activity in the whole organism and at the tissue and
cellular levels by combining imaging, luciferase assays, and immunochemistry.
Using this mouse line, we showed the tissue-specific activation pattern of this
pathway in response to amino acid deficiency or endoplasmic reticulum stress and 
the hepatic induction of this pathway in a stress-related pathology model of
liver fibrosis. The CARE-LUC mouse model represents an innovative tool to
investigate the eIF2a-ATF4 axis and to develop drugs targeting this important
pathway in the remediation of related pathologies.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 25921292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 27;10(4):e0124744. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124744.
eCollection 2015.

SIRT3 Overexpression Attenuates Palmitate-Induced Pancreatic ß-Cell Dysfunction.

Kim M(1), Lee JS(1), Oh JE(1), Nan J(1), Lee H(1), Jung HS(1), Chung SS(1), Park 
KS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Department of Molecular Medicine
and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science and
Technology, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Abnormally high levels of circulating free fatty acids can lead to pancreatic
islet ß-cell dysfunction and apoptosis, contributing to ß-cell failure in Type 2 
diabetes. The NAD+-dependent protein deacetylase Sirtuin-3 (SIRT3) has been
implicated in Type 2 diabetes. In this study, we tested whether SIRT3
overexpression affects palmitate-induced ß-cell dysfunction in cells of line
NIT1, which are derived from mouse pancreatic ß-cells. Two different lengths of
SIRT3 were overexpressed: full length SIRT3 (SIRT3LF), which was preferentially
targeted to mitochondria and partially to the nucleus, and its N-terminal
truncated form (SIRT3SF), which was located in the nucleus and cytoplasm.
Overexpression of SIRT3LF and SIRT3SF using an adenoviral system alleviated
palmitate-induced lipotoxicity such as reduction of cell viability and
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activation. Chronic exposure to low
concentrations of palmitate suppressed glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, but 
the suppression was effectively reversed by overexpression of SIRT3LF or SIRT3SF.
The mRNA levels of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress responsive genes ATF4,
GRP94 and FKBP11 were increased by palmitate treatment, but the increases were
completely inhibited by SIRT3LF overexpression and less effectively inhibited by 
SIRT3SF overexpression. This result suggests that overexpression of SIRT3
inhibits induction of ER stress by palmitate. Collectively, we conclude that
overexpression of SIRT3 alleviates palmitate-induced ß-cell dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC4411148
PMID: 25915406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 27;10(4):e0124956. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124956.
eCollection 2015.

Transcription Factor CREB3L1 Regulates Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Response
Genes in the Osmotically Challenged Rat Hypothalamus.

Greenwood M(1), Greenwood MP(1), Paton JF(2), Murphy D(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, England.
(2)School of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Bristol, Bristol,
England. (3)School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, England;
Department of Physiology, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Arginine vasopressin (AVP) is synthesised in magnocellular neurons (MCNs) of
supraoptic nucleus (SON) and paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus.
In response to the hyperosmotic stressors of dehydration (complete fluid
deprivation, DH) or salt loading (drinking 2% salt solution, SL), AVP synthesis
increases in MCNs, which over-burdens the protein folding machinery in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). ER stress and the unfolded protein response (UPR) are
signaling pathways that improve ER function in response to the accumulation of
misfold/unfold protein. We asked whether an ER stress response was activated in
the SON and PVN of DH and SL rats. We observed increased mRNA expression for the 
immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein (BiP), activating transcription factor
4 (Atf4), C/EBP-homologous protein (Chop), and cAMP responsive element binding
protein 3 like 1 (Creb3l1) in both SON and PVN of DH and SL rats. Although we
found no changes in the splicing pattern of X box-binding protein 1 (Xbp1), an
increase in the level of the unspliced form of Xbp1 (Xbp1U) was observed in DH
and SL rats. CREB3L1, a novel ER stress inducer, has been shown to be activated
by ER stress to regulate the expression of target genes. We have previously shown
that CREB3L1 is a transcriptional regulator of the AVP gene; however, a role for 
CREB3L1 in the response to ER stress has yet to be investigated in MCNs. Here, we
used lentiviral vectors to introduce a dominant negative form of CREB3L1
(CREB3L1DN) in the rat SON. Expression of CREB3L1DN in the SON decreased Chop and
Xbp1U mRNA levels, but not BiP and Atf4 transcript expression. CREB3L1 is thus
implicated as a transcriptional mediator of the ER stress response in the
osmotically stimulated SON.

PMCID: PMC4411032
PMID: 25915053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 27;10(4):e0122270. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122270.
eCollection 2015.

Pachymic acid inhibits growth and induces apoptosis of pancreatic cancer in vitro
and in vivo by targeting ER stress.

Cheng S(1), Swanson K(1), Eliaz I(2), McClintick JN(3), Sandusky GE(4), Sliva
D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Laboratory, Methodist Research Institute, Indiana University
Health, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of America. (2)Amitabha Medical
Clinic and Healing Center, Santa Rosa, California, United States of America.
(3)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Indiana
University, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of America. (4)Departments of
Pathology, School of Medicine, Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana, United 
States of America. (5)Cancer Research Laboratory, Methodist Research Institute,
Indiana University Health, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of America;
Departments of Medicine, School of Medicine, Indiana University, Indianapolis,
Indiana, United States of America; DSTest Laboratories, Purdue Research Park,
Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of America.

Pachymic acid (PA) is a purified triterpene extracted from medicinal fungus Poria
cocos. In this paper, we investigated the anticancer effect of PA on human
chemotherapy resistant pancreatic cancer. PA triggered apoptosis in
gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic cancer cells PANC-1 and MIA PaCa-2. Comparative 
gene expression array analysis demonstrated that endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress was induced by PA through activation of heat shock response and unfolded
protein response related genes. Induced ER stress was confirmed by increasing
expression of XBP-1s, ATF4, Hsp70, CHOP and phospho-eIF2a. Moreover, ER stress
inhibitor tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) blocked PA induced apoptosis. In
addition, 25 mg kg-1 of PA significantly suppressed MIA PaCa-2 tumor growth in
vivo without toxicity, which correlated with induction of apoptosis and
expression of ER stress related proteins in tumor tissues. Taken together, growth
inhibition and induction of apoptosis by PA in gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic
cancer cells were associated with ER stress activation both in vitro and in vivo.
PA may be potentially exploited for the use in treatment of chemotherapy
resistant pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC4411097
PMID: 25915041  [PubMed - in process]


206. J Inflamm (Lond). 2015 Apr 17;12:31. doi: 10.1186/s12950-015-0076-1. eCollection 
2015.

ATF4 is a novel regulator of MCP-1 in microvascular endothelial cells.

Huang H(1), Jing G(2), Wang JJ(3), Sheibani N(4), Zhang SX(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology and Biochemistry, School of Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York,
Buffalo, NY 14214 USA ; SUNY Eye Institute, The State University of New York,
Buffalo, NY 14214 USA ; Department of Endocrinology, The 2nd Affiliated Hospital 
of Fujian Medical University, Quanzhou, Fujian China. (2)Department of Medicine, 
Endocrinology and Diabetes, Harold Hamm Diabetes Center, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma, 73104 OK USA. (3)Departments of Ophthalmology
and Biochemistry, School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at
Buffalo, The State University of New York, Buffalo, NY 14214 USA ; SUNY Eye
Institute, The State University of New York, Buffalo, NY 14214 USA ; Department
of Medicine, Endocrinology and Diabetes, Harold Hamm Diabetes Center, University 
of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma, 73104 OK USA. (4)Department of
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Wisconsin, School of Medicine
and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin USA ; McPherson Eye Research Institute,
University of Wisconsin, School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) is a major chemokine that 
recruits monocyte/macrophage to the site of tissue injury and plays a critical
role in microvascular complications of diabetes. However, the mechanisms
underlying the regulation of MCP-1 are not fully understood. The present study
aims to explore the role of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), an ER
stress-inducible transcription factor, in regulation of MCP-1 expression and
production in brain and retinal microvascular endothelial cells.
METHODS: For in vitro study, primary brain microvascular endothelial cells
isolated from ATF4 knockout mice or mouse retinal endothelial cells were treated 
with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to induce MCP-1 expression. ATF4
expression/function was manipulated by adenoviruses expressing wild type ATF4
(Ad-ATF4) or a dominant negative mutant of the protein (Ad-ATF4DN). For in vivo
study, MCP-1 expression was induced by intravitreal injection of LPS or Ad-ATF4
in heterozygous ATF4 knockout or wild type mice.
RESULTS: LPS treatment induced a dose- and time-dependent increase in ATF4
expression, ER stress and MCP-1 production in brain and retinal microvascular
endothelial cells. Overexpression of ATF4 in endothelial cells significantly
increased the secretion of MCP-1 and promoted THP-1 monocyte-endothelial cell
adhesion. Conditioned medium from ATF4-overexpressiing endothelial cells
significantly enhanced THP-1 cell migration. Consistently, intravitreal injection
of Ad-ATF4 remarkably enhanced retinal levels of MCP-1 and promoted inflammatory 
cell infiltration into the vitreous and retina. In contrast, LPS-induced MCP-1
upregulation was markedly attenuated in ATF4-deficient endothelial cells and in
retinas of ATF4 knockout mice, suggesting that ATF4 is essential for LPS-induced 
MCP-1 production in endothelial cells and in the retina. Mechanistically,
overexpression of ATF4 enhanced, while inhibition of ATF4, attenuated the basal
and LPS-stimulated phosphorylation of NF-<U+03BA>B, P38, and JNK. Furthermore,
pharmacological inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B, P38, or JNK significantly reduced
ATF4-stimulated MCP-1 secretion from endothelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results suggest a critical role of ATF4 in the
regulation of MCP-1 production in retinal and brain microvascular endothelial
cells, which may contribute to inflammation-related endothelial injury in
diseases such as diabetic retinopathy.

PMCID: PMC4409760
PMID: 25914608  [PubMed]


207. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Jun 10;334(2):207-18. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.04.010. Epub
2015 Apr 24.

The switch from ER stress-induced apoptosis to autophagy via ROS-mediated JNK/p62
signals: A survival mechanism in methotrexate-resistant choriocarcinoma cells.

Shen Y(1), Yang J(2), Zhao J(2), Xiao C(2), Xu C(3), Xiang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Technical Service Centre of Family Planning and Reproductive Health, National 
Research Institute for Family Planning, Beijing 100081, People<U+05F3>s Republic of
China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking Union Medical College
Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100730, People<U+05F3>s Republic of China. (3)National Laboratory of Medical
Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical
College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, People<U+05F3>s
Republic of China. Electronic address: cmxu@ibms.pumc.edu.cn. (4)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy
of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, People<U+05F3>s
Republic of China. Electronic address: xiangy@pumch.cn.

BACKGROUND: Human choriocarcinoma, a highly curable solid tumour, is
exceptionally sensitive to methotrexate-based chemotherapy at the metastatic
stage. The present study aimed to investigate the molecular basis for this
resistance to methotrexate therapy occurs in some cases, and these patients
subsequently die from progressive and advanced disease.
METHODS: The autophagy and apoptotic activity regulated by PERK/ATF4 axis in
methotrexate-resistant JEG-3 and parental cells were evaluated with western
blotting and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). The regulatory relationships
among the reactive oxygen species (ROS), JNK/p62 axis, PERK/ATF4-mediated
apoptosis and autophagy were assessed with western blotting, RT-PCR,
fluorescence-activated cell sorting as well as ChIP.
RESULTS: The decreased apoptosis in methotrexate-resistant JEG-3 cells was
observed with an up-regulation of protective autophagy, suggesting a switch from 
apoptosis to autophagy, which was regulated via the PERK/ATF4 pathway under
condition of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Further experiments demonstrated 
that this cell death switch was regulated by ROS-mediated JNK/p62 pathway and
subsequently lead to the resistance of choriocarcinoma cells to methotrexate
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence to explain a survival mechanism of the 
switch from ER stress-induced apoptosis to autophagy via ROS-mediated JNK/p62
signals in methotrexate-resistant choriocarcinoma cells and may implicate the
chemotherapy of methotrexate resistance in choriocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25912909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Chin J Nat Med. 2015 Apr;13(4):250-6. doi: 10.1016/S1875-5364(15)30011-X.

Ethanol promotes saturated fatty acid-induced hepatoxicity through endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress response.

Yi HW(1), Ma YX(2), Wang XN(2), Wang CF(3), Lu J(4), Cao W(4), Wu XD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing
210009, China; State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of
Life Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China. Electronic address:
hwyi@seu.edu.cn. (2)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School 
of Life Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China. (3)Center for
Diagnostic Nanosystems, Marshall University, Huntington, WV 25755, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing
210009, China. (5)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of
Life Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China. Electronic address:
xudongwu@nju.edu.cn.

Serum palmitic acid (PA), a type of saturated fatty acid, causes lipid
accumulation and induces toxicity in hepatocytes. Ethanol (EtOH) is metabolized
by the liver and induces hepatic injury and inflammation. Herein, we analyzed the
effects of EtOH on PA-induced lipotoxicity in the liver. Our results indicated
that EtOH aggravated PA-induced apoptosis and lipid accumulation in primary rat
hepatocytes in dose-dependent manner. EtOH intensified PA-caused endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress response in vitro and in vivo, and the expressions of CHOP,
ATF4, and XBP-1 in nucleus were significantly increased. EtOH also increased
PA-caused cleaved caspase-3 in cytoplasm. In wild type and CHOP(-/-) mice treated
with EtOH and high fat diet (HFD), EtOH worsened the HFD-induced liver injury and
dyslipidemia, while CHOP knockout blocked toxic effects of EtOH and PA. Our study
suggested that targeting UPR-signaling pathways is a promising, novel approach to
reducing EtOH and saturated fatty acid-induced metabolic complications.

Copyright © 2015 China Pharmaceutical University. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 25908621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Cancer Biol Ther. 2015;16(5):770-9. doi: 10.1080/15384047.2015.1026477. Epub 2015
Apr 18.

p8 attenuates the apoptosis induced by dihydroartemisinin in cancer cells through
promoting autophagy.

Chen SS(1), Hu W, Wang Z, Lou XE, Zhou HJ.

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology; College of Pharmaceutical
Sciences; Zhejiang University ; Hangzhou , PR China.

Dihydroartemisinin (DHA) exhibits anticancer activities in a variety of cancer
cells, but DHA alone are not effective enough for cancer therapy. In this study
we found the stress-regulated protein p8 was obviously increased after DHA
treatment in several cancer cells, which further to induce autophagy by the
upregulation of endoplasmic reticulum stress-related protein ATF4 and CHOP.
Furthermore, when we silenced p8 by siRNA in cancer cells, the apoptosis induced 
by DHA were notably increased, whereas the overexpression of p8 in cancer cells
leaded to the resistance to DHA-induced apoptosis. Moreover, we found the
inhibition of autophagy with chloroquine (CQ) can enhance the anticancer effect
of DHA both in vitro and in vivo. In conclusion, we found that p8-mediated
autophagy attenuates DHA-induced apoptosis in cancer cells, which provides
evidence to support the use p8 as a cancer therapeutic target, and suggests that 
the combination treatment with DHA and autophagy inhibitor might be an effective 
cancer therapeutic strategy.

PMCID: PMC4622699 [Available on 2016-04-18]
PMID: 25891535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:974615. doi: 10.1155/2015/974615. Epub 2015 Mar 25.

Activating transcription factor 4 promotes angiogenesis of breast cancer through 
enhanced macrophage recruitment.

Liu C(1), Li Z(2), Wang L(3), Tong L(4), He N(2), Chen Y(2), Liu Y(2), Wu Z(1),
Sun P(5), Xiang R(6), Ren G(1), Su W(2).

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing
400016, China. (2)School of Medicine, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.
(3)State Key Lab of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology and Blood
Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Tianjin 300052, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Xiamen International Travel Healthcare
Center, Xiamen 361012, China. (5)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, The
Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (6)The First Affiliated
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China ; School of
Medicine, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

Angiogenesis plays an important role in the progression of tumor. Besides being
regulated by tumor cells per se, tumor angiogenesis is also influenced by stromal
cells in tumor microenvironment (TME), for example, tumor associated macrophages 
(TAMs). Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a member of the ATF/CREB
family, has been reported to be related to tumor angiogenesis. In this study, we 
found that exogenous overexpression of ATF4 in mouse breast cancer cells promotes
tumor growth via increasing tumor microvascular density. However, ATF4
overexpression failed to increase the expression level of a series of
proangiogenic factors including vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) in
tumor cells in this model. Thus, we further investigated the infiltration of
proangiogenic macrophages in tumor tissues and found that ATF4-overexpressing
tumors could recruit more macrophages via secretion of macrophage colony
stimulating factor (M-CSF). Overall, we concluded that exogenous overexpression
of ATF4 in breast cancer cells may facilitate the recruitment of macrophages into
tumor tissues and promote tumor angiogenesis and tumor growth indirectly.

PMCID: PMC4391610
PMID: 25883982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Clin Exp Reprod Med. 2015 Mar;42(1):1-7. doi: 10.5653/cerm.2015.42.1.1. Epub 2015
Mar 31.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress in periimplantation embryos.

Michalak M(1), Gye MC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(2)Department of Life Science and Institute of Natural Sciences, College of
Natural Sciences, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea.

Stress coping mechanisms are critical to minimize or overcome damage caused by
ever changing environmental conditions. They are designed to promote cell
survival. The unfolded protein response (UPR) pathway is mobilized in response to
the accumulation of unfolded proteins, ultimately in order to regain endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) homeostasis. Various elements of coping responses to ER stress
including Perk, Ask1, Bip, Chop, Gadd34, Ire1, Atf4, Atf6, and Xbp1 have been
identified and were found to be inducible in oocytes and preimplantation embryos,
suggesting that, as a normal part of the cellular adaptive mechanism, these
coping responses, including the UPR, play a pivotal role in the development of
preimplantation embryos. As such, the UPR-associated molecules and pathways may
become useful markers for the potential diagnosis of stress conditions for
preimplantation embryos. After implantation, ER stress-induced coping responses
become physiologically important for a normal decidual response, placentation,
and early organogenesis. Attenuation of ER stress coping responses by
tauroursodeoxycholate and salubrinal was effective for prevention of cell death
of cultured embryos. Further elucidation of new and relevant ER stress coping
responses in periimplantation embryos might contribute to a comprehensive
understanding of the regulation of normal development of embryonic development
and potentiation of embryonic development in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4390675
PMID: 25874167  [PubMed]


212. Circ Res. 2015 May 22;116(11):1736-43. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.305602. Epub
2015 Apr 14.

C/EBP-Homologous Protein (CHOP) in Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells Regulates Their
Proliferation in Aortic Explants and Atherosclerotic Lesions.

Zhou AX(1), Wang X(2), Lin CS(1), Han J(1), Yong J(1), Nadolski MJ(1), Borén
J(1), Kaufman RJ(1), Tabas I(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Medicine (A.-X.Z., X.W., M.J.N., I.T.), Pathology and 
Cell Biology (C.S.L., I.T.), and Physiology and Cellular Biophysics (I.T.),
Columbia University, New York, NY; Department of Molecular and Clinical
Medicine/Wallenberg Laboratory, University of Gothenburg and Sahlgrenska
University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden (A.-X.Z., J.B.); CVMD iMed Translational 
Science, AstraZeneca R and D, Mölndal, Sweden (A.-X.Z.); Soonchunhyang Institute 
of Med-Bio Science, Soonchunhyang University, Cheon-an, South Korea (J.H.); and
Degenerative Disease Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La
Jolla, CA (J.H., J.Y., R.J.K.). (2)From the Departments of Medicine (A.-X.Z.,
X.W., M.J.N., I.T.), Pathology and Cell Biology (C.S.L., I.T.), and Physiology
and Cellular Biophysics (I.T.), Columbia University, New York, NY; Department of 
Molecular and Clinical Medicine/Wallenberg Laboratory, University of Gothenburg
and Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden (A.-X.Z., J.B.); CVMD
iMed Translational Science, AstraZeneca R and D, Mölndal, Sweden (A.-X.Z.);
Soonchunhyang Institute of Med-Bio Science, Soonchunhyang University, Cheon-an,
South Korea (J.H.); and Degenerative Disease Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical
Research Institute, La Jolla, CA (J.H., J.Y., R.J.K.). iat1@columbia.edu
xw2279@columbia.edu.

RATIONALE: Myeloid-derived C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP), an effector of the
endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced unfolded protein response, promotes
macrophage apoptosis in advanced atherosclerosis, but the role of CHOP in
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) in atherosclerosis is not known.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of CHOP in SM22a(+) VSMCs in atherosclerosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Chop(fl/fl) mice were generated and crossed into the
Apoe(-/-) and SM22a-CreKI(+) backgrounds. SM22a-CreKI causes deletion of floxed
genes in adult SMCs. After 12 weeks of Western-type diet feeding, the content of 
a-actin-positive cells in aortic root lesions was decreased in
Chop(fl/fl)SM22a-CreKI(+)Apoe(-/-) versus control Chop(fl/fl)Apoe(-/-) mice, and 
aortic explant-derived VSMCs from the VSMC-CHOP-deficient mice displayed reduced 
proliferation. Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), a key suppressor of VSMC
proliferation, was increased in lesions and aortic VSMCs from
Chop(fl/fl)SM22a-CreKI(+)Apoe(-/-) mice, and silencing Klf4 in CHOP-deficient
VSMCs restored proliferation. CHOP deficiency in aortic VSMCs increased KLF4
through 2 mechanisms mediated by the endoplasmic reticulum stress effector
activating transcription factor 4: transcriptional induction of Klf4 mRNA and
decreased proteasomal degradation of KLF4 protein.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings in SM22a-CHOP-deficient mice imply that CHOP
expression in SM22a(+) VSMCs promotes cell proliferation by downregulating KLF4. 
The mechanisms involve newly discovered roles of CHOP in the transcriptional and 
post-translational regulation of KLF4.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4441876 [Available on 2016-05-22]
PMID: 25872946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Cell Rep. 2015 Apr 14;11(2):183-91.

Specific downregulation of hippocampal ATF4 reveals a necessary role in synaptic 
plasticity and memory.

Pasini S, Corona C, Liu J, Greene LA, Shelanski ML.

Prior studies suggested that the transcription factor ATF4 negatively regulates
synaptic plastic and memory. By contrast, we provide evidence from direct in
vitro and in vivo knockdown of ATF4 in rodent hippocampal neurons and from
ATF4-null mice that implicate ATF4 as essential for normal synaptic plasticity
and memory. In particular, hippocampal ATF4 downregulation produces deficits in
long-term spatial memory and behavioral flexibility without affecting associative
memory or anxiety-like behavior. ATF4 knockdown or loss also causes profound
impairment of both long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) as
well as decreased glutamatergic function. We conclude that ATF4 is a key
regulator of the physiological state necessary for neuronal plasticity and
memory.

PMID: 25865882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Jul;22(7):1094-105. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2015.24. Epub 2015
Apr 10.

A novel autoregulatory loop between the Gcn2-Atf4 pathway and (L)-Proline
[corrected] metabolism controls stem cell identity.

D'Aniello C(1), Fico A(1), Casalino L(1), Guardiola O(1), Di Napoli G(1), Cermola
F(1), De Cesare D(1), Tatè R(2), Cobellis G(3), Patriarca EJ(1), Minchiotti G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics 'A. Buzzati-Traverso', CNR, Naples,
Italy. (2)Integrated Microscopy, Institute of Genetics and Biophysics 'A.
Buzzati-Traverso', CNR, Naples, Italy. (3)Department of Biophysics, Biochemistry 
and General Pathology, Second University of Naples (SUN), Naples, Italy.

Erratum in
    Cell Death Differ. 2015 Jul;22(7):1234.

Increasing evidence indicates that metabolism is implicated in the control of
stem cell identity. Here, we demonstrate that embryonic stem cell (ESC) behaviour
relies on a feedback loop that involves the non-essential amino acid L-Proline
(L-Pro) in the modulation of the Gcn2-Eif2a-Atf4 amino acid starvation response
(AAR) pathway that in turn regulates L-Pro biosynthesis. This regulatory loop
generates a highly specific intrinsic shortage of L-Pro that restricts
proliferation of tightly packed domed-like ESC colonies and safeguards ESC
identity. Indeed, alleviation of this nutrient stress condition by exogenously
provided L-Pro induces proliferation and modifies the ESC phenotypic and
molecular identity towards that of mesenchymal-like, invasive pluripotent stem
cells. Either pharmacological inhibition of the prolyl-tRNA synthetase by
halofuginone or forced expression of Atf4 antagonises the effects of exogenous
L-Pro. Our data provide unprecedented evidence that L-Pro metabolism and the
nutrient stress response are functionally integrated to maintain ESC identity.

PMCID: PMC4572871
PMID: 25857264  [PubMed - in process]


215. J Thromb Haemost. 2015 Jun;13(6):1103-12. doi: 10.1111/jth.12959. Epub 2015 May
9.

The gene expression signature of anagrelide provides an insight into its
mechanism of action and uncovers new regulators of megakaryopoiesis.

Ahluwalia M(1), Butcher L(1), Donovan H(1), Killick-Cole C(1), Jones PM(1),
Erusalimsky JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, Cardiff Metropolitan University, Cardiff, UK.

BACKGROUND: Anagrelide is a cytoreductive agent used to lower platelet counts in 
essential thrombocythemia. Although the drug has been known to selectively
inhibit megakaryopoiesis for many years, the molecular mechanism accounting for
this activity is still unclear.
OBJECTIVES AND METHODS: To address this issue we have compared the global gene
expression profiles of human hematopoietic cells treated ex-vivo with and without
anagrelide while growing under megakaryocyte differentiation conditions, using
high-density oligonucleotide microarrays. Gene expression data were validated by 
the quantitative polymerase chain reaction and mined to identify functional
subsets and regulatory pathways.
RESULTS: We identified 328 annotated genes differentially regulated by
anagrelide, including many genes associated with platelet functions and with the 
control of gene transcription. Prominent among the latter was TRIB3, whose
expression increased in the presence of anagrelide. Pathway analysis revealed
that anagrelide up-regulated genes that are under the control of the
transcription factor ATF4, a known TRIB3 inducer. Notably, immunoblot analysis
demonstrated that anagrelide induced the phosphorylation of eIF2a, which is an
upstream regulator of ATF4, and increased ATF4 protein levels. Furthermore,
salubrinal, an inhibitor of eIF2a dephosphorylation, increased the expression of 
ATF4-regulated genes and blocked megakaryocyte growth.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings link signaling through eIF2a/ATF4 to the
anti-megakaryopoietic activity of anagrelide and identify new potential
modulators of megakaryopoiesis.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis published by Wiley
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of International Society on Thrombosis and
Haemostasis.

PMID: 25851510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr 7;11(4):e1005158. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005158.
eCollection 2015.

Comprehensive profiling of amino acid response uncovers unique
methionine-deprived response dependent on intact creatine biosynthesis.

Tang X(1), Keenan MM(1), Wu J(1), Lin CA(1), Dubois L(2), Thompson JW(3),
Freedland SJ(4), Murphy SK(4), Chi JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America; Center for Genomic and 
Computational Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina,
United States of America. (2)Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America; Duke
Proteomics and Metabolomics Core Facility Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina, United States of America. (3)Center for Genomic and Computational
Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of
America; Duke Proteomics and Metabolomics Core Facility Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America; Department of
Pharmacology and Cancer Biology Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, United States of America. (4)Department of Surgery Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America.

Besides being building blocks for protein synthesis, amino acids serve a wide
variety of cellular functions, including acting as metabolic intermediates for
ATP generation and for redox homeostasis. Upon amino acid deprivation, free
uncharged tRNAs trigger GCN2-ATF4 to mediate the well-characterized
transcriptional amino acid response (AAR). However, it is not clear whether the
deprivation of different individual amino acids triggers identical or distinct
AARs. Here, we characterized the global transcriptional response upon deprivation
of one amino acid at a time. With the exception of glycine, which was not
required for the proliferation of MCF7 cells, we found that the deprivation of
most amino acids triggered a shared transcriptional response that included the
activation of ATF4, p53 and TXNIP. However, there was also significant
heterogeneity among different individual AARs. The most dramatic transcriptional 
response was triggered by methionine deprivation, which activated an extensive
and unique response in different cell types. We uncovered that the specific
methionine-deprived transcriptional response required creatine biosynthesis. This
dependency on creatine biosynthesis was caused by the consumption of
S-Adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) during creatine biosynthesis that helps to deplete 
SAM under methionine deprivation and reduces histone methylations. As such, the
simultaneous deprivation of methionine and sources of creatine biosynthesis
(either arginine or glycine) abolished the reduction of histone methylation and
the methionine-specific transcriptional response. Arginine-derived ornithine was 
also required for the complete induction of the methionine-deprived specific gene
response. Collectively, our data identify a previously unknown set of
heterogeneous amino acid responses and reveal a distinct methionine-deprived
transcriptional response that results from the crosstalk of arginine, glycine and
methionine metabolism via arginine/glycine-dependent creatine biosynthesis.

PMCID: PMC4388453
PMID: 25849282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Autophagy. 2015;11(2):344-54. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1023682.

Shiga toxins induce autophagic cell death in intestinal epithelial cells via the 
endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway.

Tang B(1), Li Q, Zhao XH, Wang HG, Li N, Fang Y, Wang K, Jia YP, Zhu P, Gu J, Li 
JX, Jiao YJ, Tong WD, Wang M, Zou QM, Zhu FC, Mao XH.

Author information: 
(1)a National Engineering Research Center for Immunobiological Products;
Department of Microbiology and Biochemical Pharmacy; College of Pharmacy; Third
Military Medical University ; Chongqing , China.

Shiga toxins (Stxs) are a family of cytotoxic proteins that lead to the
development of bloody diarrhea, hemolytic-uremic syndrome, and central nervous
system complications caused by bacteria such as S. dysenteriae, E. coli O157:H7
and E. coli O104:H4. Increasing evidence indicates that macroautophagy
(autophagy) is a key factor in the cell death induced by Stxs. However, the
associated mechanisms are not yet clear. This study showed that Stx2 induces
autophagic cell death in Caco-2 cells, a cultured line model of human
enterocytes. Inhibition of autophagy using pharmacological inhibitors, such as
3-methyladenine and bafilomycin A1, or silencing of the autophagy genes ATG12 or 
BECN1 decreased the Stx2-induced death in Caco-2 cells. Furthermore, there were
numerous instances of dilated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in the Stx2-treated
Caco-2 cells, and repression of ER stress due to the depletion of viable
candidates of DDIT3 and NUPR1. These processes led to Stx2-induced autophagy and 
cell death. Finally, the data showed that the pseudokinase TRIB3-mediated DDIT3
expression and AKT1 dephosphorylation upon ER stress were triggered by Stx2.
Thus, the data indicate that Stx2 causes autophagic cell death via the ER stress 
pathway in intestinal epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4502731
PMID: 25831014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. RNA Biol. 2015;12(3):343-53. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2015.1017205.

miR-214 promotes osteoclastogenesis by targeting Pten/PI3k/Akt pathway.

Zhao C(1), Sun W, Zhang P, Ling S, Li Y, Zhao D, Peng J, Wang A, Li Q, Song J,
Wang C, Xu X, Xu Z, Zhong G, Han B, Chang YZ, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)a From Key Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Ministry of
Education; College of Life Science; Hebei Normal University ; Shijiazhuang ,
China.

microRNA is necessary for osteoclast differentiation, function and survival. It
has been reported that miR-199/214 cluster plays important roles in vertebrate
skeletal development and miR-214 inhibits osteoblast function by targeting ATF4. 
Here, we show that miR-214 is up-regulated during osteoclastogenesis from bone
marrow monocytes (BMMs) with macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF) and
receptor activator of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL) induction, which indicates
that miR-214 plays a critical role in osteoclast differentiation. Overexpression 
of miR-214 in BMMs promotes osteoclastogenesis, whereas inhibition of miR-214
attenuates it. We further find that miR-214 functions through PI3K/Akt pathway by
targeting phosphatase and tensin homolog (Pten). In vivo, osteoclast specific
miR-214 transgenic mice (OC-TG214) exhibit down-regulated Pten levels, increased 
osteoclast activity, and reduced bone mineral density. These results reveal a
crucial role of miR-214 in the differentiation of osteoclasts, which will provide
a potential therapeutic target for osteoporosis.

PMCID: PMC4615895
PMID: 25826666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 May 8;460(3):831-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.03.118. Epub 2015 Mar 28.

ALS-associated P56S-VAPB mutation restrains 3T3-L1 preadipocyte differentiation.

Tokutake Y(1), Gushima K(2), Miyazaki H(2), Shimosato T(3), Yonekura S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Science and Technology, Shinshu
University, 8304 Minamiminowa, Kamiina, Nagano 399-4598, Japan. (2)Graduate
School of Agriculture, Shinshu University, 8304 Minamiminowa, Kamiina, Nagano
399-4598, Japan. (3)Department of Interdisciplinary Genome Sciences and Cell
Metabolism, Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Interdisciplinary Cluster for
Cutting Edge Research, Shinshu University, 8304 Minamiminowa, Kamiina, Nagano
399-4598, Japan. (4)Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Science and Technology, 
Shinshu University, 8304 Minamiminowa, Kamiina, Nagano 399-4598, Japan; Graduate 
School of Agriculture, Shinshu University, 8304 Minamiminowa, Kamiina, Nagano
399-4598, Japan; Department of Interdisciplinary Genome Sciences and Cell
Metabolism, Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Interdisciplinary Cluster for
Cutting Edge Research, Shinshu University, 8304 Minamiminowa, Kamiina, Nagano
399-4598, Japan. Electronic address: yonekura@shinshu-u.ac.jp.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), which is the most common motor neuron
disease in adults, is a neurodegenerative disease that involves the selective and
systematic death of upper and lower motor neurons. In addition to the motor
neuron death, altered metabolic functions, such as dyslipidemia, have also been
reported for ALS patients; however, the underlying mechanism remains unknown. In 
the present study, we investigated the effects of ALS-associated
P56S-vesicle-associated membrane proteinassociated protein B (VAPB), P56S-VAPB on
3T3-L1 preadipocyte differentiation and on the expression of
differentiation-associated genes and unfolded protein response (UPR)-related
genes. Experiments with 3T3-L1 cells transfected with wild-type (Wt)-VAPB and
P56S-VAPB expression vectors showed that the size of lipid droplets was markedly 
smaller in P56S-VAPB-expressing cells, although fat accumulated intracellularly. 
In P56S-VAPB-expressing cells, increased the expression of PPAR<U+03B3>2, aP2, and
C/EBPa, the genes deeply involved in adipocyte differentiation, was not observed.
Furthermore, the expression levels of the UPR-related ATF4 and CHOP genes were
found to be enhanced in the P56S-VAPB-expressing cells. From these results,
P56S-VAPB was found to suppress adipocyte differentiation by promoting the
activation of the ATF4-CHOP pathway. Given previous reports showing increased
ATF4 and CHOP expression levels in neurons of ALS patients, results from the
present study suggest that dyslipidemia is caused by enhanced ATF4-CHOP pathway
in the adipose tissue of ALS patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25824044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:352794. doi: 10.1155/2015/352794. Epub 2015 Mar 3.

Calcium homeostasis and ER stress in control of autophagy in cancer cells.

Kania E(1), Pajak B(2), Orzechowski A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Electron Microscopy Platform, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish
Academy of Sciences, A. Pawinskiego 5 Street, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland. (2)Electron 
Microscopy Platform, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of
Sciences, A. Pawinskiego 5 Street, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland ; Department of
Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw University of Life
Sciences (SGGW), Nowoursynowska 159 Street, 02-776 Warsaw, Poland.

Autophagy is a basic catabolic process, serving as an internal engine during
responses to various cellular stresses. As regards cancer, autophagy may play a
tumor suppressive role by preserving cellular integrity during tumor development 
and by possible contribution to cell death. However, autophagy may also exert
oncogenic effects by promoting tumor cell survival and preventing cell death, for
example, upon anticancer treatment. The major factors influencing autophagy are
Ca(2+) homeostasis perturbation and starvation. Several Ca(2+) channels like
voltage-gated T- and L-type channels, IP3 receptors, or CRAC are involved in
autophagy regulation. Glucose transporters, mainly from GLUT family, which are
often upregulated in cancer, are also prominent targets for autophagy induction. 
Signals from both Ca(2+) perturbations and glucose transport blockage might be
integrated at UPR and ER stress activation. Molecular pathways such as IRE
1-JNK-Bcl-2, PERK-eIF2a-ATF4, or ATF6-XBP 1-ATG are related to autophagy induced 
through ER stress. Moreover ER molecular chaperones such as GRP78/BiP and
transcription factors like CHOP participate in regulation of ER stress-mediated
autophagy. Autophagy modulation might be promising in anticancer therapies;
however, it is a context-dependent matter whether inhibition or activation of
autophagy leads to tumor cell death.

PMCID: PMC4363509
PMID: 25821797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Front Biol (Beijing). 2015 Feb 1;10(1):28-51.

Transcriptional regulation of secretory capacity by bZip transcription factors.

Fox RM(1), Andrew DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Cells of specialized secretory organs expand their secretory pathways to
accommodate the increased protein load necessary for their function. The
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the Golgi apparatus and the secretory vesicles,
expand not only the membrane components but also the protein machinery required
for increased protein production and transport. Increased protein load causes an 
ER stress response akin to the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR). Recent work has
implicated several bZip transcription factors in the regulation of protein
components of the early secretory pathway necessary to alleviate this stress.
Here, we highlight eight bZip transcription factors in regulating secretory
pathway component genes. These include components of the three canonical branches
of the UPR-ATF4, XBP1, and ATF6, as well as the five members of the Creb3 family 
of transcription factors. We review findings from both invertebrate and
vertebrate model systems suggesting that all of these proteins increase secretory
capacity in response to increased protein load. Finally, we propose that the
Creb3 family of factors may have a dual role in secretory cell differentiation by
also regulating the pathways necessary for cell cycle exit during terminal
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4374484
PMID: 25821458  [PubMed]


222. Angiology. 2015 Nov;66(10):941-9. doi: 10.1177/0003319715575965. Epub 2015 Mar
29.

Preconditioning With Tauroursodeoxycholic Acid Protects Against Contrast-Induced 
HK-2 Cell Apoptosis by Inhibiting Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress.

Peng P(1), Ma Q(1), Wang L(1), Zhang O(1), Han H(1), Liu X(1), Zhou Y(2), Zhao
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing Institute of Heart Lung and Blood Vessel Disease, The Key Laboratory of
Remodeling-related Cardiovascular Disease, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing Institute of Heart Lung and Blood Vessel Disease, The Key Laboratory of
Remodeling-related Cardiovascular Disease, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China 
azzyj12@163.com.

To investigate whether tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) could attenuate contrast
media (CM)-induced renal tubular cell apoptosis by inhibiting endoplasmic
reticulum stress (ERS), we exposed HK-2 cells to increasing doses of meglumine
diatrizoate (20, 40, and 80 mg I/mL) for 2 to 16 hours, with/without TUDCA
preconditioning for 24 hours. Cell viability test, Hoechst 33258 staining, and
flow cytometry were used to detect meglumine diatrizoate-induced cell apoptosis, 
while real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analysis were used to 
measure the expressions of ERS markers of glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78),
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), and the apoptosis-related marker of
caspase 12. Cell apoptosis and messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of GRP78 (P =
.005), ATF4 (P = .01), and caspase 12 (P = .001) were significantly higher in the
CM 4 hours group than the control as well as the protein expressions. The TUDCA
preconditioning reduced the mRNA expression of GRP78, ATF4, and caspase 12 in the
CM 4 hours groups (P = .009, .019, and .003, respectively) as well as the protein
expression. In conclusion, TUDCA could protect renal tubular cells from meglumine
diatrizoate-induced apoptosis by inhibiting ERS.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25818106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):877-84. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3524. Epub 2015 Mar 20.

Gliotoxin potentiates osteoblast differentiation by inhibiting nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B 
signaling.

Wang G(1), Zhang X(1), Yu B(2), Ren K(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Third Department of Orthopaedics, Wuhu Second People's Hospital, Wuhu,
Anhui 241000, P.R. China. (2)Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai Pudong Hospital,
Fudan University Pudong Medical Centre, Shanghai 201399, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, Nanjing General Hospital of Nanjing Military
Command Region, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, P.R. China.

The differentiation of pluripotent mesenchymal stem cells to mature osteoblasts
is crucial for the maintenance of the adult skeleton. In rheumatic arthritis,
osteoblast differentiation is impaired by the overproduction of cytokine tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-a. It has been demonstrated that TNF-a is able to inhibit
osteoblast differentiation through the activation of nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B
signaling. As a result of the critical role of TNF-a and NF-<U+03BA>B in the
pathogenesis of bone-loss associated diseases, these factors are regarded as key 
targets for the development of therapeutic agents. In the current study, the role
of the NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor gliotoxin (GTX) in the regulation of osteoblast
differentiation was evaluated. The non-toxic GTX doses were determined to be = 3 
µg/ml. It was revealed that GTX was able to block TNF-a-induced inhibition of
osteoblast differentiation, as indicated by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity
and ALP staining assays, as well as the expression levels of
osteoblast-associated genes Col I, Ocn, Bsp, Runx2, Osx and ATF4. Additionally,
it was identified that gliotoxin directly promoted bone morphogenetic
protein-2-induced osteoblast differentiation. GTX was found to inhibit the
accumulation of NF-<U+03BA>B protein p65 in the nucleus and reduce NF-<U+03BA>B transcriptional
activity, suggesting that GTX potentiated osteoblast differentiation via the
suppression of NF-<U+03BA>B signaling.

PMCID: PMC4438943
PMID: 25816130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 27;10(3):e0120711. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120711.
eCollection 2015.

C-C chemokine receptor 2 inhibitor ameliorates hepatic steatosis by improving ER 
stress and inflammation in a type 2 diabetic mouse model.

Kim HM(1), Lee ES(1), Lee BR(2), Yadav D(1), Kim YM(1), Ko HJ(2), Park KS(3), Lee
EY(4), Chung CH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Graduate School, Yonsei University, Wonju, Korea.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Korea.
(3)Department of Physiology, Graduate School, Yonsei University, Wonju, Korea;
Institute of Lifestyle Medicine, Yonsei University, Wonju, Korea. (4)Department
of Internal Medicine, Soonchunhyang University Cheonan Hospital, Cheonan, Korea. 
(5)Department of Medicine, Graduate School, Yonsei University, Wonju, Korea;
Institute of Lifestyle Medicine, Yonsei University, Wonju, Korea.

Hepatic steatosis is the accumulation of excess fat in the liver. Recently,
hepatic steatosis has become more important because it occurs in the patients
with obesity, type 2 diabetes, and hyperlipidemia and is associated with
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and insulin resistance. C-C chemokine receptor 
2 (CCR2) inhibitor has been reported to improve inflammation and glucose
intolerance in diabetes, but its mechanisms remained unknown in hepatic
steatosis. We examined whether CCR2 inhibitor improves ER stress-induced hepatic 
steatosis in type 2 diabetic mice. In this study, db/db and db/m (n = 9) mice
were fed CCR2 inhibitor (2 mg/kg/day) for 9 weeks. In diabetic mice, CCR2
inhibitor decreased plasma and hepatic triglycerides levels and improved insulin 
sensitivity. Moreover, CCR2 inhibitor treatment decreased ER stress markers
(e.g., BiP, ATF4, CHOP, and XBP-1) and inflammatory cytokines (e.g., TNFa, IL-6, 
and MCP-1) while increasing markers of mitochondrial biogenesis (e.g., PGC-1a,
Tfam, and COX1) in the liver. We suggest that CCR2 inhibitor may ameliorate
hepatic steatosis by reducing ER stress and inflammation in type 2 diabetes
mellitus.

PMCID: PMC4376739
PMID: 25816097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 May 8;460(3):684-90. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.03.090. Epub 2015 Mar 24.

Stress of endoplasmic reticulum modulates differentiation and lipogenesis of
human adipocytes.

Koc M(1), Mayerová V(1), Kracmerová J(1), Mairal A(2), Maliová L(1), tich V(1),
Langin D(3), Rossmeislová L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Franco-Czech Laboratory for Clinical Research on Obesity, Third Faculty of
Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic; Department of Sport Medicine, Third Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University in Prague, CZ-100 00, Czech Republic.
(2)Franco-Czech Laboratory for Clinical Research on Obesity, Third Faculty of
Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic; Inserm, UMR1048, Obesity Research Laboratory,
Institute of Metabolic and Cardiovascular Diseases, 31432 Toulouse, Cedex 4,
France. (3)Franco-Czech Laboratory for Clinical Research on Obesity, Third
Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic; Inserm, UMR1048, Obesity Research
Laboratory, Institute of Metabolic and Cardiovascular Diseases, 31432 Toulouse,
Cedex 4, France; University of Toulouse, UMR1048, Paul Sabatier University, 31432
Toulouse, Cedex 4, France; Toulouse University Hospitals, Department of Clinical 
Biochemistry, 31059 Toulouse, Cedex 9, France. (4)Franco-Czech Laboratory for
Clinical Research on Obesity, Third Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic; 
Department of Sport Medicine, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in
Prague, CZ-100 00, Czech Republic. Electronic address:
Lenka.Rossmeislova@lf3.cuni.cz.

BACKGROUND: Adipocytes are cells specialized for storage of neutral lipids. This 
storage capacity is dependent on lipogenesis and is diminished in obesity. The
reason for the decline in lipogenic activity of adipocytes in obesity remains
unknown. Recent data show that lipogenesis in liver is regulated by pathways
initiated by endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS). Thus, we aimed at investigating 
the effect of ERS on lipogenesis in adipose cells.
METHODS: Preadipocytes were isolated from subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue
from obese volunteers and in vitro differentiated into adipocytes. ERS was
induced pharmacologically by thapsigargin (TG) or tunicamycin (TM). Activation of
Unfolded Protein Response pathway (UPR) was monitored on the level of eIF2a
phosphorylation and mRNA expression of downstream targets of UPR sensors.
Adipogenic and lipogenic capacity was evaluated by Oil Red O staining,
measurement of incorporation of radio-labelled glucose or acetic acid into lipids
and mRNA analysis of adipogenic/lipogenic markers.
RESULTS: Exposition of adipocytes to high doses of TG (100 nM) and TM (1 µg/ml)
for 1-24 h enhanced expression of several UPR markers (HSPA5, EDEM1, ATF4, XBP1s)
and phosphorylation of eIF2a. This acute ERS substantially inhibited expression
of lipogenic genes (DGAT2, FASN, SCD1) and glucose incorporation into lipids.
Moreover, chronic exposure of preadipocytes to low dose of TG (2.5 nM) during the
early phases of adipogenic conversion of preadipocytes impaired both, lipogenesis
and adipogenesis. On the other hand, chronic low ERS had no apparent effect on
lipogenesis in mature adipocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Acute ERS weakened a capacity of mature adipocytes to store lipids
and chronic ERS diminished adipogenic potential of preadipocytes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25813485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 26;10(3):e0122295. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122295.
eCollection 2015.

Maternal nicotine exposure leads to impaired disulfide bond formation and
augmented endoplasmic reticulum stress in the rat placenta.

Wong MK(1), Nicholson CJ(2), Holloway AC(2), Hardy DB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Western University, London,
Ontario, Canada. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Western 
University, London, Ontario, Canada; Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Children's Health Research Institute, Lawson, Health Research Institute, Western 
University, London, Ontario, Canada.

Maternal nicotine exposure has been associated with many adverse fetal and
placental outcomes. Although underlying mechanisms remain elusive, recent studies
have identified that augmented endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is linked to
placental insufficiency. Moreover, ER function depends on proper disulfide bond
formation--a partially oxygen-dependent process mediated by protein disulfide
isomerase (PDI) and ER oxidoreductases. Given that nicotine compromised placental
development in the rat, and placental insufficiency has been associated with poor
disulfide bond formation and ER stress, we hypothesized that maternal nicotine
exposure leads to both placental ER stress and impaired disulfide bond formation.
To test this hypothesis, female Wistar rats received daily subcutaneous
injections of either saline (vehicle) or nicotine bitartrate (1 mg/kg) for 14
days prior to mating and during pregnancy. Placentas were harvested on embryonic 
day 15 for analysis. Protein and mRNA expression of markers involved in ER stress
(e.g., phosphorylated eIF2a, Grp78, Atf4, and CHOP), disulfide bond formation
(e.g., PDI, QSOX1, VKORC1), hypoxia (Hif1a), and amino acid deprivation (GCN2)
were quantified via Western blot and/or Real-time PCR. Maternal nicotine exposure
led to increased expression of Grp78, phosphorylated eIF2a, Atf4, and CHOP
(p<0.05) in the rat placenta, demonstrating the presence of augmented ER stress. 
Decreased expression of PDI and QSOX1 (p<0.05) reveal an impaired disulfide bond 
formation pathway, which may underlie nicotine-induced ER stress. Finally,
elevated expression of Hif1a and GCN2 (p<0.05) indicate hypoxia and amino acid
deprivation in nicotine-exposed placentas, respectively, which may also cause
impaired disulfide bond formation and augmented ER stress. This study is the
first to link maternal nicotine exposure with both placental ER stress and
disulfide bond impairment in vivo, providing novel insight into the mechanisms
underlying nicotine exposure during pregnancy on placental health.

PMCID: PMC4374683
PMID: 25811377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Arthritis Res Ther. 2015 Feb 17;17:31. doi: 10.1186/s13075-015-0532-6.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß promotes receptor activator of nuclear
factor-kappa-B ligand (RANKL) expression and osteoclast formation in the synovium
in rheumatoid arthritis.

Tsushima H, Okazaki K, Ishihara K, Ushijima T, Iwamoto Y.

INTRODUCTION: CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) is a transcription factor
that is activated in the synovium in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and promotes
expression of various matrix metalloproteinases. In this study, we examined
whether C/EBPß mediates the expression of receptor activator of nuclear
factor-kappa-B ligand (RANKL) and drives osteoclast formation in primary
fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) from RA patients. The cooperation of C/EBPß
and activation transcription factor-4 (ATF4) in the regulation of the RANKL
promoter was also investigated.
METHODS: Immunofluorescence staining was performed for C/EBPß, RANKL, and ATF4 in
synovium from RA patients. Adenovirus expression vectors for two major isoforms, 
C/EBPß-liver-enriched activator protein (LAP) and - liver-enriched inhibitory
protein (LIP), or small interfering RNA for C/EBPß, were used to manipulate
C/EBPß expression in RA-FLS. RA-FLS over-expressing C/EBPß were co-cultured with 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) to test osteoclast formation by
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) staining. A promoter assay for RANKL, 
a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay and an immunoprecipitation (IP)
assay were also performed.
RESULTS: Immunofluorescence staining showed colocalization of C/EBPß, ATF4 and
RANKL in RA synovium. Western blotting revealed the expression of C/EBPß-LAP and 
-LIP in RA-FLS. Over-expression of either C/EBPß-LAP or -LIP significantly
increased the expression of RANKL mRNA, while C/EBPß-LIP down-regulated
osteoprotegerin (OPG) mRNA. The RANKL/OPG mRNA ratio was significantly increased 
by C/EBPß-LIP over-expression. Knockdown of C/EBPß with siRNA decreased the
expression of RANKL mRNA. The number of TRAP-positive multinucleated cells was
increased in co-cultures of PBMCs and FLS over-expressing either C/EBPß-LAP or
-LIP, but was more significant with LIP. C/EBPß-LIP does not have a
transactivation domain. However, promoter assays showed that C/EBPß-LIP and ATF4 
synergistically transactivate the RANKL promoter. ChIP and IP assays revealed the
cooperative binding of C/EBPß and ATF4 on the RANKL promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that C/EBPß, especially C/EBPß-LIP in cooperation
with ATF4, is involved in osteoclast formation by regulating RANKL expression in 
RA-FLS. These findings suggest that C/EBPß plays a crucial role in bone
destruction in RA joints.

PMCID: PMC4355365
PMID: 25811130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Hepatology. 2015 Jul;62(1):135-46. doi: 10.1002/hep.27804. Epub 2015 Apr 22.

Activation of sphingosine kinase 2 by endoplasmic reticulum stress ameliorates
hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance in mice.

Lee SY(1), Hong IK(1), Kim BR(1), Shim SM(2), Sung Lee J(3), Lee HY(3), Soo Choi 
C(3), Kim BK(4), Park TS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Gachon University, Sungnam, Korea. (2)Department
of Food Science and Technology, Sejong University, Seoul, Korea. (3)Lee Gil Ya
Cancer and Diabetes Institute, Gachon University, Incheon, Korea. (4)Department
of Physiology, Functional Genomics Institute, School of Medicine, Konkuk
University, Seoul, Korea.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the principal organelle in the cell for protein
folding and trafficking, lipid synthesis, and cellular calcium homeostasis.
Perturbation of ER function results in activation of the unfolded protein
response (UPR) and is implicated in abnormal lipid biosynthesis and development
of insulin resistance. In this study, we investigated whether transcription of
sphingosine kinase (Sphk)2 is regulated by ER stress-mediated UPR pathways.
Sphk2, a major isotype of sphingosine kinase in the liver, was transcriptionally 
up-regulated by tunicamycin and lipopolysaccharides. Transcriptional regulation
of Sphk2 was mediated by activation of activating transcription factor (ATF)4 as 
demonstrated by promoter assays, immunoblotting, and small interfering RNA
analyses. In primary hepatocytes, adenoviral Sphk2 expression elevated cellular
sphingosine 1 phosphate (S1P) and activated protein kinase B phosphorylation,
with no alteration of insulin receptor substrate phosphorylation. Hepatic
overexpression of Sphk2 in mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD) led to elevated S1P and
reduced ceramide, sphingomyelin, and glucosylceramide in plasma and liver.
Hepatic accumulation of lipid droplets by HFD feeding was reduced by
Sphk2-mediated up-regulation of fatty acid (FA) oxidizing genes and increased FA 
oxidation in liver. In addition, glucose intolerance and insulin resistance were 
ameliorated by improved hepatic insulin signaling through Sphk2
up-regulation.CONCLUSION: Sphk2 is transcriptionally up-regulated by acute ER
stress through activation of ATF4 and improves perturbed hepatic glucose and FA
metabolism.

© 2015 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 25808625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2015 Oct;167(2):308-19. doi: 10.1007/s12011-015-0314-7. Epub
2015 Mar 26.

Ameliorative Effects of Selenium on Cadmium-Induced Oxidative Stress and
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress in the Chicken Kidney.

Liu L(1), Yang B, Cheng Y, Lin H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Heilongjiang University of Chinese Medicine, Harbin,
150040, People's Republic of China.

The harmful influences of dietary cadmium (Cd) on the chicken kidney and the
protective role of selenium (Se) against Cd-induced nephrotoxicity in the chicken
are relatively unexplored subjects. The aim of this study was to investigate the 
ameliorative role of Se on the effects of Cd-induced oxidative stress,
endoplasmic reticulum stress, and apoptosis in chicken kidneys. For this study,
100-day-old chickens received Se (as 10 mg Na2SeO3/kg dry weight of diet), Cd (as
150 mg CdCl2/kg dry weight of diet), or Cd<U+2009>+<U+2009>Se in their diets for 60 days. Then,
the histopathological changes, Cd and Se contents, levels of oxidative stress,
inducible nitric oxide synthase-nitric oxide (iNOS-NO) system activity, levels of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, results of the terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay of apoptosis, and expression
levels of Bcl-2 and caspase 3 in the kidney were examined. The results showed
that Cd exposure caused histopathological and ultrastructural damage and
apoptosis of the kidneys. Cd administration significantly increased the
accumulation of Cd, the malondialdehyde (MDA) content, NO production, iNOS
activity, iNOS expression levels, expression levels of ER stress-related genes
(GRP78, GRP94, ATF4, ATF6, and IRE) and the pro-apoptosis gene caspase 3, and the
rate of apoptosis. Cd administration markedly decreased the Se content,
superoxide dismutase (SOD) and glutathione peroxidase (GPx) activities, and
anti-apoptosis gene Bcl-2 expression levels. Co-treatment with Se and Cd
obviously reduced the accumulation of Cd, Cd-induced histopathological and
ultrastructural changes, oxidative stress, iNOS-NO system activity, ER stress,
caspase 3 expression levels, and the rate of apoptosis in the kidneys. These
results suggested that Cd exposure caused renal injury and that Se ameliorated
Cd-induced nephrotoxicity in chickens.

PMID: 25805271  [PubMed - in process]


230. Leukemia. 2015 Sep;29(9):1918-27. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.83. Epub 2015 Mar 24.

Class IIa HDAC inhibition enhances ER stress-mediated cell death in multiple
myeloma.

Kikuchi S(1), Suzuki R(1), Ohguchi H(1), Yoshida Y(1), Lu D(1), Cottini F(1),
Jakubikova J(1), Bianchi G(1), Harada T(1), Gorgun G(1), Tai YT(1), Richardson
PG(1), Hideshima T(1), Anderson KC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Jerome Lipper Multiple Myeloma Center,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have been extensively investigated as
therapeutic agents in cancer. However, the biological role of class IIa HDACs
(HDAC4, 5, 7 and 9) in cancer cells, including multiple myeloma (MM), remains
unclear. Recent studies show HDAC4 interacts with activating transcription factor
4 (ATF4) and inhibits activation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-associated 
proapoptotic transcription factor C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP). In this study,
we hypothesized that HDAC4 knockdown and/or inhibition could enhance apoptosis in
MM cells under ER stress condition by upregulating ATF4, followed by CHOP. HDAC4 
knockdown showed modest cell growth inhibition; however, it markedly enhanced
cytotoxicity induced by either tunicamycin or carfilzomib (CFZ), associated with 
upregulating ATF4 and CHOP. For pharmacological inhibition of HDAC4, we employed 
a novel and selective class IIa HDAC inhibitor TMP269, alone and in combination
with CFZ. As with HDAC4 knockdown, TMP269 significantly enhanced cytotoxicity
induced by CFZ in MM cell lines, upregulating ATF4 and CHOP and inducing
apoptosis. Conversely, enhanced cytotoxicity was abrogated by ATF4 knockdown,
confirming that ATF4 has a pivotal role mediating cytotoxicity in this setting.
These results provide the rationale for novel treatment strategies combining
class IIa HDAC inhibitors with ER stressors, including proteasome inhibitors, to 
improve patient outcome in MM.

PMID: 25801913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Biol Chem. 2015 May 1;290(18):11749-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.619833. Epub 2015
Mar 20.

A novel dual kinase function of the RET proto-oncogene negatively regulates
activating transcription factor 4-mediated apoptosis.

Bagheri-Yarmand R(1), Sinha KM(2), Gururaj AE(3), Ahmed Z(4), Rizvi YQ(2), Huang 
SC(2), Ladbury JE(4), Bogler O(3), Williams MD(5), Cote GJ(2), Gagel RF(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Endocrine Neoplasia and Hormonal Disorders,
ryarmand@mdanderson.org. (2)From the Department of Endocrine Neoplasia and
Hormonal Disorders. (3)the Department of Neurosurgery. (4)the Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Center for Biomolecular Structure and
Function, and. (5)the Department of Pathology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030.

The RET proto-oncogene, a tyrosine kinase receptor, is widely known for its
essential role in cell survival. Germ line missense mutations, which give rise to
constitutively active oncogenic RET, were found to cause multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 2, a dominant inherited cancer syndrome that affects
neuroendocrine organs. However, the mechanisms by which RET promotes cell
survival and prevents cell death remain elusive. We demonstrate that in addition 
to cytoplasmic localization, RET is localized in the nucleus and functions as a
tyrosine-threonine dual specificity kinase. Knockdown of RET by shRNA in
medullary thyroid cancer-derived cells stimulated expression of activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a master transcription factor for stress-induced
apoptosis, through activation of its target proapoptotic genes NOXA and PUMA. RET
knockdown also increased sensitivity to cisplatin-induced apoptosis. We observed 
that RET physically interacted with and phosphorylated ATF4 at tyrosine and
threonine residues. Indeed, RET kinase activity was required to inhibit the
ATF4-dependent activation of the NOXA gene because the site-specific substitution
mutations that block threonine phosphorylation increased ATF4 stability and
activated its targets NOXA and PUMA. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays revealed that ATF4 occupancy increased at the NOXA promoter in TT cells
treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors or the ATF4 inducer eeyarestatin as well 
as in RET-depleted TT cells. Together these findings reveal RET as a novel dual
kinase with nuclear localization and provide mechanisms by which RET represses
the proapoptotic genes through direct interaction with and
phosphorylation-dependent inactivation of ATF4 during the pathogenesis of
medullary thyroid cancer.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4416875 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25795775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Pathol. 2015 Jul;236(3):373-83. doi: 10.1002/path.4534. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

Mechanical stretch-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress, apoptosis and
inflammation contribute to thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection.

Jia LX(1), Zhang WM(1), Zhang HJ(1), Li TT(1), Wang YL(1), Qin YW(1), Gu H(1), Du
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical University, Key Laboratory of
Remodelling-related Cardiovascular Diseases, Ministry of Education, Beijing
Collaborative Innovation Centre for Cardiovascular Disorders, Beijing Institute
of Heart, Lung and Blood Vessel Disease, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Thoracic aortic aneurysm/dissection (TAAD) is characterized by excessive smooth
muscle cell (SMC) loss, extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation and inflammation. 
In response to certain stimuli, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is activated
and regulates apoptosis and inflammation. Excessive apoptosis promotes aortic
inflammation and degeneration, leading to TAAD. Therefore, we studied the role of
ER stress in TAAD formation. A lysyl oxidase inhibitor, 3-aminopropionitrile
fumarate (BAPN), was administrated to induce TAAD formation in mice, which showed
significant SMC loss (a-SMA level). Excessive apoptosis (TUNEL staining) and ER
stress (ATF4 and CHOP), along with inflammation, were present in TAAD samples
from both mouse and human. Transcriptional profiling of SMCs after mechanical
stress demonstrated the expression of genes for ER stress and inflammation. To
explore the causal role of ER stress in initiating degenerative signalling events
and TAAD, we treated wild-type (CHOP(+/+)) or CHOP(-/-) mice with BAPN and found 
that CHOP deficiency protected against TAAD formation and rupture, as well as
reduction in a-SMA level. Both SMC apoptosis and inflammation were significantly 
reduced in CHOP(-/-) mice. Moreover, SMCs isolated from CHOP(-/-) mice were
resistant to mechanical stress-induced apoptosis. Taken together, our results
demonstrated that mechanical stress-induced ER stress promotes SMCs apoptosis,
inflammation and degeneration, providing insight into TAAD formation and
progression.

© 2015 Authors. Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf
of Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 25788370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 30;6(9):6684-707.

Caffeic acid phenethyl ester induced cell cycle arrest and growth inhibition in
androgen-independent prostate cancer cells via regulation of Skp2, p53, p21Cip1
and p27Kip1.

Lin HP(1), Lin CY(2), Huo C(2,)(3), Hsiao PH(2,)(4), Su LC(2), Jiang SS(1), Chan 
TM(5,)(6), Chang CH(2), Chen LT(1), Kung HJ(1,)(7), Wang HD(4), Chuu
CP(2,)(8,)(9,)(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes,
Miaoli, Taiwan, ROC. (2)Institute of Cellular and System Medicine, National
Health Research Institutes, Miaoli, Taiwan, ROC. (3)Department of Life Sciences, 
National Central University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, ROC. (4)Institute of Biotechnology,
National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu City, Taiwan, ROC. (5)Department of
Medical Education and Research, China Medical University Beigan Hospital, Yunlin,
Taiwan, ROC. (6)Department of Medical Education and Research, China Medical
University-An Nan Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC. (7)Institute of Molecular and
Genomic Medicine, National Health Research Institutes, Miaoli County, Taiwan,
ROC. (8)Graduate Institute of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University,
Taichung, Taiwan, ROC. (9)Graduate Program for Aging, China Medical University,
Taichung, Taiwan, ROC. (10)Biotechnology Center, National Chung Hsing University,
Taichung, Taiwan, ROC. (11)Ph.D. Program in Environmental and Occupational
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan, ROC.

Prostate cancer (PCa) patients receiving the androgen ablation therapy ultimately
develop recurrent castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) within 1-3 years.
Treatment with caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE) suppressed cell survival and
proliferation via induction of G1 or G2/M cell cycle arrest in LNCaP 104-R1,
DU-145, 22Rv1, and C4-2 CRPC cells. CAPE treatment also inhibited soft agar
colony formation and retarded nude mice xenograft growth of LNCaP 104-R1 cells.
We identified that CAPE treatment significantly reduced protein abundance of
Skp2, Cdk2, Cdk4, Cdk7, Rb, phospho-Rb S807/811, cyclin A, cyclin D1, cyclin H,
E2F1, c-Myc, SGK, phospho-p70S6kinase T421/S424, phospho-mTOR Ser2481,
phospho-GSK3a Ser21, but induced p21Cip1, p27Kip1, ATF4, cyclin E, p53, TRIB3,
phospho-p53 (Ser6, Ser33, Ser46, Ser392), phospho-p38 MAPK Thr180/Tyr182, Chk1,
Chk2, phospho-ATM S1981, phospho-ATR S428, and phospho-p90RSK Ser380. CAPE
treatment decreased Skp2 and Akt1 protein expression in LNCaP 104-R1 tumors as
compared to control group. Overexpression of Skp2, or siRNA knockdown of p21Cip1,
p27Kip1, or p53 blocked suppressive effect of CAPE treatment. Co-treatment of
CAPE with PI3K inhibitor LY294002 or Bcl-2 inhibitor ABT737 showed synergistic
suppressive effects. Our finding suggested that CAPE treatment induced cell cycle
arrest and growth inhibition in CRPC cells via regulation of Skp2, p53, p21Cip1, 
and p27Kip1.

PMCID: PMC4466643
PMID: 25788262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Drug Discov Ther. 2015 Feb;9(1):38-44.

Tauroursodeoxycholic acid attenuates inorganic phosphate-induced osteoblastic
differentiation and mineralization in NIH3T3 fibroblasts by inhibiting the ER
stress response PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 pathway.

Liu F(1), Cui Y, Ge P, Luan J, Zhou X, Han J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Biotech Drugs of the Ministry of Health, Shandong Medical
Biotechnological Center; 2.School of Medicine and Life Sciences, University of
Jinan-Shandong Academy of Medical Science, Ji'nan, Shandong, China.

Ectopic ossification occurs in a wide range of common and genetic diseases, but
its molecular mechanisms and effective therapeutic targets remain to be
clarified. The aim of the study is to investigate whether endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress is involved in ectopic ossification and ER stress inhibitor
tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) has potential to treat the pathological
conditions. In this study, inorganic phosphate (Pi)-induced NIH3T3 fibroblasts
induced osteogenesis and mineralization was used as an in vitro model for ectopic
ossification. Various concentrations of TUDCA (0.1, 1, 5, 10 µM) were added
during osteogenic induction. Osteoblast differentiation and minerlization were
determined by RT-qPCR, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity assay, Alizarin Red-S 
(AR-S) staining, and calcium deposition. ER stress signalling components were
detected by Western-blot analysis. We found ER stress was activated by inorganic 
phosphate in NIH3T3 cells. During osteogenic induction, TUDCA inhibited NIH3T3
cells ALP activity and mineral nodule formation. In addition, TUDCA caused
decreased expression of osteoblastic markers Runx2, Col1a1, ALP, OCN.
Mechanistically, TUDCA inhibited the ER stress response PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 pathway
during osteogenesis. In conclusion, TUDCA could inhibit fibroblasts
mineralization via supressing the ER stress response PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 pathway, and
has potential pharmacologic and therapeutic applications for treating ectopic
ossification associated diseases.

PMID: 25788050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Jan 15;8(1):934-8. eCollection 2015.

Expression of ATF4 and RUNX2 in periodontal tissue of pressure side during
orthodontic tooth movement in rat.

Han J(1), Xu X(2), Zhang B(1), Chen B(1), Hang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, Liaocheng People's Hospital Shandong Province,
Liaocheng 252000, China. (2)Hangzhou Normal University School of Medicine
Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou 310036, China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aims to explore the expression levels of ATF4 and RUNX and 
their interactions in periodontal tissue of the pressure side during orthodontic 
tooth movement.
METHODS: A total of 72 SPF level male Sprague Dawley rats were used in this
study, they were divided into 9 groups randomly and 8 rats in each group. The
expression changes of ATF4 and RUNX2 in periodontal tissue of pressure side at
different straining time point were detected with RT-PCR and Western blotting
methods. The morphological changes of cells in the tissue samples were observed
by HE staining. The data were analyzed with SPSS 19.0 software.
RESULTS: The expression levels of ATF4 and RUNX2 increased during orthodontic
tooth movement and were related with the movement time. They reached highest
after straining for 24 h and began to decrease after straining for 12 d.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression levels of ATF4 and RUNX2 in periodontal tissue can
increase transiently induced by stress, which play a role in the process of
osteogenesis and reconstruction of periodontal tissue during orthodontic tooth
movement.

PMCID: PMC4358533
PMID: 25785078  [PubMed]


236. Exp Gerontol. 2015 Aug;68:82-6. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2015.03.007. Epub 2015 Mar
14.

Senescence may mediate conversion of tau phosphorylation-induced apoptotic escape
to neurodegeneration.

Wang JZ(1), Wang ZH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Ministry of
Education of China for Neurological Disorders, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. Electronic address:
wangjz@mails.tjmu.edu.cn. (2)Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Key
Laboratory of Ministry of Education of China for Neurological Disorders, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Neurodegeneration is the characteristic pathology in the brains of Alzheimer's
disease (AD). However, the nature and molecular mechanism leading to the
degeneration are not clarified. Given that only the neurons filled with
neurofibrillary tangles survive to the end stage of the disease and the major
component of the tangles is the hyperphosphorylated tau proteins, it is
conceivable that tau hyperphosphorylation must play a crucial role in AD
neurodegeneration. We have demonstrated that tau hyperphosphorylation renders the
cells more resistant to the acute apoptosis. The molecular mechanisms involve
substrate competition of tau and ß-catenin for glycogen synthase kinase 3ß
(GSK-3ß); activation of Akt; preservation of Bcl-2 and suppression of Bax,
cytosolic cytochrome-c, and caspase-3 activity; and upregulation of unfolded
protein response (UPR), i.e., up-regulating phosphorylation of PERK, eIF2 and
IRE1 with an increased cleavage of ATF6 and ATF4. On the other hand, tau
hyperphosphorylation promotes its intracellular accumulation and disrupts axonal 
transport; hyperphosphorylated tau also impairs cholinergic function and inhibits
proteasome activity. These findings indicate that tau hyperphosphorylation and
its intracellular accumulation play dual role in the evolution of AD. We
speculate that transient tau phosphorylation helps cells abort from an acute
apoptosis, while persistent tau hyperphosphorylation/accumulation may trigger
cell senescence that eventually causes a chronic neurodegeneration. Therefore,
the nature of "AD neurodegeneration" may represent a new type of tau-regulated
chronic neuron death; and the stage of cell senescence may provide a broad window
for the intervention of AD.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25777063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Biometals. 2015 Apr;28(2):255-65. doi: 10.1007/s10534-014-9819-3. Epub 2015 Mar
14.

Roles of oxidative stress and endoplasmic reticulum stress in selenium
deficiency-induced apoptosis in chicken liver.

Yao L(1), Du Q, Yao H, Chen X, Zhang Z, Xu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Northeast
Agricultural University, Harbin, 150030, People's Republic of China.

Oxidative stress and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress are involved in different 
types of stress-induced injuries. The aim of the present study was to evaluate
the effect of Se deficiency on oxidative stress, ER stress and apoptosis in
chicken livers. Chickens (1 day old, n = 180) were randomly divided into two
groups: the L group [fed with a Se-deficient (Se 0.033 mg/kg) diet] and the
control group [fed with a normal (Se 0.2 mg/kg) diet]. Factor-associated
oxidative stress, catalase (CAT) activity, H2O2 production and the inhibition of 
hydroxyl radicals (·OH) in the chicken liver were determined on days 15, 25, 35, 
45, 55 and 65, respectively. In addition, ER stress-related genes (GRP78, GRP94, 
ATF4, ATF6 and IRE) and apoptosis-related genes (caspase3 and Bcl-2) were
examined by fluorescence quantitative PCR or western blot analysis. Apoptosis
levels were also measured using ultrastructural observations and the TdT-mediated
dUTP nick end labeling assay. The results showed that CAT activity and ·OH
inhibition were decreased and that H2O2 production was increased in the low-Se
group, which demonstrated that oxidative stress occurred in the chicken liver.
The ER stress-related genes (GRP78, GRP94, ATF4, ATF6 and IRE) and the
apoptosis-related gene caspase3 were increased (p < 0.05), while Bcl-2 was
decreased (p < 0.05) by Se deficiency. In addition, apoptosis and ER lesions were
observed by ultrastructural observations of the chicken liver in the low-Se
group. The level of apoptosis and the number of apoptotic cells increased with
time. These results indicated that the oxidative-ER stress pathway participates
in Se deficiency-induced apoptosis in the chicken liver.

PMID: 25773464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2015 May 1;308(9):G757-66. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00442.2014. Epub 2015 Mar 12.

Zinc deficiency mediates alcohol-induced apoptotic cell death in the liver of
rats through activating ER and mitochondrial cell death pathways.

Sun Q(1), Zhong W(2), Zhang W(2), Li Q(2), Sun X(2), Tan X(2), Sun X(2), Dong
D(2), Zhou Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Greensboro,
Greensboro, North Carolina; and Center for Translational Biomedical Research,
University of North Carolina at Greensboro, North Carolina Research Campus,
Kannapolis, North Carolina. (2)Center for Translational Biomedical Research,
University of North Carolina at Greensboro, North Carolina Research Campus,
Kannapolis, North Carolina. (3)Department of Nutrition, University of North
Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina; and Center for Translational 
Biomedical Research, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, North Carolina
Research Campus, Kannapolis, North Carolina z_zhou@uncg.edu.

Hepatic zinc deficiency has been well documented in alcoholic patients, but the
mechanisms by which zinc deficiency mediates cell death have not been well
defined. The objectives of this study were to determine whether alcohol perturbs 
subcellular zinc homeostasis and how organelle zinc depletion may link with cell 
death pathways. Wistar rats were pair-fed with the Lieber-DeCarli control or
ethanol diet for 5 mo. Chronic alcohol exposure significantly reduced zinc level 
in isolated hepatic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria. Among the
detected zinc transporters, ER Zrt/Irt-like protein (ZIP)13 and mitochondrial
ZIP8, which transport zinc from ER and mitochondria to cytosol, were
significantly increased. Mitochondrial zinc transporter (ZnT) 4, which transports
zinc from cytosol to mitochondria, was also increased. ER phosphorylated
eukaryotic initiation factor 2a, activating transcription factor 4, and C/EBP
homologous protein were significantly upregulated, and mitochondrial cytochrome c
release and Bax insertion were detected in association with caspase-3 activation 
and apoptotic cell death. To define the role of zinc deficiency in ER and
mitochondrial stress, H4IIEC3 cells were treated with 3 µM N,N,N',N'-tetrakis
(2-pyridylmethyl) ethylenediamine for 6 h with or without supplementation with
zinc or N-acetylcysteine (NAC). The results demonstrated that zinc deprivation
induced caspase-3 activation and apoptosis in association with ER and
mitochondria dysfunction, which were inhibited by zinc as low as 10 µM but not by
2 mM NAC. These results suggest that chronic ethanol exposure induced in ER and
mitochondrial zinc deficiency might activate intrinsic cell death signaling
pathway, which could not be effectively rescued by antioxidant treatment.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4421018 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25767260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Semin Cancer Biol. 2015 Aug;33:86-92. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2015.02.004. Epub 
2015 Mar 6.

eIF2a phosphorylation as a biomarker of immunogenic cell death.

Kepp O(1), Semeraro M(2), Bravo-San Pedro JM(3), Bloy N(3), Buqué A(3), Huang
X(1), Zhou H(1), Senovilla L(3), Kroemer G(4), Galluzzi L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolomics and Cell Biology Platforms, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus,
Villejuif, France; INSERM, U1138, Paris, France; Equipe 11 labellisée par la
Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris,
France. (2)Equipe 11 labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, Centre
de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France; Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus,
Villejuif, France; INSERM, U1015, Paris, France. (3)INSERM, U1138, Paris, France;
Equipe 11 labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, Centre de Recherche
des Cordeliers, Paris, France; Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France.
(4)Metabolomics and Cell Biology Platforms, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus,
Villejuif, France; INSERM, U1138, Paris, France; Equipe 11 labellisée par la
Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris,
France; Pôle de Biologie, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, Paris,
France; Université Paris Descartes/Paris V, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France;
Université Pierre et Marie Curie/Paris VI, Paris, France. Electronic address:
kroemer@orange.fr. (5)INSERM, U1138, Paris, France; Equipe 11 labellisée par la
Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris,
France; Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France; Université Paris
Descartes/Paris V, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France; Université Pierre et Marie
Curie/Paris VI, Paris, France. Electronic address: deadoc@vodafone.it.

Cancer cells exposed to some forms of chemotherapy and radiotherapy die while
eliciting an adaptive immune response. Such a functionally peculiar variant of
apoptosis has been dubbed immunogenic cell death (ICD). One of the central events
in the course of ICD is the activation of an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
response. This is instrumental for cells undergoing ICD to emit all the signals
that are required for their demise to be perceived as immunogenic by the host,
and culminates with the phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 2a (eIF2a). In particular, eIF2a phosphorylation is required for the
pre-apoptotic exposure of the ER chaperone calreticulin (CALR) on the cell
surface, which is a central determinant of ICD. Importantly, phosphorylated eIF2a
can be quantified in both preclinical and clinical samples by immunoblotting or
immunohistochemistry using phosphoneoepitope-specific monoclonal antibodies. Of
note, the phosphorylation of eIF2a and CALR exposure do not necessarily correlate
with each other, and neither of these parameters is sufficient for cell death to 
be perceived as immunogenic. Nonetheless, accumulating data indicate that
assessing the degree of phosphorylation of eIF2a provides a convenient parameter 
to monitor ICD. Here, we discuss the role of the ER stress response in ICD and
the potential value of eIF2a phosphorylation as a biomarker for this clinically
relevant variant of apoptosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25749194  [PubMed - in process]


240. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Oct;230(10):2426-36. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24972.

Phosphorylation of Runx2, induced by cyclic mechanical tension via ERK1/2
pathway, contributes to osteodifferentiation of human periodontal ligament
fibroblasts.

Ren D(1), Wei F(2), Hu L(2), Yang S(2), Wang C(1), Yuan X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Shandong University, Jinan, China. (2)Department
of Orthodontics, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, the 4th Military
Medical University, Qingdao, China.

Occlusal force is an important stimulus for maintaining periodontal homeostasis. 
This is attributed to the quality of human periodontal ligament fibroblasts
(hPDLFs) that could transfer occlusal force into biological signals modulating
osteoblst differentiation. However, few studies investigated the mechanism of
occlusal force-induced osteodifferentiation of hPDLFs. In our study, we used the 
cyclic mechanical tension (CMT) at 10% elongation with 0.5<U+2009>Hz to mimic occlusal
force, and explored its effects on osteogenesis of hPDLFs. Firstly, elevated
expressions of several osteoblast marker genes (Runx2, ATF4, SP7, OCN, and BSP), 
as well as activated ERK1/2 pathway were detected during CMT loading for 1, 3, 6,
12, 18, and 24<U+2009>h. To gain further insight into how CMT contributed to those
effects, we focused on the classic ERK1/2-Runx2 pathway by inhibiting ERK1/2 and 
overexpressing Runx2. Our results reflected that Runx2 overexpression alone could
induce osteodifferentiation of hPDLFs. Meanwhile, CMT loading could intensify
while combined ERK1/2 blockage could weaken this process. Furthermore, we found
that CMT promoted Runx2 transcription and phosphorylation via ERK1/2; protein
level of phospho-Runx2 (p-Runx2), rather than Runx2, was in parallel with mRNA
expressions of SP7, OCN, and BSP. Taken together, our study proved that p-Runx2, 
elevated by CMT via ERK1/2 pathway, is the predominate factor in promoting
osteoblast differentiation of hPDLFs.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25740112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):389-93. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3417. Epub 2015 Mar 4.

Activation of the unfolded protein response in aged human lenses.

Tang HZ(1), Yang LM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Liaocheng People's Hospital, Liaocheng, Shandong 
252000, P.R. China.

Cataract formation is a multifactorial disease, induced by a variety of
stressors. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-induced unfolded protein
response (UPR) is known to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) leading to
apoptosis. The present study aimed to investigate whether activation of the UPR
occurs in human lenses, using human lens epithelial cell (HLEC) lines and lenses 
obtained from an eye bank, from individuals aged between 50 and 90 years. In
vitro analysis was performed using calcimycin (10 µM) as an ER stressor. The
level of ER stress was measured by the production of ROS, staining for cell
death, detection of binding immunoglobulin proteins (BIP) and levels of other UPR
proteins, including inositol-requiring enzyme-1 (IRE), activating transcription
factor (ATF) 6 and PKR-like eukaryotic initiation factor 2a kinase (PERK). These 
parameters were examined in HLECs exposed to calcimycin for 12, 24, 48 and 72 h. 
Fluorescent activated cell sorting analysis of the levels of ROS and apoptosis
revealed an increase following 24 h calcimycin exposure. The reverse
transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction results demonstrated a
gradual increase in the mRNA levels of BIP, IRE1, ATF6 and PERK between 12 and 72
h. A similar effect was observed in the protein levels, which also demonstrated a
gradual increase in the levels of endoplasmic oxidoreductin-1-like (Ero1-L)-ß and
protein disulfide isomerase, but a lower level of Ero1-La. Activation of the UPR 
involved the apoptotic pathway, revealed by increased levels of C/EBP homologous 
protein, ATF4 and caspase-4. Additionally, the antioxidant protein levels were
also suppressed. The investigation of aged human lenses revealed a similar
increase in the protein expression of UPR. These results indicated that
activation of the UPR-induced ROS production suppressed the antioxidant status
and triggered the apoptotic pathway, ultimately leading to the formation of
age-related cataracts.

PMID: 25739021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Jul;116(7):1300-9. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25085.

An ATF4-Signal-Modulating Machine Other Than GADD34 Acts in ATF4-to-CHOP
Signaling to Block CHOP Expression in ER-Stress-Related Autophagy.

Iwasaki N(1), Sugiyama Y(1), Miyazaki S(2), Nakagawa H(1), Nishimura K(1), Matsuo
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology, Course of Veterinary Bioscience, Graduate School of 
Life and Environmental Sciences, Osaka Prefecture University, 1-58
Rinku-Orai-Kita, Izumisano, 598-8531, Japan. (2)The Center for Advanced Research,
Graduate School of Medical Science, Toho University of Medicine, Ota-ku
Omori-Nishi, 5-21-16, Tokyo, 143-8540, Japan.

Cells respond to ER-stress via ER-stress sensors, leading to the UPR and
subsequent apoptosis; however, occasionally, they activate autophagy without
subsequent apoptosis in response to ER-stress. We previously showed that the
induction of apoptosis by ER-stress was related to the presence or absence of
CHOP expression; nevertheless, how ATF4 expression is elicited without downstream
CHOP expression is unknown. We studied the role of GADD34 on the induction of
autophagy and/or apoptosis by NaF- or tunicamycin-induced ER-stress in HepG2
cells transfected with GADD34 siRNA. Although NaF and tunicamycin both induced
PERK activation followed by eIF2a phosphorylation and ATF4 expression, CHOP
expression was only induced by tunicamycin. Concomitant with the signaling
change, autophagy was activated both by NaF and tunicamycin, and apoptosis was
induced only by tunicamycin. After 4<U+2009>h, GADD34 mRNA expression was also increased
by NaF and tunicamycin. Suppression of GADD34 by GADD34 siRNA increased ATF4
expression in both NaF- and tunicamycin-treated cells. The GADD34 siRNA increased
CHOP expression, which corresponded to increased ATF4 in tunicamycin-treated
cells; however, the increased ATF4 did not induce CHOP expression in NaF-treated 
cells. In concert with signal changes, siRNA treatment additively increased the
autophagic activity of both NaF- and tunicamycin-treated cells; however,
apoptosis was produced and accelerated only for tunicamycin-treated cells. These 
findings indicate that GADD34 expression induced by ER-stress delays CHOP
expression and retards apoptotic cell death, and that an ATF4-signal-modulating
machine other than GADD34 acts on ATF4-to-CHOP signaling to block ATF4-induced
CHOP expression in ER-stress related autophagy.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25737469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Aug;230(8):1982-98. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24977.

OSU-03012 and Viagra Treatment Inhibits the Activity of Multiple Chaperone
Proteins and Disrupts the Blood-Brain Barrier: Implications for Anti-Cancer
Therapies.

Booth L(1), Roberts JL, Tavallai M, Nourbakhsh A, Chuckalovcak J, Carter J,
Poklepovic A, Dent P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, Virginia.

We examined the interaction between OSU-03012 (also called AR-12) with
phosphodiesterase 5 (PDE5) inhibitors to determine the role of the chaperone
glucose-regulated protein (GRP78)/BiP/HSPA5 in the cellular response. Sildenafil 
(Viagra) interacted in a greater than additive fashion with OSU-03012 to kill
stem-like GBM cells. Treatment of cells with OSU-03012/sildenafil: abolished the 
expression of multiple oncogenic growth factor receptors and plasma membrane drug
efflux pumps and caused a rapid degradation of GRP78 and other HSP70 and HSP90
family chaperone proteins. Decreased expression of plasma membrane receptors and 
drug efflux pumps was dependent upon enhanced PERK-eIF2a-ATF4-CHOP signaling and 
was blocked by GRP78 over-expression. In vivo OSU-03012/sildenafil was more
efficacious than treatment with celecoxib and sildenafil at killing tumor cells
without damaging normal tissues and in parallel reduced expression of ABCB1 and
ABCG2 in the normal brain. The combination of OSU-03012/sildenafil synergized
with low concentrations of sorafenib to kill tumor cells, and with lapatinib to
kill ERBB1 over-expressing tumor cells. In multiplex assays on plasma and human
tumor tissue from an OSU-03012/sildenafil treated mouse, we noted a profound
reduction in uPA signaling and identified FGF and JAK1/2 as response biomarkers
for potentially suppressing the killing response. Inhibition of FGFR signaling
and to a lesser extent JAK1/2 signaling profoundly enhanced OSU-03012/sildenafil 
lethality.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Cellular Physiology Published by Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25736380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Apr 3;459(2):300-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.104. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress induces up-regulation of hepatic ß-Klotho expression
through ATF4 signaling pathway.

Dong K(1), Li H(1), Zhang M(1), Jiang S(1), Chen S(1), Zhou J(2), Dai Z(2), Fang 
Q(1), Jia W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Diabetes Mellitus, Department of Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, Shanghai Diabetes Institute, Shanghai Clinical Center for Diabetes,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai,
China. (2)Department of Liver Surgery, Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Diabetes Mellitus, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Diabetes 
Institute, Shanghai Clinical Center for Diabetes, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
wpjia@sjtu.edu.cn.

Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) plays critical roles in regulating glucose
and lipid metabolism. ß-Klotho is the co-receptor for mediating FGF21 signaling, 
and the mRNA levels of this receptor are increased in the liver of human subjects
with obesity. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of
ß-klotho expression remain poorly defined. Here, we report that elevation of
ß-klotho protein expression in diet-induced obese mice and human patients is
associated with increased endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. In vivo study
indicates that administration of the ER stressor tunicamycin in mice led to
increased expression of ß-klotho in the liver. In addition, we show that ER
stress is sufficient to potentiate FGF21 signaling in HepG2 cell and ATF4
signaling pathway is essential for mediating the effect of ER stress on ß-klotho 
expression. These findings demonstrate a link of ER stress with up-regulation of 
hepatic ß-klotho expression and the molecular mechanism underlying ER
stress-regulated FGF21 signaling.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25727012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 May;62:1-14. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.02.010.
Epub 2015 Feb 24.

Taxol-induced unfolded protein response activation in breast cancer cells exposed
to hypoxia: ATF4 activation regulates autophagy and inhibits apoptosis.

Notte A(1), Rebucci M(1), Fransolet M(1), Roegiers E(1), Genin M(1), Tellier
C(1), Watillon K(1), Fattaccioli A(1), Arnould T(1), Michiels C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Cellular Biology (URBC), NAmur Research
Institute for Life Science (NARILIS), University of Namur, 61 rue de Bruxelles,
5000 Namur, Belgium. (2)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Cellular Biology (URBC),
NAmur Research Institute for Life Science (NARILIS), University of Namur, 61 rue 
de Bruxelles, 5000 Namur, Belgium. Electronic address: carine.michiels@unamur.be.

Understanding the mechanisms responsible for the resistance against
chemotherapy-induced cell death is still of great interest since the number of
patients with cancer increases and relapse is commonly observed. Indeed, the
development of hypoxic regions as well as UPR (unfolded protein response)
activation is known to promote cancer cell adaptive responses to the stressful
tumor microenvironment and resistance against anticancer therapies. Therefore,
the impact of UPR combined to hypoxia on autophagy and apoptosis activation
during taxol exposure was investigated in MDA-MB-231 and T47D breast cancer
cells. The results showed that taxol rapidly induced UPR activation and that
hypoxia modulated taxol-induced UPR activation differently according to the
different UPR pathways (PERK, ATF6, and IRE1a). The putative involvement of these
signaling pathways in autophagy or in apoptosis regulation in response to taxol
exposure was investigated. However, while no link between the activation of these
three ER stress sensors and autophagy or apoptosis regulation could be evidenced,
results showed that ATF4 activation, which occurs independently of UPR
activation, was involved in taxol-induced autophagy completion. In addition, an
ATF4-dependent mechanism leading to cancer cell adaptation and resistance against
taxol-induced cell death was evidenced. Finally, our results demonstrate that
expression of ATF4, in association with hypoxia-induced genes, can be used as a
biomarker of a poor prognosis for human breast cancer patients supporting the
conclusion that ATF4 might play an important role in adaptation and resistance of
breast cancer cells to chemotherapy in hypoxic tumors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25724736  [PubMed - in process]


246. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2015 May;26(5):723-32. doi: 10.1016/j.jvir.2014.12.610.
Epub 2015 Feb 24.

Gene expression in hepatocellular carcinoma: pilot study of potential
transarterial chemoembolization response biomarkers.

Gaba RC(1), Groth JV(2), Parvinian A(3), Guzman G(2), Casadaban LC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology and Division of Interventional Radiology, University
of Illinois Hospital and Health Sciences System, 1740 W. Taylor St., MC 931,
Chicago IL 60612. Electronic address: rgaba@uic.edu. (2)Department of Pathology, 
University of Illinois Hospital and Health Sciences System, 1740 W. Taylor St.,
MC 931, Chicago IL 60612. (3)Department of Radiology and Division of
Interventional Radiology, University of Illinois Hospital and Health Sciences
System, 1740 W. Taylor St., MC 931, Chicago IL 60612.

PURPOSE: To perform a feasibility study to explore the relationship between
hepatocellular carcinoma genetics and transarterial chemoembolization treatment
response to identify potential biomarkers associated with enhanced treatment
efficacy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this single-institution study, pretreatment
hepatocellular carcinoma biopsy specimens for tumors in 19 patients (14 men, five
women; mean age, 59 y) treated with chemoembolization between 2007 and 2013 were 
analyzed for a panel of 60 chemotherapy-sensitivity, hypoxia, mitosis, and
inflammatory genes with the QuantiGene Plex 2.0 mRNA detection assay.
Demographic, disease, and procedure data and tumor response outcomes were
collected. Quantitative mRNA levels were compared based on radiologic response
between tumors exhibiting complete response (CR) versus partial response (PR).
RESULTS: The study sample included 19 biopsy specimens from tumors (mean size,
3.0 cm; grade 1, n = 6; grade 2, n = 9; grade 3, n = 4) in patients treated with 
a mean of two conventional chemoembolization sessions. Thirteen and six tumors
exhibited CR and PR, respectively, at a mean of 116 days after treatment. Tumors 
with CR showed a significant increase in (P < .05) or trend toward (P < .1)
greater (range, 1.49-3.50 fold) pretreatment chemotherapy-sensitivity and mitosis
(ATF4, BAX, CCNE1, KIF11, NFX1, PPP3CA, SNX1, TOP2A, and TOP2B) gene mRNA
expression compared with tumors with PR, in addition to lower CXCL10 levels
(0.48-fold), and had significantly (P < .05) higher (1.65-fold) baseline VEGFA
levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic signatures may allow prechemoembolization stratification of 
tumor response probability, and gene analysis may therefore offer an opportunity 
to personalize locoregional therapy by enhancing treatment modality allocation.
Further corroboration of identified markers and exploration of their respective
predictive capacity thresholds is necessary.

Copyright © 2015 SIR. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25724086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Gene. 2015 May 10;562(1):62-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.02.043. Epub 2015 Feb 17.

Functional characterization of the mouse melanocortin 3 receptor gene promoter.

Okutsu K(1), Ojima F(1), Shinohara N(1), Taniuchi S(1), Mizote Y(1), Aoki K(1),
Kudo T(2), Ogoshi M(1), Takeuchi S(1), Takahashi S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Okayama University, Tsushima, Kita-ku, Okayama 700-8530, Japan. (2)Department of 
Biological Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Shujitsu University, Kita-ku, Okayama
703-8516, Japan. (3)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Natural Science and
Technology, Okayama University, Tsushima, Kita-ku, Okayama 700-8530, Japan.
Electronic address: stakaha@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp.

Melanocortin receptor 3 (MC3R) is expressed in the hypothalamus and pituitary in 
humans and rodents, and is involved in the control of feeding, energy metabolism,
and pituitary function. In the mouse pituitary, MC3R is detected in mammotrophs. 
This study aimed to clarify the regulatory mechanism for Mc3r expression in the
mouse pituitary. The promoter activities of reporter constructs for the MC3R gene
5'-flanking region up to -4000 bp (transcription initiation site designated as
+1) were analyzed. The promoter activity significantly increased in the -86/+109 
construct, but decreased in the -38/+109 construct, indicating that the minimal
promoter required for basal expression of Mc3r is located in the -86/+109 region.
Putative binding sites for transcription factors AP-1 and ATF4 were found in the 
5'-flanking region of Mc3r. Site-directed mutation or deletion of these sites
affected the promoter activities. In gel-shift assays with a nuclear extract of
mouse anterior pituitary cells, band-shifts were detected for both sites after
the addition of the nuclear extract, and were decreased in the presence of excess
unlabeled probe competitors. These results indicated that both sites were
involved in the regulation of Mc3r expression in anterior pituitary cells.
Estradiol-17ß treatment increased the Mc3r promoter activity, indicating that the
gene is regulated by estradiol-17ß. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the
minimum promoter region required for Mc3r expression, and identified two binding 
sites for AP-1 and ATF4 and in the 5' upstream-flanking region of Mc3r that are
essential for Mc3r expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25701401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Feb 19;11(2):e1004046. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004046. 
eCollection 2015.

Data-driven prediction and design of bZIP coiled-coil interactions.

Potapov V(1), Kaplan JB(1), Keating AE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America;
Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Apr;11(4):e1004243.

Selective dimerization of the basic-region leucine-zipper (bZIP) transcription
factors presents a vivid example of how a high degree of interaction specificity 
can be achieved within a family of structurally similar proteins. The coiled-coil
motif that mediates homo- or hetero-dimerization of the bZIP proteins has been
intensively studied, and a variety of methods have been proposed to predict these
interactions from sequence data. In this work, we used a large quantitative set
of 4,549 bZIP coiled-coil interactions to develop a predictive model that
exploits knowledge of structurally conserved residue-residue interactions in the 
coiled-coil motif. Our model, which expresses interaction energies as a sum of
interpretable residue-pair and triplet terms, achieves a correlation with
experimental binding free energies of R = 0.68 and significantly out-performs
other scoring functions. To use our model in protein design applications, we
devised a strategy in which synthetic peptides are built by assembling 7-residue 
native-protein heptad modules into new combinations. An integer linear program
was used to find the optimal combination of heptads to bind selectively to a
target human bZIP coiled coil, but not to target paralogs. Using this approach,
we designed peptides to interact with the bZIP domains from human JUN, XBP1, ATF4
and ATF5. Testing more than 132 candidate protein complexes using a fluorescence 
resonance energy transfer assay confirmed the formation of tight and selective
heterodimers between the designed peptides and their targets. This approach can
be used to make inhibitors of native proteins, or to develop novel peptides for
applications in synthetic biology or nanotechnology.

PMCID: PMC4335062
PMID: 25695764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Mol Metab. 2014 Nov 1;4(1):64-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2014.10.004. eCollection
2015.

The class II histone deacetylase HDAC4 regulates cognitive, metabolic and
endocrine functions through its expression in osteoblasts.

Makinistoglu MP(1), Karsenty G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The recently described endocrine functions of osteoblasts raise
questions about their transcriptional regulation. Thus far, this aspect of
osteoblast biology has been addressed only by examining the role of transcription
factors binding to specific cis-acting elements in the promoter of the
Osteocalcin gene.
METHODS: In contrast, the role of chromatin remodeling enzymes, such as histone
deacetylases (HDACs), in this process has not as yet been thoroughly understood.
RESULTS: Here we show that through its expression in osteoblasts, one class II
HDAC molecule, HDAC4, favors Osteocalcin expression, and as a result, the
physiological functions regulated by osteocalcin such as spatial learning,
memory, male fertility and insulin secretion. Molecular and genetic evidence
indicates that through its expression in osteoblasts HDAC4 fulfills these
long-range functions in part by stabilizing the transcription factor ATF4.
Remarkably, through its expression in osteoblasts, HDAC4 also enhances appetite, 
a physiological function that is not regulated by osteocalcin.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide a more in depth molecular understanding of the
regulation of the endocrine functions of the osteoblast, and suggest the
existence of additional hormones synthesized by osteoblasts that also regulate
appetite.

PMCID: PMC4314523
PMID: 25685691  [PubMed]


250. Sci Rep. 2015 Feb 16;5:8468. doi: 10.1038/srep08468.

Double minute amplification of mutant PDGF receptor a in a mouse glioma model.

Zou H(1), Feng R(2), Huang Y(2), Tripodi J(3), Najfeld V(3), Tsankova NM(4),
Jahanshahi M(5), Olson LE(6), Soriano P(5), Friedel RH(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] Fishberg Department of Neuroscience, Friedman Brain Institute [2]
Department of Neurosurgery, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY
10029. (2)Fishberg Department of Neuroscience, Friedman Brain Institute. (3)1]
Tumor Cytogenomics Laboratory, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY 10029 [2] Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, NY 10029. (4)1] Fishberg Department of Neuroscience, Friedman Brain
Institute [2] Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, NY 10029. (5)1] Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029 [2] Department of
Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY
10029. (6)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029. (7)1] Fishberg Department of
Neuroscience, Friedman Brain Institute [2] Department of Neurosurgery, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029 [3] Department of
Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY 10029.

In primary brain tumors, oncogenes are frequently amplified and maintained on
extrachromosomal DNA as double minutes (DM), but the underlying mechanisms remain
poorly understood. We have generated a mouse model of malignant glioma based on
knock-in of a mutant PDGF receptor a (PDGFRa) that is expressed in
oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) after activation by a Cre recombinase. In 
the tumor suppressor INK4/Arf(-/-) background, mutant animals frequently
developed brain tumors resembling anaplastic human gliomas (WHO grade III).
Besides brain tumors, most animals also developed aggressive fibrosarcomas,
likely triggered by Cre activation of mutant PDGFRa in fibroblastic cell
lineages. Importantly, in the brain tumors and cell lines derived from brain
tumor tissues, we identified a high prevalence of DM Pdgfra gene amplification,
suggesting its occurrence as an early mutational event contributing to the
malignant transformation of OPCs. Amplicons extended beyond the Pdgfra locus and 
included in some cases neighboring genes Kit and Kdr. Our genetically defined
mouse brain tumor model therefore supports OPC as a cell of origin for malignant 
glioma and offers an example of a defined temporal sequence of mutational events,
thus providing an entry point for a mechanistic understanding of DM gene
amplification and its functionality in gliomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC4329559
PMID: 25683249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. G3 (Bethesda). 2015 Feb 13;5(4):667-75. doi: 10.1534/g3.115.017269.

Drosophila melanogaster activating transcription factor 4 regulates glycolysis
during endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Lee JE(1), Oney M(1), Frizzell K(1), Phadnis N(1), Hollien J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112
hollien@biology.utah.edu.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress results from an imbalance between the load of
proteins entering the secretory pathway and the ability of the ER to fold and
process them. The response to ER stress is mediated by a collection of signaling 
pathways termed the unfolded protein response, which plays important roles in
development and disease. Here we show that in Drosophila melanogaster S2 cells,
ER stress induces a coordinated change in the expression of genes involved in
carbon metabolism. Genes encoding enzymes that carry out glycolysis were
up-regulated, whereas genes encoding proteins in the tricarboxylic acid cycle and
respiratory chain complexes were down-regulated. The unfolded protein response
transcription factor Atf4 was necessary for the up-regulation of glycolytic
enzymes and Lactate dehydrogenase (Ldh). Furthermore, Atf4 binding motifs in
promoters for these genes could partially account for their regulation during ER 
stress. Finally, flies up-regulated Ldh and produced more lactate when subjected 
to ER stress. Together, these results suggest that Atf4 mediates a shift from a
metabolism based on oxidative phosphorylation to one more heavily reliant on
glycolysis, reminiscent of aerobic glycolysis or the Warburg effect observed in
cancer and other proliferative cells.

Copyright © 2015 Lee et al.

PMCID: PMC4390581
PMID: 25681259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Eur J Cell Biol. 2015 Mar-Apr;94(3-4):148-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2015.01.003.
Epub 2015 Jan 30.

Loss of lysosome-associated membrane protein 3 (LAMP3) enhances cellular
vulnerability against proteasomal inhibition.

Dominguez-Bautista JA(1), Klinkenberg M(1), Brehm N(1), Subramaniam M(2), Kern
B(2), Roeper J(2), Auburger G(1), Jendrach M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Neurology, Department of Neurology, Goethe University Medical
School, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (2)Institute of Neurophysiology, Goethe
University Medical School, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (3)Experimental Neurology,
Department of Neurology, Goethe University Medical School, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany. Electronic address: marina.jendrach@charite.de.

The family of lysosome-associated membrane proteins (LAMP) includes the
ubiquitously expressed LAMP1 and LAMP2, which account for half of the proteins in
the lysosomal membrane. Another member of the LAMP family is LAMP3, which is
expressed only in certain cell types and differentiation stages. LAMP3 expression
is linked with poor prognosis of certain cancers, and the locus where it is
encoded was identified as a risk factor for Parkinson's disease (PD). Here, we
investigated the role of LAMP3 in the two main cellular degradation pathways, the
proteasome and autophagy. LAMP3 mRNA was not detected in mouse models of PD or in
the brain of human patients. However, it was strongly induced upon proteasomal
inhibition in the neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y. Induction of LAMP3 mRNA
following proteasomal inhibition was dependent on UPR transcription factor ATF4
signaling and induced autophagic flux. Prevention of LAMP3 induction enhanced
apoptotic cell death. In summary, these data demonstrate that LAMP3 regulation as
part of the UPR contributes to protein degradation and cell survival during
proteasomal dysfunction. This link between autophagy and the proteasome may be of
special importance for the treatment of tumor cells with proteasomal inhibitors.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25681212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. EMBO Mol Med. 2015 Feb 13;7(3):315-31. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201404181.

STAMP2 increases oxidative stress and is critical for prostate cancer.

Jin Y(1), Wang L(2), Qu S(2), Sheng X(1), Kristian A(3), Mælandsmo GM(3),
Pällmann N(2), Yuca E(4), Tekedereli I(4), Gorgulu K(4), Alpay N(4), Sood A(5),
Lopez-Berestein G(4), Fazli L(6), Rennie P(6), Risberg B(7), Wæhre H(8),
Danielsen HE(9), Ozpolat B(4), Saatcioglu F(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway Institute for
Cancer Genetics and Informatics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (3)Department of 
Tumor Biology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (4)Department of
Experimental Therapeutics, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Gynecological Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (6)The
Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (7)Institute for Cancer
Genetics and Informatics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway Division of
Pathology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway Division of Surgery, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (8)Institute for Cancer Genetics and
Informatics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway Division of Pathology, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway Division of Surgery, Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway Center for Cancer Biomedicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(9)Institute for Cancer Genetics and Informatics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway Center for Cancer Biomedicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway Department
of Informatics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (10)Department of Biosciences, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway Institute for Cancer Genetics and Informatics,
Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway fahris@ibv.uio.no.

The six transmembrane protein of prostate 2 (STAMP2) is an androgen-regulated
gene whose mRNA expression is increased in prostate cancer (PCa). Here, we show
that STAMP2 protein expression is increased in human PCa compared with benign
prostate that is also correlated with tumor grade and treatment response. We also
show that STAMP2 significantly increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) in PCa
cells through its iron reductase activity which also depleted NADPH levels.
Knockdown of STAMP2 expression in PCa cells inhibited proliferation, colony
formation, and anchorage-independent growth, and significantly increased
apoptosis. Furthermore, STAMP2 effects were, at least in part, mediated by
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), whose expression is regulated by ROS.
Consistent with in vitro findings, silencing STAMP2 significantly inhibited PCa
xenograft growth in mice. Finally, therapeutic silencing of STAMP2 by
systemically administered nanoliposomal siRNA profoundly inhibited tumor growth
in two established preclinical PCa models in mice. These data suggest that STAMP2
is required for PCa progression and thus may serve as a novel therapeutic target.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4364948
PMID: 25680860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Apr;61:81-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.02.004.
Epub 2015 Feb 11.

CK2 phosphorylation of C/EBPd regulates its transcription factor activity.

Schwind L(1), Zimmer AD(1), Götz C(1), Montenarh M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saarland University, Building 44, 
D-66424 Homburg, Germany. (2)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saarland
University, Building 44, D-66424 Homburg, Germany. Electronic address:
Mathias.Montenarh@uks.eu.

Protein kinase CK2 plays an essential role in cell viability in lower and higher 
eukaryotes. As a global regulator it phosphorylates and thereby regulates a broad
array of cellular targets including a large number of transcription factors.
Here, we have identified the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein d (C/EBPd) as a new
substrate for CK2. Using point mutants of C/EBPd the major phosphorylation site
for CK2 was mapped to serine 57, which is located within the transactivation
domain of C/EBPd. For proper functioning as a transcription factor C/EBPd has to 
be translocated into the nucleus where it forms heterodimers with other members
of the C/EBP family of proteins and ATF4. Here, we found that CK2 phosphorylation
does neither influence the subcellular localization of C/EBPd nor its interaction
with C/EBPß, but rather does CK2 phosphorylation modulate the transcriptional
activity of C/EBPd. Moreover, we found that CK2 bound to C/EBPd, which might help
to target CK2 to the transcriptional machinery where it can phosphorylate other
transcription factors or co-activators.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25680545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol. 2015 Feb;54(1):19-23. doi: 10.1016/j.tjog.2014.11.002.

Expression of markers of endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis in the
placenta of women with early and late onset severe pre-eclampsia.

Fu J(1), Zhao L(2), Wang L(3), Zhu X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Shandong Weifang People's Hospital, Weifang, China. 
Electronic address: Fujh_wfph@163.com. (2)Department of Nephrology, The Second
Hospital of Shandong University, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics, Shandong Weifang People's Hospital, Weifang, China.

OBJECTIVES: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-induced apoptosis has been
implicated in severe pre-eclampsia (SPE) and is characterized by the activation
of three signaling pathways: PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK),
activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6), and inositol-requiring 1 (Ire1). This
study was designed to investigate the role of ER stress in the pathogenesis of
SPE.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Placental tissues were collected from 32 women with normal
pregnancies and two cohorts of women with early (n = 32) or late onset (n = 32)
SPE. The expression of glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), PERK, eukaryotic
initiation factor 2 subunit a (eIF2a), activating transcription factor 6 (ATF4), 
ATF6, Ire1, CHOP (ClEBP homologus protein), and caspase 12 mRNA and protein in
the placentas was analyzed using real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction and Western blotting, respectively.
RESULTS: The levels of GRP78, PERK, eIF2a, CHOP, ATF6, and caspase 12 mRNA and
protein expression were significantly higher in the placentas of women with early
and late SPE than in the control women, whereas there were no differences in ATF6
and Ire1 mRNA and protein.
CONCLUSION: ER stress-induced apoptosis was important in the development of SPE, 
especially in early onset SPE and was probably due to the activation of the PERK 
signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25675914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 27;290(13):8185-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.633990. Epub 2015
Feb 5.

MicroRNA-214 suppresses gluconeogenesis by targeting activating transcriptional
factor 4.

Li K(1), Zhang J(2), Yu J(1), Liu B(1), Guo Y(1), Deng J(1), Chen S(1), Wang
C(3), Guo F(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai
200031 and. (2)the Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education,
Institute of Medical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, 130 Dongan Road, Shanghai 200032,
China. (3)From the Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for
Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road,
Shanghai 200031 and wangcx@sibs.ac.cn. (4)From the Key Laboratory of Nutrition
and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai 200031 and ffguo@sibs.ac.cn.

Although the gluconeogenesis pathway is already a target for the treatment of
type 2 diabetes, the potential role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in gluconeogenesis
remains unclear. Here, we investigated the physiological functions of miR-214 in 
gluconeogenesis. The expression of miR-214 was suppressed by glucagon via protein
kinase A signaling in primary hepatocytes, and miR-214 was down-regulated in the 
livers of fasted, high fat diet-induced diabetic and leptin receptor-mutated
(db/db) mice. The overexpression of miR-214 in primary hepatocytes suppressed
glucose production, and silencing miR-214 reversed this effect. Gluconeogenesis
was suppressed in the livers of mice injected with an adenovirus expressing
miR-214 (Ad-miR-214). Additionally, Ad-miR-214 alleviated high fat diet-induced
elevation of gluconeogenesis and hyperglycemia. Furthermore, we found that
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a reported target of miR-214, can
reverse the suppressive effect of miR-214 on gluconeogenesis in primary
hepatocytes, and this suppressive effect was blocked in liver-specific ATF4
knock-out mice. ATF4 regulated gluconeogenesis via affecting forkhead box protein
O1 (FOXO1) transcriptional activity. Finally, liver-specific miR-214 transgenic
mice exhibited suppressed gluconeogenesis and reduced expression of ATF4,
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, and glucose-6-phosphatase in liver. Taken
together, our results suggest that the miR-214-ATF4 axis is a novel pathway for
the regulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4375475
PMID: 25657009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Mediators Inflamm. 2015;2015:272313. doi: 10.1155/2015/272313. Epub 2015 Jan 14.

Rapamycin improves palmitate-induced ER stress/NF <U+03BA> B pathways associated with
stimulating autophagy in adipocytes.

Yin J(1), Gu L(1), Wang Y(1), Fan N(1), Ma Y(1), Peng Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Shanghai First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, 100 Haining Road, Shanghai 200080, China.

Obesity-induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and inflammation lead to
adipocytes dysfunction. Autophagy helps to adapt to cellular stress and involves 
in regulating innate inflammatory response. In present study, we examined the
activity of rapamycin, a mTOR kinase inhibitor, against endoplasmic reticulum
stress and inflammation in adipocytes. An in vitro model was used in which 3T3-L1
adipocytes were preloaded with palmitate (PA) to generate artificial hypertrophy 
mature adipocytes. Elevated autophagy flux and increased number of autophagosomes
were observed in response to PA and rapamycin treatment. Rapamycin attenuated
PA-induced PERK and IRE1-associated UPR pathways, evidenced by decreased protein 
levels of eIF2a phosphorylation, ATF4, CHOP, and JNK phosphorylation. Inhibiting 
autophagy with chloroquine (CQ) exacerbated these ER stress markers, indicating
the role of autophagy in ameliorating ER stress. In addition, cotreatment of CQ
abolished the anti-ER stress effects of rapamycin, which confirms the effect of
rapamycin on ERs is autophagy-dependent. Furthermore, rapamycin decreased
PA-induced nuclear translocation of NF<U+03BA>B P65 subunit, thereby NF<U+03BA>B-dependent
inflammatory cytokines MCP-1 and IL-6 expression and secretion. In conclusion,
rapamycin attenuated PA-induced ER stress/NF<U+03BA>B pathways to counterbalance
adipocytes stress and inflammation. The beneficial of rapamycin in this context
partly depends on autophagy. Stimulating autophagy may become a way to attenuate 
adipocytes dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC4310475
PMID: 25653476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 27;290(13):8173-84. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.625137. Epub 2015
Feb 4.

Proteasomal modulation of cellular SNAT2 (SLC38A2) abundance and function by
unsaturated fatty acid availability.

Nardi F(1), Hoffmann TM(1), Stretton C(1), Cwiklinski E(1), Taylor PM(1), Hundal 
HS(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, Sir James Black Centre,
College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH, United Kingdom. 
(2)From the Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, Sir James Black Centre,
College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH, United Kingdom
h.s.hundal@dundee.ac.uk.

Expression and activity of the System A/SNAT2 (SLC38A2) amino acid transporter is
up-regulated by amino acid starvation and hypertonicity by a mechanism dependent 
on both ATF4-mediated transcription of the SLC38A2 gene and enhanced
stabilization of SNAT2 itself, which forms part of an integrated cellular stress 
response to nutrient deprivation and osmotic stress. Here we demonstrate that
this adaptive increase in System A function is restrained in cells subjected to
prior incubation with linoleic acid (LOA, an unsaturated C18:2 fatty acid) for 24
h. While fatty acid treatment had no detectable effect upon stress-induced SNAT2 
or ATF4 gene transcription, the associated increase in SNAT2 protein/membrane
transport activity were strongly suppressed in L6 myotubes or HeLa cells
preincubated with LOA. Cellular ubiquitination of many proteins was increased by 
LOA and although the fatty acid-induced loss of SNAT2 could be attenuated by
proteasomal inhibition, the functional increase in System A transport activity
associated with amino acid starvation/hypertonicity that depends upon
processing/maturation and delivery of SNAT2 to the cell surface could not be
rescued. LOA up-regulated cellular expression of Nedd4.2, an E3-ligase implicated
in SNAT2 ubiquitination, but shRNA-directed Nedd4.2 gene silencing could not curb
fatty acid-induced loss of SNAT2 adaptation. However, expression of SNAT2 in
which seven putative lysyl-ubiquitination sites in the cytoplasmic N-terminal
domain were mutated to alanine protected SNAT2 against LOA-induced proteasomal
degradation. Collectively, our findings indicate that increased availability of
unsaturated fatty acids can compromise the stress-induced induction/adaptation in
SNAT2 expression and function by promoting its degradation via the
ubiquitin-proteasome system.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4375474
PMID: 25653282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Apr;35(4):932-40. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2085. Epub 2015 Jan 
30.

Palmitate induces endoplasmic reticulum stress and autophagy in mature
adipocytes: implications for apoptosis and inflammation.

Yin J(1), Wang Y(1), Gu L(1), Fan N(1), Ma Y(1), Peng Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Shanghai First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200080, P.R. China.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and inflammation induced by obesity lead to
adipocyte dysfunction, with the impairment of the insulin pathway. Recent studies
have indicated that understanding the physiological role of autophagy is of great
significance. In the present study, an in vitro model was used in which 3T3-L1
adipocytes were pre-loaded with palmitate (PA) to generate artificially
hypertrophied mature adipocytes. PA induced an autophagic flux, determined by an 
increased microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3)-II formation, as
shown by western blot analysis and fluorescence microscopy, and was confirmed
using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Using TEM and western blot
analysis, we observed increased ER stress in response to PA, as indicated by the 
increased levels of the ER stress markers, BiP, activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4) and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), and the phosphoralytion of eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2a and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). Of note, we
observed that the PA-induced ER stress occurred prior to the activation of
autophagy. We confirmed that autophagy was induced in response to JNK-dependent
ER stress, as autophagy was suppressed by treatment with the ER stress inhibitor,
4-phenyl butyrate (4-PBA), and the JNK inhibitor, SP600125. Upon the inhibition
of autophagy using chloroquine (CQ), we observed exacerbated ER stress and an
increased level of cell death. Importantly, to determine whether autophagy is
linked to inflammation, the autophagy inhibitor, 3-methyladenine (3-MA) was used.
The inhibition of autophagy led to a further increase in the PA-induced
expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) and interleukin-6
(IL-6). Consistently, such an increase was also observed following treatment with
SP600125. In conclusion, our data indicate that PA elicits a ER
stress-JNK-autophagy axis, and that this confers a pro-survival effect against
PA-induced cell death and stress in hypertrophied adipocytes. The JNK-dependent
activation of autophagy diminishes PA-induced inflammation. Therefore, the
stimulation of autophagy may become a method with which to attenuate adipocyte
dysfunction and inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4356450
PMID: 25647410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Mitochondrion. 2015 Mar;21:58-68. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2015.01.005. Epub 2015 Jan 
30.

Inhibition of mitochondrial genome expression triggers the activation of CHOP-10 
by a cell signaling dependent on the integrated stress response but not the
mitochondrial unfolded protein response.

Michel S(1), Canonne M(1), Arnould T(1), Renard P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Cell Biology (URBC), NAmur Research Institute
for LIfe Sciences (NARILIS), University of Namur (UNamur), 61 rue de Bruxelles,
5000 Namur, Belgium. (2)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Cell Biology (URBC), NAmur
Research Institute for LIfe Sciences (NARILIS), University of Namur (UNamur), 61 
rue de Bruxelles, 5000 Namur, Belgium. Electronic address:
patsy.renard@unamur.be.

Mitochondria-to-nucleus communication, known as retrograde signaling, is
important to adjust the nuclear gene expression in response to organelle
dysfunction. Among the transcription factors described to respond to
mitochondrial stress, CHOP-10 is activated by respiratory chain inhibition,
mitochondrial accumulation of unfolded proteins and mtDNA mutations. In this
study, we show that altered/impaired expression of mtDNA induces CHOP-10
expression in a signaling pathway that depends on the eIF2a/ATF4 axis of the
integrated stress response rather than on the mitochondrial unfolded protein
response.

Copyright © 2015 © Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25643991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Chin Med J (Engl). 2015 Feb 5;128(3):353-60. doi: 10.4103/0366-6999.150103.

Calreticulin translocation aggravates endoplasmic reticulum stress-associated
apoptosis during cardiomyocyte hypoxia/reoxygenation.

Xu FF, Liu XH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology; State Key Laboratory of Kidney Disease, Chinese
People's Liberation Army General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

BACKGROUND: Calreticulin (CRT) is major Ca 2+ -binding chaperone mainly resident 
in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen. Recently, it has been shown that non-ER 
CRT regulates a wide array of cellular responses. We previously found that CRT
was up-regulated during hypoxia/reoxygenation (H/R) and this study was aimed to
investigate whether CRT nuclear translocation aggravates ER stress
(ERS)-associated apoptosis during H/R injury in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes.
METHODS: Apoptosis rate and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) leakage in culture medium
were measured as indices of cell injury. Immunofluorescence staining showed the
morphological changes of ER and intracellular translocation of CRT. Western
blotting or reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction was used to detect
the expression of target molecules.
RESULTS: Compared with control, H/R increased apoptosis rate and LDH activity.
The ER became condensed and bubbled, and CRT translocated to the nucleus. Western
blotting showed up-regulation of CRT, Nrf2, activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4), CHOP and caspase-12 expression after H/R. Exogenous CRT overexpression
induced by plasmid transfection before H/R increased cell apoptosis, LDH leakage,
ER disorder, CRT nuclear translocation and the expression of ERS-associated
molecules. However, administration of the ERS inhibitor, taurine, or CRT siRNA
alleviated cell injury, ER disorder, and inhibited ERS-associated apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicated that during H/R stress, CRT translocation
increases cell apoptosis and LDH leakage, aggravates ER disorder, up-regulates
expression of nuclear transcription factors, Nrf2 and ATF4, and activates
ERS-associated apoptosis.

PMID: 25635431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2015 May;20(3):399-409. doi: 10.1007/s12192-014-0564-x.
Epub 2015 Jan 30.

Brucella suis vaccine strain S2-infected immortalized caprine endometrial
epithelial cell lines induce non-apoptotic ER-stress.

Wang X(1), Lin P, Yin Y, Zhou J, Lei L, Zhou X, Jin Y, Wang A.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology of the Ministry of Agriculture,
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, China.

Brucella, which is regarded as an intracellular pathogen responsible for a
zoonotic disease called brucellosis, survives and proliferates within several
types of phagocytic and non-phagocytic cells. Brucella infects not only their
preferred hosts but also other domestic and wild animal species, inducing
abortion and infertility. Therefore, the interaction between uterine cells and
Brucella is important for understanding the pathogenesis of this disease. In this
study, we describe the Brucella suis vaccine strain S2 (B.suis.S2) infection and 
replication in the immortalized caprine endometrial epithelial cell line
hTERT-EECs and the induced cellular and molecular response modulation in vitro.
We found that B.suis S2 was able to infect and replicate to high titers and
inhibit the proliferation of EECs and induce non-apoptotic pathways, as
determined by B.suis.S2 detection using MTT and acridine orange/ethidium bromide 
(AO/EB) staining and flow cytometry. We explored the evidence of non-apoptotic
pathways using real-time quantitative RT-PCR and by western blot analysis.
Finally, we discovered the over-expression of GRP78, ATF4, ATF6, PERK, eIF2a,
CHOP, and cytochrome c (Cyt-c) but not IRE1, xbp-1, and caspase-3 in B.suis.S2
(HK)-attacked and B.suis.S2-infected cells, suggesting that the molecular
mechanism of ER stress sensor activation by B.suis.S2 is basically concomitant
with that by B.suis.S2 (HK) and that ER stress, especially the PERK pathway,
plays an important role in the process of B.suis.S2 infecting EEC, which may, in 
part, explain the role of the uterus in the pathogenesis of B.suis.S2.

PMCID: PMC4406936
PMID: 25633898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Sep;22(9):1502-16. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.241. Epub 2015
Jan 30.

Imaging of single cell responses to ER stress indicates that the relative
dynamics of IRE1/XBP1 and PERK/ATF4 signalling rather than a switch between
signalling branches determine cell survival.

Walter F(1), Schmid J(1), Düssmann H(1), Concannon CG(1), Prehn JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Systems Medicine and Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, 
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland.

An accumulation of misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) triggers 
the unfolded protein response (UPR) mediated via the activation of three
transmembrane proteins IRE1, PERK and ATF6. Signalling through these proteins is 
aimed at enhancing the ER folding capacity and reducing the folding load. If
these processes fail to re-establish protein homeostasis within the ER, then cell
death prevails via apoptosis. How the shift from pro-survival to pro-apoptotic
signalling is regulated remains unclear with both IRE1 and PERK signalling
associated with pro-survival as well as pro-apoptotic signalling. To investigate 
the temporal activation of IRE1 and PERK in live cells and their relationship to 
cellular fate, we devised single cell reporters for both ER stress signalling
branches. SH-SY5Y neural cells stably expressing these fluorescent protein
reporter constructs to monitor IRE1-splicing activity and PERK-mediated
ATF4-translation were imaged using single cell and high content time lapse live
cell microscopy. We could correlate an early onset and attenuation of XBP1
splicing in the IRE1-reporter cells as cytoprotective. Indeed, silencing of IRE1 
expression using shRNA inhibited splicing of XBP1 resulting in an early onset of 
cell death. In contrast, in the PERK-reporter cells, we observed that a slow rate
of ATF4-translation and late re-initiation of general translation coincided with 
cells which were resistant to ER stress-induced cell death. Interestingly,
whereas silencing of PERK did not affect overall levels of cell death in response
to ER stress, it did increase sensitivity to ER stressors at early time points
following treatment. Our results suggest that apoptosis activation in response to
ER stress is not caused by a preferential activation of a single UPR branch, or
by a switch from one branch to the other. Rather, our data indicated that the
relative timing of IRE1 and PERK signalling determines the shift from cell
survival to apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC4532775 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 25633195  [PubMed - in process]


264. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2015 Mar;10(1):153-61. doi: 10.1007/s11481-014-9571-z.
Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Erythropoietin delivered via intra-arterial infusion reduces endoplasmic
reticulum stress in brain microvessels of rats following cerebral ischemia and
reperfusion.

Zhao H(1), Wang R, Wu X, Liang J, Qi Z, Liu X, Min L, Ji X, Luo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cerebrovascular Diseases Research Institute, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital
Medical University, 45 Changchun Street, Beijing, 100053, China.

Local infusion of low dose erythropoietin (EPO) alleviates cerebral ischemia and 
reperfusion (I/R) injury in rats; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms
are still unclear. The present study investigated the effect of low dose EPO
treatment on I/R-induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in brain tissue and
isolated microvessels in rodents. Sprague-Dawley rats were subjected to 2 h
ischemia/24 h reperfusion by middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion, then
administered fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled EPO via MCA infusion (MCAI) or
subcutaneous injection (SI) to compare the efficiency of two modes of delivery.
Neurobehavioral deficits and infarct volume, and the expression of ER
stress-associated proteins and apoptosis in brain tissue or isolated
microvessels, as well as the transcriptional activity of 16 factors involved in
ER stress and the unfolded protein response in brain tissue was asscessed. A
higher EPO level in cerebrospinal fluid and brain tissue was observed in rats
treated with EPO by MCAI (800 IU/kg) than by SI (5000 IU/kg). Moreover,
neurobehavioral deficits and infarct volume were reduced in rats treated with EPO
by MCAI and salubrinal. EPO suppressed the expression of ER stress signals
glucose-regulated protein 78, activating transcription factor (ATF) 6a, and CCAAT
enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP), as well as that of the
pro-apoptotic protein caspase-3 in brain microvessels, and decreased the number
of CHOP-positive, apoptotic neurons. EPO treatment also reduced the
transcriptional activities of CHOP, forkhead box protein O1, and ATF4. These
results provide evidence that low dose EPO treatment via MCAI provides
neuroprotection following acute ischemic stroke by inhibiting the ER stress
response.

PMID: 25626440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Apr;14(4):877-88. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-1093-T.
Epub 2015 Jan 22.

ATF4 Gene Network Mediates Cellular Response to the Anticancer PAD Inhibitor
YW3-56 in Triple-Negative Breast Cancer Cells.

Wang S(1), Chen XA(1), Hu J(1), Jiang JK(2), Li Y(1), Chan-Salis KY(1), Gu Y(1), 
Chen G(3), Thomas C(2), Pugh BF(1), Wang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Eukaryotic Gene Regulation, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania.
(2)National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland. (3)Department of Chemistry, Pennsylvania State
University, State College, Pennsylvania. (4)Center for Eukaryotic Gene
Regulation, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State 
University, State College, Pennsylvania. yuw12@psu.edu.

We previously reported that a pan-PAD inhibitor, YW3-56, activates p53 target
genes to inhibit cancer growth. However, the p53-independent anticancer activity 
and molecular mechanisms of YW3-56 remain largely elusive. Here, gene expression 
analyses found that ATF4 target genes involved in endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress response were activated by YW3-56. Depletion of ATF4 greatly attenuated
YW3-56-mediated activation of the mTORC1 regulatory genes SESN2 and DDIT4. Using 
the ChIP-exo method, high-resolution genomic binding sites of ATF4 and CEBPB
responsive to YW3-56 treatment were generated. In human breast cancer cells,
YW3-56-mediated cell death features mitochondria depletion and autophagy
perturbation. Moreover, YW3-56 treatment effectively inhibits the growth of
triple-negative breast cancer xenograft tumors in nude mice. Taken together, we
unveiled the anticancer mechanisms and therapeutic potentials of the pan-PAD
inhibitor YW3-56.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4394025
PMID: 25612620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Gut. 2016 Apr;65(4):595-606. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-307030. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

Methyl-deficient diet promotes colitis and SIRT1-mediated endoplasmic reticulum
stress.

Melhem H(1), Hansmannel F(1), Bressenot A(1), Battaglia-Hsu SF(1), Billioud V(1),
Alberto JM(1), Gueant JL(1), Peyrin-Biroulet L(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U954, Faculté de Médecine, Nutrition Génétique et exposition aux
risques environnementaux, Université de Lorraine 54 511, Vanduvre-Lès-Nancy
cedex, France.

BACKGROUND: Methyl donor deficiency (MDD) aggravates experimental colitis in rats
and increases endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress through decreased sirtuin 1
(SIRT1) in neuronal cells and myocardium. ER stress plays a key role in IBD
pathogenesis.
AIM: We investigated whether the influence of MDD on colitis resulted from an ER 
stress response triggered by decreased SIRT1 expression.
DESIGN: The unfolded protein response (UPR), chaperones proteins, heat shock
factor protein 1 (HSF1) and SIRT1 were examined in rats with MDD and dextran
sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis in a Caco-2 cell model with stable
expression of transcobalamin-oleosin (TO) chimera, which impairs cellular
availability of vitamin B12, and in IBD. The effects of SIRT1 activation were
studied both in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: MDD aggravated DSS-induced colitis clinically, endoscopically and
histologically. MDD activated ER stress pathways, with increased
phosphorylate-PKR-like ER kinase, P-eiF-2a, P-IRE-1a, activating transcription
factor (ATF)6, XBP1-S protein and ATF4 mRNA expression levels in rats. This was
accompanied by reduced SIRT1 expression level and greater acetylation of HSF1, in
relation with a dramatic decrease of chaperones (binding immunoglobulin protein
(BIP), heat shock protein (HSP)27 and HSP90). Adding either vitamin B12,
S-adenosylmethionine or an SIRT1 activator (SRT1720) reduced the UPR in vitro. In
rats, SIRT1 activation by SRT1720 prevented colitis by reducing HSF1 acetylation 
and increasing expression of BIP, HSP27 and HSP90. Immunohistochemistry showed
impaired expression of SIRT1 in the colonic epithelium of patients with IBD.
CONCLUSIONS: SIRT1 is a master regulator of ER stress and severity of
experimental colitis in case of MDD. It could deserve further interest as a
therapeutic target of IBD.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 25608526  [PubMed - in process]


267. Toxicol In Vitro. 2015 Dec 25;30(1 Pt A):7-18. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2014.12.011.
Epub 2015 Jan 13.

Transcriptomics hit the target: Monitoring of ligand-activated and stress
response pathways for chemical testing.

Limonciel A(1), Moenks K(2), Stanzel S(3), Truisi GL(4), Parmentier C(5),
Aschauer L(6), Wilmes A(6), Richert L(7), Hewitt P(8), Mueller SO(4), Lukas A(2),
Kopp-Schneider A(3), Leonard MO(9), Jennings P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
Electronic address: alice.limonciel@i-med.ac.at. (2)Emergentec Biodevelopment
GmbH, Vienna, Austria. (3)Division of Biostatistics (C060) Medical Biostatistics,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Non-Clinical
Safety, Merck Serono, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany; Institut für Angewandte
Biowissenschaften, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany.
(5)KaLy-Cell, Plobsheim, France. (6)Department of Physiology, Medical University 
of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. (7)KaLy-Cell, Plobsheim, France; EA4267,
Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France. (8)Non-Clinical Safety, Merck
Serono, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. (9)Centre for Radiation, Chemical and
Environmental Hazards, Public Health England, Chilton, Didcot OX11 0RQ, UK.

High content omic methods provide a deep insight into cellular events occurring
upon chemical exposure of a cell population or tissue. However, this improvement 
in analytic precision is not yet matched by a thorough understanding of molecular
mechanisms that would allow an optimal interpretation of these biological
changes. For transcriptomics (TCX), one type of molecular effects that can be
assessed already is the modulation of the transcriptional activity of a
transcription factor (TF). As more ChIP-seq datasets reporting genes specifically
bound by a TF become publicly available for mining, the generation of target gene
lists of TFs of toxicological relevance becomes possible, based on actual
protein-DNA interaction and modulation of gene expression. In this study, we
generated target gene signatures for Nrf2, ATF4, XBP1, p53, HIF1a, AhR and PPAR
gamma and tracked TF modulation in a large collection of in vitro TCX datasets
from renal and hepatic cell models exposed to clinical nephro- and hepato-toxins.
The result is a global monitoring of TF modulation with great promise as a
mechanistically based tool for chemical hazard identification.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25596134  [PubMed - in process]


268. Proteomics. 2015 May;15(9):1608-21. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201400039. Epub 2015 Mar
30.

Cytotoxic mechanisms of panduratin A on A375 melanoma cells: A quantitative and
temporal proteomics analysis.

Lai SL(1), Wong PF, Lim TK, Lin Q, Mustafa MR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Natural Products & Drug Discovery (CENAR), Department of
Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Malaysia.

Melanoma is a lethal form of skin cancer with rising global incidence. However,
limited treatment options are available for advanced melanoma and this is further
compounded by the development of resistance toward existing drugs. Panduratin A
(PA), a cyclohexanyl chalcone found in Boesenbergia rotunda, was investigated for
its cytotoxic potentials against human malignant melanoma A375 cells. Our initial
findings revealed that mitochondrion is the primary acting site of PA on A375
cancer cells and the cytotoxic mechanisms of PA were further investigated using a
temporal quantitative proteomics approach by iTRAQ 2D-LC-MS/MS. Comprehensive
proteomics analysis identified 296 proteins that were significantly deregulated
in PA-treated A375 cells and revealed the involvement of mitochondrial oxidative 
phosphorylation, secretory and ER stress pathway, and apoptosis. We further
confirmed that the PA-induced apoptosis was mediated by prolonged ER stress at
least in part via the PERK/eIF2a/ATF4/CHOP pathway. Pretreatment with
cycloheximide, an ER stress inhibitor rescued PA-induced cell death, which was
accompanied by the suppression of ER-stress-related HSPA5 and CHOP proteins. The 
present study provides comprehensive mechanistic insights into the cytotoxic
mechanisms of PA.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25594392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Jan 15;6:e1591. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.554.

Phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor eIF2a at serine 51
determines the cell fate decisions of Akt in response to oxidative stress.

Rajesh K(1), Krishnamoorthy J(1), Kazimierczak U(2), Tenkerian C(3), Papadakis
AI(4), Wang S(1), Huang S(4), Koromilas AE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, McGill University, Sir Mortimer B. 
Davis-Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T 1E2. (2)1] Lady Davis
Institute for Medical Research, McGill University, Sir Mortimer B. Davis-Jewish
General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T 1E2 [2] Department of Cancer
Immunology, Chair of Medical Biotechnology, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, Poznan, Poland. (3)1] Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, McGill
University, Sir Mortimer B. Davis-Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada H3T 1E2 [2] Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 1A3.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada H3G 1Y6. (5)1] Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, McGill
University, Sir Mortimer B. Davis-Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada H3T 1E2 [2] Department of Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H2W 1S6.

Phosphorylation of the a subunit of the translation initiation factor eIF2 at
serine 51 (eIF2aP) is a master regulator of cell adaptation to various forms of
stress with implications in antitumor treatments with chemotherapeutic drugs.
Herein, we demonstrate that genetic loss of the eIF2a kinases PERK and GCN2 or
impaired eIF2aP by genetic means renders immortalized mouse fibroblasts as well
as human tumor cells increasingly susceptible to death by oxidative stress. We
also show that eIF2aP facilitates Akt activation in cells subjected to oxidative 
insults. However, whereas Akt activation has a pro-survival role in
eIF2aP-proficient cells, the lesser amount of activated Akt in eIF2aP-deficient
cells promotes death. At the molecular level, we demonstrate that eIF2aP acts
through an ATF4-independent mechanism to control Akt activity via the regulation 
of mTORC1. Specifically, eIF2aP downregulates mTORC1 activity, which in turn
relieves the feedback inhibition of PI3K resulting in the upregulation of the
mTORC2-Akt arm. Inhibition of mTORC1 by rapamycin restores Akt activity in
eIF2aP-deficient cells but renders them highly susceptible to Akt-mediated death 
by oxidative stress. Our data demonstrate that eIF2aP acts as a molecular switch 
that dictates either cell survival or death by activated Akt in response to
oxidative stress. Hence, we propose that inactivation of eIF2aP may be a suitable
approach to unleash the killing power of Akt in tumor cells treated with
pro-oxidant drugs.

PMCID: PMC4669752
PMID: 25590801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Neuromolecular Med. 2015 Mar;17(1):58-70. doi: 10.1007/s12017-015-8340-3. Epub
2015 Jan 13.

The neuroprotective effect of salubrinal in a mouse model of traumatic brain
injury.

Rubovitch V(1), Barak S, Rachmany L, Goldstein RB, Zilberstein Y, Pick CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Anthropology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, 69978, Tel Aviv, Israel, rubovitc@post.tau.ac.il.

We have previously reported that mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) induced
cognitive deficits as well as apoptotic changes in the brains of mice. Apoptosis 
may be caused by severe, prolonged accumulation of misfolded proteins, and
protein aggregation in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER stress). In an additional
study, we have reported that mTBI activated the pro-apoptotic arm of the
integrated stress response (ISR). The main goal of the present study was to test 
the involvement of the adaptive eIF2a/ATF4 pathway in mTBI-affected brains. Head 
injury was induced with a noninvasive, closed-head weight drop (30 g) to ICR
mice. Salubrinal, the selective phosphatase inhibitor of p-eIF2a, was injected
immediately and 24 h after mTBI (1 mg/kg, ip). Y-maze and novel object
recognition tests to assess spatial and visual memories, respectively, were
conducted either 7 or 30 days post-trauma. Salubrinal administration
significantly improved memory deficits following mTBI. Slaubrinal also prevented 
the elevation of degenerating neurons and the reduction of mature neurons in the 
cortex (as seen by immunofluorescent staining with Fluoro-Jade-B and NeuN
antibodies, 72 h and 1 week post-mTBI, respectively). Western blot analysis
revealed that salubrinal prevented the significant reduction in eIF2a and ATF4
phosphorylation in mTBI brains 72 h post-injury. Immunofluorescence staining
revealed that although the reduction in p-eIF2a did not reach significance,
salubrinal administration elevated it dramatically. Our results show that
targeting the translational/adaptive arm of the ISR with salubrinal may serve as 
a therapeutic strategy for brain damage.

PMID: 25582550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Austin J Clin Ophthalmol. 2014 Jun 16;1(5):1023.

Increased ER stress as a mechanism of retinal neurovasculopathy in mice with
severe hyperhomocysteinemia.

Tawfik A(1), Smith SB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology and Anatomy, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA ; James and Jean Culver Vision Discovery 
Institute, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA. (2)Department of Cellular
Biology and Anatomy, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University,
Augusta, GA ; James and Jean Culver Vision Discovery Institute, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, GA ; Department of Ophthalmology, Medical College of
Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA.

Hyperhomocysteinemia is implicated in retinal neurovascular diseases including
arterial occlusive disease, venous occlusive disease and pseudoexfoliation
glaucoma. The mechanism for these diseases is not known. Here we used
hyperhomocysteinemic mice lacking the gene encoding cystathionine-beta-synthase
(cbs (-/-)) to examine whether ER stress could be a mechanism for the retinal
neurovasculopathy reported in these mice. Retinas of cbs (+/+) and cbs (-/-) mice
(age: 3-5 wks) were used to investigate the expression of ER stress genes
(BiP/GRP78, Perk, Atf6, Atf4, Ire1a, Chop) and the proteins they encode. The
levels of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) and cleaved cysteine-aspartic
proteases-3 (caspase-3), proteins known to be involved in apoptosis, were also
examined. Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and
western blotting revealed an increase in BiP/GRP78 and PERK in retinas of cbs
(-/-) mice compared with cbs (+/+) mice. There was an elevation of
CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) in retinal cryosections 
of cbs (-/-) mice indicating apoptosis, which was confirmed by increased levels
of PARP and cleaved caspase-3. The data suggest that the genes and proteins that 
are major players in the ER stress pathway, particularly the PERK pathway, are
upregulated in retinas of cbs (-/-) mice. The data support a role for ER stress
in the pathophysiology associated with the hyperhomocysteinemia-linked retinal
disease.

PMCID: PMC4287205
PMID: 25580465  [PubMed]


272. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2015 Apr 15;308(8):C621-30. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00096.2014. Epub 2015 Jan 7.

Impact of ER stress-regulated ATF4/p16 signaling on the premature senescence of
renal tubular epithelial cells in diabetic nephropathy.

Liu J(1), Yang JR(2), Chen XM(3), Cai GY(3), Lin LR(2), He YN(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, 
Chongqing, China; and State Key Laboratory of Kidney Disease, Kidney Center of
the People's Liberation Army, Chinese PLA General Hospital and Military Medical
Postgraduate College, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Nephrology, Daping
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China; and. (3)State Key 
Laboratory of Kidney Disease, Kidney Center of the People's Liberation Army,
Chinese PLA General Hospital and Military Medical Postgraduate College, Beijing, 
China. (4)Department of Nephrology, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China; and heynmail@163.com.

Premature senescence is an important event during diabetic nephropathy (DN)
progression. Here, we investigated the role of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-regulated activation of transcription factor 4 (ATF4)/p16 signaling in the
premature senescence of renal tubular epithelial cells (RTECs) during DN
development. In the renal tissues of Type 2 DN patients, we detected an increased
number of senescent cells; elevated deposition of advanced glycation end products
(AGEs); upregulated expression of ER stress marker, glucose-regulated protein 78;
as well as overexpression of ATF4 and p16. Similarly, these phenomena were also
observed in cultured mouse RTECs following AGE treatment. Interestingly,
AGE-induced p16 expression and premature senescence were successfully attenuated 
by ER stress inhibitor and ATF4 gene silencing. Moreover, AGE-induced premature
senescence was mimicked by ER stress inducers and ATF4 overexpression, while
suppressed by p16 gene silencing. In addition, ER stress inducers can augment
ATF4 expression. Therefore, our results demonstrate that the ER stress-regulated 
ATF4/p16 pathway is involved in the premature senescence of RTECs during DN
progression.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 25567807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 30;9(12):e111083. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111083.
eCollection 2014.

Heat stress induces apoptosis through a Ca²<U+207A>-mediated mitochondrial apoptotic
pathway in human umbilical vein endothelial cells.

Li L(1), Tan H(2), Gu Z(3), Liu Z(4), Geng Y(4), Liu Y(4), Tong H(4), Tang Y(4), 
Qiu J(4), Su L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of intensive care unit, Guangzhou General Hospital of Guangzhou
Military Command, Key Laboratory of Tropical Zone Trauma Care and Tissue Repair
of PLA, Guangzhou, P.R. China, and Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, P.R.
China. (2)Department of epilepsy surgery, Guangdong Sanjiu Brain Hospital,
Guangzhou, P.R. China. (3)Department of intensive care unit, The Third Affiliated
Hospital of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, P.R. China. (4)Department of 
intensive care unit, Guangzhou General Hospital of Guangzhou Military Command,
Key Laboratory of Tropical Zone Trauma Care and Tissue Repair of PLA, Guangzhou, 
P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: Heat stress can be acutely cytotoxic, and heat stress-induced
apoptosis is a prominent pathological feature of heat-related illnesses, although
the precise mechanisms by which heat stress triggers apoptosis are poorly
defined.
METHODS: The percentages of viability and cell death were assessed by WST-1 and
LDH release assays. Apoptosis was assayed by DNA fragmentation and caspase
activity. Expression of cleaved PARP, Apaf-1, phospho-PERK, Phospho-eIF2a, ATF4, 
XBP-1s, ATF6, GRP78, phospho-IP3R, RYR and SERCA was estimated by Western blot.
The effect of calcium overload was determined using flow cytometric analysis with
the fluorescent probe Fluo-3/AM. The generation of ROS (O2-, H2O2, NO) was
labeled by confocal laser scanning microscopy images of fluorescently and flow
cytometry.
RESULTS: In this study, we found that heat stress in HUVEC cells activated
initiators of three major unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling transduction 
pathways: PERK-eIF2a-ATF4, IRE1-XBP-1S and ATF6 to protect against ER stress,
although activation declined over time following cessation of heat stress.
Furthermore, we show that intense heat stress may induce apoptosis in HUVEC cells
through the calcium-mediated mitochondrial apoptotic pathway, as indicated by
elevation of cytoplasmic Ca2+, expression of Apaf-1, activation of caspase-9 and 
caspase-3, PARP cleavage, and ultimately nucleosomal DNA fragmentation; Reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) appear to act upstream in this process. In addition, we
provide evidence that IP3R upregulation may promote influx of Ca2+ into the
cytoplasm after heat stress.
CONCLUSION: Our findings describe a novel mechanism for heat stress-induced
apoptosis in HUVEC cells: following elevation of cytoplasm Ca2+, activation of
the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway via the IP3R upregulation, with ROS acting as
an upstream regulator of the process.

PMCID: PMC4280109
PMID: 25549352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Lab Invest. 2015 Mar;95(3):320-33. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2014.158. Epub 2014 Dec
29.

Extracellular deposition of mouse senile AApoAII amyloid fibrils induced
different unfolded protein responses in the liver, kidney, and heart.

Luo H(1), Sawashita J(2), Tian G(3), Liu Y(4), Li L(4), Ding X(4), Xu Z(4), Yang 
M(4), Miyahara H(4), Mori M(5), Qian J(6), Wang Y(4), Higuchi K(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Aging Biology, Institute of Pathogenesis and Disease
Prevention, Shinshu University Graduate School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan [2] 
Third Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, China. (2)1] Department
of Aging Biology, Institute of Pathogenesis and Disease Prevention, Shinshu
University Graduate School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan [2] Department of
Biological Sciences for Intractable Neurological Diseases, Institute for
Biomedical Sciences, Interdisciplinary Cluster for Cutting Edge Research, Shinshu
University, Matsumoto, Japan. (3)1] Department of Aging Biology, Institute of
Pathogenesis and Disease Prevention, Shinshu University Graduate School of
Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan [2] Shijiazhuang Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital,
Shijiazhuang, China. (4)Department of Aging Biology, Institute of Pathogenesis
and Disease Prevention, Shinshu University Graduate School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, Japan. (5)1] Department of Aging Biology, Institute of Pathogenesis
and Disease Prevention, Shinshu University Graduate School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, Japan [2] Department of Advanced Medicine for Health Promotion,
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Interdisciplinary Cluster for Cutting Edge
Research, Shinshu University, Matsumoto, Japan. (6)1] Department of Aging
Biology, Institute of Pathogenesis and Disease Prevention, Shinshu University
Graduate School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan [2] Department of Pathology, Hebei 
Medical University, Shijiazhuang, China.

Mouse senile amyloidosis is a disorder in which apolipoprotein A-II deposits
extracellularly in many organs as amyloid fibrils (AApoAII). In this study, we
intravenously injected 1<U+2009>µg of isolated AApoAII fibrils into R1.P1-Apoa2(c) mice,
to induce AApoAII amyloidosis. We observed that the unfolded protein response was
induced by deposition of AApoAII amyloid. We found that the mRNA and the protein 
expression levels of heat shock protein A5 (HSPA5; also known as
glucose-regulated protein 78) were increased in the liver with AApoAII amyloid
deposits. Immunohistochemistry showed that HSPA5 was only detected in hepatocytes
close to AApoAII amyloid deposits. Furthermore, gene transcription of several
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-related proteins increased, including
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 alpha kinase 3 (Eif2ak3), activating
transcription factor 6 (Atf6), activating transcription factor 4 (Atf4),
X-box-binding protein 1 splicing (Xbp1s), DNA-damage inducible transcript 3
(Ddit3), and autophagy protein 5 (Atg5). Moreover, apoptosis-positive cells were 
increased in the liver. Similar results were seen in the kidney but not in the
heart. Our study indicates that ER stress responses differed among tissues with
extracellular AApoAII amyloid fibril deposition. Although upregulated HSPA5 and
the activated unfolded protein response might have roles in protecting tissues
against aggregated extracellular AApoAII amyloid deposition, prolonged ER stress 
induced apoptosis in the liver and the kidney.

PMID: 25545477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Apoptosis. 2015 Mar;20(3):285-97. doi: 10.1007/s10495-014-1081-1.

Myofibrillogenesis regulator-1 attenuated hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced apoptosis
by inhibiting the PERK/Nrf2 pathway in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes.

Tao TQ(1), Wang XR, Liu M, Xu FF, Liu XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, 100853, 
China.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the role of myofibrillogenesis
regulator-1 (MR-1) in cardiomyocyte apoptosis induced by hypoxia/reoxygenation
(H/R), through protein kinase R-like ER kinase (PERK)/nuclear factor erythroid
2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) pathway. To address this aim, an H/R model of neonatal 
rat cardiomyocytes was used. MR-1 was overexpressed using an adenoviral vector
system and knocked down using MR-1 specific siRNA. Apoptosis was assessed by
using Annexin V/PI double staining, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling assay, and the Bcl-2/Bax ratio. Western
blotting was used to detect the protein levels of MR-1, glucose-regulated protein
78 (GRP78), total and phosphorylated PERK, Nrf2, activating transcription factor 
4 (ATF4), C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), Bcl-2 and Bax. Immunofluorescence
staining was used to assess the subcellular location of Nrf2. We found that H/R
induced significant apoptosis in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. MR-1 overexpression
attenuated H/R-induced apoptosis, decreased GRP78 (P < 0.01) and CHOP expression 
(P < 0.05), and increased the Bcl-2/Bax ratio (P < 0.01). MR-1 overexpression
suppressed H/R-induced PERK phosphorylation, Nrf2 nuclear translocation, and ATF4
expression (P < 0.01). While MR-1 knockdown aggravated H/R-induced apoptosis,
increased expression of GRP78 and CHOP (P < 0.05), and decreased the Bcl-2/Bax
ratio (P < 0.01). MR-1 knockdown significantly increased H/R-induced PERK
phosphorylation (P < 0.05), Nrf2 nuclear translocation, and ATF4 expression (P < 
0.01). These findings suggest that MR-1 alleviates H/R-induced cardiomyocyte
apoptosis through inhibition of the PERK/Nrf2 pathway.

PMID: 25542256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Diabetologia. 2015 Apr;58(4):809-18. doi: 10.1007/s00125-014-3475-6. Epub 2014
Dec 24.

Fibroblast growth factor 21 participates in adaptation to endoplasmic reticulum
stress and attenuates obesity-induced hepatic metabolic stress.

Kim SH(1), Kim KH, Kim HK, Kim MJ, Back SH, Konishi M, Itoh N, Lee MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 135-710, South Korea.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) is an endocrine hormone that
exhibits anti-diabetic and anti-obesity activity. FGF21 expression is increased
in patients with and mouse models of obesity or nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
(NAFLD). However, the functional role and molecular mechanism of FGF21 induction 
in obesity or NAFLD are not clear. As endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is
triggered in obesity and NAFLD, we investigated whether ER stress affects FGF21
expression or whether FGF21 induction acts as a mechanism of the unfolded protein
response (UPR) adaptation to ER stress induced by chemical stressors or obesity.
METHODS: Hepatocytes or mouse embryonic fibroblasts deficient in UPR signalling
pathways and liver-specific eIF2a mutant mice were employed to investigate the in
vitro and in vivo effects of ER stress on FGF21 expression, respectively. The in 
vivo importance of FGF21 induction by ER stress and obesity was determined using 
inducible Fgf21-transgenic mice and Fgf21-null mice with or without leptin
deficiency.
RESULTS: We found that ER stressors induced FGF21 expression, which was dependent
on a PKR-like ER kinase-eukaryotic translation factor 2a-activating transcription
factor 4 pathway both in vitro and in vivo. Fgf21-null mice exhibited increased
expression of ER stress marker genes and augmented hepatic lipid accumulation
after tunicamycin treatment. However, these changes were attenuated in inducible 
Fgf21-transgenic mice. We also observed that Fgf21-null mice with leptin
deficiency displayed increased hepatic ER stress response and liver injury,
accompanied by deteriorated metabolic variables.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that FGF21 plays an important
role in the adaptive response to ER stress- or obesity-induced hepatic metabolic 
stress.

PMID: 25537833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Diabetes Res. 2014;2014:160140. doi: 10.1155/2014/160140. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

The unfolded protein response and diabetic retinopathy.

Ma JH(1), Wang JJ(2), Zhang SX(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology and Biochemistry (Ira G. Ross Eye Institute),
School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, The State
University of New York, 308 Farber Hall, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA ; SUNY Eye
Institute, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA ; State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology,
Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510060, China.
(2)Departments of Ophthalmology and Biochemistry (Ira G. Ross Eye Institute),
School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, The State
University of New York, 308 Farber Hall, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA ; SUNY Eye
Institute, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

Diabetic retinopathy, a common complication of diabetes, is the leading cause of 
blindness in adults. Diabetes chronically damages retinal blood vessels and
neurons likely through multiple pathogenic pathways such as oxidative stress,
inflammation, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. To relieve ER stress, the
cell activates an adaptive mechanism known as the unfolded protein response
(UPR). The UPR coordinates the processes of protein synthesis, protein folding,
and degradation to ensure proteostasis, which is vital for cell survival and
activity. Emerging evidence suggests that diabetes can activate all three UPR
branches in retinal cells, among which the PERK/ATF4 pathway is the most
extensively studied in the development of diabetic retinopathy. X-box binding
protein 1 (XBP1) is a major transcription factor in the core UPR pathway and also
regulates a variety of genes involved in cellular metabolism, redox state,
autophagy, inflammation, cell survival, and vascular function. The exact function
and implication of XBP1 in the pathogenesis of diabetic retinopathy remain
elusive. Focusing on this less studied pathway, we summarize recent progress in
studies of the UPR pertaining to diabetic changes in retinal vasculature and
neurons, highlighting the perspective of XBP1 as a potential therapeutic target
in diabetic retinopathy.

PMCID: PMC4229964
PMID: 25530974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Mar;1853(3):539-48. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.12.013.
Epub 2014 Dec 16.

MAPK signaling triggers transcriptional induction of cFOS during amino acid
limitation of HepG2 cells.

Shan J(1), Donelan W(1), Hayner JN(1), Zhang F(1), Dudenhausen EE(1), Kilberg
MS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610. (2)Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville,
Florida 32610. Electronic address: mkilberg@ufl.edu.

Amino acid (AA) deprivation in mammalian cells activates a collection of
signaling cascades known as the AA response (AAR), which is characterized by
transcriptional induction of stress-related genes, including FBJ murine
osteosarcoma viral oncogene homolog (cFOS). The present study established that
the signaling mechanism underlying the AA-dependent transcriptional regulation of
the cFOS gene in HepG2 human hepatocellular carcinoma cells is independent of the
classic GCN2-eIF2-ATF4 pathway. Instead, a RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK cascade mediates AAR
signaling to the cFOS gene. Increased cFOS transcription is observed from 4-24 h 
after AAR-activation, exhibiting little or no overlap with the rapid and
transient increase triggered by the well-known serum response. Furthermore, serum
is not required for the AA-responsiveness of the cFOS gene and no phosphorylation
of promoter-bound serum response factor (SRF) is observed. The ERK-phosphorylated
transcription factor E-twenty six-like (p-ELK1) is increased in its association
with the cFOS promoter after activation of the AAR. This research identified cFOS
as a target of the AAR and further highlights the importance of AA-responsive
MAPK signaling in HepG2 cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4315773
PMID: 25523140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Mol Neurosci. 2015 May;56(1):122-30. doi: 10.1007/s12031-014-0473-6. Epub 2014 
Dec 19.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress is involved in the lidocaine-induced apoptosis in
SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells.

Li K(1), Han X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Henan Science
and Technology University, No. 24 Jinghua Road, Jianxi District, 471003, Luoyang,
China, khann_li@163.com.

Lidocaine has been indicated to promote apoptosis and to promote endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. However, the mechanism underlining ER stress-mediated
apoptosis is unclear. In the present study, we investigated the promotion to ER
stress in the lidocaine-induced apoptosis in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells.
Firstly, we confirmed that lidocaine treatment induced apoptosis in SH-SY5Y
cells, time-dependently and dose-dependently, via MTT cell viability assay and
annexin V/FITC apoptosis detection with a FACScan flow cytometer. And the
anti-apoptosis Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL were downregulated, whereas the
apoptosis-executive caspase 3 was promoted through Western blot assay and caspase
3 activity assay. Moreover, the ER stress-associated binding immunoglobulin
protein (BiP), PKR-like ER kinase (PERK), activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4) and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) were also
upregulated at both mRNA and protein levels by lidocaine treatment. On the other 
hand, downregulation of the ER stress-associated BiP by RNAi method not only
blocked the lidocaine-promoted ER stress but also attenuated the
lidocaine-induced SH-SY5Y cell apoptosis. In conclusion, the present study
confirmed the involvement of ER stress in the lidocaine-induced apoptosis in
human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. Our study provides a better understanding on
the mechanism of lidocaine's neurovirulence.

PMID: 25522790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. BMC Syst Biol. 2014;8 Suppl 4:S3. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-8-S4-S3. Epub 2014 Dec
8.

Computational analysis of the roles of ER-Golgi network in the cell cycle.

Gong H, Feng L.

BACKGROUND: ER-Golgi network plays an important role in the processing, sorting
and transport of proteins, and it's also a site for many signaling pathways that 
regulate the cell cycle. Accumulating evidence suggests that, the stressed ER and
malfunction of Golgi apparatus are associated with the pathogenesis of cancer and
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Our previous work discovered and verified that altering
the expression levels of target SNARE and GEF could modulate the size of Golgi
apparatus. Moreover, Golgi's structure and size undergo dramatic changes during
the development of several diseases. It is of importance to investigate the roles
of ER-Golgi network in the cell cycle progression and some diseases.
RESULTS: In this work, we first develop a computational model to study the ER
stress-induced and Golgi-related apoptosis-survival signaling pathways. Then, we 
propose and apply both asynchronous and synchronous model checking methods, which
extend our previous verification technique, to automatically and formally analyze
the ER-Golgi-regulated signaling pathways in the cell cycle progression through
verifying some computation tree temporal logic formulas.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed asynchronous and synchronous verification technique has
advantages for large network analysis and verification over traditional
simulation methods. Using the model checking method, we verified several
Alzheimer's disease and cancer-related properties, and also identified important 
proteins (NF<U+03BA>B, ATF4, ASK1 and TRAF2) in the ER-Golgi network, which might be
responsible for the pathogenesis of cancer and AD. Our studies indicate that
targeting the ER stress-induced and Golgi-related pathways might serve as potent 
therapeutic targets for the treatment of cancer and Alzheimer's disease.

PMCID: PMC4290691
PMID: 25522186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Med Oncol. 2015 Jan;32(1):447. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0447-0. Epub 2014 Dec 14.

The unfolded protein response potentiates epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) of gastric cancer cells under severe hypoxic conditions.

Shen X(1), Xue Y, Si Y, Wang Q, Wang Z, Yuan J, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Minimally Invasive Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Zhengzhou University, No. 1 East Jianshe Road, Zhengzhou, 450052, Henan, China.

The hypoxic condition occurs in most types of solid tumors and has been shown to 
be associated with the metastatic ability of gastric cancer. A previous study has
demonstrated that hypoxia might stimulate epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) of gastric cancer cells. Nevertheless, the mechanism has not yet been
completely understood. In the current study, the human gastric cancer cell lines 
HGC27 and MGC803 were presented to normoxic (21 % O2), hypoxic (1 % O2) or severe
hypoxic (0.1 % O2) conditions for 24 h. We found that hypoxia exposure induced
EMT of gastric cancer cells, which was promoted by severe hypoxia condition.
Meanwhile, expressions of PERK, ATF4 and ATF6 proteins were elevated in cells
under conditions of severe hypoxia but not by normoxia or hypoxia. Knockdown of
PERK, ATF4 or ATF6 impeded EMT of gastric cancer cells induced by severe hypoxia.
Furthermore, severe hypoxia exposure extremely boosted the expression of TGF-ß,
which was blocked by the knockdown of PERK, ATF4 or ATF6 expression.
Additionally, we found that TGF-ß release caused by hypoxia is facilitated by
elevated UPR proteins and led to the activation of Smad2/3 and PI3K/Akt
signaling. Our data suggest that UPR potentiates the EMT of gastric cancer cells 
under conditions of severe hypoxia.

PMID: 25502090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Cell Biochem. 2015 May;116(5):767-77. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25032.

Spp24 derivatives stimulate a Gi-protein coupled receptor-Erk1/2 signaling
pathway and modulate gene expressions in W-20-17 cells.

Zhao KW(1), Murray EJ, Murray SS.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center (11-E), Veterans Affairs
Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Sepulveda, California, 91343.

Secreted phosphoprotein 24<U+2009>kDa (Spp24) is an apatite- and BMP/TGF-ß
cytokine-binding phosphoprotein found in serum and many tissues, including bone. 
N-terminally intact degradation products ranging in size from 14<U+2009>kDa to 23<U+2009>kDa
have been found in bone. The cleavage sites in Spp24 that produce these short
forms have not been definitively identified, and the biological activities and
mechanisms of action of Spp24 and its degradation products have not been fully
elucidated. We found that the C-terminus of Spp24 is labile to proteolysis by
furin, kallikrein, lactoferrin, and trypsin, indicating that both extracellular
and intracellular proteolytic events could account for the generation of
biologically-active Spp18, Spp16, and Spp14. We determined the effects of these
truncation products on kinase-mediated signal transduction, gene expression, and 
osteoblastic differentiation in W-20-17 bone marrow stromal cells cultured in
basal or pro-osteogenic media. After culturing for five days, all forms inhibited
BMP-2-stimulated osteoblastic differentiation, assessed as induction of alkaline 
phosphatase activity, in basal, but not pro-osteogenic media. After 10 days, they
also inhibited BMP-2-stimulated mineral deposition in pro-osteogenic media. Spp24
had no effect on Erk1/2 phosphorylation, but Spp18 stimulated short-term Erk1/2, 
MEK 1/2, and p38 phosphorylation. Pertussis toxin and a MEK1/2 inhibitor ablated 
Spp18-stimulated Erk 1/2 phosphorylation, indicating a role for Gi proteins and
MEK1/2 in the Spp18-stimulated Erk1/2 phosphorylation cascade. Truncation
products, but not full-length Spp24, stimulated RUNX2, ATF4, and CSF1
transcription. This suggests that Spp24 truncation products have effects on
osteoblastic differentiation mediated by kinase pathways that are independent of 
exogenous BMP/TGF-ß cytokines.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25501958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014;15(12):1646-57. doi: 10.4161/15384047.2014.967992.

Regulation of dimethyl-fumarate toxicity by proteasome inhibitors.

Booth L(1), Cruickshanks N, Tavallai S, Roberts JL, Peery M, Poklepovic A, Dent
P.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

The present studies examined the biology of the multiple sclerosis drug
dimethyl-fumarate (DMF) or its in vivo breakdown product and active metabolite
mono-methyl-fumarate (MMF), alone or in combination with proteasome inhibitors,
in primary human glioblastoma (GBM) cells. MMF enhanced velcade and carfilzomib
toxicity in multiple primary GBM isolates. Similar data were obtained in breast
and colon cancer cells. MMF reduced the invasiveness of GBM cells, and enhanced
the toxicity of ionizing radiation and temozolomide. MMF killed freshly isolated 
activated microglia which was associated with reduced IL-6, TGFß and TNFa
production. The combination of MMF and the multiple sclerosis drug Gilenya
further reduced both GBM and activated microglia viability and cytokine
production. Over-expression of c-FLIP-s or BCL(-)XL protected GBM cells from MMF 
and velcade toxicity. MMF and velcade increased plasma membrane localization of
CD95, and knock down of CD95 or FADD blocked the drug interaction. The drug
combination inactivated AKT, ERK1/2 and mTOR. Molecular inhibition of
AKT/ERK/mTOR signaling enhanced drug combination toxicity whereas molecular
activation of these pathways suppressed killing. MMF and velcade increased the
levels of autophagosomes and autolysosomes and knock down of ATG5 or Beclin1
protected cells. Inhibition of the eIF2a/ATF4 arm or the IRE1a/XBP1 arm of the ER
stress response enhanced drug combination lethality. This was associated with
greater production of reactive oxygen species and quenching of ROS suppressed
cell killing.

PMCID: PMC4623310
PMID: 25482938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 3;9(12):e113983. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113983.
eCollection 2014.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress mediates the anti-inflammatory effect of ethyl
pyruvate in endothelial cells.

Wang G(1), Liu K(2), Li Y(3), Yi W(4), Yang Y(4), Zhao D(4), Fan C(5), Yang H(6),
Geng T(6), Xing J(6), Zhang Y(4), Tan S(6), Yi D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military
Medical University, 127 Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032, China; Department of
Cardiovascular Surgery, Guangdong Provincial Corps Hospital of Chinese People's
Armed Police Forces, Guangzhou Medical University, 268 Yanling Road, Guangzhou
510507, China. (2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, The Fourth Military Medical
University, 169 Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032, China. (3)Department of Air
Logistics, The 463rd Hospital of PLA, 46 Xiaoheyan Road, Shenyang 110042, China. 
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military
Medical University, 127 Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032, China. (5)Department of 
Thoracic Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University, 1
Xinsi Road, Xi'an 710038, China. (6)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery,
Guangdong Provincial Corps Hospital of Chinese People's Armed Police Forces,
Guangzhou Medical University, 268 Yanling Road, Guangzhou 510507, China.

Ethyl pyruvate (EP) is a simple aliphatic ester of the metabolic intermediate
pyruvate that has been demonstrated to be a potent anti-inflammatory agent in a
variety of in vivo and in vitro model systems. However, the protective effects
and mechanisms underlying the actions of EP against endothelial cell (EC)
inflammatory injury are not fully understood. Previous studies have confirmed
that endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) plays an important role in regulating the
pathological process of EC inflammation. In this study, our aim was to explore
the effects of EP on tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a)-induced inflammatory injury 
in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and to explore the role of ERS
in this process. TNF-a treatment not only significantly increased the adhesion of
monocytes to HUVECs and inflammatory cytokine (sICAM1, sE-selectin, MCP-1 and
IL-8) production in cell culture supernatants but it also increased ICAM and MMP9
protein expression in HUVECs. TNF-a also effectively increased the ERS-related
molecules in HUVECs (GRP78, ATF4, caspase12 and p-PERK). EP treatment effectively
reversed the effects of the TNF-a-induced adhesion of monocytes on HUVECs,
inflammatory cytokines and ERS-related molecules. Furthermore, thapsigargin (THA,
an ERS inducer) attenuated the protective effects of EP against TNF-a-induced
inflammatory injury and ERS. The PERK siRNA treatment not only inhibited
ERS-related molecules but also mimicked the protective effects of EP to decrease 
TNF-a-induced inflammatory injury. In summary, we have demonstrated for the first
time that EP can effectively reduce vascular endothelial inflammation and that
this effect at least in part depends on the attenuation of ERS.

PMCID: PMC4254754
PMID: 25470819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 3;9(12):e113785. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113785.
eCollection 2014.

PDGF-AA promotes osteogenic differentiation and migration of mesenchymal stem
cell by down-regulating PDGFRa and derepressing BMP-Smad1/5/8 signaling.

Li A(1), Xia X(2), Yeh J(2), Kua H(3), Liu H(2), Mishina Y(4), Hao A(5), Li B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Shandong University School of
Medicine, 44 Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan, Shandong, 250012 P.R. China; The Bio-X
Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric
Disorders, Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030,
China. (2)The Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental 
and Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200030, China. (3)The Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology, Agency for Science, Technology, and Research, Singapore 138632,
Singapore. (4)Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences, School of Dentistry,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.
(5)Department of Histology and Embryology, Shandong University School of
Medicine, 44 Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan, Shandong, 250012 P.R. China.

Platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) play important roles in skeletal
development and bone fracture healing, yet how PDGFs execute their functions
remains incompletely understood. Here we show that PDGF-AA, but not -AB or -BB,
could activate the BMP-Smad1/5/8 pathway in mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), which 
requires BMPRIA as well as PDGFRa. PDGF-AA promotes MSC osteogenic
differentiation through the BMP-Smad1/5/8-Runx2/Osx axis and MSC migration via
the BMP-Smad1/5/8-Twist1/Atf4 axis. Mechanistic studies show that PDGF-AA
activates BMP-Smad1/5/8 signaling by feedback down-regulating PDGFRa, which frees
BMPRI and allows for BMPRI-BMPRII complex formation to activate smad1/5/8, using 
BMP molecules in the microenvironment. This study unravels a physical and
functional interaction between PDGFRa and BMPRI, which plays an important role in
MSC differentiation and migration, and establishes a link between PDGF-AA and
BMPs pathways, two essential regulators of embryonic development and tissue
homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4254917
PMID: 25470749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Cancer Lett. 2015 Jan 28;356(2 Pt B):880-90. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.10.038.
Epub 2014 Nov 4.

A pathway-based approach for identifying biomarkers of tumor progression to
trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer.

Nam S(1), Chang HR(1), Jung HR(1), Gim Y(1), Kim NY(2), Grailhe R(2), Seo HR(3), 
Park HS(4), Balch C(5), Lee J(6), Park I(7), Jung SY(7), Jeong KC(8), Powis G(9),
Liang H(10), Lee ES(1), Ro J(7), Kim YH(11).

Author information: 
(1)New Experimental Therapeutics Branch, National Cancer Center, Goyang-si,
Gyeonggi-do 410-769, Republic of Korea. (2)Core Technology, Institut Pasteur
Korea, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do 463-400, Republic of Korea.
(3)Functional Morphometry II, Institut Pasteur Korea, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si,
Gyeonggi-do 463-400, Republic of Korea. (4)Animal Sciences Branch, National
Cancer Center, Goyang-si, Gyeonggi-do 410-769, Republic of Korea. (5)Bioscience
Advising, Indianapolis, IN 46227, USA. (6)Korean Bioinformation Center (KOBIC),
Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-806,
Republic of Korea. (7)Center for Breast Cancer, National Cancer Center of Korea, 
Goyang-si, Gyeonggi-do 410-769, Republic of Korea. (8)Biomolecular Function
Research Branch, National Cancer Center, Goyang-si, Gyeonggi-do 410-769, Republic
of Korea. (9)Cancer Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla,
CA 92037, USA. (10)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (11)New
Experimental Therapeutics Branch, National Cancer Center, Goyang-si, Gyeonggi-do 
410-769, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: yhkim@ncc.re.kr.

Although trastuzumab is a successful targeted therapy for breast cancer patients 
with tumors expressing HER2 (ERBB2), many patients eventually progress to drug
resistance. Here, we identified subpathways differentially expressed between
trastuzumab-resistant vs. -sensitive breast cancer cells, in conjunction with
additional transcriptomic preclinical and clinical gene datasets, to rigorously
identify overexpressed, resistance-associated genes. From this approach, we
identified 32 genes reproducibly upregulated in trastuzumab resistance. 25 genes 
were upregulated in drug-resistant JIMT-1 cells, which also downregulated HER2
protein by >80% in the presence of trastuzumab. 24 genes were downregulated in
trastuzumab-sensitive SKBR3 cells. Trastuzumab sensitivity was restored by siRNA 
knockdown of these genes in the resistant cells, and overexpression of 5 of the
25 genes was found in at least one of five refractory HER2<U+2009>+<U+2009>breast cancer. In
summary, our rigorous computational approach, followed by experimental
validation, significantly implicate ATF4, CHEK2, ENAH, ICOSLG, and RAD51 as
potential biomarkers of trastuzumab resistance. These results provide further
proof-of-concept of our methodology for successfully identifying potential
biomarkers and druggable signal pathways involved in tumor progression to drug
resistance.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 25449779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Cell Microbiol. 2015 May;17(5):714-29. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12396. Epub 2015 Jan 8.

The secreted antigen, HP0175, of Helicobacter pylori links the unfolded protein
response (UPR) to autophagy in gastric epithelial cells.

Halder P(1), Datta C, Kumar R, Sharma AK, Basu J, Kundu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Bose Institute, Kolkata, India.

Autophagy is an intracellular catabolic process that is required to maintain
cellular homeostasis. Pathogen-elicited host cell autophagy may favour
containment of infection or may help in bacterial survival. Pathogens have
developed the ability to modulate host autophagy. The secreted antigen HP0175, a 
peptidyl prolyl cis,trans isomerase of Helicobacter pylori, has moonlighting
functions with reference to host cells. Here we show that it executes autophagy
in gastric epithelial cells. Autophagy is dependent on the unfolded protein
response (UPR) that activates the expression of PKR-like ER kinase (PERK). This
is accompanied by phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2a (eIF-2a) and
transcriptional activation of ATF4 and CHOP. Knockdown of UPR-related genes
inhibits the conversion of LC3I to LC3II, a marker of autophagy. The
autophagy-inducing ability of H. pylori is compromised when cells are infected
with an isogenic hp0175 mutant. Autophagy precedes apoptosis. Silencing of
BECLIN1 augments cleavage of caspase 3 as well as apoptosis. Increased apoptosis 
of gastric epithelial cells is known to be linked to H. pylori-mediated gastric
inflammation and carcinogenesis. To the best of our knowledge, this study
provides the first demonstration of how HP0175 endowed with moonlighting
functions links UPR-dependent autophagy and apoptosis during H. pylori infection.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25439545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Int J Nephrol. 2014;2014:512178. doi: 10.1155/2014/512178. Epub 2014 Nov 9.

Classification of Five Uremic Solutes according to Their Effects on Renal Tubular
Cells.

Edamatsu T(1), Fujieda A(1), Ezawa A(1), Itoh Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Division, Kureha Corporation, 3-26-2 Hyakunin-cho, Shinjuku-ku,
Tokyo 169-8503, Japan.

Background/Aims. Uremic solutes, which are known to be retained in patients with 
chronic kidney disease, are considered to have deleterious effects on disease
progression. Among these uremic solutes, indoxyl sulfate (IS) has been
extensively studied, while other solutes have been studied less to state. We
conducted a comparative study to examine the similarities and differences between
IS, p-cresyl sulfate (PCS), phenyl sulfate (PhS), hippuric acid (HA), and
indoleacetic acid (IAA). Methods. We used LLC-PK1 cells to evaluate the effects
of these solutes on viable cell number, cell cycle progression, and cell death.
Results. All the solutes reduced viable cell number after 48-hour incubation.
N-Acetyl-L-cysteine inhibited this effect induced by all solutes except HA. At
the concentration that reduced the cell number to almost 50% of vehicle control, 
IAA induced apoptosis but not cell cycle delay, whereas other solutes induced
delay in cell cycle progression with marginal impact on apoptosis.
Phosphorylation of p53 and Chk1 and expression of ATF4 and CHOP genes were
detected in IS-, PCS-, and PhS-treated cells, but not in IAA-treated cells.
Conclusions. Taken together, the adverse effects of PCS and PhS on renal tubular 
cells are similar to those of IS, while those of HA and IAA differ.

PMCID: PMC4241681
PMID: 25431671  [PubMed]


289. J Dent Res. 2015 Feb;94(2):320-9. doi: 10.1177/0022034514559376. Epub 2014 Nov
25.

Cantharidins induce ER stress and a terminal unfolded protein response in OSCC.

Xi Y(1), Garshott DM(2), Brownell AL(2), Yoo GH(3), Lin HS(3), Freeburg TL(3),
Yoo NG(3), Kaufman RJ(4), Callaghan MU(2), Fribley AM(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Pathiobiology, Ministry of Education, Norman Bethune
College of Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, China Carmen and Ann Adams
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology Oncology, Children's Hospital of
Michigan, Detroit, MI, USA. (2)Carmen and Ann Adams Department of Pediatrics,
Division of Hematology Oncology, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, MI,
USA. (3)Department of Otolaryngology, Wayne State University and Karmanos Cancer 
Institute, Detroit, MI, USA. (4)Degenerative Diseases Program, Sanford|Burnham
Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA and Department of Pharmacology,
University of California Medical Center, La Jolla, CA, USA. (5)Carmen and Ann
Adams Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology Oncology, Children's
Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, MI, USA Department of Otolaryngology, Wayne State 
University and Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI, USA Developmental
Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI, USA
rkaufman@sanfordburnham.org afribley@med.wayne.edu.

Mortality and morbidity associated with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)
remain unacceptably high with disfiguring treatment options and a death rate of 1
per hour in the United States. The approval of cituximab for advanced OSCC has
been the only new treatment for these patients since the 1970s, although it has
not significantly increased overall survival. To address the paucity of effective
new therapies, we undertook a high-throughput screen to discover small molecules 
and natural products that could induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and
enforce a terminal unfolded protein response (UPR) in OSCC. The terpenoid
cantharidin (CNT), previously used to treat various malignancies in
culture-specific medical practices for over 2,000 y, emerged as a hit. CNT and
its analog, cantharidic acid, potently induced protein and gene expression
profiles consistent with the activation of ER stress, the UPR, and apoptosis in
OSCC cells. Murine embryonic fibroblasts null for the UPR-associated
transcription factors Atf4 or Chop were significantly protected from CNT,
implicating a key role for the UPR in the death response. These data validate
that our high-throughput screen can identify novel modulators of UPR signaling
and that such compounds might provide a new therapeutic approach to treating
patients with OSCC.

© International & American Associations for Dental Research 2014.

PMCID: PMC4300301
PMID: 25425581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Biometals. 2015 Feb;28(1):133-41. doi: 10.1007/s10534-014-9809-5. Epub 2014 Nov
26.

Boric acid induces cytoplasmic stress granule formation, eIF2a phosphorylation,
and ATF4 in prostate DU-145 cells.

Henderson KA(1), Kobylewski SE, Yamada KE, Eckhert CD.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Molecular Toxicology, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Dietary boron intake is associated with reduced prostate and lung cancer risk and
increased bone mass. Boron is absorbed and circulated as boric acid (BA) and at
physiological concentrations is a reversible competitive inhibitor of cyclic ADP 
ribose, the endogenous agonist of the ryanodine receptor calcium (Ca(+2))
channel, and lowers endoplasmic reticulum (ER) [Ca(2+)]. Low ER [Ca(2+)] has been
reported to induce ER stress and activate the eIF2a/ATF4 pathway. Here we report 
that treatment of DU-145 prostate cells with physiological levels of BA induces
ER stress with the formation of stress granules and mild activation of eIF2a,
GRP78/BiP, and ATF4. Mild activation of eIF2a and its downstream transcription
factor, ATF4, enables cells to reconfigure gene expression to manage stress
conditions and mild activation of ATF4 is also required for the differentiation
of osteoblast cells. Our results using physiological levels of boric acid
identify the eIF2a/ATF pathway as a plausible mode of action that underpins the
reported health effects of dietary boron.

PMCID: PMC4300416
PMID: 25425213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Biomed Opt. 2014 Nov;19(11):117009. doi: 10.1117/1.JBO.19.11.117009.

Polarization gating enables sarcomere length measurements by laser diffraction in
fibrotic muscle.

Young KW(1), Dayanidhi S(2), Lieber RL(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of California San Diego, Department of Bioengineering, 9500 Gilman 
Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0412, United StatesbVA San Diego Healthcare
System, 3350 La Jolla Village Drive, San Diego, California 92161, United States. 
(2)VA San Diego Healthcare System, 3350 La Jolla Village Drive, San Diego,
California 92161, United StatescUniversity of California San Diego, Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0863, United
States. (3)University of California San Diego, Department of Bioengineering, 9500
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0412, United StatesbVA San Diego
Healthcare System, 3350 La Jolla Village Drive, San Diego, California 92161,
United StatescUniversity of Calif.

Raman spectroscopy (RS) has been extensively used to characterize bone
composition. However, the link between bone biomechanics and RS measures is not
well established. Here, we leveraged the sensitivity of RS polarization to
organization, thereby assessing whether RS can explain differences in bone
toughness in genetic mouse models for which traditional RS peak ratios are not
informative. In the selected mutant miceactivating transcription factor 4 (ATF4)
or matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) knock-outstoughness is reduced but
differences in bone strength do not exist between knock-out and corresponding
wild-type controls. To incorporate differences in the RS of bone occurring at
peak shoulders, a multivariate approach was used. Full spectrum principal
components analysis of two paired, orthogonal bone orientations (relative to
laser polarization) improved genotype classification and correlation to bone
toughness when compared to traditional peak ratios. When applied to femurs from
wild-type mice at 8 and 20 weeks of age, the principal components of orthogonal
bone orientations improved age classification but not the explanation of the
maturation-related increase in strength. Overall, increasing polarization
information by collecting spectra from two bone orientations improves the ability
of multivariate RS to explain variance in bone toughness, likely due to
polarization sensitivity to organizational changes in both mineral and collagen.

PMCID: PMC4242972
PMID: 25422904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Cell Mol Med. 2015 Mar;19(3):581-94. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12409. Epub 2014 Nov 23.

Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate-induced apoptosis in rat INS-1 cells is dependent on
activation of endoplasmic reticulum stress and suppression of antioxidant
protection.

Sun X(1), Lin Y, Huang Q, Shi J, Qiu L, Kang M, Chen Y, Fang C, Ye T, Dong S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Urban Environment and Health, Institute of Urban Environment,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen, China.

Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) is used as plasticizer and is ubiquitously
found in the environment. Exposure to DEHP has been linked to an increased
incidence of type 2 diabetes. Pancreatic ß-cell dysfunction is a hallmark of type
2 diabetes; however, it is unknown whether DEHP exposure contributes to this
risk. Here, we aimed to investigate the cytotoxic effects of DEHP on INS-1 cells 
and to further explore the related underlying mechanisms. INS-1 cells were
exposed to 0, 5, 25, 125 or 625 µM DEHP for 24 hrs. Cell viability,
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation,
cellular antioxidant response, Ca(2+) homoeostasis and the levels of genes and
proteins involved in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress were measured. The results
showed that DEHP decreased insulin secretion and content and induced apoptosis in
INS-1 cells in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, ROS generation was increased
and Nrf2-dependent antioxidant defence protection was dysregulated in INS-1 cells
after DEHP exposure. Most importantly, DEHP effectively depleted ER Ca(2+) and
triggered the ER stress response as demonstrated by the elevated transcription
and translation of the ER chaperone GRP78 and GRP94, the increased
phosphorylation of protein kinase R-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK) and 
its downstream substrate eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a), as 
well as the increased levels of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and
C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP). Taken together, DEHP exerted toxic effects on
INS-1 cells by inducing apoptosis, which is dependent on the activation of the
PERK-ATF4-CHOP ER stress signalling pathway and the suppression of Nrf2-dependent
antioxidant protection.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4369815
PMID: 25418486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Mol Neurosci. 2015 Apr;55(4):995-1005. doi: 10.1007/s12031-014-0456-7. Epub
2014 Nov 23.

Wogonin protects rat dorsal root ganglion neurons against tunicamycin-induced ER 
stress through the PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 signaling pathway.

Chen F(1), Wu R, Zhu Z, Yin W, Xiong M, Sun J, Ni M, Cai G, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Affiliated Jinshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, 201508, People's Republic of China.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been demonstrated to contribute to
neurodegeneration in multiple nervous system diseases. Wogonin is a flavonoid
isolated from Scutellaria baicalensis root and has multiple pharmacological
effects, including anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and anticancer effects. It has
a protective role in nervous system diseases; however, the pharmacological
function of wogonin in the spinal cord is still with limited acquaintance. In the
present study, rat dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons were pretreated with
different concentrations of wogonin (0-100 µM) before inducing ER stress using
tunicamycin (TUN) (0.75 µg/ml). Wogonin pretreatment at 75 and 100 µM had a
cytoprotective effect on cells against TUN-induced toxicity. Wogonin also
decreased the number of the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end
labeling (TUNEL)-positive DRG neurons and increased expression of superoxide
dismutase (SOD), which was accompanied by decreased malondialdehyde (MDA) level. 
The induction of apoptosis was prevented with reduction in expression level of
Bax and concomitant increase in B cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) level. Furthermore,
wogonin downregulated expression level of ER stress genes coding for
glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), active
caspase 12, transcription factor 4 (ATF4), and phosphorylation of pancreatic ER
stress kinase (PERK) and eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha (eIF2a). The
current study indicated that wogonin modulated stress-responsive genes, helping
DRG neurons prevent TUN-induced ER stress through the PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 signaling
pathway.

PMID: 25417142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Nov 20;5:e1528. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.479.

Activation of volume-sensitive outwardly rectifying chloride channel by ROS
contributes to ER stress and cardiac contractile dysfunction: involvement of CHOP
through Wnt.

Shen M(1), Wang L(2), Wang B(2), Wang T(3), Yang G(3), Shen L(3), Wang T(3), Guo 
X(2), Liu Y(2), Xia Y(2), Jia L(3), Wang X(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Geriatrics, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China [2] Department of Cardiology, Hainan Branch of PLA
General Hospital, Sanya, China. (2)Department of Geriatrics, Xijing Hospital,
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China. (3)Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress occurring in stringent conditions is critically
involved in cardiomyocytes apoptosis and cardiac contractile dysfunction (CCD).
However, the molecular machinery that mediates cardiac ER stress and subsequent
cell death remains to be fully deciphered, which will hopefully provide novel
therapeutic targets for these disorders. Here, we establish tunicamycin-induced
model of cardiomyocyte ER stress, which effectively mimicks pathological stimuli 
to trigger CCD. Tunicamycin activates volume-sensitive outward rectifying Cl(-)
currents. Blockade of the volume-sensitive outwardly rectifying (VSOR) Cl(-)
channel by 4,4'-diisothiocya-natostilbene-2,2'-disulfonic acid (DIDS), a
non-selective Cl(-) channel blocker, and
4-(2-butyl-6,7-dichlor-2-cyclopentyl-indan-1-on-5-yl) oxybutyric acid (DCPIB), a 
selective VSOR Cl(-) channel blocker, improves cardiac contractility, which
correlates with suppressed ER stress through inhibiting the canonical
GRP78/eIF2a/ATF4 and XBP1 pathways, and promotes survival of cardiomyocytes by
inverting tunicamycin-induced decrease of Wnt through the CHOP pathway. VSOR
activation of tunicamycin-treated cardiomyocytes is attributed to increased
intracellular levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Our study demonstrates a
pivotal role of ROS/VSOR in mediating ER stress and functional impairment of
cardiomyocytes via the CHOP-Wnt pathway, and suggests the therapeutic values of
VSOR Cl(-) channel blockers against ER stress-associated cardiac anomalies.

PMCID: PMC4260737
PMID: 25412307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Mol Neurobiol. 2016 Jan;53(1):132-42. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8991-3. Epub 2014
Nov 20.

HIV Tat-Mediated Induction of Human Brain Microvascular Endothelial Cell
Apoptosis Involves Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and Mitochondrial Dysfunction.

Ma R(1), Yang L(2), Niu F(2), Buch S(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430030, China. (2)Department of
Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE, 68198, USA. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental
Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 68198, USA.
sbuch@unmc.edu. (4)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience,
985880 Nebraska Medical Center (DRC 8011), University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, NE, 68198-5880, USA. sbuch@unmc.edu.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress triggered under hyperglycemic, hypoxic, and
oxidative conditions has been implicated in cellular dysfunction through
activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR). Recent clinical studies have
documented that the release of soluble cellular and host factors following HIV
infection in the central nervous system (CNS) results in induction of the ER
stress response. Herein, we demonstrate that exposure of human brain
microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs) to HIV transactivator protein Tat101
resulted in early induction of several major ER stress regulators including ER
chaperones Bip/GRP78 and ER stress sensors ATF6, p-PERK, and downstream mediators
p-eIF2a and ATF4. Upregulation of the ER stress mediators was accompanied by
decreased cell viability and increased apoptosis as evidenced by MTT and terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick end-labeling (TUNEL) assays,
respectively. Pretreatment of HBMECs with either ER inhibitor or knockdown of the
effector C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) resulted in increased cell viability and
abrogation of apoptosis following Tat exposure. Notably, Tat-mediated activation 
of the UPR response involved reactive oxygen species. Furthermore, treatment of
Tat also resulted in mitochondrial dysfunction, evidenced by decrease in Bcl2/Bax
ratio, dysfunction of mitochondrial membrane potential, and release of cytochrome
c, all of which could be partially reversed by the ER stress inhibitor. The
current study demonstrates that exposure of HBMECs to Tat induces multiple stress
responses, including ER stress and mitochondrial dysfunction which in turn lead
to apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC4787264 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 25409632  [PubMed - in process]


296. BMC Genomics. 2014 Nov 18;15:982. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-982.

Retinal transcriptome profiling at transcription start sites: a cap analysis of
gene expression early after axonal injury.

Yasuda M, Tanaka Y, Nishiguchi KM, Ryu M, Tsuda S, Maruyama K, Nakazawa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8574, Japan.
ntoru@oph.med.tohoku.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Glaucoma is characterized by progressive loss of the visual field and
death of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), a process that is mediated, in part, by
axonal injury. However, the molecular pathomechanisms linking RGC death and
axonal injury remain largely unknown. Here, we examined these mechanisms with a
cap analysis of gene expression (CAGE), which allows the comprehensive
quantification of transcription initiation across the entire genome. We aimed to 
identify changes in gene expression patterns and to predict the resulting
alterations in the protein network in the early phases of axonal injury in mice.
RESULTS: We performed optic nerve crush (ONC) in mice to model axonal injury. Two
days after ONC, the retinas were isolated, RNA was extracted, and a CAGE library 
was constructed and sequenced. CAGE data for ONC eyes and sham-treated eyes was
compared, revealing 180 differentially expressed genes. Among them, the Bcat1
gene, involved in the catabolism of branched-chain amino acid transaminase,
showed the largest change in expression (log2 fold-change=6.70). In some
differentially expressed genes, alternative transcription start sites were
observed in the ONC eyes, highlighting the dynamism of transcription initiation
in a state of disease. In silico pathway analysis predicted that ATF4 was the
most significant upstream regulator orchestrating pathological processes after
ONC. Its downstream candidate targets included Ddit3, which is known to induce
cell death under endoplasmic reticulum stress. In addition, a regulatory network 
comprising IFNG, P38 MAPK, and TP53 was predicted to be involved in the induction
of cell death.
CONCLUSION: Through CAGE, we have identified differentially expressed genes that 
may account for the link between axonal injury and RGC death. Furthermore, an in 
silico pathway analysis provided a global view of alterations in the networks of 
key regulators of biological pathways that presumably take place in ONC. We thus 
believe that our study serves as a valuable resource to understand the molecular 
processes that define axonal injury-driven RGC death.

PMCID: PMC4246558
PMID: 25407019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 2;290(1):457-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.616359. Epub 2014
Nov 17.

p53 Protein-mediated regulation of phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH) is
crucial for the apoptotic response upon serine starvation.

Ou Y(1), Wang SJ(1), Jiang L(1), Zheng B(2), Gu W(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute for Cancer Genetics and Department of Pathology and Cell
Biology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New
York 10032 and. (2)the Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129. (3)From the
Institute for Cancer Genetics and Department of Pathology and Cell Biology,
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032
and wg8@columbia.edu.

Although p53 is frequently mutated in human cancers, about 80% of human melanomas
retain wild-type p53. Here we report that PHGDH, the key metabolic enzyme that
catalyzes the rate-limiting step of the serine biosynthesis pathway, is a target 
of p53 in human melanoma cells. p53 suppresses PHGDH expression and inhibits de
novo serine biosynthesis. Notably, upon serine starvation, p53-mediated cell
death is enhanced dramatically in response to Nutlin-3 treatment. Moreover, PHGDH
has been found recently to be amplified frequently in human melanomas. We found
that PHGDH overexpression significantly suppresses the apoptotic response,
whereas RNAi-mediated knockdown of endogenous PHGDH promotes apoptosis under the 
same treatment. These results demonstrate an important role of p53 in regulating 
the serine biosynthesis pathway through suppressing PHGDH expression and reveal
serine deprivation as a novel approach to sensitize p53-mediated apoptotic
responses in human melanoma cells.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4281747
PMID: 25404730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Biomed Opt. 2014;19(11):117008. doi: 10.1117/1.JBO.19.11.117008.

Polarization in Raman spectroscopy helps explain bone brittleness in genetic
mouse models.

Makowski AJ(1), Pence IJ(2), Uppuganti S(3), Zein-Sabatto A(2), Huszagh MC(2),
Mahadevan-Jansen A(2), Nyman JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Department of Veterans Affairs, Nashville,
Tennessee 27212, United StatesbVanderbilt University, Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, United StatescVanderbilt University,
Vanderbilt Center f. (2)Vanderbilt University, Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, United States. (3)Vanderbilt University,
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Rehabilitation, Nashville, Tennessee 37232,
United States.

Raman spectroscopy (RS) has been extensively used to characterize bone
composition. However, the link between bone biomechanics and RS measures is not
well established. Here, we leveraged the sensitivity of RS polarization to
organization, thereby assessing whether RS can explain differences in bone
toughness in genetic mouse models for which traditional RS peak ratios are not
informative. In the selected mutant mice - activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4) or matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) knock-outs - toughness is reduced but
differences in bone strength do not exist between knock-out and corresponding
wild-type controls. To incorporate differences in the RS of bone occurring at
peak shoulders, a multivariate approach was used. Full spectrum principal
components analysis of two paired, orthogonal bone orientations (relative to
laser polarization) improved genotype classification and correlation to bone
toughness when compared to traditional peak ratios. When applied to femurs from
wild-type mice at 8 and 20 weeks of age, the principal components of orthogonal
bone orientations improved age classification but not the explanation of the
maturation-related increase in strength. Overall, increasing polarization
information by collecting spectra from two bone orientations improves the ability
of multivariate RS to explain variance in bone toughness, likely due to
polarization sensitivity to organizational changes in both mineral and collagen.

PMCID: PMC4240742
PMID: 25402627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Gen Virol. 2015 Mar;96(Pt 3):580-9. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.071845-0. Epub 2014 Nov 
13.

Chikungunya virus non-structural protein 2-mediated host shut-off disables the
unfolded protein response.

Fros JJ(1), Major LD(2), Scholte FE(3), Gardner J(2), van Hemert MJ(3), Suhrbier 
A(4), Pijlman GP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Wageningen University, 6708 PB Wageningen, The
Netherlands QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD 4029,
Australia. (2)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD 4029,
Australia. (3)Molecular Virology Laboratory, Department of Medical Microbiology, 
Leiden University Medical Center, PO Box 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD 4029, Australia
andreas.suhrbier@qimrberghofer.edu.au gorben.pijlman@wur.nl. (5)Laboratory of
Virology, Wageningen University, 6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands
andreas.suhrbier@qimrberghofer.edu.au gorben.pijlman@wur.nl.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a cellular defence mechanism against high 
concentrations of misfolded protein in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In the
presence of misfolded proteins, ER-transmembrane proteins PERK and IRE1a become
activated. PERK phosphorylates eIF2a leading to a general inhibition of cellular 
translation, whilst the expression of transcription factor ATF4 is upregulated.
Active IRE1a splices out an intron from XBP1 mRNA, to produce a potent
transcription factor. Activation of the UPR increases the production of several
proteins involved in protein folding, degradation and apoptosis. Here, we
demonstrated that transient expression of chikungunya virus (CHIKV) (family
Togaviridae, genus Alphavirus) envelope glycoproteins induced the UPR and that
CHIKV infection resulted in the phosphorylation of eIF2a and partial splicing of 
XBP1 mRNA. However, infection with CHIKV did not increase the expression of ATF4 
and known UPR target genes (GRP78/BiP, GRP94 and CHOP). Moreover, nuclear XBP1
was not observed during CHIKV infection. Even upon stimulation with tunicamycin, 
the UPR was efficiently inhibited in CHIKV-infected cells. Individual expression 
of CHIKV non-structural proteins (nsPs) revealed that nsP2 alone was sufficient
to inhibit the UPR. Mutations that rendered nsP2 unable to cause host-cell
shut-off prevented nsP2-mediated inhibition of the UPR. This indicates that
initial UPR induction takes place in the ER but that expression of functional UPR
transcription factors and target genes is efficiently inhibited by CHIKV nsP2.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMID: 25395592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 13;9(11):e112761. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112761.
eCollection 2014.

TBL2 is a novel PERK-binding protein that modulates stress-signaling and cell
survival during endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Tsukumo Y(1), Tsukahara S(1), Furuno A(1), Iemura S(2), Natsume T(2), Tomida
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Koto-ku, 
Tokyo, Japan. (2)Biomedicinal Information Research Center, National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Koto-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Under ER stress, PKR-like ER-resident kinase (PERK) phosphorylates translation
initiation factor eIF2a, resulting in repression of global protein synthesis and 
concomitant upregulation of the translation of specific mRNAs such as activating 
transcription factor 4 (ATF4). This PERK function is important for cell survival 
under ER stress and poor nutrient conditions. However, mechanisms of the PERK
signaling pathway are not thoroughly understood. Here we identify transducin
(beta)-like 2 (TBL2) as a novel PERK-binding protein. We found that TBL2 is an
ER-localized type-I transmembrane protein and preferentially binds to the
phosphorylated form of PERK, but not another eIF2a kinase GCN2 or ER-resident
kinase IRE1, under ER stress. Immunoprecipitation analysis using various deletion
mutants revealed that TBL2 interacts with PERK via the N-terminus proximal region
and also associates with eIF2a via the WD40 domain. In addition, TBL2 knockdown
can lead to impaired ATF4 induction under ER stress or poor nutrient conditions
such as glucose and oxygen deprivation. Consistently, TBL2 knockdown rendered
cells vulnerable to stresses similarly to PERK knockdown. Thus, TBL2 serves as a 
potential regulator of the PERK pathway.

PMCID: PMC4231078
PMID: 25393282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Nov 7;20(41):15289-98. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v20.i41.15289.

N-acetylcysteine attenuates reactive-oxygen-species-mediated endoplasmic
reticulum stress during liver ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Sun Y(1), Pu LY(1), Lu L(1), Wang XH(1), Zhang F(1), Rao JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yong Sun, Department of General Surgery, Huai'an First People's Hospital,
Nanjing Medical University, Huai'an 223300, Jiangsu Province, China.

AIM: To investigate the effects of N-acetylcysteine (NAC) on endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress and tissue injury during liver ischemia reperfusion injury 
(IRI).
METHODS: Mice were injected with NAC (300 mg/kg) intraperitoneally 2 h before
ischemia. Real-time polymerase chain reaction and western blotting determined ER 
stress molecules (GRP78, ATF4 and CHOP). To analyze the role of NAC in reactive
oxygen species (ROS)-mediated ER stress and apoptosis, lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) was examined in cultured hepatocytes treated by H2O2 or thapsigargin (TG).
RESULTS: NAC treatment significantly reduced the level of ROS and attenuated
ROS-induced liver injury after IRI, based on glutathione, malondialdehyde, serum 
alanine aminotransferase levels, and histopathology. ROS-mediated ER stress was
significantly inhibited in NAC-treated mice. In addition, NAC treatment
significantly reduced caspase-3 activity and apoptosis after reperfusion, which
correlated with the protein expression of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xl. Similarly, NAC
treatment significantly inhibited LDH release from hepatocytes treated by H2O2 or
TG.
CONCLUSION: This study provides new evidence for the protective effects of NAC
treatment on hepatocytes during IRI. Through inhibition of ROS-mediated ER
stress, NAC may be critical to inhibit the ER-stress-related apoptosis pathway.

PMCID: PMC4223262
PMID: 25386077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2014;13(9):1483-4.

ATF4: the perpetrator in axonal-mediated neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's
disease.

Fayaz SM, Rajanikant GK(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology National Institute of Technology Calicut Calicut -
673601 India. rajanikant@nitc.ac.in.

Comment on
    Cell. 2014 Aug 28;158(5):1159-72.

PMID: 25382233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Dec;52(3):1765-70. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8970-8. Epub 2014 
Nov 9.

ATF4: a Novel Potential Therapeutic Target for Alzheimer's Disease.

Wei N(1,)(2), Zhu LQ(1,)(2), Liu D(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Brain Research, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, People's Republic of China. (2)Department 
of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medicine, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, People's Republic of China. 
(3)Institute of Brain Research, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, People's Republic of China.
liudan_echo@mail.hust.edu.cn. (4)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic 
Medicine, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, 430030, People's Republic of China. liudan_echo@mail.hust.edu.cn.

Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) belongs to the activating transcription 
factor family and its expression is increased upon the stimulation of a diverse
array of microenvironmental stresses. ATF4 plays a major role in the development,
metabolism, and memory formation. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a prevalent
neurodegenerative disease in aged population. The dominant pathological changes
in AD brain, including the neurofibrillary tangles, consist of
hyperphosphorylated tau protein, senile plaques composed of ß-amyloid proteins,
loss of neurons in the whole brain, and dysfunction of synapses. The protein
level of ATF4 is upregulated in both AD brain and AD mouse model, indicating its 
latent roles in the pathogenesis of this disease. In this paper, we reviewed the 
related literatures about the interaction of ATF4 with the different types of
pathological changes in AD brain and pointed out some unsolved problems in this
area. We also proposed that a fine regulation of ATF4 in separate neurons or
brain regions might be benefit to the therapy of AD.

PMID: 25381575  [PubMed - in process]


304. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Nov 18;111(46):16502-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1419349111. Epub 2014 Nov 5.

Osteoblast regulation via ligand-activated nuclear trafficking of the oxytocin
receptor.

Di Benedetto A(1), Sun L(2), Zambonin CG(3), Tamma R(4), Nico B(4), Calvano
CD(3), Colaianni G(4), Ji Y(2), Mori G(5), Grano M(4), Lu P(2), Colucci S(4),
Yuen T(2), New MI(6), Zallone A(4), Zaidi M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Science, Neurosciences and Sensory Organs,
University of Bari Aldo Moro Medical School, Bari 70126, Italy; Department of
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Foggia, Foggia 71122, Italy;
(2)Mount Sinai Bone Program and Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029; (3)Department of Chemistry, University of Bari Aldo
Moro, Bari 70126, Italy; and. (4)Department of Basic Medical Science,
Neurosciences and Sensory Organs, University of Bari Aldo Moro Medical School,
Bari 70126, Italy; (5)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
University of Foggia, Foggia 71122, Italy; (6)Departments of Pediatrics and
maria.new@mssm.edu mone.zaidi@mountsinai.org. (7)Mount Sinai Bone Program and
Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029;
Structural and Chemical Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
10029 maria.new@mssm.edu mone.zaidi@mountsinai.org.

We report that oxytocin (Oxt) receptors (Oxtrs), on stimulation by the ligand
Oxt, translocate into the nucleus of osteoblasts, implicating this process in the
action of Oxt on osteoblast maturation. Sequential immunocytochemistry of intact 
cells or isolated nucleoplasts stripped of the outer nuclear membrane showed
progressive nuclear localization of the Oxtr; this nuclear translocation was
confirmed by monitoring the movement of Oxtr-EGFP as well as by immunogold
labeling. Nuclear Oxtr localization was conclusively shown by Western
immunoblotting and MS of nuclear lysate proteins. We found that the passage of
Oxtrs into the nucleus was facilitated by successive interactions with
ß-arrestins (Arrbs), the small GTPase Rab5, importin-ß (Kpnb1), and transportin-1
(Tnpo1). siRNA-mediated knockdown of Arrb1, Arrb2, or Tnpo1 abrogated Oxt-induced
expression of the osteoblast differentiation genes osterix (Sp7), Atf4, bone
sialoprotein (Ibsp), and osteocalcin (Bglap) without affecting Erk
phosphorylation. Likewise and again, without affecting pErk, inhibiting Arrb
recruitment by mutating Ser rich clusters of the nuclear localization signal to
Ala abolished nuclear import and Oxtr-induced gene expression. These studies
define a previously unidentified mechanism for Oxtr action on bone and open
possibilities for direct transcriptional modulation by nuclear G protein-coupled 
receptors.

PMCID: PMC4246276
PMID: 25378700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Nov 6;5:e1511. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.469.

A sustained deficiency of mitochondrial respiratory complex III induces an
apoptotic cell death through the p53-mediated inhibition of pro-survival
activities of the activating transcription factor 4.

Evstafieva AG(1), Garaeva AA(2), Khutornenko AA(3), Klepikova AV(4), Logacheva
MD(1), Penin AA(4), Novakovsky GE(2), Kovaleva IE(3), Chumakov PM(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State
University, Moscow, 119992, Russia [2] Faculty of Bioengineering and
Bioinformatics, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, 119992, Russia.
(2)Faculty of Bioengineering and Bioinformatics, Lomonosov Moscow State
University, Moscow, 119992, Russia. (3)Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical
Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, 119992, Russia. (4)1] Faculty
of Bioengineering and Bioinformatics, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, 
119992, Russia [2] Faculty of Biology, Department of Genetics, Lomonosov Moscow
State University, Moscow, 119992, Russia. (5)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular
Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Vavilova Street 32, Moscow, 119991, Russia.

Generation of energy in mitochondria is subjected to physiological regulation at 
many levels, and its malfunction may result in mitochondrial diseases.
Mitochondrial dysfunction is associated with different environmental influences
or certain genetic conditions, and can be artificially induced by inhibitors
acting at different steps of the mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC). We
found that a short-term (5<U+2009>h) inhibition of ETC complex III with myxothiazol
results in the phosphorylation of translation initiation factor eIF2a and
upregulation of mRNA for the activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and several
ATF4-regulated genes. The changes are characteristic for the adaptive integrated 
stress response (ISR), which is known to be triggered by unfolded proteins,
nutrient and metabolic deficiency, and mitochondrial dysfunctions. However, after
a prolonged incubation with myxothiazol (13-17<U+2009>h), levels of ATF4 mRNA and
ATF4-regulated transcripts were found substantially suppressed. The suppression
was dependent on the p53 response, which is triggered by the impairment of the
complex III-dependent de novo biosynthesis of pyrimidines by mitochondrial
dihydroorotate dehydrogenase. The initial adaptive induction of ATF4/ISR acted to
promote viability of cells by attenuating apoptosis. In contrast, the induction
of p53 upon a sustained inhibition of ETC complex III produced a pro-apoptotic
effect, which was additionally stimulated by the p53-mediated abrogation of the
pro-survival activities of the ISR. Interestingly, a sustained inhibition of ETC 
complex I by piericidine did not induce the p53 response and stably maintained
the pro-survival activation of ATF4/ISR. We conclude that a downregulation of
mitochondrial ETC generally induces adaptive pro-survival responses, which are
specifically abrogated by the suicidal p53 response triggered by the genetic
risks of the pyrimidine nucleotide deficiency.

PMCID: PMC4260727
PMID: 25375376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Neurotherapeutics. 2015 Jan;12(1):57-65. doi: 10.1007/s13311-014-0308-8.

Targeting axonal protein synthesis in neuroregeneration and degeneration.

Baleriola J(1), Hengst U.

Author information: 
(1)The Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain,
Columbia University, 650 W. 168th St., New York, NY, USA.

Localized protein synthesis is a mechanism by which morphologically polarized
cells react in a spatially confined and temporally acute manner to changes in
their environment. During the development of the nervous system intra-axonal
protein synthesis is crucial for the establishment of neuronal connections. In
contrast, mature axons have long been considered as translationally inactive but 
upon nerve injury or under neurodegenerative conditions specific subsets of mRNAs
are recruited into axons and locally translated. Intra-axonally synthesized
proteins can have pathogenic or restorative and regenerative functions, and thus 
targeting the axonal translatome might have therapeutic value, for example in the
treatment of spinal cord injury or Alzheimer's disease. In the case of
Alzheimer's disease the local synthesis of the stress response transcription
factor activating transcription factor 4 mediates the long-range retrograde
spread of pathology across the brain, and inhibition of local Atf4 translation
downstream of the integrated stress response might interfere with this spread.
Several molecular tools and approaches have been developed to target specifically
the axonal translatome by either overexposing proteins locally in axons or,
conversely, knocking down selectively axonally localized mRNAs. Many questions
about axonal translation remain to be answered, especially with regard to the
mechanisms establishing specificity but, nevertheless, targeting the axonal
translatome is a promising novel avenue to pursue in the development for future
therapies for various neurological conditions.

PMCID: PMC4322063
PMID: 25371166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 30;9(10):e110949. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110949.
eCollection 2014.

Preconditioning with endoplasmic reticulum stress ameliorates endothelial cell
inflammation.

Leonard A(1), Paton AW(2), El-Quadi M(1), Paton JC(2), Fazal F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Lung Biology and Disease Program, University of
Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York, United States of
America. (2)Research Centre for Infectious Diseases, School of Molecular and
Biomedical Science, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) stress, caused by disturbance in ER homeostasis, has
been implicated in several pathological conditions such as ischemic injury,
neurodegenerative disorders, metabolic diseases and more recently in inflammatory
conditions. Our present study aims at understanding the role of ER stress in
endothelial cell (EC) inflammation, a critical event in the pathogenesis of acute
lung injury (ALI). We found that preconditioning human pulmonary artery
endothelial cells (HPAEC) to ER stress either by depleting ER chaperone and
signaling regulator BiP using siRNA, or specifically cleaving (inactivating) BiP 
using subtilase cytotoxin (SubAB), alleviates EC inflammation. The two approaches
adopted to abrogate BiP function induced ATF4 protein expression and the
phosphorylation of eIF2a, both markers of ER stress, which in turn resulted in
blunting the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B, and restoring endothelial barrier integrity.
Pretreatment of HPAEC with BiP siRNA inhibited thrombin-induced I<U+03BA>Ba degradation 
and its resulting downstream signaling pathway involving NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear
translocation, DNA binding, phosphorylation at serine536, transcriptional
activation and subsequent expression of adhesion molecules. However,
TNFa-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B signaling was unaffected upon BiP knockdown. In an
alternative approach, SubAB-mediated inactivation of NF-<U+03BA>B was independent of
I<U+03BA>Ba degradation. Mechanistic analysis revealed that pretreatment of EC with
SubAB interfered with the binding of the liberated NF-<U+03BA>B to the DNA, thereby
resulting in reduced expression of adhesion molecules, cytokines and chemokines. 
In addition, both knockdown and inactivation of BiP stimulated actin cytoskeletal
reorganization resulting in restoration of endothelial permeability. Together our
studies indicate that BiP plays a central role in EC inflammation and injury via 
its action on NF-<U+03BA>B activation and regulation of vascular permeability.

PMCID: PMC4214695
PMID: 25356743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2015;30(5):689-721. doi: 10.3109/14756366.2014.966704.
Epub 2014 Oct 27.

Targeting tumour hypoxia to prevent cancer metastasis. From biology, biosensing
and technology to drug development: the METOXIA consortium.

Pettersen EO(1), Ebbesen P, Gieling RG, Williams KJ, Dubois L, Lambin P, Ward C, 
Meehan J, Kunkler IH, Langdon SP, Ree AH, Flatmark K, Lyng H, Calzada MJ, Peso
LD, Landazuri MO, Görlach A, Flamm H, Kieninger J, Urban G, Weltin A, Singleton
DC, Haider S, Buffa FM, Harris AL, Scozzafava A, Supuran CT, Moser I, Jobst G,
Busk M, Toustrup K, Overgaard J, Alsner J, Pouyssegur J, Chiche J, Mazure N,
Marchiq I, Parks S, Ahmed A, Ashcroft M, Pastorekova S, Cao Y, Rouschop KM,
Wouters BG, Koritzinsky M, Mujcic H, Cojocari D.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Physics , University of Oslo , Oslo , Norway .

The hypoxic areas of solid cancers represent a negative prognostic factor
irrespective of which treatment modality is chosen for the patient. Still, after 
almost 80 years of focus on the problems created by hypoxia in solid tumours, we 
still largely lack methods to deal efficiently with these treatment-resistant
cells. The consequences of this lack may be serious for many patients: Not only
is there a negative correlation between the hypoxic fraction in tumours and the
outcome of radiotherapy as well as many types of chemotherapy, a correlation has 
been shown between the hypoxic fraction in tumours and cancer metastasis. Thus,
on a fundamental basis the great variety of problems related to hypoxia in cancer
treatment has to do with the broad range of functions oxygen (and lack of oxygen)
have in cells and tissues. Therefore, activation-deactivation of oxygen-regulated
cascades related to metabolism or external signalling are important areas for the
identification of mechanisms as potential targets for hypoxia-specific treatment.
Also the chemistry related to reactive oxygen radicals (ROS) and the biological
handling of ROS are part of the problem complex. The problem is further
complicated by the great variety in oxygen concentrations found in tissues. For
tumour hypoxia to be used as a marker for individualisation of treatment there is
a need for non-invasive methods to measure oxygen routinely in patient tumours. A
large-scale collaborative EU-financed project 2009-2014 denoted METOXIA has
studied all the mentioned aspects of hypoxia with the aim of selecting potential 
targets for new hypoxia-specific therapy and develop the first stage of tests for
this therapy. A new non-invasive PET-imaging method based on the 2-nitroimidazole
[(18)F]-HX4 was found to be promising in a clinical trial on NSCLC patients. New 
preclinical models for testing of the metastatic potential of cells were
developed, both in vitro (2D as well as 3D models) and in mice (orthotopic
grafting). Low density quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qPCR)-based assays were developed measuring multiple hypoxia-responsive markers 
in parallel to identify tumour hypoxia-related patterns of gene expression. As
possible targets for new therapy two main regulatory cascades were prioritised:
The hypoxia-inducible-factor (HIF)-regulated cascades operating at moderate to
weak hypoxia (<1% O(2)), and the unfolded protein response (UPR) activated by
endoplasmatic reticulum (ER) stress and operating at more severe hypoxia (<0.2%).
The prioritised targets were the HIF-regulated proteins carbonic anhydrase IX
(CAIX), the lactate transporter MCT4 and the PERK/eIF2a/ATF4-arm of the UPR. The 
METOXIA project has developed patented compounds targeting CAIX with a
preclinical documented effect. Since hypoxia-specific treatments alone are not
curative they will have to be combined with traditional anti-cancer therapy to
eradicate the aerobic cancer cell population as well.

PMID: 25347767  [PubMed - in process]


309. J Cancer Prev. 2014 Sep;19(3):170-8. doi: 10.15430/JCP.2014.19.3.170.

Carnosic Acid Induces Apoptosis Through Reactive Oxygen Species-mediated
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Induction in Human Renal Carcinoma Caki Cells.

Min KJ(1), Jung KJ(1), Kwon TK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, Daegu,
Korea.

BACKGROUND: Carnosic acid, which is one of extract components of rosemary, has
anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant, and anti-cancer effects. However, the
anti-cancer effect of carnosic acid in human renal carcinoma cells is unknown.
METHODS: Flow cytometry analysis was used to examine the effects of carnosic acid
on apoptosis, and Asp-Glu-Val-Asp-ase activity assay kit was used to investigate 
the involvement of caspase activation. To determine protein expression of
apoptotic and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-related proteins, we used Western
blotting. Intracellular accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) was
determined using the fluorescent probes 2', 7'-dichlorodihydrofluorescein
diacetate (H2DCFDA).
RESULTS: Carnosic acid induced sub-diploid DNA content, sub-G1, population and
poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) cleavage and activated caspase-3. A
pan-caspase inhibitor, a benzyloxycarbonylvalyl-alanyl-aspartyl fluoromethyl
ketone, markedly reduced apoptosis in carnosic acid-treated cells. Carnosic acid 
promoted intracellular ROS production, and pretreatment with the ROS scavengers
(N-acetyl-L-cysteine and glutathione ethyl ester) inhibited carnosic acid-induced
apoptosis. Furthermore, carnosic acid also induced expression of ER stress marker
proteins, including activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein (CHOP), in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. Down-regulation of ATF4 and CHOP by small interfering RNA 
(siRNA) markedly reduced carnosic acid-induced sub-G1 population and PARP
cleavage. In addition, carnosic acid induced apoptosis in human breast carcinoma 
MDA-MB-361 and human hepatocellular carcinoma SK-HEP1 cells, but not in normal
human skin fibroblast cells and normal mouse kidney epithelial TMCK-1 cells.
CONCLUSION: Carnosic acid induced apoptosis through production of ROS and
induction of ER stress in human renal carcinoma Caki cells.

PMCID: PMC4189511
PMID: 25337586  [PubMed]


310. Oncol Rep. 2014 Dec;32(6):2343-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3533. Epub 2014 Oct 6.

Knockdown of glucose-regulated protein 78 enhances poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
cleavage in human pancreatic cancer cells exposed to endoplasmic reticulum
stress.

Jiang X(1), Kanda T(1), Nakamoto S(1), Haga Y(1), Sasaki R(1), Nakamura M(1), Wu 
S(1), Mikata R(1), Yokosuka O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Nephrology, Chiba University, Graduate
School of Medicine, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8677, Japan.

The present study examined the expression of glucose-regulated protein 78
(GRP78/Bip) in human pancreatic cancer cell lines and the effect of knockdown of 
GRP78 on the cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). Human pancreatic
cancer cell lines (KP-2, MIAPaCa-2, Panc-1 and SUIT-2), constitutively expressed 
GRP78. We also demonstrated that ER stress induced by thapsigargin upregulated
protein levels of GRP78. In the presence of thapsigargin, knockdown of GRP78
enhanced the PARP cleavage in the human pancreatic cancer cells. These results
provide evidence that GRP78 is a potential therapeutic target for
'difficult-to-treat' pancreatic cancer, in which ER stress signaling in part
falls into disorder.

PMCID: PMC4240477
PMID: 25333575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Toxicol Sci. 2015 Jan;143(1):196-208. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu223. Epub 2014 Oct
20.

Involvement of endoplasmic reticulum stress in all-trans-retinal-induced retinal 
pigment epithelium degeneration.

Li J(1), Cai X(1), Xia Q(1), Yao K(1), Chen J(1), Zhang Y(1), Naranmandura H(1), 
Liu X(1), Wu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)*College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Center for Stem Cell and Tissue
Engineering, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China, Eye
Center of the Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310009, China, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University City 
College, Hangzhou 310015, China, and Department of Toxicology, School of Medicine
and Public Health, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. (2)*College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Center for Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China, Eye Center of the Second
Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310009,
China, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University City College, Hangzhou 310015,
China, and Department of Toxicology, School of Medicine and Public Health,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China *College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Center for Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, China, Eye Center of the Second Affiliated Hospital,
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310009, China, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University City College, Hangzhou 310015, China, and
Department of Toxicology, School of Medicine and Public Health, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, China yalinw@zju.edu.cn.

Excess accumulation of endogenous all-trans-retinal (atRAL) contributes to
degeneration of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and photoreceptor cells, and
plays a role in the etiologies of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and
Stargardt's disease. In this study, we reveal that human RPE cells tolerate
exposure of up to 5<U+2009>µM atRAL without deleterious effects, but higher
concentrations are detrimental and induce cell apoptosis. atRAL treatment
significantly increased production of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS)
and up-regulated mRNA expression of Nrf2, HO-1, and <U+03B3>-GCSh within RPE cells,
thereby causing oxidative stress. ROS localized to mitochondria and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). ER-resident molecular chaperone BiP, a marker of ER stress, was
up-regulated at the translational level, and meanwhile, the PERK-eIF2a-ATF4
signaling pathway was activated. Expression levels of ATF4, CHOP, and GADD34 in
RPE cells increased in a concentration-dependent manner after incubation with
atRAL. Salubrinal, a selective inhibitor of ER stress, alleviated atRAL-induced
cell death. The antioxidant N-acetylcysteine (NAC) effectively blocked RPE cell
loss and ER stress activation, suggesting that atRAL-induced ROS generation is
responsible for RPE degeneration and is an early trigger of ER stress.
Furthermore, the mitochondrial transmembrane potential was lost after atRAL
exposure, and was followed by caspase-3 activation and poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase cleavage. The results demonstrate that atRAL-driven ROS
overproduction-induced ER stress is involved in cellular mitochondrial
dysfunction and apoptosis of RPE cells.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25331497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Dec 15;25(25):3988-98. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-11-0697. Epub
2014 Oct 15.

VWA domain of S5a restricts the ability to bind ubiquitin and Ubl to the 26S
proteasome.

Piterman R(1), Braunstein I(1), Isakov E(1), Ziv T(2), Navon A(3), Cohen S(4),
Stanhill A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rappaport Family Institute for Research in the
Medical Sciences, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel.
(2)Smoler Proteomics Center, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa
32000, Israel. (3)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of
Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel. (4)Department of Biology, Technion-Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel. (5)Department of Biochemistry,
Rappaport Family Institute for Research in the Medical Sciences, Technion-Israel 
Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel stanhill@tx.technion.ac.il.

The 26S proteasome recognizes a vast number of ubiquitin-dependent degradation
signals linked to various substrates. This recognition is mediated mainly by the 
stoichiometric proteasomal resident ubiquitin receptors S5a and Rpn13, which
harbor ubiquitin-binding domains. Regulatory steps in substrate binding,
processing, and subsequent downstream proteolytic events by these receptors are
poorly understood. Here we demonstrate that mammalian S5a is present in
proteasome-bound and free states. S5a is required for efficient proteasomal
degradation of polyubiquitinated substrates and the recruitment of ubiquitin-like
(Ubl) harboring proteins; however, S5a-mediated ubiquitin and Ubl binding occurs 
only on the proteasome itself. We identify the VWA domain of S5a as a domain that
limits ubiquitin and Ubl binding to occur only upon proteasomal association.
Multiubiquitination events within the VWA domain can further regulate S5a
association. Our results provide a molecular explanation to how ubiquitin and Ubl
binding to S5a is restricted to the 26S proteasome.

© 2014 Piterman, Braunstein, Isakov, et al. This article is distributed by The
American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months
after publication it is available to the public under an
AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0 Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4263443
PMID: 25318673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Cell Physiol. 2015 May;230(5):1115-27. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24843.

PDE5 inhibitors enhance celecoxib killing in multiple tumor types.

Booth L(1), Roberts JL, Cruickshanks N, Tavallai S, Webb T, Samuel P, Conley A,
Binion B, Young HF, Poklepovic A, Spiegel S, Dent P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, Virginia.

The present studies determined whether clinically relevant phosphodiesterase 5
(PDE5) inhibitors interacted with a clinically relevant NSAID, celecoxib, to kill
tumor cells. Celecoxib and PDE5 inhibitors interacted in a greater than additive 
fashion to kill multiple tumor cell types. Celecoxib and sildenafil killed ex
vivo primary human glioma cells as well as their associated activated microglia. 
Knock down of PDE5 recapitulated the effects of PDE5 inhibitor treatment; the
nitric oxide synthase inhibitor L-NAME suppressed drug combination toxicity. The 
effects of celecoxib were COX2 independent. Over-expression of c-FLIP-s or knock 
down of CD95/FADD significantly reduced killing by the drug combination. CD95
activation was dependent on nitric oxide and ceramide signaling. CD95 signaling
activated the JNK pathway and inhibition of JNK suppressed cell killing. The drug
combination inactivated mTOR and increased the levels of autophagy and knock down
of Beclin1 or ATG5 strongly suppressed killing by the drug combination. The drug 
combination caused an ER stress response; knock down of IRE1a/XBP1 enhanced
killing whereas knock down of eIF2a/ATF4/CHOP suppressed killing. Sildenafil and 
celecoxib treatment suppressed the growth of mammary tumors in vivo. Collectively
our data demonstrate that clinically achievable concentrations of celecoxib and
sildenafil have the potential to be a new therapeutic approach for cancer.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4398314
PMID: 25303541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Oct 9;5:e1452. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.403.

The PERK pathway independently triggers apoptosis and a Rac1/Slpr/JNK/Dilp8
signaling favoring tissue homeostasis in a chronic ER stress Drosophila model.

Demay Y(1), Perochon J(1), Szuplewski S(1), Mignotte B(1), Gaumer S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique et Biologie Cellulaire, EA4589, Université
Versailles-St-Quentin-en-Yvelines, Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, 2 avenue de 
la Source de la Bièvre, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) has a major role in protein folding. The
accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER induces a stress, which can be
resolved by the unfolded protein response (UPR). Chronicity of ER stress leads to
UPR-induced apoptosis and in turn to an unbalance of tissue homeostasis. Although
ER stress-dependent apoptosis is observed in a great number of devastating human 
diseases, how cells activate apoptosis and promote tissue homeostasis after
chronic ER stress remains poorly understood. Here, using the Drosophila wing
imaginal disc as a model system, we validated that Presenilin overexpression
induces chronic ER stress in vivo. We observed, in this novel model of chronic
ER-stress, a PERK/ATF4-dependent apoptosis requiring downregulation of the
antiapoptotic diap1 gene. PERK/ATF4 also activated the JNK pathway through Rac1
and Slpr activation in apoptotic cells, leading to the expression of Dilp8. This 
insulin-like peptide caused a developmental delay, which partially allowed the
replacement of apoptotic cells. Thanks to a novel chronic ER stress model, these 
results establish a new pathway that both participates in tissue homeostasis and 
triggers apoptosis through an original regulation.

PMCID: PMC4649510
PMID: 25299777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2014 Nov;46(11):973-81. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmu091. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

Recombinant Clostridium difficile toxin B induces endoplasmic reticulum stress in
mouse colonal carcinoma cells.

Sun C(1), Wang H(2), Chen S(1), Li Z(1), Li S(3), Wang J(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology,
Guangzhou 510006, China. (2)School of Light Industry and Food Sciences, South
China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China. (3)School of Bioscience 
and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
School of Light Industry and Food Sciences, South China University of Technology,
Guangzhou 510006, China. (4)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China 
University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China jufwang@scut.edu.cn.

Clostridium difficile is the main cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea and
pseudomembranous colitis in humans and animals. Its pathogenicity is primarily
linked to the secretion of two exotoxins (TcdA and TcdB). Although great progress
in the toxic mechanism of TcdA and TcdB has been achieved, there are many
conflicting reports about the apoptotic mechanism. More importantly, apoptotic
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been reported in cells treated with Shiga
toxins-another kind of cytotoxins that can cause diarrhea and colitis. Herein we 
checked whether TcdB can induce ER stress. The results showed that recombinant
TcdB (rTcdB) activated molecular markers of unfolded protein response, suggesting
that rTcdB induced ER stress in CT26 cells. However, rTcdB did not induce the
up-regulation of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), a classic mediator of apoptotic
ER stress, but it activated the precursor of cysteine aspartic acid-specific
protease 12 (caspase-12), a controversial mediator of apoptotic ER stress.
Besides, glucosyltransferase activity-deficient mutant recombinant TcdB induced
ER stress, though it has no cytotoxic or cytopathic effect on CT26 cells.
Altogether, these data demonstrated that ER stress induced by rTcdB is
glucosyltransferase-independent, indicating that ER stress induced by rTcdB is
non-apoptotic. This work also offers us a new insight into the molecular
mechanism of CHOP protein expression regulation and the role of CHOP expression
in ER stress.

© The Author 2014. Published by ABBS Editorial Office in association with Oxford 
University Press on behalf of the Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 25274332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Dec;34(6):1661-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1949. Epub 2014 Sep 
29.

Tanshinone IIA inhibits human gastric carcinoma AGS cell growth by decreasing
BiP, TCTP, Mcl-1 and Bcl-xL and increasing Bax and CHOP protein expression.

Su CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Research Center of Integrative Medicine, Comprehensive Breast Cancer
Center, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua 50006, Taiwan, R.O.C.

Tanshinone IIA (Tan-IIA) is extracted from Danshen (Salviae Miltiorrhizae Radix) 
and is a natural anti-cancer agent, which possesses antitumor activity in a
variety of human cancer cells. Tan-IIA can induce apoptosis and inhibit the
proliferation of gastric cancer through different molecular mechanisms. However, 
the efficacy and molecular mechanism of Tan-IIA in gastric cancer have not been
well studied. In the present study, the cytotoxicity of Tan-IIA in human gastric 
cancer AGS cells by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-y1)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide 
assay was examined. The protein expression levels of B-cell lymphoma-extra large 
(Bcl-xL), Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax), myeloid cell leukemia 1 protein
(Mcl-1), translationally-controlled tumor protein (TCTP), binding immunoglobulin 
protein (BiP), calnexin, protein kinase-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase, eIF2a,
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a),
ATF6, caspase-12, caspase-9, caspase-3, C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP) and
ß-actin in AGS cells were measured by western blot analysis. The results showed
that Tan-IIA inhibited AGS cells in a time-and dose-dependent manner. AGS cells
treated with Tan-IIA upregulated the protein expression of caspase-12, caspase-9,
caspase--3, CHOP and Bax, but downregulated the protein expression of BiP, TCTP, 
Mcl-1 and Bcl-xL. These findings indicated that Tan-IIA inhibits the growth of
human gastric cancer AGS cells. One of the molecular mechanisms may be through
decreasing the protein expression of BiP to induce the activation of endoplasmic 
reticulum stress, followed by increasing the protein expression of caspase-12 to 
upregulate CHOP expression. The other may be through decreasing the protein
expression of Mcl-1, Bcl-xL and TCTP, but increasing Bax, caspase-9 and caspase-3
to induce apoptosis. The chemotherapeutic potential of Tan-IIA for human gastric 
cancer warrants further study in the future.

PMID: 25270224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jan;1853(1):52-62. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.09.016. 
Epub 2014 Sep 26.

Thermotolerance induced at a mild temperature of 40°C alleviates heat
shock-induced ER stress and apoptosis in HeLa cells.

Bettaieb A(1), Averill-Bates DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Département des sciences biologiques, TOXEN, Université du Québec à Montréal, 
CP 8888, Succursale Centre-Ville, Montréal, Québec H3C 3P8, Canada.
(2)Département des sciences biologiques, TOXEN, Université du Québec à Montréal, 
CP 8888, Succursale Centre-Ville, Montréal, Québec H3C 3P8, Canada. Electronic
address: averill.diana@uqam.ca.

Hyperthermia (39-45°C) has emerged as an alternate prospect for cancer therapy in
combination with radiation and chemotherapy. Despite promising progress in the
clinic, molecular mechanisms involved in hyperthermia-induced cell death are not 
clear. Hyperthermia causes protein denaturation/aggregation, which results in
cell death by apoptosis and/or necrosis. Hyperthermia also induces
thermotolerance, which renders cells resistant to subsequent exposure to lethal
heat shock. This study investigates the role of both lethal (42-43°C) and mild
(40°C) hyperthermia in regulating ER stress and ER stress-induced apoptosis in
HeLa cells. The ability of mild thermotolerance induced at 40°C to alleviate
either or both of these processes is also determined. Hyperthermia (42-43°C)
induced ER stress, revealed by phosphorylation of PERK, eIF2a and IRE1a, cleavage
of ATF6 and increased expression of BiP and sXBP1. Real-time PCR revealed that
mRNA levels of ATF6, ATF4, BiP, sXBP1 and CHOP increased in cells exposed to
hyperthermia. Moreover, hyperthermia caused disruption of calcium homeostasis and
activated the calpain-calpastatin proteolytic system and ER resident caspase 4.
Pre-exposure to mild hyperthermia (40°C) alleviated the induction of cytotoxicity
and ER stress by hyperthermia (42-43°C) and protected cells against ER
stress-induced apoptosis. ShRNA-mediated depletion of Hsp72 abrogated protective 
effects of mild thermotolerance (40°C) against heat-shock induced ER stress and
sensitized cells to ER stress-mediated apoptosis. Our findings show that Hsp72
contributes to the protective effects of mild hyperthermia (40°C) against
hyperthermia-induced ER stress and apoptosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25260982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Nov;28(11):1820-30. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1157. Epub 2014 Sep
24.

Maintenance of Pdx1 mRNA translation in islet ß-cells during the unfolded protein
response.

Templin AT(1), Maier B, Tersey SA, Hatanaka M, Mirmira RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology (A.T.T., R.G.M.), Department
of Pediatrics and the Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research (B.M., S.A.T.,
M.H., R.G.M.), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (R.G.M.), and
Department of Medicine (R.G.M.), Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202.

In type 1 diabetes, proinflammatory cytokines secreted by infiltrating immune
cells activate the unfolded protein response (UPR) in islet ß-cells, which leads 
to attenuation of global mRNA translation. Under such conditions, privileged
mRNAs required for adaptation to the prevailing stress are maintained in an
actively translated state. Pdx1 is a ß-cell transcription factor that is required
for the adaptive UPR, but it is not known how translation of its mRNA is
maintained under these conditions. To study translation, we established
conditions in vitro with MIN6 cells and mouse islets and a mixture of
proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1ß, TNF-a, and IFN-<U+03B3>) that mimicked the UPR
conditions seen in type 1 diabetes. Cell extracts were then subjected to
polyribosome profiling to monitor changes to mRNA occupancy by ribosomes. Similar
to other privileged mRNAs (Atf4 and Chop), Pdx1 mRNA remained partitioned in
actively translating polyribosomes under the UPR, whereas the mRNA encoding a
proinsulin-processing enzyme (Cpe) and others partitioned into inactively
translating monoribosomes. Bicistronic luciferase reporter analyses revealed that
the distal portion of the 5'-untranslated region of mouse Pdx1 (between bp -105
to -280) contained elements that promoted translation under both normal and UPR
conditions, and this region exhibited conserved sequences and secondary structure
similar to those of other known internal ribosome entry sites. Our findings
suggest that Pdx1 protein levels are maintained in the setting of the UPR, in
part, through elements in the 5'-untranslated region that confer privileged mRNA 
translation in a 5'-7-methylguanylate cap-independent manner.

PMCID: PMC4213362
PMID: 25251389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Mol Cell. 2014 Oct 23;56(2):205-18. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.08.018. Epub 2014 
Sep 18.

Asparagine plays a critical role in regulating cellular adaptation to glutamine
depletion.

Zhang J(1), Fan J(2), Venneti S(1), Cross JR(3), Takagi T(4), Bhinder B(4),
Djaballah H(4), Kanai M(5), Cheng EH(5), Judkins AR(6), Pawel B(7), Baggs J(8),
Cherry S(9), Rabinowitz JD(2), Thompson CB(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (2)Department of Chemistry and Lewis-Sigler
Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,
USA. (3)Donald B. and Catherine C. Marron Cancer Metabolism Center, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (4)High-Throughput
Screening Core Facility, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA. (5)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Children's Hospital Los Angeles and Keck School of Medicine, University
of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90027, USA. (7)Department of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(8)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA. (9)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (10)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic
address: thompsonc@mskcc.org.

Many cancer cells consume large quantities of glutamine to maintain TCA cycle
anaplerosis and support cell survival. It was therefore surprising when RNAi
screening revealed that suppression of citrate synthase (CS), the first TCA cycle
enzyme, prevented glutamine-withdrawal-induced apoptosis. CS suppression reduced 
TCA cycle activity and diverted oxaloacetate, the substrate of CS, into
production of the nonessential amino acids aspartate and asparagine. We found
that asparagine was necessary and sufficient to suppress
glutamine-withdrawal-induced apoptosis without restoring the levels of other
nonessential amino acids or TCA cycle intermediates. In complete medium, tumor
cells exhibiting high rates of glutamine consumption underwent rapid apoptosis
when glutamine-dependent asparagine synthesis was suppressed, and expression of
asparagine synthetase was statistically correlated with poor prognosis in human
tumors. Coupled with the success of L-asparaginase as a therapy for childhood
leukemia, the data suggest that intracellular asparagine is a critical suppressor
of apoptosis in many human tumors.

PMCID: PMC4224619
PMID: 25242145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Immunity. 2014 Sep 18;41(3):389-401. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.08.015.

The stress-response sensor chop regulates the function and accumulation of
myeloid-derived suppressor cells in tumors.

Thevenot PT(1), Sierra RA(1), Raber PL(2), Al-Khami AA(1), Trillo-Tinoco J(1),
Zarreii P(1), Ochoa AC(3), Cui Y(2), Del Valle L(1), Rodriguez PC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center, Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. (2)Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center, Louisiana 
State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA; Department
of Microbiology, Immunology, and Parasitology, Louisiana State University Health 
Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. (3)Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center,
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA;
Department of Pediatrics, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New 
Orleans, LA 70112, USA. (4)Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center, Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA; Department of
Microbiology, Immunology, and Parasitology, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. Electronic address:
prodri1@lsuhsc.edu.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2014 Sep 18;41(3):341-2.

Adaptation of malignant cells to the hostile milieu present in tumors is an
important determinant of their survival and growth. However, the interaction
between tumor-linked stress and antitumor immunity remains poorly characterized. 
Here, we show the critical role of the cellular stress sensor C/EBP-homologous
protein (Chop) in the accumulation and immune inhibitory activity of
tumor-infiltrating myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs). MDSCs lacking Chop
had decreased immune-regulatory functions and showed the ability to prime T cell 
function and induce antitumor responses. Chop expression in MDSCs was induced by 
tumor-linked reactive oxygen and nitrogen species and regulated by the
activating-transcription factor-4. Chop-deficient MDSCs displayed reduced
signaling through CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-ß, leading to a decreased
production of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and low expression of phospho-STAT3. IL-6
overexpression restored immune-suppressive activity of Chop-deficient MDSCs.
These findings suggest the role of Chop in tumor-induced tolerance and the
therapeutic potential of targeting Chop in MDSCs for cancer immunotherapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4171711
PMID: 25238096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Dec;77:217-29. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.09.008. Epub 2014 Sep 16.

Oxidative stress-dependent activation of the eIF2aATF4 unfolded protein response
branch by skin sensitizer 1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene modulates dendritic-like
cell maturation and inflammatory status in a biphasic manner [corrected].

Luís A(1), Martins JD(2), Silva A(3), Ferreira I(3), Cruz MT(2), Neves BM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Mass Spectrometry Centre, QOPNA, University of
Aveiro, Campus Universitário de Santiago, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal. (2)Centre
for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra 3004-517, Coimbra,
Portugal; Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Coimbra 3004-517, Coimbra, Portugal.
(3)Centre for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra 3004-517,
Coimbra, Portugal. (4)Department of Chemistry, Mass Spectrometry Centre, QOPNA,
University of Aveiro, Campus Universitário de Santiago, 3810-193 Aveiro,
Portugal; Centre for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra
3004-517, Coimbra, Portugal. Electronic address: neves_bruno@sapo.pt.

Erratum in
    Free Radic Biol Med. 2015 May;82:203.

The pathogenesis of allergic contact dermatitis, the most common manifestation of
immunotoxicity in humans, is intimately connected to hapten-induced maturation of
dendritic cells (DC). The molecular mechanisms driving this maturational program 
are not completely known; however, initial danger signals such as the generation 
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) were shown to play a critical role. Recent
evidence linking ROS production, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and the
pathogenesis of several inflammatory diseases led us to analyze, in the present
work, the ability of the skin sensitizer 1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (DNFB) to
evoke ER stress in DC-like THP-1 cells and the concomitant consequences to their 
immunobiology. We found that DNFB triggers a ROS-dependent activation of the
PERK-eIFa-ATF4 unfolded protein response (UPR) branch conferring cytoprotection
and modulating the maturation/proinflammatory cell status in a biphasic manner.
Early DNFB induction of ATF4 positively modulates autophagy-related genes
MAP1LC3B and ATG3 and stabilizes the transcription factor Nrf2, causing a strong 
induction of the HMOX1-detoxifying gene. Moreover, we observed that in a first
phase, DNFB-induced ATF4 upregulates IL8 mRNA levels while blocking CD86, IL1B,
IL12B, and CXL10 transcription. Later, following ATF4 decay, HMOX1 and IL8
transcription drastically decrease and CD86, IL1B, and Il12B are upregulated.
Overall, our results evidence a connection between sensitizer-induced redox
imbalance and the establishment of ER stress in DC-like cells and provide new
insights into the role of UPR effectors such as ATF4 to the complex DC
maturational program.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25236743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Sci Rep. 2014 Sep 17;4:6226. doi: 10.1038/srep06226.

Histone deacetylases inhibition by SAHA/Vorinostat normalizes the glioma
microenvironment via xCT equilibration.

Wolf IM(1), Fan Z(1), Rauh M(2), Seufert S(3), Hore N(4), Buchfelder M(4),
Savaskan NE(1), Eyüpoglu IY(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Neurosurgery, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Friedrich
Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU) [2]. (2)Department of Pediatrics
and Adolescent Medicine, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg. (3)Institute of Human 
Genetics, University of Cologne. (4)Department of Neurosurgery,
Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Friedrich Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg 
(FAU).

Malignant gliomas are characterized by neurodegenerative actions leading to the
destruction of surrounding brain parenchyma. The disturbance in glutamate
homeostasis caused by increased expression of the glutamate transporter xCT plays
a key role in glioma progression. We demonstrate that the HDAC-inhibitor SAHA
specifically inhibits the xCT-transporter expression. Thereby, tumor cell stress 
is engendered, marked by increase in ROS. Moreover, SAHA dependent xCT-reduction 
correlates with the inhibition of ATF4-expression, a factor known to foster xCT
expression. Since xCT/system Xc- is pivotal for the brain tumor microenvironment,
normalization of this system is a key in the management of malignant gliomas. To 
date, the problem lay in the inability to specifically target xCT due to the
ubiquitous expression of the xCT-transporter--i.e. in non-cancerously transformed
cells too--as well as its essential role in physiological CNS processes. Here, we
show xCT-transporter equilibration through SAHA is specific for malignant brain
tumors whereas SAHA does not affect the physiological xCT levels in healthy brain
parenchyma. Our data indicate that SAHA operates on gliomas specifically via
normalizing xCT expression which in consequence leads to reduced extracellular
glutamate levels. This in turn causes a marked reduction in neuronal cell death
and normalized tumor microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC4165982
PMID: 25228443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Apoptosis. 2014 Nov;19(11):1559-70. doi: 10.1007/s10495-014-1021-0.

ClC-3 deficiency protects preadipocytes against apoptosis induced by palmitate in
vitro and in type 2 diabetes mice.

Huang YY(1), Huang XQ, Zhao LY, Sun FY, Chen WL, Du JY, Yuan F, Li J, Huang XL,
Liu J, Lv XF, Guan YY, Chen JW, Wang GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cardiac and Cerebral Vascular Research Center,
Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, 74 Zhongshan 2 Rd,
Guangzhou, 510080, China.

Palmitate, a common saturated free fatty acid (FFA), has been demonstrated to
induce preadipocyte apoptosis in the absence of adipogenic stimuli, suggesting
that preadipocytes may be prone to apoptosis under adipogenic insufficient
conditions, like type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). ClC-3, encoding Cl(-) channel
or Cl(-)/H(+) antiporter, is critical for cell fate choices of proliferation
versus apoptosis under diseased conditions. However, it is unknown whether ClC-3 
is related with preadipocyte apoptosis induced by palmitate or T2DM. Palmitate,
but not oleate, induced apoptosis and increase in ClC-3 protein expression and
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in 3T3-L1 preadipocyte. ClC-3 specific siRNA
attenuated palmitate-induced apoptosis and increased protein levels of Grp78,
ATF4, CHOP and phosphorylation of JNK1/2, whereas had no effects on increased
phospho-PERK and phospho-eIF2a protein expression. Moreover, the enhanced
apoptosis was shown in preadipocytes from high-sucrose/fat, low-dose STZ induced 
T2DM mouse model with hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia (elevated serum TG and FFA
levels) and insulin resistance. ClC-3 knockout significantly attenuated
preadipocyte apoptosis and the above metabolic disorders in T2DM mice. These data
demonstrated that ClC-3 deficiency prevent preadipocytes against
palmitate-induced apoptosis via suppressing ER stress, and also suggested that
ClC-3 may play a role in regulating cellular apoptosis and disorders of glucose
and lipid metabolism during T2DM.

PMID: 25218423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Metabolism. 2015 Feb;64(2):226-35. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2014.08.006. Epub 2014 
Aug 15.

Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor, vildagliptin, inhibits pancreatic beta cell
apoptosis in association with its effects suppressing endoplasmic reticulum
stress in db/db mice.

Wu YJ(1), Guo X(1), Li CJ(1), Li DQ(1), Zhang J(1), Yang Y(1), Kong Y(1), Guo
H(1), Liu DM(1), Chen LM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Hormones and Development (Ministry of Health), Metabolic
Diseases Hospital & Tianjin Institute of Endocrinology, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Hormones and Development
(Ministry of Health), Metabolic Diseases Hospital & Tianjin Institute of
Endocrinology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China. Electronic address:
xfx22081@vip.163.com.

Comment in
    Metabolism. 2015 Feb;64(2):157-9.

AIMS: Vildagliptin promotes beta cell survival by inhibiting cell apoptosis. It
has been suggested that chronic ER (endoplasmic reticulum) stress triggers beta
cell apoptosis. The objective of the study is to explore whether the pro-survival
effect of vildagliptin is associated with attenuation of endoplasmic reticulum
stress in islets of db/db mice.
METHODS: Vildagliptin was orally administered to db/db mice for 6 weeks, followed
by evaluation of beta cell apoptosis by caspase3 activity and TUNEL staining
method. Endoplasmic reticulum stress markers were determined with quantitative
RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry and immunoblot analysis.
RESULTS: After 6 weeks of treatment, vildagliptin treatment increased plasma
active GLP-1 levels (22.63±1.19 vs. 11.69±0.44, P<0.001), inhibited beta cell
apoptosis as demonstrated by lower amounts of TUNEL staining nuclei (0.37±0.03
vs. 0.55±0.03, P<0.01) as well as decreased caspase3 activity (1.48±0.11 vs.
2.67±0.13, P<0.01) in islets of diabetic mice compared with untreated diabetic
group. Further, vildagliptin treatment down-regulated several genes related to
endoplasmic reticulum stress including TRIB3 (tribbles homolog 3) (15.9±0.4 vs.
33.3±1.7, ×10<U+207B>³, P<0.001), ATF-4(activating transcription factor 4) (0.83±0.06
vs. 1.42±0.02, P<0.001) and CHOP(C/EBP homologous protein) (0.07±0.01 vs.
0.16±0.01, P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Vildagliptin promoted beta cell survival in db/db mice in
association with down-regulating markers of endoplasmic reticulum stress
including TRIB3, ATF-4 as well as CHOP.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25195070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Cell. 2014 Aug 28;158(5):1159-72. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.07.001.

Axonally synthesized ATF4 transmits a neurodegenerative signal across brain
regions.

Baleriola J(1), Walker CA(2), Jean YY(3), Crary JF(4), Troy CM(5), Nagy PL(4),
Hengst U(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain,
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(2)Integrated Program in Cellular, Molecular and Biomedical Studies, College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA. (4)The Taub Institute for Research 
on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Pathology and Cell
Biology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA. (5)The Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the
Aging Brain, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York,
NY 10032, USA; Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Physicians
and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA; Department of
Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 
10032, USA. (6)The Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the
Aging Brain, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York,
NY 10032, USA; Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Physicians
and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA. Electronic address:
uh2112@cumc.columbia.edu.

Comment in
    CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2014;13(9):1483-4.

In Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain, exposure of axons to Aß causes pathogenic
changes that spread retrogradely by unknown mechanisms, affecting the entire
neuron. We found that locally applied Aß1-42 initiates axonal synthesis of a
defined set of proteins including the transcription factor ATF4. Inhibition of
local translation and retrograde transport or knockdown of axonal Atf4 mRNA
abolished Aß-induced ATF4 transcriptional activity and cell loss. Aß1-42
injection into the dentate gyrus (DG) of mice caused loss of forebrain neurons
whose axons project to the DG. Protein synthesis and Atf4 mRNA were upregulated
in these axons, and coinjection of Atf4 siRNA into the DG reduced the effects of 
Aß1-42 in the forebrain. ATF4 protein and transcripts were found with greater
frequency in axons in the brain of AD patients. These results reveal an active
role for intra-axonal translation in neurodegeneration and identify ATF4 as a
mediator for the spread of AD pathology.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4149755
PMID: 25171414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 24;289(43):29751-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.565960. Epub
2014 Aug 28.

Fibroblast growth factor 21 is regulated by the IRE1a-XBP1 branch of the unfolded
protein response and counteracts endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced hepatic
steatosis.

Jiang S(1), Yan C(2), Fang QC(1), Shao ML(2), Zhang YL(2), Liu Y(2), Deng YP(2), 
Shan B(2), Liu JQ(2), Li HT(1), Yang L(2), Zhou J(3), Dai Z(3), Liu Y(4), Jia
WP(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Diabetes Mellitus, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Diabetes Institute, Shanghai Clinical
Center for Diabetes, and Shanghai Key Clinical Center for Metabolic Disease,
Shanghai JiaoTong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai 200233.
(2)the Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, and.
(3)the Department of Liver Surgery, Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. (4)the Key Laboratory of Nutrition and 
Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, University of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, and liuy@sibs.ac.cn. (5)From the Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Diabetes Mellitus, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, 
Shanghai Diabetes Institute, Shanghai Clinical Center for Diabetes, and Shanghai 
Key Clinical Center for Metabolic Disease, Shanghai JiaoTong University
Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai 200233, wpjia@sjtu.edu.cn.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress activates the adaptive unfolded protein
response (UPR) and represents a critical mechanism that underlies metabolic
dysfunctions. Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21), a hormone that is
predominantly secreted by the liver, exerts a broad range of effects upon the
metabolism of carbohydrates and lipids. Although increased circulating levels of 
FGF21 have been documented in animal models and human subjects with obesity and
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, the functional interconnections between
metabolic ER stress and FGF21 are incompletely understood. Here, we report that
increased ER stress along with the simultaneous elevation of FGF21 expression
were associated with the occurrence of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease both in
diet-induced obese mice and human patients. Intraperitoneal administration of the
ER stressor tunicamycin in mice resulted in hepatic steatosis, accompanied by
activation of the three canonical UPR branches and increased the expression of
FGF21. Furthermore, the IRE1a-XBP1 pathway of the UPR could directly activate the
transcriptional expression of Fgf21. Administration of recombinant FGF21 in mice 
alleviated tunicamycin-induced liver steatosis, in parallel with reduced
eIF2a-ATF4-CHOP signaling. Taken together, these results suggest that FGF21 is an
integral physiological component of the cellular UPR program, which exerts
beneficial feedback effects upon lipid metabolism through counteracting ER
stress.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4207989
PMID: 25170079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;43(4):1413-27. doi: 10.3233/JAD-140216.

Chronic copper exposure causes spatial memory impairment, selective loss of
hippocampal synaptic proteins, and activation of PKR/eIF2a pathway in mice.

Ma Q(1), Ying M(2), Sui X(3), Zhang H(3), Huang H(3), Yang L(3), Huang X(3),
Zhuang Z(3), Liu J(3), Yang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Shenzhen, Shenzhen Center for Disease
Control and Prevention, Shenzhen, China College of Life Sciences, Shenzhen
University, Shenzhen, China. (2)College of Life Sciences, Shenzhen University,
Shenzhen, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Shenzhen, Shenzhen
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shenzhen, China.

Copper is an essential element for human growth and development; however,
excessive intake of copper could contribute to neurotoxicity. Here we show that
chronic exposure to copper in drinking water impaired spatial memory with
simultaneous selective loss of hippocampal pre-synaptic protein synapsin 1, and
post-synaptic density protein (PSD)-93/95 in mice. Copper exposure was shown to
elevate the levels of nitrotyrosine and 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) in
hippocampus, two markers of oxidative stress. Concurrently, we also found that
copper exposure activated double stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) as
evidenced by increased ratio of phosphorylated PKR at Thr451 and total PKR and
increased the phosphorylation of its downstream signaling molecule eukaryotic
initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) at Ser51 in hippocampus. Consistent with activation 
of PKR/eIF2a signaling pathway which was shown to mediate synaptic deficit and
cognitive impairment, the levels of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF-4), a 
downstream signaling molecule of eIF2a and a repressor of CREB-mediated gene
expression, were significantly increased, while the activity of cAMP response
elements binding protein (CREB) was inactivated as suggested by decreased
phosphorylation of CREB at Ser133 by copper exposure. In addition, the expression
of the pro-apoptotic target molecule C/EBP homology protein (CHOP) of ATF-4 was
upregulated and hippocampal neuronal apoptosis was induced by copper exposure.
Taken together, we propose that chronic copper exposure might cause spatial
memory impairment, selective loss of synaptic proteins, and neuronal apoptosis
through the mechanisms involving activation of PKR/eIF2a signaling pathway.

PMID: 25159668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Aging Cell. 2014 Dec;13(6):1012-8. doi: 10.1111/acel.12264. Epub 2014 Aug 26.

ATF4 activity: a common feature shared by many kinds of slow-aging mice.

Li W(1), Li X, Miller RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.

ATF4, a DNA-binding factor that modulates responses to amino acid availability
and ribosomal function, has been shown to be altered in both liver and
fibroblasts from two strains of long-lived mice, i.e. Snell dwarf and PAPP-A
knockout mice. New data now show elevated ATF4 levels, and elevation of
ATF4-dependent proteins and mRNAs, in liver of mice treated with acarbose or
rapamycin, calorically restricted mice, methionine-restricted mice, and mice
subjected to litter crowding. Elevation of ATF4, at least in liver, thus seems to
be a shared feature of diets, drugs, genes, and developmental alterations that
extend maximum lifespan in mice.

© 2014 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley
& Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4326926
PMID: 25156122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Oncogene. 2015 Jun;34(25):3264-72. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.271. Epub 2014 Aug 25.

Fatty acid synthase inhibition engages a novel caspase-2 regulatory mechanism to 
induce ovarian cancer cell death.

Yang CS(1), Matsuura K(1), Huang NJ(1), Robeson AC(1), Huang B(1), Zhang L(1),
Kornbluth S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC, USA.

Blockade of fatty acid synthase (FASN), a key enzyme involved in de novo
lipogenesis, results in robust death of ovarian cancer cells. However, known FASN
inhibitors have proven to be poor therapeutic agents due to their ability to
induce cachexia. Therefore, we sought to identify additional targets in the
pathway linking FASN inhibition and cell death whose modulation might kill
ovarian cancer cells without the attendant side effects. Here, we show that the
initiator caspase-2 is required for robust death of ovarian cancer cells induced 
by FASN inhibitors. REDD1 (also known as Rtp801 or DDIT4), a known mTOR inhibitor
previously implicated in the response to FASN inhibition, is a novel caspase-2
regulator in this pathway. REDD1 induction is compromised in ovarian cancer cells
that do not respond to FASN inhibition. Inhibition of FASN induced an
ATF4-dependent transcriptional induction of REDD1; downregulation of REDD1
prevented orlistat-induced activation of caspase-2, as monitored by its cleavage,
proteolytic activity and dimerization. Abrogation of REDD1-mediated suppression
of mTOR by TSC2 RNAi protected FASN inhibitor-sensitive ovarian cancer cells
(OVCA420 cells) from orlistat-induced death. Conversely, suppression of mTOR with
the chemical inhibitors PP242 or rapamycin-sensitized DOV13, an ovarian cancer
cell line incapable of inducing REDD1, to orlistat-induced cell death through
caspase-2. These findings indicate that REDD1 positively controls
caspase-2-dependent cell death of ovarian cancer cells by inhibiting mTOR,
placing mTOR as a novel upstream regulator of caspase-2 and supporting the
possibility of manipulating mTOR to enhance caspase-2 activation in ovarian
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4340825
PMID: 25151963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Nov;76:138-47. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2014.08.011. Epub
2014 Aug 23.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress-dependent activation of ATF3 mediates the late phase
of ischemic preconditioning.

Brooks AC(1), Guo Y(1), Singh M(1), McCracken J(1), Xuan YT(2), Srivastava S(1), 
Bolli R(1), Bhatnagar A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Cardiology, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY
40202, USA. (2)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. (3)Institute of Molecular Cardiology,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40202, USA. Electronic address:
aruni@louisville.edu.

Ischemic preconditioning (PC) is an adaptive response to transient myocardial
ischemia that protects the heart from subsequent ischemia/reperfusion (I/R)
injury. However, the mechanisms underlying its cardioprotective effects remain
unclear. Myocardium of adult male C57/BL6 mice, preconditioned by 6 cycles of 4
minute coronary occlusion and reperfusion, showed nuclear translocation of ATF3
and ATF6 and PERK phosphorylation 30 min after PC. The abundance of ER proteins, 
ATF3 and ATF4 was increased 24h after PC; however, there was no evidence of IRE-1
activation in WT or ER-stress activated indicator (ERAI) mice expressing
XBP-1-Venus fusion protein. PC-induced nuclear translocation of ATF3 was
attenuated in transgenic mice with cardiac-restricted overexpression of inducible
ATF6. Ischemic PC increased the abundance of inducible nitric oxide synthase,
cyclooxygenase-2, heme oxygenase-1 and aldose reductase to levels similar between
WT and ATF3-null hearts; however, the increase in IL-6 and ICAM-1 was exaggerated
in ATF3-null hearts. Genetic deletion of ATF3 did not increase infarct size in
non-preconditioned hearts but abolished the cardioprotective effects of PC.
Larger infarct size in preconditioned ATF3-null hearts was associated with
greater neutrophil infiltration in the myocardium, but no ATF3-dependent changes 
in the total or relative abundance of inflammatory monocytes were observed.
Ischemic PC activates the unfolded protein response (UPR) and the activation of
ATF3 by ER stress is essential for the cardioprotective effects of late PC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4336548
PMID: 25151953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Toxicol In Vitro. 2014 Dec;28(8):1443-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2014.07.013. Epub
2014 Aug 20.

4-Phenylbutyric acid prevent cytotoxicity induced by thapsigargin in rat cardiac 
fibroblast.

Humeres C(1), Montenegro J(1), Varela M(1), Ayala P(1), Vivar R(1), Letelier
A(1), Olmedo I(1), Catalán M(1), Rivas C(1), Baeza P(1), Muñoz C(1), García L(1),
Lavandero S(2), Díaz-Araya G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Farmacológica y Toxicológica, Facultad de Ciencias
Químicas y Farmacéuticas, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile. (2)Centro FONDAP
ACCDis (Advanced Center of Chronic Diseases), Facultad de Ciencias Químicas y
Farmacéuticas, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile. (3)Departamento de Química 
Farmacológica y Toxicológica, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas y Farmacéuticas,
Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile; Centro FONDAP ACCDis (Advanced Center of
Chronic Diseases), Facultad de Ciencias Químicas y Farmacéuticas, Universidad de 
Chile, Santiago, Chile. Electronic address: gadiaz@ciq.uchile.cl.

Cardiac fibroblast (CF) survival is important for the maintenance of the
extracellular matrix homeostasis in the heart; providing a functional support to 
cardiomyocytes necessary for the correct myocardial function. Endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress causes cellular dysfunction and cell death by apoptosis;
and thapsigargin is a well-known ER stress inducer. On the other hand, the
chemical chaperone, 4-phenylbutyric acid (4-PBA) had showed to prevent ER stress;
however, in cardiac fibroblast both the ER stress induced by thapsigargin and
prevention by 4-PBA, have not been studied in detail. Neonate rat CF were treated
with thapsigargin in presence or absence of 4-PBA, and cell viability was
evaluated by trypan blue exclusion and apoptosis by flow cytometry; whereas CHOP,
BIP, PDI, ATF4 and procollagen protein levels were assessed by western blot. In
CF, thapsigargin triggered the unfolded protein response detected by early
increases in ATF4, CHOP, PDI and BIP protein levels as well as, the accumulation 
of intracellular procollagen. Thapsigargin also stimulated CF death in a time and
concentration-dependent manner. ER stress, CF death and apoptosis induced by
thapsigargin were prevented by 4-PBA. Conclusion our data suggest that 4-PBA
prevent ER stress, intracellular procollagen accumulation, CF death and apoptosis
induced by thapsigargin.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25149584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. RNA. 2014 Oct;20(10):1507-18. doi: 10.1261/rna.045286.114. Epub 2014 Aug 21.

Detecting translational regulation by change point analysis of ribosome profiling
data sets.

Zupanic A(1), Meplan C(2), Grellscheid SN(3), Mathers JC(4), Kirkwood TB(4),
Hesketh JE(2), Shanley DP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrated Systems Biology of Ageing and Nutrition, Institute for
Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE4 5PL, United
Kingdom Department of Environmental Toxicology, Eawag: Swiss Federal Institute of
Aquatic Science and Technology, 8600 Dübendorf, Switzerland
daryl.shanley@ncl.ac.uk anze.zupanic@eawag.ch. (2)Institute for Cell and
Molecular Biosciences and Human Nutrition Research Centre, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE2 4HH, United Kingdom. (3)School of Biological and
Biomedical Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom. (4)Centre
for Integrated Systems Biology of Ageing and Nutrition, Institute for Ageing and 
Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE4 5PL, United Kingdom.
(5)Centre for Integrated Systems Biology of Ageing and Nutrition, Institute for
Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE4 5PL, United
Kingdom daryl.shanley@ncl.ac.uk anze.zupanic@eawag.ch.

Ribo-Seq maps the location of translating ribosomes on mature mRNA transcripts.
While during normal translation, ribosome density is constant along the length of
the mRNA coding region, this can be altered in response to translational
regulatory events. In the present study, we developed a method to detect
translational regulation of individual mRNAs from their ribosome profiles,
utilizing changes in ribosome density. We used mathematical modeling to show that
changes in ribosome density should occur along the mRNA at the point of
regulation. We analyzed a Ribo-Seq data set obtained for mouse embryonic stem
cells and showed that normalization by corresponding RNA-Seq can be used to
improve the Ribo-Seq quality by removing bias introduced by deep-sequencing and
alignment artifacts. After normalization, we applied a change point algorithm to 
detect changes in ribosome density present in individual mRNA ribosome profiles. 
Additional sequence and gene isoform information obtained from the UCSC Genome
Browser allowed us to further categorize the detected changes into different
mechanisms of regulation. In particular, we detected several mRNAs with known
post-transcriptional regulation, e.g., premature termination for selenoprotein
mRNAs and translational control of Atf4, but also several more mRNAs with
hitherto unknown translational regulation. Additionally, our approach proved
useful for identification of new transcript isoforms.

© 2014 Zupanic et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the
RNA Society.

PMCID: PMC4174433
PMID: 25147239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014;42(16):10321-30. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku670. Epub 2014 Aug
21.

Essential role of eIF5-mimic protein in animal development is linked to control
of ATF4 expression.

Hiraishi H(1), Oatman J(1), Haller SL(1), Blunk L(2), McGivern B(2), Morris J(1),
Papadopoulos E(3), Gutierrez W(2), Gordon M(2), Bokhari W(1), Ikeda Y(1), Miles
D(1), Fellers J(4), Asano M(1), Wagner G(3), Tazi L(1), Rothenburg S(1), Brown
SJ(2), Asano K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cellular and Developmental Biology Program, Division of Biology,
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA. (2)Molecular Cellular and
Developmental Biology Program, Division of Biology, Kansas State University,
Manhattan, KS 66506, USA Arthropod Genomics Center, Kansas State University,
Manhattan, KS 66506, USA. (3)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (4)USDA-ARS, Hard
WinterWheat Genetics Research Unit, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506.
(5)Molecular Cellular and Developmental Biology Program, Division of Biology,
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA kasano@ksu.edu.

Translational control of transcription factor ATF4 through paired upstream ORFs
(uORFs) plays an important role in eukaryotic gene regulation. While it is
typically induced by phosphorylation of eIF2a, ATF4 translation can be also
induced by expression of a translational inhibitor protein, eIF5-mimic protein 1 
(5MP1, also known as BZW2) in mammals. Here we show that the 5MP gene is
maintained in eukaryotes under strong purifying selection, but is uniquely
missing in two major phyla, nematoda and ascomycota. The common function of 5MP
from protozoa, plants, fungi and insects is to control translation by inhibiting 
eIF2. The affinity of human 5MP1 to eIF2ß was measured as being equivalent to the
published value of human eIF5 to eIF2ß, in agreement with effective competition
of 5MP with eIF5 for the main substrate, eIF2. In the red flour beetle, Tribolium
castaneum, RNA interference studies indicate that 5MP facilitates expression of
GADD34, a downstream target of ATF4. Furthermore, both 5MP and ATF4 are essential
for larval development. Finally, 5MP and the paired uORFs allowing ATF4 control
are conserved in the entire metazoa except nematoda. Based on these findings, we 
discuss the phylogenetic and functional linkage between ATF4 regulation and 5MP
expression in this group of eukaryotes.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4176352
PMID: 25147208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Pathol. 2015 Jan;235(1):90-100. doi: 10.1002/path.4429. Epub 2014 Oct 6.

ATF4 and N-Myc coordinate glutamine metabolism in MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma
cells through ASCT2 activation.

Ren P(1), Yue M, Xiao D, Xiu R, Gan L, Liu H, Qing G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medicine, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, People's Republic of China.

Erratum in
    J Pathol. 2015 Sep;237(1):133.

Amplification of the MYCN gene in human neuroblastoma predicts poor prognosis and
resistance to therapy. We previously showed that MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma
cells constantly require large amounts of glutamine to support their unabated
growth. However, the identity and regulation of the transporter(s) that capture
glutamine in MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma cells and the clinical significance of 
the transporter(s) in neuroblastoma diagnosis remain largely unknown. Here, we
performed a systemic glutamine influx analysis and identified that MYCN-amplified
neuroblastoma cells predominantly rely on activation of ASCT2 (solute carrier
family 1 member 5, SLC1A5) to maintain sufficient levels of glutamine essential
for the TCA cycle anaplerosis. Consequently, ASCT2 depletion profoundly inhibited
glutaminolysis, concomitant with a substantial decrease in cell proliferation and
viability in vitro and inhibition of tumourigenesis in vivo. Mechanistically, we 
identified ATF4 as a novel regulator which coordinates with N-Myc to directly
activate ASCT2 expression. Of note, ASCT2 expression, which correlates with that 
of N-Myc and ATF4, is markedly elevated in high-stage neuroblastoma tumour
samples compared with low-stage ones. More importantly, high ASCT2 expression is 
significantly associated with poor prognosis and survival of neuroblastoma
patients. In aggregate, these findings elucidate a novel mechanism depicting how 
cell autonomous insults (MYCN amplification) and microenvironmental stresses
(ATF4 induction) in concert coordinate ASCT2 activation to promote aggressive
neuroblastoma progression, and establish ASCT2 as a novel biomarker in patient
prognosis and stratification.

Copyright © 2014 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25142020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Jan 15;330(2):412-22. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.08.014. Epub
2014 Aug 17.

Celastrol induces unfolded protein response-dependent cell death in head and neck
cancer.

Fribley AM(1), Miller JR(2), Brownell AL(2), Garshott DM(3), Zeng Q(4), Reist
TE(5), Narula N(6), Cai P(6), Xi Y(2), Callaghan MU(2), Kodali V(7), Kaufman
RJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Carmen and Ann Adams Department of Pediatrics, Children<U+05F3>s Hospital of
Michigan, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Molecular Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann
Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Wayne State University School 
of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA. Electronic address: afribley@med.wayne.edu.
(2)Carmen and Ann Adams Department of Pediatrics, Children<U+05F3>s Hospital of
Michigan, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, MI, USA. (3)Carmen and Ann Adams Department of Pediatrics, Children<U+05F3>s
Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Molecular Therapeutics Program,
Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. (4)Carmen and Ann 
Adams Department of Pediatrics, Children<U+05F3>s Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, MI
48201, USA; Molecular Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, MI, USA. (5)The Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (6)Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA. (7)Degenerative Disease Research Center,
Sanford|Burnham Medical Research Institute La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The survival rate for patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) has not
seen marked improvement in recent decades despite enhanced efforts in prevention 
and the introduction of novel therapies. We have reported that pharmacological
exacerbation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) is an effective approach to
killing OSCC cells. The UPR is executed via distinct signaling cascades whereby
an initial attempt to restore folding homeostasis in the endoplasmic reticulum
during stress is complemented by an apoptotic response if the defect cannot be
resolved. To identify novel small molecules able to overwhelm the adaptive
capacity of the UPR in OSCC cells, we engineered a complementary cell-based assay
to screen a broad spectrum of chemical matter. Stably transfected CHO-K1 cells
that individually report (luciferase) on the PERK/eIF2a/ATF4/CHOP (apoptotic) or 
the IRE1/XBP1 (adaptive) UPR pathways, were engineered [1]. The triterpenoids
dihydrocelastrol and celastrol were identified as potent inducers of UPR
signaling and cell death in a primary screen and confirmed in a panel of OSCC
cells and other cancer cell lines. Biochemical and genetic assays using OSCC
cells and modified murine embryonic fibroblasts demonstrated that intact
PERK-eIF2-ATF4-CHOP signaling is required for pro-apoptotic UPR and OSCC death
following celastrol treatment.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4280347
PMID: 25139619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2014 Aug 4;4:105. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2014.00105.
eCollection 2014.

Induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded protein response
constitutes a pathogenic strategy of group A streptococcus.

Baruch M(1), Hertzog BB(1), Ravins M(1), Anand A(1), Cheng CY(2), Biswas D(3),
Tirosh B(4), Hanski E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem (HUJI) Jerusalem, Israel. (2)Department of
Microbiology, Center for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise
(CREATE), National University of Singapore (NUS) and NUS-HUJI Singapore.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem (HUJI) Jerusalem, Israel ; Department of
Microbiology, Center for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise
(CREATE), National University of Singapore (NUS) and NUS-HUJI Singapore. (4)The
School of Pharmacy, Institute for Drug Research, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem Jerusalem, Israel.

The connection between bacterial pathogens and unfolded protein response (UPR) is
poorly explored. In this review we highlight the evidence showing that group A
streptococcus (GAS) induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and UPR through
which it captures the amino acid asparagine (ASN) from the host. GAS acts
extracellularly and during adherence to host cells it delivers the hemolysin
toxins; streptolysin O (SLO) and streptolysin S (SLS). By poorly understood
pathways, these toxins trigger UPR leading to the induction of the
transcriptional regulator ATF4 and consequently to the upregulation of asparagine
synthetase (ASNS) transcription leading to production and release of ASN. GAS
senses ASN and alters gene expression profile accordingly, and increases the rate
of multiplication. We suggest that induction of UPR by GAS and by other bacterial
pathogens represent means through which bacterial pathogens gain nutrients from
the host, obviating the need to become internalized or inflict irreversible cell 
damage.

PMCID: PMC4120759
PMID: 25136516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Cancer Lett. 2014 Nov 1;354(1):142-52. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.07.044. Epub
2014 Aug 15.

Activating transcription factor 4 mediates a multidrug resistance phenotype of
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cells through transactivation of STAT3
expression.

Zhu H(1), Chen X(2), Chen B(3), Chen B(3), Fan J(4), Song W(5), Xie Z(1), Jiang
D(1), Li Q(1), Zhou M(1), Sun D(6), Zhao Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou General Hospital of the Guangzhou
Military Command of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Fuzhou General Hospital of the Nanjing Military
Command of the PLA, Fuzhou, China. (3)Department of Oncology, Guangzhou General
Hospital of the Guangzhou Military Command of the People's Liberation Army (PLA),
Guangzhou, China. (4)Department of Dermatology, Guangzhou General Hospital of the
Guangzhou Military Command of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), Guangzhou,
China. (5)Department of Gerontology, Guangzhou General Hospital of the Guangzhou 
Military Command of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), Guangzhou, China.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou General Hospital of the Guangzhou
Military Command of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), Guangzhou, China.
Electronic address: sundayong1967@126.com. (7)Department of Gastroenterology,
Guangzhou General Hospital of the Guangzhou Military Command of the People's
Liberation Army (PLA), Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: yagang78@163.com.

Multidrug resistance (MDR) is a major challenge to the clinical treatment of
esophageal cancer. The stress response gene activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4) is involved in homeostasis and cellular protection. However, relatively
little is known about the expression and function of ATF4 in esophageal squamous 
cell carcinoma (ESCC) MDR. In this study, we investigate the potential role and
mechanisms of ATF4 in ESCC MDR. We demonstrated that overexpression of ATF4
promotes the MDR phenotype in ESCC cells, while depletion of ATF4 in the MDR ESCC
cell line induces drug re-sensitization. We also demonstrated that ATF4
transactivates STAT3 expression by directly binding to the signal transducers and
activators of transcription 3 (STAT3) promoter, resulting in MDR in ESCC cells.
Significantly, inhibition of STAT3 by small interfering RNA (siRNA) or a
selective inhibitor (JSI-124) reintroduces therapeutic sensitivity. In addition, 
increased Bcl-2, survivin, and MRP1 expression levels were observed in
ATF4-overexpressing cells. In conclusion, ATF4 may promote MDR in ESCC cells
through the up-regulation of STAT3 expression, and thus is an attractive
therapeutic target to combat therapeutic resistance in ESCC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25130172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Autophagy. 2014 Oct 1;10(10):1801-13. doi: 10.4161/auto.32136. Epub 2014 Aug 5.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress induced by tunicamycin and thapsigargin protects
against transient ischemic brain injury: Involvement of PARK2-dependent
mitophagy.

Zhang X(1), Yuan Y(2), Jiang L(2), Zhang J(2), Gao J(3), Shen Z(2), Zheng Y(2),
Deng T(2), Yan H(2), Li W(4), Hou WW(2), Lu J(3), Shen Y(3), Dai H(5), Hu WW(1), 
Zhang Z(6), Chen Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology; Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology of the
Ministry of Health of China; Zhejiang Province Key Laboratory of Neurobiology;
College of Pharmaceutical Sciences; Zhejiang University; Hangzhou, China;
Collaborative Innovation Center for Infectious Diseases; Zhejiang University;
Hangzhou, China. (2)Department of Pharmacology; Key Laboratory of Medical
Neurobiology of the Ministry of Health of China; Zhejiang Province Key Laboratory
of Neurobiology; College of Pharmaceutical Sciences; Zhejiang University;
Hangzhou, China. (3)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics;
School of Life Sciences; Wenzhou Medical College; Wenzhou, China. (4)Department
of Pharmacology; Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology of the Ministry of Health
of China; Zhejiang Province Key Laboratory of Neurobiology; College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences; Zhejiang University; Hangzhou, China; Department of
Pharmacy; the Second Affiliated Hospital; School of Medicine; Zhejiang
University; Hangzhou, China. (5)Department of Pharmacy; the Second Affiliated
Hospital; School of Medicine; Zhejiang University; Hangzhou, China. (6)State Key 
Laboratory of Medical Genetics; Central South University; Changsha, China.

Transient cerebral ischemia leads to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. However, 
the contributions of ER stress to cerebral ischemia are not clear. To address
this issue, the ER stress activators tunicamycin (TM) and thapsigargin (TG) were 
administered to transient middle cerebral artery occluded (tMCAO) mice and
oxygen-glucose deprivation-reperfusion (OGD-Rep.)-treated neurons. Both TM and TG
showed significant protection against ischemia-induced brain injury, as revealed 
by reduced brain infarct volume and increased glucose uptake rate in ischemic
tissue. In OGD-Rep.-treated neurons, 4-PBA, the ER stress releasing mechanism,
counteracted the neuronal protection of TM and TG, which also supports a
protective role of ER stress in transient brain ischemia. Knocking down the ER
stress sensor Eif2s1, which is further activated by TM and TG, reduced the
OGD-Rep.-induced neuronal cell death. In addition, both TM and TG prevented PARK2
loss, promoted its recruitment to mitochondria, and activated mitophagy during
reperfusion after ischemia. The neuroprotection of TM and TG was reversed by
autophagy inhibition (3-methyladenine and Atg7 knockdown) as well as Park2
silencing. The neuroprotection was also diminished in Park2(+/-) mice. Moreover, 
Eif2s1 and downstream Atf4 silencing reduced PARK2 expression, impaired mitophagy
induction, and counteracted the neuroprotection. Taken together, the present
investigation demonstrates that the ER stress induced by TM and TG protects
against the transient ischemic brain injury. The PARK2-mediated mitophagy may be 
underlying the protection of ER stress. These findings may provide a new strategy
to rescue ischemic brains by inducing mitophagy through ER stress activation.

PMCID: PMC4198364
PMID: 25126734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 14;9(8):e103109. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103109.
eCollection 2014.

Subverting ER-stress towards apoptosis by nelfinavir and curcumin coexposure
augments docetaxel efficacy in castration resistant prostate cancer cells.

Mathur A(1), Abd Elmageed ZY(2), Liu X(3), Kostochka ML(4), Zhang H(3),
Abdel-Mageed AB(2), Mondal D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans,
Louisiana, United States of America. (2)Department of Urology, Tulane University 
School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pathology, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans,
Louisiana, United States of America. (4)Peptide Research Laboratories, Tulane
University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America.

Despite its side-effects, docetaxel (DTX) remains a first-line treatment against 
castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Therefore, strategies to increase
its anti-tumor efficacy and decrease its side effects are critically needed.
Targeting of the constitutive endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in cancer cells
is being investigated as a chemosensitization approach. We hypothesized that the 
simultaneous induction of ER-stress and suppression of PI3K/AKT survival pathway 
will be a more effective approach. In a CRPC cell line, C4-2B, we observed
significant (p<0.005) enhancement of DTX-induced cytotoxicity following
coexposure to thapsigargin and an AKT-inhibitor. However, since these two agents 
are not clinically approved, we investigated whether a combination of nelfinavir 
(NFR) and curcumin (CUR), known to target both these metabolic pathways, can
similarly increase DTX cytotoxicity in CRPC cells. Within 24 hrs post-exposure to
physiologic concentrations of NFR (5 µM) and CUR (5 µM) a significantly (p<0.005)
enhanced cytotoxicity was evident with low concentration of DTX (10 nM). This
3-drug combination rapidly increased apoptosis in aggressive C4-2B cells, but not
in RWPE-1 cells or in primary prostate epithelial cells (PrEC). Comparative
molecular studies revealed that this 3-drug combination caused a more pronounced 
suppression of phosphorylated-AKT and higher induction in phosphorylated-eIF2a in
C4-2B cells, as compared to RWPE-1 cells. Acute exposure (3-9 hrs) to this 3-drug
combination intensified ER-stress induced pro-apoptotic markers, i.e. ATF4, CHOP,
and TRIB3. At much lower concentrations, chronic (3 wks) exposures to these three
agents drastically reduced colony forming units (CFU) by C4-2B cells. In vivo
studies using mice containing C4-2B tumor xenografts showed significant (p<0.05) 
enhancement of DTX's (10 mg/kg) anti-tumor efficacy following coexposure to NFR
(20 mg/kg) & CUR (100 mg/kg). Immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses of tumor
sections indicated decreased Ki-67 staining and increased TUNEL intensity in mice
exposed to the 3-drug combination. Therefore, subverting ER-stress towards
apoptosis using adjuvant therapy with NFR and CUR can chemosensitize the CRPC
cells to DTX therapy.

PMCID: PMC4133210
PMID: 25121735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Life Sci. 2014 Sep 15;113(1-2):60-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2014.07.033. Epub 2014
Aug 7.

Progesterone production is affected by unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling 
during the luteal phase in mice.

Park HJ(1), Park SJ(1), Koo DB(2), Lee SR(3), Kong IK(4), Ryoo JW(1), Park YI(5),
Chang KT(6), Lee DS(7).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, KNU Creative BioResearch Group (BK21 Plus Project) and
Biotechnology, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, Republic of Korea;
Center for Food and Nutritional Genomics Research, Kyungpook National University,
Daegu 702-701, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Biotechnology, Daegu
University, Gyeongbuk 712-749, Republic of Korea. (3)National Primate Research
Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon
305-806, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Animal Science, Gyeongsang National 
University, Jinju 660-701, Republic of Korea. (5)Graduate School Department of
Digital Media, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, Republic of Korea.
(6)National Primate Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
changkt@kribb.re.kr. (7)School of Life Science, KNU Creative BioResearch Group
(BK21 Plus Project) and Biotechnology, Kyungpook National University, Daegu
702-701, Republic of Korea; Center for Food and Nutritional Genomics Research,
Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: lee1@knu.ac.kr.

AIMS: We examined whether the three unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling
pathways, which are activated in response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-stress,
are involved in progesterone production in the luteal cells of the corpus luteum 
(CL) during the mouse estrous cycle.
MAIN METHODS: The luteal phase of C57BL/6 female mice (8 weeks old) was divided
into two stages: the functional stage (16, 24, and 48 h) and the regression stage
(72 and 96 h). Western blotting and reverse transcription (RT)-PCR were performed
to analyze UPR protein/gene expression levels in each stage. We investigated
whether ER stress affects the progesterone production by using Tm (0.5 µg/g BW)
or TUDCA (0.5 µg/g BW) through intra-peritoneal injection.
KEY FINDINGS: Our results indicate that expressions of Grp78/Bip, p-eIF2a/ATF4,
p50ATF6, and p-IRE1/sXBP1 induced by UPR activation were predominantly maintained
in functional and early regression stages of the CL. Furthermore, the expression 
of p-JNK, CHOP, and cleaved caspase3 as ER-stress mediated apoptotic factors
increased during the regression stage. Cleaved caspase3 levels increased in the
late-regression stage after p-JNK and CHOP expression in the early-regression
stage. Additionally, although progesterone secretion and levels of steroidogenic 
enzymes decreased following intra-peritoneal injection of Tunicamycin, an ER
stress inducer, the expression of Grp78/Bip, p50ATF6, and CHOP dramatically
increased.
SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that the UPR signaling pathways activated in 
response to ER stress may play important roles in the regulation of the CL
function. Furthermore, our findings enhance the understanding of the basic
mechanisms affecting the CL life span.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25108065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 31;9(7):e103882. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103882.
eCollection 2014.

Activating transcription factor 4 promotes esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
invasion and metastasis in mice and is associated with poor prognosis in human
patients.

Zhu H(1), Chen X(2), Chen B(3), Chen B(3), Song W(4), Sun D(1), Zhao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou General Hospital of the Guangzhou
Military Command of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Fuzhou General Hospital of the Nanjing Military
Command of the PLA, Fuzhou, China. (3)Department of Oncology, Guangzhou General
Hospital of the Guangzhou Military Command of the People's Liberation Army (PLA),
Guangzhou, China. (4)Department of Gerontology, Guangzhou General Hospital of the
Guangzhou Military Command of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), Guangzhou,
China.

BACKGROUND: Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is a stress response gene
that is involved in homeostasis and cellular protection. However, its expression 
and function in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains unknown. In
this study, we aimed to determine the clinicopathologic significance of ATF4 in
ESCC and its potential role in ESCC invasion and metastasis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We demonstrated that ATF4 overexpression is
correlated with multiple malignant characteristics and indicates poor prognosis
in ESCC patients. ATF4 expression was an independent factor that affected the
overall survival of patients with ESCC after surgical resection. ATF4 promoted
cell invasion and metastasis by promoting matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and
MMP-7 expression, while its silencing significantly attenuated these activities
both in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We report that ATF4 is a potential biomarker for ESCC
prognosis and that its dysregulation may play a key role in the regulation of
invasion and metastasis in ESCC cells. The targeting of ATF4 may provide a new
strategy for blocking ESCC metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4117569
PMID: 25078779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 3;289(40):27551-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.528174. Epub 2014
Jul 30.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress is chronically activated in chronic pancreatitis.

Sah RP(1), Garg SK(1), Dixit AK(1), Dudeja V(1), Dawra RK(1), Saluja AK(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Basic and Translational Research, Department of Surgery, 
University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455. (2)From the
Division of Basic and Translational Research, Department of Surgery, University
of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455 asaluja@umn.edu.

The pathogenesis of chronic pancreatitis (CP) is poorly understood. Endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress has now been recognized as a pathogenic event in many
chronic diseases. However, ER stress has not been studied in CP, although
pancreatic acinar cells seem to be especially vulnerable to ER dysfunction
because of their dependence on high ER volume and functionality. Here, we aim to 
investigate ER stress in CP, study its pathogenesis in relation to trypsinogen
activation (widely regarded as the key event of pancreatitis), and explore its
mechanism, time course, and downstream consequences during pancreatic injury. CP 
was induced in mice by repeated episodes of acute pancreatitis (AP) based on
caerulein hyperstimulation. ER stress leads to activation of unfolded protein
response components that were measured in CP and AP. We show sustained
up-regulation of unfolded protein response components ATF4, CHOP, GRP78, and XBP1
in CP. Overexpression of GRP78 and ATF4 in human CP confirmed the experimental
findings. We used novel trypsinogen-7 knock-out mice (T(-/-)), which lack
intra-acinar trypsinogen activation, to clarify the relationship of ER stress to 
intra-acinar trypsinogen activation in pancreatic injury. Comparable activation
of ER stress was seen in wild type and T(-/-) mice. Induction of ER stress
occurred through pathologic calcium signaling very early in the course of
pancreatic injury. Our results establish that ER stress is chronically activated 
in CP and is induced early in pancreatic injury through pathologic calcium
signaling independent of trypsinogen activation. ER stress may be an important
pathogenic mechanism in pancreatitis that needs to be explored in future studies.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4183795
PMID: 25077966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Neurobiol Dis. 2014 Nov;71:169-79. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.07.006. Epub 2014 Jul 
27.

Granulovacuolar degeneration and unfolded protein response in mouse models of
tauopathy and Aß amyloidosis.

Köhler C(1), Dinekov M(2), Götz J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute II for Anatomy, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Kerpener
Str. 62, 50924 Cologne, Germany. Electronic address: c.koehler@uni-koeln.de.
(2)Institute II for Anatomy, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Kerpener
Str. 62, 50924 Cologne, Germany. (3)Clem Jones Centre for Ageing Dementia
Research (CADR), Queensland Brain Institute (QBI), The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane (St Lucia Campus), QLD 4072, Australia.

Histopathological studies on the brains of tauopathy cases including cases with
Alzheimer's disease (AD) demonstrate that neurons with hyperphosphorylated
protein tau display granulovacuolar degeneration (GVD), as evidenced by vacuolar 
lesions harboring a central granule, together with markers of the activated
unfolded protein response (UPR). In order to examine whether this hallmark is
reproduced in animal models we studied the presence of GVD and the activated UPR 
in two complementary mouse models, pR5 mice with a tau pathology and APPSLxPS1mut
mice with an amyloid plaque pathology. Neither GVD nor a significant activation
of the UPR was found in both APPSLxPS1mut mice and in those regions in the pR5
brain where only neurons with an early stage of tau hyperphosphorylation were
present. In contrast, those neurons that displayed a tau phospho-epitope
signature that only appeared in old pR5 mice and also correlated with
Gallyas-positive tangle staining harbored granulovacuolar lesions that were
labeled with the GVD markers casein kinases 1d and 1e. Granulovacuolar lesions in
pR5 mice were also labeled with the UPR markers phosphorylated PKR-like
endoplasmic reticulum kinase, phosphorylated inositol-requiring enzyme 1a and
phosphorylated eukaryotic initiation factor 2a. However, GVD was rarely observed 
in neurons bearing mature neurofibrillary tangles as evidenced by Congo red
staining. Our results suggest that NFT-formation activates the UPR in pR5 mice
and that it is the early stages of neurofibrillary tangle formation that are
accompanied by GVD, in line with observations from studies on human autopsy
cases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25073087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014 Jun 30;8:177. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00177.
eCollection 2014.

Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) modulates post-synaptic development and 
dendritic spine morphology.

Liu J(1), Pasini S(1), Shelanski ML(1), Greene LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center
New York, NY, USA.

The ubiquitously expressed activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) has been
variably reported to either promote or inhibit neuronal plasticity and memory.
However, the potential cellular bases for these and other actions of ATF4 in
brain are not well-defined. In this report, we focus on ATF4's role in
post-synaptic synapse development and dendritic spine morphology. shRNA-mediated 
silencing of ATF4 significantly reduces the densities of PSD-95 and GluR1 puncta 
(presumed markers of excitatory synapses) in long-term cultures of cortical and
hippocampal neurons. ATF4 knockdown also decreases the density of mushroom spines
and increases formation of abnormally-long dendritic filopodia in such cultures. 
In vivo knockdown of ATF4 in adult mouse hippocampal neurons also reduces
mushroom spine density. In contrast, ATF4 over-expression does not affect the
densities of PSD-95 puncta or mushrooom spines. Regulation of synaptic puncta and
spine densities by ATF4 requires its transcriptional activity and is mediated at 
least in part by indirectly controlling the stability and expression of the total
and active forms of the actin regulatory protein Cdc42. In support of such a
mechanism, ATF4 silencing decreases the half-life of Cdc42 in cultured cortical
neurons from 31.5 to 18.5 h while knockdown of Cdc42, like ATF4 knockdown,
reduces the densities of mushroom spines and PSD-95 puncta. Thus, ATF4 appears to
participate in neuronal development and plasticity by regulating the
post-synaptic development of synapses and dendritic mushroom spines via a
mechanism that includes regulation of Cdc42 levels.

PMCID: PMC4075335
PMID: 25071442  [PubMed]


345. J Neurosci. 2014 Jul 23;34(30):10010-21. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0934-14.2014.

eIF2a dephosphorylation in basolateral amygdala mediates reconsolidation of drug 
memory.

Jian M(1), Luo YX(1), Xue YX(2), Han Y(1), Shi HS(3), Liu JF(1), Yan W(1), Wu
P(2), Meng SQ(1), Deng JH(1), Shen HW(2), Shi J(4), Lu L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Mental Health/Peking University Sixth Hospital and Key Laboratory
of Mental Health and National Institute on Drug Dependence, Peking University,
Beijing 100191, China. (2)National Institute on Drug Dependence, Peking
University, Beijing 100191, China. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Basic Medical College, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050017,
China, and. (4)National Institute on Drug Dependence, Peking University, Beijing 
100191, China, linlu@bjmu.edu.cn Shijie@bjmu.edu.cn. (5)Institute of Mental
Health/Peking University Sixth Hospital and Key Laboratory of Mental Health and
National Institute on Drug Dependence, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China, 
Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences and PKU-IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain
Research, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China linlu@bjmu.edu.cn
Shijie@bjmu.edu.cn.

Maladaptive memories elicited by exposure to environmental stimuli associated
with drugs of abuse are often responsible for relapse among addicts. Interference
with the reconsolidation of drug memory can inhibit drug seeking. Previous
studies have indicated that the dephosphorylation of the eukaryotic initiation
factor 2 a-subunit (eIF2a) plays an important role in synaptic plasticity and
long-term memory consolidation, but its role in the reconsolidation of drug
memory remains unknown. The amygdala is required for the reconsolidation of a
destabilized drug memory after retrieval of drug-paired stimuli. Here, we used
conditioned place preference (CPP) and self-administration procedures to
determine whether amygdala eIF2a dephosphorylation is required for the
reconsolidation of morphine and cocaine memories in rats. We found that the
levels of eIF2a phosphorylation (Ser51) and activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4) were decreased after reexposure to a previously morphine- or
cocaine-paired context (i.e., a memory retrieval procedure) in the basolateral
amygdala (BLA) but not in the central amygdala. Intra-BLA infusions of Sal003, a 
selective inhibitor of eIF2a dephosphorylation, immediately after memory
retrieval disrupted the reconsolidation of morphine- or cocaine-induced CPP,
leading to a long-lasting suppression of drug-paired stimulus-induced craving.
Advanced knockdown of ATF4 expression in the BLA by lentivirus-mediated
short-hairpin RNA blocked the disruption of the reconsolidation of
morphine-induced CPP induced by Sal003 treatment. Furthermore, inhibition of
eIF2a dephosphorylation in the BLA immediately after light/tone stimulus
retrieval decreased subsequent cue-induced heroin-seeking behavior in the
self-administration procedure. These results demonstrate that eIF2a
dephosphorylation in the BLA mediates the memory reconsolidation of drug-paired
stimuli.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3410010-12$15.00/0.

PMID: 25057203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Apoptosis. 2014 Sep;19(9):1399-410. doi: 10.1007/s10495-014-1013-0.

Apelin is transcriptionally regulated by ER stress-induced ATF4 expression via a 
p38 MAPK-dependent pathway.

Jeong K(1), Oh Y, Kim SJ, Kim H, Park KC, Kim SS, Ha J, Kang I, Choe W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (BK21 project), Medical
Research Center for Bioreaction to Reactive Oxygen Species and Biomedical Science
Institute, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, #1, Hoegi-dong,
Dongdaemoon-gu, Seoul, 130-701, Republic of Korea.

Apelin, which is an endogenous ligand for the orphan G-protein-coupled receptor
APJ, was reported to be up-regulated by hypoxia-inducible factor 1-a (HIF1-a) in 
hypoxia- and insulin-treated cell systems. However, a negative transcriptional
regulator of apelin has not yet been identified. In this study, we showed that
apelin is down-regulated by ATF4 via the pro-apoptotic p38 MAPK pathway under
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. First, we analyzed the human apelin promoter
to characterize the effects of ER stress on apelin expression in hepatocytes.
Treatment with thapsigargin, an inducer of ER stress, and over-expression of ATF4
decreased apelin expression in hepatocytes. This work identified an
ATF4-responsive region within the apelin promoter. Interestingly, ATF4-mediated
repression of apelin was dependent upon the N-terminal domain of ATF4. C/EBP-ß
knockdown experiments suggest that C/EBP-ß, which acts as an ATF4 binding
partner, is critical for the ER stress-induced down-regulation of apelin. We also
demonstrated that ATF4 regulates apelin gene expression via p38 pathways. Ectopic
expression of constitutively active MKK6, an upstream kinase of p38, suggested
that activation of the p38 pathway is sufficient to induce ATF4-mediated
repression of apelin. Moreover, apelin enhanced cell migration in a wound healing
assay in a p38 MAPK-dependent manner. Furthermore, analysis of caspase-3
activation indicated that ATF4 knockdown up-regulated apelin expression, leading 
to the inability of MKK6 (CA) to exert pro-apoptotic effects. Taken together, our
results suggest that ATF4-mediated repression of apelin contributes substantially
to the pro-apoptotic effects of p38.

PMID: 25052841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Exp Dermatol. 2014 Dec;23(12):868-73. doi: 10.1111/exd.12517. Epub 2014 Oct 7.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress: key promoter of rosacea pathogenesis.

Melnik BC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Environmental Medicine and Health Theory,
University of Osnabrück, Osnabrück, Germany.

Recent scientific interest in the pathogenesis of rosacea focuses on abnormally
high facial skin levels of cathelicidin and the trypsin-like serine protease
kallikrein 5 (KLK5) that cleaves the cathelicidin precursor protein into the
bioactive fragment LL-37, which exerts crucial proinflammatory, angiogenic and
antimicrobial activities. Furthermore, increased expression of toll-like receptor
2 (TLR2) has been identified in rosacea skin supporting the participation of the 
innate immune system. Notably, TLRs are expressed on sensory neurons and increase
neuronal excitability linking TLR signalling to the transmission of
neuroinflammatory responses. It is the intention of this viewpoint to present a
unifying concept that links all known clinical trigger factors of rosacea such as
UV irradiation, heat, skin irritants and special foods to one converging point:
enhanced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress that activates the unfolded protein
response (UPR). ER stress via upregulation of transcription factor ATF4 increases
TLR2 expression, resulting in enhanced production of cathelicidin and KLK5
mediating downstream proinflammatory, angiogenic and antimicrobial signalling.
The presented concept identifies rosacea trigger factors as environmental
stressors that enhance the skin's ER stress response. Exaggerated cutaneous ER
stress that stimulates the TLR2-driven inflammatory response may involve
sebocytes, keratinocytes, monocyte-macrophages and sensory cutaneous neurons.
Finally, all antirosacea drugs are proposed to attenuate the ER stress signalling
cascade at some point. Overstimulated ER stress signalling may have
evolutionarily evolved as a compensatory mechanism to balance impaired vitamin
D-driven LL-37-mediated antimicrobial defenses due to lower exposure of UV-B
irradiation of the northern Celtic population.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25047092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2014;78(3):482-9. doi: 10.1080/09168451.2014.882753.
Epub 2014 Apr 14.

Attenuation by a Vigna nakashimae extract of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in 
high-fat diet-fed mice.

Jeon BT(1), Heo RW, Shin HJ, Yi CO, Lee YH, Joung HN, Jung JH, Jung J, Kim SK,
Hahm JR, Lee BW, Ko JM, Baek IY, Kang SS, Roh GS.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pediatrics , Oregon Health and Science University , Portland ,
OR , USA.

A Vigna nakashimae (VN) extract has been shown to have antidiabetic and
anti-obesity effects. However, the mechanism underlying the effect of a VN
extract on hepatic inflammation and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress remains
unclear. In the present study, we investigated how a VN extract protects against 
the development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). A VN extract for 12
weeks reduced the body weight, serum metabolic parameters, cytokines, and hepatic
steatosis in high-fat diet (HFD)-fed mice. A VN extract decreased HFD-induced
hepatic acetyl CoA carboxylase and glucose transporter 4 expressions. In addition
to the levels of high-mobility group box 1 and receptor for advanced glycation,
the hepatic expression of ATF4 and caspase-3 was also reduced by a VN extract.
Thus, these data indicate that a chronic VN extract prevented NAFLD through
multiple mechanisms, including inflammation, ER stress, and apoptosis in the
liver.

PMID: 25036839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Jul 17;5:e1332. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.301.

Fluvoxamine alleviates ER stress via induction of Sigma-1 receptor.

Omi T(1), Tanimukai H(2), Kanayama D(2), Sakagami Y(3), Tagami S(2), Okochi M(2),
Morihara T(2), Sato M(2), Yanagida K(2), Kitasyoji A(4), Hara H(4), Imaizumi
K(5), Maurice T(6), Chevallier N(6), Marchal S(6), Takeda M(2), Kudo T(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Psychiatry, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine,
Suita, Osaka, Japan [2] Department of Psychiatry, Osaka General Medical center,
Sumiyoshi-ku, Osaka, Japan. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Osaka University
Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan. (3)Department of Psychiatry,
Osaka General Medical center, Sumiyoshi-ku, Osaka, Japan. (4)Gifu Pharmaceutical 
University, Department of Biofunctional Molecules, Gifu, Japan. (5)Department of 
Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical & Health Sciences Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan. (6)Team II Endogenous Neuroprotection in
Neurodegenerative Diseases INSERM U. 710, EPHE, University of Montpellier cc 105,
place Eugene Bataillon, Montpellier cedex 5, France. (7)Department of Psychiatry,
Osaka University Health Care Center, Toyonaka, Osaka, Japan.

We recently demonstrated that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress induces sigma-1
receptor (Sig-1R) expression through the PERK pathway, which is one of the cell's
responses to ER stress. In addition, it has been demonstrated that induction of
Sig-1R can repress cell death signaling. Fluvoxamine (Flv) is a selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) with a high affinity for Sig-1R. In the
present study, we show that treatment of neuroblastoma cells with Flv induces
Sig-1R expression by increasing ATF4 translation directly, through its own
activation, without involvement of the PERK pathway. The Flv-mediated induction
of Sig-1R prevents neuronal cell death resulting from ER stress. Moreover,
Flv-induced ER stress resistance reduces the infarct area in mice after focal
cerebral ischemia. Thus, Flv, which is used frequently in clinical practice, can 
alleviate ER stress. This suggests that Flv could be a feasible therapy for
cerebral diseases caused by ER stress.

PMCID: PMC4123092
PMID: 25032855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 29;289(35):24665-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.565028. Epub
2014 Jul 15.

A mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase
(MEK)-dependent transcriptional program controls activation of the early growth
response 1 (EGR1) gene during amino acid limitation.

Shan J(1), Balasubramanian MN(1), Donelan W(1), Fu L(1), Hayner J(1), Lopez
MC(2), Baker HV(2), Kilberg MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shands Cancer
Center and Center for Nutritional Sciences and. (2)the Department of Molecular
Genetics and Microbiology, Genetics Institute, University of Florida College of
Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610. (3)From the Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Shands Cancer Center and Center for Nutritional Sciences and
mkilberg@ufl.edu.

Amino acid (AA) limitation in mammalian cells triggers a collection of signaling 
cascades jointly referred to as the AA response (AAR). In human HepG2
hepatocellular carcinoma, the early growth response 1 (EGR1) gene was induced by 
either AA deprivation or endoplasmic reticulum stress. AAR-dependent EGR1
activation was discovered to be independent of the well characterized GCN2-ATF4
pathway and instead dependent on MEK-ERK signaling, one of the MAPK pathways.
ChIP showed that constitutively bound ELK1 at the EGR1 proximal promoter region
was phosphorylated after AAR activation. Increased p-ELK1 binding was associated 
with increased de novo recruitment of RNA polymerase II to the EGR1 promoter.
EGR1 transcription was not induced in HEK293T cells lacking endogenous MEK
activity, but overexpression of exogenous constitutively active MEK in HEK293T
cells resulted in increased basal and AAR-induced EGR1 expression. ChIP analysis 
of the human vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) gene, a known
EGR1-responsive gene, revealed moderate increases in AAR-induced EGR1 binding
within the proximal promoter and highly inducible binding to a site within the
first intron. Collectively, these data document a novel AA-activated MEK-ERK-ELK1
signaling mechanism.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4148889
PMID: 25028509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Metabolism. 2014 Sep;63(9):1131-40. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2014.06.002. Epub 2014
Jun 9.

The saturated fatty acid, palmitic acid, induces anxiety-like behavior in mice.

Moon ML(1), Joesting JJ(2), Lawson MA(3), Chiu GS(1), Blevins NA(2), Kwakwa
KA(2), Freund GG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana IL, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Program in Integrative Immunology and Behavior,
University of Illinois, Urbana IL, USA. (3)Department of Animal Sciences,
University of Illinois, Urbana IL, USA. (4)Division of Nutritional Sciences,
University of Illinois, Urbana IL, USA; Department of Pathology, Program in
Integrative Immunology and Behavior, University of Illinois, Urbana IL, USA;
Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana IL, USA. Electronic
address: freun@illinois.edu.

OBJECTIVES: Excess fat in the diet can impact neuropsychiatric functions by
negatively affecting cognition, mood and anxiety. We sought to show that the free
fatty acid (FFA), palmitic acid, can cause adverse biobehaviors in mice that last
beyond an acute elevation in plasma FFAs.
METHODS: Mice were administered palmitic acid or vehicle as a single
intraperitoneal (IP) injection. Biobehaviors were profiled 2 and 24 h after
palmitic acid treatment. Quantification of dopamine (DA), norepinephrine (NE),
serotonin (5-HT) and their major metabolites was performed in cortex, hippocampus
and amygdala. FFA concentration was determined in plasma. Relative fold change in
mRNA expression of unfolded protein response (UPR)-associated genes was
determined in brain regions.
RESULTS: In a dose-dependent fashion, palmitic acid rapidly reduced mouse
locomotor activity by a mechanism that did not rely on TLR4, MyD88, IL-1, IL-6 or
TNFa but was dependent on fatty acid chain length. Twenty-four hours after
palmitic acid administration mice exhibited anxiety-like behavior without
impairment in locomotion, food intake, depressive-like behavior or spatial
memory. Additionally, the serotonin metabolite 5-HIAA was increased by 33% in the
amygdala 24h after palmitic acid treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Palmitic acid induces anxiety-like behavior in mice while increasing
amygdala-based serotonin metabolism. These effects occur at a time point when
plasma FFA levels are no longer elevated.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4151238
PMID: 25016520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2014 Dec 1;563:108-17. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2014.06.034. Epub
2014 Jul 9.

Involvement of ER stress and activation of apoptotic pathways in fisetin induced 
cytotoxicity in human melanoma.

Syed DN(1), Lall RK(1), Chamcheu JC(1), Haidar O(1), Mukhtar H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA. Electronic
address: hmukhtar@wisc.edu.

The prognosis of malignant melanoma remains poor in spite of recent advances in
therapeutic strategies for the deadly disease. Fisetin, a dietary flavonoid is
currently being investigated for its growth inhibitory properties in various
cancer models. We previously showed that fisetin inhibited melanoma growth in
vitro and in vivo. Here, we evaluated the molecular basis of fisetin induced
cytotoxicity in metastatic human melanoma cells. Fisetin treatment induced
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in highly aggressive A375 and 451Lu human
melanoma cells, as revealed by up-regulation of ER stress markers including
IRE1a, XBP1s, ATF4 and GRP78. Time course analysis indicated that the ER stress
was associated with activation of the extrinsic and intrinsic apoptotic pathways.
Fisetin treated 2-D melanoma cultures displayed autophagic response concomitant
with induction of apoptosis. Prolonged treatment (16days) with fisetin in a 3-D
reconstituted melanoma model resulted in inhibition of melanoma progression with 
significant apoptosis, as evidenced by increased staining of cleaved Caspase-3 in
the treated constructs. However, no difference in the expression of autophagic
marker LC-3 was noted between treated and control groups. Fisetin treatment to
2-D melanoma cultures resulted in phosphorylation and activation of the
multifunctional AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) involved in the regulation of
diverse cellular processes, including autophagy and apoptosis. Silencing of AMPK 
failed to prevent cell death indicating that fisetin induced cytotoxicity is
mediated through both AMPK-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Taken together,
our studies confirm apoptosis as the primary mechanism through which fisetin
inhibits melanoma cell growth and that activation of both extrinsic and intrinsic
pathways contributes to fisetin induced cytotoxicity.

PMCID: PMC4221553
PMID: 25016296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;33(6):1975-87.

Down-regulation of PERK-ATF4-CHOP pathway by Astragaloside IV is associated with 
the inhibition of endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced podocyte apoptosis in
diabetic rats.

Chen Y, Gui D, Chen J, He D, Luo Y, Wang N.

BACKGROUND: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-induced podocyte apoptosis plays a 
critical role in the development of diabetic nephropathy (DN). Here, we tested
the hypothesis that suppression of PERK-ATF4-CHOP pathway by Astragaloside IV
(AS-IV) is associated with inhibition of ER stress-induced podocyte apoptosis in 
streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic rats.
METHODS: Diabetic rats were treated with AS-IV at 5 and 10 mg·kg-1·d-1, p.o., for
12 weeks. Albuminuria examination, hematoxylin & eosin staining and TUNEL
analysis were performed. Immunohistochemistry, western blot, and real-time PCR
were used to detect renal expression of ER chaperone GRP78 and ER-associated
apoptosis proteins.
RESULTS: Treatment with AS-IV ameliorated albuminuria and renal histopathology in
diabetic rats. Diabetic rats had significant increment in podocyte apoptosis as
well as phosphorylated PERK and eIF2a in the kidneys, which were attenuated by
AS-IV treatment. Furthermore, diabetic rats were found to have increased protein 
and mRNA expressions of GRP78 and ER-associated apoptosis proteins, such as ATF4,
CHOP and TRB3, which were also attenuated by AS-IV treatment. Increased Bax
expression and decreased Bcl-2 expression were detected in diabetic rats, and
these changes were partially restored by AS-IV treatment.
CONCLUSION: The protective effect of AS-IV on ER stress-induced podocyte
apoptosis is associated with inhibition of PERK-ATF4-CHOP pathway.
Down-regulation of PERK- ATF4-CHOP pathway by AS-IV may be a novel strategy for
the treatment of DN.

PMID: 25012492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 10;9(7):e102408. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102408.
eCollection 2014.

Important role of autophagy in endothelial cell response to ionizing radiation.

Kalamida D(1), Karagounis IV(1), Giatromanolaki A(2), Koukourakis MI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy/Oncology, Democritus University of Thrace, and
University General Hospital of Alexandroupolis, Alexandroupolis, Greece.
(2)Department of Pathology, Democritus University of Thrace, and University
General Hospital of Alexandroupolis, Alexandroupolis, Greece.

OBJECTIVES: Vasculature damage is an important contributor to the side-effects of
radiotherapy. The aim of this study is to provide insights into the radiobiology 
of the autophagic response of endothelial cells.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Human umbilical vascular endothelial cells (HUVEC) were
exposed to 2 Gy of ionizing radiation (IR) and studied using confocal microscopy 
and western blot analysis, at 4 and 8 days post-irradiation. The role of
autophagy flux in HUVEC radio-sensitivity was also examined.
RESULTS: IR-induced accumulation of LC3A(+), LC3B(+) and p62 cytoplasmic
vacuoles, while in double immunostaining with lysosomal markers (LAMP2a and
CathepsinD) repression of the autophagolysosomal flux was evident.
Autophagy-related proteins (ATF4, HIF1a., HIF2a, Beclin1) were, however, induced 
excluding an eventual repressive effect of radiation on autophagy initiating
protein expression. Exposure of HUVEC to SMER28, an mTOR-independent inducer of
autophagy, enhanced proLC3 and LC3A, B-I protein expression and accelerated the
autophagic flux. Pre-treatment of HUVEC with SMER28 protected against the
blockage of autophagic flux induced by IR and conferred radio-resistance.
Suppression of LC3A/LC3B proteins with siRNAs resulted in radio-sensitization.
CONCLUSIONS: The current data provide a rationale for the development of novel
radioprotection policies targeting the autophagic pathway.

PMCID: PMC4092133
PMID: 25010689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2014 Sep 15;307(6):R664-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00511.2013. Epub 2014 Jul 9.

The unfolded protein response is triggered following a single, unaccustomed
resistance-exercise bout.

Ogborn DI(1), McKay BR(2), Crane JD(2), Parise G(2), Tarnopolsky MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada; (2)Department of Kinesiology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada; and. (3)Department of Pediatrics and Medicine, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada tarnopol@mcmaster.ca.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress results from an imbalance between the abundance
of synthesized proteins and the folding capacity of the ER. In response, the
unfolded protein response (UPR) attempts to restore ER function by attenuating
protein synthesis and inducing chaperone expression. Resistance exercise (RE)
stimulates protein synthesis; however, a postexercise accumulation of unfolded
proteins may activate the UPR. Aging may impair protein folding, and the
accumulation of oxidized and misfolded proteins may stimulate the UPR at rest in 
aged muscle. Eighteen younger (n = 9; 21 ± 3 yr) and older (n = 9; 70 ± 4 yr)
untrained men completed a single, unilateral bout of RE using the knee extensors 
(four sets of 10 repetitions at 75% of one repetition maximum on the leg press
and leg extension) to determine whether the UPR is increased in resting, aged
muscle and whether RE stimulates the UPR. Muscle biopsies were taken from the
nonexercised and exercised vastus lateralis at 3, 24, and 48 h postexercise. Age 
did not affect any of the proteins and transcripts related to the UPR.
Glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) and protein kinase R-like ER protein kinase 
(PERK) proteins were increased at 48 h postexercise, whereas inositol-requiring
enzyme 1 alpha (IRE1a) was elevated at 24 h and 48 h. Despite elevated protein,
GRP78 and PERK mRNA was unchanged; however, IRE1a mRNA was increased at 24 h
postexercise. Activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) mRNA increased at 24 h and
48 h, whereas ATF4, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP), and
growth arrest and DNA damage protein 34 mRNA were unchanged. These data suggest
that RE activates specific pathways of the UPR (ATF6/IRE1a), whereas
PERK/eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha/CHOP does not. In conclusion, acute RE 
results in UPR activation, irrespective of age.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 25009220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Sep 15;34(18):3421-34. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00221-14. Epub 2014
Jul 7.

Nrf2- and ATF4-dependent upregulation of xCT modulates the sensitivity of T24
bladder carcinoma cells to proteasome inhibition.

Ye P(1), Mimura J(2), Okada T(3), Sato H(3), Liu T(1), Maruyama A(1), Ohyama
C(4), Itoh K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stress Response Science, Hirosaki University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Hirosaki, Japan. (2)Department of Stress Response Science, Hirosaki
University Graduate School of Medicine, Hirosaki, Japan
jmimura@cc.hirosaki-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Food and Applied Life Sciences,
Faculty of Agriculture, Yamagata University, Tsuruoka, Yamagata, Japan.
(4)Department of Urology, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine,
Hirosaki, Japan.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jul;35(13):2366.

The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway degrades ubiquitinated proteins to remove
damaged or misfolded protein and thus plays an important role in the maintenance 
of many important cellular processes. Because the pathway is also crucial for
tumor cell growth and survival, proteasome inhibition by specific inhibitors
exhibits potent antitumor effects in many cancer cells. xCT, a subunit of the
cystine antiporter system xc (-), plays an important role in cellular cysteine
and glutathione homeostasis. Several recent reports have revealed that xCT is
involved in cancer cell survival; however, it was unknown whether xCT affects the
cytotoxic effects of proteasome inhibitors. In this study, we found that two
stress-inducible transcription factors, Nrf2 and ATF4, were upregulated by
proteasome inhibition and cooperatively enhance human xCT gene expression upon
proteasome inhibition. In addition, we demonstrated that the knockdown of xCT by 
small interfering RNA (siRNA) or pharmacological inhibition of xCT by
sulfasalazine (SASP) or (S)-4-carboxyphenylglycine (CPG) significantly increased 
the sensitivity of T24 cells to proteasome inhibition. These results suggest that
the simultaneous inhibition of both the proteasome and xCT could have therapeutic
benefits in the treatment of bladder tumors.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4135628
PMID: 25002527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;818:213-27. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4471-6458-6_11.

Isolation and characterization of the anticancer gene organic cation transporter 
like-3 (ORCTL3).

AbuAli G(1), Grimm S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Campus, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK.

ORCTL3, an organic cation/anion transporter expressed in various tissue types,
was isolated in a genome-wide cDNA screen as a gene with a tumor-specific
apoptosis activity. When overexpressed it elicits an apoptosis response in many
transformed cells, while normal cells remain unaffected. It can be activated for 
apoptosis induction by individual tumorigenic mutations in renal cells. This
effect is independent of the tumor cells' proliferation status and mediated by an
incomplete ER stress response, characterized by the accumulation of the
endoplasmic reticulum-stress marker ATF4, but not BiP. Recent studies show that
for its apoptosis induction activity ORCTL3 targets the enzyme stearoyl-CoA
desaturase-1 (SCD-1) that is involved in the fatty acid metabolism. This is
evidenced by the inhibition of apoptosis induced through ORCTL3 when the SCD-1
product oleic acid is exogenously supplemented or when SCD-1 is co-transfected in
the transformed cells. ORCTL3's activity to specifically target tumor cells is
caused by the transmembrane domains 3 and 4 of the mouse, but not the human,
gene. In an in vivo model ORCTL3 shows a significant shrinkage in the size of
xenograft tumors when injected with an adenoviral carrier carrying the mouse
ORCTL3 gene. An ex vivo study using human renal cancer cells confirmed the
promising tumor-specific apoptosis effect of ORCTL3. Since ORCTL3 targets fatty
acid metabolism in transformed cells and induces an ER stress specifically in
these cells, it reveals a novel therapeutic interference option for tumor cells.

PMID: 25001539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Jul 3;5:e1316. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.281.

Usp9x- and Noxa-mediated Mcl-1 downregulation contributes to pemetrexed-induced
apoptosis in human non-small-cell lung cancer cells.

Yan J(1), Zhong N(2), Liu G(1), Chen K(3), Liu X(1), Su L(1), Singhal S(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan, China. (2)School of
Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, China. (3)Central Hospital of Xinwen Mining
Group, Xintai, China. (4)Department of Surgery, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Pemetrexed, a folate antimetabolite, combined with cisplatin is used as a
first-line therapy for malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) and locally advanced 
or metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Pemetrexed arrests cell cycle
by inhibiting three enzymes in purine and pyrimidine synthesis that are necessary
for DNA synthesis. Pemetrexed also promotes apoptosis in target cells, but little
is known about its mechanism in cancer cells. We have previously shown that
pemetrexed can result in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and it can lead to
downstream apoptosis. In this study, we further elucidate this mechanism. Our
data show that pemetrexed increases Noxa expression through activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3)
upregulation. Furthermore, pemetrexed induces apoptosis by activating the
Noxa-Usp9x-Mcl-1 pathway. Inhibition of Noxa by small interfering RNA (siRNA)
promotes Usp9x (ubiquitin-specific peptidase 9, X-linked) expression. Moreover,
downregulation of the deubiquitinase Usp9x by pemetrexed results in downstream
reduction of myeloid cell leukemia 1 (Mcl-1) expression. Mechanistically, Noxa
upregulation likely reduces the availability of Usp9x to Mcl-1, thereby promoting
its ubiquitination and degradation, leading to the apoptosis of neoplastic cells.
Thus, our findings demonstrate that Noxa-Usp9x-Mcl-1 axis may contribute to
pemetrexed-induced apoptosis in human lung cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4123075
PMID: 24991768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Korean J Physiol Pharmacol. 2014 Jun;18(3):211-6. doi:
10.4196/kjpp.2014.18.3.211. Epub 2014 Jun 12.

Effect of exercise intensity on unfolded protein response in skeletal muscle of
rat.

Kim K(1), Kim YH(1), Lee SH(1), Jeon MJ(2), Park SY(1), Doh KO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, Yeungnam University, Daegu
705-717, Korea. (2)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, College
of Medicine, Yeungnam University, Daegu 705-717, Korea.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, unfolded protein response (UPR), and
mitochondrial biogenesis were assessed following varying intensities of exercise 
training. The animals were randomly assigned to receive either low- (LIT, n=7) or
high intensity training (HIT, n=7), or were assigned to a control group (n=7).
Over 5 weeks, the animals in the LIT were exercised on a treadmill with a 10°
incline for 60 min at a speed of 20 m/min group, and in the HIT group at a speed 
of 34 m/min for 5 days a week. No statistically significant differences were
found in the body weight, plasma triglyceride, and total cholesterol levels
across the three groups, but fasting glucose and insulin levels were
significantly lower in the exercise-trained groups. Additionally, no
statistically significant differences were observed in the levels of PERK
phosphorylation in skeletal muscles between the three groups. However, compared
to the control and LIT groups, the level of BiP was lower in the HIT group.
Compared to the control group, the levels of ATF4 in skeletal muscles and CHOP
were significantly lower in the HIT group. The HIT group also showed increased
PGC-1a mRNA expression in comparison with the control group. Furthermore, both of
the trained groups showed higher levels of mitochondrial UCP3 than the control
group. In summary, we found that a 5-week high-intensity exercise training
routine resulted in increased mitochondrial biogenesis and decreased ER stress
and apoptotic signaling in the skeletal muscle tissue of rats.

PMCID: PMC4071173
PMID: 24976760  [PubMed]


360. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 8;289(32):22090-102. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.566927. Epub
2014 Jun 27.

Mitochondrial phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK-M) is a pro-survival,
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response gene involved in tumor cell adaptation
to nutrient availability.

Méndez-Lucas A(1), Hyroová P(1), Novellasdemunt L(1), Viñals F(1), Perales
JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques II, Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona E-08907, Spain. (2)From the Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques II,
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona E-08907, Spain jperales@ub.edu.

Mitochondrial phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK-M), encoded by the nuclear
PCK2 gene, links TCA cycle intermediates and glycolytic pools through the
conversion of mitochondrial oxaloacetate into phosphoenolpyruvate. In the liver
PEPCK-M adjoins its profusely studied cytosolic isoform (PEPCK-C) potentiating
gluconeogenesis and TCA flux. However, PEPCK-M is present in a variety of
non-gluconeogenic tissues, including tumors of several origins. Despite its
potential relevance to cancer metabolism, the mechanisms responsible for PCK2
gene regulation have not been elucidated. The present study demonstrates PEPCK-M 
overexpression in tumorigenic cells as well as the mechanism for the modulation
of PCK2 abundance under several stress conditions. Amino acid limitation and ER
stress inducers, conditions that activate the amino acid response (AAR) and the
unfolded protein response (UPR), stimulate PCK2 gene transcription. Both the AAR 
and UPR lead to increased synthesis of ATF4, which mediates PCK2 transcriptional 
up-regulation through its binding to a putative ATF/CRE composite site within the
PCK2 promoter functioning as an amino acid response element. In addition,
activation of the GCN2-eIF2a-ATF4 and PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 signaling pathways are
responsible for increased PEPCK-M levels. Finally, PEPCK-M knockdown using either
siRNA or shRNA were sufficient to reduce MCF7 mammary carcinoma cell growth and
increase cell death under glutamine deprivation or ER stress conditions. Our data
demonstrate that this enzyme has a critical role in the survival program
initiated upon stress and shed light on an unexpected and important role of
mitochondrial PEPCK in cancer metabolism.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4139223
PMID: 24973213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Toxicol Sci. 2014 Sep;141(1):155-65. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu121. Epub 2014 Jun
27.

Sialic acid rescues repurified lipopolysaccharide-induced acute renal failure via
inhibiting TLR4/PKC/gp91-mediated endoplasmic reticulum stress, apoptosis,
autophagy, and pyroptosis signaling.

Yang CC(1), Yao CA(2), Yang JC(3), Chien CT(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 11221, 
Taiwan Department of Family Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital and
College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)National Taiwan University Hospital and
College of Medicine, Taipei 10016, Taiwan. (3)Department of Life Science,
National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei 11677, Taiwan ctchien@ntnu.edu.tw.
(4)Department of Planning, Ministry of Health and Welfare, Executive Yuan, Taipei
11558, Taiwan ctchien@ntnu.edu.tw.

Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) through Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) and Toll-like
receptor 4 (TLR4) activation induce systemic inflammation where oxidative damage 
plays a key role in multiple organ failure. Because of the neutralization of LPS 
toxicity by sialic acid (SA), we determined its effect and mechanisms on
repurified LPS (rLPS)-evoked acute renal failure. We assessed the effect of
intravenous SA (10 mg/kg body weight) on rLPS-induced renal injury in female
Wistar rats by evaluating blood and kidney reactive oxygen species (ROS)
responses, renal and systemic hemodynamics, renal function, histopathology, and
molecular mechanisms. SA can interact with rLPS through a high binding affinity. 
rLPS dose- and time-dependently reduced arterial blood pressure, renal
microcirculation and blood flow, and increased vascular resistance in the rats.
rLPS enhanced monocyte/macrophage (ED-1) infiltration and ROS production and
impaired kidneys by triggering p-IRE1a/p-JNK/CHOP/GRP78/ATF4-mediated endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, Bax/PARP-mediated apoptosis,
Beclin-1/Atg5-Atg12/LC3-II-mediated autophagy, and caspase 1/IL-1ß-mediated
pyroptosis in the kidneys. SA treatment at 30 min, but not 60 min after rLPS
stimulation, gp91 siRNA and protein kinase C-a (PKC) inhibitor efficiently
rescued rLPS-induced acute renal failure via inhibition of TLR4/PKC/NADPH oxidase
gp91-mediated ER stress, apoptosis, autophagy and pyroptosis in renal proximal
tubular cells, and rat kidneys. In response to rLPS or IFN<U+03B3>, the enhanced Atg5,
FADD, LC3-II, and PARP expression can be inhibited by Atg5 siRNA. Albumin (10
mg/kg body weight) did not rescue rLPS-induced injury. In conclusion, early
treatment (within 30 min) of SA attenuates rLPS-induced renal failure via the
reduction in LPS toxicity and subsequently inhibiting rLPS-activated
TLR4/PKC/gp91/ER stress/apoptosis/autophagy/pyroptosis signaling.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24973090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Chin J Nat Med. 2014 Jun;12(6):461-8. doi: 10.1016/S1875-5364(14)60072-8.

Protective effect of total flavonoid C-glycosides from Abrus mollis extract on
lipopolysaccharide-induced lipotoxicity in mice.

Wang Y(1), Jiang ZZ(2), Chen M(1), Wu MJ(1), Guo HL(1), Sun LX(1), Wang H(3),
Zhang S(1), Wang T(4), Zhang LY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Center for Drug Screening, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing
210009, China. (2)Jiangsu Center for Drug Screening, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing 210009, China; Key Laboratory of Drug Quality Control and
Pharmacovigilance, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009, China.
(3)Department of Natural Medicinal Chemistry, China Pharmaceutical University,
Nanjing 210009, China. (4)Jiangsu Center for Drug Screening, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing 210009, China; Jiangsu Center for Pharmacodynamics Research
and Evaluation, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 21009, China. (5)Jiangsu
Center for Drug Screening, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009,
China; State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing 210009, China. Electronic address: lyzhang@cpu.edu.cn.

Abrus mollis is a widely used traditional Chinese medicine for treating acute and
chronic hepatitis, steatosis, and fibrosis. It was found that the total flavonoid
C-glycosides from Abrus mollis extract (AME) showed potent antioxidant,
anti-inflammatory, and hepatoprotective activities. To further investigate the
hepatoprotective effect of AME and its possible mechanisms, lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-induced liver injury models were applied in the current study. The results 
indicated that AME significantly attenuated LPS-induced lipid accumulation in
mouse primary hepatocytes as measured by triglyceride (TG) and total cholesterol 
(TC) assays and Oil Red O staining. Meanwhile, AME exerted a protective effect on
LPS-induced liver injury as shown by decreased liver index, serum
aminotransferase levels, and hepatic lipid accumulation. Real-time PCR and
immunoblot data suggested that AME reversed the LPS-mediated lipid metabolism
gene expression, such as sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1 (SREBP-1),
fatty acid synthase (FAS), and acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 (ACC1). In addition,
LPS-induced overexpression of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4),
X-box-binding protein-1 (XBP-1), and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) were
dramatically reversed by AME. Furthermore, AME also decreased the expression of
LPS-enhanced interleukin-6 (IL-6) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). Here, it is
demonstrated for the first time that AME ameliorated LPS-induced hepatic lipid
accumulation and that this effect of AME can be attributed to its modulation of
hepatic de novo fatty acid synthesis. This study also suggested that the
hepatoprotective effect of AME may be related to its down-regulation of unfolded 
protein response (UPR) activation.

Copyright © 2014 China Pharmaceutical University. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 24969528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Hazard Mater. 2014 Aug 15;278:180-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2014.06.005. Epub
2014 Jun 12.

Nano-sized titanium dioxide-induced splenic toxicity: a biological pathway
explored using microarray technology.

Sheng L(1), Wang L(2), Sang X(1), Zhao X(1), Hong J(1), Cheng S(1), Yu X(1), Liu 
D(1), Xu B(1), Hu R(1), Sun Q(1), Cheng J(1), Cheng Z(1), Gui S(1), Hong F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. (2)Library of
Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. (3)Medical College of Soochow
University, Suzhou 215123, China. Electronic address: Hongfsh_cn@sina.com.

Titanium dioxide nanoparticles (TiO2 NPs) have been widely used in various areas,
and its potential toxicity has gained wide attention. However, the molecular
mechanisms of multiple genes working together in the TiO2 NP-induced splenic
injury are not well understood. In the present study, 2.5, 5, or 10mg/kg body
weight TiO2 NPs were administered to the mice by intragastric administration for 
90 consecutive days, their immune capacity in the spleen as well as the
gene-expressed characteristics in the mouse damaged spleen were investigated
using microarray assay. The findings showed that with increased dose, TiO2 NP
exposure resulted in the increases of spleen indices, immune dysfunction, and
severe macrophage infiltration as well as apoptosis in the spleen. Importantly,
microarray data showed significant alterations in the expressions of 1041 genes
involved in immune/inflammatory responses, apoptosis, oxidative stress, stress
responses, metabolic processes, ion transport, signal transduction, cell
proliferation/division, cytoskeleton and translation in the 10 mg/kg TiO2
NP-exposed spleen. Specifically, Cyp2e1, Sod3, Mt1, Mt2, Atf4, Chac1, H2-k1,
Cxcl13, Ccl24, Cd14, Lbp, Cd80, Cd86, Cd28, Il7r, Il12a, Cfd, and Fcnb may be
potential biomarkers of spleen toxicity following exposure to TiO2 NPs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24968254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 25;9(6):e101053. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101053.
eCollection 2014.

Glucose-regulated protein 78 (Grp78) confers chemoresistance to tumor endothelial
cells under acidic stress.

Visioli F(1), Wang Y(2), Alam GN(2), Ning Y(2), Rados PV(3), Nör JE(4), Polverini
PJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences, University of Michigan School
of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America; Department of
Conservative Dentistry, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul School of
Dentistry, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. (2)Department of Biologic and
Materials Sciences, University of Michigan School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, United States of America. (3)Department of Conservative Dentistry,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul School of Dentistry, Porto Alegre, Rio 
Grande do Sul, Brazil. (4)Department of Cariology, Restorative Sciences, and
Endodontics, University of Michigan School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, Michigan,
United States of America. (5)Department of Periodontics and Oral Medicine,
University of Michigan School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of
America.

OBJECTIVES: This study was designed to investigate the activation of the unfolded
protein response (UPR) in tumor associated endothelial cells (TECs) and its
association with chemoresistance during acidic pH stress.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Endothelial cells from human oral squamous cell carcinomas
(OSCC) were excised by laser capture microdissection (LCM) followed by analysis
of UPR markers (Grp78, ATF4 and CHOP) using quantitative PCR. Grp78 expression
was also determined by immunostaining. Acidic stress was induced in primary human
dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HDMECs) by treatment with conditioned
medium (CM) from tumor cells grown under hypoxic conditions or by adjusting
medium pH to 6.4 or 7.0 using lactic acid or hydrochloric acid (HCl). HDMEC
resistance to the anti-angiogenic drug Sunitinib was assessed with SRB assay.
RESULTS: UPR markers, Grp78, ATF4 and CHOP were significantly upregulated in TECs
from OSCC compared to HDMECs. HDMECs cultured in acidic CM (pH 6.0-6.4) showed
increased expression of the UPR markers. However, severe acidosis led to marked
cell death in HDMECs. Alternatively, HDMECs were able to adapt when exposed to
chronic acidosis at pH 7.0 for 7 days, with concomittant increase in Grp78
expression. Chronic acidosis also confers drug resistance to HDMECs against
Sunitinib. Knockdown of Grp78 using shRNA resensitizes HDMECs to drug treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: UPR induction in ECs under acidic pH conditions is related to
chemoresistance and may contribute to therapeutic failures in response to
chemotherapy. Targeting Grp78, the key component of the UPR pathway, may provide 
a promising approach to overcome ECs resistance in cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4071032
PMID: 24964091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Neurochem Res. 2014 Sep;39(9):1741-52. doi: 10.1007/s11064-014-1369-0. Epub 2014 
Jun 25.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress is involved in the neuroprotective effect of
propofol.

Wang L(1), Tang W, Jiang T, Lu P, Li Y, Sun A, Shen Y, Chen Y, Wang H, Zong Z,
Wang Y, Chen L, Shen Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, China.

Propofol is a common clinically used intravenous anaesthetic agent with
antioxidative property. It has been thought to have neuroprotection in vitro and 
in vivo. However, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress plays an important role in regulating the signaling pathways
concerning cell death and survival. Therefore, we wondered whether the
neuroprotective effects of propofol are associated with its regulation on ER
stress. In this study, we found that propofol up-regulated BiP and attenuated
tunicamycin-induced neural cell death. Propofol pretreatment also inhibited
tunicamycin-induced up-regulation of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP). We also
found that propofol or tunicamycin alone increased the levels of spliced XBP1
(XBP1s) and cleaved activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6), an active form of
ATF6. However, pretreatment with propofol attenuated the levels of phosphorylated
protein kinase receptor-like ER kinase, phosphorylated elF2a, ATF4, and
caspase-3, but failed to affect the increase of cleaved ATF6 and XBP1s, induced
by tunicamycin. Knockdown endogenous BiP with siRNA abolished the suppression of 
propofol on tunicamycin-mediated activation of CHOP and caspase-3. Meanwhile,
knockdown BiP attenuated the protective effects of propofol on the neural cells
exposed to tunicamycin. These data suggest that ER stress is involved in the
neuroprotection of propofol via differentially regulating the unfolded protein
response pathway, in which BiP plays an important role in initiating the adaptive
ER stress and inhibiting the apoptotic ER stress.

PMID: 24962313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Dig Liver Dis. 2014 Sep;46(9):788-94. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2014.05.013. Epub 2014
Jun 19.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded protein response are involved in
paediatric inflammatory bowel disease.

Negroni A(1), Prete E(2), Vitali R(2), Cesi V(2), Aloi M(3), Civitelli F(3),
Cucchiara S(3), Stronati L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiobiology and Human Health, ENEA, Rome, Italy. Electronic
address: anna.negroni@enea.it. (2)Department of Radiobiology and Human Health,
ENEA, Rome, Italy. (3)Department of Pediatrics and Infantile Neuropsychiatry,
Paediatric Gastroenterology and Liver Unit, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded protein response have been 
recently associated with the development of inflammatory bowel diseases in
adults. We aimed at assessing the involvement of these pathways also in
paediatric inflammatory bowel disease by analysing the expression of the main
genes involved in endoplasmic reticulum stress and correlating them with the
degree of intestinal inflammation.
METHODS: Real-time PCR and Western blot analysis of the expression of the
endoplasmic reticulum stress marker HSPA5 and of selected genes representing the 
three pathways of unfolded protein response (IRE-XBP1, PERK-ATF4, ATF6p90-p50) in
inflamed and uninflamed biopsies from 28 inflammatory bowel disease paediatric
patients and 10 controls.
RESULTS: HSPA5, PDIA4, as well as unspliced and spliced XBP1 mRNAs were
significantly increased in patients' inflamed colonic mucosa compared to
uninflamed mucosa and controls. HSPA5, PDIA4, ATF6, and phospho-IRE proteins were
also upregulated, indicating the activation of the IRE-XBP1 and ATF6p90-p50
branches of unfolded protein response. A positive significant correlation between
interleukin-8 levels, as a marker of inflammation, and upregulated genes was
found in the inflamed colonic mucosa.
CONCLUSION: A deregulation of the genes involved in the endoplasmic reticulum
stress and unfolded protein response pathways may be a key component of the
inflammatory response in paediatric patients with inflammatory bowel disease.

Copyright © 2014 Editrice Gastroenterologica Italiana S.r.l. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24953208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Lipids Health Dis. 2014 Jun 21;13:98. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-13-98.

Atorvastatin helps preserve pancreatic ß cell function in obese C57BL/6 J mice
and the effect is related to increased pancreas proliferation and amelioration of
endoplasmic-reticulum stress.

Chen ZY, Liu SN, Li CN, Sun SJ, Liu Q, Lei L, Gao LH, Shen ZF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of pharmacology, State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substance and
Function of Natural Medicines, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, No,1 Xiannongtan Street,
100050 Beijing, P, R, China. shenzhf@imm.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: 3-Hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors or
statins are competitive inhibitors of the rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol
biosynthesis. Currently, statins are used as first-line therapy in the treatment 
of diabetic dyslipidemia. However, effects of statins on ß cell function remains 
unclear. This study aims to examine effects of atorvastatin treatment on
pancreatic ß cell function in obese C57BL/6 J mice and the possible mechanisms.
METHODS: Diet-induced obesity (DIO) C57BL/6 J mice were treated with atorvastatin
(30 mg/kg/day) for 58 days. ß cell function was assessed by hyperglycemic clamp
and the area of insulin-positive ß cells was examined by immunofluorescence. Gene
expression was assessed by RT-PCR, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress related 
proteins were examined by Western blot. Additionally, cell viability and
apoptosis of the cholesterol-loaded NIT-1 cells were investigated after
atorvastatin treatment.
RESULTS: Hyperglycemic clamp study revealed that glucose infusion rate (GIR) and 
insulin stimulation ratio in atorvastatin-treated DIO mice were markedly higher
than control mice (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01 vs. con), indicating preserved ß-cell
sensitivity to glucose. Lipid profiles of plasma triglyceride (TG), pancreas TG
and plasma cholesterol (CHO) were improved. Pancreas weight and weight index were
improved significantly after atorvastatin treatment (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05 vs. con).
Immunofluorescence results showed that atorvastatin-treated mice had
significantly larger insulin-positive ß cell area (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05 vs. con).
Furthermore, RT-PCR and western blot showed that the mRNA and protein expression 
of pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 (Pdx1) in the pancreas were upregulated
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01 vs. con). Moreover, the expression level of ER stress
markers of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), CCAAT-enhancer-binding
protein homologous protein (CHOP) and phosphorylated eukaryotic initiation factor
2a (eIF2a) were downregulated in the pancreas of atorvastatin-treated mice
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01 vs. con). Besides, atorvastatin protected the
pancreatic ß cell line of NIT-1 from cholesterol-induced apoptosis. Western blot 
showed increased expression of anti-apoptotic protein of B-cell lymphoma 2
(Bcl-2).
CONCLUSION: Pancreatic ß cell function of obese C57BL/6 J mice was preserved
after atorvastatin treatment, and this improvement may be attributed to enhanced 
pancreas proliferation and amelioration of pancreatic ER stress.

PMCID: PMC4078942
PMID: 24950764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 1;289(31):21544-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.558890. Epub 2014
Jun 17.

Role of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-induced sensitization of p53-deficient human colon cancer cells to tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)-mediated
apoptosis through up-regulation of death receptor 5 (DR5) by zerumbone and
celecoxib.

Edagawa M(1), Kawauchi J(2), Hirata M(2), Goshima H(2), Inoue M(2), Okamoto T(3),
Murakami A(4), Maehara Y(3), Kitajima S(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, 113-8510, Japan, the Department of Surgery 
and Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
812-8582, Japan, and. (2)From the Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical
Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, 113-8510, Japan. 
(3)the Department of Surgery and Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan, and. (4)the Division of Food Science
and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8502, Japan. (5)From the Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research
Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, 113-8510, Japan,
kita.bgen@mri.tmd.ac.jp.

Death receptor 5 (DR5) is a death domain-containing transmembrane receptor that
triggers cell death upon binding to its ligand, TNF-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand (TRAIL), and a combination of TRAIL and agents that increase the
expression of DR5 is expected to be a novel anticancer therapy. In this report,
we demonstrate that the stress response gene ATF3 is required for endoplasmic
reticulum stress-mediated DR5 induction upon zerumbone (ZER) and celecoxib (CCB) 
in human p53-deficient colorectal cancer cells. Both agents activated PERK-eIF2a 
kinases and induced the expression of activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4)-CCAAT enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) homologous protein, which were
remarkably suppressed by reactive oxygen species scavengers. In the absence of
ATF3, the induction of DR5 mRNA and protein was abrogated significantly, and this
was associated with reduced cell death by cotreatment of TRAIL with ZER or CCB.
By contrast, exogenous expression of ATF3 caused a more rapid and elevated
expression of DR5, resulting in enhanced sensitivity to apoptotic cell death by
TRAIL/ZER or TRAIL/CCB. A reporter assay demonstrated that at least two ATF/cAMP 
response element motifs as well as C/EBP homologous protein motif at the proximal
region of the human DR5 gene promoter were required for ZER-induced DR5 gene
transcription. Taken together, our results provide novel insights into the role
of ATF3 as an essential transcription factor for p53-independent DR5 induction
upon both ZER and CCB treatment, and this may be a useful biomarker for
TRAIL-based anticancer therapy.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4118115
PMID: 24939851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Aging Cell. 2014 Oct;13(5):817-27. doi: 10.1111/acel.12238. Epub 2014 Jun 17.

Methionine restriction restores a younger metabolic phenotype in adult mice with 
alterations in fibroblast growth factor 21.

Lees EK(1), Król E, Grant L, Shearer K, Wyse C, Moncur E, Bykowska AS, Mody N,
Gettys TW, Delibegovic M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Life Sciences and Medicine,
University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK.

Methionine restriction (MR) decreases body weight and adiposity and improves
glucose homeostasis in rodents. Similar to caloric restriction, MR extends
lifespan, but is accompanied by increased food intake and energy expenditure.
Most studies have examined MR in young animals; therefore, the aim of this study 
was to investigate the ability of MR to reverse age-induced obesity and insulin
resistance in adult animals. Male C57BL/6J mice aged 2 and 12 months old were fed
MR (0.172% methionine) or control diet (0.86% methionine) for 8 weeks or 48 h.
Food intake and whole-body physiology were assessed and serum/tissues analyzed
biochemically. Methionine restriction in 12-month-old mice completely reversed
age-induced alterations in body weight, adiposity, physical activity, and glucose
tolerance to the levels measured in healthy 2-month-old control-fed mice. This
was despite a significant increase in food intake in 12-month-old MR-fed mice.
Methionine restriction decreased hepatic lipogenic gene expression and caused a
remodeling of lipid metabolism in white adipose tissue, alongside increased
insulin-induced phosphorylation of the insulin receptor (IR) and Akt in
peripheral tissues. Mice restricted of methionine exhibited increased circulating
and hepatic gene expression levels of FGF21, phosphorylation of eIF2a, and
expression of ATF4, with a concomitant decrease in IRE1a phosphorylation.
Short-term 48-h MR treatment increased hepatic FGF21 expression/secretion and
insulin signaling and improved whole-body glucose homeostasis without affecting
body weight. Our findings suggest that MR feeding can reverse the negative
effects of aging on body mass, adiposity, and insulin resistance through an FGF21
mechanism. These findings implicate MR dietary intervention as a viable therapy
for age-induced metabolic syndrome in adult humans.

© 2014 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley
& Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4331744
PMID: 24935677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Cell Biol. 2014 Jun 23;205(6):771-80. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201403138. Epub 2014 Jun
16.

HDAC4 integrates PTH and sympathetic signaling in osteoblasts.

Obri A(1), Makinistoglu MP(1), Zhang H(2), Karsenty G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032. (2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655. (3)Department of Genetics and 
Development, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032 gk2172@columbia.edu.

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) and the sympathetic tone promote Rankl expression in
osteoblasts and osteoclast differentiation by enhancing cyclic adenosine
monophosphate production through an unidentified transcription factor for PTH and
through ATF4 for the sympathetic tone. How two extracellular cues using the same 
second messenger in the same cell elicit different transcriptional events is
unknown. In this paper, we show that PTH favors Rankl expression by triggering
the ubiquitination of HDAC4, a class II histone deacetylase, via Smurf2. HDAC4
degradation releases MEF2c, which transactivates the Rankl promoter. Conversely, 
sympathetic signaling in osteoblasts favors the accumulation of HDAC4 in the
nucleus and its association with ATF4. In this context, HDAC4 increases Rankl
expression. Because of its ability to differentially connect two extracellular
cues to the genome of osteoblasts, HDAC4 is a critical regulator of osteoclast
differentiation.

© 2014 Obri et al.

PMCID: PMC4068141
PMID: 24934156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 11;9(6):e99728. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099728. eCollection
2014.

Uridine affects liver protein glycosylation, insulin signaling, and heme
biosynthesis.

Urasaki Y(1), Pizzorno G(1), Le TT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nevada Cancer Institute, Las Vegas, Nevada, United States of America; Desert
Research Institute, Las Vegas, Nevada, United States of America.

Purines and pyrimidines are complementary bases of the genetic code. The roles of
purines and their derivatives in cellular signal transduction and energy
metabolism are well-known. In contrast, the roles of pyrimidines and their
derivatives in cellular function remain poorly understood. In this study, the
roles of uridine, a pyrimidine nucleoside, in liver metabolism are examined in
mice. We report that short-term uridine administration in C57BL/6J mice increases
liver protein glycosylation profiles, reduces phosphorylation level of insulin
signaling proteins, and activates the HRI-eIF-2a-ATF4 heme-deficiency stress
response pathway. Short-term uridine administration is also associated with
reduced liver hemin level and reduced ability for insulin-stimulated blood
glucose removal during an insulin tolerance test. Some of the short-term effects 
of exogenous uridine in C57BL/6J mice are conserved in transgenic UPase1-/- mice 
with long-term elevation of endogenous uridine level. UPase1-/- mice exhibit
activation of the liver HRI-eIF-2a-ATF4 heme-deficiency stress response pathway. 
UPase1-/- mice also exhibit impaired ability for insulin-stimulated blood glucose
removal. However, other short-term effects of exogenous uridine in C57BL/6J mice 
are not conserved in UPase1-/- mice. UPase1-/- mice exhibit normal
phosphorylation level of liver insulin signaling proteins and increased liver
hemin concentration compared to untreated control C57BL/6J mice. Contrasting
short-term and long-term consequences of uridine on liver metabolism suggest that
uridine exerts transient effects and elicits adaptive responses. Taken together, 
our data support potential roles of pyrimidines and their derivatives in the
regulation of liver metabolism.

PMCID: PMC4053524
PMID: 24918436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 18;450(1):459-63. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.143. Epub 2014 Jun 8.

Activation of ER stress by hydrogen peroxide in C2C12 myotubes.

Pierre N(1), Barbé C(1), Gilson H(1), Deldicque L(2), Raymackers JM(1), Francaux 
M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Université catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve,
Belgium. (2)Department of Kinesiology, Exercise Physiology Research Group, KU
Leuven, Belgium. (3)Institute of Neuroscience, Université catholique de Louvain, 
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium. Electronic address: marc.francaux@uclouvain.be.

The purpose of this study was to examine the link between oxidative stress and
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in myogenic cells. C2C12 myotubes were
incubated with hydrogen peroxide (H2O2, 200 µM) and harvested 4h or 17 h after
the induction of this oxidative stress. A massive upregulation of binding
immunoglobulin protein (BiP) was found, indicating the presence of ER stress.
Nevertheless, the three branches of the unfolded protein response (UPR) were not 
activated to the same extent. The double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase
(PKR)-like ER kinase (PERK) branch was the most activated as shown by the
increase of phospho-eukaryotic translation-initiation factor 2a (eIF2a, Ser51)
and the mRNA levels of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), C/EBP homologous
(CHOP) and tribbles homolog 3 (TRB3). The slight increase in the spliced form of 
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1s) together with the decrease of the unspliced form 
(XBP1u) indicated a higher endoribonuclease activity of inositol-requiring 1a
(IRE1a). The transcriptional activity of activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6)
remained unchanged after incubation with H2O2. The mechanisms by which the three 
branches of UPR can be specifically regulated by oxidative stress are currently
unresolved and need further investigations.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24915138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2014 Jul;160(1):73-8. doi: 10.1007/s12011-014-0034-4. Epub
2014 Jun 7.

Study on changes of clinical indicators and key proteins from fluoride exposure.

He H(1), Wang H, Han M, Jiao Y, Ma C, Zhang H, Zhou Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Criteria and Risk Assessment, Chinese
Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100012,
China.

Comment in
    Biol Trace Elem Res. 2014 Oct;161(1):1-2.

Few studies have evaluated the biomarker changes of fluoride exposure. In order
to explore early and sensitive indicators, animal experiment was designed.
Ninety-six healthy SD rats (48 males and 48 females) weighing approximately 60 g 
were randomly divided into six groups of 16 animals each by gender average.
Control animals were supplied with distilled water only as group 1. Exposure
groups' animals were treated with 2, 4, 8, 16, and 32 mg NaF/kg bw, respectively,
as groups 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. Our study found that contents of white blood cell
(WBC), lymphocyte percentage (LYMPH%), lymphocyte (LYM), mean platelet volume
(MPV), and platelet distribution width (PDW) increased significantly in
high-fluoride-exposure groups (p < 0.05), which revealed that immune system may
be interfered by high fluoride. Meanwhile, levels of alanine aminotransaminase
(ALT), aspartate aminotransaminase (AST), and ALT/AST in groups 5 and 6 decreased
significantly compared to those in control group (p < 0.05), as well as the
concentration of uric acid (UA) in groups 3, 4, 5, and 6 exhibited the same
trends (p < 0.05). On the contrary, the level of blood B2 microglobulin (BB2MG)
increased significantly (p < 0.05) in groups 4, 5, and 6. Changes of ALT, AST,
UA, and BB2MG suggested the functions of the liver and kidney be altered by
fluoride exposure. At the same time, the ATF4 content decreased gradually with
the increase of fluoride concentration; furthermore, a highly significant (r
=<U+2009>-0.586, p < 0.01) negative relationship between ATF4 content and fluoride
exposure level was found. Results meant that clinical indicators cannot act as
indicators of high fluoride exposure, and it also suggested that protein ATF4
might be the early and sensitive indicator in epidemiologic study of high
fluoride exposure.

PMID: 24907160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 6;9(6):e99378. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099378. eCollection 
2014.

Finding ATF4/p75NTR/IL-8 signal pathway in endothelial-mesenchymal transition by 
safrole oxide.

Ge D(1), Jing Q(2), Zhao W(1), Yue H(1), Su L(1), Zhang S(1), Zhao J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Cells and Developmental Biology, 
School of Life Science, Shandong University, Jinan, China. (2)Institute of
Poultry Science, Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Jinan, China.

Targeting the endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EndoMT) may be a novel
therapeutic strategy for cancer and various diseases induced by fibrosis. We
aimed to identify a small chemical molecule as an inducer of EndoMT and find a
new signal pathway by using the inducer. Safrole oxide (SFO), 50 µg/ml, could
most effectively induce EndoMT within 12 h. To understand the underlying
molecular mechanism, we performed microarray, quantitative real-time PCR and
western blot analysis to find key factors involved in SFO-induced EndoMT and
demonstrated the involvement of the factors by RNAi. The expression of activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR), and
interleukin 8 (IL-8) was greatly increased in SFO-induced EndoMT. Knockdown of
ATF4 inhibited the SFO-induced EndoMT completely, and knockdown of p75NTR or IL-8
partially inhibited the EndoMT, which suggests that all three factors were
involved in the process. Furthermore, knockdown of p75NTR inhibited the
SFO-increased IL-8 expression and secretion, and knockdown of ATF4 inhibited
SFO-increased p75NTR level significantly. The ATF4/p75NTR/IL-8 signal pathway may
have an important role in EndoMT induced by SFO. Our findings support potential
novel targets for the therapeutics of cancer and fibrosis disease.

PMCID: PMC4048316
PMID: 24905361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:807874. doi: 10.1155/2014/807874. Epub 2014 May 11.

ATF4- and CHOP-dependent induction of FGF21 through endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Wan XS(1), Lu XH(2), Xiao YC(3), Lin Y(4), Zhu H(5), Ding T(2), Yang Y(3), Huang 
Y(3), Zhang Y(5), Liu YL(3), Xu ZM(3), Xiao J(6), Li XK(7).

Author information: 
(1)College of Basic Medical Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun 130021, China. 
(2)Translation Medicine Research Center, Lishui People's Hospital, Wenzhou
Medical University, Lishui, Zhejiang 323000, China. (3)Molecular Pharmacology
Research Center, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Engineering, 
School of Pharmaceutical Science, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang
325035, China. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, Xiamen Hospital of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Xiamen 361000, China. (5)Department of Endocrinology, The First
Affiliated Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 323000, China.
(6)Translation Medicine Research Center, Lishui People's Hospital, Wenzhou
Medical University, Lishui, Zhejiang 323000, China ; Molecular Pharmacology
Research Center, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Engineering, 
School of Pharmaceutical Science, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang
325035, China. (7)College of Basic Medical Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun 
130021, China ; Molecular Pharmacology Research Center, Key Laboratory of
Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Engineering, School of Pharmaceutical Science,
Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325035, China.

Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) is an important endogenous regulator involved
in the regulation of glucose and lipid metabolism. FGF21 expression is strongly
induced in animal and human subjects with metabolic diseases, but little is known
about the molecular mechanism. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress plays an
essential role in metabolic homeostasis and is observed in numerous pathological 
processes, including type 2 diabetes, overweight, nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD). In this study, we investigate the correlation between the
expression of FGF21 and ER stress. We demonstrated that TG-induced ER stress
directly regulated the expression and secretion of FGF21 in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. FGF21 is the target gene for activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4) and CCAAT enhancer binding protein homologous protein (CHOP).
Suppression of CHOP impaired the transcriptional activation of FGF21 by
TG-induced ER stress in CHOP-/- mouse primary hepatocytes (MPH), and
overexpression of ATF4 and CHOP resulted in FGF21 promoter activation to initiate
the transcriptional programme. In mRNA stability assay, we indicated that ER
stress increased the half-life of mRNA of FGF21 significantly. In conclusion,
FGF21 expression is regulated by ER stress via ATF- and CHOP-dependent
transcriptional mechanism and posttranscriptional mechanism, respectively.

PMCID: PMC4037570
PMID: 24900988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 18;289(29):20102-19. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.551069. Epub
2014 Jun 4.

The nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-ß/d (PPARß/d)
promotes oncogene-induced cellular senescence through repression of endoplasmic
reticulum stress.

Zhu B(1), Ferry CH(1), Markell LK(1), Blazanin N(1), Glick AB(1), Gonzalez FJ(2),
Peters JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences and The Center for
Molecular Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania 16802 and. (2)the Laboratory of Metabolism, NCI,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892. (3)From the Department
of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences and The Center for Molecular Toxicology and
Carcinogenesis, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 
16802 and jmp21@psu.edu.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and ER stress-associated unfolded protein
response (UPR) can promote cancer cell survival, but it remains unclear whether
they can influence oncogene-induced senescence. The present study examined the
role of ER stress in senescence using oncogene-dependent models. Increased ER
stress attenuated senescence in part by up-regulating phosphorylated protein
kinase B (p-AKT) and decreasing phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (p-ERK). A positive feed forward loop between p-AKT, ER stress, and UPR
was discovered whereby a transient increase of ER stress caused reduced
senescence and promotion of tumorigenesis. Decreased ER stress was further
correlated with increased senescence in both mouse and human tumors.
Interestingly, H-RAS-expressing Pparß/d null cells and tumors having increased
cell proliferation exhibited enhanced ER stress, decreased cellular senescence,
and/or enhanced tumorigenicity. Collectively, these results demonstrate a new
role for ER stress and UPR that attenuates H-RAS-induced senescence and suggest
that PPARß/d can repress this oncogene-induced ER stress to promote senescence in
accordance with its role as a tumor modifier that suppresses carcinogenesis.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4106326
PMID: 24898257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Aug 1;307(3):E245-61. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00010.2014. Epub 2014 Jun 3.

p53 and ATF4 mediate distinct and additive pathways to skeletal muscle atrophy
during limb immobilization.

Fox DK(1), Ebert SM(1), Bongers KS(1), Dyle MC(1), Bullard SA(2), Dierdorff
JM(1), Kunkel SD(1), Adams CM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Roy 
J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City,
Iowa; and. (2)Departments of Internal Medicine and Molecular Physiology and
Biophysics, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, Iowa; and Iowa City Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Iowa City, Iowa. 
(3)Departments of Internal Medicine and Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Roy 
J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City,
Iowa; and Iowa City Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Iowa City, Iowa
christopher-adams@uiowa.edu.

Immobilization causes skeletal muscle atrophy via complex signaling pathways that
are not well understood. To better understand these pathways, we investigated the
roles of p53 and ATF4, two transcription factors that mediate adaptations to a
variety of cellular stresses. Using mouse models, we demonstrate that 3 days of
muscle immobilization induces muscle atrophy and increases expression of p53 and 
ATF4. Furthermore, muscle fibers lacking p53 or ATF4 are partially resistant to
immobilization-induced muscle atrophy, and forced expression of p53 or ATF4
induces muscle fiber atrophy in the absence of immobilization. Importantly,
however, p53 and ATF4 do not require each other to promote atrophy, and
coexpression of p53 and ATF4 induces more atrophy than either transcription
factor alone. Moreover, muscle fibers lacking both p53 and ATF4 are more
resistant to immobilization-induced atrophy than fibers lacking only p53 or ATF4.
Interestingly, the independent and additive nature of the p53 and ATF4 pathways
allows for combinatorial control of at least one downstream effector, p21. Using 
genome-wide mRNA expression arrays, we identified p21 mRNA as a skeletal muscle
transcript that is highly induced in immobilized muscle via the combined actions 
of p53 and ATF4. Additionally, in mouse muscle, p21 induces atrophy in a manner
that does not require immobilization, p53 or ATF4, and p21 is required for
atrophy induced by immobilization, p53, and ATF4. Collectively, these results
identify p53 and ATF4 as essential and complementary mediators of
immobilization-induced muscle atrophy and discover p21 as a critical downstream
effector of the p53 and ATF4 pathways.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4121573
PMID: 24895282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Oct;35(10):2272-81. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.04.031. Epub 2014 May 2.

PERK mediates eIF2a phosphorylation responsible for BACE1 elevation, CREB
dysfunction and neurodegeneration in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Devi L(1), Ohno M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Dementia Research, Nathan Kline Institute, Orangeburg, NY, USA.
(2)Center for Dementia Research, Nathan Kline Institute, Orangeburg, NY, USA;
Department of Psychiatry, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York,
NY, USA. Electronic address: mohno@nki.rfmh.org.

Emerging evidence suggests that aberrant phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation
factor-2a (eIF2a) may induce synaptic failure and neurodegeneration through
persistent translational inhibition of global protein synthesis. However,
elevated phospho-eIF2a also paradoxically causes translational activation of a
subset of messenger RNAs such as the ß-secretase enzyme, ß-site APP-cleaving
enzyme 1 (BACE1) and cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) repressor,
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). Therefore, we tested whether genetic
reduction of the eIF2a kinase PERK may prevent these deleterious events and
mitigate Alzheimer's disease (AD)-like neuropathology and cognitive impairments
in the 5XFAD mouse model. PERK haploinsufficiency blocked overactivation of the
PERK-eIF2a pathway, as evidenced by significant reductions in phosphorylation of 
PERK and eIF2a, in 5XFAD mice. PERK haploinsufficiency was sufficient to rescue
memory deficits and cholinergic neurodegeneration in this AD model. Notably, PERK
haploinsufficiency also prevented BACE1 elevations, resulting in reduced levels
of amyloid-ß peptides and plaque burden in 5XFAD mice. Moreover, CREB dysfunction
was restored in PERK(+/-)·5XFAD mice concomitant with reversal of ATF4
upregulation. Together, these findings suggest that PERK may be a
disease-modifying therapeutic target to prevent multiple memory-disrupting
mechanisms associated with AD.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4127890
PMID: 24889041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2014 Sep;28(9):413-7. doi: 10.1002/jbt.21579. Epub 2014
May 30.

Assessment of ER Stress and autophagy induced by ionizing radiation in both
radiotherapy patients and ex vivo irradiated samples.

Saglar E(1), Unlu S, Babalioglu I, Gokce SC, Mergen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Hacettepe University, Beytepe,
Ankara, Turkey. esaglar@hacettepe.edu.tr.

Acute radiation leads to several toxic clinical states and triggers some
molecular pathways. To shed light on molecular mechanisms triggered by ionizing
radiation (IR), we examined the expression profiles of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress and autophagy-related genes in individuals who were exposed to IR. Blood
samples were collected from 50 cancer patients before radiotherapy and on the
5th, 15th, and 25th days of the treatment. Peripheral blood samples from 10
healthy volunteers were also obtained for ex vivo irradiation, divided into five 
and irradiated at a rate of 373 kGy/h to 0, 0.1, 0.5, 1, and 3Gy <U+03B3>-rays using a
constant gamma source. GRP78, ATG5, LC3, ATF4, XBP1, and GADD153 genes were
analyzed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (QRT-PCR) using beta
2 microglobulin (B2M) and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) as
references. In both groups, expressions of the selected genes have increased. It 
can be concluded that IR induces ER stress and related authophagy pathway in the 
peripheral lymphocyte cells proportionally by dose.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24888459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Biomed Sci. 2014 May 4;21:38. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-21-38.

Valproate pretreatment protects pancreatic ß-cells from palmitate-induced ER
stress and apoptosis by inhibiting glycogen synthase kinase-3ß.

Huang S, Zhu M, Wu W, Rashid A, Liang Y, Hou L, Ning Q, Luo X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, No,1095, Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan, Hubei
Province 430030, P,R, China. xpluo@tjh.tjmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Reduction of pancreatic ß-cells mass, major secondary to increased
ß-cells apoptosis, is increasingly recognized as one of the main contributing
factors to the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes (T2D), and saturated free fatty
acid palmitate has been shown to induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress that
may contribute to promoting ß-cells apoptosis. Recent literature suggests that
valproate, a diffusely prescribed drug in the treatment of epilepsy and bipolar
disorder, can inhibit glycogen synthase kinase-3ß (GSK-3ß) activity and has
cytoprotective effects in neuronal cells and HepG2 cells. Thus, we hypothesized
that valproate may protect INS-1 ß-cells from palmitate-induced apoptosis via
inhibiting GSK-3ß.
RESULTS: Valproate pretreatment remarkable prevented palmitate-mediated
cytotoxicity and apoptosis (lipotoxicity) as well as ER distension. Furthermore, 
palmitate triggered ER stress as evidenced by increased mRNA levels of C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP) and activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) in a
time-dependent fashion. However, valproate not only reduced the mRNA and protein 
expression of CHOP but also inhibited GSK-3ß and caspase-3 activity induced by
palmitate, whereas, the mRNA expression of ATF4 was not affected. Interestingly, 
TDZD-8, a specific GSK-3ß inhibitor, also showed the similar effect on
lipotoxicity and ER stress as valproate in INS-1 cells. Finally, compared with
CHOP knockdown, valproate displayed better cytoprotection against palmitate.
CONCLUSIONS: Valproate may protect ß-cells from palmitate-induced apoptosis and
ER stress via GSK-3ß inhibition, independent of ATF4/CHOP pathway. Besides,
GSK-3ß, rather than CHOP, may be a more promising therapeutic target for T2D.

PMCID: PMC4084580
PMID: 24884462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 29;5:e1270. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.200.

Involvement of p38 in signal switching from autophagy to apoptosis via the
PERK/eIF2a/ATF4 axis in selenite-treated NB4 cells.

Jiang Q(1), Li F(1), Shi K(1), Wu P(1), An J(1), Yang Y(1), Xu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences and School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.

Selenite has emerged as an optional chemotherapeutic agent for hematological
malignancies. Autophagy and apoptosis are both engaged in selenite-induced cell
death. In a previous report, we have identified heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) as 
a critical modulator of the balance between autophagy and apoptosis in
selenite-treated leukemia cells. However, the mechanisms by which selenite
mediates the crosstalk between autophagy and apoptosis remain largely unknown.
Herein, we demonstrate that the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-related
PERK/eIF2a/ATF4 pathway and p38 are core modules for the selenite-induced switch 
to apoptosis from autophagy. We found that selenite activated PERK and eIF2a/ATF4
downstream to promote apoptosis. During this progression, p38 was dissociated
from PERK-inhibiting Hsp90 and became autophosphorylated. Then, activated p38
further enhanced the docking of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) onto the
CHOP (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein) promoter via eIF2a to
enhance apoptosis. We also found that activated p38 suppressed the
phosphorylation of eIF4E that directed ATF4 to bind to the MAP1LC3B
(microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3B) promoter. Because of the
deactivation of eIF4E, the association of ATF4 with the MAP1LC3B promoter was
inhibited, and autophagy was compromised. Intriguingly, p53 played important
roles in mediating the p38-mediated regulation of eIF2a and eIF4E. When activated
by p38, p53 induced the phosphorylation of eIF2a and the dephosphorylation of
eIF4E, particularly in the nucleus where the ATF4 transcription factor was
modulated, ultimately resulting in differential expression of CHOP and LC3.
Moreover, selenite exhibited potent antitumor effects in vivo. In an NB4 cell
xenograft model, selenite induced apoptosis and hampered autophagy. In addition, 
related signaling proteins demonstrated similar changes to those observed in
vitro. These data suggest that selenite may be a candidate drug for leukemia
therapy.

PMCID: PMC4047911
PMID: 24874742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Br J Nutr. 2014 Aug 28;112(4):573-82. doi: 10.1017/S0007114514001093. Epub 2014
May 28.

Postprandial inflammation is not associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress in 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy lean men.

Kracmerová J(1), Czudková E(1), Koc M(1), Maliová L(1), iklová M(1), tich
V(1), Rossmeislová L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sport Medicine,Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in 
Prague, Ruská 87,100 00,Prague 10,Czech Republic.

The consumption of lipids and simple sugars induces an inflammatory response
whose exact molecular trigger remains elusive. The aims of the present study were
to investigate (1) whether inflammation induced by a single high-energy, high-fat
meal (HFM) is associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and (2) whether these inflammatory and ERS
responses could be prevented by the chemical chaperone ursodeoxycholic acid
(UDCA). A total of ten healthy lean men were recruited to a randomised, blind,
cross-over trial. Subjects were given two doses of placebo (lactose) or UDCA
before the consumption of a HFM (6151 kJ; 47·4 % lipids). Blood was collected at 
baseline and 4 h after the HFM challenge. Cell populations and their activation
were analysed using flow cytometry, and plasma levels of inflammatory cytokines
were assessed by ELISA and Luminex technology. Gene expression levels of
inflammatory and ERS markers were analysed in CD14<U+207A> and CD14<U+207B> PBMC using
quantitative RT-PCR. The HFM induced an increase in the mRNA expression levels of
pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1ß, 2·1-fold; IL-8, 2·4-fold; TNF-a, 1·4-fold;
monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, 2·1-fold) and a decrease in the expression
levels of miR181 (0·8-fold) in CD14<U+207A> monocytes. The HFM challenge did not
up-regulate the expression of ERS markers (XBP1, HSPA5, EDEM1, DNAJC3 and ATF4)
in either CD14<U+207A> or CD14<U+207B> cell populations, except for ATF3 (2·3-fold). The
administration of UDCA before the consumption of the HFM did not alter the
HFM-induced change in the expression levels of ERS or inflammatory markers. In
conclusion, HFM-induced inflammation detectable on the level of gene expression
in PBMC was not associated with the concomitant increase in the expression levels
of ERS markers and could not be prevented by UDCA.

PMID: 24870697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jul;59(7):1461-74. doi: 10.1007/s10620-014-3217-0. Epub 2014
May 28.

Tauroursodeoxycholic acid attenuates progression of steatohepatitis in mice fed a
methionine-choline-deficient diet.

Cho EJ(1), Yoon JH, Kwak MS, Jang ES, Lee JH, Yu SJ, Kim YJ, Kim CY, Lee HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Liver Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul, 110-744, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been implicated in the 
development of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. A methionine-choline-deficient (MCD)
diet induces robust ER stress response and steatohepatitis, but the effects of ER
stress modulation on the course of steatohepatitis remain uncertain. The present 
study evaluated whether reducing ER stress using the chemical chaperone
tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) could limit hepatocyte lipoapoptosis and
progression of MCD diet-induced steatohepatitis.
METHODS: HuH7 cells stably transfected with sodium taurocholate cotransporting
polypeptide (HuH-Ntcp cells) and palmitate (PA) were used. Experimental
steatohepatitis was induced in male C57BL/6 mice using an MCD diet, and three
different doses of TUDCA (500, or 1,000 mg/kg, once daily; or 500 mg/kg twice
daily) were administered by gavage from the start of the MCD diet regimen or
after 4 weeks.
RESULTS: TUDCA reduced PA-induced ER stress as manifested by decreased eIF2a
phosphorylation, XBP1 splicing and expression of BiP, ATF4, and CHOP in HuH-Ntcp 
cells. TUDCA also decreased PA-induced JNK phosphorylation, Puma up-regulation
and Bax activation, which in turn suppressed caspase-dependent hepatocyte
lipoapoptosis. Mice given TUDCA did not show a significant decrease in the
intrahepatic triglyceride contents and steatosis. However, TUDCA treatment
significantly reduced hepatic damage compared to controls for both early and late
treatment groups. TUDCA treatment reduced the expression of ER stress markers and
pro-apoptotic proteins, leading to decreased apoptosis and oxidative stress.
Finally, TUDCA reduced histological fibrosis along with the down-regulation of
pro-fibrotic gene expression in both early and late treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that TUDCA attenuates the progression of MCD
diet-induced steatohepatitis by reducing ER stress.

PMID: 24865256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Environ Sci Technol. 2014 Jun 17;48(12):7062-8. doi: 10.1021/es5019948. Epub 2014
Jun 5.

Mechanisms of selenomethionine developmental toxicity and the impacts of combined
hypersaline conditions on Japanese medaka (Oryzias latipes).

Kupsco A(1), Schlenk D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, University of California- Riverside ,
Riverside, California 92507, United States.

Selenium (Se) is an essential micronutrient that can cause embryotoxicty at
levels 7-30 times above essential concentrations. Exposure to hypersaline
conditions and 50 µM selenomethionine (SeMet) decreased embryo hatch and depleted
glutathione in Japanese medaka embryos without affecting Se accumulation. To
better understand the impacts of nonchemical stressors on developmental toxicity 
of Se in fish, several adverse outcome pathways were evaluated in the Japanese
medaka (Oryzias latipes). We treated medaka embryos at 12 h post fertilization
with 50 µM SeMet for 12 hours in freshwater or in 13 ppth hypersalinity and
evaluated the contributions of oxidative stress, the unfolded protein response
and apoptosis to reduced hatch. Exposure to SeMet and hypersalinity decreased
embryo hatch to 3.7% ± 1.95, and induced teratogenesis in 100% ± 0 of hatched
embryos. In contrast, treatments of freshwater, saltwater, and SeMet in
freshwater resulted in 89.8% ± 3.91-86.7% ± 3.87 hatch, and no significant
increase in deformities. We found no significant differences in lipid
peroxidation, indicating that oxidative stress may not be responsible for the
observed toxicity in embryos at this time point (24 h). Although significant
changes in apoptosis were not observed, we witnessed up to 100 fold increases in 
transcripts of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperone, immunoglobulin binding
protein (BiP) and trends toward increasing downstream signals, activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and ATF6 indicating potential contributions of the 
unfolded protein response to the effects of SeMet and hypersaline conditions.
These data indicate that multiple adverse outcome pathways may be responsible for
the developmental toxicity of Se and salinity, and these pathways may be time
dependent.

PMCID: PMC4066905
PMID: 24856650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 22;5:e1240. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.203.

HKH40A downregulates GRP78/BiP expression in cancer cells.

Kosakowska-Cholody T(1), Lin J(1), Srideshikan SM(1), Scheffer L(1), Tarasova
NI(2), Acharya JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Signaling, National Cancer Institute at
Frederick, Frederick, MD, USA. (2)Cancer and Inflammation Program, National
Cancer Institute at Frederick, Frederick, MD, USA.

HKH40A, the 8-methoxy analog of WMC79, is a synthetic agent with promising in
vitro and in vivo antitumor activity, especially against solid tumors. However,
molecular mechanisms underlying its antitumor effects are poorly understood.
Here, we report that HKH40A markedly reduces the level of GRP78/BiP protein in
cancer cell lines of various origin. In this study, we show that HKH40A not only 
downregulates transcription of GRP78 but also directly binds to the isolated
protein and induces its proteosomal degradation. Knockdown of BiP increased the
efficacy of the drug and overexpression of BiP diminished its activity. BiP is
generally highly elevated in solid tumors having a pivotal role in cancer cell
survival and chemoresistance, and has been suggested as a novel target for
therapeutic intervention. We show that reduction of BiP level by HKH40A impairs
its function and induces unfolded protein response as evidenced by the activation
of IRE1a, ATF6 and PERK. This leads to a series of downstream events, including
sustained eIF2a phosphorylation, increased abundance of spliced XBP1 mRNA and
protein levels of ATF4 and CHOP. We also demonstrate that HKH40A inhibited tumor 
formation in an in vivo xenograft tumor model. Collectively, our data show that
HKH40A reduces BiP levels and this could have an important role in the activity
of HKH40A against cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4047900
PMID: 24853418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Aug 4;228(3):170-8. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.05.012. Epub
2014 May 20.

Anacardic acid induces cell apoptosis associated with induction of ATF4-dependent
endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Huang H(1), Hua X(1), Liu N(2), Li X(1), Liu S(1), Chen X(1), Zhao C(1), Lan
X(1), Yang C(1), Dou QP(3), Liu J(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab of Respiratory Disease, Protein Modification and Degradation
Lab, Department of Pathophysiology, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangdong
510182, People's Republic of China. (2)State Key Lab of Respiratory Disease,
Protein Modification and Degradation Lab, Department of Pathophysiology,
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangdong 510182, People's Republic of China;
Guangzhou Research Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, The Second Affiliated
Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510260, People's
Republic of China. (3)State Key Lab of Respiratory Disease, Protein Modification 
and Degradation Lab, Department of Pathophysiology, Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangdong 510182, People's Republic of China; The Molecular Therapeutics Program,
Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, and Departments of Oncology, Pharmacology 
and Pathology, School of Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI
48201-2013, USA. (4)State Key Lab of Respiratory Disease, Protein Modification
and Degradation Lab, Department of Pathophysiology, Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangdong 510182, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
jliu@gzhmu.edu.cn.

Anacardic acid (6-pentadecylsalicylic acid, AA), a natural compound isolated from
the traditional medicine Amphipterygium adstringens, has been reported to possess
antitumor activities. However, its molecular targets have not been thoroughly
studied. Here, we report that AA is a potent inducer of endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress, leading to apoptosis in hepatoma HepG2 and myeloma U266 cells.
Induction of ER stress by AA was supported by a dose- and time-dependent increase
in expression of the ER signaling downstream molecules, such as GRP78/BiP,
phosphorylated eIF2a, ATF4 and CHOP in both HepG2 and U266 cell lines. Blockage
of ATF4 expression by siRNA partially inhibited, while knockdown of CHOP
expression by siRNA slightly increased AA-induced cell death in these cells. In
addition, AA suppressed HepG2 xenograft tumor growth, associated with increased
ER stress in vivo. These results suggest that AA induces tumor cell apoptosis
associated with ATF4-dependent ER stress.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 24853302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 May 20;15(5):8959-78. doi: 10.3390/ijms15058959.

Genes and gene networks involved in sodium fluoride-elicited cell death
accompanying endoplasmic reticulum stress in oral epithelial cells.

Tabuchi Y(1), Yunoki T(2), Hoshi N(3), Suzuki N(4), Kondo T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics Research, Life Science Research Center,
University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.
ytabu@cts.u-toyama.ac.jp. (2)Department of Radiological Sciences, Graduate School
of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani,
Toyama 930-0194, Japan. yunokiki@med.u-toyama.ac.jp. (3)Department of Animal
Science, Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai, 
Kobe 657-8501, Japan. nobhoshi@kobe-u.ac.jp. (4)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute
of Nature and Environmental Technology, Kanazawa University, Housu-gun, Ishikawa 
927-0553, Japan. nobuos@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (5)Department of Radiological
Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of 
Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan. kondot@med.u-toyama.ac.jp.

Here, to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying cell death induced by
sodium fluoride (NaF), we analyzed gene expression patterns in rat oral
epithelial ROE2 cells exposed to NaF using global-scale microarrays and
bioinformatics tools. A relatively high concentration of NaF (2 mM) induced cell 
death concomitant with decreases in mitochondrial membrane potential, chromatin
condensation and caspase-3 activation. Using 980 probe sets, we identified 432
up-regulated and 548 down-regulated genes, that were differentially expressed by 
>2.5-fold in the cells treated with 2 mM of NaF and categorized them into 4
groups by K-means clustering. Ingenuity® pathway analysis revealed several gene
networks from gene clusters. The gene networks Up-I and Up-II included many
up-regulated genes that were mainly associated with the biological function of
induction or prevention of cell death, respectively, such as Atf3, Ddit3 and Fos 
(for Up-I) and Atf4 and Hspa5 (for Up-II). Interestingly, knockdown of Ddit3 and 
Hspa5 significantly increased and decreased the number of viable cells,
respectively. Moreover, several endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-related genes
including, Ddit3, Atf4 and Hapa5, were observed in these gene networks. These
findings will provide further insight into the molecular mechanisms of
NaF-induced cell death accompanying ER stress in oral epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4057769
PMID: 24853129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jun 10;111(23):8482-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1310617111. Epub 2014 May 21.

Cbfß deletion in mice recapitulates cleidocranial dysplasia and reveals multiple 
functions of Cbfß required for skeletal development.

Chen W(1), Ma J(2), Zhu G(3), Jules J(3), Wu M(4), McConnell M(3), Tian F(3),
Paulson C(3), Zhou X(5), Wang L(6), Li YP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294; ypli@uab.edu wechen@uab.edu. (2)Department of Pathology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294;College of Stomatology, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, People's Republic of China; (3)Department of 
Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294;
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294;Institute of Genetics, Life Science College, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang 310058, People's Republic of China; and. (5)The State Key Laboratory of 
Oral Diseases, West China College of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
Sichuan 610041, People's Republic of China. (6)College of Stomatology, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, People's Republic of China;

The pathogenesis of cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) as well as the specific role of
core binding factor ß (Cbfß) and the Runt-related transcription factor
(RUNX)/Cbfß complex in postnatal skeletogenesis remain unclear. We demonstrate
that Cbfß ablation in osteoblast precursors, differentiating chondrocytes,
osteoblasts, and odontoblasts via Osterix-Cre, results in severe craniofacial
dysplasia, skeletal dysplasia, abnormal teeth, and a phenotype recapitulating the
clinical features of CCD. Cbfß(f/f)Osterix-Cre mice have fewer proliferative and 
hypertrophic chondrocytes, fewer osteoblasts, and almost absent trabecular bone, 
indicating that Cbfß may maintain trabecular bone formation through its function 
in hypertrophic chondrocytes and osteoblasts. Cbfß(f/f)Collagen, type 1, alpha 1 
(Col1a1)-Cre mice show decreased bone mineralization and skeletal deformities,
but no radical deformities in teeth, mandibles, or cartilage, indicating that
osteoblast lineage-specific ablation of Cbfß results in milder bone defects and
less resemblance to CCD. Activating transcription factor 4 (Atf4) and Osterix
protein levels in both mutant mice are dramatically reduced. ChIP assays show
that Cbfß directly associates with the promoter regions of Atf4 and Osterix. Our 
data further demonstrate that Cbfß highly up-regulates the expression of Atf4 at 
the transcriptional regulation level. Overall, our genetic dissection approach
revealed that Cbfß plays an indispensable role in postnatal skeletal development 
and homeostasis in various skeletal cell types, at least partially by
up-regulating the expression of Atf4 and Osterix. It also revealed that CCD may
result from functional defects of the Runx2/Cbfß heterodimeric complex in various
skeletal cells. These insights into the role of Cbfß in postnatal skeletogenesis 
and CCD pathogenesis may assist in the development of new therapies for CCD and
osteoporosis.

PMCID: PMC4060659
PMID: 24850862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Front Genet. 2014 May 9;5:122. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2014.00122. eCollection 2014.

The first international mini-symposium on methionine restriction and lifespan.

Ables GP(1), Brown-Borg HM(2), Buffenstein R(3), Church CD(4), Elshorbagy AK(5), 
Gladyshev VN(6), Huang TH(7), Miller RA(8), Mitchell JR(9), Richie JP(10), Rogina
B(11), Stipanuk MH(12), Orentreich DS(1), Orentreich N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Orentreich Foundation for the Advancement of Science, Cold Spring NY, USA.
(2)School of Medicine & Health Sciences, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks 
ND, USA. (3)University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio
TX, USA. (4)Harwell Science and Innovation Campus Oxfordshire, UK. (5)Department 
of Pharmacology, University of Oxford Oxford, UK ; Department of Physiology,
University of Alexandria Alexandria, Egypt. (6)Department of Medicine, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Harvard University, Boston MA, USA.
(7)Institute of Physical Education, Health and Leisure Studies, National Cheng
Kung University Tainan, Taiwan. (8)Geriatrics Center and Institute of
Gerontology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor MI, USA. (9)Department of Genetics
and Complex Diseases, Harvard School of Public Health, Harvard University Boston,
MA, USA. (10)Public Health Sciences, College of Medicine, Penn State University
Hershey, PA, USA. (11)University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington CT,
USA. (12)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University Ithaca, NY, USA.

It has been 20 years since the Orentreich Foundation for the Advancement of
Science, under the leadership Dr. Norman Orentreich, first reported that low
methionine (Met) ingestion by rats extends lifespan (Orentreich et al., 1993).
Since then, several studies have replicated the effects of dietary methionine
restricted (MR) in delaying age-related diseases (Richie et al., 1994; Miller et 
al., 2005; Ables et al., 2012; Sanchez-Roman and Barja, 2013). We report the
abstracts from the First International Mini-Symposium on Methionine Restriction
and Lifespan held in Tarrytown, NY, September 2013. The goals were (1) to gather 
researchers with an interest in MR and lifespan, (2) to exchange knowledge, (3)
to generate ideas for future investigations, and (4) to strengthen relationships 
within this community. The presentations highlighted the importance of research
on cysteine, growth hormone (GH), and ATF4 in the paradigm of aging. In addition,
the effects of dietary restriction or MR in the kidneys, liver, bones, and the
adipose tissue were discussed. The symposium also emphasized the value of other
species, e.g., the naked mole rat, Brandt's bat, and Drosophila, in aging
research. Overall, the symposium consolidated scientists with similar research
interests and provided opportunities to conduct future collaborative studies
(Figure 3).

PMCID: PMC4023024
PMID: 24847356  [PubMed]


390. PLoS One. 2014 May 20;9(5):e97880. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097880. eCollection
2014.

Luteolin modulates 6-hydroxydopamine-induced transcriptional changes of stress
response pathways in PC12 cells.

Hu LW(1), Yen JH(2), Shen YT(3), Wu KY(1), Wu MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and Science,
Tainan, Taiwan. (2)Department of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Tzu Chi
University, Hualien, Taiwan. (3)Department of Pharmacy, Chia Nan University of
Pharmacy and Science, Tainan, Taiwan.

The neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA), which causes transcriptional changes
associated with oxidative and proteotoxic stress, has been widely used to
generate an experimental model of Parkinson's disease. The food-derived compound 
luteolin has multi-target actions including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and
neurotrophic activities. The aim of this study is to investigate how luteolin
affects 6-OHDA-mediated stress response pathways. The results showed that when
PC12 cells were pre-treated with luteolin (20 µM) 30 min prior to 6-OHDA (100 µM)
exposure, 6-OHDA-induced ROS overproduction, cytotoxicity, caspase-3 activation, 
and mRNA expression of BIM, TRB3 and GADD34 were significantly attenuated.
Moreover, 6-OHDA-mediated cell cycle arrest and transcription of p53 target
genes, p21, GADD45a and PUMA, were reduced by luteolin. Luteolin also
significantly down-regulated 6-OHDA-mediated unfolded protein response (UPR),
leading to decreases in phospho-eIF2a, ATF4, GRP78 and CHOP. In addition,
luteolin attenuated 6-OHDA-induced Nrf2-mediated HO-1 and GCLC. Taken together,
these results suggest that diminishing intracellular ROS formation and
down-regulation of p53, UPR and Nrf2-ARE pathways may be involved in the
neuroprotective effect of luteolin.

PMCID: PMC4028259
PMID: 24846311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Eur J Nutr. 2015 Apr;54(3):377-89. doi: 10.1007/s00394-014-0717-9. Epub 2014 May 
20.

Pomegranate and green tea extracts protect against ER stress induced by a
high-fat diet in skeletal muscle of mice.

Rodriguez J(1), Gilson H, Jamart C, Naslain D, Pierre N, Deldicque L, Francaux M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Université catholique de Louvain, Place Pierre de
Coubertin-1, bte L8.10.01, 1348, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

PURPOSE: We tested the hypothesis that polyphenol-rich extracts can reduce
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress induced by a high-fat diet (HFD) in skeletal
muscle of mice.
METHODS: Mice were randomly assigned to four groups receiving during 20 weeks
either a standard chow control (CTRL), or a HFD supplemented, or not, with
pomegranate (HFD + P) or green tea (HFD + GT) extracts. After the nutritional
intervention, mice were killed and gastrocnemius muscles were taken. Proteins and
mRNA were measured by Western blot and RT-qPCR, respectively.
RESULTS: Body weight gain and visceral fat were higher in HFD, HFD + P and
HFD + GT than in CTRL. The markers of the unfolded protein response BiP, XBP1u,
XBP1s and ATF4 were higher only in HFD. In HFD + P and HFD + GT, this increase
was not observed except for CHOP, which was elevated in all HFD groups. HFD
increased also markers of ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, autophagy and oxidative
stress, which were kept low in HFD + P and HFD + GT groups.
CONCLUSION: Our data provide evidence for a protective effect of pomegranate and 
green tea extracts against ER stress, oxidative stress and protein degradation
induced by HFD in skeletal muscle. They give arguments for a usefulness of these 
natural nutritional compounds to fight against cellular dysfunctions related to
fat excess.

PMID: 24842709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Surg Neurol Int. 2014 Mar 20;5:37. doi: 10.4103/2152-7806.129259. eCollection
2014.

Os odontoideum in identical twins: Comparative gene expression analysis.

Straus D(1), Xu S(2), Traynelis VC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago,
IL, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Ophthalmology and Neurological Sciences, 
Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Os odontoideum is a well identified anomaly of the craniovertebral
junction. Since its initial description, there has been a continuous debate
regarding the nature of its etiology: Whether congenital or traumatic. We sought 
to compare the gene expression profiles in patients with congenital os
odontoideum, those with traumatic os odontoideum and controls.
METHODS: We have evaluated a pair of identical twins both with os odontoideum. We
identified two additional patients with and four subjects without os odontoideum.
We analyzed the gene expression profiles in these patients using a custom TaqMan 
microarray and quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR). The relative gene expression profiles in the two identical twins, the 
two nontwin patients with os odontoideum and the controls were assessed.
RESULTS: A total of 213 genes with significantly different expression between the
twin os odontoideum patients and the subjects without os odontoideum were
detected. CACNG6, PHEX, CACNAD3, IL2, FAS, TUFT1, KIT, TGFBR2, and IGF2 were
expressed at levels greater than 100-fold more in the twins. There were six genes
with significantly different expression profiles in the twins as compared with
the nontwin os odontoideum patients: CMK4, ATF1, PLCG1, TAB1, E2F3, and ATF4.
There were no statistically significant differences in gene expression in the
four patients with os odontoideum and the subjects without. Trends, however, were
noted in MMP8, KIT, HIF1A, CREB3, PWHAZ, TGFBR1, NFKB2, FGFR1, IPO8, STAT1,
COL1A1, and BMP3.
CONCLUSIONS: Os odontoideum has multiple etiologies, both traumatic and
congenital and perhaps some represent a combination of the two. This work has
identified a number of genes that show increased expression in a pair of twins
with congenital os odontoideum and also demonstrates trends in gene expression
profiles between a larger group of os odontoideum patients and non-os patients. A
number of these genes are related to bone morphogenesis and maintenance.

PMCID: PMC4014826
PMID: 24818044  [PubMed]


393. Cell Signal. 2014 Sep;26(9):1958-74. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.04.023. Epub
2014 May 9.

Mitotic activation of the DISC1-inducible cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase-4D9
(PDE4D9), through multi-site phosphorylation, influences cell cycle progression.

Sheppard CL(1), Lee LC(1), Hill EV(1), Henderson DJ(1), Anthony DF(1), Houslay
DM(1), Yalla KC(1), Cairns LS(1), Dunlop AJ(1), Baillie GS(2), Huston E(3),
Houslay MD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Psychology, Wolfson Link and Davidson Buildings,
University of Glasgow, University Avenue, Glasgow G12 8QQ, Scotland, UK.
(2)Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, Wolfson Link and Davidson
Buildings, University of Glasgow, University Avenue, Glasgow G12 8QQ, Scotland,
UK. (3)Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, King's College London, 5th Floor,
Franklin-Wilkins Building, 150 Stamford Street, London SE1 9NH, UK. (4)Institute 
of Pharmaceutical Science, King's College London, 5th Floor, Franklin-Wilkins
Building, 150 Stamford Street, London SE1 9NH, UK. Electronic address:
miles.houslay@kcl.ac.uk.

In Rat-1 cells, the dramatic decrease in the levels of both intracellular cyclic 
3'5' adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP; cAMP) and in the activity of
cAMP-activated protein kinase A (PKA) observed in mitosis was paralleled by a
profound increase in cAMP hydrolyzing phosphodiesterase-4 (PDE4) activity. The
decrease in PKA activity, which occurs during mitosis, was attributable to PDE4
activation as the PDE4 selective inhibitor, rolipram, but not the
phosphodiesterase-3 (PDE3) inhibitor, cilostamide, specifically ablated this cell
cycle-dependent effect. PDE4 inhibition caused Rat-1 cells to move from S phase
into G2/M more rapidly, to transit through G2/M more quickly and to remain in G1 
for a longer period. Inhibition of PDE3 elicited no observable effects on cell
cycle dynamics. Selective immunopurification of each of the four PDE4
sub-families identified PDE4D as being selectively activated in mitosis.
Subsequent analysis uncovered PDE4D9, an isoform whose expression can be
regulated by Disrupted-In-Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1)/activating transcription factor
4 (ATF4) complex, as the sole PDE4 species activated during mitosis in Rat-1
cells. PDE4D9 becomes activated in mitosis through dual phosphorylation at Ser585
and Ser245, involving the combined action of ERK and an unidentified 'switch'
kinase that has previously been shown to be activated by H2O2. Additionally, in
mitosis, PDE4D9 also becomes phosphorylated at Ser67 and Ser81, through the
action of MK2 (MAPKAPK2) and AMP kinase (AMPK), respectively. The multisite
phosphorylation of PDE4D9 by all four of these protein kinases leads to decreased
mobility (band-shift) of PDE4D9 on SDS-PAGE. PDE4D9 is predominantly concentrated
in the perinuclear region of Rat-1 cells but with a fraction distributed
asymmetrically at the cell margins. Our investigations demonstrate that the
diminished levels of cAMP and PKA activity that characterise mitosis are due to
enhanced cAMP degradation by PDE4D9. PDE4D9, was found to locate primarily not
only in the perinuclear region of Rat-1 cells but also at the cell margins. We
propose that the sequestration of PDE4D9 in a specific complex together with
AMPK, ERK, MK2 and the H2O2-activatable 'switch' kinase allows for its selective 
multi-site phosphorylation, activation and regulation in mitosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24815749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 8;5:e1222. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.166.

Transcriptional and metabolic adaptation of human neurons to the mitochondrial
toxicant MPP(+).

Krug AK(1), Gutbier S(1), Zhao L(2), Pöltl D(3), Kullmann C(1), Ivanova V(4),
Förster S(1), Jagtap S(5), Meiser J(6), Leparc G(7), Schildknecht S(1), Adam
M(1), Hiller K(6), Farhan H(8), Brunner T(9), Hartung T(2), Sachinidis A(5),
Leist M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Doerenkamp-Zbinden Chair for In Vitro Toxicology and Biomedicine, University
of Konstanz, Konstanz D-78457, Germany. (2)Center for Alternatives to Animal
Testing (CAAT-US), Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD
21205, USA. (3)1] Doerenkamp-Zbinden Chair for In Vitro Toxicology and
Biomedicine, University of Konstanz, Konstanz D-78457, Germany [2] Konstanz
Research School Chemical Biology, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.
(4)1] Konstanz Research School Chemical Biology, University of Konstanz,
Konstanz, Germany [2] Nycomed Chair for Bioinformatics and Information Mining,
University of Konstanz, Konstanz D-78457, Germany. (5)Center of Physiology and
Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology, University of Cologne, Cologne
D-50931, Germany. (6)Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of
Luxembourg, Campus Belval, Esch-Belval L-4362, Luxembourg. (7)Boehringer
Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG Div. Research, Ingelheim, Germany.
(8)Biotechnology Institute Thurgau at the University of Konstanz, Kreuzlingen
CH-8280, Switzerland. (9)Chair of Biochemical Pharmacology, University of
Konstanz, Konstanz D-78457, Germany.

Assessment of the network of toxicity pathways by Omics technologies and
bioinformatic data processing paves the road toward a new toxicology for the
twenty-first century. Especially, the upstream network of responses, taking place
in toxicant-treated cells before a point of no return is reached, is still little
explored. We studied the effects of the model neurotoxicant
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+)) by a combined metabolomics (mass
spectrometry) and transcriptomics (microarrays and deep sequencing) approach to
provide unbiased data on earliest cellular adaptations to stress. Neural
precursor cells (LUHMES) were differentiated to homogeneous cultures of fully
postmitotic human dopaminergic neurons, and then exposed to the mitochondrial
respiratory chain inhibitor MPP(+) (5 µM). At 18-24 h after treatment,
intracellular ATP and mitochondrial integrity were still close to control levels,
but pronounced transcriptome and metabolome changes were seen. Data on altered
glucose flux, depletion of phosphocreatine and oxidative stress (e.g., methionine
sulfoxide formation) confirmed the validity of the approach. New findings were
related to nuclear paraspeckle depletion, as well as an early activation of
branches of the transsulfuration pathway to increase glutathione. Bioinformatic
analysis of our data identified the transcription factor ATF-4 as an upstream
regulator of early responses. Findings on this signaling pathway and on adaptive 
increases of glutathione production were confirmed biochemically. Metabolic and
transcriptional profiling contributed complementary information on multiple
primary and secondary changes that contribute to the cellular response to MPP(+).
Thus, combined 'Omics' analysis is a new unbiased approach to unravel earliest
metabolic changes, whose balance decides on the final cell fate.

PMCID: PMC4047858
PMID: 24810058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. PLoS Genet. 2014 May 8;10(5):e1004348. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004348.
eCollection 2014.

Fine tuning of the UPR by the ubiquitin ligases Siah1/2.

Scortegagna M(1), Kim H(1), Li JL(2), Yao H(3), Brill LM(2), Han J(4), Lau E(1), 
Bowtell D(5), Haddad G(3), Kaufman RJ(4), Ronai ZA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Initiation and Maintenance Program, Cancer Center, Sanford-Burnham
Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, California, United States of America.
(2)Proteomics Facility, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla,
California, United States of America. (3)Department of Pediatrics, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of America.
(4)Degenerative Diseases Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La 
Jolla, California, United States of America. (5)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia;
Department of Pathology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; Cancer Genomics and Genetics, Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) responds to changes in intracellular homeostasis
through activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR). Yet, it is not known
how UPR-signaling coordinates adaptation versus cell death. Previous studies
suggested that signaling through PERK/ATF4 is required for cell death. We show
that high levels of ER stress (i.e., ischemia-like conditions) induce
transcription of the ubiquitin ligases Siah1/2 through the UPR transducers
PERK/ATF4 and IRE1/sXBP1. In turn, Siah1/2 attenuates proline hydroxylation of
ATF4, resulting in its stabilization, thereby augmenting ER stress output.
Conversely, ATF4 activation is reduced upon Siah1/2 KD in cultured cells, which
attenuates ER stress-induced cell death. Notably, Siah1a(+/-)::Siah2(-/-) mice
subjected to neuronal ischemia exhibited smaller infarct volume and were
protected from ischemia-induced death, compared with the wild type (WT) mice. In 
all, Siah1/2 constitutes an obligatory fine-tuning mechanism that predisposes
cells to death under severe ER stress conditions.

PMCID: PMC4014425
PMID: 24809345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Horm Metab Res. 2014 Jul;46(8):574-80. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1374588. Epub 2014 May
5.

Activation of eIF2a signaling cascade is associated with testosterone-induced
cell apoptosis in INS-1 cells.

Cui Y(1), Ma Z(2), Zhao H(2), Chen X(2), Zhang Y(2), Guo H(3), Zhao Y(2), Chen
ZJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai Key Laboratory for Assisted -Reproduction
and Reproductive Genetics, Shanghai, China. (2)Center for Reproductive Medicine, 
Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, China. (3)Qilu
Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, China.

Hyperandrogenemia is associated with insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes in
women with polycystic ovary syndrome raising the possibility that androgen
receptor signaling pathway plays an important role in the development and
progression of ß-cell dysfunction. Testosterone is the major circulating androgen
in women. In this study, we investigated the effect of testosterone on INS-1
cells to find whether excess androgen could produce endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress thereby contributing to ß-cell dysfunction. The role of testosterone in
INS-1 cell apoptosis was detected by flow cytometry and electron microscopy.
Expression of BIP, ATF4, and CHOP were assessed by RT-PCR and Western blot.
Testosterone/AR could not only initiate cell apoptosis but also induce the
activation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha (eIF2a) cascades in INS-1
cells. Treatment of ER stress inhibitor or flutamide (AR inhibitor) could inhibit
testosterone-induced cell apoptosis and CHOP expression. These results suggest
that testosterone/AR pathway caused INS-1 cell apoptosis was at least in part
through eIF2a/CHOP cascades.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 24799026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Virol Methods. 2014 May 4;205C:38-52. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2014.04.014.
[Epub ahead of print]

TaqMan real time RT-PCR assays for detecting ferret innate and adaptive immune
responses.

Carolan LA(1), Butler J(2), Rockman S(3), Guarnaccia T(4), Hurt AC(1), Reading
P(1), Kelso A(1), Barr I(1), Laurie KL(5).

Author information: 
(1)WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza at the Peter 
Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, 792 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne,
Victoria, 3000, Australia. (2)WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research
on Influenza at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, 792
Elizabeth Street, Melbourne, Victoria, 3000, Australia; CSIRO Australian Animal
Health Laboratory, East Geelong, 3219, Australia. (3)bioCSL Limited, Parkville,
3052, Australia; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of
Melbourne, at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Victoria,
3010, Australia. (4)WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on
Influenza at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, 792
Elizabeth Street, Melbourne, Victoria, 3000, Australia; Monash University
Gippsland, Churchill, 3842, Australia. (5)WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference 
and Research on Influenza at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and
Immunity, 792 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne, Victoria, 3000, Australia. Electronic 
address: Karen.laurie@influenzacentre.org.

The ferret is an excellent model for many human infectious diseases including
influenza, SARS-CoV, henipavirus and pneumococcal infections. The ferret is also 
used to study cystic fibrosis and various cancers, as well as reproductive
biology and physiology. However, the range of reagents available to measure the
ferret immune response is very limited. To address this deficiency,
high-throughput real time RT-PCR TaqMan assays were developed to measure the
expression of fifteen immune mediators associated with the innate and adaptive
immune responses (IFNa, IFNß, IFN<U+03B3>, IL1a, IL1ß, IL2, IL4, IL6, IL8, IL10,
IL12p40, IL17, Granzyme A, MCP1, TNFa), as well as four endogenous housekeeping
genes (ATF4, HPRT, GAPDH, L32). These assays have been optimized to maximize
reaction efficiency, reduce the amount of sample required (down to 1ng RNA per
real time RT-PCR reaction) and to select the most appropriate housekeeping genes.
Using these assays, the expression of each of the tested genes could be detected 
in ferret lymph node cells stimulated with mitogens or infected with influenza
virus in vitro. These new tools will allow a more comprehensive analysis of the
ferret immune responses following infection or in other disease states.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24797460  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


398. Front Mol Neurosci. 2014 Apr 16;7:22. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2014.00022. eCollection 
2014.

Roles of eIF2a kinases in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.

Ohno M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nathan Kline Institute, Center for Dementia Research Orangeburg, NY, USA ;
Department of Psychiatry, New York University Langone Medical Center New York,
NY, USA.

Cell signaling in response to an array of diverse stress stimuli converges on the
phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor-2a (eIF2a). Evidence is
accumulating that persistent eIF2a phosphorylation at Ser51 through prolonged
overactivation of regulatory kinases occurs in neurodegenerative diseases such as
Alzheimer's disease (AD), leading to shutdown of general translation and
translational activation of a subset of mRNAs. Recent advances in the development
of gene-based strategies and bioavailable inhibitors, which specifically target
one of the eIF2a kinases, have enabled us to investigate pathogenic roles of
dysregulated eIF2a phosphorylation pathways. This review provides an overview of 
animal model studies in this field, focusing particularly on molecular mechanisms
by which the dysregulation of eIF2a kinases may account for synaptic and memory
deficits associated with AD. A growing body of evidence suggests that correcting 
aberrant eIF2a kinase activities may serve as disease-modifying therapeutic
interventions to treat AD and related cognitive disorders.

PMCID: PMC3997008
PMID: 24795560  [PubMed]


399. Nature. 2014 Jun 12;510(7504):268-72. doi: 10.1038/nature13228. Epub 2014 Apr 28.

The unfolded protein response governs integrity of the haematopoietic stem-cell
pool during stress.

van Galen P(1), Kreso A(1), Mbong N(1), Kent DG(2), Fitzmaurice T(3), Chambers
JE(4), Xie S(1), Laurenti E(1), Hermans K(1), Eppert K(5), Marciniak SJ(4),
Goodall JC(3), Green AR(2), Wouters BG(6), Wienholds E(1), Dick JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto,
Ontario M5G 2M9, Canada [2] Department of Molecular Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada. (2)Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research, Wellcome Trust/MRC Stem Cell Institute and Department of Haematology,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK. (3)Department of Medicine, School
of Clinical Medicine, Addenbrookes Hospital, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
CB2 0QQ, UK. (4)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Wellcome Trust/MRC Stem
Cell Institute and Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2
0XY, UK. (5)Department of Pediatrics, McGill University and the Research
Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Westmount, Québec H3Z 2Z3,
Canada. (6)Departments of Radiation Oncology and Medical Biophysics, Princess
Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario M5G 2M9,
Canada.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jun;15(6):364-5.

The blood system is sustained by a pool of haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) that 
are long-lived due to their capacity for self-renewal. A consequence of longevity
is exposure to stress stimuli including reactive oxygen species (ROS), nutrient
fluctuation and DNA damage. Damage that occurs within stressed HSCs must be
tightly controlled to prevent either loss of function or the clonal persistence
of oncogenic mutations that increase the risk of leukaemogenesis. Despite the
importance of maintaining cell integrity throughout life, how the HSC pool
achieves this and how individual HSCs respond to stress remain poorly understood.
Many sources of stress cause misfolded protein accumulation in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), and subsequent activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) 
enables the cell to either resolve stress or initiate apoptosis. Here we show
that human HSCs are predisposed to apoptosis through strong activation of the
PERK branch of the UPR after ER stress, whereas closely related progenitors
exhibit an adaptive response leading to their survival. Enhanced ER protein
folding by overexpression of the co-chaperone ERDJ4 (also called DNAJB9)
increases HSC repopulation capacity in xenograft assays, linking the UPR to HSC
function. Because the UPR is a focal point where different sources of stress
converge, our study provides a framework for understanding how stress signalling 
is coordinated within tissue hierarchies and integrated with stemness. Broadly,
these findings reveal that the HSC pool maintains clonal integrity by clearance
of individual HSCs after stress to prevent propagation of damaged stem cells.

PMID: 24776803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Clin Sci (Lond). 2014 Oct;127(7):507-18. doi: 10.1042/CS20140026.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress does not contribute to steatohepatitis in obese and 
insulin-resistant high-fat-diet-fed foz/foz mice.

Legry V(1), Van Rooyen DM(2), Lambert B(1), Sempoux C(3), Poekes L(1),
Español-Suñer R(1), Molendi-Coste O(1), Horsmans Y(1), Farrell GC(2), Leclercq
IA(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Laboratory of Hepato-Gastroenterology, Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et
Clinique, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (2)Liver Research
Group, ANU Medical School at the Canberra Hospital, Garran, ACT, Australia.
(3)Pathology Department, St-Luc University Hospital, Université catholique de
Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver (steatosis) and steatohepatitis [non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH)] are hepatic complications of the metabolic syndrome.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is proposed as a crucial disease mechanism in
obese and insulin-resistant animals (such as ob/ob mice) with simple steatosis,
but its role in NASH remains controversial. We therefore evaluated the role of ER
stress as a disease mechanism in foz/foz mice, which develop both the metabolic
and histological features that mimic human NASH. We explored ER stress markers in
the liver of foz/foz mice in response to a high-fat diet (HFD) at several time
points. We then evaluated the effect of treatment with an ER stress inducer
tunicamycin, or conversely with the ER protectant tauroursodeoxycholic acid
(TUDCA), on the metabolic and hepatic features. foz/foz mice are obese, glucose
intolerant and develop NASH characterized by steatosis, inflammation, ballooned
hepatocytes and apoptosis from 6 weeks of HFD feeding. This was not associated
with activation of the upstream unfolded protein response [phospho-eukaryotic
initiation factor 2a (eIF2a), inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a) activity and
spliced X-box-binding protein 1 (Xbp1)]. Activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK) and up-regulation of activating transcription factor-4 (Atf4) and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein (Chop) transcripts were however
compatible with a 'pathological' response to ER stress. We tested this by using
intervention experiments. Induction of chronic ER stress failed to worsen
obesity, glucose intolerance and NASH pathology in HFD-fed foz/foz mice. In
addition, the ER protectant TUDCA, although reducing steatosis, failed to improve
glucose intolerance, hepatic inflammation and apoptosis in HFD-fed foz/foz mice. 
These results show that signals driving hepatic inflammation, apoptosis and
insulin resistance are independent of ER stress in obese diabetic mice with
steatohepatitis.

PMID: 24766485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Toxicol Sci. 2014 Jul;140(1):144-59. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu072. Epub 2014 Apr
20.

Drug-induced endoplasmic reticulum and oxidative stress responses independently
sensitize toward TNFa-mediated hepatotoxicity.

Fredriksson L(1), Wink S(1), Herpers B(1), Benedetti G(1), Hadi M(2), de Bont
H(1), Groothuis G(2), Luijten M(3), Danen E(1), de Graauw M(1), Meerman J(1), van
de Water B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Toxicology, Leiden Academic Centre for Drug Research, Leiden
University, 2333 CC Leiden The Netherlands. (2)Division of Pharmacokinetics,
Toxicology and Targeting, Department of Pharmacy, University of Groningen, 9713
AV Groningen, The Netherlands. (3)The National Institute for Public Health and
the Environment (RIVM), 3720 BA Bilthoven, The Netherlands. (4)Division of
Toxicology, Leiden Academic Centre for Drug Research, Leiden University, 2333 CC 
Leiden The Netherlands b.water@lacdr.leidenuniv.nl.

Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is an important clinical problem. Here, we used 
a genomics approach to in detail investigate the hypothesis that critical
drug-induced toxicity pathways act in synergy with the pro-inflammatory cytokine 
tumor necrosis factor a (TNFa) to cause cell death of liver HepG2 cells.
Transcriptomics of the cell injury stress response pathways initiated by two
hepatoxicants, diclofenac and carbamazepine, revealed the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress/translational initiation signaling and nuclear factor-erythroid 2
(NF-E2)-related factor 2 (Nrf2) antioxidant signaling as two major affected
pathways, which was similar to that observed for the majority of ~80 DILI
compounds in primary human hepatocytes. Compounds displaying weak or no TNFa
synergism, namely ketoconazole, nefazodone, and methotrexate, failed to
synchronously induce both pathways. The ER stress induced was primarily related
to protein kinase R-like ER kinase (PERK) and activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4) activation and subsequent expression of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP),
which was all independent of TNFa signaling. Identical ATF4 dependent
transcriptional programs were observed in primary human hepatocytes as well as
primary precision-cut human liver slices. Targeted RNA interference studies
revealed that whereas ER stress signaling through inositol-requiring enzyme 1a
(IRE1a) and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) acted cytoprotective,
activation of the ER stress protein kinase PERK and subsequent expression of CHOP
was pivotal for the onset of drug/TNFa-induced apoptosis. Whereas inhibition of
the Nrf2-dependent adaptive oxidative stress response enhanced the drug/TNFa
cytotoxicity, Nrf2 signaling did not affect CHOP expression. Both hepatotoxic
drugs enhanced expression of the translational initiation factor EIF4A1, which
was essential for CHOP expression and drug/TNFa-mediated cell killing. Our data
support a model in which enhanced drug-induced translation initiates
PERK-mediated CHOP signaling in an EIF4A1 dependent manner, thereby sensitizing
toward caspase-8-dependent TNFa-induced apoptosis.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24752500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Arch Toxicol. 2014 Jun;88(6):1267-80. doi: 10.1007/s00204-014-1240-8. Epub 2014
Apr 20.

The transcription factor CHOP, a central component of the transcriptional
regulatory network induced upon CCl4 intoxication in mouse liver, is not a
critical mediator of hepatotoxicity.

Campos G(1), Schmidt-Heck W, Ghallab A, Rochlitz K, Pütter L, Medinas DB, Hetz C,
Widera A, Cadenas C, Begher-Tibbe B, Reif R, Günther G, Sachinidis A, Hengstler
JG, Godoy P.

Author information: 
(1)IfADo-Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors,
Technical University Dortmund, Ardeystrasse 67, 44139, Dortmund, Germany.

Since xenobiotics enter the organism via the liver, hepatocytes must cope with
numerous perturbations, including modifications of proteins leading to
endoplasmic reticulum stress (ER-stress). This triggers a signaling pathway
termed unfolded protein response (UPR) that aims to restore homeostasis or to
eliminate disturbed hepatocytes by apoptosis. In the present study, we used the
well-established CCl4 hepatotoxicity model in mice to address the questions
whether CCl4 induces ER-stress and, if so, whether the well-known ER-stress
effector CHOP is responsible for CCl4-induced apoptosis. For this purpose, we
treated mice with a high dose of CCl4 injected i.p. and followed gene expression 
profile over time using Affymetrix gene array analysis. This time resolved gene
expression analysis allowed the identification of gene clusters with
overrepresented binding sites for the three most important ER-stress induced
transcription factors, CHOP, XBP1 and ATF4. Such result was confirmed by the
demonstration of CCl4-induced XBP1 splicing, upregulation of CHOP at mRNA and
protein levels, and translocation of CHOP to the nucleus. Two observations
indicated that CHOP may be responsible for CCl4-induced cell death: (1) Nuclear
translocation of CHOP was exclusively observed in the pericentral fraction of
hepatocytes that deteriorate in response to CCl4 and (2) CHOP-regulated genes
with previously reported pro-apoptotic function such as GADD34, TRB3 and ERO1L
were induced in the pericentral zone as well. Therefore, we compared CCl4 induced
hepatotoxicity in CHOP knockout versus wild-type mice. Surprisingly, genetic
depletion of CHOP did not afford protection against CCl4-induced damage as
evidenced by serum GOT and GPT as well as quantification of dead tissue areas.
The negative result was obtained at several time points (8, 24 and 72 h) and
different CCl4 doses (1.6 and 0.132 g/kg). Overall, our results demonstrate that 
all branches of the UPR are activated in mouse liver upon CCl4 treatment.
However, CHOP does not play a critical role in CCl4-induced cell death and cannot
be considered as a biomarker strictly linked to hepatotoxicity. The role of
alternative UPR effectors such as XBP1 remains to be investigated.

PMID: 24748426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Apr 17;5:e1179. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.162.

Impaired autophagic flux is associated with increased endoplasmic reticulum
stress during the development of NAFLD.

González-Rodríguez A(1), Mayoral R(2), Agra N(3), Valdecantos MP(1), Pardo V(1), 
Miquilena-Colina ME(4), Vargas-Castrillón J(5), Lo Iacono O(6), Corazzari M(7),
Fimia GM(7), Piacentini M(8), Muntané J(9), Boscá L(10), García-Monzón C(5),
Martín-Sanz P(10), Valverde ÁM(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades
Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain [2] Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas 'Alberto Sols' (CSIC/UAM), Madrid, Spain. (2)1]
Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA [2] Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), ISCIII,
Barcelona, Spain. (3)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas 'Alberto Sols'
(CSIC/UAM), Madrid, Spain. (4)Liver Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Santa
Cristina, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Princesa, Madrid, Spain. (5)1]
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas
(CIBEREHD), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain [2] Liver Research Unit, Hospital
Universitario Santa Cristina, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Princesa,
Madrid, Spain. (6)Gastroenterology Unit, Hospital del Tajo, Aranjuez, Madrid,
Spain. (7)National Institute for Infectious Diseases IRCCS 'L Spallanzani', Rome,
Italy. (8)1] National Institute for Infectious Diseases IRCCS 'L Spallanzani',
Rome, Italy [2] Department of Biology, University of Rome 'Tor Vergata', Rome,
Italy. (9)1] Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y
Digestivas (CIBEREHD), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain [2] Oncology Surgery, Cell
Therapy and Transplant Organs, Institute of Biomedicine of Seville (IBiS)/Virgen 
del Rocio Universitary Hospital/CSIC/University of Seville, Seville, Spain.
(10)1] Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas 'Alberto Sols' (CSIC/UAM), Madrid,
Spain [2] Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y
Digestivas (CIBEREHD), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain.

The pathogenic mechanisms underlying the progression of non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD) are not fully understood. In this study, we aimed to assess the
relationship between endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and autophagy in human and
mouse hepatocytes during NAFLD. ER stress and autophagy markers were analyzed in 
livers from patients with biopsy-proven non-alcoholic steatosis (NAS) or
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) compared with livers from subjects with
histologically normal liver, in livers from mice fed with chow diet (CHD)
compared with mice fed with high fat diet (HFD) or methionine-choline-deficient
(MCD) diet and in primary and Huh7 human hepatocytes loaded with palmitic acid
(PA). In NASH patients, significant increases in hepatic messenger RNA levels of 
markers of ER stress (activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), glucose-regulated
protein 78 (GRP78) and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP)) and autophagy (BCN1) were
found compared with NAS patients. Likewise, protein levels of GRP78, CHOP and
p62/SQSTM1 (p62) autophagic substrate were significantly elevated in NASH
compared with NAS patients. In livers from mice fed with HFD or MCD, ER
stress-mediated signaling was parallel to the blockade of the autophagic flux
assessed by increases in p62, microtubule-associated protein 2 light chain 3
(LC3-II)/LC3-I ratio and accumulation of autophagosomes compared with CHD fed
mice. In Huh7 hepatic cells, treatment with PA for 8 h triggered activation of
both unfolding protein response and the autophagic flux. Conversely, prolonged
treatment with PA (24 h) induced ER stress and cell death together with a
blockade of the autophagic flux. Under these conditions, cotreatment with
rapamycin or CHOP silencing ameliorated these effects and decreased apoptosis.
Our results demonstrated that the autophagic flux is impaired in the liver from
both NAFLD patients and murine models of NAFLD, as well as in lipid-overloaded
human hepatocytes, and it could be due to elevated ER stress leading to
apoptosis. Consequently, therapies aimed to restore the autophagic flux might
attenuate or prevent the progression of NAFLD.

PMCID: PMC4001315
PMID: 24743734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 14;9(4):e94691. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094691. eCollection
2014.

Trib3 is developmentally and nutritionally regulated in the brain but is
dispensable for spatial memory, fear conditioning and sensing of amino
acid-imbalanced diet.

Örd T(1), Innos J(2), Lilleväli K(3), Tekko T(2), Sütt S(2), Örd D(4), Kõks S(5),
Vasar E(2), Örd T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. 
(2)Department of Physiology, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. (3)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia; Department of Physiology, Institute of
Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(4)Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. (5)Chair of Pathological Physiology,
Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, 
Estonia.

Tribbles homolog 3 (TRIB3) is a mammalian pseudokinase that is induced in
neuronal cell cultures in response to cell death-inducing stresses, including
neurotrophic factor deprivation. TRIB3 is an inhibitor of activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), the central transcriptional regulator in the
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) phosphorylation pathway that 
is involved in the cellular stress response and behavioral processes. In this
article, we study the expression of Trib3 in the mouse brain, characterize the
brain morphology of mice with a genetic ablation of Trib3 and investigate whether
Trib3 deficiency alters eIF2a-dependent cognitive abilities. Our data show that
the consumption of a leucine-deficient diet induces Trib3 expression in the
anterior piriform cortex, the brain region responsible for detecting essential
amino acid intake imbalance. However, the aversive response to leucine-devoid
diet does not differ in Trib3 knockout and wild type mice. Trib3 deletion also
does not affect long-term spatial memory and reversal learning in the Morris
water maze and auditory or contextual fear conditioning. During embryonic
development, Trib3 expression increases in the brain and persists in the early
postnatal stadium. Neuroanatomical characterization of mice lacking Trib3
revealed enlarged lateral ventricles. Thus, although the absence of Trib3 does
not alter the eIF2a pathway-dependent cognitive functions of several areas of the
brain, including the hippocampus, amygdala and anterior piriform cortex, Trib3
may serve a role in other central nervous system processes and molecular
pathways.

PMCID: PMC3986210
PMID: 24732777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Sep;1843(9):1948-68. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.04.006. Epub 2014 Apr 13.

Keeping the eIF2 alpha kinase Gcn2 in check.

Castilho BA(1), Shanmugam R(2), Silva RC(1), Ramesh R(2), Himme BM(2), Sattlegger
E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Escola Paulista de
Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Institute of Natural and 
Mathematical Sciences, Massey University, New Zealand. (3)Institute of Natural
and Mathematical Sciences, Massey University, New Zealand. Electronic address:
e.sattlegger@massey.ac.nz.

The protein kinase Gcn2 is present in virtually all eukaryotes and is of
increasing interest due to its involvement in a large array of crucial biological
processes. Some of these are universally conserved from yeast to humans, such as 
coping with nutrient starvation and oxidative stress. In mammals, Gcn2 is
important for e.g. long-term memory formation, feeding behaviour and immune
system regulation. Gcn2 has been also implicated in diseases such as cancer and
Alzheimer's disease. Studies on Gcn2 have been conducted most extensively in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, where the mechanism of its activation by amino acid
starvation has been revealed in most detail. Uncharged tRNAs stimulate Gcn2 which
subsequently phosphorylates its substrate, eIF2a, leading to reduced global
protein synthesis and simultaneously to increased translation of specific mRNAs, 
e.g. those coding for Gcn4 in yeast and ATF4 in mammals. Both proteins are
transcription factors that regulate the expression of a myriad of genes, thereby 
enabling the cell to initiate a survival response to the initial activating cue. 
Given that Gcn2 participates in many diverse processes, Gcn2 itself must be
tightly controlled. Indeed, Gcn2 is regulated by a vast network of proteins and
RNAs, the list of which is still growing. Deciphering molecular mechanisms
underlying Gcn2 regulation by effectors and inhibitors is fundamental for
understanding how the cell keeps Gcn2 in check ensuring normal organismal
function, and how Gcn2-associated diseases may develop or may be treated. This
review provides a critical evaluation of the current knowledge on mechanisms
controlling Gcn2 activation or activity.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24732012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;33(4):1139-48. doi: 10.1159/000358683. Epub 2014 Apr
11.

Acetaminophen attenuates obesity-related renal injury through ER-mediated stress 
mechanisms.

Wang C(1), Wu M, Arvapalli R, Dai X, Mahmood M, Driscoll H, Rice KM, Blough E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Diagnostic Nanosystems, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine,
Marshall University, Huntington, WV, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Obesity is an independent risk factor for the development of
kidney disease. The purpose of this study was to determine how obesity may
contribute to renal damage and whether acetaminophen ingestion can diminish
obesity-associated renal cell injury in the obese Zucker rat model.
METHODS: Male obese Zucker rats (4 weeks old, n=6) were treated with
acetaminophen (30 mg / kg body weight / day) for 26 weeks. Age matched obese
control (OC), obese vehicle (OV, 0.073 mL DMSO/kg/d), and lean Zucker rats (LC)
were used to determine the effects of treatment and obesity.
RESULTS: Compared to lean control rats, renal lipid deposition, expression of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress protein GRP78 and activation of the ER
stress-related eIF2a-ATF4-CHOP, caspase 12, and JNK-MAPK signaling pathways were 
increased in the obese control and obese vehicle rats. These alterations were
associated with the elevated renal cell apoptosis and urinary albumin excretion. 
Acetaminophen treatment decreased renal lipid deposition, ER-stress related
signaling, apoptosis and albuminuria.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that the protective effects of low dose
acetaminophen on renal injury are mediated, at least in part, through attenuation
of ER stress.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24731963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2014 Oct;121(10):1233-43. doi:
10.1007/s00702-014-1208-0. Epub 2014 Apr 13.

Salubrinal, ER stress inhibitor, attenuates kainic acid-induced hippocampal cell 
death.

Kim JS(1), Heo RW, Kim H, Yi CO, Shin HJ, Han JW, Roh GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Haeundae Paik Hospital, College of Medicine, Inje 
University, Busan, Republic of Korea.

Kainic acid (KA)-induced neuronal death is closely linked to endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) and mitochondrial dysfunction. Parkin is an ubiquitin E3 ligase
that mediates the ubiquitination of the Bcl-2 family of proteins and its
mutations are associated with neuronal apoptosis in neurodegenerative diseases.
We investigated the effect of salubrinal, an ER stress inhibitor, on the
regulation of ER stress and mitochondrial apoptosis induced by KA, in particular,
by controlling parkin expression. We showed that salubrinal significantly reduced
seizure activity and increased survival rates of mice with KA-induced seizures.
We found that salubrinal protected neurons against apoptotic death by reducing
expression of mitochondrial apoptotic factors and elF2a-ATF4-CHOP signaling
proteins. Interestingly, we showed that salubrinal decreased the KA-induced
parkin expression and inhibited parkin translocation to mitochondria, which
suggests that parkin may regulate a cross-talk between ER and mitochondria.
Collectively, inhibition of ER stress attenuates mitochondrial apoptotic and ER
stress pathways and controls parkin-mediated neuronal death following KA-induced 
seizures.

PMID: 24728926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Langenbecks Arch Surg. 2014 Jun;399(5):639-47. doi: 10.1007/s00423-014-1188-4.
Epub 2014 Apr 10.

Gene expression changes in cancellous bone of type 2 diabetics: a biomolecular
basis for diabetic bone disease.

Haug AT(1), Braun KF, Ehnert S, Mayer L, Stöckle U, Nüssler AK, Pscherer S,
Freude T.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Trauma Surgery, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical University
Munich, Ismaninger Straße 22, 81675, Munich, Germany, haug@uchir.me.tum.de.

PURPOSE: Diabetes mellitus type 2 (2DM) is associated with altered bone quality. 
In order to analyze associated changes on a molecular level, we investigated the 
gene expression of key factors of osteoblast metabolism in type 2 diabetics.
METHODS: Total mRNA and protein of bone samples from 2DM patients and
non-diabetic patients were isolated, and subsequently, reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) or Western blot was performed. Furthermore,
pro- and anti-inflammatory serum cytokine levels were determined using a cytokine
array.
RESULTS: Expression of runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) was increased 
by 53 %. Expression of the bone sialoproteins, secreted phosphoprotein 1 (SPP1;
osteopontin), and integrin-binding sialoprotein (IBSP), was elevated by more than
50 %, and activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) expression was 13 % lower in
the investigated diabetes group compared to the control group. Similarly, the
expression of versican (VCAN) and decorin (DCN) was upregulated twofold in the
diabetic group. At the same time, 2DM patients and controls show alterations in
pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine levels in the serum.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identifies considerable changes in the expression of
transcription factors and extracellular matrix (ECM) components of bone in 2DM
patients. Furthermore, the analysis of key differentiation factors of osteoblasts
revealed significant alterations in gene expression of these factors, which may
contribute to the dysregulation of energy metabolism in 2DM.

PMID: 24715035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Curr Opin Hematol. 2014 May;21(3):172-8. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000030.

Translational control by heme-regulated eIF2a kinase during erythropoiesis.

Chen JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review will provide an overview of the translational
regulation of globin mRNAs and integrated stress response (ISR) during
erythropoiesis by heme-regulated eIF2a kinase (HRI). HRI is an intracellular heme
sensor that coordinates heme and globin synthesis in erythropoiesis by inhibiting
protein synthesis of globins and heme biosynthetic enzymes during heme
deficiency.
RECENT FINDINGS: It has been demonstrated recently that HRI also activates the
eIF2aP-activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) ISR in primary erythroid
precursors to combat oxidative stress. During chronic iron/heme deficiency in
vivo, this HRI-eIF2aP-ATF4 signaling is necessary both to reduce oxidative stress
and to promote erythroid differentiation. Augmenting eIF2aP signaling by the
small molecule salubrinal, which inhibits dephosphorylation of eIF2aP, reduces
excess a-globin synthesis and enhances translation of ATF4 mRNA in mouse
ß-thalassemic erythroid precursors. Intriguingly, salubrinal treatment of
differentiating human CD34<U+207A> cells in culture increases fetal hemoglobin
production with a concomitant decrease of adult hemoglobin by a
posttranscriptional mechanism.
SUMMARY: HRI-eIF2aP-ATF4 stress signaling is important not only to inhibit excess
globin synthesis during erythropoiesis, but is also critical for adaptation to
oxidative stress and for enhancing effective erythropoiesis. Modulation of this
signaling pathway with small chemicals may provide a novel therapy for
hemoglobinopathy.

PMCID: PMC4124034
PMID: 24714526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Cancer Discov. 2014 Jun;4(6):702-15. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-13-0945. Epub 2014
Apr 4.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition activates PERK-eIF2a and sensitizes cells to
endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Feng YX(1), Sokol ES(2), Del Vecchio CA(3), Sanduja S(3), Claessen JH(3), Proia
TA(3), Jin DX(2), Reinhardt F(3), Ploegh HL(2), Wang Q(3), Gupta PB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research; Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts. (2)Whitehead
Institute for Biomedical Research; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology; Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research; Harvard Stem Cell 
Institute; Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts; and Department of
Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, North CarolinaAuthors' Affiliations:Whitehead
Institute for Biomedical Research; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology; Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research; Harvard Stem Cell 
Institute; Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts; and Department of
Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina. (3)Whitehead Institute for
Biomedical Research; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology; Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research; Harvard Stem Cell
Institute; Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts; and Department of
Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina. (4)Whitehead Institute for
Biomedical Research; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology; Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research; Harvard Stem Cell
Institute; Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts; and Department of
Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, North CarolinaAuthors' Affiliations:Whitehead
Institute for Biomedical Research; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology; Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research; Harvard Stem Cell 
Institute; Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts pgupta@wi.mit.edu.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) promotes both tumor progression and
drug resistance, yet few vulnerabilities of this state have been identified.
Using selective small molecules as cellular probes, we show that induction of EMT
greatly sensitizes cells to agents that perturb endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
function. This sensitivity to ER perturbations is caused by the synthesis and
secretion of large quantities of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins by EMT
cells. Consistent with their increased secretory output, EMT cells display a
branched ER morphology and constitutively activate the PERK-eIF2a axis of the
unfolded protein response (UPR). Protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase (PERK)
activation is also required for EMT cells to invade and metastasize. In human
tumor tissues, EMT gene expression correlates strongly with both ECM and
PERK-eIF2a genes, but not with other branches of the UPR. Taken together, our
findings identify a novel vulnerability of EMT cells, and demonstrate that the
PERK branch of the UPR is required for their malignancy.SIGNIFICANCE: EMT drives 
tumor metastasis and drug resistance, highlighting the need for therapies that
target this malignant subpopulation. Our findings identify a previously
unrecognized vulnerability of cancer cells that have undergone an EMT:
sensitivity to ER stress. We also find that PERK-eIF2a signaling, which is
required to maintain ER homeostasis, is also indispensable for EMT cells to
invade and metastasize.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24705811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Gene. 2014 Jun 15;543(2):259-67. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.04.002. Epub 2014 Apr
1.

Bioinformatics analysis of time series gene expression in left ventricle (LV)
with acute myocardial infarction (AMI).

Zhang T(1), Zhao LL(2), Cao X(1), Qi LC(1), Wei GQ(1), Liu JY(1), Yan SJ(1), Liu 
JG(3), Li XQ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin 150001, Heilongjiang Province, China. (2)Department of
Gastroenterology, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University,
Harbin 150001, Heilongjiang Province, China. (3)The Central Hospital of the
Heilongjiang Prison Administrative Bureau, Harbin 150001, Heilongjiang Province, 
China. (4)Department of Cardiology, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin 150001, Heilongjiang Province, China. Electronic
address: xueqili89856@hotmail.com.

This study is to investigate the key genes and their possible function in acute
myocardial infarction (AMI). The data of GSE4648 downloaded from the Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) database include 6 time points (15 min, 60 min, 4h, 12h,
24h and 48 h) of 12 left ventricle (LV) samples, 12 surviving LV free wall (FW)
samples, 12 inter-ventricular septum (IVS) samples after AMI operation and
corresponding sham-operated samples. The data of each sample were analyzed with
Affy and Bioconductor packages, and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were
screened out using BETR package with false discovery rate (FDR)<0.01. Then,
functional enrichment analysis for DEGs was conducted with Database for
Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID). Totally 194 DEGs were
identified in LV, and only the gene tubulin beta 2a (Tubb2a) and natriuretic
peptide B (Nppb) were respectively up-regulated in surviving FW tissue and IVS
tissue. The biological process response to wounding and inflammatory response
were significantly enriched, as well as leukocyte transendothelial migration
pathway. Besides, the expression pattern analysis showed the DEGs mostly
up-regulated at 4h after AMI, and these genes were mainly associated with
immunity. Additionally, in transcriptional regulatory network, early growth
response 1 (Egr1), activating transcription factor 3 (Atf3), Atf4, Myc and Fos
were considered as the key transcription factors related to immune response. The 
key transcription factors and potential target genes might provide new
information for the development of AMI, and leukocyte transendothelial migration 
pathway might play a vital role in AMI.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24704022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2015 Mar;70(3):263-72. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glu040.
Epub 2014 Apr 1.

Elevated ATF4 function in fibroblasts and liver of slow-aging mutant mice.

Li W(1), Miller RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and. (2)Department of Pathology and Geriatrics Center,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor millerr@umich.edu.

Work in yeast has shown that longevity extension induced by nutrient deprivation,
altered ribosomal function, or diminished target of rapamycin action requires the
activity of GCN4. We hypothesized that increased activity of ATF4, the mammalian 
equivalent of yeast GCN4, might be characteristic of mutations that extend mouse 
life span. Fibroblasts from the skin of two such mutants (Snell dwarf and PAPP-A 
knockout) were found to have higher levels of ATF4 protein and expression of
several ATF4 target genes in responses to amino acid withdrawal, cadmium,
hydrogen peroxide, and tunicamycin. ATF4 pathways were also elevated in liver of 
both kinds of long-lived mutant mice. Thus, a connection between ATF4 pathways
and longevity may have deep evolutionary roots, and further studies of ATF4
mechanisms may provide insights into the links between cellular stress
resistance, protein translation control, and aging.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4351389
PMID: 24691093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Exp Neurol. 2014 Jun;256:25-38. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2014.03.016. Epub 2014
Mar 30.

CD36 deletion improves recovery from spinal cord injury.

Myers SA(1), Andres KR(1), Hagg T(2), Whittemore SR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Kentucky Spinal Cord Injury Research Center, University of Louisville School
of Medicine, 511 S. Floyd St., Rm. 616A, Louisville, KY 40202, USA; Department of
Neurological Surgery, University of Louisville School of Medicine, 511 S. Floyd
St., Rm. 616A, Louisville, KY 40202, USA. (2)Kentucky Spinal Cord Injury Research
Center, University of Louisville School of Medicine, 511 S. Floyd St., Rm. 616A, 
Louisville, KY 40202, USA; Department of Neurological Surgery, University of
Louisville School of Medicine, 511 S. Floyd St., Rm. 616A, Louisville, KY 40202, 
USA; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Louisville School
of Medicine, 500 S. Preston St., Louisville, KY 40202, USA. Electronic address:
haggt1@etsu.edu. (3)Kentucky Spinal Cord Injury Research Center, University of
Louisville School of Medicine, 511 S. Floyd St., Rm. 616A, Louisville, KY 40202, 
USA; Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Louisville School of
Medicine, 511 S. Floyd St., Rm. 616A, Louisville, KY 40202, USA; Department of
Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, University of Louisville School of
Medicine, 500 S. Preston St., Rm 916A, Louisville, KY 40202, USA. Electronic
address: swhittemore@louisville.edu.

CD36 is a pleiotropic receptor involved in several pathophysiological conditions,
including cerebral ischemia, neurovascular dysfunction and atherosclerosis, and
recent reports implicate its involvement in the endoplasmic reticulum stress
response (ERSR). We hypothesized that CD36 signaling contributes to the
inflammation and microvascular dysfunction following spinal cord injury.
Following contusive injury, CD36(-/-) mice demonstrated improved hindlimb
functional recovery and greater white matter sparing than CD36(+/+) mice.
CD36(-/-) mice exhibited a reduced macrophage, but not neutrophil, infiltration
into the injury epicenter. Fewer infiltrating macrophages were either apoptotic
or positive for the ERSR marker, phospho-ATF4. CD36(-/-) mice also exhibited
significant improvements in injury heterodomain vascularity and function. These
microvessels accumulated less of the oxidized lipid product
4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal (4HNE) and exhibited a reduced ERSR, as detected by
vascular phospho-ATF4, CHOP and CHAC-1 expression. In cultured primary
endothelial cells, deletion of CD36 diminished 4HNE-induced phospho-ATF4 and CHOP
expression. A reduction in phospho-eIF2a and subsequent increase in
KDEL-positive, ER-localized proteins suggest that 4HNE-CD36 signaling facilitates
the detection of misfolded proteins upstream of eIF2a phosphorylation, ultimately
leading to CHOP-induced apoptosis. We conclude that CD36 deletion modestly, but
significantly, improves functional recovery from spinal cord injury by enhancing 
vascular function and reducing macrophage infiltration. These phenotypes may, in 
part, stem from reduced ER stress-induced cell death within endothelial and
macrophage cells following injury.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4086463
PMID: 24690303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Cell Signal. 2014 Jul;26(7):1567-75. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.03.014. Epub
2014 Mar 29.

ER stress signaling in ARPE-19 cells after inhibition of protein kinase CK2 by
CX-4945.

Intemann J(1), Saidu NE(1), Schwind L(1), Montenarh M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of the Saarland,
Building 44, D-66424 Homburg, Germany. (2)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of the Saarland, Building 44, D-66424 Homburg, Germany.
Electronic address: M.Montenarh@mx.uni-saarland.de.

Protein kinase CK2 is a critical factor for the survival of cells. It is
overexpressed in many cancer cells and provides protection against apoptosis in
these cells. Inhibition of CK2 kinase activity in various cancer cells leads to
apoptosis, which makes CK2 an attractive target for cancer therapy. Little is,
however, known about CK2 inhibition in non-cancerous cells. Using the human
retinal pigment epithelial cell line ARPE-19, we analyzed the formation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the ER stress signaling pathway after CK2
inhibition with CX-4945. Following CK2 inhibition, we did not find any
significant generation of ROS in neither ARPE-19 non-cancer cells nor in HCT116
cancer cells. We found an induction of the ER stress pathway including the
activation of eIF2a and ATF4 in both cell types. This activation was sufficient
for ARPE-19 cells to cope with the ER stress. Furthermore, in contrast to HCT116 
cancer cells, there was no induction of the pro-apoptotic transcription factor
CHOP and no induction of apoptosis in the ARPE-19 cells. Overexpression of CHOP, 
however, induced apoptosis in ARPE-19 cells indicating that this step in the ER
stress pathway is abrogated in normal cells compared to cancer cell.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24686080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Oncogene. 2015 Mar 5;34(10):1207-19. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.43. Epub 2014 Mar 31.

B-cell lymphoma/leukemia 10 promotes oral cancer progression through
STAT1/ATF4/S100P signaling pathway.

Wu TS(1), Tan CT(2), Chang CC(1), Lin BR(3), Lai WT(1), Chen ST(4), Kuo MY(5),
Rau CL(6), Jaw FS(7), Chang HH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Oral Biology, School of Dentistry, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Otolaryngology, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of Surgery, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)1] Department of Pediatrics, National
Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan [2] Department of Pediatrics, National
Taiwan University Hospital YunLin Branch, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of
Dentistry and Graduate Institute of Clinical Dentistry, School of Dentistry,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (6)1] Institute of Biomedical
Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan [2] Department of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

B-cell lymphoma/leukemia 10 (BCL10) is an apoptotic regulatory protein related to
advanced TNM stage and disease recurrence in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).
However, the regulatory mechanism of BCL10 in OSCC progression is still unknown. 
Here, we showed that knockdown of endogenous BCL10 could significantly reduce
cell migration and invasion abilities, retard cell proliferation by G0/G1 phase
accumulation and inhibit tumorigenicity in vivo. In molecular level, we
identified S100P as a crucial downstream effector of BCL10-inhibited OSCC
progression by high-throughput microarray analysis. S100P messenger RNA and
protein expression levels were significantly diminished in silenced-BCL10 clones,
and transfected S100P expression plasmids restored migration, invasion,
proliferation abilities and tumorigenicity in shBCL10 transfectants. Furthermore,
we provided evidence that BCL10 regulated S100P expression through signal
transducers and activators of transcription 1 (STAT1) and activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4). Knockdown of BCL10 decreased S100P promoter
activity, but showed no effect in truncated STAT1/ATF4 S100P promoter.  In
addition, we also found that the P50/P65 signaling pathway was involved in
BCL10-enhanced OSCC progression. Restored S100P in silenced-BCL10 clones could
markedly reverse P65 activation via outside-in signaling. Taken together, we
discovered a novel axis of BCL10-regulated OSCC progression via
STAT1/ATF4/S100P/P65 signaling, which could predict the prognosis of OSCC and
will be beneficial for developing therapeutic strategy against advanced OSCC.

PMID: 24681956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2014 Mar;55(3):304-10.

[Determinants of sensitivity to proteasome inhibitors and strategies to overcome 
acquired resistance to bortezomib in multiple myeloma].

Iida S, Ri M.

PMID: 24681933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Bone Miner Res. 2014 Aug;29(8):1823-32. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2229.

Identification of novel transcription factors in osteoclast differentiation using
genome-wide analysis of open chromatin determined by DNase-seq.

Inoue K(1), Imai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrative Pathophysiology, Proteo-Science Center, Graduate
School of Medicine, Ehime University, Ehime, Japan; Department of Biological
Resources, Integrated Center for Sciences, Ehime University, Ehime, Japan.

Clarification of the mechanisms underlying osteoclast differentiation enables us 
to understand the physiology of bone metabolism as well as the pathophysiology of
bone diseases such as osteoporosis. Recently, it has been reported that
epigenetics can determine cell fate and regulate cell type-specific gene
expression. However, little is known about epigenetics during osteoclastogenesis.
To reveal a part of epigenetics, especially focused on chromatin dynamics, during
early osteoclastogenesis and to identify novel transcription factors involved in 
osteoclastogenesis, we performed a genome-wide analysis of open chromatin during 
receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL)-induced osteoclastogenesis using DNase
I hypersensitive sites sequencing (DNase-seq). DNase-seq was performed using the 
extracted nuclei from RAW264 cells treated with or without RANKL for 24 hours,
followed by several bioinformatic analyses. DNase I hypersensitive sites (DHSs)
were dynamically changed during RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis and they
accumulated in promoter regions. The distributions of DHSs among cis-regulatory
DNA regions were identical regardless of RANKL stimulation. Motif discovery
analysis successfully identified well-known osteoclastogenic transcription
factors including Jun, CREB1, FOS, ATF2, and ATF4, but also novel transcription
factors for osteoclastogenesis such as Zscan10, Atf1, Nrf1, and Srebf2. siRNA
knockdown of these identified novel transcription factors impaired
osteoclastogenesis. Taken together, DNase-seq is a useful tool for comprehension 
of epigenetics, especially chromatin dynamics during osteoclastogenesis and for
identification of novel transcription factors involved in osteoclastogenesis.
This study may reveal underlying mechanisms that determine cell type-specific
differentiation of bone cells and may lead to investigation of novel therapeutic 
targets for osteoporosis.

© 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 24677342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 27;9(3):e93258. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093258. eCollection
2014.

RNA sequence reveals mouse retinal transcriptome changes early after axonal
injury.

Yasuda M(1), Tanaka Y(1), Ryu M(1), Tsuda S(1), Nakazawa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan.

Glaucoma is an ocular disease characterized by progressive retinal ganglion cell 
(RGC) death caused by axonal injury. However, the underlying mechanisms involved 
in RGC death remain unclear. In this study, we investigated changes in the
transcriptome profile following axonal injury in mice (C57BL/6) with RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) technology. The experiment group underwent an optic nerve
crush (ONC) procedure to induce axonal injury in the right eye, and the control
group underwent a sham procedure. Two days later, we extracted the retinas and
performed RNA-seq and a pathway analysis. We identified 177 differentially
expressed genes with RNA-seq, notably the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-related genes Atf3, Atf4, Atf5, Chac1, Chop, Egr1 and Trb3, which were
significantly upregulated. The pathway analysis revealed that ATF4 was the most
significant upstream regulator. The antioxidative response-related genes Hmox1
and Srxn1, as well as the immune response-related genes C1qa, C1qb and C1qc, were
also significantly upregulated. To our knowledge, this is the first reported
RNA-seq investigation of the retinal transcriptome and molecular pathways in the 
early stages after axonal injury. Our results indicated that ER stress plays a
key role under these conditions. Furthermore, the antioxidative defense and
immune responses occurred concurrently in the early stages after axonal injury.
We believe that our study will lead to a better understanding of and insight into
the molecular mechanisms underlying RGC death after axonal injury.

PMCID: PMC3968129
PMID: 24676137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. FEBS J. 2014 May;281(10):2399-409. doi: 10.1111/febs.12792. Epub 2014 Apr 22.

Activating transcription factor 4 regulates adipocyte differentiation via
altering the coordinate expression of CCATT/enhancer binding protein ß and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>.

Yu K(1), Mo D, Wu M, Chen H, Chen L, Li M, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

Adipose tissue is crucial for energy homeostasis and is a topic interest with
respect to investigating the regulation of adipose tissue formation for the
ever-increasing health concerns of obesity and type 2 diabetes. Adipocyte
differentiation is tightly regulated by the characteristic sequential expression 
change of adipocyte genes, including members of the CCATT/enhancer binding
protein (C/EBP) family of transcription factors, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> and tribbles homolog 3. In the present study,
we demonstrate that C/EBPß and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (but 
not tribbles homolog 3) are targeted for activation by activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4), a member of cAMP response element-binding/activator
transcription factor family. Importantly, overexpression of ATF4 in 3T3-L1 cells 
enhanced adipogenesis, whereas small-interfering ATF4 blocked conversion of
preadipocytes to adipocytes. These findings were accomplished by altering the
coordinate expression of adipogenic transcription factors. Taken together, our
results suggest that ATF4 is a positive regulator of adipocyte differentiation.
This notion is also supported by the results of the present study showing that
the expression of ATF4 is induced during adipocyte differentiation. Thus, ATF4
could be an important regulator of energy homeostasis.

© 2014 FEBS.

PMID: 24673832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Eur J Oral Sci. 2014 Jun;122(3):190-7. doi: 10.1111/eos.12122. Epub 2014 Mar 26.

Lentiviral-mediated expression of SATB2 promotes osteogenic differentiation of
bone marrow stromal cells in vitro and in vivo.

Gong Y(1), Qian Y, Yang F, Wang H, Yu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.

Special AT-rich sequence-binding protein 2 (SATB2 ) acts as a potent
transcription factor to promote osteoblast differentiation and bone regeneration.
In this study, we first used lentiviral-mediated gene transfer of Satb2 into
mouse bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) and investigated the capacity of SATB2
overexpression to promote osteogenic differentiation in vitro and in vivo. We
found that LV-Satb2 -transduced BMSCs produced SATB2 protein and underwent rapid 
and marked osteogenic differentiation, as demonstrated by increased expression of
osteoblastic genes, including runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2),
transcription factor Sp7 (Sp7), activating transcription factor 4 (Atf4), and
bone sialoprotein (Bsp), and increased alkaline phosphatase activity and Alizarin
Red S staining. To analyze the induction of bone formation in vivo,
LV-Satb2-transduced BMSCs were implanted into the hindlimbs of syngeneic mice,
with ß-tricalcium phosphate as the scaffolding material. Four weeks after
implantation, transduction with LV-Satb2 had greatly enhanced the formation of
new bone. These data demonstrated the capacity of lentiviral-mediated SATB2 to
promote the osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs in vitro and to enhance bone
formation through a tissue-engineering technique that may be useful in
bone-regenerative medicine.

© 2014 Eur J Oral Sci.

PMID: 24666017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Biol Chem. 2014 May 2;289(18):12593-611. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.543215. Epub
2014 Mar 19.

Translational control during endoplasmic reticulum stress beyond phosphorylation 
of the translation initiation factor eIF2a.

Guan BJ(1), Krokowski D, Majumder M, Schmotzer CL, Kimball SR, Merrick WC,
Koromilas AE, Hatzoglou M.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology.

The accumulation of unfolded/misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
causes stress to which an unfolded protein response is activated to render cell
survival or apoptosis (chronic stress). Transcriptional and translational
reprogramming is tightly regulated during the unfolded protein response to ensure
specific gene expression. The master regulator of this response is the
PERK/eIF2a/ATF4 signaling where eIF2a is phosphorylated (eIF2a-P) by the kinase
PERK. This signal leads to global translational shutdown, but it also enables
translation of the transcription factor ATF4 mRNA. We showed recently that ATF4
induces an anabolic program through the up-regulation of selected amino acid
transporters and aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Paradoxically, this anabolic program
led cells to apoptosis during chronic ER stress in a manner that involved
recovery from stress-induced protein synthesis inhibition. By using
eIF2a-P-deficient cells as an experimental system, we identified a communicating 
network of signaling pathways that contribute to the inhibition of protein
synthesis during chronic ER stress. This eIF2a-P-independent network includes (i)
inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin kinase protein complex 1
(mTORC1)-targeted protein phosphorylation, (ii) inhibited translation of a
selective group of 5'-terminal oligopyrimidine mRNAs (encoding proteins involved 
in the translation machinery and translationally controlled by mTORC1 signaling),
and (iii) inhibited translation of non-5'-terminal oligopyrimidine ribosomal
protein mRNAs and ribosomal RNA biogenesis. We propose that the PERK/eIF2a-P/ATF4
signaling acts as a brake in the decline of protein synthesis during chronic ER
stress by positively regulating signaling downstream of the mTORC1 activity.
These studies advance our knowledge on the complexity of the communicating
signaling pathways in controlling protein synthesis rates during chronic stress.

PMCID: PMC4007450
PMID: 24648524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 May;25(10):1686-97. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E14-02-0704. Epub 2014
Mar 19.

Selective mRNA translation during eIF2 phosphorylation induces expression of
IBTKa.

Baird TD(1), Palam LR(1), Fusakio ME(1), Willy JA(2), Davis CM(1), McClintick
JN(1), Anthony TG(3), Wek RC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202Investigative Toxicology, Lilly Research Laboratories, Indianapolis, IN
46285. (3)Department of Nutritional Sciences, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, 
NJ 08901. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202 rwek@iu.edu.

Disruption of protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) triggers the
unfolded protein response (UPR), a transcriptional and translational control
network designed to restore protein homeostasis. Central to the UPR is PKR-like
ER kinase (PERK/EIF2AK3) phosphorylation of the a subunit of eIF2 (eIF2a~P),
which represses global translation coincident with preferential translation of
mRNAs, such as activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and C/EBP-homologous
protein (CHOP), that serve to implement UPR transcriptional regulation. In this
study, we used sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation and a genome-wide microarray 
approach to measure changes in mRNA translation during ER stress. Our analysis
suggests that translational efficiencies vary over a broad range during ER
stress, with the majority of transcripts being either repressed or resistant to
eIF2a~P, whereas a notable cohort of key regulators are subject to preferential
translation. From the latter group, we identified the a isoform of inhibitor of
Bruton's tyrosine kinase (IBTKa) as being subject to both translational and
transcriptional induction during eIF2a~P in both cell lines and a mouse model of 
ER stress. Translational regulation of IBTKa mRNA involves stress-induced relief 
of two inhibitory upstream open reading frames in the 5'-leader of the
transcript. Depletion of IBTKa by short hairpin RNA reduced viability of cultured
cells coincident with increased caspase 3/7 cleavage, suggesting that IBTKa is a 
key regulator in determining cell fate during the UPR.

© 2014 Baird et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell 
Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4019499
PMID: 24648495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 19;9(3):e85039. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085039. eCollection
2014.

A new class of pluripotent stem cell cytotoxic small molecules.

Richards M(1), Phoon CW(1), Goh GT(2), Seng EK(1), Guo XM(1), Tan CM(1), Chan
WK(3), Lee JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical & Life Sciences, Nanyang Polytechnic, Singapore.
(2)Singapore Eye Research Institute, 11 Third Hospital Avenue, Singapore.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore,
Singapore. (4)School of Chemical & Life Sciences, Nanyang Polytechnic, Singapore;
Food & Human Nutrition Programme (Singapore), School of Agriculture, Food and
Rural Development, Agriculture Building, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon
Tyne, United Kingdom.

A major concern in Pluripotent Stem Cell (PSC)-derived cell replacement therapy
is the risk of teratoma formation from contaminating undifferentiated cells.
Removal of undifferentiated cells from differentiated cultures is an essential
step before PSC-based cell therapies can be safely deployed in a clinical
setting. We report a group of novel small molecules that are cytotoxic to PSCs.
Our data indicates that these molecules are specific and potent in their activity
allowing rapid eradication of undifferentiated cells. Experiments utilizing mixed
PSC and primary human neuronal and cardiomyocyte cultures demonstrate that up to 
a 6-fold enrichment for specialized cells can be obtained without adversely
affecting cell viability and function. Several structural variants were
synthesized to identify key functional groups and to improve specificity and
efficacy. Comparative microarray analysis and ensuing RNA knockdown studies
revealed involvement of the PERK/ATF4/DDIT3 ER stress pathway. Surprisingly, cell
death following ER stress induction was associated with a concomitant decrease in
endogenous ROS levels in PSCs. Undifferentiated cells treated with these
molecules preceding transplantation fail to form teratomas in SCID mice.
Furthermore, these molecules remain non-toxic and non-teratogenic to zebrafish
embryos suggesting that they may be safely used in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3960094
PMID: 24647085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Biol Chem. 2014 May 2;289(18):12485-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.544122. Epub 2014
Mar 18.

Impaired oxidative endoplasmic reticulum stress response caused by deficiency of 
thyroid hormone receptor a.

Takahashi K(1), Furuya F, Shimura H, Kaneshige M, Kobayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)From the Third Department of Internal Medicine, Interdisciplinary Graduate
School of Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Chuo-shi, Yamanashi 
409-3898, Japan and.

Thyroid hormone receptor a (TRa) is critical to postnatal pancreatic ß-cell
maintenance. To investigate the association between TRa and the survival of
pancreatic ß-cells under endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, the expression of
endogenous TRa was inhibited by infection with an adenovirus expressing
double-stranded short hairpin RNA against TRa (AdshTRa). In control
adenovirus-infected pancreatic ß-cells, palmitate enhanced the expression of
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and heme oxygenase 1, which facilitates 
adaptation to oxidative ER stress. However, in AdshTRa-infected pancreatic
ß-cells, palmitate did not induce ATF4-mediated integrated stress response, and
oxidative stress-associated apoptotic cell death was significantly enhanced.
TRa-deficient mice or wild-type mice (WT) were fed a high fat diet (HFD) for 30
weeks, and the effect of oxidative ER stress on pancreatic ß-cells was analyzed. 
HFD-treated TRa-deficient mice had high blood glucose levels and low plasma
insulin levels. In HFD-treated TRa-deficient mice, ATF4 was not induced, and
apoptosis was enhanced compared with HFD-treated WT mice. Furthermore, the
expression level of 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine, an oxidative stress marker, was
enhanced in the ß-cells of HFD-treated TRa-deficient mice. These results indicate
that endogenous TRa plays an important role for the expression of ATF4 and
facilitates reduced apoptosis in pancreatic ß-cells under ER stress.

PMCID: PMC4007442
PMID: 24644288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Nephron Exp Nephrol. 2014;126(1):25-32. doi: 10.1159/000357777. Epub 2014 Mar 7.

Contributions of endoplasmic reticulum stress and reactive oxygen species to
renal injury in aldosterone/salt-induced rats.

Xu C(1), Ding W, Yang L, Yang M, Zhang M, Gu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Huashan Hospital and Institute of Nephrology, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have suggested that aldosterone (Aldo) plays a key
role in the pathogenesis of renal injury; however, the molecular mechanisms of
Aldo-induced renal injury have not been characterized. This study was performed
to test the hypothesis that reactive oxygen species (ROS) and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress contribute to the pathogenesis of Aldo- and salt-induced
renal injury.
METHODS: Rats were uninephrectomized and treated with one of the following for 4 
weeks: (1) vehicle, (2) vehicle + NaCl, (3) Aldo + NaCl or (4) Aldo + NaCl +
N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC). Following this treatment period, the extent of renal
injury was assessed by periodic acid-Schiff staining and immunohistochemistry,
and the expression levels of proteins related to ER stress, as well as p47phox
and p67phox in the kidney, were measured by Western blot. Intracellular ROS
generation was evaluated by 2'7'-dichlorofluorescin diacetate fluorescence and
ELISA kits.
RESULTS: Rats that received Aldo + 1% NaCl exhibited severe renal injury. ROS
levels were higher in Aldo-infused rats and were inhibited by NAC. Renal cortical
protein levels of GRP78, GRP94, CHOP, ATF-4, p47phox and p67phox were
significantly upregulated in rats that received Aldo + 1% NaCl. Treatment with
NAC significantly ameliorated the increase in the expression of these proteins.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that ROS and ER stress play a role in the
progression of Aldo- and salt-induced renal injury.

2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24642932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Intern Med. 2014 Nov;276(5):498-511. doi: 10.1111/joim.12217. Epub 2014 Mar 20.

Fish oil supplementation induces expression of genes related to cell cycle,
endoplasmic reticulum stress and apoptosis in peripheral blood mononuclear cells:
a transcriptomic approach.

Myhrstad MC(1), Ulven SM, Günther CC, Ottestad I, Holden M, Ryeng E, Borge GI,
Kohler A, Brønner KW, Thoresen M, Holven KB.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of Health, Nutrition and Management,
Oslo and Akershus University College of Applied Sciences, Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Fish oil supplementation has been shown to alter gene expression of
mononuclear cells both in vitro and in vivo. However, little is known about the
total transcriptome profile in healthy subjects after intake of fish oil. We
therefore investigated the gene expression profile in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) after intake of fish oil for 7 weeks using
transcriptome analyses.
DESIGN: In a 7-week, double-blinded, randomized, controlled, parallel-group
study, healthy subjects received 8 g day(-1) fish oil (1.6 g day(-1)
eicosapentaenoic acid + docosahexaenoic acid) (n = 17) or 8 g day(-1) high oleic 
sunflower oil (n = 19). Microarray analyses of RNA isolated from PBMCs were
performed at baseline and after 7 weeks of intervention.
RESULTS: Cell cycle, DNA packaging and chromosome organization are biological
processes found to be upregulated after intake of fish oil compared to high oleic
sunflower oil using a moderated t-test. In addition, gene set enrichment analysis
identified several enriched gene sets after intake of fish oil. The genes
contributing to the significantly different gene sets in the subjects given fish 
oil compared with the control group are involved in cell cycle, endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress and apoptosis. Gene transcripts with common motifs for 35
known transcription factors including E2F, TP53 and ATF4 were upregulated after
intake of fish oil.
CONCLUSION: We have shown that intake of fish oil for 7 weeks modulates gene
expression in PBMCs of healthy subjects. The increased expression of genes
related to cell cycle, ER stress and apoptosis suggests that intake of fish oil
may modulate basic cellular processes involved in normal cellular function.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Internal Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons
Ltd on behalf of The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal
Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4263263
PMID: 24641624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 17;9(3):e92110. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092110. eCollection
2014.

Rifampicin protects PC12 cells from rotenone-induced cytotoxicity by activating
GRP78 via PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 pathway.

Jing X(1), Shi Q(2), Bi W(3), Zeng Z(1), Liang Y(1), Wu X(1), Xiao S(1), Liu
J(1), Yang L(1), Tao E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Radiology,
School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States of
America. (3)Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China; Department of Neurology, the
First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of
China.

Rifampicin has been proposed as a therapeutic candidate for Parkinson's disease
(PD). We previously showed that rifampicin was neuroprotective in PD models in
vivo and in vitro. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying are not fully
elucidated. In this study, using the comprehensive proteomic analysis, we
identified that the 78 kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP78), a hallmark of the
unfolded protein response (UPR), was upregulated in rifampicin-treated PC12
cells. Western blot analysis confirmed GRP78 activation. GRP78 functions
cytoprotectively in stressed cells, therefore, we hypothesized that GRP78
mediated rifampicin-induced neuroprotection. Using RNA interference, we found
that GRP78 gene knockdown significantly attenuated the neuroprotective effects of
rifampicin. Next, we examined three UPR transducers, namely, protein kinase
RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK), inositol requiring kinase a (IREa) 
and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF 6), and how they regulated
rifampicin-stimulated GRP78 expression. Our results showed that PERK, eukaryotic 
initiation factor 2a (eIF2a), and activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) were
activated in rifampicin-treated PC12 cells. Silencing the ATF4 gene using RNAi
inhibited GRP78 stimulation. Interestingly, we did not detect significant IREa
activation, X-box binding protein 1 mRNA splicing, or ATF6 cleavage up to 24 h
after rifampicin treatment. Taken together, our data suggested that rifampicin
induced GRP78 via the PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 pathway to protect neurons against
rotenone-induced cell damage. Targeting molecules in this pathway could be a
novel therapeutic approach for PD treatment.

PMCID: PMC3956889
PMID: 24638036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Bioengineered. 2014 May-Jun;5(3):186-92. doi: 10.4161/bioe.27607. Epub 2014 Jan
14.

Engineering ribosomal leaky scanning and upstream open reading frames for precise
control of protein translation.

Ferreira JP(1), Noderer WL(1), Diaz de Arce AJ(1), Wang CL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering; Stanford University; Stanford, CA USA.

We have employed upstream open reading frames (uORFs) to systematically tune the 
translation levels of recombinant proteins. We present the design principles that
guided the development of this technology and provide information that may help
others in implementing synthetic uORFs for their own applications. We also report
on recent applications to our own research projects, including the coupling of
uORF and translation initiation site (TIS) engineering with small
molecule-inducible post-translational control. Finally, we discuss opportunities 
to investigate and potentially engineer gene-specific translational responses to 
cellular stress.

PMCID: PMC4101011
PMID: 24637490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 May;38(1):140-8. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.03.004.
Epub 2014 Mar 14.

ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4) from grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon
idella) modulates the transcription initiation of GRP78 and GRP94 in CIK cells.

Fan Q(1), Mao H(1), Wu C(2), Liu Y(1), Hu Y(1), Zhong B(1), Mi Y(1), Hu C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science and Food Engineering,
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China. (2)Nanchang Teachers College,
Nanchang 330103, China. (3)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science and 
Food Engineering, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China. Electronic
address: hucy2008@163.com.

GRP78 and GRP94, belong to GRP (glucose-regulated protein) family of
endoplasmatic reticulum (ER) chaperone superfamily, are essential for cell
survival under ER stress. ATF4 is a protective protein which regulates the
adaptation of cells to ER stress by modulating the transcription of UPR (Unfolded
Protein Response) target genes, including GRP78 and GRP94. To understand the
molecular mechanism of ATF4 modulates the transcription initiation of CiGRP78 and
CiGRP94, we cloned ATF4 ORF cDNA sequences (CiATF4) by homologous cloning
techniques. The expression trend of CiATF4 was similar to CiGRP78 and CiGRP94 did
under 37 °C thermal stress, namely, the expression of CiATF4 was up-regulated
twice at 2 h post-thermal stress and at 18 h post recovery from thermal stress.
In this paper, CiATF4 was expressed in BL21 Escherichia coli, and the expressed
protein was purified by affinity chromatography with the Ni-NTA His-Bind Resin.
On the basis of the cloned CiGRP78 and CiGRP94 cDNA in our laboratory previously,
we cloned their promoter sequences by genomic walking approach. In vitro, gel
mobility shift assays revealed that CiATF4 could bind to CiGRP78 and CiGRP94
promoter with high affinity. Subsequently, the recombinant plasmid of pGL3-CiGRPs
and pcDNA3.1-CiATF4 were constructed and transiently co-transfected into
Ctenopharyngodon idella kidney (CIK) cells. The impact of CiATF4 on CiGRP
promoter sequences were measured by luciferase assays. These results demonstrated
that CiATF4 could activate the transcription of CiGRP78 and CiGRP94. What's more,
for better understanding the molecular mechanism of CiATF4 modulate the
transcription initiation of CiGRP, three mutant fragments of CiGRP78 promoter
recombinant plasmids (called CARE-mut/LUC, CRE1-mut/LUC and CRE2-mut/LUC) were
constructed and transiently co-transfected with CiATF4 into CIK cells. The
results indicated that CRE or CARE elements were the regulatory element for
transcription initiation of CiGRP78. Between them, CRE element would play more
important role in it.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24636856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Head Neck. 2015 Jun;37(6):896-905. doi: 10.1002/hed.23693. Epub 2014 Jun 27.

Hypoxic regulation of the PERK/ATF4/LAMP3-arm of the unfolded protein response in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Nagelkerke A(1,)(2), Sweep FC(2), Stegeman H(1), Grénman R(3), Kaanders JH(1),
Bussink J(1), Span PN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboud
University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Department of
Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery and Department of Medical Biochemistry,
Turku University Hospital and University of Turku, Turku, Finland.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to examine the hypoxic regulation of
the PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK)/activating transcription
factor-4 (ATF4)/lysosome-associated membrane protein 3 (LAMP3)-arm of the
unfolded protein response (UPR) in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
METHODS: LAMP3 expression was determined in patient biopsies by
immunohistochemistry and correlated to clinicopathological parameters. mRNA and
protein expression for PERK, ATF4, and LAMP3 was evaluated after hypoxic exposure
of HNSCC cell lines.
RESULTS: In patients with HNSCC, high LAMP3 expression correlated with N
classification (p = .019) and the occurrence of distant metastases during
follow-up (p = .039). Patients with high LAMP3 levels had a worse metastasis-free
survival (p = .008). Intriguingly, LAMP3 expression was localized exclusively in 
normoxic areas of tumors and xenografts. Expression of PERK, p-PERK, p-eIF2a,
ATF4, and LAMP3 was not universally induced in hypoxic HNSCC cell lines. Exposure
to endoplasmic reticulum-stress stimulated PERK, ATF4, and LAMP3 expression.
CONCLUSION: LAMP3 is relevant for prognosis in HNSCC. However, the
PERK/ATF4/LAMP3-arm of the UPR responds differently to hypoxia in HNSCC compared 
to other tumor types.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24634103  [PubMed - in process]


431. Cell Biochem Funct. 2014 Jul;32(5):445-52. doi: 10.1002/cbf.3036. Epub 2014 Mar
13.

Inhibition of palmitate-induced GADD34 expression augments apoptosis in mouse
insulinoma cells (MIN6).

Fransson L(1), Sjöholm A, Ortsäter H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Science and Education, Södersjukhuset, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Saturated fatty acids like palmitate induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in 
pancreatic beta-cells, an event linked to apoptotic loss of ß-cells in type 2
diabetes. Sustained activation of the ER stress response leads to expression of
growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible protein 34 (GADD34), a regulatory subunit 
of protein phosphatase 1. In the present study, we have used small interfering
RNA in order to knockdown GADD34 expression in insulin-producing MIN6 cells prior
to induction of ER stress by palmitate and evaluated its consequences on
RNA-activated protein kinase-like ER-localized eIF2alpha kinase (PERK) signalling
and apoptosis. Salubrinal, a specific inhibitor of eukaryotic initiation factor
2a (eIF2a) dephosphorylation, was used as a comparison. Salubrinal treatment
augmented palmitate-induced ER stress and increased GADD34 levels. Both GADD34
knockdown and salubrinal treatment potentiated the cytotoxic effects of palmitate
as evidenced by increased DNA fragmentation and activation of caspase 3, with the
fundamental difference that the former did not involve enhanced levels of GADD34.
The data from this study suggest that sustained activation of PERK signalling and
eIF2a phosphorylation sensitizes insulin-producing MIN6 cells to lipoapoptosis
independently of GADD34 expression levels.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24633916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 May;25(9):1411-20. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-11-0664. Epub 2014
Mar 12.

Translational and posttranslational regulation of XIAP by eIF2a and ATF4 promotes
ER stress-induced cell death during the unfolded protein response.

Hiramatsu N(1), Messah C, Han J, LaVail MM, Kaufman RJ, Lin JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093 Center for Neuroscience, Aging, and Stem Cell Research, Sanford Burnham
Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037 Departments of Anatomy and
Ophthalmology, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) protein misfolding activates the unfolded protein
response (UPR) to help cells cope with ER stress. If ER homeostasis is not
restored, UPR promotes cell death. The mechanisms of UPR-mediated cell death are 
poorly understood. The PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK) arm of the
UPR is implicated in ER stress-induced cell death, in part through up-regulation 
of proapoptotic CCAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous protein (CHOP).
Chop((-)/(-)) cells are partially resistant to ER stress-induced cell death, and 
CHOP overexpression alone does not induce cell death. These findings suggest that
additional mechanisms regulate cell death downstream of PERK. Here we find
dramatic suppression of antiapoptosis XIAP proteins in response to chronic ER
stress. We find that PERK down-regulates XIAP synthesis through eIF2a and
promotes XIAP degradation through ATF4. Of interest, PERK's down-regulation of
XIAP occurs independently of CHOP activity. Loss of XIAP leads to increased cell 
death, whereas XIAP overexpression significantly enhances resistance to ER
stress-induced cell death, even in the absence of CHOP. Our findings define a
novel signaling circuit between PERK and XIAP that operates in parallel with PERK
to CHOP induction to influence cell survival during ER stress. We propose a
"two-hit" model of ER stress-induced cell death involving concomitant CHOP
up-regulation and XIAP down-regulation both induced by PERK.

PMCID: PMC4004591
PMID: 24623724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2014 May;306(9):H1314-23. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00869.2013. Epub 2014 Mar 7.

Reduction of endoplasmic reticulum stress by 4-phenylbutyric acid prevents the
development of hypoxia-induced pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Koyama M(1), Furuhashi M, Ishimura S, Mita T, Fuseya T, Okazaki Y, Yoshida H,
Tsuchihashi K, Miura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular, Renal and Metabolic Medicine, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan; and.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is characterized by vasoconstriction and
vascular remodeling of the pulmonary artery (PA). Recently, endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress and inappropriate adaptation through the unfolded protein response
(UPR) have been disclosed in various types of diseases. Here we examined whether 
ER stress is involved in the pathogenesis of PAH. Four weeks of chronic
normobaric hypoxia increased right ventricular (RV) systolic pressure by 63%
compared with that in normoxic controls and induced RV hypertrophy and medial
thickening of the PA in C57BL/6J mice. Treatment with 4-phenylbutyric acid
(4-PBA), a chemical chaperone, significantly reduced RV systolic pressure by 30%,
attenuated RV hypertrophy and PA muscularization, and increased total running
distance in a treadmill test by 70% in hypoxic mice. The beneficial effects of
4-PBA were associated with suppressed expression of inflammatory cytokines and ER
stress markers, including Grp78 and Grp94 in the activating transcription
factor-6 branch, sXbp1 and Pdi in the inositol-requiring enzyme-1 branch and Atf4
in the PKR-like ER kinase branch, and reduced phosphorylation of c-Jun
NH2-terminal kinase and eukaryotic translation initiation factor-2a in the lung. 
The pattern of changes in ER stress and inflammatory markers by 4-PBA in the lung
of the PAH model was reproduced in PA smooth muscle cells by chronic stimulation 
of platelet-derived growth factor-BB or hypoxia. Furthermore, knockdown of each
UPR branch sensor activated other branches and promoted proliferation of PA
smooth muscle cells. The findings indicate that activation of all branches of the
UPR and accompanying inflammation play a major role in the pathogenesis of PAH,
and that chemical chaperones are potentially therapeutic agents for PAH.

PMID: 24610918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jul;35(7):6255-64. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1789-0. Epub 2014
Mar 9.

Translational regulator eIF2a in tumor.

Zheng Q(1), Ye J, Cao J.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Center, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, 88 Jiefang Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, 310009, China.

The eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) is the regulatory subunit
of eIF2 which can be inactivated by phosphorylation. In the adaptive response to 
various microenvironmental stresses, phosphorylation of eIF2a (p-eIF2a) by
specific kinases significantly downregulates global protein synthesis while
selectively upregulates the activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) translation.
The ATF4 is a transcription activator that can translocate into nucleus and
upregulate genes involved in amino acid synthesis, redox balance, protein
maturation, and degradation which lead to the activation of both autophagy and
apoptosis. During tumor progression, adaptive response facilitates tumor cell
survival and growth under severe stresses. Therefore, eIF2a phosphorylation
significantly promotes tumor progression and resistance to therapy. However,
there is also evidence showing that p-eIF2a exerts suppressive effects on
tumorigenesis. Current understanding of the roles eIF2a plays in tumor is still
incomplete and needs further investigation. This review addresses on the past and
current efforts to delineate the molecular mechanisms of eIF2a in tumorigenesis, 
tumor progression, resistance to therapy, and tumor cachexia as well as the
translational promise of therapeutic applications targeting eIF2a-related
signaling pathway.

PMID: 24609900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Autophagy. 2014 May;10(5):766-84. doi: 10.4161/auto.27954. Epub 2014 Feb 20.

Hepatitis C virus core protein activates autophagy through EIF2AK3 and ATF6 UPR
pathway-mediated MAP1LC3B and ATG12 expression.

Wang J(1), Kang R(1), Huang H(1), Xi X(1), Wang B(1), Wang J(1), Zhao Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens; Institute of Pathogen
Biology; Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College;
Beijing, China.

HCV infection induces autophagy, but how this occurs is unclear. Here, we report 
the induction of autophagy by the structural HCV core protein and subsequent
endoplasmic reticular (ER) stress in Huh7 hepatoma cells. During ER stress, both 
the EIF2AK3 and ATF6 pathways of the unfolded protein response (UPR) were
activated by HCV core protein. Then, these pathways upregulated transcription
factors ATF4 and DDIT3. The ERN1-XBP1 pathway was not activated. Through ATF4 in 
the EIF2AK3 pathway, the autophagy gene ATG12 was upregulated. DDIT3 upregulated 
the transcription of autophagy gene MAP1LC3B (LC3B) by directly binding to the
-253 to -99 base region of the LC3B promoter, contributing to the development of 
autophagy. Collectively, these data suggest not only a novel role for the HCV
core protein in autophagy but also offer new insight into detailed molecular
mechanisms with respect to HCV-induced autophagy, specifically how downstream UPR
molecules regulate key autophagic gene expression.

PMID: 24589849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 28;9(2):e90388. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090388. eCollection
2014.

JNK contributes to the tumorigenic potential of human cholangiocarcinoma cells
through the mTOR pathway regulated GRP78 induction.

Feng C(1), He K(1), Zhang C(2), Su S(1), Li B(1), Li Y(2), Duan CY(2), Chen S(2),
Chen R(3), Liu Y(2), Li H(2), Wei M(4), Xia X(1), Dai R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery of the Affiliated Hospital, Luzhou Medical
College, Luzhou, Sichuan, China. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou, Sichuan, China. (3)Department of Public 
Health, Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou, Sichuan, China. (4)Affiliated Hospital of
Chinese Traditional Medicine, Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou, Sichuan, China.
(5)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery of the Affiliated Hospital, Luzhou Medical
College, Luzhou, Sichuan, China ; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou, Sichuan, China.

Less is known about the roles of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) in
cholangiocarcinoma (CCA). Here, we report that JNK exerts its oncogenic action in
human CCA cells, partially due to the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
pathway regulated glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) induction. In human CCA
cells, the phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor alpha (eIF2a) results 
in the accumulation of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and GRP78
independent of unfolded protein response (UPR). Suppression of GRP78 expression
decreases the proliferation and invasion of human CCA cells. It's notable that
mTOR is required for eIF2a phosphorylation-induced ATF4 and GRP78 expression.
Importantly, JNK promotes eIF2a/ATF4-mediated GRP78 induction through regulating 
the activity of mTOR. Thus, our study implicates JNK/mTOR signaling plays an
important role in cholangiocarcinogenesis, partially through promoting the
eIF2a/ATF4/GRP78 pathway.

PMCID: PMC3938720
PMID: 24587347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Mol Neurobiol. 2014 Oct;50(2):655-72. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8658-0. Epub 2014
Feb 28.

Mode of action of S-methyl-N, N-diethylthiocarbamate sulfoxide (DETC-MeSO) as a
novel therapy for stroke in a rat model.

Mohammad-Gharibani P(1), Modi J, Menzie J, Genova R, Ma Z, Tao R, Prentice H, Wu 
JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Charles and Schmidt College of Medicine,
Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL, 33431, USA, pgharibani@gmail.com.

One approach for protecting neurons from excitotoxic damage in stroke is to
attenuate receptor activity with specific antagonists. S-Methyl-N,
N-diethylthiocarbamate sulfoxide (DETC-MeSO), the active metabolite of
disulfiram, has been shown to be a partial antagonist of glutamate receptors and 
effective in reducing seizure. First, we investigated neuroprotective effect of
DETC-MeSO on primary cortical neuronal culture under hypoxia/reoxygenation
condition in vitro. Then, DETC-MeSO was administered subcutaneously for 4 and 8
days with the first injection occurring 1 h before or 24 h after reperfusion in
the rat middle cerebral artery occlusion stroke model. Rats were subjected to the
neuroscore test, and the brain was analyzed for infarct size. Monitoring
neurotransmitter release was carried out by microdialysis. Heat shock proteins,
key proteins involved in apoptosis and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, were
analyzed by immunoblotting. DETC-MeSO greatly reduced both cell death following
hypoxia/reoxygenation and brain infarct size. It improved performance on the
neuroscore test and attenuated proteolysis of aII-spectrin. The level of
pro-apoptotic proteins declined, and anti-apoptotic and HSP27 protein expressions
were markedly increased. Levels of the ER stress protein markers p-PERK, p-eIF2a,
ATF4, JNK, XBP-1, GADD34, and CHOP significantly declined after DETC-MeSO
administration. Microdialysis data showed that DETC-MeSO increased high
potassium-induced striatal dopamine release indicating that more neurons were
protected and survived under ischemic insult in the presence of DETC-MeSO. We
also showed that DETC-MeSO can prevent gliosis. DETC-MeSO elicits neuroprotection
through the preservation of ER resulting in reduction of apoptosis by increase of
anti-apoptotic proteins and decrease of pro-apoptotic proteins.

PMID: 24573692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. RNA. 2014 Apr;20(4):559-67. doi: 10.1261/rna.042267.113. Epub 2014 Feb 25.

A single inhibitory upstream open reading frame (uORF) is sufficient to regulate 
Candida albicans GCN4 translation in response to amino acid starvation
conditions.

Sundaram A, Grant CM.

Candida albicans is a major fungal pathogen that responds to various
environmental cues as part of its infection mechanism. We show here that the
expression of C. albicans GCN4, which encodes a transcription factor that
regulates morphogenetic and metabolic responses, is translationally regulated in 
response to amino acid starvation induced by exposure to the histidine analog
3-aminotriazole (3AT). However, in contrast to the well-known translational
control mechanisms that regulate yeast GCN4 and mammalian ATF4 expression via
multiple upstream open reading frames (uORFs) in their 5'-leader sequences, a
single inhibitory uORF is necessary and sufficient for C. albicans GCN4
translational control. The 5'-leader sequence of GCN4 contains three uORFs, but
uORF3 alone is sufficient for translational regulation. Under nonstress
conditions, uORF3 inhibits GCN4 translation. Amino acid starvation conditions
promote Gcn2-mediated phosphorylation of eIF2a and leaky ribosomal scanning to
bypass uORF3, inducing GCN4 translation. GCN4 expression is also
transcriptionally regulated, although maximal induction is observed at higher
concentrations of 3AT compared with translational regulation. C. albicans GCN4
expression is therefore highly regulated by both transcriptional and
translational control mechanisms. We suggest that it is particularly important
that Gcn4 levels are tightly controlled since Gcn4 regulates morphogenetic
changes during amino acid starvation conditions, which are important determinants
of virulence in this fungus.

PMCID: PMC3964917
PMID: 24570481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Fertil Steril. 2014 May;101(5):1450-7. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2014.01.025.
Epub 2014 Feb 19.

Characterization of a mechanism to inhibit ovarian follicle activation.

Barilovits SJ(1), Newsom KJ(2), Bickford JS(2), Beachy DE(2), Rhoton-Vlasak A(3),
Nick HS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College
of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida. (2)Department of
Neuroscience, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida. (4)Department of Neuroscience, College of
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida. Electronic address: hnick@ufl.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate that a small molecule can induce the transcription
factor Foxo3 in the ovary and lead to inhibition of follicle activation.
DESIGN: Cell culture, organ culture, and animal studies.
SETTING: University-based laboratory.
ANIMAL(S): 23 female C57BL/6 mice.
INTERVENTION(S): Human ovary cells and mouse ovaries in culture treated with
2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) to mimic glucose deprivation, and mice intraperitoneally
injected with 100 mg/kg, 300 mg/kg, or 600 mg/kg 2-DG daily for 2 weeks.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): In cell and organ culture, Foxo3 expression analyzed by 
quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR); in
treated animals, expression of genes regulated by nutrient deprivation (Foxo3,
ATF4, GRP78, CHOP, ASNS, c-Myc) measured in brain, kidney, and ovary by qRT-PCR; 
and ovarian follicles histologically classified and counted.
RESULT(S): Foxo3 expression is induced by 2-DG at both the mRNA and protein level
in human ovarian cell culture, possibly through ATF4-dependent gene regulation.
Foxo3 expression is also induced by 2-DG in ovarian organ culture. Treatment of
mice with 100 mg/kg 2-DG resulted in a 2.6 fold induction of Foxo3 in the ovary
and a 58% decrease in type 3a primary follicles.
CONCLUSION(S): Expression of Foxo3 is induced by nutrient deprivation in cell
culture, organ culture, and in vivo. In mice, 2-DG treatment results in an
inhibition of primordial follicle activation. These data indicate that Foxo3
induction by 2-DG may be useful for fertility preservation.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24559722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Amino Acids. 2014 May;46(5):1285-96. doi: 10.1007/s00726-014-1687-1. Epub 2014
Feb 21.

Upregulation of capacity for glutathione synthesis in response to amino acid
deprivation: regulation of glutamate-cysteine ligase subunits.

Sikalidis AK(1), Mazor KM, Lee JI, Roman HB, Hirschberger LL, Stipanuk MH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA.

Using HepG2/C3A cells and MEFs, we investigated whether induction of GSH
synthesis in response to sulfur amino acid deficiency is mediated by the decrease
in cysteine levels or whether it requires a decrease in GSH levels per se. Both
the glutamate-cysteine ligase catalytic (GCLC) and modifier (GCLM) subunit mRNA
levels were upregulated in response to a lack of cysteine or other essential
amino acids, independent of GSH levels. This upregulation did not occur in MEFs
lacking GCN2 (general control non-derepressible 2, also known as eIF2a kinase 4) 
or in cells expressing mutant eIF2a lacking the eIF2a kinase Ser(51)
phosphorylation site, indicating that expression of both GCLC and GCLM was
mediated by the GCN2/ATF4 stress response pathway. Only the increase in GCLM mRNA
level, however, was accompanied by a parallel increase in protein expression,
suggesting that the enhanced capacity for GSH synthesis depended largely on
increased association of GCLC with its regulatory subunit. Upregulation of both
GCLC and GLCM mRNA levels in response to cysteine deprivation was dependent on
new protein synthesis, which is consistent with expression of GCLC and GCLM being
mediated by proteins whose synthesis depends on activation of the GCN2/ATF4
pathway. Our data suggest that the regulation of GCLC expression may be mediated 
by changes in the abundance of transcriptional regulators, whereas the regulation
of GCLM expression may be mediated by changes in the abundance of mRNA
stabilizing or destabilizing proteins. Upregulation of GCLM levels in response to
low cysteine levels may serve to protect the cell in the face of a future stress 
requiring GSH as an antioxidant or conjugating/detoxifying agent.

PMCID: PMC3991118
PMID: 24557597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Mar 7;445(2):320-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.01.184. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Role of ATF3 in synergistic cancer cell killing by a combination of HDAC
inhibitors and agonistic anti-DR5 antibody through ER stress in human colon
cancer cells.

Liu J(1), Edagawa M(2), Goshima H(2), Inoue M(2), Yagita H(3), Liu Z(4), Kitajima
S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan; Department of Immunology, Norman
Bethune College of Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, China;
Department of Thyroid Surgery, First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun,
Jilin 130021, China. (2)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research
Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.
(3)Department of Immunology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo
113-8421, Japan. (4)Department of Immunology, Norman Bethune College of Medicine,
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, China. Electronic address:
liuzh@jlu.edu.cn. (5)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research
Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan. Electronic
address: kita.bgen@mri.tmd.ac.jp.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) are promising agents for cancer therapy. 
However, the mechanism(s) responsible for the efficacy of HDACIs have not yet to 
be fully elucidated. Death receptor 5 (DR5) is a transmembrane receptor
containing death domain that triggers cell death upon binding to TRAIL (tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand) or agonistic anti-DR5
monoclonal antibody, and the combination of TRAIL/agonistic anti-DR5 monoclonal
antibody and agents that increase the expression of DR5 is expected as a novel
anticancer therapeutic strategy. Here we report that six different HDACIs
activated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress sensor PERK and eIF2a and induced the
ATF4/ATF3/CHOP pathway in p53-deficient human colon cancer cells. This resulted
in an increased expression of DR5 on the cell surface and sensitized cells to
apoptosis by agonistic anti-DR5 monoclonal antibody. Stress response gene ATF3
was required for efficient DR5 induction by HDACIs, and DR5 reporter assay showed
that ATF3 play crucial role for the HDACIs-induced activation of DR5 gene
transcription. These provide important mechanistic insight into how HDACIs
exhibit pro-apoptotic activity in clinical anti-cancer treatments when they are
used in combination with other therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24530917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jun;1840(6):1808-16. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2014.02.003. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

A new tellurium-containing amphiphilic molecule induces apoptosis in HCT116 colon
cancer cells.

Du P(1), Saidu NE(2), Intemann J(2), Jacob C(3), Montenarh M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of the Saarland,
Building 44, D-66424 Homburg, Germany; Bioorganic Chemistry, University of the
Saarland, P.O. Box 151150, D-66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. (2)Medical Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, University of the Saarland, Building 44, D-66424 Homburg, 
Germany. (3)Bioorganic Chemistry, University of the Saarland, P.O. Box 151150,
D-66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. (4)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of the Saarland, Building 44, D-66424 Homburg, Germany. Electronic
address: M.Montenarh@mx.uni-saarland.de.

BACKGROUND: Chalcogen-based redox modulators over the years have attracted
considerable attention as anti-cancer agents. New selenium- and
tellurium-containing compounds with a polar head group and aryl-groups of various
lengths have recently been reported as biologically active in several organisms. 
In the present study, we used the most active of the tellurium compound DP41, and
its selenium counterpart DP31 to investigate their effects on the human cancer
cell line HCT116.
METHODS: Cells were treated with DP41 or DP31 and the formation of superoxide
radicals was determined using dihydroethidium. Cell cycle analysis and apoptosis 
was determined by cytofluorimetry. Proteins involved in ER signaling and
apoptosis were determined by Western blot analysis and fluorescence microscopy.
RESULTS: With 50µM of DP41, we observed an increase in O2(-) formation. There
was, however, no such increase in O2(-) after treatment with the corresponding
selenium compound under the same conditions. In the case of DP41, the production 
of O2(-) radicals was followed by an up-regulation of Nrf2, HO-1, phospho-eIF2a
and ATF4. CHOP was also induced and cells entered apoptosis. Unlike the cancer
cells, normal retinal epithelial ARPE-19 cells did not produce elevated levels of
O2(-) radicals nor did they induce the ER signaling pathway or apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The tellurium-containing compound DP41, in contrast to the
corresponding selenium compound, induces O2(-) radical formation and oxidative
and ER stress responses, including CHOP activation and finally apoptosis.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: These results indicate that DP41 is a redox modulating
agent with promising anti-cancer potentials.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24530428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Methods Enzymol. 2014;538:135-50. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-800280-3.00008-6.

Measurement of the unfolded protein response to investigate its role in
adipogenesis and obesity.

Han J(1), Kaufman RJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience, Aging, and Stem Cell Research, Sanford Burnham
Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA. (2)Center for
Neuroscience, Aging, and Stem Cell Research, Sanford Burnham Medical Research
Institute, La Jolla, California, USA. Electronic address:
rkaufman@sanfordburnham.org.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the cellular organelle responsible for the
folding of proteins destined for secretion and the intramembrane system of the
cell, biosynthesis of lipids, and storage of calcium for regulated release.
Extracellular stimuli and changes in intracellular homeostasis can alter the
protein-folding environment of the ER and cause the accumulation of misfolded or 
unfolded proteins, a stress condition called ER stress. To resolve protein
misfolding, cells have evolved a collection of adaptive signaling pathways,
called the unfolded protein response (UPR). It is now recognized that ER stress
contributes to many pathophysiological conditions. Increasing lines of evidence
suggest that obesity/insulin resistance and subsequent type 2 diabetes are
associated with ER stress and UPR activation in adipose tissue. However, whether 
and/or how ER stress and the UPR contribute to the pathogenesis of metabolic
syndrome and obesity is not entirely clear. In this section, we describe how the 
UPR may contribute to the pathology of obesity, methods to measure UPR induction,
and approaches to investigate the role of the UPR during adipocyte
differentiation and in mature adipose tissue.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24529437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Exp Eye Res. 2014 Apr;121:26-34. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2014.01.021. Epub 2014 Feb
10.

Valproic acid suppresses Nrf2/Keap1 dependent antioxidant protection through
induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress and Keap1 promoter DNA demethylation in
human lens epithelial cells.

Palsamy P(1), Bidasee KR(2), Shinohara T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology and
Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
68198, USA. (3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA. Electronic address:
tshinohara@unmc.edu.

Recent epidemiological studies confirm the prevalence of cataract in epileptic
patients. Similarly, the drugs used to treat epilepsy also show the connection
with increased cataract formation. In this present study, we investigated the
suppression of Nrf2/Keap1 dependent antioxidant protection through induction of
endoplasmic (ER) stress and Keap1 promoter DNA demethylation in human lens
epithelial cells (HLECs) treated with valproic acid (VPA), an antiepileptic drug.
20 mM VPA induces ER stress and activates the unfolded protein response (UPR)
within 4 h by activating the ER stress sensor proteins, such as PERK, IRE1a, and 
ATF6 in HLECs. Consequently, the integrated ER stress signals, such as eIF2a,
ATF4, BiP, and CHOP are altered accordingly to induce ER-Ca2+ release, reactive
oxygen species (ROS) overproduction, and cell death in HLECs treated with VPA.
VPA also suppresses the Nrf2, catalase, and glutathione reductase expressions
with significant increases in Keap1 protein. Bisulphite genomic DNA sequencing
reveals the promoter DNA demethylation in the Keap1 promoter, which results in
the overexpression of Keap1 mRNA and protein in HLECs treated with 20 mM VPA. VPA
also alters the expression profiles of passive DNA demethylation pathway enzymes 
such Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, Dnmt3b, and active DNA demethylation pathway enzyme, TET1
leading to DNA demethylation in the Keap1 promoter of HLECs. Overexpressed Keap1 
decreases the Nrf2 level, thereby abolishing the Nrf2 dependent antioxidant
protection. This might be responsible for lenticular proteins oxidation and
cataract formation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4293019
PMID: 24525405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Bone. 2014 May;62:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2014.01.021. Epub 2014 Feb 7.

The loss of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) reduces bone toughness and
fracture toughness.

Makowski AJ(1), Uppuganti S(2), Wadeer SA(3), Whitehead JM(4), Rowland BJ(5),
Granke M(6), Mahadevan-Jansen A(7), Yang X(8), Nyman JS(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville,
TN 27212, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery & Rehabilitation, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Department of
Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(3)Department of Veterans Affairs, Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville,
TN 27212, USA. (4)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery & Rehabilitation, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (5)Department of Veterans
Affairs, Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, TN 27212, USA; Center for
Bone Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(6)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery & Rehabilitation, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Center for Bone Biology, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (7)Department of Biomedical 
Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (8)Center for Bone 
Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA;
Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
37232, USA; Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (9)Department of Veterans Affairs, Tennessee Valley
Healthcare System, Nashville, TN 27212, USA; Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery & Rehabilitation, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Center for Bone Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. Electronic address:
jeffry.s.nyman@vanderbilt.edu.

Even though age-related changes to bone tissue affecting fracture risk are well
characterized, only a few matrix-related factors have been identified as
important to maintaining fracture resistance. As a gene critical to osteoblast
differentiation, activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is possibly one of
these important factors. To test the hypothesis that the loss of ATF4 affects the
fracture resistance of bone beyond bone mass and structure, we harvested bones
from Atf4+/+ and Atf4-/- littermates at 8 and 20 weeks of age (n=9 per group) for
bone assessment across several length scales. From whole bone mechanical tests in
bending, femurs from Atf4-/- mice were found to be brittle with reduced toughness
and fracture toughness compared to femurs from Atf4+/+ mice. However, there were 
no differences in material strength and in tissue hardness, as determined by
nanoindentation, between the genotypes, irrespective of age. Tissue mineral
density of the cortex at the point of loading as determined by micro-computed
tomography was also not significantly different. However, by analyzing local
composition by Raman Spectroscopy (RS), bone tissue of Atf4-/- mice was found to 
have higher mineral to collagen ratio compared to wild-type tissue, primarily at 
20 weeks of age. From RS analysis of intact femurs at 2 orthogonal orientations
relative to the polarization axis of the laser, we also found that the
organizational-sensitive peak ratio, <U+03BD>1Phosphate per Amide I, changed to a
greater extent upon bone rotation for Atf4-deficient tissue, implying bone matrix
organization may contribute to the brittleness phenotype. Target genes of ATF4
activity are not only important to osteoblast differentiation but also in
maintaining bone toughness and fracture toughness.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3992706
PMID: 24509412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Autophagy. 2014 Apr;10(4):699-701. doi: 10.4161/auto.27955. Epub 2014 Jan 31.

NOX4 regulates autophagy during energy deprivation.

Sciarretta S(1), Volpe M(2), Sadoshima J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute; Department of Cell Biology and Molecular
Medicine; Rutgers New Jersey Medical School; Newark, NJ USA; IRCCS Neuromed;
Pozzilli (IS), Italy. (2)IRCCS Neuromed; Pozzilli (IS), Italy; Department of
Clinical and Molecular Medicine; School of Medicine and Psicology; University
"Sapienza"; Rome, Italy. (3)Cardiovascular Research Institute; Department of Cell
Biology and Molecular Medicine; Rutgers New Jersey Medical School; Newark, NJ
USA.

NADPH oxidase is a cellular enzyme devoted to the production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS). NOX4 and NOX2 are the main isoforms of NADPH oxidase in the
cardiovascular system. In our recent study, we demonstrated that NOX4, but not
NOX2, is a critical mediator of the cardiomyocyte adaptive response to energy
stress. NOX4 activity and protein levels are increased in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) but not in mitochondria of cardiomyocytes during the early phase
of energy deprivation. NOX4-derived production of ROS in the ER is a critical
event that activates autophagy through stimulation of the
EIF2AK3/PERK-EIF2S1/eIF-2a-ATF4 pathway. NOX4-dependent autophagy is an important
mechanism to preserve cellular energy and limit cell death in energy-deprived
cardiomyocytes. Aside from elucidating a crucial physiological function of NOX4
during cellular energy stress, our study dissects a novel signaling mechanism
that regulates autophagy under this condition.

PMCID: PMC4091158
PMID: 24492492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Cell Tissue Res. 2014 Apr;356(1):15-27. doi: 10.1007/s00441-013-1774-8. Epub 2014
Jan 28.

Sigma receptor 1 modulates ER stress and Bcl2 in murine retina.

Ha Y(1), Shanmugam AK, Markand S, Zorrilla E, Ganapathy V, Smith SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology and Anatomy, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, 1120 15th Street, CB 1101, Augusta, GA 30912-2000,
USA.

Sigma receptor 1 (sR1), a non-opiate transmembrane protein located on endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) and mitochondrial membranes, is considered to be a molecular
chaperone. Marked protection against cell death has been observed when ligands
for sR1 have been used in in vitro and in vivo models of retinal cell death. Mice
lacking sR1 (sR1(-/-)) manifest late-onset loss of retinal ganglion cells and
retinal electrophysiological changes (after many months). The role of sR1 in the 
retina and the mechanisms by which its ligands afford neuroprotection are
unclear. We therefore used sR1(-/-) mice to investigate the expression of ER
stress genes (BiP/GRP78, Atf6, Atf4, Ire1a) and proteins involved in apoptosis
(BCL2, BAX) and to examine the retinal transcriptome at young ages. Whereas no
significant changes occurred in the expression of major ER stress genes (over a
period of a year) in neural retina, marked changes were observed in these genes, 
especially Atf6, in isolated retinal Müller glial cells. BCL2 levels decreased in
sR1(-/-) retina concomitantly with decreases in NFkB and pERK1/2. We postulate
that sR1 regulates ER stress in retinal Müller cells and that the role of sR1 in 
retinal neuroprotection probably involves BCL2 and some of the proteins that
modify its expression (such as ERK, NF<U+03BA>B). Data from the analysis of the retinal 
transcriptome of sR1 null mice provide new insights into the role of sR1 in
retinal neuroprotection.

PMCID: PMC3976706
PMID: 24469320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Int J Radiat Biol. 2014 Apr;90(4):306-12. doi: 10.3109/09553002.2014.886793. Epub
2014 Mar 19.

Ionizing radiation activates PERK/eIF2a/ATF4 signaling via ER stress-independent 
pathway in human vascular endothelial cells.

Kim EJ(1), Lee YJ, Kang S, Lim YB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Effects, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical
Sciences , Seoul.

PURPOSE: Perturbations in protein folding induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress, which elicits coordinated response, namely the unfolded protein response 
(UPR), to cope with the accumulation of misfolded proteins in ER. In this study, 
we characterized mechanisms underlying ionizing radiation (IR)-induced UPR
signaling pathways.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed alterations in UPR signaling pathways in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) and human coronary artery endothelial
cells (HCAEC) irradiated with 15 Gy IR.
RESULTS: IR selectively activated the eIF2a/ATF4 branch of the UPR signaling
pathway, with no alterations in the IRE1 and ATF6 branches in HUVEC and HCAEC.
Phosphorylation of PERK was enhanced in response to IR, and the IR-induced
activation of the eIF2a/ATF4 signaling pathway was completely inhibited by PERK
knockdown with siRNA. Surprisingly, chemical chaperones, which inhibit the
formation of misfolded proteins and sequential protein aggregates to reduce ER
stress, failed to prevent the IR-induced phosphorylation of PERK and the
subsequent activation of the eIF2a/ATF4 signaling pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: PERK mediates the IR-induced selective activation of the eIF2a/ATF4 
signaling pathway, and the IR-induced activation of PERK/eIF2a/ATF4 signaling in 
human vascular endothelial cells is independent of alterations in protein-folding
homeostasis in the ER.

PMID: 24456547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 15;74(6):1766-77. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1747. Epub
2014 Jan 22.

Activated ERBB2/HER2 licenses sensitivity to apoptosis upon endoplasmic reticulum
stress through a PERK-dependent pathway.

Martín-Pérez R(1), Palacios C, Yerbes R, Cano-González A, Iglesias-Serret D, Gil 
J, Reginato MJ, López-Rivas A.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina
Regenerativa-CSIC, CABIMER, Avda Américo Vespucio s/n, Sevilla; Departament de
Ciències Fisiològiques II, Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge
(IDIBELL)-Universitat de Barcelona, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain; 
and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Drexel University College
of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

HER2/Neu/ERBB2 is a receptor tyrosine kinase overexpressed in approximately 20%
of human breast tumors. Truncated or mutant isoforms that show increased
oncogenicity compared with the wild-type receptor are found in many breast
tumors. Here, we report that constitutively active ERBB2 sensitizes human breast 
epithelial cells to agents that induce endoplasmic reticulum stress, altering the
unfolded protein response (UPR) of these cells. Deregulation of the ERK, AKT, and
mTOR activities elicited by mutant ERBB2 was involved in mediating this
differential UPR response, elevating the response to endoplasmic reticulum
stress, and apoptotic cell death. Mechanistic investigations revealed that the
increased sensitivity of mutant ERBB2-expressing cells to endoplasmic reticulum
stress relied upon a UPR effector signaling involving the PERK-ATF4-CHOP pathway,
upregulation of the proapoptotic cell surface receptor TRAIL-R2, and activation
of proapoptotic caspase-8. Collectively, our results offer a rationale for the
therapeutic exploration of treatments inducing endoplasmic reticulum stress
against mutant ERBB2-expressing breast tumor cells.

©2014 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4053205
PMID: 24453000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Gene. 2014 Apr 1;538(2):328-33. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.01.009. Epub 2014 Jan
17.

Altered gene dosage confirms the genetic interaction between FIAT and aNAC.

Hekmatnejad B(1), Mandic V(1), Yu VW(1), Akhouayri O(1), Arabian A(2), St-Arnaud 
R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children - Canada, Montreal, Quebec H3G
1A6, Canada; Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec
H3A 2T5, Canada. (2)Research Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children - Canada,
Montreal, Quebec H3G 1A6, Canada. (3)Research Unit, Shriners Hospital for
Children - Canada, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1A6, Canada; Department of Human
Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2T5, Canada; Department of
Surgery, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2T5, Canada; Department of
Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2T5, Canada. Electronic
address: rst-arnaud@shriners.mcgill.ca.

Factor inhibiting ATF4-mediated transcription (FIAT) interacts with Nascent
polypeptide associated complex and coregulator alpha (aNAC). In cultured
osteoblastic cells, this interaction contributes to maximal FIAT-mediated
inhibition of Osteocalcin (Ocn) gene transcription. We set out to demonstrate the
physiological relevance of this interaction by altering gene dosage in compound
Fiat and Naca (encoding aNAC) heterozygous mice. Compound Naca(+/-); Fiat(+/-)
heterozygous animals were viable, developed normally, and exhibited no
significant difference in body weight compared with control littermate genotypes.
Animals with a single Fiat allele had reduced Fiat mRNA expression without
changes in the expression of related family members. Expression of the osteocyte 
differentiation marker Dmp1 was elevated in compound heterozygotes. Static
histomorphometry parameters were assessed at 8weeks of age using microcomputed
tomography (µCT). Trabecular measurements were not different between genotypes.
Cortical thickness and area were not affected by gene dosage, but we measured a
significant increase in cortical porosity in compound heterozygous mice, without 
changes in biomechanical parameters. The bone phenotype of compound Naca(+/-);
Fiat(+/-) heterozygotes confirms that FIAT and aNAC are part of a common genetic 
pathway and support a role for the FIAT/aNAC interaction in normal bone
physiology.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3938185
PMID: 24440290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2014 Mar;22(3):481-9. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2013.12.020. 
Epub 2014 Jan 11.

BMP-2 induces ATF4 phosphorylation in chondrocytes through a COX-2/PGE2 dependent
signaling pathway.

Li TF(1), Yukata K(2), Yin G(3), Sheu T(4), Maruyama T(5), Jonason JH(4), Hsu
W(5), Zhang X(4), Xiao G(6), Konttinen YT(7), Chen D(6), O'Keefe RJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rush University Medical Center, 1735 W. Harrison
St, Chicago, IL 60612, USA; Department of Orthopaedics, Rush University Medical
Center, 1611 W. Harrison St, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. Electronic address:
tianfang_li@rush.edu. (2)Department of Orthopaedics, University of Tokushima,
3-18-15 Kuramoto, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan; Center for Musculoskeletal Research,
Department of Orthopaedics, University of Rochester, 601 Elmwood Ave., NY 14642, 
USA. (3)Department of Orthopaedics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing
Medical University, 300 Guangzhou Rd., Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China. (4)Center 
for Musculoskeletal Research, Department of Orthopaedics, University of
Rochester, 601 Elmwood Ave., NY 14642, USA. (5)Department of Biomedical Genetics,
Center for Oral Biology, and James P. Wilmot Cancer Center, University of
Rochester, 601 Elmwood Ave., Rochester, NY 14642, USA. (6)Department of
Biochemistry, Rush University Medical Center, 1735 W. Harrison St, Chicago, IL
60612, USA. (7)Department of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University
of Helsinki, PO Box 700 (Haartmaninkatu 8, Biomedicum 1), 00029 HUS, Finland.
(8)Center for Musculoskeletal Research, Department of Orthopaedics, University of
Rochester, 601 Elmwood Ave., NY 14642, USA. Electronic address:
Regis_OKeefe@urmc.rochester.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Bone morphogenic protein (BMP)-2 is approved for fracture non-union
and spine fusion. We aimed to further dissect its downstream signaling events in 
chondrocytes with the ultimate goal to develop novel therapeutics that can mimic 
BMP-2 effect but have less complications.
METHODS: BMP-2 effect on cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 expression was examined using
Real time quantitative PCR (RT-PCR) and Western blot analysis. Genetic approach
was used to identify the signaling pathway mediating the BMP-2 effect. Similarly,
the pathway transducing the PGE2 effect on ATF4 was investigated.
Immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed to assess the complex formation after PGE2
binding.
RESULTS: BMP-2 increased COX-2 expression in primary mouse costosternal
chondrocytes (PMCSC). The results from the C9 Tet-off system demonstrated that
endogenous BMP-2 also upregulated COX-2 expression. Genetic approaches using
PMCSC from ALK2(fx/fx), ALK3(fx/fx), ALK6(-/-), and Smad1(fx/fx) mice established
that BMP-2 regulated COX-2 through activation of ALK3-Smad1 signaling. PGE-2 EIA 
showed that BMP-2 increased PGE2 production in PMCSC. ATF4 is a transcription
factor that regulates bone formation. While PGE2 did not have significant effect 
on ATF4 expression, it induced ATF4 phosphorylation. In addition to stimulating
COX-2 expression, BMP-2 also induced phosphorylation of ATF4. Using COX-2
deficient chondrocytes, we demonstrated that the BMP-2 effect on ATF4 was
COX-2-dependent. Tibial fracture samples from COX-2(-/-) mice showed reduced
phospho-ATF4 immunoreactivity compared to wild type (WT) ones. PGE2 mediated ATF4
phosphorylation involved signaling primarily through the EP2 and EP4 receptors
and PGE2 induced an EP4-ERK1/2-RSK2 complex formation.
CONCLUSIONS: BMP-2 regulates COX-2 expression through ALK3-Smad1 signaling, and
PGE2 induces ATF4 phosphorylation via EP4-ERK1/2-RSK2 axis.

Copyright © 2014 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3947583
PMID: 24418675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014;1839(4):288-96. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.01.005.
Epub 2014 Jan 10.

Activating transcription factor 4 mediates up-regulation of alanine
aminotransferase 2 gene expression under metabolic stress.

Salgado MC(1), Metón I(1), Anemaet IG(1), Baanante IV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Facultat de Farmàcia,
Universitat de Barcelona, Joan XXIII s/n, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. (2)Departament 
de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Facultat de Farmàcia, Universitat de
Barcelona, Joan XXIII s/n, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address:
baanantevazquez@ub.edu.

Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) provides a molecular link between carbohydrate and
amino acid metabolism. In humans, two ALT isoforms have been characterized: ALT1,
cytosolic, and ALT2, mitochondrial. To gain insight into the transcriptional
regulation of the ALT2 gene, we cloned and characterized the human ALT2 promoter.
5'-deletion analysis of ALT2 promoter in transiently transfected HepG2 cells and 
site-directed mutagenesis allowed us to identify ATF4 as a new factor involved in
the transcriptional regulation of ALT2 expression. Quantitative RT-PCR assays
showed that the metabolic stressors histidinol and tunicamycin increased ATF4
levels and up-regulated ALT2 in HepG2 and Huh7 cells. Consistently, knock-down of
ATF4 decreased ALT2 mRNA levels in HepG2 and Huh-7 cells. Moreover, ATF4
silencing prevented the activating effect of histidinol and tunicamycin on ATF4
and ALT2 expression. Our findings point to ALT2 as an enzyme involved in the
metabolic adaptation of the cell to stress.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24418603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Brain Res. 2014 Feb 26;1549:52-62. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.01.003. Epub 2014
Jan 10.

Salubrinal protects against rotenone-induced SH-SY5Y cell death via ATF4-parkin
pathway.

Wu L(1), Luo N(1), Zhao HR(1), Gao Q(1), Lu J(2), Pan Y(2), Shi JP(2), Tian
YY(3), Zhang YD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210006, PR China. (2)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Nanjing
Brain Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Jiangsu 210029, PR China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210006, PR China. Electronic address: tyy9956@163.com.
(4)Department of Neurology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210006, PR China. Electronic address: zhangyingdong@aliyun.com.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, for which
there are no effective disease-modifying therapies. Growing evidence from studies
in human PD brain, in addition to genetic and toxicological models, indicates
that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is a common feature of the disease and
contributes to neurodegeneration. We examine whether salubrinal, a ER stress
inhibitor, can protect the rotenone-induced SH-SY5Y cell death and explore the
mechanisms underlying this protection. Our results demonstrated that rotenone
induced a significant ER stress response and caused cell apoptosis, which was
inhibited by salubrinal. Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a member of
the ATF/CREB family of basic leucine zipper transcription factors, has been
implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegeneration. We showed that salubrinal
increased the up-regulation of ATF4 expression. An ATF4 siRNA significantly
increased the rotenone cytotoxicity and decreased the salubrinal's protection.
Further, we showed that ATF4 siRNA inhibited the expression of parkin, and parkin
knockdown similarly aggravated the rotenone cytotoxicity and reduced the
salubrinal's protection. Additionally, the protein level of parkin was declined
after treatment with rotenone, whereas this reduction was rescued by salubrinal. 
These findings indicate ATF4-parkin pathway plays an important role in the
salubrinal-mediated neuroprotection of rotenone-induced dopaminergic cell death.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24418467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Jan 6;33:3. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-33-3.

Parthenolide induces apoptosis via TNFRSF10B and PMAIP1 pathways in human lung
cancer cells.

Zhao X, Liu X, Su L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Cells and Developmental Biology, 
School of Life Sciences, Shandong University, Room 103, South Building, 27 Shanda
South RD, Jinan 250100, P,R, China. suling@sdu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Parthenolide (PTL) is a sesquiterpene lactone which can induce
apoptosis in cancer cells and eradicate cancer stem cells such as leukemia stem
cells, prostate tumor-initiating cells and so on. However, the mechanism remains 
largely unclear.
METHODS: Lung cancer cells were treated with parthenolide and the cell lysates
were prepared to detect the given proteins by Western Blot analysis, and the cell
survival was assayed by SRB and MTT assay. Cell cycle was evaluated by DNA flow
cytometry analysis. TNFRSF10B, PMAIP1, ATF4 and DDIT3 genes were knocked down by 
siRNA technique. Apoptosis was evaluated by using Annexin V-FITC/PI staining and 
flow cytometry analysis.
RESULTS: Parthenolide (PTL) induces apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in human lung
cancer cells. Moreover, PTL treatment in NSCLC cells increases expression of
TNFRSF10B/DR5 and PMAIP1/NOXA. Silencing of TNFRSF10B or PMAIP1 or overexpression
of CFLAR /c-FLIP (long form) could protect cells from PTL-induced apoptosis.
Furthermore, PTL could increase the levels of endoplasmic reticulum stress
hallmarks such as ERN1, HSPA5, p-EIF2A, ATF4 and DDIT3. Knockdown of ATF4 and
DDIT3 abrogated PTL-induced apoptosis, which suggested that PTL induced apoptosis
in NSCLC cells through activation of endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway. More
importantly, we found that ATF4, DDIT3, TNFRSF10B and PMAIP1 were up-regulated
more intensively, while CFLAR and MCL1 were down-regulated more dramatically by
PTL in A549/shCDH1 cells than that in control cells, suggesting that PTL
preferred to kill cancer stem cell-like cells by activating more intensive ER
stress response in cancer stem cell-like cells.
CONCLUSION: We showed that parthenolide not only triggered extrinsic apoptosis by
up-regulating TNFRSF10B and down-regulating CFLAR, but also induced intrinsic
apoptosis through increasing the expression of PMAIP1 and decreasing the level of
MCL1 in NSCLC cells. In addition, parthenolide triggered stronger ER stress
response in cancer stem cell-like cells which leads to its preference in
apoptotic induction. In summary, PTL induces apoptosis in NSCLC cells by
activating endoplasmic reticulum stress response.

PMCID: PMC3892099
PMID: 24387758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Mol Pharmacol. 2014 Mar;85(3):451-9. doi: 10.1124/mol.113.090605. Epub 2013 Dec
30.

Triapine and a more potent dimethyl derivative induce endoplasmic reticulum
stress in cancer cells.

Trondl R(1), Flocke LS, Kowol CR, Heffeter P, Jungwirth U, Mair GE, Steinborn R, 
Enyedy ÉA, Jakupec MA, Berger W, Keppler BK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria (R.T.,
L.S.F., C.R.K., M.A.J., B.K.K.); Research Platform "Translational Cancer Therapy 
Research" (R.T., C.R.K., P.H., U.J., M.A.J., W.B., B.K.K.), Institute of Cancer
Research (P.H., U.J., W.B.), and Comprehensive Cancer Centre (P.H., U.J., W.B.), 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Genomics Core Facility, VetCore,
University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria (G.E.M., R.S.); Department of 
Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary
(E.A.E.); and Hungarian Academy of Science-USZ Bioinorganic Chemistry Research
Group, Szeged, Hungary (E.A.E.).

Triapine (3-AP; 3-aminopyridine-2-carboxaldehyde thiosemicarbazone), a
ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor, has been extensively evaluated in clinical
trials in the last decade. This study addresses the role of endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress in the anticancer activity of 3-AP and the derivative
N(4),N(4)-dimethyl-triapine (3-AP-Me), differing from 3-AP only by dimethylation 
of the terminal nitrogen. Treatment of colon cancer cells with 3-AP or 3-AP-Me
activated all three ER stress pathways (PERK, IRE1a, ATF6) by phosphorylation of 
eIF2a and upregulation of gene expression of activating transcription factors
ATF4 and ATF6. In particular, 3-AP-Me led to an upregulation of the alternatively
spliced mRNA variant XBP1 (16-fold). Moreover, 3-AP and 3-AP-Me activated the
cellular stress kinases c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinases, and inhibition of JNK activity antagonized the cytotoxic effect 
of both compounds. Subsequent to induction of the unfolded protein response, a
significant upregulation of proapoptotic proteins was detected, including the
transcription factor CHOP and Bim, an essential factor for ER stress-related
apoptosis. In correlation with the higher degree of ER stress after 3-AP-Me
treatment, also a more potent depolarization of mitochondrial membranes was
found. These data suggest that 3-AP and 3-AP-Me induce apoptosis via ER stress.
This was further corroborated by showing that inhibition of protein biosynthesis 
with cycloheximide prior to 3-AP and 3-AP-Me treatment leads to a significant
reduction of the antiproliferative properties of both compounds. Taken together, 
this study demonstrates that induction of ER stress contributes to the mode of
action of 3-AP and that terminal dimethylation leads to an even more pronounced
manifestation of this effect.

PMID: 24378333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Cell Biochem. 2014 May;115(5):866-73. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24729.

SUMOylated aNAC potentiates transcriptional repression by FIAT.

Hekmatnejad B(1), Akhouayri O, Jafarov T, St-Arnaud R.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit, Shriners Hospitals for Children - Canada, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada, H3G 1A6; Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada, H3A 1B1.

The transcriptional coregulator aNAC (Nascent polypeptide associated complex And 
Coregulator alpha) and the transcriptional repressor FIAT (Factor Inhibiting
ATF4-mediated Transcription) interact but the biological relevance of this
interaction remains unclear. The activity of aNAC is extensively modulated by
post-translational modifications (PTMs). We identified a novel aNAC PTM through
covalent attachment of the Small Ubiquitin-like MOdifier (SUMO1). Recombinant
aNAC was a SUMO1 target in in vitro SUMOylation assays and we confirmed that aNAC
is conjugated to SUMO1 in cultured osteoblasts and in calvarial tissue. The amino
acid sequence of aNAC contains one copy of the composite "phospho-sumoyl switch" 
motif that couples sequential phosphorylation and SUMOylation. We found that aNAC
is selectively SUMOylated at lysine residue 127 within the motif and that
SUMOylation is enhanced when a phosphomimetic mutation is introduced at the
nearby serine residue 132. SUMOylation did not alter the DNA-binding capacity of 
aNAC. The S132D, hyper-SUMOylated aNAC mutant specifically interacted with
histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) and enhanced the inhibitory activity of FIAT on
ATF4-mediated transcription from the Osteocalcin gene promoter. This effect
required binding of SUMOylated aNAC to the target promoter. We propose that
maximal transcriptional repression by FIAT requires its interaction with
SUMOylated, HDAC2-interacting aNAC.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24375853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Cell Mol Med. 2014 Jan;18(1):80-90. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12166. Epub 2013 Nov 6.

ATF4 deficiency protects hepatocytes from oxidative stress via inhibiting CYP2E1 
expression.

Wang C(1), Li H, Meng Q, Du Y, Xiao F, Zhang Q, Yu J, Li K, Chen S, Huang Z, Liu 
B, Guo F.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, The Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai,
China.

Activating transcription factor (ATF) 4 is involved in the regulation of
oxidative stress in fibroblasts and neurons. The role of ATF4 in hepatocytes,
however, is unknown. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of ATF4 in
hepatocytes in oxidative stress under a high-fat diet (HFD). Here, we showed that
palmitate-stimulated reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and triglyceride
(TG) accumulation is blocked by ATF4 deficiency in primary hepatocytes.
Consistently, HFD-induced oxidative stress, TG accumulation and expression of
cytochrome P450, family 2, subfamily, polypeptide 1 (CYP2E1) are also blocked by 
knocking down ATF4 expression in the mouse liver. This suggests that ATF4 might
regulate oxidative stress via CYP2E1 under an HFD. In addition, we observed that 
expression of CYP2E1 is indirectly regulated by ATF4 in a cAMP-responsive element
binding protein (CREB)-dependent manner, which can directly activate the CYP2E1
promoter activity. Notably, ATF4-stimulated ROS production is inhibited in vivo
by treatment with diallyl sulphide, a selective CYP2E1 inhibitor. Finally, we
showed that ATF4 expression in the liver is responsible for the protective
effects against HFD-induced CYP2E1 expression, oxidative stress, and TG
accumulation. Taken together, these observations suggest that ATF4 is a novel
regulator of oxidative stress as well as accumulation of TG in response to HFD.

© 2013 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC3916120
PMID: 24373582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Apoptosis. 2014 May;19(5):801-15. doi: 10.1007/s10495-013-0961-0.

ERp29 deficiency affects sensitivity to apoptosis via impairment of the ATF6-CHOP
pathway of stress response.

Hirsch I(1), Weiwad M, Prell E, Ferrari DM.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Research Unit for Enzymology of Protein Folding, Weinbergweg 22,
06120, Halle/Saale, Germany, irina-hirsch@gmx.de.

Endoplasmic reticulum protein 29 (ERp29) belongs to the redox-inactive
PDI-Dß-subfamily of PDI-proteins. ERp29 is expressed in all mammalian tissues
examined. Especially high levels of expression were observed in secretory tissues
and in some tumors. However, the biological role of ERp29 remains unclear. In the
present study we show, by using thyrocytes and primary dermal fibroblasts from
adult ERp29(-/-) mice, that ERp29 deficiency affects the activation of the
ATF6-CHOP-branch of unfolded protein response (UPR) without influencing the
function of other UPR branches, like the ATF4-eIF2a-XBP1 signaling pathway. As a 
result of impaired ATF6 activation, dermal fibroblasts and adult thyrocytes from 
ERp29(-/-) mice display significantly lower apoptosis sensitivities when treated 
with tunicamycin and hydrogen peroxide. However, in contrast to previous reports,
we could demonstrate that ERp29 deficiency does not alter thyroglobulin
expression levels. Therefore, our study suggests that ERp29 acts as an escort
factor for ATF6 and promotes its transport from ER to Golgi apparatus under ER
stress conditions.

PMID: 24370996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Korean Surg Soc. 2013 Dec;85(6):249-60. doi: 10.4174/jkss.2013.85.6.249. Epub
2013 Nov 26.

Effect of quercetin on apoptosis of PANC-1 cells.

Lee JH(1), Lee HB(1), Jung GO(1), Oh JT(1), Park DE(1), Chae KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Department of Surgery, Wonkwang University 
School of Medicine & Hospital, Iksan, Korea.

PURPOSE: To investigate the chemotherapeutic effect of quercetin against cancer
cells, signaling pathway of apoptosis was explored in human pancreatic cells.
METHODS: Various anticancer drugs including adriamycin, cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU) and gemcitabine were used. Cell viability was measured by
3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphe-nyltetra zolium bromide assay. Apoptosis
was determined by 4'-6-diamidino-2-phenylindole nuclei staining and flow
cytometry in PANC-1 cells treated with 50 µg/mL quercetin for 24 hours.
Expression of endoplas mic reticulum (ER) stress mediators including, Grp78/Bip, 
p-PERK, PERK, ATF4, ATF6 and GADD153/CHOP proteins were measured by Western blot 
analysis. Mitochondrial membrane potential was measured by fluorescence staining 
with JC-1, rhodamine 123. Quercetin induced the apoptosis of PANC-1, which was
characterized as nucleic acid and genomic DNA fragmentation, chromatin
condensation, and sub-G0/G1 fraction of cell cycle increase. But not adriamycin, 
cisplatin, gemcitabine, and 5-FU. PANC-1 cells were markedly sensitive to
quercetin.
RESULTS: Treatment with quercetin resulted in the increased accumulation of
intracellular Ca(2+) ion. Treatment with quercetin also increased the expression 
of Grp78/Bip and GADD153/CHOP protein and induced mitochondrial dysfunction.
Quercetin exerted cytotoxicity against human pancreatic cancer cells via ER
stress-mediated apoptotic signaling including reactive oxygen species production 
and mitochondrial dysfunction.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that quercetin may be an important modulator of
chemosensitivity of cancer cells against anticancer chemotherapeutic agents.

PMCID: PMC3868676
PMID: 24368982  [PubMed]


460. Calcif Tissue Int. 2014 Apr;94(4):454-64. doi: 10.1007/s00223-013-9828-1. Epub
2013 Dec 22.

Involvement of the osteoinductive factors, Tmem119 and BMP-2, and the ER stress
response PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 pathway in the commitment of myoblastic into
osteoblastic cells.

Tanaka K(1), Kaji H, Yamaguchi T, Kanazawa I, Canaff L, Hendy GN, Sugimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 1, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine,
Izumo, 693-8501, Japan.

The osteoinductive factors BMP-2 and Tmem119 that promote the differentiation of 
myoblasts into osteoblasts, each increase the levels of the other. However, the
relative contributions of BMP-2 and Tmem119 to the osteogenic differentiation and
the mechanisms involved are incompletely understood. In the present study, we
examined the relationship among BMP-2, Tmem119, and the PERK-eIF2a-ATF4
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response pathway in the differentiation of
C2C12 myoblasts into osteoblastic cells. Both BMP-2 and Tmem119 induced levels of
the osteoblast markers Runx2, Osterix, Col1a1, ALP, and osteocalcin, as well as
mineralization. BMP-2 activation of the ER stress sensor PERK stimulated
phosphorylation of eIF2a and led to increased biosynthesis of the osteoblast
differentiation factor ATF4. When dephosphorylation of eIF2a was blocked by the
selective inhibitor salubrinal, the osteogenic effects of BMP-2 and Tmem119 were 
enhanced further. Although BMP-2 stimulated both P-eIF2a and ATF4 levels, Tmem119
had no effect on P-eIF2a but stimulated ATF4 only. Reduction in endogenous
Tmem119 levels by siRNA reduced both basal and BMP-2-stimulated levels of the
ATF4 protein. In conclusion, BMP-2 stimulates differentiation of myoblasts into
osteoblasts via the PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 pathway but in addition stimulates Tmem119,
which itself increases ATF4. Hence, BMP-2 stimulates ATF4 both dependently and
independently of the PERK-eIF2a ER stress response pathway.

PMID: 24362451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Prog Lipid Res. 2014 Jan;53:124-44. doi: 10.1016/j.plipres.2013.12.001. Epub 2013
Dec 18.

Regulation of energy metabolism by long-chain fatty acids.

Nakamura MT(1), Yudell BE(2), Loor JJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
905 South Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. Electronic address:
mtnakamu@illinois.edu. (2)Division of Nutritional Sciences, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 905 South Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

In mammals, excess energy is stored primarily as triglycerides, which are
mobilized when energy demands arise. This review mainly focuses on the role of
long chain fatty acids (LCFAs) in regulating energy metabolism as ligands of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs). PPAR-alpha expressed
primarily in liver is essential for metabolic adaptation to starvation by
inducing genes for beta-oxidation and ketogenesis and by downregulating energy
expenditure through fibroblast growth factor 21. PPAR-delta is highly expressed
in skeletal muscle and induces genes for LCFA oxidation during fasting and
endurance exercise. PPAR-delta also regulates glucose metabolism and
mitochondrial biogenesis by inducing FOXO1 and PGC1-alpha. Genes targeted by
PPAR-gamma in adipocytes suggest that PPAR-gamma senses incoming non-esterified
LCFAs and induces the pathways to store LCFAs as triglycerides. Adiponectin,
another important target of PPAR-gamma may act as a spacer between adipocytes to 
maintain their metabolic activity and insulin sensitivity. Another topic of this 
review is effects of skin LCFAs on energy metabolism. Specific LCFAs are required
for the synthesis of skin lipids, which are essential for water barrier and
thermal insulation functions of the skin. Disturbance of skin lipid metabolism
often causes apparent resistance to developing obesity at the expense of normal
skin function.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24362249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Aug;229(8):1028-38. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24527.

Fenretinide induces ubiquitin-dependent proteasomal degradation of stearoyl-CoA
desaturase in human retinal pigment epithelial cells.

Samuel W(1), Kutty RK, Duncan T, Vijayasarathy C, Kuo BC, Chapa KM, Redmond TM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Retinal Cell and Molecular Biology, National Eye Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

Stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD, SCD1), an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) resident
protein and a rate-limiting enzyme in monounsaturated fatty acid biosynthesis,
regulates cellular functions by controlling the ratio of saturated to
monounsaturated fatty acids. Increase in SCD expression is strongly implicated in
the proliferation and survival of cancer cells, whereas its decrease is known to 
impair proliferation, induce apoptosis, and restore insulin sensitivity. We
examined whether fenretinide, (N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide, 4HPR), which
induces apoptosis in cancer cells and recently shown to improve insulin
sensitivity, can modulate the expression of SCD. We observed that fenretinide
decreased SCD protein and enzymatic activity in the ARPE-19 human retinal pigment
epithelial cell line. Increased expression of BiP/GRP78, ATF4, and GADD153
implicated ER stress. Tunicamycin and thapsigargin, compounds known to induce ER 
stress, also decreased the SCD protein. This decrease was completely blocked by
the proteasome inhibitor MG132. In addition, PYR41, an inhibitor of ubiquitin
activating enzyme E1, blocked the fenretinide-mediated decrease in SCD.
Immunoprecipitation analysis using anti-ubiquitin and anti-SCD antibodies and the
blocking of SCD loss by PYR41 inhibition of ubiquitination further corroborate
that fenretinide mediates the degradation of SCD in human RPE cells via the
ubiquitin-proteasome dependent pathway. Therefore, the effect of fenretinide on
SCD should be considered in its potential therapeutic role against cancer, type-2
diabetes, and retinal diseases.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3999186
PMID: 24357007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 7;289(6):3352-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.507194. Epub 2013
Dec 17.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and hypoxia response pathways interact to
potentiate hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) transcriptional activity on targets
like vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).

Pereira ER(1), Frudd K, Awad W, Hendershot LM.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105.

Cells respond to suboptimal microenvironments by activating stress signaling
pathways, like the unfolded protein response and hypoxia-induced transcription
factors HIF-1/2, to restore homeostasis. Both cytoprotective pathways have been
well studied in isolation at the biochemical and molecular levels. Mounting
evidence reveals that they can be activated simultaneously in tumor cells and,
likely, in other tissues experiencing inadequate microenvironments and that they 
share some transcriptional targets, like the proangiogenic factor VEGFA. However,
the potential interaction between these pathways is poorly understood. Cell
culture experiments revealed that as a consequence of unfolded protein response
activation, ATF4 bound to the human VEGFA promoter and activated its
transcription, whereas HIF-1 did so in response to hypoxia. When both pathways
were activated together, VEGFA transcripts were induced to a higher level than
when either stress was applied alone. Surprisingly, this was not due to the
combined actions of the stress pathway-specific transcription factors. Instead,
we found that endoplasmic reticulum stress potentiated HIF-1 activity to
transactivate VEGF expression as well as another well characterized target,
BNIP3. These data reveal an unexpected interaction between two important
cytoprotective responses that are likely to have significant consequences in
environmentally compromised tissues and tumor cells.

PMCID: PMC3916539
PMID: 24347168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Mar 1;306(5):E469-82. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00330.2013. Epub 2013 Dec 17.

Skeletal muscle mitochondrial uncoupling drives endocrine cross-talk through the 
induction of FGF21 as a myokine.

Keipert S(1), Ost M, Johann K, Imber F, Jastroch M, van Schothorst EM, Keijer J, 
Klaus S.

Author information: 
(1)German Institute of Human Nutrition, Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Germany;

UCP1-Tg mice with ectopic expression of uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) in skeletal
muscle (SM) are a model of improved substrate metabolism and increased longevity.
Analysis of myokine expression showed an induction of fibroblast growth factor 21
(FGF21) in SM, resulting in approximately fivefold elevated circulating FGF21 in 
UCP1-Tg mice. Despite a reduced muscle mass, UCP1-Tg mice showed no evidence for 
a myopathy or muscle autophagy deficiency but an activation of integrated stress 
response (ISR; eIF2a/ATF4) in SM. Targeting mitochondrial function in vitro by
treating C2C12 myoblasts with the uncoupler FCCP resulted in a dose-dependent
activation of ISR, which was associated with increased expression of FGF21, which
was also observed by treatment with respiratory chain inhibitors antimycin A and 
myxothiazol. The cofactor required for FGF21 action, ß-klotho, was expressed in
white adipose tissue (WAT) of UCP1-Tg mice, which showed an increased browning of
WAT similar to what occurred in altered adipocyte morphology, increased brown
adipocyte markers (UCP1, CIDEA), lipolysis (HSL phosphorylation), and respiratory
capacity. Importantly, treatment of primary white adipocytes with serum of
transgenic mice resulted in increased UCP1 expression. Additionally, UCP1-Tg mice
showed reduced body length through the suppressed IGF-I-GH axis and decreased
bone mass. We conclude that the induction of FGF21 as a myokine is coupled to
disturbance of mitochondrial function and ISR activation in SM. FGF21 released
from SM has endocrine effects leading to increased browning of WAT and can
explain the healthy metabolic phenotype of UCP1-Tg mice. These results confirm
muscle as an important endocrine regulator of whole body metabolism.

PMID: 24347058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2013 Dec 25;65(6):600-6.

[Palmitate induces apoptosis and endoplasmic reticulum stress in human umbilical 
cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu J(1), Dong HY, Lin LJ, Wang QH, Huang LH, Tan JM.

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Transplant Biology, Fuzhou General
Hospital, Fuzhou 350025, China. hlhtiger@163.com, tanjm156@gmail.com.

The saturated free fatty acid (FFA), palmitate, could induce apoptosis in various
cell types, but little is known about its effects on human umbilical cord-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (hUC-MSCs). Here, we investigated whether palmitate
induced apoptosis and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in hUC-MSCs. hUC-MSCs
were stained by labeled antibodies and identified by flow cytometry. After
administration with palmitate, apoptotic cell was assessed by flow cytometry
using the Annexin V-FITC/7-AAD apoptosis detection kit. Relative spliced XBP1
levels were analyzed using semi-quantitative RT-PCR. The mRNA of BiP, GRP94, ATF4
and CHOP were analyzed by real-time PCR. Relative BiP and CHOP protein were
analyzed using Western blot analysis. The results showed that hUC-MSCs were
homogeneously positive for MSC markers; palmitate increased apoptosis of hUC-MSCs
and activated XBP1 splicing, BiP, GRP94, ATF4 and CHOP transcription. These
findings suggest that palmitate induces apoptosis and ER stress in hUC-MSCs.

PMID: 24343717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Oncol Rep. 2014 Feb;31(2):581-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2921. Epub 2013 Dec 13.

Capsaicin induces apoptosis in PC12 cells through ER stress.

Krizanova O(1), Steliarova I(1), Csaderova L(2), Pastorek M(3), Hudecova S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Sciences,
833 34 Bratislava, Slovak Republic. (2)Molecular Medicine Center, Slovak Academy 
of Sciences, 831 01 Bratislava, Slovak Republic. (3)Cancer Research Institute,
Slovak Academy of Sciences, 833 91 Bratislava, Slovak Republic.

Capsaicin, the pungent agent in chili peppers, has been shown to act as a
tumor-suppressor in cancer. In our previous study, capsaicin was shown to induce 
apoptosis in the rat pheochromocytoma cell line (PC12 cells). Thus, the aim of
the present study was to determine the potential mechanism by which capsaicin
induces apoptosis. We treated PC12 cells with 50, 100 and 500 µM capsaicin and
measured the reticular calcium content and expression of the reticular calcium
transport systems. These results were correlated with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
stress markers CHOP, ATF4 and X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), as well as with
apoptosis induction. We observed that capsaicin decreased reticular calcium in a 
concentration-dependent manner. Simultaneously, expression levels of the
sarco/endoplasmic reticulum pump and ryanodin receptor of type 2 were modified.
These changes were accompanied by increased ER stress, as documented by increased
stress markers. Thus, from these results we propose that in PC12 cells capsaicin 
induces apoptosis through increased ER stress.

PMCID: PMC3896516
PMID: 24337105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Gene. 2014 Feb 15;536(1):90-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.11.074. Epub 2013 Dec 14.

Inhibition of PKR protects against tunicamycin-induced apoptosis in neuroblastoma
cells.

Vaughn LS(1), Snee B(1), Patel RC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 
29208, USA. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina,
Columbia, SC 29208, USA. Electronic address: patelr@biol.sc.edu.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) dysfunction is thought to play a significant role in
several neurological disorders, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's
disease, Huntington's disease, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,
cerebral ischemia, and the prion diseases. ER dysfunction can be mimicked by
cellular stress signals such as disruption of calcium homeostasis, inhibition of 
protein glycosylation, and reduction of disulfide bonds, which results in
accumulation of misfolded proteins in the ER and leads to cell death by
apoptosis. Tunicamycin, which is an inhibitor of protein glycosylation, induces
ER stress and apoptosis. In this study, we examined the involvement of double
stranded (ds) RNA-activated protein kinase PKR in tunicamycin-induced apoptosis. 
We used overexpression of the trans-dominant negative, catalytically inactive
mutant K296R to inhibit PKR activity in neuroblastoma cells. We demonstrate that 
inhibition of PKR activation in response to tunicamycin protects neuronal cells
from undergoing apoptosis. Furthermore, K296R overexpressing cells show defective
PKR activation, delayed eIF2a phosphorylation, dramatically delayed ATF4
expression. In addition, both caspase-3 activation and C/EBP homologous protein
(CHOP, also known as GADD153) induction, which are markers of apoptotic cells,
are absent from K296R overexpression cells in response to tunicamycin. These
results establish that PKR activation plays a major regulatory role in induction 
of apoptosis in response to ER stress and indicates the potential of PKR as
possible target for neuroprotective therapeutics.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24334130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jan 10;443(2):592-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.12.021. Epub 2013 Dec 11.

Evolutionarily conserved IMPACT impairs various stress responses that require
GCN1 for activating the eIF2 kinase GCN2.

Cambiaghi TD(1), Pereira CM(1), Shanmugam R(2), Bolech M(2), Wek RC(3),
Sattlegger E(2), Castilho BA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Escola Paulista de
Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Institute of Natural and 
Mathematical Sciences, Massey University, New Zealand. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Escola Paulista de
Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address:
bacastilho@unifesp.br.

In response to a range of environmental stresses, phosphorylation of the alpha
subunit of the translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2a) represses general protein 
synthesis coincident with increased translation of specific mRNAs, such as those 
encoding the transcription activators GCN4 and ATF4. The eIF2a kinase GCN2 is
activated by amino acid starvation by a mechanism involving GCN2 binding to an
activator protein GCN1, along with association with uncharged tRNA that
accumulates during nutrient deprivation. We previously showed that mammalian
IMPACT and its yeast ortholog YIH1 bind to GCN1, thereby preventing GCN1
association with GCN2 and stimulation of this eIF2a kinase during amino acid
depletion. GCN2 activity is also enhanced by other stresses, including proteasome
inhibition, UV irradiation and lack of glucose. Here, we provide evidence that
IMPACT affects directly and specifically the activation of GCN2 under these
stress conditions in mammalian cells. We show that activation of mammalian GCN2
requires its interaction with GCN1 and that IMPACT promotes the dissolution of
the GCN2-GCN1 complex. To a similar extent as the overexpression of YIH1,
overexpression of IMPACT in yeast cells inhibited growth under all stress
conditions that require GCN2 and GCN1 for cell survival, including exposure to
acetic acid, high levels of NaCl, H2O2 or benomyl. This study extends our
understanding of the roles played by GCN1 in GCN2 activation induced by a variety
of stress arrangements and suggests that IMPACT and YIH1 use similar mechanisms
for regulating this eIF2a kinase.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24333428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. BMC Mol Biol. 2013 Dec 12;14:27. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-14-27.

An aryl hydrocarbon receptor induces VEGF expression through ATF4 under glucose
deprivation in HepG2.

Terashima J(1), Tachikawa C, Kudo K, Habano W, Ozawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacodynamics and Molecular Genetics, School of Pharmacy,
Iwate Medical University, 2-1-1 Nishitokuda, Yahaba-CHO, Siwa-Gun 028-3694,
Iwate, Japan. jterashi@iwate-med.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) not only regulates drug-metabolizing 
enzyme expression but also regulates cancer malignancy. The steps to the
development of malignancy include angiogenesis that is induced by tumor
microenvironments, hypoxia, and nutrient deprivation. Vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) plays a central role in the angiogenesis of cancer cells, and it is
induced by activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4).
RESULTS: Recently, we identified that glucose deprivation induces AhR
translocation into the nucleus and increases CYP1A1 and 1A2 expression in HepG2
cells. Here, we report that the AhR pathway induces VEGF expression in human
hepatoblastoma HepG2 cells under glucose deprivation, which involves ATF4. ATF4
knockdown suppressed VEGF expression under glucose deprivation. Moreover, AhR
knockdown suppressed VEGF and ATF4 expression under glucose deprivation at
genetic and protein levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The AhR-VEGF pathway through ATF4 is a novel pathway in
glucose-deprived liver cancer cells that is related to the microenvironment
within a cancer tissue affecting liver cancer malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3866938
PMID: 24330582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Am J Neurodegener Dis. 2013 Nov 29;2(4):247-65.

ER-stress in Alzheimer's disease: turning the scale?

Endres K(1), Reinhardt S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Clinical Research Group,
University Medical Centre Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz Untere Zahlbacher
Str. 8, D-55131 Mainz, Germany.

Pathogenic mechanisms of Alzheimer's disease (AD) are intensely investigated as
it is the most common form of dementia and burdens society by its costs and
social demands. While key molecules such as A-beta peptides and tau have been
identified decades ago, it is still enigmatic what drives the disease in its
sporadic manifestation. Synthesis of A-beta peptides as well as phosphorylation
of tau proteins comprise normal cellular functions and occur in principle in the 
healthy as well as in dementia-affected persons. Dyshomeostasis of Amyloid
Precursor Protein (APP) cleavage, energy metabolism or kinase/phosphatase
activity due to stressors has been suggested as a trigger of the disease. One way
for cells to escape stress based on dysfunction of ER is the unfolded protein
response - the UPR. This pathway is composed out of three different routes that
differ in proteins involved, targets and consequences for cell fate: activation
of transmembrane ER resident kinases IRE1-alpha and PERK or monomerization of
membrane-anchored activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) induce activation of
versatile transcription factors (XBP-1, eIF2-alpha/ATF4 and ATF6 P50). These bind
to specific DNA sequences on target gene promoters and on one hand attenuate
general ER-prone protein synthesis and on the other equip the cell with tools to 
de-stress. If cells fail in stress compensation, this signaling also is able to
evoke apoptosis. In this review we summarized knowledge on how APP processing and
phosphorylation of tau might be influenced by ER-stress signaling. In addition,
we depicted the effects UPR itself seems to have on molecules closely related to 
AD and describe what is known about UPR in AD animal models as well as in human
patients.

PMCID: PMC3852565
PMID: 24319643  [PubMed]


471. J Pineal Res. 2014 Mar;56(2):175-88. doi: 10.1111/jpi.12110. Epub 2014 Jan 7.

Melatonin treatment combined with treadmill exercise accelerates muscular
adaptation through early inhibition of CHOP-mediated autophagy in the
gastrocnemius of rats with intra-articular collagenase-induced knee laxity.

Hong Y(1), Kim JH, Jin Y, Lee S, Park K, Lee Y, Chang KT, Hong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Science, Graduate School of Inje University,
Gimhae, Korea; Cardiovascular & Metabolic Disease Center, College of Biomedical
Science & Engineering, Inje University, Gimhae, Korea.

The purpose of this study was to determine the effects of melatonin intervention 
on gastrocnemius remodeling in rats with collagenase-induced knee instability.
Type VII collagenase was injected into the right knee to induce joint laxity with
cartilage destruction. Melatonin (MT; 10 mg/kg) injection was performed twice
daily subcutaneously, and treadmill exercise (Ex; 11 m/min) was conducted for 1
hr/day at a frequency of 5 days/wk for 4 wks. The gastrocnemius mass, which was
reduced with collagenase injection only (Veh), was increased with collagenase
injection with melatonin treatment with and without exercise in the early phase, 
and the mass in both limbs was significantly different in the Veh compared with
the MT group. However, there was an increase in the relative muscle weight to
body weight ratio in the Veh group at the advanced stage. Insulin-like growth
factor receptor (IGF-IR) was downregulated in the Veh group, whereas IGF-IR was
upregulated in the MT and MT + Ex groups. Joint laxity induced enhancement of
autophagic proteolysis (LC3 II) in the muscle, which was recovered to values
similar to those in the normal control group (Con) compared with those in the MT 
and MT+Ex groups. Although intra-articular collagenase increased the total C/EBP 
homology protein (CHOP) levels at 1 wk and decreased them at 4 wks in the Veh
group, CHOP in the nucleus was upregulated continuously. Prolonged melatonin
treatment with and without exercise intervention suppressed nuclear localization 
of ATF4 and CHOP with less activation of caspase-3, at the advanced phase.
Moreover, the interventions promoted the expression of myosin heavy chain (MHC)
isoforms under the control of myogenin. Concomitant with a beneficial effect of
melatonin with and without exercise, step length of the saline-injected limb and 
the collagenase-injected supporting side was maintained at values similar to
those in control rats. Taken together, the findings demonstrate that melatonin
with and without exercise accelerate remodeling of the gastrocnemius through
inhibition of nuclear CHOP in rats with collagenase-induced knee instability.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24313305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Cell Signal. 2014 Mar;26(3):556-63. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.11.026. Epub 2013
Dec 2.

HDAC4 protects cells from ER stress induced apoptosis through interaction with
ATF4.

Zhang P(1), Sun Q(2), Zhao C(3), Ling S(2), Li Q(2), Chang YZ(4), Li Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Physiology, Biochemistry & Molecular Biology of Hebei Province,
Hebei Normal University, Shijiazhuang 050024, China; State Key Laboratory of
Space Medicine Fundamentals and Application, China Astronaut Research and
Training Center, Beijing 100094, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Space Medicine
Fundamentals and Application, China Astronaut Research and Training Center,
Beijing 100094, China. (3)Key Lab of Physiology, Biochemistry & Molecular Biology
of Hebei Province, Hebei Normal University, Shijiazhuang 050024, China. (4)Key
Lab of Physiology, Biochemistry & Molecular Biology of Hebei Province, Hebei
Normal University, Shijiazhuang 050024, China. Electronic address:
chang7676@163.com. (5)State Key Laboratory of Space Medicine Fundamentals and
Application, China Astronaut Research and Training Center, Beijing 100094, China.
Electronic address: yingxianli@aliyun.com.

Histone deacetylase 4 (HDAC4) is involved in the regulation of many fundamental
cell processes such as proliferation, differentiation, and survival via the
modification of their substrates or protein-protein interactions. In this study, 
we found that HDAC4 could be upregulated under ER stress. There exists a direct
interaction between HDAC4 and activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). In vitro,
overexpression of HDAC4 caused the retention of ATF4 in cytoplasm and inhibition 
of ATF4 transcriptional activity. ER stress could promote cell apoptosis through 
the upregulation of ATF4 levels and its target genes such as CHOP and TRB3. This 
effect was exacerbated by downregulation of HDAC4 levels. These results
demonstrated that HDAC4 played an important role in the regulation of ER
stress-induced apoptosis through interacting with ATF4 and inhibiting its
transcriptional activity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24308964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Toxicology. 2014 Jan 6;315:24-37. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2013.11.007. Epub 2013 Nov
28.

Lipid peroxidation end product 4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal triggers unfolded
protein response and heme oxygenase-1 expression in PC12 cells: Roles of ROS and 
MAPK pathways.

Lin MH(1), Yen JH(2), Weng CY(1), Wang L(3), Ha CL(4), Wu MJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and Science,
Tainan 717, Taiwan. (2)Department of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Tzu
Chi University, Hualien 970, Taiwan. (3)Department of Food Science and
Technology, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and Science, Tainan 717, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Health and Nutrition, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and
Science, Tainan 717, Taiwan. (5)Department of Biotechnology, Chia Nan University 
of Pharmacy and Science, Tainan 717, Taiwan. Electronic address:
imwu@mail.chna.edu.tw.

This study investigates the roles of ROS overproduction and MAPK signaling
pathways in the induction of unfolded protein response (UPR) and the expression
of Phase II enzymes in response to 4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal (4-HNE) in a
neuronal-like catecholaminergic PC12 cells. Our results showed that 4-HNE
triggered three canonical pathways of UPR, namely IRE1-XBP1, PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 and 
ATF6, and induced the expression of UPR-targeted genes, GRP78, CHOP, TRB3, PUMA, 
and GADD34, as well as Phase II enzymes, HO-1 and GCLC. 4-HNE also induced
apoptosis, intracellular calcium accumulation, caspase-3 activation, and G0/G1
cell cycle arrest, which was correlated with the increased expression of GADD45a.
The addition of tiron, a cellular permeable superoxide scavenger, scavenged
4-HNE-mediated ROS formation, but did not alleviate cytotoxicity, or the
expression of UPR-targeted genes or Phase II enzymes, indicating that ROS
overproduction per se did not play a major role in 4-HNE-caused deleterious
effects. HO-1 expression was attenuated by Nrf2 siRNA and chemical chaperone
4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA), suggesting HO-1 expression was regulated by Nrf2-ARE,
which may work downstream of ER stress. 4-HNE treatment promptly induced ERK, JNK
and p38 MAPK activation. Addition of p38 MAPK specific inhibitor SB203580
attenuated HO-1 upregulation, but enhanced expression of CHOP, PUMA and TRB3, and
cytotoxicity. These results indicate that 4-HNE-induced transient p38 MAPK
activation may serve as an upstream negative regulator of ER stress and confer
adaptive cytoprotection against 4-HNE-mediated cell injury.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24291486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Jan 15;320(2):281-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.11.012. Epub
2013 Nov 23.

Tetracyclines cause cell stress-dependent ATF4 activation and mTOR inhibition.

Brüning A(1), Brem GJ(2), Vogel M(2), Mylonas I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich, Germany. Electronic address: ansgar.bruening@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich, Germany.

Tetracyclines have long been used as valuable broad-spectrum antibiotics. The
high antibacterial activity of tetracyclines, combined with their good
tolerability, has led to their widespread use in treating various infectious
diseases. However, similar to other antibiotics, tetracyclines are also known for
their adverse effects on different human tissues, including hepatic steatosis. We
observed that tetracyclines, including doxycycline and minocycline, caused
enhanced expression of the liver chalone inhibin ßE in HepG2 cells, mediated by
the cell stress-regulated transcription factor ATF4. ATF4 and its target genes
ATF3, CHOP, and inhibin ßE are involved in cell cycle control, cell survival,
cell metabolism, and modulation of cytokine expression. Furthermore, we observed 
that long term tetracycline incubation also caused inhibition of the mTOR
complex, a central regulator of cell metabolism, further contributing to the
observed cell-cycle arrest and autophagy in doxycycline- and minocycline-treated 
cell lines. ATF4 activation and mTOR inhibition link two crucial regulators of
the cellular stress response and cell metabolism to the effects of tetracyclines 
on eukaryotic cell metabolism, and may help to understand the
antibiotic-independent influence of these drugs on human tissues. Since the
observed effects of tetracyclines on human cells were also found to be dependent 
on the magnesium ion concentrations supplied, the data further indicate the
importance of magnesium supplementation to reduce or prevent side effects of long
term treatment with tetracyclines.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24280420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Cell Metab. 2013 Dec 3;18(6):803-15. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.10.011. Epub 2013
Nov 21.

Activation of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II in obesity mediates 
suppression of hepatic insulin signaling.

Ozcan L(1), Cristina de Souza J, Harari AA, Backs J, Olson EN, Tabas I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
Electronic address: lo2192@columbia.edu.

A hallmark of obesity is selective suppression of hepatic insulin signaling
("insulin resistance"), but critical gaps remain in our understanding of the
molecular mechanisms. We now report a major role for hepatic CaMKII, a
calcium-responsive kinase that is activated in obesity. Genetic targeting of
hepatic CaMKII, its downstream mediator p38, or the p38 substrate and stabilizer 
MK2 enhances insulin-induced p-Akt in palmitate-treated hepatocytes and obese
mouse liver, leading to metabolic improvement. The mechanism of improvement
begins with induction of ATF6 and the ATF6 target p58(IPK), a chaperone that
suppresses the PERK-p-eIF2a-ATF4 branch of the UPR. The result is a decrease in
the ATF4 target TRB3, an inhibitor of insulin-induced p-Akt, leading to enhanced 
activation of Akt and its downstream metabolic mediators. These findings increase
our understanding of the molecular mechanisms linking obesity to selective
insulin resistance and suggest new therapeutic targets for type 2 diabetes and
metabolic syndrome.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3863383
PMID: 24268736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2013 Jul 15;1:37. doi: 10.1186/2051-5960-1-37.

Calreticulin and other components of endoplasmic reticulum stress in rat and
human inflammatory demyelination.

Ní Fhlathartaigh M(1), McMahon J, Reynolds R, Connolly D, Higgins E, Counihan T, 
Fitzgerald U.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Biomedical Engineering Science, Galway Neuroscience
Centre, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
una.fitzgerald@nuigalway.ie.

BACKGROUND: Calreticulin (CRT) is a chaperone protein, which aids correct folding
of glycosylated proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Under conditions of
ER stress, CRT is upregulated and may be displayed on the surface of cells or be 
secreted. This 'ecto-CRT' may activate the innate immune response or it may aid
clearance of apoptotic cells. Our and other studies have demonstrated
upregulation of ER stress markers CHOP, BiP, ATF4, XBP1 and phosphorylated e-IF2 
alpha (p-eIF2 alpha) in biopsy and post-mortem human multiple sclerosis (MS)
samples. We extend this work by analysing changes in expression of CRT, BiP,
CHOP, XBP1 and p-eIF2 alpha in a rat model of inflammatory demyelination.
Demyelination was induced in the spinal cord by intradermal injection of
recombinant mouse MOG mixed with incomplete Freund's adjuvant (IFA) at the base
of the tail. Tissue samples were analysed by semi-quantitative scoring of
immunohistochemically stained frozen tissue sections. Data generated following
sampling of tissue from animals with spinal cord lesions, was compared to that
obtained using tissue derived from IFA- or saline-injected controls. CRT present 
in rat serum and in a cohort of human serum derived from 14 multiple sclerosis
patients and 11 healthy controls was measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: Stained tissue scores revealed significantly (p<0.05) increased amounts 
of CRT, CHOP and p-eIF2 alpha in the lesion, lesion edge and normal-appearing
white matter when compared to controls. CHOP and p-eIF2 alpha were also
significantly raised in regions of grey matter and the central canal (p<0.05).
Immunofluorescent dual-label staining confirmed expression of these markers in
astrocytes, microglia or neurons. Dual staining of rat and human spinal cord
lesions with Oil Red O and CRT antibody showed co-localisation of CRT with the
rim of myelin fragments. ELISA testing of sera from control and EAE rats
demonstrated significant down-regulation (p<0.05) of CRT in the serum of EAE
animals, compared to saline and IFA controls. This contrasted with significantly 
increased amounts of CRT detected in the sera of MS patients (p<0.05), compared
to controls.
CONCLUSION: This data highlights the potential importance of CRT and other ER
stress proteins in inflammatory demyelination.

PMCID: PMC3893522
PMID: 24252779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;34(3):428-38. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00946-13. Epub 2013 Nov
18.

GCN2-dependent metabolic stress is essential for endotoxemic cytokine induction
and pathology.

Liu H(1), Huang L, Bradley J, Liu K, Bardhan K, Ron D, Mellor AL, Munn DH, McGaha
TL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Immunology, Inflammation, and Tolerance Program, GRU Cancer Center,
Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia, USA.

Activated inflammatory macrophages can express indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) 
and thus actively deplete their own tryptophan supply; however, it is not clear
how amino acid depletion influences macrophage behavior in inflammatory
environments. In this report, we demonstrate that the stress response kinase GCN2
promotes macrophage inflammation and mortality in a mouse model of septicemia. In
vitro, enzymatic amino acid consumption enhanced sensitivity of macrophages to
the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) ligand lipopolysaccharide (LPS) with
significantly increased interleukin 6 (IL-6) production. Tryptophan withdrawal
induced the stress response proteins ATF4 and CHOP/GADD153; however, LPS
stimulation rapidly enhanced expression of both proteins. Moreover, LPS-driven
cytokine production under amino acid-deficient conditions was dependent on GCN2, 
as GCN2 knockout (GCN2KO) macrophages had a significant reduction of cytokine
gene expression after LPS stimulation. To test the in vivo relevance of these
findings, monocytic-lineage-specific GCN2KO mice were challenged with a lethal
dose of LPS intraperitoneally (i.p.). The GCN2KO mice showed reduced inflammatory
responses, with decreased IL-6 and IL-12 expression correlating with significant 
reduction in animal mortality. Thus, the data show that amino acid depletion
stress signals (via GCN2) synergize with proinflammatory signals to potently
increase innate immune responsiveness.

PMCID: PMC3911502
PMID: 24248597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2014 Mar;38(3):683-93. doi: 10.1111/acer.12311. Epub 2013
Nov 13.

The resveratrol attenuates ethanol-induced hepatocyte apoptosis via inhibiting
ER-related caspase-12 activation and PDE activity in vitro.

Liu LQ(1), Fan ZQ, Tang YF, Ke ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress plays a key role in cell apoptosis 
pathways. Caspase-12, a proapoptotic gene induced by ER stress, is also the key
molecule in ER-related apoptosis. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the
protective activity and possible mechanism of resveratrol (ResV) against ethanol 
(EtOH)-induced apoptosis in human hepatocyte Chang cell line.
METHODS: The human hepatocyte Chang cell line was used to test the hypothesis
that ResV may alleviate the liver cell apoptosis induced by EtOH. ER
stress-inducible proteins and silent mating type information regulation 2 homolog
1 (SIRT1) were assayed by Western blot. Cell viability was studied by MTT assay
and apoptosis was measured by Annexin-V and propidium iodide assay. Caspase-12
activation was examined by immunofluorescence staining. Alcohol dehydrogenase-2
(ADH-2) and aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 (ALDH-2) were measured by polymerase chain
reaction amplified product length polymorphism. Phosphodiesterase (PDE) activity 
was assayed in cell lysates using a cyclic nucleotide PDE assay.
RESULTS: EtOH exposure significantly increased the expression of ER stress
markers and activated signaling pathways associated with ER stress. These include
GRP78, p-IRE1a, p-eIF2a, p-PERK, ATF4 as well as cleaved caspase-3/12,
CHOP/GADD153, and Bax in human hepatocyte Chang cell line. The expression of
these proteins were significantly down-regulated by ResV (10 µM) in a
SIRT1-dependent manner. ResV can inhibit EtOH-, tunicamycin-,
thapsigargin-induced caspase-12 activation. ADH-2 and ALDH-2 activities are lower
in this cell line. PDE activity increased by EtOH was inhibited by ResV (10 µM).
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that (i) EtOH-induced activation of caspase-12 
could be one of the underlying mechanisms of hepatocyte apoptosis; (ii)
EtOH-induced cell apoptosis was alleviated via ResV (10 µM) by inhibiting ER
stress and caspase-12 activation in a SIRT1-dependent manner; and (iii) SIRT1
activated indirectly by ResV (10 µM) attenuates EtOH-induced hepatocyte apoptosis
partly through inhibiting PDE activity.

Copyright © 2013 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMID: 24224909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Life Sci. 2014 Jan 14;94(1):37-44. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2013.10.030. Epub 2013 Nov 
10.

Blockage of TRPM7 channel induces hepatic stellate cell death through endoplasmic
reticulum stress-mediated apoptosis.

Zhu Y(1), Men R(1), Wen M(1), Hu X(2), Liu X(3), Yang L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive Diseases, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610041, China. (2)Division of Digestive Diseases, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China; Department of Internal Medicine,
Hospital of Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China. (3)Laboratory of
Cardiovascular Diseases, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041,
China. (4)Division of Digestive Diseases, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041, China. Electronic address: linayang63@gmail.com.

AIMS: Proliferation is a 'multiplier' for extracellular matrix production and
contraction of activated hepatic stellate cells (HSC) in fibrotic liver.
Transient receptor potential melastatin-like 7 channels (TRPM7) are implicated in
the survival and proliferation of several kinds of cells. This study was aimed to
investigate the effect of TRPM7 blocker 2-APB on survival and proliferation of
HSC and the underlying mechanisms.
MAIN METHODS: Rat HSC were stimulated by 2-APB for 24 h and then collected for
further use. Cell viability was detected by MTT, and apoptosis was determined by 
AnnexinV/PI staining and TUNEL assay. Gene expressions of TRPM7, a-SMA, bcl-2,
bax, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress key members CHOP, caspase-12, ATF4,
ATF6, Xbp1, GRP78 and calnexin were evaluated with quantitative RT-PCR.
Quantifications of a-SMA, TRPM7, CHOP and GRP78 proteins were carried out by
Western blot. Transmission electron microscopy and Xbp1 mRNA splicing analysis
were also used for detection of ER stress.
KEY FINDINGS: 2-APB decreased TRPM7 and a-SMA expressions in primary HSC, and
inhibited proliferation of activated HSC in a dose-dependent manner. 2-APB also
decreased total count of activated HSC and increased the number of apoptotic
cells. 2-APB increased expressions of bax and ER stress key factors CHOP,
caspase-12, ATF4, ATF6, Xbp1, GRP78 and calnexin. Meanwhile, ultra-structural ER 
changes and spliced Xbp1 mRNA were also observed in 2-APB treated HSC.
SIGNIFICANCE: Blockage of TRPM7 could inhibit activation and proliferation of
primary HSC and induce apoptotic death of activated cells, in which ER stress was
identified as one of possible underlying molecular bases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24220678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Biochimie. 2014 Mar;98:75-85. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2013.10.019. Epub 2013 Nov 7.

Cholesterol biosynthesis and ER stress in peroxisome deficiency.

Faust PL(1), Kovacs WJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA. (2)Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, ETH Zuerich, CH-8093
Zuerich, Switzerland; Competence Center for Systems Physiology and Metabolic
Diseases, ETH Zuerich, CH-8093 Zuerich, Switzerland. Electronic address:
werner.kovacs@biol.ethz.ch.

Cholesterol biosynthesis is a multi-step process involving more than 20 enzymes
in several subcellular compartments. The pre-squalene segment of the
cholesterol/isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway is localized in peroxisomes. This
review intends to highlight recent findings illustrating the important role
peroxisomes play in cholesterol biosynthesis and maintenance of cholesterol
homeostasis. Disruption of the Pex2 gene leads to peroxisome deficiency and
widespread metabolic dysfunction. The Pex2(-/-) mouse model for Zellweger
syndrome enabled us to evaluate the role of peroxisomes in cholesterol
biosynthesis. These studies have shown that Pex2(-/-) mice exhibit low levels of 
cholesterol in plasma and liver. Pex2(-/-) mice were unable to maintain normal
cholesterol homeostasis despite activation of SREBP-2, the master transcriptional
regulator of cholesterol biosynthesis, and increased protein levels and
activities of cholesterol biosynthetic enzymes. The SREBP-2 pathway remained
activated even after normalization of hepatic cholesterol levels in response to
bile acid feeding as well as in extrahepatic tissues and the liver of neonatal
and longer surviving Pex2 mutants, where cholesterol levels were normal. Several 
studies have shown that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress can dysregulate lipid
metabolism via SREBP activation independently of intracellular cholesterol
concentration. We demonstrated that peroxisome deficiency activates endoplasmic
reticulum stress pathways in Pex2(-/-) mice, especially the integrated stress
response mediated by PERK and ATF4 signaling, and thereby leads to dysregulation 
of the SREBP-2 pathway. Our findings suggest that functional peroxisomes are
necessary to prevent chronic ER stress and dysregulation of the endogenous sterol
response pathway. The constitutive activation of ER stress pathways might
contribute to organ pathology and metabolic dysfunction in peroxisomal disorder
patients.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24211592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Biol Chem. 2013 Dec 13;288(50):35812-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.519637. Epub
2013 Nov 4.

25-Hydroxycholesterol activates the integrated stress response to reprogram
transcription and translation in macrophages.

Shibata N(1), Carlin AF, Spann NJ, Saijo K, Morello CS, McDonald JG, Romanoski
CE, Maurya MR, Kaikkonen MU, Lam MT, Crotti A, Reichart D, Fox JN, Quehenberger
O, Raetz CR, Sullards MC, Murphy RC, Merrill AH Jr, Brown HA, Dennis EA, Fahy E, 
Subramaniam S, Cavener DR, Spector DH, Russell DW, Glass CK.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

25-Hydroxycholesterol (25OHC) is an enzymatically derived oxidation product of
cholesterol that modulates lipid metabolism and immunity. 25OHC is synthesized in
response to interferons and exerts broad antiviral activity by as yet poorly
characterized mechanisms. To gain further insights into the basis for antiviral
activity, we evaluated time-dependent responses of the macrophage lipidome and
transcriptome to 25OHC treatment. In addition to altering specific aspects of
cholesterol and sphingolipid metabolism, we found that 25OHC activates integrated
stress response (ISR) genes and reprograms protein translation. Effects of 25OHC 
on ISR gene expression were independent of liver X receptors and sterol-response 
element-binding proteins and instead primarily resulted from activation of the
GCN2/eIF2a/ATF4 branch of the ISR pathway. These studies reveal that 25OHC
activates the integrated stress response, which may contribute to its antiviral
activity.

PMCID: PMC3861632
PMID: 24189069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Apoptosis. 2014 Mar;19(3):414-27. doi: 10.1007/s10495-013-0930-7.

Glucose deprivation induces reticulum stress by the PERK pathway and caspase-7-
and calpain-mediated caspase-12 activation.

de la Cadena SG(1), Hernández-Fonseca K, Camacho-Arroyo I, Massieu L.

Author information: 
(1)División de Neurociencias, Departamento de Neuropatología Molecular, Instituto
de Fisiología Celular, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, AP 70-253,
Mexico, DF, 04510, Mexico.

Glucose is the main energy source in brain and it is critical for correct brain
functioning. Type 1 diabetic patients might suffer from severe hypoglycemia if
exceeding insulin administration, which can lead to acute brain injury if not
opportunely corrected. The mechanisms leading to hypoglycemic brain damage are
not completely understood and the role of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has
not been studied. ER stress resulting from the accumulation of unfolded or
misfolded proteins in the ER is counteracted by the unfolded protein response
(UPR). When the UPR is sustained, apoptotic death might take place. We have
examined UPR activation during glucose deprivation (GD) in hippocampal cultured
neurons and its role in the induction of apoptosis. Activation of the PERK
pathway of the UPR was observed, as increased phosphorylation of eIF2a and
elevated levels of the transcription factor ATF4, occurred 30 min after GD and
the levels of the chaperone protein, GRP78 and the transcription factor CHOP,
increased after 2 h of GD. In addition, we observed an early activation of
caspase-7 and 12 during GD, while caspase-3 activity increased only transiently
during glucose reintroduction. Inhibition of caspase-3/7 and the
calcium-dependent protease, calpain, significantly decreased caspase-12 activity.
The ER stress inhibitor, salubrinal prevented neuronal death and caspase-12
activity. Results suggest that the PERK pathway of the UPR is involved in
GD-induced apoptotic neuronal death through the activation of caspase-12, rather 
than the mitochondrial-dependent caspase pathway. In addition, we show that
calpain and caspase-7 are soon activated after GD and mediate caspase-12
activation and neuronal death.

PMID: 24185830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Biol Open. 2013 Aug 27;2(10):1084-90. doi: 10.1242/bio.20135033. eCollection
2013.

Selection of autophagy or apoptosis in cells exposed to ER-stress depends on ATF4
expression pattern with or without CHOP expression.

Matsumoto H(1), Miyazaki S, Matsuyama S, Takeda M, Kawano M, Nakagawa H,
Nishimura K, Matsuo S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology, Course of Veterinary Science, Graduate School of
Life and Environmental Biosciences, Osaka Prefecture University , 1-58,
Rinku-Ourai-Kita, Izumisano 598-8531 , Japan.

Cells exposed to ER-stress undergo the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) to avoid
apoptosis, but may also activate autophagy. However, the signal for selection of 
one of these two protective responses is unknown. To clarify the key switch
between autophagy and apoptosis, we examined the correlation of UPR-related
signals with autophagy and/or apoptosis inductions in HepG2 cells exposed to
three ER-stress inducers (NaF, tunicamycin, and thapsigargin) with time,
including the effect of small interfering RNA on the cell responses.
Thapsigargin-induced ER-stress caused only apoptosis after ~2 hr with Ire1
phosphorylation, and Grp78, ATF4, and CHOP expressions. On the other hand, NaF-
and tunicamycin-induced ER-stress caused only autophagy in the early stage by
~8 hr with ATF4 expression and without CHOP expression. ATF4-siRNA completely
inhibited the autophagy induced by NaF or tunicamycin with suppressed ATF4
protein and mRNA expressions, and also inhibited apoptosis by thapsigargin with
suppression of both ATF4 and CHOP. CHOP-siRNA had no effect on autophagy
activation by NaF and tunicamycin. On the other hand, CHOP-siRNA activated
autophagy in thapsigargin-induced ER-stress with significant ATF4 expression, and
suppressed apoptosis with CHOP suppression. These results showed that ATF4 is the
key signal for autophagy induced by ER-stress, and that autophagy is switched to 
apoptosis by subsequent CHOP upregulation, suggesting that the changeover switch 
between autophagy and apoptosis is located between ATF4 to CHOP in the PERK
pathway.

PMCID: PMC3798192
PMID: 24167719  [PubMed]


484. Clin Calcium. 2013 Nov;23(11):1569-75. doi: CliCa131115691575.

[Endoplasmic reticulum stress response in osteogenesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Saito A(1), Imaizumi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Biomedical & Health Sciences,
University of Hiroshima, Japan.

Various cellular conditions such as synthesis of abundant proteins, expressions
of mutant proteins and oxidative stress lead to accumulation of unfolded or
misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen. This type of stress
is called ER stress. The excessive ER stress causes cellular damages followed by 
apoptosis. When ER stress occurs, cells are activated ER stress response
(unfolded protein response) to avoid cellular damages. Recently, it has been
clear that ER stress response plays crucial roles not only in cell survival after
ER stress but also in regulating various cellular functions and tissue
formations. In particular, ER stress and ER stress response regulate protein
quality control, secretory protein production, and smooth secretion of proteins
in the cells such as osteoblasts which synthesize and secrete enormous matrix
proteins.

PMID: 24162596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 15;441(2):344-50. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.10.056. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

Unfolding protein response signaling is involved in development, maintenance, and
regression of the corpus luteum during the bovine estrous cycle.

Park HJ(1), Park SJ, Koo DB, Kong IK, Kim MK, Kim JM, Choi MS, Park YH, Kim SU,
Chang KT, Park CK, Chae JI, Lee DS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biotechnology (BK 21 plus program), Kyungpook
National University, Daegu 702-701, Republic of Korea.

The corpus luteum (CL) is a transient endocrine organ. Development, maintenance, 
and regression of CL are effectively controlled by dynamic changes in gene
expression. However, it is unknown what types of gene are affected during the CL 
life span of the estrous cycle in bovine. Here, we determined whether unfolded
protein response (UPR) signaling via eIF2a/ATF4/GADD34, p90ATF6/p50ATF6, and
IRE1/XBP1, which is a cellular stress response associated with the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), is involved in the bovine CL life span. Our results indicated
that expression of Grp78/Bip, the master UPR regulator, was increased during the 
maintenance stage and rapidly decreased at the regression stage. Additionally,
UPR signaling pathways genes were found to be involved in luteal phase
progression during the estrous cycle. Our findings suggested that Grp78/Bip,
ATF6, and XBP1 act as ER chaperones for initiating CL development and maintaining
the CL. In addition, we investigated whether ER stress-mediated apoptosis is
occurred through three UPR signaling pathways in CL regression stage.
Interestingly, pIRE1 and CHOP were found to be involved in both the adaptive
response and ER stress-mediated apoptosis. During the CL regression stage,
increased expression of pJNK and CHOP, two components of ER stress-mediated
apoptotic cascades, occurred before increased level of cleaved caspase 3 were
observed. The present investigation was performed to identify a functional link
between UPR signaling and CL life span during the bovine estrous cycle. Taken
together, results from this study demonstrated that UPR protein/gene expression
levels were different at various stages of the bovine CL life span. Variations in
the expression of these protein/genes may play important roles in luteal stage
progression during the estrous cycle.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24161737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Food Chem Toxicol. 2013 Dec;62:880-91. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2013.10.017. Epub 2013 
Oct 22.

A protective role of heme-regulated eIF2a kinase in cadmium-induced toxicity in
erythroid cells.

Wang L(1), Wang X, Zhang S, Qu G, Liu S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environment Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research
Center for Eco-Environment Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085,
China.

Although a number of studies have demonstrated that cadmium (Cd) can incur damage
to mature red cells, the potential injuries of Cd to erythroid progenitor cells
have not been investigated thus far. Heme-regulated eIF2a kinase (Hri) is
essential for translational regulation and survival of erythroid precursors in
the setting of iron deficiency. Hri has been demonstrated to activate Atf4
signaling in reducing oxidative stress and in promoting erythroid differentiation
during stress erythropoiesis. Here, we demonstrated that Cd significantly
provoked cell death and suppressed erythroid differentiation of erythroid
progenitor cells. Importantly, our results established a crucial role of Hri in
ameliorating Cd-induced impairment to erythropoiesis. Upon Cd treatment,
Hri-eIF2aP-Atf4 signaling was activated to protect cells from cell death and
differentiation attenuation in Wt fetal liver erythroblasts; in contrast,
Hri(-/-) erythroblasts suffered from enhanced oxidative stress, as evidenced by
increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and consequentially elevated
apoptosis. As for Cd administration in vivo, impaired erythropoiesis in bone
marrow and dramatic extramedullary erythropoiesis in spleen were observed in
Hri(-/-) mice. Taken together, our combined data highlighted a crucial role of
Hri in protecting survival and differentiation of erythroid progenitor cells upon
Cd treatment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24161693  [PubMed - in process]


487. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 14;8(10):e77256. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077256.
eCollection 2013.

Zhangfei/CREB-ZF - a potential regulator of the unfolded protein response.

Zhang R(1), Rapin N, Ying Z, Shklanka E, Bodnarchuk TW, Verge VM, Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology,Western College of Veterinary Medicine, University 
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,Canada.

Cells respond to perturbations in the microenvironment of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), and to the overloading of its capacity to process secretory and
membrane-associate proteins, by activating the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR).
Genes that mediate the UPR are regulated by three basic leucine-zipper (bLZip)
motif-containing transcription factors - Xbp1s, ATF4 and ATF6. A failure of the
UPR to achieve homeostasis and its continued stimulation leads to apoptosis.
Mechanisms must therefore exist to turn off the UPR if it successfully restores
normalcy. The bLZip protein Zhangfei/CREBZF/SMILE is known to suppress the
ability of several, seemingly structurally unrelated, transcription factors.
These targets include Luman/CREB3 and CREBH, ER-resident bLZip proteins known to 
activate the UPR in some cell types. Here we show that Zhangfei had a suppressive
effect on most UPR genes activated by the calcium ionophore thapsigargin. This
effect was at least partially due to the interaction of Zhangfei with Xbp1s. The 
leucine zipper of Zhangfei was required for this interaction, which led to the
subsequent proteasomal degradation of Xbp1s. Zhangfei suppressed the ability of
Xbp1s to activate transcription from a promoter containing unfolded protein
response elements and significantly reduced the ability to Xbp1s to activate the 
UPR as measured by RNA and protein levels of UPR-related genes. Finally, specific
suppression of endogenous Zhangfei in thapsigargin-treated primary rat sensory
neurons with siRNA directed to Zhangfei transcripts, led to a significant
increase in transcripts and proteins of UPR genes, suggesting a potential role
for Zhangfei in modulating the UPR.

PMCID: PMC3796484
PMID: 24155933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Sci Rep. 2013 Oct 23;3:3022. doi: 10.1038/srep03022.

Sirt6 regulates postnatal growth plate differentiation and proliferation via Ihh 
signaling.

Piao J(1), Tsuji K, Ochi H, Iwata M, Koga D, Okawa A, Morita S, Takeda S, Asou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University 1-5-45 Yushima Bunkyo-ku Tokyo Japan, 113-8519.

Sirtuin 6 (Sirt6) is a mammalian homologue of NAD<U+207A>-dependent histone deacetylase 
Sir2. Although Sirt6<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice exhibit growth retardation, the role of Sirt6 in
cartilage metabolism is unclear. The aim of this study was to investigate the
Sirt6 signaling pathway in cartilage metabolism. Immunohistological evaluation of
the tibial growth plate in Sirt6<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice exhibited impaired proliferation and
differentiation of chondrocytes, reduced expression of Indian hedgehog (Ihh), and
a senescent phenotype. When Sirt6 was knocked down in chondrocytes in vitro,
expression of Ihh and its downstream genes were reduced. Impaired differentiation
by Sirt6 silencing was completely rescued by administration of a Hh signal
agonist. When sirtuins were activated, chondrocyte differentiation was enhanced
together with activation of Ihh signal, and these effects were abrogated by Sirt6
silencing. ChIP assay revealed the affinity of ATF4 to the Ihh promoter was
markedly decreased by Sirt6 knockdown. These data indicate Sirt6 directly
controls proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes.

PMID: 24149372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 11;8(10):e77335. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077335.
eCollection 2013.

Deletion of the eIF2a Kinase GCN2 fails to rescue the memory decline associated
with Alzheimer's disease.

Devi L(1), Ohno M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Dementia Research, Nathan Kline Institute, Orangeburg, New York,
United States of America.

Emerging evidence suggests that dysregulated translation through phosphorylation 
of eukaryotic initiation factor-2a (eIF2a) may contribute to Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) and related memory impairments. However, the underlying mechanisms remain
unclear. Here, we crossed knockout mice for an eIF2a kinase (GCN2: general
control nonderepressible-2 kinase) with 5XFAD transgenic mice, and investigated
whether GCN2 deletion affects AD-like traits in this model. As observed in AD
brains, 5XFAD mice recapitulated significant elevations in the ß-secretase enzyme
BACE1 and the CREB repressor ATF4 concomitant with a dramatic increase of eIF2a
phosphorylation. Contrary to expectation, we found that GCN2(-/-) and GCN2(+/-)
deficiencies aggravate rather than suppress hippocampal BACE1 and ATF4 elevations
in 5XFAD mice, failing to rescue memory deficits as tested by the contextual fear
conditioning. The facilitation of these deleterious events resulted in
exacerbated ß-amyloid accumulation, plaque pathology and CREB dysfunction in
5XFAD mice with GCN2 mutations. Notably, GCN2 deletion caused overactivation of
the PKR-endoplasmic reticulum-related kinase (PERK)-dependent eIF2a
phosphorylation pathway in 5XFAD mice in the absence of changes in the PKR
pathway. Moreover, PERK activation in response to GCN2 deficiency was specific to
5XFAD mice, since phosphorylated PERK levels were equivalent between GCN2(-/-)
and wild-type control mice. Our findings suggest that GCN2 may be an important
eIF2a kinase under the physiological condition, whereas blocking the GCN2 pathway
under exposure to significant ß-amyloidosis rather aggravates eIF2a
phosphorylation leading to BACE1 and ATF4 elevations in AD.

PMCID: PMC3795630
PMID: 24146979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Oct 10;4:e851. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.379.

Translational control in the stress adaptive response of cancer cells: a novel
role for the heat shock protein TRAP1.

Matassa DS(1), Amoroso MR, Agliarulo I, Maddalena F, Sisinni L, Paladino S,
Romano S, Romano MF, Sagar V, Loreni F, Landriscina M, Esposito F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of
Naples Federico II, Via Pansini 5, Naples 80131, Italy.

TNF receptor-associated protein 1 (TRAP1), the main mitochondrial member of the
heat shock protein (HSP) 90 family, is induced in most tumor types and is
involved in the regulation of proteostasis in the mitochondria of tumor cells
through the control of folding and stability of selective proteins, such as
Cyclophilin D and Sorcin. Notably, we have recently demonstrated that TRAP1 also 
interacts with the regulatory protein particle TBP7 in the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER), where it is involved in a further extra-mitochondrial quality control of
nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins through the regulation of their
ubiquitination/degradation. Here we show that TRAP1 is involved in the
translational control of cancer cells through an attenuation of global protein
synthesis, as evidenced by an inverse correlation between TRAP1 expression and
ubiquitination/degradation of nascent stress-protective client proteins. This
study demonstrates for the first time that TRAP1 is associated with ribosomes and
with several translation factors in colon carcinoma cells and, remarkably, is
found co-upregulated with some components of the translational apparatus (eIF4A, 
eIF4E, eEF1A and eEF1G) in human colorectal cancers, with potential new
opportunities for therapeutic intervention in humans. Moreover, TRAP1 regulates
the rate of protein synthesis through the eIF2a pathway either under basal
conditions or under stress, favoring the activation of GCN2 and PERK kinases,
with consequent phosphorylation of eIF2a and attenuation of cap-dependent
translation. This enhances the synthesis of selective stress-responsive proteins,
such as the transcription factor ATF4 and its downstream effectors BiP/Grp78, and
the cystine antiporter system xCT, thereby providing protection against ER
stress, oxidative damage and nutrient deprivation. Accordingly, TRAP1 silencing
sensitizes cells to apoptosis induced by novel antitumoral drugs that inhibit
cap-dependent translation, such as ribavirin or 4EGI-1, and reduces the ability
of cells to migrate through the pores of transwell filters. These new findings
target the TRAP1 network in the development of novel anti-cancer strategies.

PMCID: PMC3824688
PMID: 24113185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2013 Dec;6(12):1337-47. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0220. Epub 2013 Oct 8.

The involvement of endoplasmic reticulum stress in the suppression of colorectal 
tumorigenesis by tolfenamic acid.

Zhang X(1), Lee SH, Min KW, McEntee MF, Jeong JB, Li Q, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, 2407 River Drive,
Knoxville, TN 37996-4542. Phone: 865-974-8216; Fax: 865-974-5616; sbaek2@utk.edu;
Qingwang Li, College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, 
22 Xinong Road, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, People's Republic of China.
liqingwangysu@aliyun.com.

The nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug tolfenamic acid has been shown to
suppress cancer cell growth and tumorigenesis in different cancer models.
However, the underlying mechanism by which tolfenamic acid exerts its
antitumorigenic effect remains unclear. Previous data from our group and others
indicate that tolfenamic acid alters expression of apoptosis- and cell-cycle
arrest-related genes in colorectal cancer cells. Here, we show that tolfenamic
acid markedly reduced the number of polyps and tumor load in APC(min)(/+) mice,
accompanied with cyclin D1 downregulation in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, 
tolfenamic acid promotes endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, resulting in
activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling pathway, of which
PERK-mediated phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a
(eIF2a) induces the repression of cyclin D1 translation. Moreover, the
PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 branch of the UPR pathway plays a role in tolfenamic acid-induced
apoptosis in colorectal cancer cells, as silencing ATF4 attenuates tolfenamic
acid-induced apoptosis. Taken together, these results suggest ER stress is
involved in tolfenamic acid-induced inhibition of colorectal cancer cell growth, 
which could contribute to antitumorigenesis in a mouse model.

PMCID: PMC3855893
PMID: 24104354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Dec;23(12):1785-90.

SIRT1 suppresses activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) expression in response 
to proteasome inhibition.

Woo SR(1), Park JE, Kim YH, Ju YJ, Shin HJ, Joo HY, Park ER, Hong SH, Park GH,
Lee KH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Cancer Research, Korea Institute of Radiological and
Medical Sciences, Seoul 139-706, Republic of Korea.

The synthetic machinery of ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4) is activated 
in response to various stress conditions involved in nutrient restriction,
endoplasmic reticulum homeostasis, and oxidation. Stress-induced inhibition of
proteasome activity triggers the unfolded protein response and endoplasmic
reticulum stress, where ATF4 is crucial for consequent biological events. In the 
current study, we showed that the NAD(+)-dependent deacetylase, SIRT1, suppresses
ATF4 synthesis during proteasome inhibition. SIRT1 depletion via transfection of 
specific siRNA into HeLa cells resulted in a significant increase in ATF4
protein, which was observed specifically in the presence of the proteasome
inhibitor MG132. Consistent with SIRT1 depletion data, transient transfection of 
cells with SIRT1-overexpressing plasmid induced a decrease in the ATF4 protein
level in the presence of MG132. Interestingly, however, ATF4 mRNA was not
affected by SIRT1, even in the presence of MG132, indicating that SIRT1-induced
suppression of ATF4 synthesis occurs under post-transcriptional control.
Accordingly, we propose that SIRT1 serves as a negative regulator of ATF4 protein
synthesis at the post-transcriptional level, which is observed during stress
conditions, such as proteasome inhibition.

PMID: 24100623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Toxicol Sci. 2014 Jan;137(1):26-35. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kft230. Epub 2013 Oct 4.

The adaptive endoplasmic reticulum stress response to lipotoxicity in progressive
human nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.

Lake AD(1), Novak P, Hardwick RN, Flores-Keown B, Zhao F, Klimecki WT,
Cherrington NJ.

Author information: 
(1)* Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology and.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) may progress from simple steatosis to
severe, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) in 7%-14% of the U.S. population
through a second "hit" in the form of increased oxidative stress and
inflammation. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress signaling and the unfolded
protein response (UPR) are triggered when high levels of lipids and misfolded
proteins alter ER homeostasis creating a lipotoxic environment within NAFLD
livers. The objective of this study was to determine the coordinate regulation of
ER stress-associated genes in the progressive stages of human NAFLD. Human liver 
samples categorized as normal, steatosis, NASH (Fatty), and NASH (Not Fatty) were
analyzed by individual Affymetrix GeneChip Human 1.0 ST microarrays, immunoblots,
and immunohistochemistry. A gene set enrichment analysis was performed on
autophagy, apoptosis, lipogenesis, and ER stress/UPR gene categories. An
enrichment of downregulated genes in the ER stress-associated lipogenesis and ER 
stress/UPR gene categories was observed in NASH. Conversely, an enrichment of
upregulated ER stress-associated genes for autophagy and apoptosis gene
categories was observed in NASH. Protein expression of the adaptive liver
response protein STC2 and the transcription factor X-box binding protein 1
spliced (XBP-1s) were significantly elevated among NASH samples, whereas other
downstream ER stress proteins including CHOP, ATF4, and phosphorylated JNK and
eIF2a were not significantly changed in disease progression. Increased nuclear
accumulation of total XBP-1 protein was observed in steatosis and NASH livers.
The findings reveal the presence of a coordinated, adaptive transcriptional
response to hepatic ER stress in human NAFLD.

PMCID: PMC3871931
PMID: 24097666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Nature. 2013 Nov 14;503(7475):272-6. doi: 10.1038/nature12599. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

Paneth cells as a site of origin for intestinal inflammation.

Adolph TE(1), Tomczak MF, Niederreiter L, Ko HJ, Böck J, Martinez-Naves E,
Glickman JN, Tschurtschenthaler M, Hartwig J, Hosomi S, Flak MB, Cusick JL, Kohno
K, Iwawaki T, Billmann-Born S, Raine T, Bharti R, Lucius R, Kweon MN, Marciniak
SJ, Choi A, Hagen SJ, Schreiber S, Rosenstiel P, Kaser A, Blumberg RS.

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK [2].

The recognition of autophagy related 16-like 1 (ATG16L1) as a genetic risk factor
has exposed the critical role of autophagy in Crohn's disease. Homozygosity for
the highly prevalent ATG16L1 risk allele, or murine hypomorphic (HM) activity,
causes Paneth cell dysfunction. As Atg16l1(HM) mice do not develop spontaneous
intestinal inflammation, the mechanism(s) by which ATG16L1 contributes to disease
remains obscure. Deletion of the unfolded protein response (UPR) transcription
factor X-box binding protein-1 (Xbp1) in intestinal epithelial cells, the human
orthologue of which harbours rare inflammatory bowel disease risk variants,
results in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, Paneth cell impairment and
spontaneous enteritis. Unresolved ER stress is a common feature of inflammatory
bowel disease epithelium, and several genetic risk factors of Crohn's disease
affect Paneth cells. Here we show that impairment in either UPR (Xbp1(<U+0394>IEC)) or
autophagy function (Atg16l1(<U+0394>IEC) or Atg7(<U+0394>IEC)) in intestinal epithelial cells
results in each other's compensatory engagement, and severe spontaneous
Crohn's-disease-like transmural ileitis if both mechanisms are compromised.
Xbp1(<U+0394>IEC) mice show autophagosome formation in hypomorphic Paneth cells, which
is linked to ER stress via protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase
(PERK), elongation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) and activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4). Ileitis is dependent on commensal microbiota and derives from
increased intestinal epithelial cell death, inositol requiring enzyme 1a
(IRE1a)-regulated NF-<U+03BA>B activation and tumour-necrosis factor signalling, which
are synergistically increased when autophagy is deficient. ATG16L1 restrains
IRE1a activity, and augmentation of autophagy in intestinal epithelial cells
ameliorates ER stress-induced intestinal inflammation and eases NF-<U+03BA>B
overactivation and intestinal epithelial cell death. ER stress, autophagy
induction and spontaneous ileitis emerge from Paneth-cell-specific deletion of
Xbp1. Genetically and environmentally controlled UPR function within Paneth cells
may therefore set the threshold for the development of intestinal inflammation
upon hypomorphic ATG16L1 function and implicate ileal Crohn's disease as a
specific disorder of Paneth cells.

PMCID: PMC3862182
PMID: 24089213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Circ Res. 2013 Nov 8;113(11):1253-64. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.301787. Epub
2013 Sep 30.

Activation of NADPH oxidase 4 in the endoplasmic reticulum promotes cardiomyocyte
autophagy and survival during energy stress through the protein kinase
RNA-activated-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase/eukaryotic initiation factor
2a/activating transcription factor 4 pathway.

Sciarretta S(1), Zhai P, Shao D, Zablocki D, Nagarajan N, Terada LS, Volpe M,
Sadoshima J.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Cardiovascular
Research Institute, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Newark (S.S., P.Z., D.S., 
D.Z., N.N., J.S.); IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli (IS), Italy (S.S., M.V.); Department 
of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas
(L.S.T.); and Department of Clinical/Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine and
Psychology, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy (M.V.).

RATIONALE: Autophagy is an essential survival mechanism during energy stress in
the heart. Oxidative stress is activated by energy stress, but its role in
mediating autophagy is poorly understood. NADPH oxidase (Nox) 4 is an enzyme that
generates reactive oxygen species (ROS) at intracellular membranes. Whether Nox4 
acts as a sensor of energy stress to mediate activation of autophagy is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated whether Nox4 is involved in the regulation of
autophagy and cell survival during energy stress in cardiomyocytes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Production of ROS in cardiomyocytes was increased during
glucose deprivation (GD) in a Nox4-dependent manner. Protein levels and the
ROS-producing activity of Nox4 were increased in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), 
but not in mitochondria, in response to GD. Selective knockdown of Nox4, but not 
Nox2, or selective reduction of ROS in the ER with ER-targeted catalase, but not 
mitochondria-targeted perioxiredoxin 3, abrogated GD-induced autophagy. Nox4
promoted autophagy during GD through activation of the protein kinase
RNA-activated-like ER kinase pathway by suppression of prolyl hydroxylase 4. The 
decrease in cell survival during GD in the presence of Nox4 knockdown was rescued
by reactivation of autophagy by Atg7 overexpression, indicating that the effect
of Nox4 on cell survival is critically mediated through regulation of autophagy. 
Nox4 was activated during fasting and prolonged ischemia in the mouse heart,
where Nox4 is also required for autophagy activation and cardioprotection.
CONCLUSIONS: Nox4 critically mediates autophagy in response to energy stress in
cardiomyocytes by eliciting ROS in the ER and stimulating the protein kinase
RNA-activated-like ER kinase signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3937770
PMID: 24081881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2013;32(3):743-54. doi: 10.1159/000354476. Epub 2013 Sep
13.

ER stress activating ATF4/CHOP-TNF-a signaling pathway contributes to
alcohol-induced disruption of osteogenic lineage of multipotential mesenchymal
stem cell.

Chen Y(1), Gao H, Yin Q, Chen L, Dong P, Zhang X, Kang J.

Author information: 
(1)Southern Medical University, 2010 MD TongHe, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Studies have provided substantial evidence that osteoblasts and 
adipocytes share common progenitor<U+2012>multipotential mesenchymal stem cells in bone 
marrow (BMSCs), and excessive alcohol consumption shifts away from osteogenic to 
adipogenic lineage. However, how exactly alcohol impairs osteogenesis is still
incompletely understood. This study was designed to shed light on this issue.
METHODS: We treated primary BMSCs from human subjects with alcohol for 24 days.
We measured changes of genes related to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress,
adipogenic markers and osteogenic markers using quantitative real-time RT-PCR and
Western blot analysis. We performed Oil red O staining and quantification of
adipogenesis. We also conducted caspase 3 activity assay to assess BMSC
apoptosis.
RESULTS: We showed here that chronic exposure of BMSCs to alcohol induced
adipogenesis and disrupted osteogenesis as indicated by upregulation of
adipogenic markers (PPAR<U+03B3>2 and aP2), downregulation of osteogenic markers
(Osf2/Cbfa1), and accumulation of lipid droplets. Alcohol induced ER stress, as
reflected by increased expression of glucose-regulated proteins GRP78 and GRP94, 
and by increased expression of transcription factors activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4) and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), and enhanced caspase 3
activity. Additionally, ER stress also upregulated tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-a). Simultaneous silencing of ATF4 and CHOP prevented upregulation of TNF-a.
Knockdown of either ATF4 and CHOP or TNF-a by their siRNAs was able to reverse
the ethanol-induced adipogenesis.
CONCLUSION: Our data therefore revealed a role of ER stress and ATF4/CHOP in the 
ethanol-induced inhibition of osteogenesis, and activation of TNF-a signaling by 
ATF4/CHOP linking ER stress to adipogenic lineage in response to alcohol
stimulation. This work should establish a new signaling pathway linking alcohol, 
ER stress, and TNF-a to loss of bone formation: Ethanol <U+2192> ER stress<U+2191><U+2191><U+2191> <U+2192> ATF4 &
CHOP<U+2191><U+2191><U+2191> <U+2192> TNF-a<U+2191><U+2191><U+2191> <U+2192> Osteoblasts<U+2193><U+2193><U+2193>.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24080827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2014 May;19(3):379-88.

Identification of signaling pathways modulated by RHBDD2 in breast cancer cells: 
a link to the unfolded protein response.

Lacunza E, Rabassa ME, Canzoneri R, Pellon-Maison M, Croce MV, Aldaz CM, Abba MC.

Rhomboid domain containing 2 (RHBDD2) was previously observed overexpressed and
amplified in breast cancer samples. In order to identify biological pathways
modulated by RHBDD2, gene expression profiles of RHBDD2 silenced breast cancer
cells were analyzed using whole genome human microarray. Among the statistically 
significant overrepresented biological processes, we found protein
metabolismwith the associated ontological terms folding , ubiquitination, and
proteosomal degradationcell death, cell cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation. In
addition, we performed an in silico analysis searching for RHBDD2 co-expressed
genes in several human tissues. Interestingly, the functional analysis of these
genes showed similar results to those obtained with the microarray data, with
negative regulation of protein metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation as the
most enriched gene ontology terms. These data led us to hypothesize that RHBDD2
might be involved in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response. Thus, we
specifically analyzed the unfolding protein response (UPR) of the ER stress
process. We used a lentivirus-based approach for stable silencing of RHBDD2 mRNA 
in the T47D breast cancer cell line, and we examined the transcriptional
consequences on UPR genes as well as the phenotypic effects on migration and
proliferation processes. By employing dithiothreitol as an UPR inducer, we
observed that cells with silenced RHBDD2 showed increased expression of ATF6,
IRE1, PERK, CRT, BiP, ATF4, and CHOP (p <0.01). We also observed that RHBDD2
silencing inhibited colony formation and decreased cell migration. Based on these
studies, we hypothesize that RHBDD2 overexpression in breast cancer could
represent an adaptive phenotype to the stressful tumor microenvironment by
modulating the ER stress response.

PMCID: PMC3982031
PMID: 24078384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Mol Neurosci. 2014 Feb;52(2):225-30. doi: 10.1007/s12031-013-0126-1. Epub 2013 
Sep 27.

Activating transcription factor 4 modulates BDNF release from microglial cells.

Sun P(1), Li X, Chen C, Chen Q, Ouyang Q, Liu F, Xiang Z, Yuan H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Neuroscience Research Centre, Changzheng
Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, 200003, China.

Pathogenic pain is a common sign of many diseases. The mechanism is unclear.
Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) plays a critical role in cell
activation. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is an important molecule in 
pathogenic pain. This study aims to investigate the role of ATF4 in inducing BDNF
release from microglial cells. In this study, mouse microglial cells were
cultured. The levels of BDNF in the culture medium were determined by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Overexpression of ATF4 in microglial cells was
performed by gene transfection. The apoptosis of microglial cells was assessed by
flow cytometry. The results showed that microglial cells expressed ATF4 and
protease-activated receptor-2 (PAR2). BDNF was detectable in the culture medium
of microglial cells, which was significantly increased in the ATF4-overexpressing
microglial cells. The ATF4-overexpressing microglial cells showed a high
frequency of apoptotic cells, which could be inhibited by exposure to the PAR2
agonist tryptase in the culture. The tryptase-treated ATF4-overexpressing
microglial cells kept higher secretion of BDNF. We conclude that the activation
of ATF4 can increase BDNF release from microglial cells.

PMID: 24072482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(9):e1003701. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003701. Epub 2013 Sep 
12.

Integration of the unfolded protein and oxidative stress responses through
SKN-1/Nrf.

Glover-Cutter KM(1), Lin S, Blackwell TK.

Author information: 
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, and Harvard Medical
School Department of Genetics, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2013;9(9):e1003827.

The Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) maintains homeostasis in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) and defends against ER stress, an underlying factor in various
human diseases. During the UPR, numerous genes are activated that sustain and
protect the ER. These responses are known to involve the canonical UPR
transcription factors XBP1, ATF4, and ATF6. Here, we show in C. elegans that the 
conserved stress defense factor SKN-1/Nrf plays a central and essential role in
the transcriptional UPR. While SKN-1/Nrf has a well-established function in
protection against oxidative and xenobiotic stress, we find that it also
mobilizes an overlapping but distinct response to ER stress. SKN-1/Nrf is
regulated by the UPR, directly controls UPR signaling and transcription factor
genes, binds to common downstream targets with XBP-1 and ATF-6, and is present at
the ER. SKN-1/Nrf is also essential for resistance to ER stress, including
reductive stress. Remarkably, SKN-1/Nrf-mediated responses to oxidative stress
depend upon signaling from the ER. We conclude that SKN-1/Nrf plays a critical
role in the UPR, but orchestrates a distinct oxidative stress response that is
licensed by ER signaling. Regulatory integration through SKN-1/Nrf may coordinate
ER and cytoplasmic homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3772064
PMID: 24068940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Arch Toxicol. 2014 Feb;88(2):403-14. doi: 10.1007/s00204-013-1129-y. Epub 2013
Sep 22.

PI3K signaling mediates diverse regulation of ATF4 expression for the survival of
HK-2 cells exposed to cadmium.

Fujiki K(1), Inamura H, Matsuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene and Public Health I, Tokyo Women's Medical University,
Tokyo, 162-8666, Japan.

Cadmium exposure causes endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and accumulation of
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), an ER stress marker. To elucidate the
role of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) signaling in this process, we
examined the effects of PI3K signaling on cadmium chloride (CdCl2)
exposure-induced ATF4 expression in HK-2 human renal proximal tubular cells. ATF4
knockdown by siRNA enhanced CdCl2-induced cellular damage, indicating a
cytoprotective function of ATF4. Treatment with LY294002, a PI3K inhibitor,
suppressed CdCl2-induced ATF4 expression and Akt phosphorylation at Thr308 with
little effect on phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2
subunit a at Ser51. Activation of PI3K signaling with epidermal growth factor
treatment enhanced CdCl2-induced Akt phosphorylation and ATF4 expression.
Suppression of CdCl2-induced ATF4 expression by LY294002 treatment was markedly
blocked by cycloheximide, a translation inhibitor, but not by MG-132, a
proteasome inhibitor, or actinomycin D, a transcription inhibitor. CdCl2 exposure
also induced phosphorylation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) at Ser2448, 
glycogen synthase kinase-3a (GSK-3a) at Ser21, GSK-3ß at Ser9, and 90 kDa
ribosomal S6 kinase 2 (RSK2) at Ser227 in HK-2 cells. Treatment with rapamycin,
an mTOR inhibitor, MK2206, an Akt inhibitor, and BI-D1870, a RSK inhibitor,
partially suppressed CdCl2-induced ATF4 expression. Conversely, SB216763, a GSK-3
inhibitor, markedly inhibited the potency of LY294002 to suppress CdCl2-induced
ATF4 expression. These results suggest that PI3K signaling diversely regulates
the expression of ATF4 in a translation-dependent manner via downstream
molecules, including mTOR, GSK-3a/ß, and RSK2, and plays a role in protecting
HK-2 cells from cadmium-induced damage.

PMID: 24057571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Aquat Toxicol. 2013 Oct 15;142-143:221-9. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2013.08.017.
Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Exposure to tributyltin induces endoplasmic reticulum stress and the unfolded
protein response in zebrafish.

Komoike Y(1), Matsuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene and Public Health I, School of Medicine, Tokyo Women's
Medical University, 8-1 Kawadacho, Shinjuku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan. Electronic
address: komoike@research.twmu.ac.jp.

Tributyltin (TBT) is a major marine contaminant and causes endocrine disruption, 
hepatotoxicity, immunotoxicity, and neurotoxicity. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying the toxicity of TBT have not been fully elucidated. We
examined whether exposure to TBT induces the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
response in zebrafish, a model organism. Zebrafish-derived BRF41 fibroblast cells
were exposed to 0.5 or 1 µM TBT for 0.5-16 h and subsequently lysed and
immunoblotted to detect ER stress-related proteins. Zebrafish embryos, grown
until 32 h post fertilization (hpf), were exposed to 1 µM TBT for 16 h and used
in whole mount in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry to visualize the
expression of ER chaperones and an ER stress-related apoptosis factor. Exposure
of the BRF41 cells to TBT caused phosphorylation of the zebrafish homolog of
protein kinase RNA-activated-like ER kinase (PERK), eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 2 alpha (eIF2a), and inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1),
characteristic splicing of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA, and enhanced
expression of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) protein. In TBT-exposed
zebrafish embryos, ectopic expression of the gene encoding zebrafish homolog of
the 78 kDa glucose-regulating protein (GRP78) and gene encoding
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) was detected in the
precursors of the neuromast, which is a sensory organ for detecting water flow
and vibration. Our in vitro and in vivo studies revealed that exposure of
zebrafish to TBT induces the ER stress response via activation of both the
PERK-eIF2a and IRE1-XBP1 pathways of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in an
organ-specific manner.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24055755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Oct 2;105(19):1427-8. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt252. Epub
2013 Sep 19.

Metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer hungers for leucine.

Tee AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Affiliation of author: Institute of Cancer and Genetics, Cardiff University,
Wales, United Kingdom.

Comment on
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Oct 2;105(19):1463-73.

PMID: 24052625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Oct 2;105(19):1463-73. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt241. Epub
2013 Sep 19.

Targeting amino acid transport in metastatic castration-resistant prostate
cancer: effects on cell cycle, cell growth, and tumor development.

Wang Q(1), Tiffen J, Bailey CG, Lehman ML, Ritchie W, Fazli L, Metierre C, Feng
YJ, Li E, Gleave M, Buchanan G, Nelson CC, Rasko JE, Holst J.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliations of authors: Origins of Cancer Laboratory (QW, JT, JH) and Gene & 
Stem Cell Therapy Program (QW, JT, CGB, WR, CM, YF, JEJR, JH), Centenary
Institute, Camperdown, Australia; Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney,
Sydney, Australia (QW, JT, CGB, WR, CM, YF, JEJR, JH); Vancouver Prostate Centre,
Department of Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada (MLL, LF, EL, MG, CCN); Cancer Biology Group, Basil Hetzel Institute for
Translational Health Research, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia (GB); 
Australian Prostate Cancer Research Centre-Queensland, Queensland University of
Technology, Brisbane, Australia (CCN, MLL); Cell and Molecular Therapies, Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, Australia (JEJR).

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Oct 2;105(19):1427-8.

BACKGROUND: L-type amino acid transporters (LATs) uptake neutral amino acids
including L-leucine into cells, stimulating mammalian target of rapamycin complex
1 signaling and protein synthesis. LAT1 and LAT3 are overexpressed at different
stages of prostate cancer, and they are responsible for increasing nutrients and 
stimulating cell growth.
METHODS: We examined LAT3 protein expression in human prostate cancer tissue
microarrays. LAT function was inhibited using a leucine analog (BCH) in
androgen-dependent and -independent environments, with gene expression analyzed
by microarray. A PC-3 xenograft mouse model was used to study the effects of
inhibiting LAT1 and LAT3 expression. Results were analyzed with the Mann-Whitney 
U or Fisher exact tests. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: LAT3 protein was expressed at all stages of prostate cancer, with a
statistically significant decrease in expression after 4-7 months of neoadjuvant 
hormone therapy (4-7 month mean = 1.571; 95% confidence interval = 1.155 to 1.987
vs 0 month = 2.098; 95% confidence interval = 1.962 to 2.235; P = .0187).
Inhibition of LAT function led to activating transcription factor 4-mediated
upregulation of amino acid transporters including ASCT1, ASCT2, and 4F2hc, all of
which were also regulated via the androgen receptor. LAT inhibition suppressed
M-phase cell cycle genes regulated by E2F family transcription factors including 
critical castration-resistant prostate cancer regulatory genes UBE2C, CDC20, and 
CDK1. In silico analysis of BCH-downregulated genes showed that 90.9% are
statistically significantly upregulated in metastatic castration-resistant
prostate cancer. Finally, LAT1 or LAT3 knockdown in xenografts inhibited tumor
growth, cell cycle progression, and spontaneous metastasis in vivo.
CONCLUSION: Inhibition of LAT transporters may provide a novel therapeutic target
in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer, via suppression of mammalian 
target of rapamycin complex 1 activity and M-phase cell cycle genes.

PMID: 24052624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Oct 11;440(1):76-81. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.09.026. Epub 2013 Sep 13.

Metformin-induced inhibition of the mitochondrial respiratory chain increases
FGF21 expression via ATF4 activation.

Kim KH(1), Jeong YT, Kim SH, Jung HS, Park KS, Lee HY, Lee MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, 50 Irwon-dong Gangnam-gu, Seoul 135-710, South Korea; Samsung
Advanced Institute for Health Sciences and Technology, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, 50 Irwon-dong Gangnam-gu, Seoul 135-710, South Korea.

Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) is an endocrine hormone that exhibits
anti-obesity and anti-diabetes effects. Because metformin is widely used as a
glucose-lowering agent in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D), we investigated
whether metformin modulates FGF21 expression in cell lines, and in mice or human 
subjects. We found that metformin increased the expression and release of FGF21
in a diverse set of cell types, including rat hepatoma FaO, primary mouse
hepatocytes, and mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). Intriguingly, AMP-activated 
protein kinase (AMPK) was dispensable for the induction of FGF21 by metformin.
Mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor a (PPARa), which are additional targets of
metformin, were not involved in metformin-induced FGF21 expression. Importantly, 
inhibition of mitochondrial complex I activity by metformin resulted in FGF21
induction through PKR-like ER kinase (PERK)-eukaryotic translation factor 2a
(eIF2a)-activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). We showed that metformin
activated ATF4 and increased FGF21 expression in the livers of mice, which led to
increased serum levels of FGF21. We also found that serum FGF21 level was
increased in human subjects with T2D after metformin therapy for 6 months. In
conclusion, our results indicate that metformin induced expression of FGF21
through an ATF4-dependent mechanism by inhibiting mitochondrial respiration
independently of AMPK. Therefore, FGF21 induction by metformin might explain a
portion of the beneficial metabolic effects of metformin.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24041694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cytotechnology. 2013 Dec;65(6):993-1002. doi: 10.1007/s10616-013-9631-x. Epub
2013 Sep 13.

Improved antibody production in Chinese hamster ovary cells by ATF4
overexpression.

Haredy AM(1), Nishizawa A, Honda K, Ohya T, Ohtake H, Omasa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University,
Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

To improve antibody production in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, the
humanized antibody-producing CHO DP-12-SF cell line was transfected with the gene
encoding activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a central factor in the
unfolded protein response. Overexpression of ATF4 significantly enhanced the
production of antibody in the CHO DP-12-SF cell line. The specific IgG production
rate of in the ATF4-overexpressing CHO-ATF4-16 cells was approximately 2.4 times 
that of the parental host cell line. Clone CHO-ATF4-16 did not show any change in
growth rate compared with the parental cells or mock-transfected CHO-DP12-SF
cells. The expression levels of mRNAs encoding both the antibody heavy and light 
chains in the CHO-ATF4-16 clone were analyzed. This analysis showed that ATF4
overexpression improved the total production and specific production rate of
antibody without affecting the mRNA transcription level. These results indicate
that ATF4 overexpression is a promising method for improving recombinant IgG
production in CHO cells.

PMCID: PMC3853642
PMID: 24026344  [PubMed]


6. Exp Eye Res. 2013 Nov;116:177-84. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2013.08.021. Epub 2013 Sep 
7.

Retinal pigment epithelium cells produce VEGF in response to oxidized
phospholipids through mechanisms involving ATF4 and protein kinase CK2.

Pollreisz A(1), Afonyushkin T, Oskolkova OV, Gruber F, Bochkov VN,
Schmidt-Erfurth U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Optometry, Medical University Vienna,
Waehringer Guertel 18-20, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

Oxidized phospholipids (OxPLs) are pleiotropic lipid mediators known to induce
proangiogenic and proinflammatory cellular effects that are increasingly
recognized to be involved in a number of physiologic and pathologic processes in 
the retina. Immunohistochemical studies have detected OxPLs in retinal
structures, such as retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) or photoreceptor cells. This
study analyzed whether OxPLs could play a role in upregulation of VEGF, which is 
a cause of pathological neovascularization characteristic of eye diseases such as
age-related macular degeneration. We confirmed accumulation of OxPLs in the eye
using reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. Multiple
species of oxidized phosphatidylcholines (OxPCs) were detected in human vitreous,
including biologically active fragmented species POVPC, PGPC, PONPC and PAzPC. In
in vitro experiments human fetal RPE and primary RPE cells were stimulated with
OxPLs. Primary RPE cells were transfected with small interfering RNAs targeting
ATF4. mRNA levels of VEGF in fetal and primary RPE cells were determined by
real-time quantitative PCR. VEGF protein concentrations were measured in culture 
medium by ELISA. We found that OxPCs and other classes of OxPLs upregulated the
expression of VEGF in fetal and primary RPE cells, which critically depended on
ATF4. In addition, upregulation of VEGF in primary RPE cells was blocked by a
chemical inhibitor of protein kinase CK2 known to suppress induction of ATF4 and 
VEGF by OxPLs. Our data show that different species of OxPLs, which are present
in the human eye are capable of stimulating expression of VEGF in fetal and
primary RPE cells via ATF4-dependent mechanisms.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24021586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cell Signal. 2013 Dec;25(12):2709-16. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.08.038. Epub
2013 Sep 7.

Regulated in DNA damage and development 1 (REDD1) promotes cell survival during
serum deprivation by sustaining repression of signaling through the mechanistic
target of rapamycin in complex 1 (mTORC1).

Dennis MD(1), McGhee NK, Jefferson LS, Kimball SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, The Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA.

Regulated in DNA damage and development 1 (REDD1) functions to repress signaling 
through the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) protein kinase in complex 1
(mTORC1) in response to diverse stress conditions. In the present study, we
investigated the role of REDD1 in the response of cells to growth cessation
induced by serum deprivation. REDD1 expression was induced within 2h of depriving
cells of serum, with the induction being mediated through ER stress, as evidenced
by activation of PERK, enhanced eIF2a phosphorylation, and ATF4 facilitated
transcription of the REDD1 gene. In wild-type cells, signaling through mTORC1 was
rapidly (within 30min) repressed in response to serum deprivation and the
repression was sustained for at least 10h. In contrast, in REDD1 knockout cells
mTORC1 signaling recovered toward the end of the 10h-deprivation period.
Interestingly, Akt phosphorylation initially declined in response to serum
deprivation and then recovered between 2 and 4h in wild-type but not REDD1
knockout cells. The recovery of mTORC1 signaling and the failure of Akt
phosphorylation to do so in the REDD1 knockout cells were accompanied by a
dramatic increase in caspase-3 cleavage and cell death, both of which were
blocked by rapamycin. Furthermore, overexpression of constitutively active Akt
rescued REDD1 knockout cells from serum deprivation induced cell death. Overall, 
the results implicate REDD1 as a key regulatory checkpoint that coordinates
growth signaling inputs to activate pro-survival mechanisms and reduce
susceptibility to cell death.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC3867791
PMID: 24018049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. FASEB J. 2013 Dec;27(12):5122-30. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-234104. Epub 2013 Sep 5.

Losartan, an angiotensin II type 1 receptor blocker, protects human islets from
glucotoxicity through the phospholipase C pathway.

Madec AM(1), Cassel R, Dubois S, Ducreux S, Vial G, Chauvin MA, Mesnier A, Chikh 
K, Bosco D, Rieusset J, Van Coppenolle F, Thivolet C.

Author information: 
(1)2INSERM U1060/University Lyon 1/Inra 1235, Lyon-Sud Medicine, Faculty, 165
Chemin du Grand Revoyet-BP 12, 69921 Oullins Cedex, France.
anne-marie.coquelet-madec@univ-lyon1.fr.

As shown in a large clinical prospective trial, inhibition of the
renin-angiotensin system (RAS) can delay the onset of type 2 diabetes in
high-risk individuals. We evaluated the beneficial effects of RAS inhibition on
ß-cell function under glucotoxic conditions. Human islets from 13 donors were
cultured in 5.5 mM (controls) or 16.7 mM glucose [high glucose (HG)] for 4 d with
or without losartan (5 µM), a selective AT1R blocker, and/or U73122 (2 µM), a
selective PLC inhibitor, during the last 2 d. HG induced RAS activation with
overexpression of AT1R (P<0.05) and angiotensinogen (P<0.001) mRNAs. HG increased
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress markers (P<0.001) such as GRP78, sXBP1, and
ATF4 mRNAs and Grp78 protein levels (P<0.01). HG also decreased reticular calcium
concentration (P<0.0001) and modified protein expressions of ER calcium pumps
with reduction of SERCA2b (P<0.01) and increase of IP3R2 (P<0.05). Losartan
prevented these deleterious effects and was associated with improved insulin
secretion despite HG exposure. AT1R activation triggers the PLC-IP3-calcium
pathway. Losartan prevented the increase of PLC ß1 and <U+03B3>1 protein levels induced 
by HG (P<0.05). U73122 reproduced all the protective effects of losartan. AT1R
blockade protects human islets from the deleterious effects of glucose through
inhibition of the PLC-IP3-calcium pathway.

PMID: 24008754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Am Heart Assoc. 2013 Sep 5;2(5):e000238. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000238.

PERK-eIF2a-ATF4-CHOP signaling contributes to TNFa-induced vascular
calcification.

Masuda M(1), Miyazaki-Anzai S, Levi M, Ting TC, Miyazaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, University of Colorado Denver,
Aurora, CO.

Comment in
    J Am Heart Assoc. 2013 Oct;2(5):e000481.

BACKGROUND: Vascular calcification is a common feature in patients with chronic
kidney disease (CKD). CKD increases serum levels of tumor necrosis factor-a
(TNFa), a critical mediator of vascular calcification. However, the molecular
mechanism by which TNFa promotes CKD-dependent vascular calcification remains
obscure. The purpose of the present study was to investigate whether TNFa-induced
vascular calcification in CKD is caused by the endoplasmic reticulum response
involving protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK), eukaryotic
initiation factor 2a (eIF2a), activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), and C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We examined the effects of TNFa on the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress response of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). TNFa treatment
drastically induced the PERK-eIF2a-ATF4-CHOP axis of the ER stress response in
VSMCs. PERK, ATF4, and CHOP shRNA-mediated knockdowns drastically inhibited
mineralization and osteogenesis of VSMCs induced by TNFa. CKD induced by 5/6
nephrectomies activated the PERK-eIF2a-ATF4-CHOP axis of the ER stress response
in the aortas of ApoE-/- mice with increased aortic TNFa expression and vascular 
calcification. Treatment of 5/6 nephrectomized ApoE-/- mice with the TNFa
neutralizing antibody or chemical Chaperones reduced aortic PERK-eIF2a-ATF4-CHOP 
signaling of the ER stress increased by CKD. This resulted in the inhibition of
CKD-dependent vascular calcification.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that TNFa induces the PERK-eIF2a-ATF4-CHOP
axis of the ER stress response, leading to CKD-dependent vascular calcification.

PMCID: PMC3835225
PMID: 24008080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2013 Oct;238(10):1136-46. doi: 10.1177/1535370213502619. 
Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Intermedin1-53 attenuates vascular smooth muscle cell calcification by inhibiting
endoplasmic reticulum stress via cyclic adenosine monophosphate/protein kinase A 
pathway.

Chang JR(1), Duan XH, Zhang BH, Teng X, Zhou YB, Liu Y, Yu YR, Zhu Y, Tang CS, Qi
YF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Science,
Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China.

We previously reported that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-mediated apoptosis 
participated in vascular calcification. Importantly, a novel paracrine/autocrine 
peptide intermedin1-53 (IMD1-53) in the vasculature inhibited vascular
calcification in rats. But the mechanisms needed to be fully elucidated. Vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) calcification was induced by CaCl2 and
ß-glycerophosphate. Tunicamycin (Tm) or dithiothreitol (DTT) was used to induce
ER stress. We found that IMD1-53 (10(-7)mol/L) treatment significantly alleviated
the protein expression of ER stress hallmarks activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4), ATF6, glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) and GRP94 induced by Tm or
DTT. ER stress occurred in early and late calcification of VSMCs but was
inhibited by IMD1-53. These inhibitory effects of IMD1-53 were abolished by
treatment with the protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor H89. Pretreatment with
IMD1-53 decreased the number of apoptotic VSMCs and downregulated protein
expression of cleaved caspase 12 and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) in calcified
VSMCs. Concurrently, IMD1-53 restored the loss of VSMC lineage markers and
ameliorated calcium deposition and alkaline phosphatase activity in calcified
VSMCs as well. The observation was further verified by Alizarin Red S staining,
which showed that IMD1-53 reduced positive red nodules among calcified VSMCs. In 
conclusion, IMD1-53 attenuated VSMC calcification by inhibiting ER stress through
cAMP/PKA signalling.

PMID: 24006303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 18;288(42):30399-410. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.469973. Epub
2013 Sep 4.

Critical role of AKT protein in myeloma-induced osteoclast formation and
osteolysis.

Cao H(1), Zhu K, Qiu L, Li S, Niu H, Hao M, Yang S, Zhao Z, Lai Y, Anderson JL,
Fan J, Im HJ, Chen D, Roodman GD, Xiao G.

Author information: 
(1)From the College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

Abnormal osteoclast formation and osteolysis are the hallmarks of multiple
myeloma (MM) bone disease, yet the underlying molecular mechanisms are
incompletely understood. Here, we show that the AKT pathway was up-regulated in
primary bone marrow monocytes (BMM) from patients with MM, which resulted in
sustained high expression of the receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B (RANK) in osteoclast
precursors. The up-regulation of RANK expression and osteoclast formation in the 
MM BMM cultures was blocked by AKT inhibition. Conditioned media from MM cell
cultures activated AKT and increased RANK expression and osteoclast formation in 
BMM cultures. Inhibiting AKT in cultured MM cells decreased their growth and
ability to promote osteoclast formation. Of clinical significance, systemic
administration of the AKT inhibitor LY294002 blocked the formation of tumor
tissues in the bone marrow cavity and essentially abolished the MM-induced
osteoclast formation and osteolysis in SCID mice. The level of activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) protein was up-regulated in the BMM cultures from
multiple myeloma patients. Adenoviral overexpression of ATF4 activated RANK
expression in osteoclast precursors. These results demonstrate a new role of AKT 
in the MM promotion of osteoclast formation and bone osteolysis through, at least
in part, the ATF4-dependent up-regulation of RANK expression in osteoclast
precursors.

PMCID: PMC3798504
PMID: 24005670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Diabetes. 2014 Jan;63(1):152-61. doi: 10.2337/db13-0757. Epub 2013 Aug 29.

Activating transcription factor 4 links metabolic stress to interleukin-6
expression in macrophages.

Iwasaki Y(1), Suganami T, Hachiya R, Shirakawa I, Kim-Saijo M, Tanaka M,
Hamaguchi M, Takai-Igarashi T, Nakai M, Miyamoto Y, Ogawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology and Metabolism, Graduate School of
Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2014 Jan;63(1):48-9.

Chronic inflammation is a molecular element of the metabolic syndrome and type 2 
diabetes. Saturated fatty acids (SFAs) are considered to be an important
proinflammatory factor. However, it is still incompletely understood how SFAs
induce proinflammatory cytokine expression. Hereby we report that activating
transcription factor (ATF) 4, a transcription factor that is induced downstream
of metabolic stresses including endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, plays critical
roles in SFA-induced interleukin-6 (Il6) expression. DNA microarray analysis
using primary macrophages revealed that the ATF4 pathway is activated by SFAs.
Haploinsufficiency and short hairpin RNA-based knockdown of ATF4 in macrophages
markedly inhibited SFA- and metabolic stress-induced Il6 expression. Conversely, 
pharmacological activation of the ATF4 pathway and overexpression of ATF4
resulted in enhanced Il6 expression. Moreover, ATF4 acts in synergy with the
Toll-like receptor-4 signaling pathway, which is known to be activated by SFAs.
At a molecular level, we found that ATF4 exerts its proinflammatory effects
through at least two different mechanisms: ATF4 is involved in SFA-induced
nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B activation; and ATF4 directly activates the Il6 promoter. These
findings provide evidence suggesting that ATF4 links metabolic stress and Il6
expression in macrophages.

PMID: 23990363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2013 Nov;33(8):1087-98. doi: 10.1007/s10571-013-9975-y. Epub 
2013 Aug 25.

Short-term cuprizone feeding induces selective amino acid deprivation with
concomitant activation of an integrated stress response in oligodendrocytes.

Goldberg J(1), Daniel M, van Heuvel Y, Victor M, Beyer C, Clarner T, Kipp M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Neuroanatomy, RWTH Aachen University,
Wendlingweg 2, 52074, Aachen, Germany.

Cuprizone [bis(cyclohexylidenehydrazide)]-induced toxic demyelination is an
experimental approach frequently used to study de- and re-myelination in the
central nervous system. In this model, mice are fed with the copper chelator
cuprizone which leads to oligodendrocyte apoptosis and subsequent microgliosis,
astrocytosis, and demyelination. The underlying mechanisms of cuprizone-induced
oligodendrocyte death are still unknown. We analysed differences in amino acid
levels after short-term cuprizone exposure (i.e., 4 days). Furthermore, an amino 
acid response (AAR) pathway activated in oligodendrocytes after cuprizone
intoxication was evaluated. Short-term cuprizone exposure resulted in a selective
decrease of alanine, glycine, and proline plasma levels, which was paralleled by 
an increase of apoptotic cells in the liver and a decrease of alanine
aminotransferase in the serum. These parameters were paralleled by
oligodendrocyte apoptosis and the induction of an AAR with increased expression
of the transcription factors ATF-3 and ATF-4 (activating transcription factor-3
and -4). Immunohistochemistry revealed that ATF-3 is exclusively expressed by
oligodendrocytes and localized to the nuclear compartment. Our results suggest
that cuprizone-induced liver dysfunction results in amino acid starvation and in 
consequence to the activation of an AAR. We propose that this stress response
modulates oligodendrocyte viability in the cuprizone animal model.

PMID: 23979168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 15;8(8):e71082. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071082. eCollection
2013.

Phenyl acyl acids attenuate the unfolded protein response in tunicamycin-treated 
neuroblastoma cells.

Zamarbide M(1), Martinez-Pinilla E, Ricobaraza A, Aragón T, Franco R,
Pérez-Mediavilla A.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Neuropharmacology Laboratory, Neurosciences Division,
Center for Applied Medical Research - CIMA, University of Navarra, Pamplona,
Spain.

Understanding how neural cells handle proteostasis stress in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) is important to decipher the mechanisms that underlie the cell
death associated with neurodegenerative diseases and to design appropriate
therapeutic tools. Here we have compared the sensitivity of a human neuroblastoma
cell line (SH-SY5H) to the ER stress caused by an inhibitor of protein
glycosylation with that observed in human embryonic kidney (HEK-293T) cells. In
response to stress, SH-SY5H cells increase the expression of mRNA encoding
downstream effectors of ER stress sensors and transcription factors related to
the unfolded protein response (the spliced X-box binding protein 1,
CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein homologous protein, endoplasmic
reticulum-localized DnaJ homologue 4 and asparagine synthetase).
Tunicamycin-induced death of SH-SY5H cells was prevented by terminal aromatic
substituted butyric or valeric acids, in association with a decrease in the mRNA 
expression of stress-related factors, and in the accumulation of the ATF4
protein. Interestingly, this decrease in ATF4 protein occurs without modifying
the phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor eIF2a. Together, these
results show that when short chain phenyl acyl acids alleviate ER stress in
SH-SY5H cells their survival is enhanced.

PMCID: PMC3744558
PMID: 23976981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jan;35(1):765-71. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1104-5. Epub 2013 Aug
23.

Expression of a phosphorylated form of ATF4 in lung and non-small cell lung
cancer tissues.

Fan CF(1), Miao Y, Lin XY, Zhang D, Wang EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital and College of Basic
Medical Sciences of China Medical University, 110001, Shenyang, China,
fancf_cmu@163.com.

ATF4 is a member of the cAMP-responsive element-binding protein family of basic
zipper-containing proteins, a family of transcription factors phosphorylated at
serines residues by protein kinase A. The family has been proved to be able to
stimulate the transcription of the genes containing CRE elements. Elevated ATF4
expression was detected in some tumors including breast carcinoma compared to
their corresponding nontumor tissues. p-ATF4 (ser 245), a phosphorylated form of 
ATF4 protein at serine 245 site, was believed to be an active type of this
protein. However, its expression and clinical significance in malignant tumors
including non-small cell lung cancer were not reported up to date. In the current
study, we investigate the expression of p-ATF4 (ser 245) in non-small cell lung
cancer using tissue microarray and immunohistochemistry. p-ATF4 (ser 245)
immunostaining was detected in nucleus and cytoplasm in cancer cells and normal
lung epithelial cells. Compared to bronchial epithelium and submucosal glands
(total positive rate, 14.6% (12/82)), there was increased expression of p-ATF4
(ser 245) in non-small cell lung cancer cells (total positive rate, 42.7%
(35/82)) (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). In addition, increased expression of p-ATF4 (ser 245) was
associated with lymph node metastasis and advanced TNM stages (III and IV) in
non-small cell lung cancer (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Immunofluorescent staining confirmed
nuclear and cytoplasmic expression of p-ATF4 (ser 245) in lung and cancer
tissues, and also in non-small cell lung cancer cell lines including NCI-H157 and
LTE cells. These results indicate that increased expression of p-ATF4 (ser 245)
may contribute to cancer development of non-small cell lung cancer and may be a
potential cancer marker.

PMID: 23975372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Molecules. 2013 Aug 22;18(9):10146-61. doi: 10.3390/molecules180910146.

Sinulariolide induced hepatocellular carcinoma apoptosis through activation of
mitochondrial-related apoptotic and PERK/eIF2a/ATF4/CHOP pathway.

Chen YJ(1), Su JH, Tsao CY, Hung CT, Chao HH, Lin JJ, Liao MH, Yang ZY, Huang HH,
Tsai FJ, Weng SH, Wu YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital, Kaohsiung 80761, Taiwan. wyr924@ms24.hinet.net.

Sinulariolide, an active compound isolated from the cultured soft coral Sinularia
flexibilis, has potent anti-microbial and anti-tumorigenesis effects towards
melanoma and bladder cancer cells. In this study, we investigated the effects of 
sinulariolide on hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell growth and protein
expression. Sinulariolide suppressed the proliferation and colony formation of
HCC HA22T cells in a dose-dependent manner and induced both early and late
apoptosis according to flow cytometry, Annexin V/PI stain and TUNEL/DAPI stain
analyses. A mechanistic analysis demonstrated that sinulariolide-induced
apoptosis was activated through a mitochondria-related pathway, showing
up-regulation of Bax, Bad and AIF, and down- regulation of Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, MCl-1
and p-Bad. Sinulariolide treatment led to loss of the mitochondrial membrane
potential, release of mitochondrial cytochrome c to the cytosol, and activation
of both caspase-9 and caspase-3. Sinulariolide-induced apoptosis was
significantly blocked by the caspase inhibitors Z-VAD-FMK and Z-DEVD-FMK. The
increased expression of cleaved PARP also suggested that caspase-independent
apoptotic pathway was involved. In the western blotting; the elevation of ER
chaperones GRP78; GRP94; and CALR; as well as up-regulations of
PERK/eIF2a/ATF4/CHOP; and diminished cell death with pre-treatment of eIF2a
phosphatase inhibitor; salubrinal; implicated the involvement of ER
stress-mediated PERK/eIF2a/ATF4/CHOP apoptotic pathway following sinulariolide
treatment in hepatoma cells. The current study suggested sinulariolide-induced
hepatoma cell cytotoxicity involved multiple apoptotic signal pathways. This may 
implicate that sinulariolide is a potential compound for the treatment of
hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMID: 23973991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Nov 1;272(3):879-87. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2013.08.004. Epub 2013 Aug 14.

Unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling regulates arsenic trioxide-mediated
macrophage innate immune function disruption.

Srivastava RK(1), Li C, Chaudhary SC, Ballestas ME, Elmets CA, Robbins DJ,
Matalon S, Deshane JS, Afaq F, Bickers DR, Athar M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Skin Diseases Research Center, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.

Arsenic exposure is known to disrupt innate immune functions in humans and in
experimental animals. In this study, we provide a mechanism by which arsenic
trioxide (ATO) disrupts macrophage functions. ATO treatment of murine macrophage 
cells diminished internalization of FITC-labeled latex beads, impaired clearance 
of phagocytosed fluorescent bacteria and reduced secretion of pro-inflammatory
cytokines. These impairments in macrophage functions are associated with
ATO-induced unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling pathway characterized by
the enhancement in proteins such as GRP78, p-PERK, p-eIF2a, ATF4 and CHOP. The
expression of these proteins is altered both at transcriptional and translational
levels. Pretreatment with chemical chaperon, 4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA)
attenuated the ATO-induced activation in UPR signaling and afforded protection
against ATO-induced disruption of macrophage functions. This treatment also
reduced ATO-mediated reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation. Interestingly,
treatment with antioxidant N-acetylcysteine (NAC) prior to ATO exposure, not only
reduced ROS production and UPR signaling but also improved macrophage functions. 
These data demonstrate that UPR signaling and ROS generation are interdependent
and are involved in the arsenic-induced pathobiology of macrophage. These data
also provide a novel strategy to block the ATO-dependent impairment in innate
immune responses.

© 2013.

PMID: 23954561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Drug Target. 2013 Nov;21(9):830-6. doi: 10.3109/1061186X.2013.829073. Epub 2013
Aug 19.

Post-translational regulation of gene expression using the ATF4 oxygen-dependent 
degradation domain for hypoxia-specific gene therapy.

Cho SH(1), Oh B, Kim HA, Park JH, Lee M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, College of Engineering, Hanyang University ,
Seoul , Korea and.

Solid tumors have hypoxic regions in their cores, due to low blood supply levels.
Therefore, hypoxia-specific gene regulation systems have been developed for
tumor-specific gene therapy. In this study, the oxygen-dependent degradation
(ODD) domain on activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4) was evaluated for
post-translational regulation of proteins. The ATF4 ODD cDNA was amplified by
RT-PCR, and a luciferase plasmid containing the ATF4 ODD domain,
pSV-Luc-ATF4-ODD, was constructed. Luciferase expression was induced under
hypoxia by the ATF4 ODD domain in transfection assays into N2A neuroblastoma
cells, C6 glioblastoma cells, and U87 glioblastoma cells. In the transfection
assay with pSV-Luc-ATF4-ODD, RT-PCR results showed that the mRNA level did not
change under hypoxia. This suggests that the induction of luciferase under
hypoxia was mediated by post-translational regulation. A plasmid expressing
thymidine kinase from herpes simplex virus (HSV-tk), pSV-HSVtk-ATF4-ODD, was
constructed with the ATF4 ODD cDNA. The transfection assay with pSV-TK-ATF4-ODD
showed that the ATF4 ODD domain induced HSV-tk expression under hypoxia and
facilitated the death of C6 cells in the presence of ganciclovir (GCV).
Furthermore, pSV-HSVtk-ATF4-ODD induced caspase-3 activity in the hypoxic cells. 
In conclusion, the ATF4 ODD may be useful for hypoxia-specific gene therapy by
post-translational regulation of gene expression.

PMID: 23952904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Toxicol Lett. 2013 Oct 9;222(3):239-46. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2013.08.001. Epub
2013 Aug 12.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress signaling involvement in manganese-induced nerve
cell damage in organotypic brain slice cultures.

Xu B(1), Shan M, Wang F, Deng Y, Liu W, Feng S, Yang TY, Xu ZF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, School of Public Health, China Medical
University, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
xubin@mail.cmu.edu.cn.

Overexposure to manganese (Mn) has been known to induce neuronal damage. However,
the mechanisms underlying the neurotoxicity of Mn are still incompletely
understood but seem to involve endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. The current
study investigated whether ER stress signaling was involved in Mn-induced
neurotoxicity in organotypic brain slices. After the brain slices were
respectively exposed to 400µM Mn for 0, 6, 12, 18, 24h, there was a
time-dependent increase in apoptotic cell death in slices and levels of lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) in the culture medium. Moreover, Mn was found to upregulate
GRP78/94, CHOP and caspase-12 expression. Furthermore, PERK phosphorylation,
PERK-mediated phosphorylation of eIF2a and ATF4 mRNA expression increased. IRE1
activation and Xbp1 mRNA splicing also increased. However, ATF6 p90 levels did
not change. The findings clearly demonstrated that Mn induced the ER stress via
activation of PERK and IRE1 signaling pathway, which contributed to the
occurrence of apoptosis in cultured slices.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23948121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Sep 3;54(9):5995-6002. doi:
10.1167/iovs.13-12117.

Modulation of angiogenesis by genetic manipulation of ATF4 in mouse model of
oxygen-induced retinopathy [corrected].

Wang X(1), Wang G, Kunte M, Shinde V, Gorbatyuk M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of North Texas Health
Science Center, North Texas Eye Research Institute, Fort Worth, Texas, USA.

Erratum in
    Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Mar;55(3):1310.

PURPOSE: The activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) and an increase in
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) has been previously reported in the
diabetic retina. Despite this, a direct link between ATF4 and the degree of
proliferative retinopathy has not been demonstrated to date. Therefore, the
objective of this study was to determine whether ATF4 deficiency could reduce
neovascularization in mice with oxygen-induced retinopathy (OIR).
METHODS: We induced OIR in C57BL/6, ATF4(+/-), and endoplasmic reticulum
stress-activated indicator (ERAI) mice and used quantitative RT-PCR and Western
blot analysis to evaluate relative gene and protein expression. Histology and
microscopy were used to calculate the extent of neovascularization in
flat-mounted retinas.
RESULTS: Experimental data revealed Xbp1 splicing in the retinal ganglia cells,
outer plexiform layer, inner nuclear layer, and outer nuclear layer and in
pericytes of postdevelopment day 17 ERAI OIR mice, confirming the activation of
IRE1 UPR signaling. In naive ATF4-deficient mice, we also observed an elevation
in UPR-associated and vascular-associated gene expression (Bip, Atf6, Hif1a,
Pik3/Akt, Flt1/Vegfa, and Tgfb1), which may have contributed to the alleviation
of hypoxia-driven neovascularization in experimental ATF4(+/-) retinas. The OIR
ATF4(+/-) retinas demonstrated reprogramming of the UPR seen at both the mRNA
(Atf6 and Bip) and protein (pATF6 and peIf2a) levels, as well as a reduction in
vascularization-associated gene expression (Flt1, Vegf1, Hif1, and Tgb1). These
changes corresponded to the decline in the rate of neovascularization.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study validates ATF4 as a prospective therapeutic target to
inhibit neovascularization in proliferative retinopathy.

PMCID: PMC3762331
PMID: 23942974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Oct 1;305(7):E907-15. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00380.2013. Epub 2013 Aug 13.

Skeletal muscle denervation causes skeletal muscle atrophy through a pathway that
involves both Gadd45a and HDAC4.

Bongers KS(1), Fox DK, Ebert SM, Kunkel SD, Dyle MC, Bullard SA, Dierdorff JM,
Adams CM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Molecular Physiology and Biophysics and
Fraternal Order of Eagles Diabetes Research Center, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver 
College of Medicine, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa; and.

Skeletal muscle denervation causes muscle atrophy via complex molecular
mechanisms that are not well understood. To better understand these mechanisms,
we investigated how muscle denervation increases growth arrest and DNA
damage-inducible 45a (Gadd45a) mRNA in skeletal muscle. Previous studies
established that muscle denervation strongly induces Gadd45a mRNA, which
increases Gadd45a, a small myonuclear protein that is required for
denervation-induced muscle fiber atrophy. However, the mechanism by which
denervation increases Gadd45a mRNA remained unknown. Here, we demonstrate that
histone deacetylase 4 (HDAC4) mediates induction of Gadd45a mRNA in denervated
muscle. Using mouse models, we show that HDAC4 is required for induction of
Gadd45a mRNA during muscle denervation. Conversely, forced expression of HDAC4 is
sufficient to increase skeletal muscle Gadd45a mRNA in the absence of muscle
denervation. Moreover, Gadd45a mediates several downstream effects of HDAC4,
including induction of myogenin mRNA, induction of mRNAs encoding the embryonic
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, and, most importantly, skeletal muscle fiber
atrophy. Because Gadd45a induction is also a key event in fasting-induced muscle 
atrophy, we tested whether HDAC4 might also contribute to Gadd45a induction
during fasting. Interestingly, however, HDAC4 is not required for fasting-induced
Gadd45a expression or muscle atrophy. Furthermore, activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4), which contributes to fasting-induced Gadd45a expression, is not 
required for denervation-induced Gadd45a expression or muscle atrophy.
Collectively, these results identify HDAC4 as an important regulator of Gadd45a
in denervation-induced muscle atrophy and elucidate Gadd45a as a convergence
point for distinct upstream regulators during muscle denervation and fasting.

PMCID: PMC3798708
PMID: 23941879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 23;8(7):e68017. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068017. Print 2013.

A novel role for Tm7sf2 gene in regulating TNFa expression.

Bellezza I(1), Roberti R, Gatticchi L, Del Sordo R, Rambotti MG, Marchetti MC,
Sidoni A, Minelli A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Scienze Biochimiche, Sezione di
Biochimica Cellulare, Università di Perugia, Perugia, Italia.
ilaria.bellezza@unipg.it

We have explored the role of Tm7sf2 gene, which codifies for 3ß-hydroxysterol
<U+0394>14-reductase, an endoplasmic reticulum resident protein, in the sensitivity to
endoplasmic reticulum stress and in the resulting inflammatory response. We used 
mouse embryonic fibroblasts, derived from Tm7sf2(+/+) and Tm7sf2(-/-) mice, to
determine the in vitro effects of thapsigargin on NF-<U+03BA>B activation. Our results
show that the Tm7sf2 gene controls the launch of the unfolded protein response
and presides an anti-inflammatory loop thus its absence correlates with NF-<U+03BA>B
activation and TNFa up-regulation. Our data also show that Tm7sf2 gene regulates 
liver X receptor activation and its absence inhibits LXR signalling. By
expressing the hTm7sf2 gene in KO MEFs and observing a reduced NF-<U+03BA>B activation, 
we have confirmed that Tm7sf2 gene is linked to NF-<U+03BA>B activation. Finally we used
genetically modified mice in an in vivo model of ER stress and of inflammation.
Our results show a significant increase in renal TNFa expression after
tunicamycin exposure and in the oedematogenic response in Tm7sf2(-/-) mice. In
conclusion, we have shown that the Tm7sf2 gene, to date involved only in
cholesterol biosynthesis, also controls an anti-inflammatory loop thereby
confirming the existence of cross talk between metabolic pathways and
inflammatory response.

PMCID: PMC3720723
PMID: 23935851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Neurobiol. 2014 Feb;49(1):399-412. doi: 10.1007/s12035-013-8527-2. Epub 2013 
Aug 10.

a-Synuclein is involved in manganese-induced ER stress via PERK signal pathway in
organotypic brain slice cultures.

Xu B(1), Wang F, Wu SW, Deng Y, Liu W, Feng S, Yang TY, Xu ZF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, School of Public Health, China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, 110001, People's Republic of China,
xubin@mail.cmu.edu.cn.

Overexposure to manganese (Mn) has been known to induce neuronal damage involving
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. However, the exact mechanism of Mn-induced ER 
stress is unclear. Increasing evidence suggested that the overexpression of
alpha-synuclein played a critical role in Mn-induced neurotoxicity. To explore
whether the occurrence of ER stress was associated with alpha-synuclein
overexpression, we made the rat brain slices model of silencing alpha-synuclein
using short-interference RNA. After non-silencing alpha-synuclein slices were
treated with Mn (0-400 µM) for 24 h, there was a dose-dependent increase in
apoptotic rates of cells and levels of lactate dehydrogenase in the culture
medium. Moreover, there was a dose-dependent increase in the protein expression
of 78, 94-kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP78/94), C/EBP homologous protein
(CHOP), and caspase-12. Moreover, PKR-like ER kinase (PERK) phosphorylation,
PERK-mediated phosphorylation of eIF2a, and ATF4 expression also increased.
Inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) activation and X-box-binding protein-1 (Xbp1) 
mRNA splicing increased. Activating transcription factor 6 p90 levels did not
change. However, after silencing alpha-synuclein slices were treated with 400 µM 
Mn for 24 h, there was a significant decrease in the expression of GRP78/94,
CHOP, and caspase-12 compared with 400 µM Mn-treated non-silencing
alpha-synuclein slices. Furthermore, PERK phosphorylation, PERK-mediated
phosphorylation of eIF2a, and ATF4 mRNA expression also decreased. However, IRE1 
phosphorylation and Xbp1 mRNA splicing did not change. The findings revealed that
Mn induced ER stress via activation of PERK and IRE1 signaling pathways and
subsequent apoptosis in cultured slices. Moreover, alpha-synuclein protein was
associated with Mn-induced activation of PERK signaling pathway.

PMID: 23934647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Aug 30;438(3):463-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.07.126. Epub 2013 Aug 7.

Advanced glycation end products suppress osteoblastic differentiation of stromal 
cells by activating endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Tanaka K(1), Yamaguchi T, Kaji H, Kanazawa I, Sugimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 1, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine,
Izumo, Japan. ken1nai@med.shimane-u.ac.jp

Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) are involved in bone quality deterioration
in diabetes mellitus. We previously showed that AGE2 or AGE3 inhibited
osteoblastic differentiation and mineralization of mouse stromal ST2 cells, and
also induced apoptosis and decreased cell growth. Although quality management for
synthesized proteins in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is crucial for the maturation 
of osteoblasts, the effects of AGEs on ER stress in osteoblast lineage are
unknown. We thus examined roles of ER stress in AGE2- or AGE3-induced suppression
of osteoblastogenesis of ST2 cells. An ER stress inducer, thapsigargin (TG),
induced osteoblastic differentiation of ST2 cells by increasing the levels of
Osterix, type 1 collagen (Col1), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and osteocalcin (OCN)
mRNA. AGE2 or AGE3 suppressed the levels of ER stress sensors such as IRE1a, ATF6
and OASIS, while they increased the levels of PERK and its downstream molecules, 
ATF4. A reduction in PERK level by siRNA did not affect the AGEs-induced
suppression of the levels of Osterix, Col1 and OCN mRNA. In conclusion, AGEs
inhibited the osteoblastic differentiation of stromal cells by suppressing ER
stress sensors and accumulating abnormal proteins in the cells. This process
might accelerate AGEs-induced suppression of bone formation found in diabetes
mellitus.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23933252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 26;8(7):e69911. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069911. Print 2013.

The natural pesticide dihydrorotenone induces human plasma cell apoptosis by
triggering endoplasmic reticulum stress and activating p38 signaling pathway.

Zhang J(1), Tang J, Cao B, Zhang Z, Li J, Schimmer AD, He S, Mao X.

Author information: 
(1)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Soochow University, Suzhou, China.

Dihydrorotenone (DHR) is a natural pesticide widely used in farming industry,
such as organic produces. DHR is a potent mitochondrial inhibitor and probably
induces Parkinsonian syndrome, however, it is not known whether DHR is toxic to
other systems. In the present study, we evaluated the cytotoxicity of DHR on
human plasma cells. As predicted, DHR impaired mitochondrial function by
decreasing mitochondrial membrane potential in plasma cells. Because
mito-dysfunction leads to unfolded protein response (UPR) and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, we examined the signature proteins in ER stress, including
GRP78, ATF4, and CHOP. After DHR treatment, these proteins were significantly
upregulated. It is reported that activation of the mitogen-activated protein
kinases p38 and JNK are involved in endoplasmic reticulum stress. However, in the
subsequent study, DHR was found to activate p38 but not the JNK signaling. When
pre-treated with p38 inhibitor SB203580, activation of p38 and cell apoptosis
induced by DHR was partially blocked. Thus, we found that DHR induced human
plasma cell death by activating the p38 but not the JNK signaling pathway.
Because plasma cells are very important in the immune system, this study provided
a new insight in the safety evaluation of DHR application.

PMCID: PMC3724796
PMID: 23922854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Oncol. 2013 Dec;7(6):1012-8. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2013.07.010. Epub 2013 Jul
20.

Nelfinavir and bortezomib inhibit mTOR activity via ATF4-mediated sestrin-2
regulation.

Brüning A(1), Rahmeh M, Friese K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich, Germany. Electronic address: ansgar.bruening@med.uni-muenchen.de.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and autophagy are two basic cell survival
mechanisms often occurring in concert. Extensive ER stress in cancer cells
deliberately induced by chemotherapeutic drugs may lead to growth arrest and cell
death. However, the link between ER stress and autophagy is not well understood. 
In this study, the treatment of cancer cells with ER stress-inducing drug
nelfinavir resulted in the expression of endogenous mTOR inhibitor sestrin-2
(SESN2). Upregulation of SESN2 expression was associated with expression of ER
stress markers ATF4, ATF3, and CHOP. SESN2 upregulation also occurred in cells
treated with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib. Ectopic expression of ATF4, but
not of ATF3 or CHOP, caused transcriptional upregulation of SESN2 expression,
indicating expressional regulation of SESN2 by ATF4. Transient overexpression of 
ectopic SESN2 resulted in mTOR inhibition and autophagy, confirming a link
between ER stress, SESN2 upregulation, and mTOR inhibition. Accordingly, cancer
cells treated with the ER stress-inducing agent nelfinavir showed reduced mTOR
activity and associated increases in the expression levels of ATF4 and SESN2.
These results show that ATF4-regulated SESN2 expression presents a new link
between ER stress and mTOR inhibition and autophagy. mTOR inhibition by
nelfinavir, which is currently in clinical trials for cancer patients, may also
explain its observed ability to induce autophagy, growth arrest, and
radiosensitization in cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23916134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Neoplasia. 2013 Aug;15(8):989-97.

Amino acid deprivation promotes tumor angiogenesis through the GCN2/ATF4 pathway.

Wang Y(1), Ning Y, Alam GN, Jankowski BM, Dong Z, Nör JE, Polverini PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences, University of Michigan School
of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

As tumors continue to grow and exceed their blood supply, nutrients become
limited leading to deficiencies in amino acids (AAD), glucose (GD), and oxygen
(hypoxia). These alterations result in significant changes in gene expression.
While tumors have been shown to overcome the stress associated with GD or hypoxia
by stimulating vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-mediated angiogenesis,
the role of AAD in tumor angiogenesis remains to be elucidated. We found that in 
human tumors, the expression of the general control non-derepressible 2 (GCN2, an
AAD sensor) kinase is elevated at both protein and mRNA levels. In vitro studies 
revealed that VEGF expression is universally induced by AAD treatment in all five
cell lines tested (five of five). This is in contrast to two other angiogenesis
mediators interleukin-6 (two of five) and fibroblast growth factor 2 (two of
five) that have a more restricted expression. Suppressing GCN2 expression
significantly decreased AAD-induced VEGF expression. Silencing activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a downstream transcription factor of the GCN2
signaling pathway, is also associated with strong inhibition of AAD-induced VEGF 
expression. PKR-like kinase, the key player in GD-induced unfolded protein
response is not involved in this process. In vivo xenograft tumor studies in
nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient mice confirmed that knockdown
of GCN2 in tumor cells retards tumor growth and decreases tumor blood vessel
density. Our results reveal that the GCN2/ATF4 pathway promotes tumor growth and 
angiogenesis through AAD-mediated VEGF expression and, thus, is a potential
target in cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3730049
PMID: 23908598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Sci Rep. 2013;3:2346. doi: 10.1038/srep02346.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress preconditioning attenuates methylmercury-induced
cellular damage by inducing favorable stress responses.

Usuki F(1), Fujimura M, Yamashita A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, National Institute for Minamata Disease,
4058-18 Hama, Minamata 867-0008, Japan. usuki@nimd.go.jp

We demonstrate that methylmercury (MeHg)-susceptible cells preconditioned with an
inhibitor of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca(2+)-ATPase, thapsigargin, showed
resistance to MeHg cytotoxicity through favorable stress responses, which
included phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha (Eif2a),
accumulation of activating transcription factor 4 (Atf4), upregulation of
stress-related proteins, and activation of extracellular signal regulated kinase 
pathway. In addition, ER stress preconditioning induced suppression of
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) mainly through the phospho-Eif2a-mediated
general suppression of translation initiation and possible combined effects of
decreased several NMD components expression. Atf4 accumulation was not mediated
by NMD inhibition but translation inhibition of its upstream open reading frame
(uORF) and translation facilitation of its protein-coding ORF by the
phospho-Eif2a. These results suggested that ER stress plays an important role in 
MeHg cytotoxicity and that the modulation of ER stress has therapeutic potential 
to attenuate MeHg cytotoxicity, the underlying mechanism being the induction of
integrated stress responses.

PMCID: PMC3731649
PMID: 23907635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Aug 1;4:e754. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.280.

GADD34 induces cell death through inactivation of Akt following traumatic brain
injury.

Farook JM(1), Shields J, Tawfik A, Markand S, Sen T, Smith SB, Brann D,
Dhandapani KM, Sen N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Georgia Regents University,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell Death Dis. 2013;4:e813.

Neuronal cell death contributes significantly to the pathology of traumatic brain
injury (TBI) irrespective of the mode or severity of the injury. Activation of a 
pro-survival protein, Akt, is known to be regulated by an E3 ligase TRAF6 through
a process of ubiquitination-coupled phosphorylation at its T308 residue. Here we 
show that upregulation of a pro-apototic protein, GADD34, attenuates
TRAF6-mediated Akt activation in a controlled cortical impact model of TBI in
mice. TBI induces the expression of GADD34 by stimulating binding of a stress
inducible transcription factor, ATF4, to the GADD34 promoter. GADD34 then binds
with TRAF6 and prevents its interaction with Akt. This event leads to retention
of Akt in the cytosol and prevents phosphorylation at the T308 position. Finally,
in vivo depletion of GADD34 using a lentiviral knockdown approach leads to a
rescue of Akt activation and markedly attenuates TBI-induced cell death.

PMCID: PMC3763442
PMID: 23907468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 2013 Sep 13;288(37):26569-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.489310. Epub
2013 Jul 29.

Alteration of endoplasmic reticulum lipid rafts contributes to lipotoxicity in
pancreatic ß-cells.

Boslem E(1), Weir JM, MacIntosh G, Sue N, Cantley J, Meikle PJ, Biden TJ.

Author information: 
(1)From the Diabetes and Obesity Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research,
384 Victoria St., Darlinghurst, New South Wales 2010, Australia and.

Chronic saturated fatty acid exposure causes ß-cell apoptosis and, thus,
contributes to type 2 diabetes. Although endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and
reduced ER-to-Golgi protein trafficking have been implicated, the exact
mechanisms whereby saturated fatty acids trigger ß-cell death remain elusive.
Using mass spectroscopic lipidomics and subcellular fractionation, we demonstrate
that palmitate pretreatment of MIN6 ß-cells promoted ER remodeling of both
phospholipids and sphingolipids, but only the latter was causally linked to
lipotoxic ER stress. Thus, overexpression of glucosylceramide synthase,
previously shown to protect against defective protein trafficking and ER stress, 
partially reversed lipotoxic reductions in ER sphingomyelin (SM) content and
aggregation of ER lipid rafts, as visualized using Erlin1-GFP. Using both
lipidomics and a sterol response element reporter assay, we confirmed that free
cholesterol in the ER was also reciprocally modulated by chronic palmitate and
glucosylceramide synthase overexpression. This is consistent with the known
coregulation and association of SM and free cholesterol in lipid rafts.
Inhibition of SM hydrolysis partially protected against ATF4/C/EBP homology
protein induction because of palmitate. Our results suggest that loss of SM in
the ER is a key event for initiating ß-cell lipotoxicity, which leads to
disruption of ER lipid rafts, perturbation of protein trafficking, and initiation
of ER stress.

PMCID: PMC3772204
PMID: 23897822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Arch Toxicol. 2014 Feb;88(2):213-26. doi: 10.1007/s00204-013-1101-x. Epub 2013
Jul 27.

Arsenic trioxide induces unfolded protein response in vascular endothelial cells.

Weng CY(1), Chiou SY, Wang L, Kou MC, Wang YJ, Wu MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and Science,
Tainan, 717, Taiwan.

Chronic arsenic exposure has been linked to endothelial dysfunction and
apoptosis. We investigate the involvement of unfolded protein response (UPR)
signaling in the arsenic-mediated cytotoxicity of the SVEC4-10 mouse endothelial 
cells. The SVEC4-10 cells underwent apoptosis in response to As2O3 dose- and
time-dependently, accompanied by increased accumulation of calcium, and
activation of caspase-3. These phenomena were completely inhibited by a-lipoic
acid (LA), which did not scavenge ROS over-production, but were only partially or
not ameliorated by tiron, a potent superoxide scavenger. Moreover, arsenic
activated UPR, leading to phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 2 subunit a (eIF2a), induction of ATF4, and processing of ATF6. Treatment 
with arsenic also triggered the expression of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
markers, GRP78 (glucose-regulated protein), and CHOP (C/EBP homologous protein). 
The activation of eIF2a, ATF4 and ATF6 and expression of GRP78 and CHOP are
repressed by both LA and tiron, indicating arsenic-induced UPR is mediated
through ROS-dependent and ROS-independent pathways. Arsenic also induced ER
stress-inducible genes, BAX, PUMA (p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis), TRB3 
(tribbles-related protein 3), and SNAT2 (sodium-dependent neutral amino acid
transporter 2). Consistent with intracellular calcium and cell viability data,
ROS may not be important in arsenic-induced death, because tiron did not affect
the expression of these pro-apoptotic genes. In addition, pretreatment with
salubrinal, a selective inhibitor of eIF2a dephosphorylation, enhanced
arsenic-induced GRP78 and CHOP expression and partially prevented arsenic
cytotoxicity in SVEC4-10 cells. Taken together, these results suggest that
arsenic-induced endothelial cytotoxicity is associated with ER stress, which is
mediated by ROS-dependent and ROS-independent signaling.

PMID: 23892647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Radiother Oncol. 2013 Sep;108(3):415-21. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2013.06.037. Epub 
2013 Jul 25.

The PERK/ATF4/LAMP3-arm of the unfolded protein response affects radioresistance 
by interfering with the DNA damage response.

Nagelkerke A(1), Bussink J, van der Kogel AJ, Sweep FC, Span PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
The Netherlands; Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboud University Nijmegen
Medical Centre, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Lysosome-associated membrane protein 3 (LAMP3) is induced
by the PKR-like ER kinase (PERK)/activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4)-arm of 
the unfolded protein response (UPR) during hypoxia. LAMP3 has prognostic value in
breast cancer patients treated with radiotherapy. Here, we specifically
investigated the role of the PERK/ATF4/LAMP3-arm in the radiation response of
breast cancer cells.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Radiosensitivity of breast cancer cells was examined after 
siRNA-mediated knockdown of PERK, ATF4 and LAMP3. Activation of DNA damage repair
proteins was evaluated by Western blotting and immunocytochemistry.
RESULTS: Knockdown of the PERK/ATF4/LAMP3-arm and chemical inhibition of PERK
could radiosensitise MDA-MB-231 cells significantly. Western blot analysis of
several DNA damage repair proteins showed that LAMP3 knockdowns had an attenuated
DNA damage response after radiation compared to controls. <U+03B3>-H2AX foci analysis
revealed that LAMP3 knockdowns had a reduced number of positive cells after
irradiation, indicating that their DNA damage repair signalling response is
decreased. In addition, the effect of autophagy inhibition was examined and
revealed a radiosensitising effect and the presence of residual <U+03B3>-H2AX foci.
CONCLUSIONS: The PERK/ATF4/LAMP3-arm causes radioresistance of breast cancer
cells by increasing DNA damage repair signalling. Inhibition of PERK and/or
autophagy may sensitise tumours to radiotherapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23891100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2013 Oct;170(2):434-8. doi:
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2013.07.005. Epub 2013 Jul 24.

Expression of ATF4 and VEGF in chorionic villus tissue in early spontaneous
abortion.

Chai L(1), Ling K, He X, Yang R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering, Chongqing Medical University, 
Chongqing 400016, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the relationship between early spontaneous abortion (SA)
and the expression of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
STUDY DESIGN: The expression of ATF4 and VEGF protein and mRNA in villi from
first trimester spontaneous abortion (SA, n=30) and normal pregnancy (NP, n=30)
were detected by immunohistochemistry and fluorescent quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (FQ-PCR).
RESULTS: Both protein and mRNA expressions of ATF4 and VEGF in the SA group were 
significantly lower than in the NP group (P<0.01). Their proteins are expressed
mainly in syncytiotrophoblast, cytotrophoblast and villous stromal cells.
Correlation analysis showed that the expression of ATF4 was positively correlated
with that of VEGF in the SA group (r=0.717, P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: Lower expression of ATF4 and VEGF genes in chorionic villus tissue
may participate in the pathogenesis of spontaneous abortion.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23891064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 30;288(35):25350-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.470526. Epub
2013 Jul 25.

ATF4 protein deficiency protects against high fructose-induced
hypertriglyceridemia in mice.

Xiao G(1), Zhang T, Yu S, Lee S, Calabuig-Navarro V, Yamauchi J, Ringquist S,
Dong HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 
60612, USA. Guozhi_Xiao@rush.edu

Hypertriglyceridemia is the most common lipid disorder in obesity and type 2
diabetes. It results from increased production and/or decreased clearance of
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. To better understand the pathophysiology of
hypertriglyceridemia, we studied hepatic regulation of triglyceride metabolism by
the activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a member of the basic leucine
zipper-containing protein subfamily. We determined the effect of ATF4 on hepatic 
lipid metabolism in Atf4(-/-) mice fed regular chow or provided with free access 
to fructose drinking water. ATF4 depletion preferentially attenuated hepatic
lipogenesis without affecting hepatic triglyceride production and fatty acid
oxidation. This effect prevented excessive fat accumulation in the liver of
Atf4(-/-) mice, when compared with wild-type littermates. To gain insight into
the underlying mechanism, we showed that ATF4 depletion resulted in a significant
reduction in hepatic expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>, 
a nuclear receptor that acts to promote lipogenesis in the liver. This effect was
accompanied by a significant reduction in hepatic expression of sterol regulatory
element-binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c), acetyl-CoA carboxylase, and fatty-acid
synthase, three key functions in the lipogenic pathway in Atf4(-/-) mice. Of
particular significance, we found that Atf4(-/-) mice, as opposed to wild-type
littermates, were protected against the development of steatosis and
hypertriglyceridemia in response to high fructose feeding. These data demonstrate
that ATF4 plays a critical role in regulating hepatic lipid metabolism in
response to nutritional cues.

PMCID: PMC3757199
PMID: 23888053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Am J Pathol. 2013 Sep;183(3):745-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.05.032. Epub 2013
Jul 22.

Molecular and functional alterations in a mouse cardiac model of Friedreich
ataxia: activation of the integrated stress response, eIF2a phosphorylation, and 
the induction of downstream targets.

Huang ML(1), Sivagurunathan S, Ting S, Jansson PJ, Austin CJ, Kelly M, Semsarian 
C, Zhang D, Richardson DR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology and Pathology Program, Department of Pathology,
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.

Friedreich ataxia (FA) is a neurodegenerative and cardiodegenerative disease
resulting from marked frataxin deficiency. The condition is characterized by
ataxia with fatal cardiomyopathy, but the pathogenic mechanisms are unclear. We
investigated the association between gene expression and progressive
histopathological and functional changes using the muscle creatine kinase
conditional frataxin knockout (KO) mouse; this mouse develops a severe cardiac
phenotype that resembles that of FA patients. We examined KO mice from 3 weeks of
age, when they are asymptomatic, to 10 weeks of age, when they die of the
disease. Positive iron staining was identified in KO mice from 5 weeks of age,
with markedly reduced cardiac function from 6 weeks. We identified an early and
marked up-regulation of a gene cohort responsible for stress-induced amino acid
biosynthesis and observed markedly increased phosphorylation of eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2a (p-eIF2a), an activator of the integrated stress
response, in KO mice at 3 weeks of age, relative to wild-type mice. Importantly, 
the eIF2a-mediated integrated stress response has been previously implicated in
heart failure via downstream processes such as autophagy and apoptosis. Indeed,
expression of a panel of autophagy and apoptosis markers was enhanced in KO mice.
Thus, the pathogenesis of cardiomyopathy in FA correlates with the early and
persistent eIF2a phosphorylation, which precedes activation of autophagy and
apoptosis.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23886890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2014 Feb;41(1):81-3. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2013.06.001. Epub
2013 Jul 21.

Arsenic trioxide induced endoplasmic reticulum stress in laryngeal squamous cell 
line Hep-2 cells.

Yang X(1), An L(2), Li X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong Province, PR China. (2)Rizhao
People's Hospital, Rizhao, Shandong Province, PR China. (3)The Affiliated
Hospital of Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong Province, PR China.
Electronic address: lixiaoyu6666@aliyun.com.

Arsenic trioxide (As2O3) has been used in the treatment of acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL) and many malignant solid tumors. Recently, endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress plays an important role in As2O3-treated laryngeal squamous cell line
Hep-2 cells. In the present work, the expression of ER stress-related proteins
was investigated in As2O3-treated Hep-2 cells. The results showed that As2O3
increased the expression of GRP78, CHOP, phosphorylated eIF2a and ATF4, all of
which are the molecule of ER stress. Therefore, As2O3 induced ER stress in Hep-2 
cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23880367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2013 Sep;139(9):1551-62. doi: 10.1007/s00432-013-1473-6.
Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Perturbation of proteasome function by bortezomib leading to ER stress-induced
apoptotic cell death in cholangiocarcinoma.

Vaeteewoottacharn K(1), Kariya R, Matsuda K, Taura M, Wongkham C, Wongkham S,
Okada S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematopoiesis, Center for AIDS Research, Kumamoto University,
2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto, 860-0811, Japan.

PURPOSE: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) or cancer of the biliary tract is
heterogeneous; however, chronic inflammatory-related features are unique in CCA. 
Moreover, the genes involved in proteasome functions are evidently increased in
CCA. Hence, CCA might be vulnerable to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stressors,
particularly a proteasome inhibitor. Therefore, bortezomib (BTZ), a specific 26S 
proteasome inhibitor, was selected, and its antitumor effects against CCA were
investigated.
METHODS: Liver fluke-associated CCA cell lines were used. Cell proliferation and 
apoptosis detection were determined by a tetrazolium-based assay, caspase
detection and annexin V binding assay. The accumulations of proteasome
substrates, the inductions of ER stress and unfolded protein response (UPR)
proteins were demonstrated by western blot and reporter systems. The in vivo
anti-proliferative effect was accessed in a subcutaneous transplantation mouse
model.
RESULTS: BTZ inhibited CCA proliferation and induced caspase-dependent apoptosis,
independently of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. Inhibition of protein degradation by BTZ led 
to the induction of UPR; induction of XBP1 splicing, ATF6 proteolysis and nuclear
ATF4 as well as BiP and CHOP expressions were evident. Nevertheless, ER
stress-induced UPR was overwhelming, leading to the activation of apoptosis
demonstrated by proteolytic cleavages of ER-related caspase 4 and 12 as well as
classical caspase 8, 9 and 3. The growth inhibitory effect of BTZ was supported
by an in vivo model.
CONCLUSION: BTZ treatment could be a promising therapeutic approach for CCA
treatment.

PMID: 23877657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 18;8(7):e66672. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066672. Print 2013.

Functional contribution of the transcription factor ATF4 to the pathogenesis of
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Matus S(1), Lopez E, Valenzuela V, Nassif M, Hetz C.

Author information: 
(1)Neurounion Biomedical Foundation, Santiago, Chile.
soledad.matus@neurounion.com

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress represents an early pathological event in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). ATF4 is a key ER stress transcription factor
that plays a role in both adaptation to stress and the activation of apoptosis.
Here we investigated the contribution of ATF4 to ALS. ATF4 deficiency reduced the
rate of birth of SOD1(G86R) transgenic mice. The fraction of ATF4(-/-)-SOD1(G85R)
transgenic mice that were born are more resistant to develop ALS, leading to
delayed disease onset and prolonged life span. ATF4 deficiency completely
attenuated the induction of pro-apoptotic genes, including BIM and CHOP, and also
led to quantitative changes in the ER protein homeostasis network. Unexpectedly, 
ATF4 deficiency enhanced mutant SOD1 aggregation at the end stage of the disease.
Studies in the motoneuron cell line NSC34 demonstrated that knocking down ATF4
enhances mutant SOD1 aggregation possibly due to alteration in the redox status
of the cell. Our results support a functional role of ATF4 in ALS, offering a
novel target for disease intervention.

PMCID: PMC3715499
PMID: 23874395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Sep;28(9):1866-9. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2045.

ATF4 and HIF-1a in bone: an intriguing relationship.

Schipani E, Mangiavini L, Merceron C.

Comment on
    J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Sep;28(9):1870-84.

PMCID: PMC4335802
PMID: 23873659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Oct;73(10):1844-53. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-203405.
Epub 2013 Jul 17.

Genes expressed in blood link osteoarthritis with apoptotic pathways.

Ramos YF(1), Bos SD(2), Lakenberg N(1), Böhringer S(3), den Hollander WJ(1),
Kloppenburg M(4), Slagboom PE(2), Meulenbelt I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Molecular Epidemiology, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands The Netherlands Genomics
Initiative, sponsored by the NCHA, Leiden-Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (4)Departments of Clinical Epidemiology and
Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To identify novel gene expression networks in blood of osteoarthritis 
patients compared to controls.
METHODS: A comprehensive exploration of gene expression in peripheral blood was
performed by microarray analysis for a subset of osteoarthritis patients from the
Genetics osteoARthritis and Progression (GARP) study in comparison with sex and
age-matched healthy controls. To identify pathways, we performed gene enrichment 
analyses (database for annotation, visualisation and integrated discovery and
search tool for the retrieval of interacting genes). Quantitative PCR analysis in
overlapping and in additional osteoarthritis samples was performed for
prioritised genes to validate and replicate findings. Classification of cases and
controls was explored by applying statistical models.
RESULTS: 741 probes representing 694 unique genes were differentially expressed
between cases and controls, including 86 genes expressed with at least a 1.5-fold
difference. ATF4, GPR18 and H3F3B were among the top genes identified
(p<4.5<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8)). We found that in the blood of osteoarthritis patients the
apoptosis pathway, including the well-known gene CASP3, was significantly
enriched among the differentially expressed genes. Our findings were validated in
independent samples and when using a small subset of the validated genes, we
could accurately distinguish patients from controls (area under the curve 98%).
CONCLUSIONS: In the current study, we have identified specific gene expression
networks, in the easily accessible tissue blood, which associated consistently
with osteoarthritis among GARP study cases. Our data further hint at the
relevance of apoptosis as an aetiological factor in osteoarthritis onset, thereby
qualifying expression profiling of blood as a useful tool to understand the
underlying molecular mechanisms of osteoarthritis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 23864235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Free Radic Biol Med. 2013 Dec;65:347-59. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.07.001. Epub 2013 Jul 9.

Lafora disease fibroblasts exemplify the molecular interdependence between
thioredoxin 1 and the proteasome in mammalian cells.

García-Giménez JL(1), Seco-Cervera M, Aguado C, Romá-Mateo C, Dasí F, Priego S,
Markovic J, Knecht E, Sanz P, Pallardó FV.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER),
Valencia, Spain; Fundación del Hospital Clínico Universitat de Valencia-INCLIVA, 
Valencia, Spain; Department of Physiology, University of Valencia, 46010
Valencia, Spain.

Thioredoxin 1 (Trx1) is a key regulator of cellular redox balance and
participates in cellular signaling events. Recent evidence from yeast indicates
that members of the Trx family interact with the 20S proteasome, indicating redox
regulation of proteasome activity. However, there is little information about the
interrelationship of Trx proteins with the proteasome system in mammalian cells, 
especially in the nucleus. Here, we have investigated this relationship under
various cellular conditions in mammalian cells. We show that Trx1 levels and its 
subcellular localization (cytosol, endoplasmic reticulum, and nucleus) depend on 
proteasome activity during the cell cycle in NIH3T3 fibroblasts and under stress 
conditions, when proteasomes are inhibited. In addition, we also studied in these
cells how the main cellular antioxidant systems are stimulated when proteasome
activity is inhibited. Finally, we describe a reduction in Trx1 levels in Lafora 
disease fibroblasts and demonstrate that the nuclear colocalization of Trx1 with 
20S proteasomes in laforin-deficient cells is altered compared with control
cells. Our results indicate a close relationship between Trx1 and the 20S nuclear
proteasome and give a new perspective to the study of diseases or
physiopathological conditions in which defects in the proteasome system are
associated with oxidative stress.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23850970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1833(12):3460-70. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.06.028. Epub 2013 Jul 10.

ER stress-induced cell death mechanisms.

Sano R(1), Reed JC.

Author information: 
(1)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA.

The endoplasmic-reticulum (ER) stress response constitutes a cellular process
that is triggered by a variety of conditions that disturb folding of proteins in 
the ER. Eukaryotic cells have developed an evolutionarily conserved adaptive
mechanism, the unfolded protein response (UPR), which aims to clear unfolded
proteins and restore ER homeostasis. In cases where ER stress cannot be reversed,
cellular functions deteriorate, often leading to cell death. Accumulating
evidence implicates ER stress-induced cellular dysfunction and cell death as
major contributors to many diseases, making modulators of ER stress pathways
potentially attractive targets for therapeutics discovery. Here, we summarize
recent advances in understanding the diversity of molecular mechanisms that
govern ER stress signaling in health and disease. This article is part of a
Special Section entitled: Cell Death Pathways.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC3834229
PMID: 23850759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Endocrinology. 2013 Sep;154(9):3077-88. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-2138. Epub 2013 Jul 
8.

Circulating levels of IL-1B+IL-6 cause ER stress and dysfunction in islets from
prediabetic male mice.

O'Neill CM(1), Lu C, Corbin KL, Sharma PR, Dula SB, Carter JD, Ramadan JW, Xin W,
Lee JK, Nunemaker CS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Virginia, Department of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia
22908, USA.

Elevated levels of circulating proinflammatory cytokines are associated with
obesity and increased risk of type 2 diabetes, but the mechanism is unknown. We
tested whether proinflammatory cytokines IL-1B+IL-6 at low picogram per
milliliter concentrations (consistent with serum levels) could directly trigger
pancreatic islet dysfunction. Overnight exposure to IL-1B+IL-6 in islets isolated
from normal mice and humans disrupted glucose-stimulated intracellular calcium
responses; cytokine-induced effects were more severe among islets from
prediabetic db/db mice that otherwise showed no signs of dysfunction. IL-1B+IL-6 
exposure reduced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) calcium storage, activated ER stress 
responses (Nos2, Bip, Atf4, and Ddit3 [CHOP]), impaired glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion, and increased cell death only in islets from prediabetic db/db
mice. Furthermore, we found increased serum levels of IL-1B and IL-6 in
diabetes-prone mice at an age before hyperglycemia was exhibited, suggesting that
low-grade systemic inflammation develops early in the disease process. In
addition, we implanted normal outbred and inbred mice with subcutaneous osmotic
mini-pumps containing IL-1B+IL-6 to mimic the serum increases found in
prediabetic db/db mice. Both IL-1B and IL-6 were elevated in serum from
cytokine-pump mice, but glucose tolerance and blood glucose levels did not differ
from controls. However, when compared with controls, isolated islets from
cytokine-pump mice showed deficiencies in calcium handling and insulin secretion 
that were similar to observations with islets exposed to cytokines in vitro.
These findings provide proof of principle that low-grade systemic inflammation is
present early in the development of type 2 diabetes and can trigger ER
stress-mediated islet dysfunction that can lead to islet failure.

PMCID: PMC3749476
PMID: 23836031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Arch Toxicol. 2014 Jan;88(1):97-107. doi: 10.1007/s00204-013-1085-6. Epub 2013
Jul 9.

V8, a newly synthetic flavonoid, induces apoptosis through ROS-mediated ER stress
pathway in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhang Y(1), Zhao L, Li X, Wang Y, Yao J, Wang H, Li F, Li Z, Guo Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Intervention, China Pharmaceutical University, 24
Tongjiaxiang, Nanjing, 210009, People's Republic of China.

Natural flavonoids from plants have been demonstrated to possess promising
chemopreventive activities against various diseases.
7-{4-[Bis-(2-hydroxy-ethyl)-amino]-butoxy}-5-hydroxy-8-methoxy-2-phenyl-chromen-4
-one (V8), a newly synthesized derivative of wogonin may have antioxidant,
antiviral, anti-inflammatory and anti-tumor potentials as wogonin. Based on the
recent findings of V8, the anti-tumor activities and fundamental mechanisms by
which V8 inhibits growth of hepatocellular carcinoma were further investigated in
this study. After the treatment of V8, a significant inhibition of HepG2 cell
proliferation was observed in a dose-dependent manner with the IC50 value of
23 µM using MTT assay. The exposure to V8 also resulted in apoptosis induction
and an accumulation of ROS and Ca(2+). Meanwhile, a release of cytochrome c
(Cyt-c), activation of BH-3 only proteins and Bax, decrease in mitochondrial
membrane potential <U+0394><U+03A8>, as well as a suppression of Bcl-2, pro-caspase9 and
pro-caspase3 expression were shown. Moreover, knocking down CHOP partly decreased
the effect of V8-mediated apoptosis and activation of GRP78, p-PERK, p-eIF2a,
ATF4 and CHOP modulated ER stress triggered by V8. In vivo, V8 inhibited the
transplanted mice H22 liver carcinomas in a dose-dependent manner. Compared with 
wogonin, V8 exhibited stronger anti-proliferative effects both in vitro and in
vivo. The underlying mechanism of activating PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 pathway by which V8 
induces apoptosis was verified once again in vivo. The apoptosis induction via
the mitochondrial pathway by modulating the ROS-mediated ER signaling pathway
might serve to provide support for further studies of V8 as a possible anticancer
drug in the clinical treatment of cancer.

PMID: 23835921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Gene. 2013 Sep 15;527(1):321-31. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.06.021. Epub 2013 Jul
1.

MicroRNA expression profiling of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells during 
osteogenic differentiation reveals Osterix regulation by miR-31.

Baglìo SR(1), Devescovi V, Granchi D, Baldini N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Orthopedic Pathophysiology and Regenerative Medicine, Istituto 
Ortopedico Rizzoli, via di Barbiano 1/10, 40136, Bologna Italy.
rubinabaglio@gmail.com

Erratum in
    Gene. 2014 Feb 10;535(2):380.

Osteogenesis is the result of a complex sequence of events that involve the
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) into osteoblasts. MSCs are
multipotent adult stem cells that can give rise to different cell types of the
mesenchymal germ layer. The differentiation fate of MSCs depends on the
microenvironmental signals received by these cells and is tightly regulated by
multiple pathways that lead to the activation of specific transcription factors. 
Among the transcription factors involved in osteogenic differentiation Osterix
(Sp7) plays a key role and has been shown to be fundamental for bone homeostasis.
However, the molecular events governing the expression of this transcription
factor are not fully understood. In this study we set out to investigate the
changes in the microRNA (miRNA) expression that occur during the osteogenic
differentiation of bone marrow-derived MSCs. To this purpose, we analyzed the
miRNA expression profile of MSCs deriving from 3 donors during the
differentiation and mineralization processes by microarray. 29 miRNAs were
significantly and consistently modulated during the osteogenic differentiation
and 5 during the mineralization process. Interestingly, most of the
differentially expressed miRNAs have been reported to be implicated in stemness
maintenance, differentiation and/or oncogenesis. Subsequently, we focused our
attention on the regulation of Osterix by miRNAs and demonstrated that one of the
miRNAs differentially modulated during osteogenic differentiation, miR-31,
controls Osterix expression through association to the 3' untranslated region of 
this transcription factor. By analyzing miR-31 and Osterix expression levels we
found an inverse miRNA-target expression trend during osteogenic differentiation 
and in osteosarcoma cell lines. Moreover, the inhibition of the microRNA activity
led to an increase in the endogenous expression of Osterix. Our results define a 
miRNA signature characterizing the osteogenic differentiation of MSCs and provide
evidence for the involvement of miR-31 in the regulation of the bone-specific
transcription factor Osterix.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23827457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. BMC Genomics. 2013 Jun 28;14:429. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-429.

The duration of gastrin treatment affects global gene expression and molecular
responses involved in ER stress and anti-apoptosis.

Selvik LK(1), Fjeldbo CS, Flatberg A, Steigedal TS, Misund K, Anderssen E, Doseth
B, Langaas M, Tripathi S, Beisvag V, Lægreid A, Thommesen L, Bruland T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology-NTNU, Trondheim N-7489, Norway.

BACKGROUND: How cells decipher the duration of an external signal into different 
transcriptional outcomes is poorly understood. The hormone gastrin can promote a 
variety of cellular responses including proliferation, differentiation, migration
and anti-apoptosis. While gastrin in normal concentrations has important
physiological functions in the gastrointestine, prolonged high levels of gastrin 
(hypergastrinemia) is related to pathophysiological processes.
RESULTS: We have used genome-wide microarray time series analysis and molecular
studies to identify genes that are affected by the duration of gastrin treatment 
in adenocarcinoma cells. Among 403 genes differentially regulated in transiently 
(gastrin removed after 1 h) versus sustained (gastrin present for 14 h) treated
cells, 259 genes upregulated by sustained gastrin treatment compared to untreated
controls were expressed at lower levels in the transient mode. The difference was
subtle for early genes like Junb and c-Fos, but substantial for delayed and late 
genes. Inhibition of protein synthesis by cycloheximide was used to distinguish
between primary and secondary gastrin regulated genes. The majority of gastrin
upregulated genes lower expressed in transiently treated cells were primary genes
induced independently of de novo protein synthesis. This indicates that the
duration effect of gastrin treatment is mainly mediated via post-translational
signalling events, while a smaller fraction of the differentially expressed genes
are regulated downstream of primary transcriptional events. Indeed, sustained
gastrin treatment specifically induced prolonged ERK1/2 activation and elevated
levels of the AP-1 subunit protein JUNB. Enrichment analyses of the
differentially expressed genes suggested that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
and survival is affected by the duration of gastrin treatment. Sustained
treatment exerted an anti-apoptotic effect on serum starvation-induced apoptosis 
via a PKC-dependent mechanism. In accordance with this, only sustained treatment 
induced anti-apoptotic genes like Clu, Selm and Mcl1, while the pro-apoptotic
gene Casp2 was more highly expressed in transiently treated cells. Knockdown
studies showed that JUNB is involved in sustained gastrin induced expression of
the UPR/ER stress related genes Atf4, Herpud1 and Chac1.
CONCLUSION: The duration of gastrin treatment affects both intracellular
signalling mechanisms and gene expression, and ERK1/2 and AP-1 seem to play a
role in converting different durations of gastrin treatment into distinct
cellular responses.

PMCID: PMC3698217
PMID: 23805861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Sep;41(16):7683-99. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt563. Epub 2013
Jun 26.

The eIF2a/ATF4 pathway is essential for stress-induced autophagy gene expression.

B'chir W(1), Maurin AC, Carraro V, Averous J, Jousse C, Muranishi Y, Parry L,
Stepien G, Fafournoux P, Bruhat A.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR 1019 Nutrition Humaine, Centre de Clermont-Ferrand-Theix, F-63122
Saint Genès Champanelle, France and Université Clermont 1, UFR Médecine, UMR 1019
Nutrition Humaine, Clermont-Ferrand, France.

In response to different environmental stresses, eIF2a phosphorylation represses 
global translation coincident with preferential translation of ATF4, a master
regulator controlling the transcription of key genes essential for adaptative
functions. Here, we establish that the eIF2a/ATF4 pathway directs an autophagy
gene transcriptional program in response to amino acid starvation or endoplasmic 
reticulum stress. The eIF2a-kinases GCN2 and PERK and the transcription factors
ATF4 and CHOP are also required to increase the transcription of a set of genes
implicated in the formation, elongation and function of the autophagosome. We
also identify three classes of autophagy genes according to their dependence on
ATF4 and CHOP and the binding of these factors to specific promoter cis elements.
Furthermore, different combinations of CHOP and ATF4 bindings to target promoters
allow the trigger of a differential transcriptional response according to the
stress intensity. Overall, this study reveals a novel regulatory role of the
eIF2a-ATF4 pathway in the fine-tuning of the autophagy gene transcription program
in response to stresses.

PMCID: PMC3763548
PMID: 23804767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Hepatol. 2013 Oct;59(4):780-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.06.005. Epub 2013 Jun
17.

ER stress in human hepatic cells treated with Efavirenz: mitochondria again.

Apostolova N(1), Gomez-Sucerquia LJ, Alegre F, Funes HA, Victor VM, Barrachina
MD, Blas-Garcia A, Esplugues JV.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Valencia,
Valencia, Spain; CIBERehd, Valencia, Spain. Electronic address:
nadezda.apostolova@uv.es.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: ER stress is associated with a growing number of liver
diseases, including drug-induced hepatotoxicity. The non-nucleoside analogue
reverse transcriptase inhibitor Efavirenz, a cornerstone of the multidrug
strategy employed to treat HIV1 infection, has been related to the development of
various adverse events, including metabolic disturbances and hepatic toxicity,
the mechanisms of which remain elusive. Recent evidence has pinpointed a specific
mitochondrial effect of Efavirenz in human hepatic cells. This study assesses the
induction of ER stress by Efavirenz in the same model and the implication of
mitochondria in this process.
METHODS: Primary human hepatocytes and Hep3B were treated with clinically
relevant concentrations of Efavirenz and parameters of ER stress were studied
using standard cell biology techniques.
RESULTS: ER stress markers, including CHOP and GRP78 expression (both protein and
mRNA), phosphorylation of eIF2a, and presence of the spliced form of XBP1 were
upregulated. Efavirenz also enhanced cytosolic Ca(2+) content and induced
morphological changes in the ER suggestive of ER stress. This response was
greatly attenuated in cells with altered mitochondrial function (Rho°). The
effects of Efavirenz on the ER, and particularly in regard to the mitochondrial
involvement, differed from those elicited by a standard pharmacological ER
stressor.
CONCLUSIONS: This newly discovered mechanism of cellular insult involving ER
stress and UPR response may help comprehend the hepatic toxicity that has been
associated with the widespread and life-long use of Efavirenz. In addition, the
specificity of the actions of Efavirenz observed expands our knowledge of the
mechanisms that trigger ER stress and shed some light on the mitochondria/ER
interplay in drug-induced hepatic challenge.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23792026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. FEBS Lett. 2013 Aug 2;587(15):2420-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.06.011. Epub
2013 Jun 19.

ATF4 activation by the p38MAPK-eIF4E axis mediates apoptosis and autophagy
induced by selenite in Jurkat cells.

Jiang Q(1), Li F, Shi K, Wu P, An J, Yang Y, Xu C.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medicine 
Sciences & School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, China.

Previous studies have shown that selenite exerts pro-apoptosis and pro-autophagy 
effects and is associated with the activation of ER stress in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Herein we demonstrate the underlying mechanisms
by which the activation of p38MAPK plays essential roles in apoptosis and
autophagy and the coordination of cellular metabolic processes during leukemia
therapy. MKK3/6-dependent activation of p38MAPK is required for the
phosphorylation of eIF4E, thus initiating the translation of ER stress-related
transcription factor ATF4. Upregulated ATF4 results in the transcriptional
initiation of the apoptosis-related chop gene and autophagy-related map1lc3b
gene, through which selenite links ER stress to apoptosis and autophagy during
leukemia treatment. Moreover, autophagy induction enhances cell apoptosis under
this condition.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23792164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Neurosci. 2013 Jun 19;33(25):10512-25. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5183-12.2013.

Modulation of 5-lipoxygenase in proteotoxicity and Alzheimer's disease.

Valera E(1), Dargusch R, Maher PA, Schubert D.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037-1002,
USA.

The accumulation of intracellular ß amyloid (Aß) may be one of the factors
leading to neuronal cell death in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Using a pyrazole
called CNB-001, which was selected for its ability to reduce intracellular Aß, we
show that the activation of the eIF2a/ATF4 arm of the unfolded protein response
is sufficient to degrade aggregated intracellular Aß. CNB-001 is a potent
inhibitor of 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX), decreases 5-LOX expression, and increases
proteasome activity. 5-LOX inhibition induces eIF2a and PERK (protein kinase
R-like extracellular signal-regulated kinase) phosphorylation, and HSP90 and ATF4
levels. When fed to AD transgenic mice, CNB-001 also increases eIF2a
phosphorylation and HSP90 and ATF4 levels, and limits the accumulation of soluble
Aß and ubiquitinated aggregated proteins. Finally, CNB-001 maintains the
expression of synapse-associated proteins and improves memory. Therefore, 5-LOX
metabolism is a key element in the promotion of endoplasmic reticulum
dysfunction, and its inhibition under conditions of stress is sufficient to
reduce proteotoxicity both in vivo and in vitro.

PMCID: PMC3685841
PMID: 23785163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:629750. doi: 10.1155/2013/629750.
Epub 2013 May 28.

Involvement of endoplasmic reticulum stress in capsaicin-induced apoptosis of
human pancreatic cancer cells.

Lin S(1), Zhang J, Chen H, Chen K, Lai F, Luo J, Wang Z, Bu H, Zhang R, Li H,
Tong H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310003,
China ; Department of Hepatobiliary-Pancreatic Surgery, The Second Affiliated
Hospital of Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325027, China.

Capsaicin, main pungent ingredient of hot chilli peppers, has been shown to have 
anticarcinogenic effect on various cancer cells through multiple mechanisms. In
this study, we investigated the apoptotic effect of capsaicin on human pancreatic
cancer cells in both in vitro and in vivo systems, as well as the possible
mechanisms involved. In vitro, treatment of both the pancreatic cancer cells
(PANC-1 and SW1990) with capsaicin resulted in cells growth inhibition, G0/G1
phase arrest, and apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner. Knockdown of growth
arrest- and DNA damage-inducible gene 153 (GADD153), a marker of the
endoplasmic-reticulum-stress- (ERS-) mediated apoptosis pathway, by specific
siRNA attenuated capsaicin-induced apoptosis both in PANC-1 and SW1990 cells.
Moreover, in vivo studies capsaicin effectively inhibited the growth and
metabolism of pancreatic cancer and prolonged the survival time of pancreatic
cancer xenograft tumor-induced mice. Furthermore, capsaicin increased the
expression of some key ERS markers, including glucose-regulated protein 78
(GRP78), phosphoprotein kinase-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (phosphoPERK),
and phosphoeukaryotic initiation factor-2 a (phospho-eIF2 a ), activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and GADD153 in tumor tissues. In conclusion, we for
the first time provide important evidence to support the involvement of ERS in
the induction of apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells by capsaicin.

PMCID: PMC3679855
PMID: 23781265  [PubMed]


52. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Aug 26;548:50-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.06.008. Epub 2013
Jun 14.

Inhibition of endoplasmic reticulum stress is involved in the neuroprotective
effects of candesartan cilexitil in the rotenone rat model of Parkinson's
disease.

Wu L(1), Tian YY, Shi JP, Xie W, Shi JQ, Lu J, Zhang YD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, PR China.

Recent studies indicated that angiotensin II (Ang II) receptor blockers could
reduce neurotoxins-induced dopaminergic (DA) cell death, but the underlying
mechanisms are still unclear. Given that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress plays 
a major role in rotenone-induced neuronal apoptosis, we investigated whether
candesartan cilexetil, a selective and high-affinity Ang II receptor antagonist, 
could protect the DA neuron via reducing ER stress in a chronic rotenone rat
model for Parkinson's disease (PD). Our data showed that candesartan cilexetil
could ameliorate the descent latency in catalepsy tests, and decrease
rotenone-induced DA neuron apoptosis. Moreover, candesartan cilexetil has been
found to play a protective role via down-regulating the expression of activating 
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), the CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)
homologous protein (CHOP), and p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis (Puma).
Thus, our experiments strongly suggest that administration of candesartan
cilexetil protects DA neuron involving blocking ER stress, possibly via
inhibiting activation of the ATF4-CHOP-Puma pathway, which could provide new
insight into clinical therapeutics for PD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23774475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2014 Mar;69(3):270-3. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glt082. 
Epub 2013 Jun 14.

Association analyses of insulin signaling pathway gene polymorphisms with healthy
aging and longevity in Americans of Japanese ancestry.

Morris BJ(1), Donlon TA, He Q, Grove JS, Masaki KH, Elliott A, Willcox DC,
Willcox BJ.

Author information: 
(1)DSc Honolulu Heart Program (HHP)/Honolulu-Asia Aging Study (HAAS), Kuakini
Medical Center, 347 North Kuakini Street, HPM-9, Honolulu, Hawaii 96817.
brian.morris@sydney.edu.au.

Evidence from model organisms suggests that the insulin/IGF-1 signaling pathway
has an important, evolutionarily conserved influence over rate of aging and thus 
longevity. In humans, the FOXO3 gene is the only widely replicated insulin/IGF-1 
signaling pathway gene associated with longevity across multiple populations.
Therefore, we conducted a nested case-control study of other insulin/IGF-1
signaling genes and longevity, utilizing a large, homogeneous, long-lived
population of American men of Japanese ancestry, well characterized for aging
phenotypes. Genotyping was performed of single nucleotide polymorphisms, tagging 
most of the genetic variation across several genes in the insulin/IGF-1 signaling
pathway or related gene networks that may be influenced by FOXO3, namely, ATF4,
CBL, CDKN2, EXO1, and JUN. Two initial, marginal associations with longevity did 
not remain significant after correction for multiple comparisons, nor were they
correlated with aging-related phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3968832
PMID: 23770741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Aug;24(15):2477-90. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-01-0067. Epub 2013
Jun 12.

CHOP induces activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) to trigger apoptosis in
response to perturbations in protein homeostasis.

Teske BF(1), Fusakio ME, Zhou D, Shan J, McClintick JN, Kilberg MS, Wek RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Indiana 
University, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Environmental stresses that disrupt protein homeostasis induce phosphorylation of
eIF2, triggering repression of global protein synthesis coincident with
preferential translation of ATF4, a transcriptional activator of the integrated
stress response (ISR). Depending on the extent of protein disruption, ATF4 may
not be able to restore proteostatic control and instead switches to a terminal
outcome that features elevated expression of the transcription factor CHOP
(GADD153/DDIT3). The focus of this study is to define the mechanisms by which
CHOP directs gene regulatory networks that determine cell fate. We find that in
response to proteasome inhibition, CHOP enhances the expression of a collection
of genes encoding transcription regulators, including ATF5, which is
preferentially translated during eIF2 phosphorylation. Transcriptional expression
of ATF5 is directly induced by both CHOP and ATF4. Knockdown of ATF5 increases
cell survival in response to proteasome inhibition, supporting the idea that both
ATF5 and CHOP have proapoptotic functions. Transcriptome analysis of
ATF5-dependent genes reveals targets involved in apoptosis, including NOXA, which
is important for inducing cell death during proteasome inhibition. This study
suggests that the ISR features a feedforward loop of stress-induced
transcriptional regulators, each subject to transcriptional and translational
control, which can switch cell fate toward apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3727939
PMID: 23761072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 4;8(6):e65568. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065568. Print 2013.

Lipopolysaccharide preconditioning protects hepatocytes from ischemia/reperfusion
injury (IRI) through inhibiting ATF4-CHOP pathway in mice.

Rao J(1), Qin J, Qian X, Lu L, Wang P, Wu Z, Zhai Y, Zhang F, Li G, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Transplantation Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Key Laboratory of Living Donor Liver Transplantation of Ministry of
Public Health, Nanjing, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Low-dose lipopolysaccharide (LPS) preconditioning-induced liver
protection has been demonstrated during ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI) in
several organs but has not been sufficiently elucidated underlying causal
mechanism. This study investigated the role of low-dose LPS preconditioning on
ATF4-CHOP pathway as well as the effects of the pathway on tissue injury and
inflammation in a mouse model of liver partial-warm IRI.
METHODS: LPS (100 µg/kg/d) was injected intraperitoneally two days before
ischemia. Hepatic injury was evaluated based on serum alanine aminotransferase
levels, histopathology, and caspase-3 activity. The ATF4-CHOP pathway and its
related apoptotic molecules were investigated after reperfusion. The role of LPS 
preconditioning on apoptosis and ATF4-CHOP pathway was examined in vitro.
Moreover, the effects of the ATF4-CHOP pathway on apoptosis, Caspase-12, and
Caspase-3 were determined with ATF4 small interfering RNA (siRNA). Inflammatory
cytokine expression was also checked after reperfusion. Inflammatory cytokines
and related signaling pathways were analyzed in vitro in macrophages treated by
LPS preconditioning or ATF4 siRNA.
RESULTS: LPS preconditioning significantly attenuated liver injury after IRI. As 
demonstrated by in vitro experiments, LPS preconditioning significantly reduced
the upregulation of the ATF4-CHOP pathway and inhibited Caspase-12 and Caspase-3 
activation after IRI. Later experiments showed that ATF4 knockdown significantly 
suppressed CHOP, cleaved caspase-12 and caspase-3 expression, as well as
inhibited hepatocellular apoptosis. In addition, in mice pretreated with LPS,
TNF-a and IL-6 were inhibited after reperfusion, whereas IL-10 was upregulated.
Similarly, low-dose LPS significantly inhibited TNF-a, IL-6, ATF4-CHOP pathway,
NF-<U+03BA>B pathway, and ERK1/2 in high-dose LPS-stimulated macrophages, whereas IL-10 
and cytokine signaling (SOCS)-3 suppressor were induced. Importantly, ATF4 siRNA 
is consistent with results of LPS preconditioning in macrophages.
CONCLUSIONS: This work is the first time to provide evidence for LPS
preconditioning protects hepatocytes from IRI through inhibiting ATF4-CHOP
pathway, which may be critical to reducing related apoptosis molecules and
modulating innate inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3672158
PMID: 23750267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Elife. 2013 May 28;2:e00895. doi: 10.7554/eLife.00895.

Less translational control, more memory.

Pavitt GD(1).

Author information: 
(1)is at the Faculty of Life Sciences , University of Manchester , Manchester ,
United Kingdom graham.pavitt@manchester.ac.uk.

Comment on
    Elife. 2013;2:e00498.

A small molecule can enhance the memories of rats and mice by blocking the
integrated stress response in these animals.

PMCID: PMC3667575
PMID: 23741622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Elife. 2013 May 28;2:e00498. doi: 10.7554/eLife.00498.

Pharmacological brake-release of mRNA translation enhances cognitive memory.

Sidrauski C(1), Acosta-Alvear D, Khoutorsky A, Vedantham P, Hearn BR, Li H,
Gamache K, Gallagher CM, Ang KK, Wilson C, Okreglak V, Ashkenazi A, Hann B, Nader
K, Arkin MR, Renslo AR, Sonenberg N, Walter P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics , University of California, San
Francisco , San Francisco , United States ; Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California, San Francisco , San Francisco , United States.

Comment in
    Elife. 2013;2:e00895.

Phosphorylation of the a-subunit of initiation factor 2 (eIF2) controls protein
synthesis by a conserved mechanism. In metazoa, distinct stress conditions
activate different eIF2a kinases (PERK, PKR, GCN2, and HRI) that converge on
phosphorylating a unique serine in eIF2a. This collection of signaling pathways
is termed the 'integrated stress response' (ISR). eIF2a phosphorylation
diminishes protein synthesis, while allowing preferential translation of some
mRNAs. Starting with a cell-based screen for inhibitors of PERK signaling, we
identified a small molecule, named ISRIB, that potently (IC50 = 5 nM) reverses
the effects of eIF2a phosphorylation. ISRIB reduces the viability of cells
subjected to PERK-activation by chronic endoplasmic reticulum stress. eIF2a
phosphorylation is implicated in memory consolidation. Remarkably, ISRIB-treated 
mice display significant enhancement in spatial and fear-associated learning.
Thus, memory consolidation is inherently limited by the ISR, and ISRIB releases
this brake. As such, ISRIB promises to contribute to our understanding and
treatment of cognitive disorders. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00498.001.

PMCID: PMC3667625
PMID: 23741617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Aug 1;305(3):E325-35. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00136.2013. Epub 2013 Jun 4.

Activation of the amino acid response modulates lineage specification during
differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells.

Shan J(1), Hamazaki T, Tang TA, Terada N, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, McKnight Brain Institute,
Shands Cancer Center, and Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida 
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

In somatic cells, a collection of signaling pathways activated by amino acid
limitation have been identified and referred to as the amino acid response (AAR).
Despite the importance of possible detrimental effects of nutrient limitation
during in vitro culture, the AAR has not been investigated in embryonic stem
cells (ESC). AAR activation caused the expected increase in transcription factors
that mediate specific AAR pathways, as well as the induction of asparagine
synthetase, a terminal AAR target gene. Neither AAR activation nor stable
knockdown of activating transcription factor (Atf) 4, a transcriptional mediator 
of the AAR, adversely affected ESC self-renewal or pluripotency. Low-level
induction of the AAR over a 12-day period of embryoid body differentiation did
alter lineage specification such that the primitive endodermal, visceral
endodermal, and endodermal lineages were favored, whereas mesodermal and certain 
ectodermal lineages were suppressed. Knockdown of Atf4 further enhanced the
AAR-induced increase in endodermal formation, suggesting that this phenomenon is 
mediated by an Atf4-independent mechanism. Collectively, the results indicate
that, during differentiation of mouse embryoid bodies in culture, the
availability of nutrients, such as amino acids, can influence the formation of
specific cell lineages.

PMCID: PMC4116408
PMID: 23736538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2013;29:63-79. doi:
10.1146/annurev-cellbio-101512-122347. Epub 2013 May 31.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways in osteoblasts.

Greenblatt MB(1), Shim JH, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115; email: matt.greenblatt@gmail.com.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are ancient signal transducers well
characterized as mediators of inflammation and neoplastic transformation. Recent 
work has expanded our understanding of their developmental functions,
particularly in the regulation of bone mass via control of osteoblast
differentiation. Here, we review the functions of MAPK pathways in osteoblasts,
including a consideration of MAPK substrates. In particular, MAPKs function to
regulate the key transcriptional mediators of osteoblast differentiation, with
ERK and p38 MAPKs phosphorylating RUNX2, the master regulator of osteoblast
differentiation. ERK also activates RSK2, which in turn phosphorylates ATF4, a
transcriptional regulator of late-stage osteoblast synthetic functions. The
MAP3Ks and MAP2Ks upstream of MAPKs have also been investigated, and significant 
differences have been found in the wiring of MAPK pathways in osteoblasts
relative to other tissues. Thus, the investigation of MAPKs in osteoblasts has
both revealed critical mechanisms for the maintenance of bone mass and added to
our understanding of how the individual components of MAPK pathways function in
concert in a complex in vivo system.

PMID: 23725048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Int J Hematol. 2013 Jul;98(1):66-73. doi: 10.1007/s12185-013-1367-z. Epub 2013
May 25.

Activating transcription factor 4, an ER stress mediator, is required for, but
excessive ER stress suppresses osteoblastogenesis by bortezomib.

Nakamura S(1), Miki H, Kido S, Nakano A, Hiasa M, Oda A, Amou H, Watanabe K,
Harada T, Fujii S, Takeuchi K, Kagawa K, Ozaki S, Matsumoto T, Abe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Sciences, University of Tokushima
Graduate School of Medicine, 3-18-15 Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is induced in matrix-producing osteoblasts and 
plays an essential role in osteoblastogenesis. Although the bone anabolic
activity of proteasome inhibitors has been demonstrated, the roles of ER stress
induced by proteasome inhibition in osteoblastogenesis remain largely unknown.
Here we show that bortezomib translationally increases protein levels of
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a downstream mediator of ER stress, in 
bone marrow stromal cells and MC3T3-E1 preosteoblastic cells. The suppression of 
ATF4 expression by siRNA abrogated osteocalcin expression and mineralized nodule 
formation by MC3T3-E1 cells induced by bortezomib, indicating a critical role for
ATF4 in bortezomib-mediated osteoblastogenesis. However, bortezomib at 20 nM or
higher abolished the mineralized nodule formation along with reductions in the
expression of osteoblastogenesis mediators ß-catenin and Osterix. Furthermore, at
50 nM, bortezomib induced the expression of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP),
suggesting activation of the ATF4-CHOP pro-apoptotic pathway. These results
suggest that a low dose of bortezomib induces osteogenic activity, but that, in
contrast, excessive ER stress caused by bortezomib at higher doses hampers
osteoblastogenesis. Therefore, dosing schedules for proteasome inhibitors warrant
further study to maximize anabolic actions without compromising anti-MM activity 
in patients with multiple myeloma (MM).

PMID: 23708974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Jan 22;7:9. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-9.

Signaling dynamics of palmitate-induced ER stress responses mediated by ATF4 in
HepG2 cells.

Cho H(1), Wu M, Zhang L, Thompson R, Nath A, Chan C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, East Lansing, MI
48824, USA.

BACKGROUND: Palmitic acid, the most common saturated free fatty acid, has been
implicated in ER (endoplasmic reticulum) stress-mediated apoptosis. This
lipoapotosis is dependent, in part, on the upregulation of the activating
transcription factor-4 (ATF4). To better understand the mechanisms by which
palmitate upregulates the expression level of ATF4, we integrated literature
information on palmitate-induced ER stress signaling into a discrete dynamic
model. The model provides an in silico framework that enables simulations and
predictions. The model predictions were confirmed through further experiments in 
human hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cells and the results were used to update 
the model and our current understanding of the signaling induced by palmitate.
RESULTS: The three key things from the in silico simulation and experimental
results are: 1) palmitate induces different signaling pathways (PKR
(double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase), PERK (PKR-like ER kinase), PKA
(cyclic AMP (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase A) in a time dependent-manner, 2)
both ATF4 and CREB1 (cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 1) interact with the
Atf4 promoter to contribute to a prolonged accumulation of ATF4, and 3) CREB1 is 
involved in ER-stress induced apoptosis upon palmitate treatment, by regulating
ATF4 expression and possibly Ca2+ dependent-CaM (calmodulin) signaling pathway.
CONCLUSION: The in silico model helped to delineate the essential signaling
pathways in palmitate-mediated apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3557202
PMID: 23339444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cancer Res. 2013 Mar 15;73(6):1993-2002. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3109. Epub
2013 Jan 18.

Characterization of a novel PERK kinase inhibitor with antitumor and
antiangiogenic activity.

Atkins C(1), Liu Q, Minthorn E, Zhang SY, Figueroa DJ, Moss K, Stanley TB,
Sanders B, Goetz A, Gaul N, Choudhry AE, Alsaid H, Jucker BM, Axten JM, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Oncology R&D, Collegeville, Pennsylvania 19426, USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a signal transduction pathway that
coordinates cellular adaptation to microenvironmental stresses that include
hypoxia, nutrient deprivation, and change in redox status. These stress stimuli
are common in many tumors and thus targeting components of the UPR signaling is
an attractive therapeutic approach. We have identified a first-in-class, small
molecule inhibitor of the eukaryotic initiation factor 2-alpha kinase 3 (EIF2AK3)
or PERK, one of the three mediators of UPR signaling. GSK2656157 is an
ATP-competitive inhibitor of PERK enzyme activity with an IC(50) of 0.9 nmol/L.
It is highly selective for PERK with IC(50) values >100 nmol/L against a panel of
300 kinases. GSK2656157 inhibits PERK activity in cells with an IC(50) in the
range of 10-30 nmol/L as shown by inhibition of stress-induced PERK
autophosphorylation, eIF2a substrate phosphorylation, together with corresponding
decreases in ATF4 and CAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) in 
multiple cell lines. Oral administration of GSK2656157 to mice shows a dose- and 
time-dependent pharmacodynamic response in pancreas as measured by PERK
autophosphorylation. Twice daily dosing of GSK2656157 results in dose-dependent
inhibition of multiple human tumor xenografts growth in mice. Altered amino acid 
metabolism, decreased blood vessel density, and vascular perfusion are potential 
mechanisms for the observed antitumor effect. However, despite its antitumor
activity, given the on-target pharmacologic effects of PERK inhibition on
pancreatic function, development of any PERK inhibitor in human subjects would
need to be cautiously pursued in cancer patients.

PMID: 23333938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Autophagy. 2013 Apr;9(4):612-4. doi: 10.4161/auto.23486. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

PERK-ing up autophagy during MYC-induced tumorigenesis.

Dey S(1), Tameire F, Koumenis C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Stress in the tumor microenvironment in the form of hypoxia and low glucose/amino
acid levels activates the evolutionarily conserved cellular adaptation program
called the unfolded protein response (UPR) promoting cell survival in such
conditions. Our recent studies showed that cell autonomous stress such as
activation of the proto-oncogene MYC/c-Myc, can also trigger the UPR and induce
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-mediated autophagy. Amelioration of ER stress
or autophagy enhances cancer cell death in vitro and attenuates tumor growth in
vivo. Here we will discuss the role of the UPR and autophagy in MYC-induced
transformation. Our findings demonstrate that the EIF2AK3/PERK-EIF2S1/eIF2a-ATF4 
arm of the UPR promotes tumorigenesis by activating autophagy and enhancing tumor
formation. Therefore, the UPR is an attractive target in MYC-driven cancers.

PMCID: PMC3627677
PMID: 23328692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2013 Jul;18(4):455-73. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0400-0.
Epub 2013 Jan 16.

A delayed antioxidant response in heat-stressed cells expressing a non-DNA
binding HSF1 mutant.

Hensen SM(1), Heldens L, van Genesen ST, Pruijn GJ, Lubsen NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.

To assess the consequences of inactivation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) during
aging, we analyzed the effect of HSF1 K80Q, a mutant unable to bind DNA, and of
dnHSF1, a mutant lacking the activation domain, on the transcriptome of cells 6
and 24 h after heat shock. The primary response to heat shock (6 h recovery), of 
which 30 % was HSF1-dependent, had decayed 24 h after heat shock in control cells
but was extended in HSF1 K80Q and dnHSF1 cells. Comparison with literature data
showed that even the HSF1 dependent primary stress response is largely cell
specific. HSF1 K80Q, but not HSF1 siRNA-treated, cells showed a delayed stress
response: an increase in transcript levels of HSF1 target genes 24 h after heat
stress. Knockdown of NRF2, but not of ATF4, c-Fos or FosB, inhibited this delayed
stress response. EEF1D_L siRNA inhibited both the delayed and the extended
primary stress responses, but had off target effects. In control cells an
antioxidant response (ARE binding, HMOX1 mRNA levels) was detected 6 h after heat
shock; in HSF1 K80Q cells this response was delayed to 24 h and the ARE complex
had a different mobility. Inactivation of HSF1 thus affects the timing and nature
of the antioxidant response and NRF2 can activate at least some HSF1 target genes
in the absence of HSF1 activity.

PMCID: PMC3682012
PMID: 23321918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Breast Cancer Res. 2013 Jan 7;15(1):R2. doi: 10.1186/bcr3373.

Hypoxia stimulates migration of breast cancer cells via the PERK/ATF4/LAMP3-arm
of the unfolded protein response.

Nagelkerke A, Bussink J, Mujcic H, Wouters BG, Lehmann S, Sweep FC, Span PN.

INTRODUCTION: The hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 pathway can stimulate tumor
cell migration and metastasis. Furthermore, hypoxic tumors are associated with a 
poor prognosis. Besides the HIF-1 pathway, the unfolded protein response (UPR) is
also induced by hypoxic conditions. The PKR-like ER kinase (PERK)/activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4)-arm of the UPR induces expression of
lysosomal-associated membrane protein 3 (LAMP3), a factor that has been linked to
metastasis and poor prognosis in solid tumors. In this study the role of
UPR-induced LAMP3 in hypoxia-mediated migration of breast cancer cells was
examined.
METHODS: A number of in vitro metastasis models were used to study the migration 
and invasion of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells under hypoxic conditions. PERK,
ATF4 and their downstream factor LAMP3 were knocked down to examine their role in
cell migration. In addition, multicellular tumor spheroids were used to study the
involvement of the tumor microenvironment in invasion.
RESULTS: Using transwell assays, migration of different breast cancer cell lines 
was assessed. A direct correlation was found between cell migration and baseline 
LAMP3 expression. Furthermore, moderate hypoxia (1% O2) was found to be optimal
in stimulating migration of MDA-MB-231 cells. siRNA mediated knockdown of PERK,
ATF4 and LAMP3 reduced migration of cells under these conditions. Using gap
closure assays, similar results were found. In a three-dimensional invasion assay
into collagen, LAMP3 knockdown cells showed a diminished capacity to invade
compared to control cells when collectively grown in multicellular spheroids.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, the PERK/ATF4/LAMP3-arm of the UPR is an additional pathway
mediating hypoxia-induced breast cancer cell migration.

PMCID: PMC3672809
PMID: 23294542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 1;431(1):19-24. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.12.114. Epub 2013 Jan 3.

Role of paraoxonase-1 in bone anabolic effects of parathyroid hormone in
hyperlipidemic mice.

Lu J(1), Cheng H, Atti E, Shih DM, Demer LL, Tintut Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA
90095-1679, United States.

Hyperlipidemia blunts anabolic effects of intermittent parathyroid hormone (PTH) 
on cortical bone, and the responsiveness to PTH are restored in part by oral
administration of the antioxidant ApoA-I mimetic peptide, D-4F. To evaluate the
mechanism of this rescue, hyperlipidemic mice overexpressing the high-density
lipoprotein-associated antioxidant enzyme, paraoxonase 1 (Ldlr(-/-)PON1(tg)) were
generated, and daily PTH injections were administered to Ldlr(-/-)PON1(tg) and to
littermate Ldlr(-/-) mice. Expression of bone regulatory genes was determined by 
realtime RT-qPCR, and cortical bone parameters of the femoral bones by
micro-computed tomographic analyses. PTH-treated Ldlr(-/-)PON1(tg) mice had
significantly greater expression of PTH receptor (PTH1R), activating
transcription factor-4 (ATF4), and osteoprotegerin (OPG) in femoral cortical
bone, as well as significantly greater cortical bone mineral content, thickness, 
and area in femoral diaphyses compared with untreated Ldlr(-/-)PON1(tg) mice. In 
contrast, in control mice (Ldlr(-/-)) without PON1 overexpression, PTH treatment 
did not induce these markers. Calvarial bone of PTH-treated Ldlr(-/-)PON1(tg)
mice also had significantly greater expression of osteoblastic differentiation
marker genes as well as BMP-2-target and Wnt-target genes. Untreated
Ldlr(-/-)PON1(tg) mice had significantly greater expression of PTHR1 than
untreated Ldlr(-/-) mice, whereas sclerostin expression was reduced. In femoral
cortical bones, expression levels of transcription factors, FoxO1 and ATF4, were 
also elevated in the untreated, control Ldlr(-/-)PON1(tg) mice, suggesting
enhancement of cellular protection against oxidants. These findings suggest that 
PON1 restores responsiveness to PTH through effects on oxidant stress, PTH
receptor expression, and/or Wnt signaling.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3563775
PMID: 23291186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52333. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052333. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Upregulating Noxa by ER stress, celastrol exerts synergistic anti-cancer activity
in combination with ABT-737 in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Zhu H(1), Yang W, He LJ, Ding WJ, Zheng L, Liao SD, Huang P, Lu W, He QJ, Yang B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

The human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) represents biologically aggressive and
chemo-resistant cancers. Owing to the low affinity with the apoptotic factor
Mcl-1, the BH3 mimetic drug ABT-737 failed to exert potent cancer-killing
activities in variety of cancer models including HCC. The current study
demonstrated that combining ABT-737 and Celastrol synergistically suppressed HCC 
cell proliferation, and induced apoptosis which was accompanied with the
activation of caspase cascade and release of cytochrome c from mitochondria.
Further study revealed that the enhanced Noxa caused by Celastrol was the key
factor for the synergy, since small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of Noxa
expression in HCC cells resulted in decreased apoptosis and attenuated
anti-proliferative effects of the combination. In addition, our study unraveled
that, upon Celastrol exposure, the activation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress, specifically, the eIF2a-ATF4 pathway played indispensable roles in the
activation of Noxa, which was validated by the observation that depletion of ATF4
significantly abrogated the Noxa elevation by Celastrol. Our findings highlight a
novel signaling pathway through which Celastrol increase Noxa expression, and
suggest the potential use of ATF4-mediated regulation of Noxa as a promising
strategy to improve the anti-cancer activities of ABT-737.

PMCID: PMC3527540
PMID: 23284992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 22;288(8):5682-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.408641. Epub 2012 
Dec 28.

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) inhibit insulin secretion and
action in pancreatic ß cells.

Isaac R(1), Boura-Halfon S, Gurevitch D, Shainskaya A, Levkovitz Y, Zick Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100 Israel.

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are antidepressants used for the 
treatment of mood and anxiety disorders. Here, we demonstrate that incubation (2 
h) of murine islets or Min6 ß cell line with the SSRIs paroxetine, fluoxetine, or
sertraline inhibited insulin-induced Tyr phosphorylation of insulin receptor
substrate (IRS)-2 protein and the activation of its downstream targets Akt and
the ribosomal protein S6 kinase-1 (S6K1). Inhibition was dose-dependent with
half-maximal effects at ~15-20 µM. It correlated with a rapid dephosphorylation
and activation of the IRS kinase GSK3ß. Introduction of GSK3ß siRNAs eliminated
the inhibitory effects of the SSRIs. Inhibition of IRS-2 action by 30 µM SSRI was
associated with a marked inhibition of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from 
murine and human pancreatic islets. Secretion induced by basic secretagogues (KCl
and Arg) was not affected by these drugs. Prolonged treatment (16 h) of Min6
cells with sertraline resulted in the induction of inducible nitric oxide
synthase; activation of endoplasmic reticulum stress, and the initiation of the
unfolded protein response, manifested by enhanced transcription of ATF4 and C/EBP
homologous protein. This triggered an apoptotic process, manifested by enhanced
caspase 3/7 activity, which resulted in ß cell death. These findings implicate
SSRIs as inhibitors of IRS protein function and insulin action through the
activation of GSK3ß. They further suggest that SSRIs inhibit insulin secretion;
induce the unfolded protein response; activate an apoptotic process, and trigger 
ß cell death. Given that SSRIs promote insulin resistance while inhibiting
insulin secretion, these drugs might accelerate the transition from an
insulin-resistant state to overt diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3581374
PMID: 23275337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Physiol Genomics. 2013 Feb 15;45(4):127-37. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00160.2012. Epub 2012 Dec 26.

Elevated cJUN expression and an ATF/CRE site within the ATF3 promoter contribute 
to activation of ATF3 transcription by the amino acid response.

Fu L(1), Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, Shands
Cancer Center, and Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College
of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Mammalian cells respond to amino acid deprivation through multiple signaling
pathways referred to as the amino acid response (AAR). Transcription factors
mediate the AAR after their activation by several mechanisms; examples include
translational control (activating transcription factor 4, ATF4), phosphorylation 
(p-cJUN), and transcriptional control (ATF3). ATF4 induces ATF3 transcription
through a promoter-localized C/EBP-ATF response element (CARE). The present
report characterizes an ATF/CRE site upstream of the CARE that also contributes
to AAR-induced ATF3 transcription. ATF4 binds to the ATF/CRE and CARE sequences
and both are required for a maximal response to ATF4 induction. ATF3, which
antagonizes ATF4 and represses its own gene, also exhibited binding activity to
the ATF/CRE and CARE sequences. The AAR resulted in elevated total cJUN and
p-cJUN protein levels and both forms exhibited binding activity to the ATF/CRE
and CARE ATF3 sequences. Knockdown of AAR-enhanced cJUN expression blocked
induction of the ATF3 gene and mutation of either the ATF/CRE or the CARE site
prevented the cJUN-dependent increase in ATF3-driven luciferase activity. The
results indicate that both increased cJUN and the cis-acting ATF/CRE sequence
within the ATF3 promoter contribute to the transcriptional activation of the gene
during the AAR.

PMCID: PMC3568878
PMID: 23269699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Feb 15;50(2):151-66. doi: 10.1530/JME-12-0195. Print 2013 
Apr.

hCG-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress triggers apoptosis and reduces
steroidogenic enzyme expression through activating transcription factor 6 in
Leydig cells of the testis.

Park SJ(1), Kim TS, Park CK, Lee SH, Kim JM, Lee KS, Lee IK, Park JW, Lawson MA, 
Lee DS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Food and Nutritional Genomics Research, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, Republic of Korea.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress generally occurs in secretory cell types. It
has been reported that Leydig cells, which produce testosterone in response to
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), express key steroidogenic enzymes for the
regulation of testosterone synthesis. In this study, we analyzed whether hCG
induces ER stress via three unfolded protein response (UPR) pathways in mouse
Leydig tumor (mLTC-1) cells and the testis. Treatment with hCG induced ER stress 
in mLTC-1 cells via the ATF6, IRE1a/XBP1, and eIF2a/GADD34/ATF4 UPR pathways, and
transient expression of 50<U+200A>kDa protein activating transcription factor 6
(p50ATF6) reduced the expression level of steroidogenic 3ß-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase <U+0394>5-<U+0394>4-isomerase (3ß-HSD) enzyme. In an in vivo model, high-level
hCG treatment induced expression of p50ATF6 while that of steroidogenic enzymes, 
especially 3ß-HSD, 17a-hydroxylase/C17-20 lyase (CYP17), and 17ß-hydrozysteroid
dehydrogenase (17ß-HSD), was reduced. Expression levels of steroidogenic enzymes 
were restored by the ER stress inhibitor tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA).
Furthermore, lentivirus-mediated transient expression of p50ATF6 reduced the
expression level of 3ß-HSD in the testis. Protein expression levels of
phospho-JNK, CHOP, and cleaved caspases-12 and -3 as markers of ER
stress-mediated apoptosis markedly increased in response to high-level hCG
treatment in mLTC-1 cells and the testis. Based on transmission electron
microscopy and H&E staining of the testis, it was shown that abnormal ER
morphology and destruction of testicular histology induced by high-level hCG
treatment were reversed by the addition of TUDCA. These findings suggest that
hCG-induced ER stress plays important roles in steroidogenic enzyme expression
via modulation of the ATF6 pathway as well as ER stress-mediated apoptosis in
Leydig cells.

PMCID: PMC4111658
PMID: 23256993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Mar;45(3):711-23. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.12.005. Epub 2012 Dec 13.

Ku70 acetylation and modulation of c-Myc/ATF4/CHOP signaling axis by SIRT1
inhibition lead to sensitization of HepG2 cells to TRAIL through induction of DR5
and down-regulation of c-FLIP.

Kim MJ(1), Hong KS, Kim HB, Lee SH, Bae JH, Kim DW, Dao TT, Oh WK, Kang CD, Kim
SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Research Institute, Pusan National
University School of Medicine, Yangsan 626-870, Republic of Korea.

Erratum in
    Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 May;45(5):1016-7.

In this study, we investigated the role of c-Myc/ATF4/CHOP signaling pathway in
sensitization of human hepatoma HepG2 cells to TRAIL. Knockdown of SIRT1 or
treatment with SIRT1 inhibitor caused the up-regulation of DR5 and
down-regulation of c-FLIP through modulation of c-Myc/ATF4/CHOP pathway, and
subsequently enhanced the cytotoxic and apoptotic effects of TRAIL on HepG2
cells. Interestingly, SIRT1 interacted directly with c-FLIP(L) and Ku70, and
treatment with SIRT1 inhibitor enhanced acetylation of Ku70 and subsequently
decreased its binding to c-FLIP. And this was followed by degradation of c-FLIP. 
Moreover, Ku70(-/-) MEF and Ku70-knockdown HepG2 cells showed the increased
levels of c-Myc, ATF4, CHOP, and DR5 and decreased level of c-FLIP. These results
were followed by increased sensitivity of Ku70(-/-) MEF cells and Ku70-knockdown 
HepG2 cells to TRAIL compared with their control cells. These findings reveal for
the first time that SIRT1 inhibition increases Ku70 acetylation, and the
acetylated Ku70 with a decreased function mediates the induction of DR5 and the
down-regulation of c-FLIP by up-regulating c-Myc/ATF4/CHOP pathway, and
consequently promotes the TRAIL-induced apoptosis of HepG2 cells. This study
provides important mechanistic insight of the synergism exhibited by SIRT1
inhibition and TRAIL.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23247197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Feb 15;304(4):C342-53. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00153.2012. Epub 2012 Dec 12.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress signal impairs erythropoietin production: a role for
ATF4.

Chiang CK(1), Nangaku M, Tanaka T, Iwawaki T, Inagi R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Endocrinology, University of Tokyo School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Hypoxia upregulates the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) pathway and the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress signal, unfolded protein response (UPR). The
cross talk of both signals affects the pathogenic alteration by hypoxia. Here we 
showed that ER stress induced by tunicamycin or thapsigargin suppressed inducible
(CoCl(2) or hypoxia) transcription of erythropoietin (EPO), a representative HIF 
target gene, in HepG2. This suppression was inversely correlated with UPR
activation, as estimated by expression of the UPR regulator glucose-regulated
protein 78, and restored by an ER stress inhibitor, salubrinal, in association
with normalization of the UPR state. Importantly, the decreased EPO expression
was also observed in HepG2 overexpressing UPR activating transcription factor
(ATF)4. Overexpression of mutated ATF4 that lacks the transcriptional activity
did not alter EPO transcriptional regulation. Transcriptional activity of the EPO
3'-enhancer, which is mainly regulated by HIF, was abolished by both ER stressors
and ATF4 overexpression, while nuclear HIF accumulation or expression of other
HIF target genes was not suppressed by ER stress. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis identified a novel ATF4 binding site (TGACCTCT) within the EPO
3'-enhancer region, suggesting a distinct role for ATF4 in UPR-dependent
suppression of the enhancer. Induction of ER stress in rat liver and kidney by
tunicamycin decreased the hepatic and renal mRNA and plasma level of EPO.
Collectively, ER stress selectively impairs the transcriptional activity of EPO
but not of other HIF target genes. This effect is mediated by suppression of EPO 
3'-enhancer activity via ATF4 without any direct effect on HIF, indicating that
UPR contributes to oxygen-sensing regulation of EPO.

PMID: 23242184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cell Mol Immunol. 2013 Jan;10(1):84-94. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2012.57. Epub 2012 Dec
17.

ATF4 is directly recruited by TLR4 signaling and positively regulates
TLR4-trigged cytokine production in human monocytes.

Zhang C(1), Bai N, Chang A, Zhang Z, Yin J, Shen W, Tian Y, Xiang R, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Nankai University School of Medicine, Tianjin,
China.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are sentinels of the host defense system, which
recognize a large number of microbial pathogens. The host defense system may be
inefficient or inflammatory diseases may develop if microbial recognition by TLRs
and subsequent TLR-triggered cytokine production are deregulated. Activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a member of the ATF/CREB transcription factor
family, is an important factor that participates in several pathophysiological
processes. In this report, we found that ATF4 is also involved in the
TLR-mediated innate immune response, which participates in TLR4 signal
transduction and mediates the secretion of a variety of cytokines. We observed
that ATF4 is activated and translocates to the nucleus following
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation via the TLR4-MyD88-dependent pathway.
Additionally, a cytokine array assay showed that some key inflammatory cytokines,
such as IL-6, IL-8 and RANTES, are positively regulated by ATF4. We also
demonstrate that c-Jun directly binds to ATF4, thereby promoting the secretion of
inflammatory cytokines. Taken together, these results indicate that ATF4 acts as 
a positive regulator in TLR4-triggered cytokine production.

PMCID: PMC4003182
PMID: 23241898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Proteomics. 2013 Feb 21;79:180-94. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.11.022. Epub 2012 
Dec 10.

Application of integrated transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic profiling for
the delineation of mechanisms of drug induced cell stress.

Wilmes A(1), Limonciel A, Aschauer L, Moenks K, Bielow C, Leonard MO, Hamon J,
Carpi D, Ruzek S, Handler A, Schmal O, Herrgen K, Bellwon P, Burek C, Truisi GL, 
Hewitt P, Di Consiglio E, Testai E, Blaauboer BJ, Guillou C, Huber CG, Lukas A,
Pfaller W, Mueller SO, Bois FY, Dekant W, Jennings P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Physiology, Department of Physiology and Medical Physics,
Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck 6020, Austria.

High content omic techniques in combination with stable human in vitro cell
culture systems have the potential to improve on current pre-clinical safety
regimes by providing detailed mechanistic information of altered cellular
processes. Here we investigated the added benefit of integrating transcriptomics,
proteomics and metabolomics together with pharmacokinetics for drug testing
regimes. Cultured human renal epithelial cells (RPTEC/TERT1) were exposed to the 
nephrotoxin Cyclosporine A (CsA) at therapeutic and supratherapeutic
concentrations for 14days. CsA was quantified in supernatants and cellular
lysates by LC-MS/MS for kinetic modeling. There was a rapid cellular uptake and
accumulation of CsA, with a non-linear relationship between intracellular and
applied concentrations. CsA at 15µM induced mitochondrial disturbances and
activation of the Nrf2-oxidative-damage and the unfolded protein-response
pathways. All three omic streams provided complementary information, especially
pertaining to Nrf2 and ATF4 activation. No stress induction was detected with 5µM
CsA; however, both concentrations resulted in a maximal secretion of cyclophilin 
B. The study demonstrates for the first time that CsA-induced stress is not
directly linked to its primary pharmacology. In addition we demonstrate the power
of integrated omics for the elucidation of signaling cascades brought about by
compound induced cell stress.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23238060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Pharmacol. 2013 Mar;83(3):594-604. doi: 10.1124/mol.112.081810. Epub 2012 Dec
10.

Identification and characterization of a potent activator of p53-independent
cellular senescence via a small-molecule screen for modifiers of the integrated
stress response.

Sayers CM(1), Papandreou I, Guttmann DM, Maas NL, Diehl JA, Witze ES, Koong AC,
Koumenis C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School
of Medicine, Translational Research Center Room 8-124, 3400 Civic Center Blvd.,
Bldg. 421, Philadelphia, PA 19104-5156, USA.

The Integrated Stress Response (ISR) is a signaling program that enables cellular
adaptation to stressful conditions like hypoxia and nutrient deprivation in the
tumor microenvironment. An important effector of the ISR is activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a transcription factor that regulates genes
involved in redox homeostasis and amino acid metabolism and transport. Because
both inhibition and overactivation of the ISR can induce tumor cell death,
modulators of ATF4 expression could prove to be clinically useful. In this study,
chemical libraries were screened for modulators of ATF4 expression. We identified
one compound, E235
(N-(1-benzyl-piperidin-4-yl)-2-(4-fluoro-phenyl)-benzo[d]imidazo[2,1-b]thiazole-7
-carboxamide), that activated the ISR and dose-dependently increased levels of
ATF4 in transformed cells. A dose-dependent decrease in viability was observed in
several mouse and human tumor cell lines, and knockdown of ATF4 significantly
increased the antiproliferative effects of E235. Interestingly, low µM doses of
E235 induced senescence in many cell types, including HT1080 human fibrosarcoma
and B16F10 mouse melanoma cells. E235-mediated induction of senescence was not
dependent on p21 or p53; however, p21 conferred protection against the growth
inhibitory effects of E235. Treatment with E235 resulted in an increase in cells 
arrested at the G2/M phase with a concurrent decrease in S-phase cells. E235 also
activated DNA damage response signaling, resulting in increased levels of
Ser15-phosphorylated p53, <U+03B3>-H2AX, and phosphorylated checkpoint kinase 2 (Chk2), 
although E235 does not appear to cause physical DNA damage. Induction of <U+03B3>-H2AX
was abrogated in ATF4 knockdown cells. Together, these results suggest that
modulation of the ISR pathway with the small molecule E235 could be a promising
antitumor strategy.

PMCID: PMC3583498
PMID: 23229510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Nat Med. 2013 Jan;19(1):93-100. doi: 10.1038/nm.3026. Epub 2012 Dec 9.

miR-214 targets ATF4 to inhibit bone formation.

Wang X(1), Guo B, Li Q, Peng J, Yang Z, Wang A, Li D, Hou Z, Lv K, Kan G, Cao H, 
Wu H, Song J, Pan X, Sun Q, Ling S, Li Y, Zhu M, Zhang P, Peng S, Xie X, Tang T, 
Hong A, Bian Z, Bai Y, Lu A, Li Y, He F, Zhang G, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Space Medicine Fundamentals and Application, China
Astronaut Research and Training Center, Beijing, China.

Emerging evidence indicates that microRNAs (miRNAs) have important roles in
regulating osteogenic differentiation and bone formation. Thus far, no study has 
established the pathophysiological role for miRNAs identified in human
osteoporotic bone specimens. Here we found that elevated miR-214 levels
correlated with a lower degree of bone formation in bone specimens from aged
patients with fractures. We also found that osteoblast-specific manipulation of
miR-214 levels by miR-214 antagomir treatment in miR-214 transgenic,
ovariectomized, or hindlimb-unloaded mice revealed an inhibitory role of miR-214 
in regulating bone formation. Further, in vitro osteoblast activity and matrix
mineralization were promoted by antagomir-214 and decreased by agomir-214, and
miR-214 directly targeted ATF4 to inhibit osteoblast activity. These data suggest
that miR-214 has a crucial role in suppressing bone formation and that miR-214
inhibition in osteoblasts may be a potential anabolic strategy for ameliorating
osteoporosis.

PMID: 23223004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e50407. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050407. Epub 2012 Nov 28.

Glutamine treatment attenuates endoplasmic reticulum stress and apoptosis in
TNBS-induced colitis.

Crespo I(1), San-Miguel B, Prause C, Marroni N, Cuevas MJ, González-Gallego J,
Tuñón MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y
Digestivas (CIBERehd), León, Spain.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and apoptotic cell death play an important role
in the pathogenesis and perpetuation of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). We
aimed to explore the potential of glutamine to reduce ER stress and apoptosis in 
a rat model of experimental IBD. Colitis was induced in male Wistar rats by
intracolonic administration of 30 mg of 2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid
(TNBS). Glutamine (25 mg/dL) was given by rectal route daily for 2 d or 7 d. Both
oxidative stress (TBARS concentration and oxidised/reduced glutathione ratio) and
ER stress markers (CHOP, BiP, calpain-1 and caspase-12 expression) increased
significantly within 48 h of TNBS instillation, and glutamine attenuated the
extent of the changes. Glutamine also inhibited the significant increases of
ATF6, ATF4 and spliced XBP-1 mRNA levels induced by TNBS instillation.
TNBS-colitis resulted in a significant increase in p53 and cytochrome c
expression, and a reduced Bcl-xL expression and Bax/Bcl-2 ratio. These effects
were significantly inhibited by glutamine. Treatment with the amino acid also
resulted in significant decreases of caspase-9, caspase-8 and caspase-3
activities. Double immunofluorescence staining showed co-localization of CHOP and
cleaved caspase-3 in colon sections. Phospho-JNK and PARP-1 expression was also
significantly higher in TNBS-treated rats, and treatment with glutamine
significantly decreased JNK phosphorylation and PARP-1 proteolysis. To directly
address the effect of glutamine on ER stress and apoptosis in epithelial cells,
the ER stress inducers brefeldin A and tunicamycin were added to Caco-2 cells
that were treated with glutamine (5 mM and 10 mM). The significant enhancement in
PERK, ATF6 phosphorylated IRE1, BiP and cleaved caspase-3 expression induced by
brefeldin A and tunicamycin was partly prevented by glutamine. Data obtained
indicated that modulation of ER stress signalling and anti-apoptotic effects
contribute to protection by glutamine against damage in TNBS-induced colitis.

PMCID: PMC3508929
PMID: 23209735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Biochem J. 2013 Feb 15;450(1):221-9. doi: 10.1042/BJ20121393.

FGF19 (fibroblast growth factor 19) as a novel target gene for activating
transcription factor 4 in response to endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Shimizu M(1), Li J, Maruyama R, Inoue J, Sato R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Sciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8657,
Japan.

FGF19 (fibroblast growth factor 19), expressed in the small intestine, acts as an
enterohepatic hormone by mediating inhibitory effects on the bile acid synthetic 
pathway and regulating carbohydrate and lipid metabolism. In an attempt to
identify novel agents other than bile acids that induce increased FGF19
expression, we found that some ER (endoplasmic reticulum) stress inducers were
effective. When intestinal epithelial Caco-2 cells were incubated with
thapsigargin, marked increases were observed in the mRNA and secreted protein
levels of FGF19. This was not associated with the farnesoid X receptor. Reporter 
gene analyses using the 5'-promoter region of FGF19 revealed that a functional
AARE (amino-acid-response element) was localized in this region, and this site
was responsible for inducing its transcription through ATF4 (activating
transcription factor 4), which is activated in response to ER stress. EMSAs
(electrophoretic mobility-shift assays) and ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) 
assays showed that ATF4 bound to this site and enhanced FGF19 expression.
Overexpression of ATF4 in Caco-2 cells induced increased FGF19 mRNA expression,
whereas shRNA (short hairpin RNA)-mediated depletion of ATF4 significantly
attenuated a thapsigargin-induced increase in FGF19 mRNA.

PMID: 23205607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Nat Med. 2013 Jan;19(1):83-92. doi: 10.1038/nm.3014. Epub 2012 Dec 2.

Autophagy deficiency leads to protection from obesity and insulin resistance by
inducing Fgf21 as a mitokine.

Kim KH(1), Jeong YT, Oh H, Kim SH, Cho JM, Kim YN, Kim SS, Kim do H, Hur KY, Kim 
HK, Ko T, Han J, Kim HL, Kim J, Back SH, Komatsu M, Chen H, Chan DC, Konishi M,
Itoh N, Choi CS, Lee MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2013 Jan;19(1):17-8.

Despite growing interest and a recent surge in papers, the role of autophagy in
glucose and lipid metabolism is unclear. We produced mice with skeletal
muscle-specific deletion of Atg7 (encoding autophagy-related 7). Unexpectedly,
these mice showed decreased fat mass and were protected from diet-induced obesity
and insulin resistance; this phenotype was accompanied by increased fatty acid
oxidation and browning of white adipose tissue (WAT) owing to induction of
fibroblast growth factor 21 (Fgf21). Mitochondrial dysfunction induced by
autophagy deficiency increased Fgf21 expression through induction of Atf4, a
master regulator of the integrated stress response. Mitochondrial respiratory
chain inhibitors also induced Fgf21 in an Atf4-dependent manner. We also observed
induction of Fgf21, resistance to diet-induced obesity and amelioration of
insulin resistance in mice with autophagy deficiency in the liver, another
insulin target tissue. These findings suggest that autophagy deficiency and
subsequent mitochondrial dysfunction promote Fgf21 expression, a hormone we
consequently term a 'mitokine', and together these processes promote protection
from diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance.

PMID: 23202295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Cell Signal. 2013 Feb;25(2):552-60. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.11.015. Epub 2012
Nov 23.

Osteoporosis regulation by salubrinal through eIF2a mediated differentiation of
osteoclast and osteoblast.

He L(1), Lee J, Jang JH, Sakchaisri K, Hwang J, Cha-Molstad HJ, Kim KA, Ryoo IJ, 
Lee HG, Kim SO, Soung NK, Lee KS, Kwon YT, Erikson RL, Ahn JS, Kim BY.

Author information: 
(1)Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Korea.

Nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) ligand (RANKL) was shown to induce osteoclast
differentiation by increasing the expression of c-Fos, NFATc1 and TRAP.
Salubrinal treatment to bone marrow macrophage (BMM) cells, however,
significantly blocked NFATc1 expression and osteoclast differentiation by RANKL. 
Overexpression of NFATc1 further confirmed that NFATc1 is a key factor affected
by salubrinal in osteoclast differentiation by RANKL. Unexpectedly, NFATc1 and
c-Fos mRNA expressions were not affected by salubrinal, implicating that NFATc1
expression is regulated at a translational stage. In support of this, salubrinal 
increased the phosphorylation of a translation factor eIF2a, decreasing the
global protein synthesis including NFATc1. In contrast, a phosphorylation mutant 
plasmid pLenti-eIF2a-S51A restored RANKL-induced NFATc1 expression and osteoclast
differentiation even in the presence of salubrinal. Furthermore, knockdown of
ATF4 significantly reduced salubrinal-induced osteoblast differentiation as
evidenced by decreased calcium accumulation and lowered expressions of the
osteoblast differentiation markers, alkaline phosphatase and RANKL in MC3T3-E1
osteoblast cells. Salubrinal treatment to co-cultured BMM and MC3T3-E1 cells also
showed reduction of osteoclast differentiation. Finally, salubrinal efficiently
blocked osteoporosis in mice model treated with RANKL as evidenced by elevated
bone mineral density (BMD) and other osteoporosis factors. Collectively, our data
indicate that salubrinal could affect the differentiation of both osteoblast and 
osteoclast, and be developed as an excellent anti-osteoporosis drug. In addition,
modulation of ATF4 and NFATc1 expressions through eIF2a phosphorylation could be 
a valuable target for the treatment of osteoporosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3593652
PMID: 23178987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. BMC Genomics. 2012 Nov 24;13:665. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-665.

Analysis of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-ß/d (PPARß/d) cistrome
reveals novel co-regulatory role of ATF4.

Khozoie C(1), Borland MG, Zhu B, Baek S, John S, Hager GL, Shah YM, Gonzalez FJ, 
Peters JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences and The Center for Molecular 
Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, The Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, PA 16802, USA.

BACKGROUND: The present study coupled expression profiling with chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) to examine peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-ß/d (PPARß/d)-dependent regulation of gene
expression in mouse keratinocytes, a cell type that expresses PPARß/d in high
concentration.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis elucidated eight different types of regulation that 
modulated PPARß/d-dependent gene expression of 612 genes ranging from repression 
or activation without an exogenous ligand, repression or activation with an
exogenous ligand, or a combination of these effects. Bioinformatic analysis of
ChIP-seq data demonstrated promoter occupancy of PPARß/d for some of these genes,
and also identified the presence of other transcription factor binding sites in
close proximity to PPARß/d bound to chromatin. For some types of regulation, ATF4
is required for ligand-dependent induction of PPARß/d target genes.
CONCLUSIONS: PPARß/d regulates constitutive expression of genes in keratinocytes,
thus suggesting the presence of one or more endogenous ligands. The diversity in 
the types of gene regulation carried out by PPARß/d is consistent with dynamic
binding and interactions with chromatin and indicates the presence of complex
regulatory networks in cells expressing high levels of this nuclear receptor such
as keratinocytes. Results from these studies are the first to demonstrate that
differences in DNA binding of other transcription factors can directly influence 
the transcriptional activity of PPARß/d.

PMCID: PMC3556323
PMID: 23176727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cancer Cell. 2012 Nov 13;22(5):631-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.09.021.

ATF4 regulates MYC-mediated neuroblastoma cell death upon glutamine deprivation.

Qing G(1), Li B, Vu A, Skuli N, Walton ZE, Liu X, Mayes PA, Wise DR, Thompson CB,
Maris JM, Hogarty MD, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Oncogenic Myc alters mitochondrial metabolism, making it dependent on exogenous
glutamine (Gln) for cell survival. Accordingly, Gln deprivation selectively
induces apoptosis in MYC-overexpressing cells via unknown mechanisms. Using
MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma as a model, we identify PUMA, NOXA, and TRB3 as
executors of Gln-starved cells. Gln depletion in MYC-transformed cells induces
apoptosis through ATF4-dependent, but p53-independent, PUMA and NOXA induction.
MYC-transformed cells depend on both glutamate-oxaloacetate transaminase and
glutamate dehydrogenase to maintain Gln homeostasis and suppress apoptosis.
Consequently, either ATF4 agonists or glutaminolysis inhibitors potently induce
apoptosis in vitro and inhibit tumor growth in vivo. These results reveal
mechanisms whereby Myc sensitizes cells to apoptosis, and validate ATF4 agonists 
and inhibitors of Gln metabolism as potential Myc-selective cancer therapeutics.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3510660
PMID: 23153536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Hepatology. 2013 Apr;57(4):1366-77. doi: 10.1002/hep.26126.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress induces hepatic steatosis via increased expression
of the hepatic very low-density lipoprotein receptor.

Jo H(1), Choe SS, Shin KC, Jang H, Lee JH, Seong JK, Back SH, Kim JB.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
University of Ulsan, Ulsan, Korea.

Recent evidence suggests that obese animals exhibit increased endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress in the liver and adipose tissue. Although ER stress is
closely associated with lipid homeostasis, it is largely unknown how ER stress
contributes to hepatic steatosis. In this study, we demonstrate that the
induction of ER stress stimulates hepatic steatosis through increased expression 
of the hepatic very low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR). Among the unfolded 
protein response sensors, the protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase-activating
transcription factor 4 signaling pathway was required for hepatic VLDLR
up-regulation. In primary hepatocytes, ER stress-dependent VLDLR expression
induced intracellular triglyceride accumulation in the presence of very
low-density lipoprotein. Moreover, ER stress-dependent hepatic steatosis was
diminished in the livers of VLDLR-deficient and apolipoprotein E-deficient mice
compared with wild-type mice. In addition, the VLDLR-deficient mice exhibited
decreased hepatic steatosis upon high-fat diet feeding.CONCLUSION: These data
suggest that ER stress-dependent expression of hepatic VLDLR leads to hepatic
steatosis by increasing lipoprotein delivery to the liver, which might be a novel
mechanism explaining ER stress-induced hepatic steatosis.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 23152128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Tissue Eng Part B Rev. 2013 Jun;19(3):254-63. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEB.2012.0527.
Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Transcriptional regulatory cascades in Runx2-dependent bone development.

Liu TM(1), Lee EH.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore. dbsliutm@yahoo.com

The development of the musculoskeletal system is a complex process that involves 
very precise control of bone formation and growth as well as remodeling during
postnatal life. Although the understanding of the transcriptional mechanisms of
osteogenesis has increased considerably, the molecular regulatory basis,
especially the gene regulatory network of osteogenic differentiation, is still
poorly understood. This review provides the reader with an overview of the key
transcription factors that govern bone formation, highlighting their function and
regulation linked to Runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2). Runx2 as the
master transcription factor of osteoblast differentiation, Twist, Msh homeobox 2 
(Msx2), and promyelocytic leukemia zinc-finger protein (PLZF) acting upstream of 
Runx2, Osterix (Osx) acting downstream of Runx2, and activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4) and zinc-finger protein 521 (ZFP521) acting as cofactors of Runx2
are discussed, and their relevance for tissue engineering is presented.
References are provided for more in-depth personal study.

PMCID: PMC3627420
PMID: 23150948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47931. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047931. Epub 2012 Oct 29.

UPR-induced resistance to etoposide is downstream of PERK and independent of
changes in topoisomerase IIa levels.

Mann MJ(1), Pereira ER, Liao N, Hendershot LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The unfolded protein response (UPR) is regulated by three
ER-localized, transmembrane signal transducers that control distinct aspects of
the UPR. We previously reported that both increased resistance to etoposide and a
reduction in Topoisomerase IIa protein levels were a direct response of UPR
activation, and the latter occurred independent of changes in Topo IIa mRNA
levels. We have now examined the contribution of each of the three up-stream
transducers of the UPR, as well as some of their downstream targets in affecting 
decreased expression of Topo IIa protein and increased drug resistance.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Our data revealed that while Ire1 activation led to Topo IIa 
loss at the protein level it did not contribute to changes in sensitivity to
etoposide. The decreased expression of Topo IIa protein was not downstream of
XBP-1, in keeping with the fact that Topo IIa transcription was not affected by
ER stress. Conversely, PERK activation did not contribute to changes in Topo IIa 
protein levels, but it did play a significant role in the UPR-induced decreased
sensitivity to etoposide. Several cellular responses downstream of PERK were
examined for their potential to contribute to resistance. The ATF6 arm of the UPR
did not significantly contribute to etoposide resistance within the time frame of
our experiments.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: In toto, our data demonstrate that UPR-induced
changes in Topo IIa protein levels are not responsible for resistance to
etoposide as has been previously hypothesized, and instead demonstrate that the
PERK branch plays a Topo IIa-independent role in altered sensitivity to this
drug.

PMCID: PMC3483293
PMID: 23144714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Clin Invest. 2012 Dec;122(12):4621-34. doi: 10.1172/JCI62973. Epub 2012 Nov 12.

ER stress-mediated autophagy promotes Myc-dependent transformation and tumor
growth.

Hart LS(1), Cunningham JT, Datta T, Dey S, Tameire F, Lehman SL, Qiu B, Zhang H, 
Cerniglia G, Bi M, Li Y, Gao Y, Liu H, Li C, Maity A, Thomas-Tikhonenko A, Perl
AE, Koong A, Fuchs SY, Diehl JA, Mills IG, Ruggero D, Koumenis C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-5156, USA.

The proto-oncogene c-Myc paradoxically activates both proliferation and
apoptosis. In the pathogenic state, c-Myc-induced apoptosis is bypassed via a
critical, yet poorly understood escape mechanism that promotes cellular
transformation and tumorigenesis. The accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER
initiates a cellular stress program termed the unfolded protein response (UPR) to
support cell survival. Analysis of spontaneous mouse and human lymphomas
demonstrated significantly higher levels of UPR activation compared with normal
tissues. Using multiple genetic models, we demonstrated that c-Myc and N-Myc
activated the PERK/eIF2a/ATF4 arm of the UPR, leading to increased cell survival 
via the induction of cytoprotective autophagy. Inhibition of PERK significantly
reduced Myc-induced autophagy, colony formation, and tumor formation. Moreover,
pharmacologic or genetic inhibition of autophagy resulted in increased
Myc-dependent apoptosis. Mechanistically, we demonstrated an important link
between Myc-dependent increases in protein synthesis and UPR activation.
Specifically, by employing a mouse minute (L24+/-) mutant, which resulted in
wild-type levels of protein synthesis and attenuation of Myc-induced
lymphomagenesis, we showed that Myc-induced UPR activation was reversed. Our
findings establish a role for UPR as an enhancer of c-Myc-induced transformation 
and suggest that UPR inhibition may be particularly effective against
malignancies characterized by c-Myc overexpression.

PMCID: PMC3533536
PMID: 23143306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48235. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048235. Epub 2012 Oct 25.

2-Hydroxyoleic acid induces ER stress and autophagy in various human glioma cell 
lines.

Marcilla-Etxenike A(1), Martín ML, Noguera-Salvà MA, García-Verdugo JM,
Soriano-Navarro M, Dey I, Escribá PV, Busquets X.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Biología, Instituto Universitario de Investigación en Ciencias 
de la Salud, Universidad de las Islas Baleares, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

BACKGROUND: 2-Hydroxyoleic acid is a synthetic fatty acid with potent anti-cancer
activity which does not induce undesired side effects. However, the molecular and
cellular mechanisms by which this compound selectively kills human glioma cancer 
cells without killing normal cells is not fully understood. The present study was
designed to determine the molecular bases underlying the potency against 1321N1, 
SF-767 and U118 human glioma cell lines growth without affecting non cancer MRC-5
cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The cellular levels of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress, unfolded protein response (UPR) and autophagy markers were determined by 
quantitative RT-PCR and immunoblotting on 1321N1, SF-767 and U118 human glioma
cells and non-tumor MRC-5 cells incubated in the presence or absence of 2OHOA or 
the ER stress/autophagy inducer, palmitate. The cellular response to these agents
was evaluated by fluorescence microscopy, electron microscopy and flow cytometry.
We have observed that 2OHOA treatments induced augments in the expression of
important ER stress/UPR markers, such as phosphorylated eIF2a, IRE1a, CHOP, ATF4 
and the spliced form of XBP1 in human glioma cells. Concomitantly, 2OHOA led to
the arrest of 1321N1 cells in the G(2)/M phase of the cell cycle, with
down-regulation of cyclin B1 and Cdk1/Cdc2 proteins in the three glioma cell
lines studied. Finally, 2OHOA induced autophagy in 1321N1, SF-767 and U118 cells,
with the appearance of autophagic vesicles and the up-regulation of LC3BI, LC3BII
and ATG7 in 1321N1 cells, increases of LC3BI, LC3BII and ATG5 in SF-767 cells and
up-regulation of LC3BI and LC3BII in U118 cells. Importantly, 2OHOA failed to
induce such changes in non-tumor MRC-5 cells.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: The present results demonstrate that 2OHOA induces ER
stress/UPR and autophagy in human glioma (1321N1, SF-767 and U118 cell lines) but
not normal (MRC-5) cells, unraveling the molecular bases underlying the efficacy 
and lack of toxicity of this compound.

PMCID: PMC3484997
PMID: 23133576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Diabetologia. 2013 Feb;56(2):234-41. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2762-3. Epub 2012
Nov 7.

Signalling danger: endoplasmic reticulum stress and the unfolded protein response
in pancreatic islet inflammation.

Eizirik DL(1), Miani M, Cardozo AK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Medical Faculty, Université Libre de
Bruxelles (ULB), CP-618, Route de Lennik 808, Brussels, Belgium.
deizirik@ulb.ac.be

Protein synthesis is increased by several-fold in stimulated pancreatic beta
cells. Synthesis and folding of (pro)insulin takes place in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), and beta cells trigger the unfolded protein response (UPR) to
upgrade the functional capacity of the ER. Prolonged or excessive UPR activation 
contributes to beta cell dysfunction and death in type 2 diabetes, but there is
another side of the UPR that may be of particular relevance for autoimmune type 1
diabetes, namely, the cross-talk between the UPR and innate
immunity/inflammation. Recent evidence, discussed in this review, indicates that 
both saturated fats and inflammatory mediators such as cytokines trigger the UPR 
in pancreatic beta cells. The UPR potentiates activation of nuclear factor <U+03BA>B, a 
key regulator of inflammation. Two branches of the UPR, namely IRE1/XBP1s and
PERK/ATF4/CHOP, mediate the UPR-induced sensitisation of pancreatic beta cells to
the proinflammatory effects of cytokines. This can contribute to the upregulation
of local inflammatory mechanisms and the aggravation of insulitis. The dialogue
between the UPR and inflammation may provide an explanation for the parallel
increase in the prevalence of childhood obesity and type 1 diabetes.

PMID: 23132339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Feb;374(1-2):91-103. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1508-3. Epub 
2012 Nov 3.

Activation of the unfolded protein response during anoxia exposure in the turtle 
Trachemys scripta elegans.

Krivoruchko A(1), Storey KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, Carleton University, 1125
Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B6, Canada. krivoruchko@gmail.com

Red-eared slider turtles, Trachemys scripta elegans, can survive for several
weeks without oxygen when submerged in cold water. We hypothesized that
anaerobiosis is aided by adaptive up-regulation of the unfolded protein response 
(UPR), a stress-responsive pathway that is activated by accumulation of unfolded 
proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and functions to restore ER
homeostasis. RT-PCR, western immunoblotting and DNA-binding assays were used to
quantify the responses and/or activation status of UPR-responsive genes and
proteins in turtle tissues after animal exposure to 5 or 20 h of anoxic
submergence at 4 °C. The phosphorylation state of protein kinase-like ER kinase
(PERK) (a UPR-regulated kinase) and eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2a)
increased by 1.43-2.50 fold in response to anoxia in turtle heart, kidney, and
liver. Activation of the PERK-regulated transcription factor, activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), during anoxia was documented by elevated atf4
transcripts and total ATF4 protein (1.60-2.43 fold), increased nuclear ATF4
content, and increased DNA-binding activity (1.44-2.32 fold). ATF3 and GADD34
(downstream targets of ATF4) also increased by 1.38-3.32 fold in heart and liver 
under anoxia, and atf3 transcripts were also elevated in heart. Two
characteristic chaperones of the UPR, GRP78, and GRP94, also responded positively
to anoxia with strong increases in both the transcript and protein levels. The
data demonstrate that the UPR is activated in turtle heart, kidney, and liver in 
response to anoxia, suggesting that this pathway mediates an integrated stress
response to protect tissues during oxygen deprivation.

PMID: 23124854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Biochimie. 2013 Apr;95(4):692-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2012.10.019. Epub 2012 Nov
2.

Fibroblast growth factor 21 is induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Schaap FG(1), Kremer AE, Lamers WH, Jansen PL, Gaemers IC.

Author information: 
(1)Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research, Academic Medical Center,
Meibergdreef 69-71, 1105 BK Amsterdam, The Netherlands. f.g.schaap@amc.uva.nl

Increased hepatic expression is held responsible for elevated serum levels of
fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) 
but the underlying molecular mechanism is unclear. In the present study we tested
the postulate that the metabolic hormone FGF21 is regulated by endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, a condition that is observed in a number of diseases
including NAFLD and results in activation of an adaptive response known as the
unfolded protein response (UPR). ER stress stimuli were found to induce
expression of Fgf21 mRNA in H4IIE hepatoma cells and in isolated rat hepatocytes.
Moreover, intraperitoneal injection of the ER stressor tunicamycin induced
hepatic Fgf21 expression in mice and resulted in marked elevation of serum FGF21 
levels. The effect of ER stress on FGF21 expression could be mimicked by
overexpression of ATF4, a transcriptional effector of the PERK-branch of the UPR.
In silico analysis revealed the presence of two binding sites for ATF4 in the
FGF21 promoter region. Combined disruption of these elements, abrogated FGF21
promoter activity induced by ER stress or ATF4 overexpression. These findings
implicate the PERK/eIF2alpha/ATF4 cascade in ER stress regulation of FGF21. A
consequence of this notion is that other intracellular stress signaling pathways 
that converge at eIF2alpha, can regulate FGF21 expression. Indeed, both nutrient 
(amino acid deprivation) and oxidative stress (arsenite) were found to induce
Fgf21 expression in hepatoma cells and isolated rat hepatocytes. In conclusion,
FGF21 expression is regulated by ER stress and additional intracellular stress
signaling pathways. Our findings suggest that increased cellular stress in fatty 
livers may underlie the elevated FGF21 levels observed in patients with NAFLD.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23123503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Toxicol In Vitro. 2013 Mar;27(2):588-96. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2012.10.014. Epub
2012 Oct 30.

Helenalin-induced apoptosis is dependent on production of reactive oxygen species
and independent of induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress in renal cell
carcinoma.

Jang JH(1), Iqbal T, Min KJ, Kim S, Park JW, Son EI, Lee TJ, Kwon TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, 2800
Dalgubeoldaero, Dalseo-Gu, Daegu 704-701, South Korea.

Helenalin, a sesquiterpene lactone, exhibits anti-inflammatory and anti-tumor
activities. Here, we investigated whether helenalin could induce apoptosis in
human renal carcinoma Caki cells. Helenalin increased apoptosis in dose dependent
manner in Caki cells, and also induced apoptosis in other carcinoma cells, such
as human renal carcinoma ACHN cells, human colon carcinoma HT29 and HCT116 cells.
We found that helenalin markedly induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-related genes, such as regulated in development and DNA damage responses
(REDD) 1, activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4) and/or the CCAAT
enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein (CHOP). However, down-regulation of
ATF4 and/or CHOP expression by siRNA had no effect on helenalin-induced apoptosis
in Caki and HCT116 cells. Helenalin increased production of intracellular
reactive oxygen species (ROS). Furthermore, ROS scavengers, N-acetylcystine
(NAC), and glutathione ethyl ester (GEE), reduced helenalin-induced apoptosis.
Taken together, helenalin induced apoptosis via ROS generation in human renal
carcinoma Caki cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23123298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Mar;1833(3):439-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.10.025.
Epub 2012 Oct 31.

Functional interaction of protein kinase CK2 and activating transcription factor 
4 (ATF4), a key player in the cellular stress response.

Ampofo E(1), Sokolowsky T, Götz C, Montenarh M.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Biochemie und Molekularbiologie und Kompetenzzentrum, Molekulare 
Medizin, Universität des Saarlandes, Gebäude 44, 66424 Homburg, Germany.

Protein kinase CK2 is a pleiotropic enzyme, which is implicated in the regulation
of numerous biological processes. It seems to regulate the various functions by
binding to other proteins and by phosphorylation of many different substrates.
Here, we identified the activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), an essential
component of the ER stress signaling, as a new binding partner and a new
substrate of CK2 in vitro and in vivo. Bifluorescence complementation analysis
(BiFC) revealed that CK2a and ATF4 associate in the nucleus. By using mutants of 
ATF4 we identified serine 215 as the main CK2 phosphorylation site. The ATF4
S215A mutant turned out to be more stable than the wild-type form. We further
noticed that an inhibition of CK2 caused an increased transcription of the ATF4
gene. Analyses of the transcription factor activity revealed an impaired activity
of the CK2 phosphorylation mutant of ATF4. Thus, we show that (i) ATF4 is a
binding partner of CK2a (ii) ATF4 is a substrate of CK2, (iii) the
phosphorylation of ATF4 by CK2 influences the stability of ATF4, (iv) the
transcription of ATF4 is regulated by CK2 and (v) the transcription factor
activity of ATF4 is regulated by the CK2 phosphorylation of ATF4. Thus, CK2 plays
an essential role in the regulation of the ER-stress induced signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23123191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47950. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047950. Epub 2012 Oct 24.

ATF6alpha promotes astroglial activation and neuronal survival in a chronic mouse
model of Parkinson's disease.

Hashida K(1), Kitao Y, Sudo H, Awa Y, Maeda S, Mori K, Takahashi R, Iinuma M,
Hori O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

Accumulating evidence suggests a crucial role for the unfolded protein response
(UPR) in Parkinson's disease (PD). In this study, we investigated the relevance
of the UPR in a mouse model of chronic MPTP/probenecid (MPTP/P) injection, which 
causes severe and persistent degeneration of dopaminergic neurons. Enhanced
activation of the UPR branches, including ATF6a and PERK/eIF2a/ATF4, was observed
after MPTP/P injections into mice. Deletion of the ATF6a gene accelerated
neuronal degeneration and ubiquitin accumulation relatively early in the MPTP/P
injection course. Surprisingly, astroglial activation was strongly suppressed,
and production of the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and anti-oxidative
genes, such as heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and xCT, in astrocytes were reduced in
ATF6a -/- mice after MPTP/P injections. Decreased BDNF expression in ATF6a -/-
mice was associated with decreased expression of GRP78, an ATF6a-dependent
molecular chaperone in the ER. Decreased HO-1 and xCT levels were associated with
decreased expression of the ATF4-dependent pro-apoptotic gene CHOP. Consistent
with these results, administration of the UPR-activating reagent tangeretin
(5,6,7,8,4'-pentamethoxyflavone; IN19) into mice enhanced the expression of
UPR-target genes in both dopaminergic neurons and astrocytes, and promoted
neuronal survival after MPTP/P injections. These results suggest that the UPR is 
activated in a mouse model of chronic MPTP/P injection, and contributes to the
survival of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons, in part, through activated
astrocytes.

PMCID: PMC3480445
PMID: 23112876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Dec;39(12):10811-22. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1975-3. Epub 2012
Oct 23.

ATF4 orchestrates a program of BH3-only protein expression in severe hypoxia.

Pike LR(1), Phadwal K, Simon AK, Harris AL.

Author information: 
(1)Growth Factor Group, Cancer Research UK, Molecular Oncology Laboratories,
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, University
of Oxford, Headington, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK. lrgpike@gmail.com

Intratumoral hypoxia is associated with poor prognosis, regardless of the mode of
therapy. Cancer cells survive this condition through activating several adaptive 
signaling pathways, including the integrated stress response (ISR) and autophagy.
Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is the major transcriptional mediator of
the ISR, which we have shown to be involved in autophagy regulation to protect
cells from severe hypoxia. Here we demonstrate that ATF4 orchestrates a program
of BH3-only protein expression in severe hypoxia. We find that the BH3-only
proteins HRK, PUMA, and NOXA are transcriptionally induced in severe hypoxia and 
that their expression is abrogated by RNA interference against ATF4. In
particular, we show that the BH3-only protein harakiri (HRK) is transactivated by
ATF4 in severe hypoxia through direct binding of ATF4 to the promoter region.
Furthermore, we demonstrate through siRNA knockdown that HRK induces autophagy
and promotes cancer cell survival in severe hypoxia.

PMID: 23090478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Biochem J. 2013 Jan 15;449(2):389-400. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120972.

Transcriptional up-regulation of ULK1 by ATF4 contributes to cancer cell
survival.

Pike LR(1), Singleton DC, Buffa F, Abramczyk O, Phadwal K, Li JL, Simon AK,
Murray JT, Harris AL.

Author information: 
(1)Growth Factor Group, Cancer Research UK, Molecular Oncology Laboratories,
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe 
Hospital, Headington, Oxford, UK.

Hypoxia in the microenvironment of many solid tumours is an important determinant
of malignant progression. The ISR (integrated stress response) protects cells
from the ER (endoplasmic reticulum) stress caused by severe hypoxia. Likewise,
autophagy is a mechanism by which cancer cells can evade hypoxic cell death. In
the present paper we report that the autophagy-initiating kinase ULK1 (UNC51-like
kinase 1) is a direct transcriptional target of ATF4 (activating transcription
factor 4), which drives the expression of ULK1 mRNA and protein in severe hypoxia
and ER stress. We demonstrate that ULK1 is required for autophagy in severe
hypoxia and that ablation of ULK1 causes caspase-3/7-independent cell death.
Furthermore, we report that ULK1 expression is associated with a poor prognosis
in breast cancer. Collectively, the findings of the present study identify
transcriptional up-regulation of ULK1 as a novel arm of the ISR, and suggest ULK1
as a potentially effective target for cancer therapy.

PMID: 23078367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Mol Cell. 2012 Nov 9;48(3):353-64. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.08.025. Epub 2012
Sep 27.

miR-211 is a prosurvival microRNA that regulates chop expression in a
PERK-dependent manner.

Chitnis NS(1), Pytel D, Bobrovnikova-Marjon E, Pant D, Zheng H, Maas NL,
Frederick B, Kushner JA, Chodosh LA, Koumenis C, Fuchs SY, Diehl JA.

Author information: 
(1)The Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

MicroRNAs typically function at the level of posttranscriptional gene silencing
within the cytoplasm; however, increasing evidence suggests that they may also
function in nuclear, Argonaut-containing complexes, to directly repress target
gene transcription. We have investigated the role of microRNAs in mediating
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress responses. ER stress triggers the activation of
three signaling molecules: Ire-1a/ß, PERK, and ATF6, whose function is to
facilitate adaption to the ensuing stress. We demonstrate that PERK induces
miR-211, which in turn attenuates stress-dependent expression of the proapoptotic
transcription factor chop/gadd153. MiR-211 directly targets the proximal
chop/gadd153 promoter, where it increases histone methylation and represses chop 
expression. Maximal chop accumulation ultimately correlates with miR-211
downregulation. Our data suggest a model in which PERK-dependent miR-211
induction prevents premature chop accumulation and thereby provides a window of
opportunity for the cell to re-establish homeostasis prior to apoptotic
commitment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3496065
PMID: 23022383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mar Drugs. 2012 Aug;10(8):1883-98. Epub 2012 Aug 22.

Induction of apoptosis by 11-dehydrosinulariolide via mitochondrial dysregulation
and ER stress pathways in human melanoma cells.

Su TR(1), Tsai FJ, Lin JJ, Huang HH, Chiu CC, Su JH, Yang YT, Chen JY, Wong BS,
Wu YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Antai Medical Care Cooperation, Antai Tian-Sheng Memorial Hospital, Pingtung
92842, Taiwan.

In this study the isolated compound 11-dehydrosinulariolide from soft coral
Sinularia leptoclados possessed anti-proliferative, anti-migratory and
apoptosis-inducing activities against A2058 melanoma cells. Anti-tumor effects of
11-dehydrosinulariolide were determined by MTT assay, cell migration assay and
flow cytometry. Growth and migration of melanoma cells were dose-dependently
inhibited by 2-8 µg/mL 11-dehydrosinulariolide. Flow cytometric data indicated
that 11-dehydrosinulariolide induces both early and late apoptosis in melanoma
cells. It was found that the apoptosis induced by 11-dehydrosinulariolide is
relevant to mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis via caspase-dependent pathways,
elucidated by loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (<U+2206><U+03A8>m), release of
cytochrome C, activation of caspase-3/-9 and Bax as well as suppression of
Bcl-2/Bcl-xL. The cleavage of PARP-1 suggested partial involvement of
caspase-independent pathways. Immunoblotting data displayed up-regulations of
PERK/eIF2a/ATF4/CHOP and ATF6/CHOP coupling with elevation of ER stress
chaperones GRP78, GRP94, calnexin, calreticulin and PDI, implicating the
involvement of these factors in ER stress-mediated apoptosis induced by
11-dehydrosinulariolide. The abolishment of apoptotic events after pre-treatment 
with salubrinal indicated that ER stress-mediated apoptosis is also induced by
11-dehydrosinulariolide against melanoma cells. The data in this study suggest
that 11-dehydrosinulariolide potentially induces apoptosis against melanoma cells
via mitochondrial dysregulation and ER stress pathways.

PMCID: PMC3447343
PMID: 23015779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2012 Dec;16(12):1189-202. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2012.728207. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Targeting the ATF4 pathway in cancer therapy.

Singleton DC(1), Harris AL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Oxford, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Department of Oncology, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is a member of the
activating transcription factor family. ATF4 expression is increased in response 
to a diverse array of microenvironmental stresses including amino acid depletion,
oxidative stress and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress that are sensed by
upstream eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) kinases. In tumours,
ATF4 expression is detected in hypoxic- and nutrient-deprived regions where it
promotes metabolic homeostasis and cancer cell survival by transcriptionally
regulating amino acid uptake and biosynthesis, autophagy, redox balance and
angiogenesis.
AREAS COVERED: The mechanism governing translational expression of ATF4 is
discussed along with the physiological roles of ATF4 in growth and development.
Conditions that result in ATF4 expression in tumours are described with a focus
on the role of ATF4 in cancer progression and treatment resistance. Several
approaches to target ATF4 are presented including strategies aimed at inhibiting 
transcriptional activity or increasing degradation, approaches to reduce ATF4
translation by inhibiting upstream eIF2a kinases and targeting of downstream
pathways that are regulated by ATF4 including amino acid biosynthesis,
ER-associated degradation and autophagy.
EXPERT OPINION: The authors provide a number of suggestions that may assist in
the development of ATF4 inhibitors.

PMID: 23009153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 Dec;371(1-2):225-32. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1439-z. Epub 
2012 Sep 23.

ATF4 and IRE1a inhibit DNA repair protein DNA-dependent protein kinase 1 induced 
by heat shock.

Zhu H(1), Guo FJ, Zhao W, Zhou J, Liu Y, Song F, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Molecular Medicine and
Cancer Research Center, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.

With the increase of environment temperature, more and more attentions are payed 
to the effects of heat stress. Cells under heat shock either are adapted to the
condition or are damaged and dead. In this paper, we found that heat shock
induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. ATF4, PERK, and IRE1a were induced by 
heat shock of 45 °C in the transcriptional level. Under the stress of 45 °C, PERK
was phosphorylated and XBP1s was detected. The result indicated that heat shock
could induce the ER stress. We found that heat shock of 45 °C induced the
dysregulation of HSP70 and DNA-PKcs, and downregulated the expression of PARP1
and XRCC1. Further results showed that after the knockdown of ATF4 or IRE1a, the 
expression of DNA-PKcs and XRCC1 were increased. It was indicated that ATF4 and
IRE1a could inhibit the expression of DNA-PKcs and XRCC1 under the heat stress.
Our results suggested that heat shock could activate ER stress. IRE1a and ATF4,
as the important ER stress molecules, could inhibit the expression of DNA repair 
proteins DNA-PKcs, XRCC1, and HSP70 under heat shock. Downregulation of DNA
repair proteins could aggravate the cell damage that may cause cell apoptosis.
This may explain that heat shock could increase the lethality of chemotherapeutic
drugs on tumor cells.

PMID: 23001845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Oct 26;427(3):485-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.09.074. Epub 2012 Sep 20.

Induction of REDD1 gene expression in the liver in response to endoplasmic
reticulum stress is mediated through a PERK, eIF2a phosphorylation,
ATF4-dependent cascade.

Kimball SR(1), Jefferson LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, The Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. skimball@psu.edu

Since the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) plays a vital role in hepatocyte function,
it is not surprising that a variety of liver-related diseases are associated with
ER stress. As in other tissues, ER stress in the liver leads to generation of the
unfolded-protein response resulting in activation of a transcriptional program
that promotes restoration of homeostasis within the lumen of the ER. Previous
studies using cells in culture demonstrated that ER stress induces expression of 
REDD1 (regulated in development and DNA damage responses), a potent repressor of 
signaling through the protein kinase referred to as the mechanistic target of
rapamycin in complex 1 (mTORC1). In the present study, the results from the cell 
culture experiments were extended to show that tunicamycin-mediated ER stress in 
the liver in vivo also induces REDD1 gene expression. Moreover, the induction of 
REDD1 gene expression was shown to require the protein kinase PERK and enhanced
phosphorylation of its substrate, the a-subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor
2.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3482272
PMID: 23000413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Autophagy. 2012 Dec;8(12):1873-4. doi: 10.4161/auto.22185. Epub 2012 Sep 20.

The next generation proteasome inhibitors carfilzomib and oprozomib activate
prosurvival autophagy via induction of the unfolded protein response and ATF4.

Zang Y(1), Thomas SM, Chan ET, Kirk CJ, Freilino ML, DeLancey HM, Grandis JR, Li 
C, Johnson DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh
Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib has shown remarkable clinical success in the 
treatment of multiple myeloma. However, the efficacy and mechanism of action of
bortezomib in solid tumor malignancies is less well understood. In addition, the 
use of this first-in-class proteasome inhibitor is limited by several factors,
including off-target effects that lead to adverse toxicities. We recently
reported the impact and mechanisms of carfilzomib and oprozomib, second-in-class 
proteasome inhibitors with higher specificities and reduced toxicities, against
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Carfilzomib and oprozomib potently
inhibit HNSCC cell survival and the growth of HNSCC tumors. Both compounds
promote upregulation of proapoptotic BIK and antiapoptotic MCL1, which serves to 
mediate and attenuate, respectively, the killing activities of these proteasome
inhibitors. Both compounds also induce complete autophagic flux that is partially
dependent on activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) and upregulation
of ATF4. Carfilzomib- and oprozomib-induced autophagy acts to promote HNSCC cell 
survival. Our study indicates that the therapeutic benefit of these promising
proteasome inhibitors may be improved by inhibiting MCL1 expression or autophagy.

PMCID: PMC3541310
PMID: 22995770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Oct 19;427(2):266-72. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.09.032. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

Febuxostat suppressed renal ischemia-reperfusion injury via reduced oxidative
stress.

Tsuda H(1), Kawada N, Kaimori JY, Kitamura H, Moriyama T, Rakugi H, Takahara S,
Isaka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Technology for Transplantation, Osaka University
Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Japan.

Febuxostat is a novel selective inhibitor of xanthine oxidase (XO), approved for 
treating hyperuricemia. XO inhibits the generation of uric acid (UA) as well as
the resulting generation of superoxide. During renal ischemia-reperfusion (I/R)
injury, the burst of reactive oxygen species (ROS) can trigger the inflammation
and the tubular cell injury. As XO is a critical source of ROS, inhibition of XO 
could be a therapeutic target for I/R injury. Therefore, we performed this study 
to test the therapeutic effect of febuxostat on renal I/R injury. Sprague-Dawley 
rats, received vehicle or febuxostat, were subjected to right nephrectomy and
left renal I/R injury. Febuxostat significantly suppressed XO activity, and
thereby reduced oxidative stress, assessed by nitrotyrosine, thiobarbituric
acid-reactive substances (TBARS) and urine 8-isoprostane. Furthermore, febuxostat
reduced the induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, assessed by GRP-78,
ATF4, and CHOP. Vehicle-treated I/R injured rats exhibited elevated serum
creatinine and UN, which were significantly suppressed in febuxostat-treated
I/R-injured rats. Histological analysis revealed that fubuxostat-treated rats
showed less tubular injury and interstitial fibrosis with reduction in
ED1-positive macrophage infiltration, TUNEL positive apoptotic tubular cells, and
interstitial smooth muscle a actin (SMaA) expression, compared to vehicle-treated
rats. In conclusion; novel XO inhibitor, febuxostat, can protect kidney from
renal I/R injury, and may contribute to preserve kidney function.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22995295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Nutrition. 2013 Jan;29(1):284-90. doi: 10.1016/j.nut.2012.05.008. Epub 2012 Sep
15.

Upregulation of amino acid transporter expression induced by L-leucine
availability in L6 myotubes is associated with ATF4 signaling through
mTORC1-dependent mechanism.

Luo JQ(1), Chen DW, Yu B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Nutrition, Sichuan Agricultural University, Ya'an,
Sichuan, China. ljqlyh2009@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: Essential amino acids, especially l-leucine, initiate the signaling of
the mammalian target of rapamycin complex-1 (mTORC1) and protein synthesis in
skeletal muscle. Current information on the relation between amino acid
transporter mechanisms and mTORC1 signaling is sparse. The objectives of this
study were to determine whether an increase in leucine availability upregulates
the gene transcription and translation of amino acid transporters and other amino
acid members in an mTORC1-dependent pathway that control amino acid use (general 
control non-repressed-2 and activating transcription factor-4) and to measure the
factors related to protein synthesis and proteolysis.
METHODS: L6 skeletal muscle cells that had been treated with l-leucine (0.105
g/L) were incubated for 30 min to stimulate the transcription of L-type amino
acid transporter-1, CD98, and sodium-coupled neutral amino acid transporter-2 and
increase activating transcription factor-4 protein, which is dependent on the
mTORC1 signaling pathway.
RESULTS: A rapid, high level of p70 S6 kinase-1 phosphorylation was detected but 
was suppressed by rapamycin (P < 0.05). The addition of leucine decreased the
atrogin-1 transcription abundance in an insulin-involved manner (P < 0.05), which
could not be completely blocked by rapamycin (P = 0.055).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that the mTOR is a component of the nutrient
signaling pathway, which regulates system A and L amino acid transporters, the
initiation factors involved in mRNA translation, and is downstream of forkhead
box-O in L6 myotubes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22985970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Med Hypotheses. 2012 Dec;79(6):709-12. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2012.07.025. Epub 2012
Sep 13.

Possible link between the synthesis of GR alpha isoforms and eIF2 alpha
phosphorylation state.

Kochetov AV(1), Merkulova TI, Merkulov VM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology & Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russia.

Glucocorticoid hormones regulate numerous physiological processes and are widely 
used in the treatment of inflammation, autoimmune disease and cancer.
Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) - a transcription factor, derived from a single
gene, is responsible for the diverse actions of glucocorticoids. It was shown
that GR gene gives rise a variety of mRNA species that produces several protein
isoforms, among them GRa is the most abundant. In addition, GRa N-end-truncated
protein isoforms (A, B, C, D) are generated by translational mechanisms. As it
was found that the ratio between the translational isoforms amounts varied in
different tissues and cell lines and distinct isoforms could control
transcription of different sets of genes, molecular mechanisms underlining the
synthesis of translational GRa isoforms are of great interest. It was considered 
that GRa isoform A is translated by a conventional linear scanning, isoform B is 
translated by leaky scanning, isoform C is translated by leaky scanning and
ribosomal shunt whereas translation of isoform D occurs through ribosomal shunt
only. Since the sequence organization of GRa mRNA strongly resembles the cases of
ATF4 or ATF5, the well-known examples of reinitiation-dependent synthesis of
functional isoforms, we hypothesize that translation of isoform C could be
controlled by reinitiation mechanism also. If this assumption is correct, the
ratio between GRa N-end isoforms could depend on the eIF2a phosphorylation state 
that could provide an additional connection between the GR and cellular stresses.
We believe that this hypothesis could be of interest to plan more robust
experiments or for better interpretation of available data.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 22981593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Metabolism. 2013 Feb;62(2):282-9. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2012.07.017. Epub 2012
Sep 11.

Effects of ATF4 on PGC1a expression in brown adipose tissue and metabolic
responses to cold stress.

Wang C(1), Xia T, Du Y, Meng Q, Li H, Liu B, Chen S, Guo F.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, the Graduate School of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

OBJECTIVE: We have shown previously that the expression of peroxisome
proliferator activated receptor gamma coactivator (PGC1a) increases significantly
in the white and brown adipose tissue of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4)
global knockout mice, which suggests that ATF4 is involved in the regulation of
PGC1a expression. The goal of the current study is to investigate this
possibility and elucidate the underlying cellular mechanisms.
MATERIAL/METHODS: The effects of ATF4 on PGC1a expression and on PGC1a promoter
activity were analyzed in vivo and in vitro using mice, HIB-1B, and 293T cell
line. The physiological functions of ATF4 in the regulation of PGC1a expression
were confirmed by analysis of body temperature of Atf4(-/-) and Atf4(+/+) mice in
response to cold stress as well as expression of Complex I, II, III, V in BAT.
RESULTS: In this study, we showed ATF4 to be a negative regulator of PGC1a
expression through competitive binding with cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB) at a cAMP response element (CRE) site in the PGC1a promoter. ATF4 was also
found to influence the expression of mitochondria-related proteins, including
Complex I, II, III, and IV through regulation of PGC1a. Finally, we showed that
Atf4(-/-) mice have higher core body temperatures in reduced-temperature
environments than control mice.
CONCLUSION: This study describes the mechanisms underlying ATF4 regulating PGC1a 
expression. We demonstrate a novel function of ATF4 in the regulation of
thermogenesis. Taken together, these observations provide new insight into the
physiological functions of ATF4, especially the regulation of thermogenesis and
the response to cold stress.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22980225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Biochem J. 2013 Jan 1;449(1):219-29. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120958.

Dynamic changes in genomic histone association and modification during activation
of the ASNS and ATF3 genes by amino acid limitation.

Balasubramanian MN(1), Shan J, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shands Cancer Center and
Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Gainesville, FL 32610, U.S.A.

Amino acid deprivation of mammalian cells triggers several signalling pathways,
the AAR (amino acid response), that results in transcriptional activation. For
the ASNS (asparagine synthetase) and ATF3 (activating transcription factor 3)
genes, increased transcription occurs in conjunction with recruitment of ATF4 to 
the gene. In HepG2 cells, analysis of the ASNS and ATF3 genes during AAR
activation revealed increases in histone H3K4me3 (histone 3 trimethylated Lys4)
and H4Ac (acetylated histone 4) levels, marks associated with active
transcription, but a concurrent loss of total H3 protein near the promoter. The
dynamic nature of AAR-regulated transcription was illustrated by a decline in
ASNS transcription activity within minutes after removal of the AAR stress and a 
return to basal levels by 2 h. Reversal of ASNS transcription occurred in
parallel with decreased promoter-associated H4Ac and ATF4 binding. However, the
reduction in histone H3 and increase in H3K4me3 were not reversed. In yeast,
persistence of H3K4me3 has been proposed to be a 'memory' mark of gene activity
that alters the responsiveness of the gene, but the time course and magnitude of 
ASNS induction was unaffected when cells were challenged with a second round of
AAR activation. The results of the present study document changes in
gene-associated nucleosome abundance and histone modifications in response to
amino-acid-dependent transcription.

PMCID: PMC3608204
PMID: 22978410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Dec;1823(12):2149-56. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.08.020. Epub 2012 Sep 6.

ATF4 interacts with Abro1/KIAA0157 scaffold protein and participates in a
cytoprotective pathway.

Ambivero CT(1), Cilenti L, Zervos AS.

Author information: 
(1)Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of
Central Florida, 12722 Research Parkway, Orlando, FL 32826, USA.

Abro1 (Abraxas brother 1), also known as KIAA0157, is a scaffold protein that
recruits various polypeptides to assemble the BRISC (BRCC36 isopeptide)
deubiquitinating enzyme (DUB) complex. The BRISC enzyme has a Lys63-linked
deubiquitinating activity and is comprised of four known subunits: MERIT40
(mediator of Rap80 interactions and targeting 40kDa), BRE (brain and reproductive
organ-expressed), BRCC36 (BRCA1/BRCA2-containing complex, subunit 3) and Abro1.
We have previously shown that Abro1 has a cytoprotective role that involves the
BRISC DUB complex acting on specific Lys63-linked polyubiquitinated substrates.
In this report we identify three members of the AP-1 (activating protein-1)
family, the ATF4, ATF5 (activating transcription factor) and JunD proteins, as
specific interactors of Abro1. The function of ATF4-Abro1 interaction was
investigated under normal conditions as well as under cellular stress. Abro1 is
predominantly cytoplasmic, but during cellular stress it enters the nucleus and
co-localizes with ATF4. Furthermore, this interaction with ATF4 is necessary and 
essential for the cytoprotective function of Abro1 following oxidative stress.
The ability of Abro1 to specifically interact with a number of transcription
factors suggests a new mechanism of regulation of the BRISC DUB complex. This
regulation involves the participation of at least three known members of the AP-1
family of transcription factors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22974638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2013 Jan;121(1):43-7. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1321787. 
Epub 2012 Sep 12.

Tauroursodeoxycholate, a chemical chaperone, prevents palmitate-induced apoptosis
in pancreatic ß-cells by reducing ER stress.

Zhu Q(1), Zhong JJ, Jin JF, Yin XM, Miao H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Free fatty acids (FFA) can have deleterious effects on ß-cells and
promote type 2 diabetes, a process known as lipotoxicity. Recently, the induction
of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is one mechanism proposed to contribute to
the detrimental effects of FFA on ß-cells. Tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) has 
been reported to show cytoprotective effects by alleviating ER stress induced by 
some cytotoxic stimuli. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of
TUDCA on FFA (palmitate)-induced apoptosis and ER stress in rat islet ß-cells.
METHODS: The rat pancreatic ß-cell line INS-1 was cultured with palmitate
(0.5<U+2009>mM), or cultured togther with TUDCA (100<U+2009>µM), Annexin
V-fluorescein-isothiocyanate/propidium iodide flow cytometry was used to assess
apoptosis in INS-1 cells. Cell viability was evaluated with MTT reduction
conversion assay. The expressions of ER stress marker GRP78, ER stress-associated
pro-apoptotic effectors CHOP and ATF4 were detected by Western blotting.
RESULTS: TUDCA significantly reduced palmitate-induced cell apoptosis and growth 
inhibition in INS-1 cells. TUDCA also attenuated palmitate-induced expressions of
GRP78, CHOP and ATF4 in INS-1 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results thus suggested that TUDCA could protect INS-1 cells from
palmitate-induced injury, which might be due to the amelioration of ER stress and
blocking the ATF4/CHOP signaling pathway.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 22972029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Endocrinology. 2012 Nov;153(11):5275-84. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1418. Epub 2012 Sep
11.

Palmitate causes endoplasmic reticulum stress and apoptosis in human mesenchymal 
stem cells: prevention by AMPK activator.

Lu J(1), Wang Q, Huang L, Dong H, Lin L, Lin N, Zheng F, Tan J.

Author information: 
(1)FuJian Provincial Key Laboratory of Transplant Biology, Fuzhou General
Hospital, Xiamen University, China. junlu.heather@yahoo.com

Elevated circulating saturated fatty acids concentration is commonly associated
with poorly controlled diabetes. The highly prevalent free fatty acid palmitate
could induce apoptosis in various cell types, but little is known about its
effects on human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). Here, we report that prolonged
exposure to palmitate induces human bone marrow-derived MSC (hBM-MSC) and human
umbilical cord-derived MSC apoptosis. We investigated the role of endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, which is known to promote cell apoptosis. Palmitate
activated XBP1 splicing, elF2a (eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a)
phosphorylation, and CHOP, ATF4, BiP, and GRP94 transcription in hBM-MSCs. ERK1/2
and p38 MAPK phosphorylation were also induced by palmitate in hBM-MSCs. A
selective p38 inhibitor inhibited palmitate activation of the ER stress, whereas 
the ERK1/2 inhibitors had no effect. The AMP-activated protein kinase activator
aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide blocked palmitate-induced ER stress and
apoptosis. These findings suggest that palmitate induces ER stress and ERK1/2 and
p38 activation in hBM-MSCs, and AMP-activated protein kinase activator prevents
the deleterious effects of palmitate by inhibiting ER stress and apoptosis.

PMID: 22968644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 19;287(43):36393-403. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.399600. Epub
2012 Sep 6.

ATF4-dependent regulation of the JMJD3 gene during amino acid deprivation can be 
rescued in Atf4-deficient cells by inhibition of deacetylation.

Shan J(1), Fu L, Balasubramanian MN, Anthony T, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, Shands
Cancer Center, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida
32610, USA.

Following amino acid deprivation, the amino acid response (AAR) induces
transcription from specific genes through a collection of signaling mechanisms,
including the GCN2-eIF2-ATF4 pathway. The present report documents that the
histone demethylase JMJD3 is an activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4)-dependent target gene. The JMJD3 gene contains two AAR-induced promoter
activities and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis showed that the AAR 
leads to enhanced ATF4 recruitment to the C/EBP-ATF response element (CARE)
upstream of Promoter-1. AAR-induced histone modifications across the JMJD3 gene
locus occur upon ATF4 binding. Jmjd3 transcription is not induced in
Atf4-knock-out cells, but the AAR-dependent activation was rescued by inhibition 
of histone deacetylation with trichostatin A (TSA). The TSA rescue of AAR
activation in the absence of Atf4 also occurred for the Atf3 and C/EBP homology
protein (Chop) genes, but not for the asparagine synthetase gene. ChIP analysis
of the Jmjd3, Atf3, and Chop genes in Atf4 knock-out cells documented that
activation of the AAR in the presence of TSA led to specific changes in
acetylation of histone H4. The results suggest that a primary function of ATF4 is
to recruit histone acetyltransferase activity to a sub-set of AAR target genes.
Thus, absolute binding of ATF4 to these particular genes is not required and no
ATF4 interaction with the general transcription machinery is necessary. The data 
are consistent with the hypothesis that ATF4 functions as a pioneer factor to
alter chromatin structure and thus, enhance transcription in a gene-specific
manner.

PMCID: PMC3476305
PMID: 22955275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 19;287(43):35975-84. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.372458. Epub
2012 Sep 4.

Transforming growth factor ß suppresses osteoblast differentiation via the
vimentin activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) axis.

Lian N(1), Lin T, Liu W, Wang W, Li L, Sun S, Nyman JS, Yang X.

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt Center for Bone Biology, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

ATF4 is an osteoblast-enriched transcription factor of the leucine zipper family.
We recently identified that vimentin, a leucine zipper-containing intermediate
filament protein, suppresses ATF4-dependent osteocalcin (Ocn) transcription and
osteoblast differentiation. Here we show that TGFß inhibits ATF4-dependent
activation of Ocn by up-regulation of vimentin expression. Osteoblasts lacking
Atf4 (Atf4(-/-)) were less sensitive than wild-type (WT) cells to the inhibition 
by TGFß on alkaline phosphatase activity, Ocn transcription and mineralization.
Importantly, the anabolic effect of a monoclonal antibody neutralizing active
TGFß ligands on bone in WT mice was blunted in Atf4(-/-) mice. These data
establish that ATF4 is required for TGFß-related suppression of Ocn transcription
and osteoblast differentiation in vitro and in vivo. Interestingly, TGFß did not 
directly regulate the expression of ATF4; instead, it enhanced the expression of 
vimentin, a negative regulator of ATF4, at the post-transcriptional level.
Accordingly, knockdown of endogenous vimentin in 2T3 osteoblasts abolished the
inhibition of Ocn transcription by TGFß, confirming an indirect mechanism by
which TGFß acts through vimentin to suppress ATF4-dependent Ocn activation.
Furthermore, inhibition of PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling, but not canonical Smad
signaling, downstream of TGFß, blocked TGFß-induced synthesis of vimentin, and
inhibited ATF4-dependent Ocn transcription in osteoblasts. Thus, our study
identifies that TGFß stimulates vimentin production via PI3K-Akt-mTOR signaling, 
which leads to suppression of ATF4-dependent Ocn transcription and osteoblast
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3476265
PMID: 22952236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3490-503. doi: 10.1172/JCI64906. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

FOXO1 orchestrates the bone-suppressing function of gut-derived serotonin.

Kode A(1), Mosialou I, Silva BC, Rached MT, Zhou B, Wang J, Townes TM, Hen R,
DePinho RA, Guo XE, Kousteni S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, College of Physicians and
Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Serotonin is a critical regulator of bone mass, fulfilling different functions
depending on its site of synthesis. Brain-derived serotonin promotes osteoblast
proliferation, whereas duodenal-derived serotonin suppresses it. To understand
the molecular mechanisms of duodenal-derived serotonin action on osteoblasts, we 
explored its transcriptional mediation in mice. We found that the transcription
factor FOXO1 is a crucial determinant of the effects of duodenum-derived
serotonin on bone formation We identified two key FOXO1 complexes in osteoblasts,
one with the transcription factor cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 1
(CREB) and another with activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). Under normal
levels of circulating serotonin, the proliferative activity of FOXO1 was promoted
by a balance between its interaction with CREB and ATF4. However, high
circulating serotonin levels prevented the association of FOXO1 with CREB,
resulting in suppressed osteoblast proliferation. These observations identify
FOXO1 as the molecular node of an intricate transcriptional machinery that
confers the signal of duodenal-derived serotonin to inhibit bone formation.

PMCID: PMC3461930
PMID: 22945629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2012 Oct 15;264(2):300-4. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2012.08.011. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Inhibin beta E is upregulated by drug-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress as a
transcriptional target gene of ATF4.

Brüning A(1), Matsingou C, Brem GJ, Rahmeh M, Mylonas I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich,
Munich, Germany. ansgar.bruening@med.uni-muenchen.de

Inhibins and activins are gonadal peptide hormones of the transforming growth
factor-ß super family with important functions in the reproductive system. By
contrast, the recently identified inhibin ßE subunit, primarily expressed in
liver cells, appears to exert functions unrelated to the reproductive system.
Previously shown downregulation of inhibin ßE in hepatoma cells and
anti-proliferative effects of ectopic inhibin ßE overexpression indicated
growth-regulatory effects of inhibin ßE. We observed a selective re-expression of
the inhibin ßE subunit in HepG2 hepatoblastoma cells, MCF7 breast cancer cells,
and HeLa cervical cancer cells under endoplasmic reticulum stress conditions
induced by tunicamycin, thapsigargin, and nelfinavir. Analysis of XPB1 splicing
and ATF4 activation revealed that inhibin ßE re-expression was associated with
induction of the endoplasmic reticulum stress reaction by these drugs.
Transfection of an ATF4 expression plasmid specifically induced inhibin ßE
expression in HeLa cells and indicates inhibin ßE as a hitherto unidentified
target gene of ATF4, a key transcription factor of the endoplasmic reticulum
stress response. Therefore, the inhibin ßE subunit defines not only a new player 
but also a possible new marker for drug-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22935518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Neurosci. 2012 Aug 29;32(35):11930-41.

p300/CBP-associated factor selectively regulates the extinction of conditioned
fear.

Wei W(1), Coelho CM, Li X, Marek R, Yan S, Anderson S, Meyers D, Mukherjee C,
Sbardella G, Castellano S, Milite C, Rotili D, Mai A, Cole PA, Sah P, Kobor MS,
Bredy TW.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia 
4072.

It is well established that the activity of chromatin-modifying enzymes is
crucial for regulating gene expression associated with hippocampal-dependent
memories. However, very little is known about how these epigenetic mechanisms
influence the formation of cortically dependent memory, particularly when there
is competition between opposing memory traces, such as that which occurs during
the acquisition and extinction of conditioned fear. Here we demonstrate, in
C57BL/6 mice, that the activity of p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF) within the
infralimbic prefrontal cortex is required for long-term potentiation and is
necessary for the formation of memory associated with fear extinction, but not
for fear acquisition. Further, systemic administration of the PCAF activator
SPV106 enhances memory for fear extinction and prevents fear renewal. The
selective influence of PCAF on fear extinction is mediated, in part, by a
transient recruitment of the repressive transcription factor ATF4 to the promoter
of the immediate early gene zif268, which competitively inhibits its expression. 
Thus, within the context of fear extinction, PCAF functions as a transcriptional 
coactivator, which may facilitate the formation of memory for fear extinction by 
interfering with reconsolidation of the original memory trace.

PMCID: PMC3466419
PMID: 22933779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Oct 15;18(20):5639-49. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-1213. 
Epub 2012 Aug 28.

Carfilzomib and ONX 0912 inhibit cell survival and tumor growth of head and neck 
cancer and their activities are enhanced by suppression of Mcl-1 or autophagy.

Zang Y(1), Thomas SM, Chan ET, Kirk CJ, Freilino ML, DeLancey HM, Grandis JR, Li 
C, Johnson DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh
Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

PURPOSE: Carfilzomib is a selective, irreversible inhibitor of the
chymotrypsin-like activity of the proteasome and is undergoing clinical
evaluation in myeloma. ONX 0912 (oprozomib) is an orally bioavailable derivative.
The activities of carfilzomib and ONX 0912 against solid tumor malignancies are
less well understood. We investigated the impact and mechanisms of action of
carfilzomib and ONX 0912 in preclinical models of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effects of carfilzomib and ONX 0912 on HNSCC cell
survival and xenograft tumor growth were evaluated. The impact and mechanisms of 
both agents on apoptosis and autophagy induction were also investigated. The
contribution of the unfolded protein response (UPR) to autophagy induction and
the role of autophagy in attenuating HNSCC cell death were determined.
RESULTS: Carfilzomib and ONX 0912 potently induced apoptosis in HNSCC cell lines 
via upregulation of pro-apoptotic Bik. Upregulation of Mcl-1 by these agents
served to dampen their efficacies. Carfilzomib and ONX 0912 also induced
autophagy, mediated, in part, by activation of the UPR pathway involving
upregulation of ATF4 transcription factor. Autophagy induction served a
prosurvival role. Oral administration of ONX 0912 inhibited the growth of HNSCC
xenograft tumors in a dose-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that carfilzomib and ONX 0912 are potently active
against HNSCC cells, and the activities of these agents can be enhanced via
suppression of Mcl-1 or inhibition of autophagy. Oral ONX 0912 exhibits in vivo
activity against HNSCC tumors and may represent a useful therapeutic agent for
this malignancy.

©2012 AACR

PMCID: PMC3473099
PMID: 22929803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Cancer Res. 2012 Oct 15;72(20):5396-406. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0474. Epub
2012 Aug 20.

The unfolded protein response induces the angiogenic switch in human tumor cells 
through the PERK/ATF4 pathway.

Wang Y(1), Alam GN, Ning Y, Visioli F, Dong Z, Nör JE, Polverini PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences, University of Michigan School
of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1078, USA.

Neovascularization is a limiting factor in tumor growth and progression. It is
well known that changes in the tumor microenvironment, such as hypoxia and
glucose deprivation (GD), can induce VEGF production. However, the mechanism
linking GD to tumor growth and angiogenesis is unclear. We hypothesize that GD
induces the angiogenic switch in tumors through activation of the unfolded
protein response (UPR). We report that UPR activation in human tumors results in 
elevated expression of proangiogenic mediators and a concomitant decrease in
angiogenesis inhibitors. cDNA microarray results showed that GD-induced UPR
activation promoted upregulation of a number of proangiogenic mediators (VEGF,
FGF-2, IL-6, etc.) and downregulation of several angiogenic inhibitors (THBS1,
CXCL14, and CXCL10). In vitro studies revealed that partially blocking UPR
signaling by silencing protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase (PERK) or activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) significantly reduced the production of
angiogenesis mediators induced by GD. However, suppressing the alpha subunit of
hypoxia-inducible factors had no effect on this process. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) confirmed binding of ATF4 to a regulatory site in the 
VEGF gene. In vivo results confirmed that knockdown of PERK in tumor cells slows 
down tumor growth and decreases tumor blood vessel density. Collectively, these
results show that the PERK/ATF4 arm of UPR mediates the angiogenic switch and is 
a potential target for antiangiogenic cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3743425
PMID: 22915762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(8):e1002883. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002883. Epub 2012 Aug 
9.

Cryptocephal, the Drosophila melanogaster ATF4, is a specific coactivator for
ecdysone receptor isoform B2.

Gauthier SA(1), VanHaaften E, Cherbas L, Cherbas P, Hewes RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma, United States
of America.

The ecdysone receptor is a heterodimer of two nuclear receptors, the Ecdysone
receptor (EcR) and Ultraspiracle (USP). In Drosophila melanogaster, three EcR
isoforms share common DNA and ligand-binding domains, but these proteins differ
in their most N-terminal regions and, consequently, in the activation domains
(AF1s) contained therein. The transcriptional coactivators for these domains,
which impart unique transcriptional regulatory properties to the EcR isoforms,
are unknown. Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is a basic-leucine zipper
transcription factor that plays a central role in the stress response of mammals.
Here we show that Cryptocephal (CRC), the Drosophila homolog of ATF4, is an
ecdysone receptor coactivator that is specific for isoform B2. CRC interacts with
EcR-B2 to promote ecdysone-dependent expression of ecdysis-triggering hormone
(ETH), an essential regulator of insect molting behavior. We propose that this
interaction explains some of the differences in transcriptional properties that
are displayed by the EcR isoforms, and similar interactions may underlie the
differential activities of other nuclear receptors with distinct
AF1-coactivators.

PMCID: PMC3415445
PMID: 22912598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Oct;40(19):9557-70. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks762. Epub 2012
Aug 16.

Translation termination efficiency modulates ATF4 response by regulating ATF4
mRNA translation at 5' short ORFs.

Ait Ghezala H(1), Jolles B, Salhi S, Castrillo K, Carpentier W, Cagnard N, Bruhat
A, Fafournoux P, Jean-Jean O.

Author information: 
(1)UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS-FRE 3402, Biologie de l'ARN, 9 quai Saint Bernard,
75005 Paris, France.

The activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) promotes transcriptional
upregulation of specific target genes in response to cellular stress. ATF4
expression is regulated at the translational level by two short open reading
frames (uORFs) in its 5'-untranslated region (5'-UTR). Here, we describe a
mechanism regulating ATF4 expression in translation termination-deficient human
cells. Using microarray analysis of total RNA and polysome-associated mRNAs, we
show that depletion of the eucaryotic release factor 3a (eRF3a) induces
upregulation of ATF4 and of ATF4 target genes. We show that eRF3a depletion
modifies ATF4 translational control at regulatory uORFs increasing ATF4 ORF
translation. Finally, we show that the increase of REDD1 expression, one of the
upregulated targets of ATF4, is responsible for the mTOR pathway inhibition in
eRF3a-depleted cells. Our results shed light on the molecular mechanisms
connecting eRF3a depletion to mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway
inhibition and give an example of ATF4 activation that bypasses the signal
transduction cascade leading to the phosphorylation of eIF2a. We propose that in 
mammals, in which the 5'-UTR regulatory elements of ATF4 mRNA are strictly
conserved, variations in translation termination efficiency allow the modulation 
of the ATF4 response.

PMCID: PMC3479206
PMID: 22904092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 28;287(40):33293-303. Epub 2012 Aug 9.

Positive regulation by <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid B receptor subunit-1 of chondrogenesis
through acceleration of nuclear translocation of activating transcription
factor-4.

Takahata Y(1), Hinoi E, Takarada T, Nakamura Y, Ogawa S, Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Natural Science and Technology, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

A view that signaling machineries for the neurotransmitter <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) are functionally expressed by cells outside the central nervous system is 
now prevailing. In this study, we attempted to demonstrate functional expression 
of GABAergic signaling molecules by chondrocytes. In cultured murine costal
chondrocytes, mRNA was constitutively expressed for metabotropic GABA(B) receptor
subunit-1 (GABA(B)R1), but not for GABA(B)R2. Immunohistochemical analysis
revealed the predominant expression of GABA(B)R1 by prehypertrophic to
hypertrophic chondrocytes in tibial sections of newborn mice. The GABA(B)R
agonist baclofen failed to significantly affect chondrocytic differentiation
determined by Alcian blue staining and alkaline phosphatase activity in cultured 
chondrocytes, whereas newborn mice knocked out of GABA(B)R1 (KO) showed a
decreased body size and delayed calcification in hyoid bone and forelimb and
hindlimb digits. Delayed calcification was also seen in cultured metatarsals from
KO mice with a marked reduction of Indian hedgehog gene (Ihh) expression.
Introduction of GABA(B)R1 led to synergistic promotion of the transcriptional
activity of activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4) essential for normal
chondrogenesis, in addition to facilitating ATF4-dependent Ihh promoter
activation. Although immunoreactive ATF4 was negligibly detected in the nucleus
of chondrocytes from KO mice, ATF4 expression was again seen in the nucleus and
cytoplasm after the retroviral introduction of GABA(B)R1 into cultured
chondrocytes from KO mice. In nuclear extracts of KO chondrocytes, a marked
decrease was seen in ATF4 DNA binding. These results suggest that GABA(B)R1
positively regulates chondrogenesis through a mechanism relevant to the
acceleration of nuclear translocation of ATF4 for Ihh expression in chondrocytes.

PMCID: PMC3460433
PMID: 22879594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Curr Neurovasc Res. 2012 Nov;9(4):274-81.

Deletion of endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced CHOP protects microvasculature
post-spinal cord injury.

Fassbender JM(1), Saraswat-Ohri S, Myers SA, Gruenthal MJ, Benton RL, Whittemore 
SR.

Author information: 
(1)Kentucky Spinal Cord Injury Research Center, University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

Trauma introduces damaging stressors that compromise protein, lipid, and nucleic 
acid integrity. Aggregates of unfolded and misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) triggers the ER stress response (ERSR)/unfolded protein response
(UPR) leading to activation of three signaling pathways mediated by PERK, ATF6,
and IRE1. Initially, the ERSR/UPR is pro-homeostatic as it globally slows
translation while increasing translation of chaperone proteins and inducing
ER-associated degradation. If the cellular stress is not controlled, apoptosis is
subsequently induced through several mechanisms, of which the most well-described
is CHOP. Following spinal cord injury (SCI), mice deficient in CHOP signaling
show increased spared white matter and enhanced locomotor recovery by 6 weeks. At
24 hours after SCI, ATF4 and CHOP are upregulated in under perfused microvessels.
We observed vascular protection 3 days post-SCI and a significant decrease in
macrophage infiltration by the end of the first week. These results suggest that 
modulating ER-stress signaling in endothelial cells and macrophages may protect
against vascular injury and attenuate inflammation post-SCI.

PMID: 22873727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. FASEB J. 2012 Nov;26(11):4548-60. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-202861. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

Translational attenuation differentially alters the fate of disease-associated
fibulin proteins.

Hulleman JD(1), Balch WE, Kelly JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 
92037, USA. hulleman@scripps.edu

Mutations in fibulin proteins that cause cellular secretion deficiencies are
linked to a variety of diseases, ranging from retinopathies to cutis laxa (CL).
One secretion-deficient fibulin mutant, R345W fibulin-3, causes the macular
dystrophy malattia leventinese by increased endoplasmic reticulum retention
and/or extracellular misfolding. Herein, we report that small-molecule activation
of the PERK arm of the unfolded protein response partially rescues R345W
secretion deficiencies through translational attenuation mediated by eIF2a
phosphorylation. Enhanced mutant fibulin-3 secretion can also be achieved by
activation of a PERK-independent eIF2a kinase through arsenite treatment and is
independent of activating transcription factor 4 signaling and protein
translation. However, this translational attenuation strategy was unsuccessful
for enhancing the secretion deficiencies of fibulin-5 mutants associated with
age-related macular degeneration or CL. While lowered growth temperature enhanced
the secretion of mutants associated with CL (C217R and S227P), these effects were
not mediated through translational attenuation. In stark contrast to the
situation with fibulin-3, protein translation was required for efficient
wild-type and mutant fibulin-5 secretion. These data suggest that alteration of
specific cellular signaling pathways and proteostasis network components can
differentially influence fibulin fate, a hypothesis that could be exploited as a 
therapy for fibulin-related diseases.

PMCID: PMC3475254
PMID: 22872678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41462. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041462. Epub 2012 Jul 30.

Downregulation of miR-205 modulates cell susceptibility to oxidative and
endoplasmic reticulum stresses in renal tubular cells.

Muratsu-Ikeda S(1), Nangaku M, Ikeda Y, Tanaka T, Wada T, Inagi R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Endocrinology, University of Tokyo School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Oxidative stress and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress play a crucial
role in tubular damage in both acute kidney injury (AKI) and chronic kidney
disease (CKD). While the pathophysiological contribution of microRNAs (miRNA) to 
renal damage has also been highlighted, the effect of miRNA on renal damage under
oxidative and ER stresses conditions remains elusive.
METHODS: We assessed changes in miRNA expression in the cultured renal tubular
cell line HK-2 under hypoxia-reoxygenation-induced oxidative stress or ER stress 
using miRNA microarray assay and real-time RT-PCR. The pathophysiological effect 
of miRNA was evaluated by cell survival rate, intracellular reactive oxygen
species (ROS) level, and anti-oxidant enzyme expression in miRNA-inhibited HK-2
or miRNA-overexpressed HK-2 under these stress conditions. The target gene of
miRNA was identified by 3'-UTR-luciferase assay.
RESULTS: We identified 8 and 10 miRNAs whose expression was significantly altered
by oxidative and ER stresses, respectively. Among these, expression of miR-205
was markedly decreased in both stress conditions. Functional analysis revealed
that decreased miR-205 led to an increase in cell susceptibility to oxidative and
ER stresses, and that this increase was associated with the induction of
intracellular ROS and suppression of anti-oxidant enzymes. While increased
miR-205 by itself made no change in cell growth or morphology, cell viability
under oxidative or ER stress conditions was partially restored. Further, miR-205 
bound to the 3'-UTR of the prolyl hydroxylase 1 (PHD1/EGLN2) gene and suppressed 
the transcription level of EGLN2, which modulates both intracellular ROS level
and ER stress state.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-205 serves a protective role against both oxidative and ER
stresses via the suppression of EGLN2 and subsequent decrease in intracellular
ROS. miR-205 may represent a novel therapeutic target in AKI and CKD associated
with oxidative or ER stress in tubules.

PMCID: PMC3408438
PMID: 22859986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Biomed Sci. 2012 Aug 1;19:71. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-19-71.

Attenuation of endoplasmic reticulum stress and mitochondrial injury in kidney
with ischemic postconditioning application and trimetazidine treatment.

Mahfoudh-Boussaid A(1), Zaouali MA, Hauet T, Hadj-Ayed K, Miled AH, Ghoul-Mazgar 
S, Saidane-Mosbahi D, Rosello-Catafau J, Ben Abdennebi H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of human physiology, faculty of pharmacy, university of Monastir,
Rue Avicenne, Monastir 5000, Tunisia.

BACKGROUND: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria have been implicated in
the pathology of renal ischemia/reperfusion (I/R). In the present study, we
investigated whether the use of ischemic postconditioning (IPostC) and
trimetazidine (TMZ) separately or combined could reduce ER stress and
mitochondria damage after renal ischemia.
METHODS: Kidneys of Wistar rats were subjected to 60-min of warm ischemia
followed by 120-min of reperfusion (I/R group, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>6), or to 6 cycles of
ischemia/reperfusion (10-s each cycle) just after 60-min of warm ischemia (IPostC
group, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>6), or to i.p. injection of TMZ (3<U+2009>mg/kg) 30-min before ischemia (TMZ 
group, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>6), or to the combination of both treatments (IPostC+TMZ group,
n<U+2009>=<U+2009>6). The results of these experimental groups were compared to those of a
sham-operated group in which rat renal pedicles were only dissected. Sodium
reabsorption rate, creatinine clearance lactate deshydrogenase (LDH) activity in 
plasma, and concentration of malonedialdehyde (MDA) in tissue were determined. In
addition, Western blot analysis was performed to identify the amounts of
cytochrome c, c-JunNH2-terminal kinase (JNK), voltage-dependent anion channel
(VDAC), glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta (GSK3-ß), and ER stress parameters.
RESULTS: IPostC or/and TMZ significantly decreased cytolysis, oxidative stress
and improved renal function in comparison to I/R group. IPostC but not TMZ
significantly attenuated ER stress parameters versus I/R group. Indeed, it
down-regulated the glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), the activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), the RNA activated protein kinase (PKR)-like ER
kinas (PERK), the X box binding protein-1 (XBP-1) and the caspase12 protein
levels. TMZ treatment significantly augmented GSK3-ß phosphorylation and reduced 
levels of cytochrome c and VDAC phosphorylation in comparison to IPostC
application. The combination of both treatments gave a synergetic effect. It
significantly improved the survival rate, attenuated cytolysis, oxidative stress 
and improved renal function.
CONCLUSION: This study revealed that IPostC protects kidney from I/R injury by
suppressing ER stress while the beneficial effects of TMZ are mediated by
mitochondria protection. The combination of both treatments ameliorated
functional recovery.

PMCID: PMC3431271
PMID: 22853733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40994. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040994. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Upregulation of the coagulation factor VII gene during glucose deprivation is
mediated by activating transcription factor 4.

Cronin KR(1), Mangan TP, Carew JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, VA Boston Healthcare System, West Roxbury,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Constitutive production of blood coagulation proteins by hepatocytes 
is necessary for hemostasis. Stressful conditions trigger adaptive cellular
responses and delay processing of most proteins, potentially affecting plasma
levels of proteins secreted exclusively by hepatocytes. We examined the effect of
glucose deprivation on expression of coagulation proteins by the human hepatoma
cell line, HepG2.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Expression of coagulation factor VII, which is
required for initiation of blood coagulation, was elevated by glucose
deprivation, while expression of other coagulation proteins decreased. Realtime
PCR and ELISA demonstrated that the relative percentage expression +/- SD of
steady-state F7 mRNA and secreted factor VII antigen were significantly increased
(from 100+/-15% to 188+/-27% and 100+/-8.8% to 176.3+/-17.3% respectively,
p<0.001) at 24 hr of treatment. The integrated stress response was induced, as
indicated by upregulation of transcription factor ATF4 and of additional
stress-responsive genes. Small interfering RNAs directed against ATF4 potently
reduced basal F7 expression, and prevented F7 upregulation by glucose
deprivation. The response of the endogenous F7 gene was replicated in reporter
gene assays, which further indicated that ATF4 effects were mediated via
interaction with an amino acid response element in the F7 promoter.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data indicated that glucose deprivation enhanced F7
expression in a mechanism reliant on prior ATF4 upregulation primarily due to
increased transcription from the ATF4 gene. Of five coagulation protein genes
examined, only F7 was upregulated, suggesting that its functions may be important
in a systemic response to glucose deprivation stress.

PMCID: PMC3407153
PMID: 22848420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Oct;11(10):2174-82. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0602.
Epub 2012 Jul 30.

PKCd regulates death receptor 5 expression induced by PS-341 through
ATF4-ATF3/CHOP axis in human lung cancer cells.

Xu L(1), Su L, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong University School of Life Sciences, Room 103, South Building, 27
Shanda South Road, Jinan, Shandong 250100, China.

PS-341 (bortezomib), a proteasome inhibitor, has been approved for the treatment 
of multiple myeloma. Our previous work has shown that PS-341 induces death
receptor 5 (DR5)-dependent apoptosis and enhances the TNF-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand-induced apoptosis in human non-small cell lung cancer
cells. However, the definite mechanism remains undefined. In the present study,
we reveal that PKCd and RSK2 mediate PS-341-induced DR5 upregulation, involving
coactivation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. We discovered that PS-341
activated ER stress through elevating the expression of BiP, p-eIF2a, IRE1a,
ATF4, ATF3, and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP). Further
study showed that DR5 upregulation was dependent on ATF4, ATF3, and CHOP
expression. Silencing either one of the ATF4, ATF3, and CHOP expression decreased
DR5 upregulation and subsequent apoptosis. We determined that ATF4 regulated ATF3
and CHOP expression. Thereafter, ATF3 and CHOP formed a complex and regulated DR5
expression. In addition, we discovered that the phosphorylation of extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 and RSK2 were elevated after PS-341 treatment
and inhibition of their phosphorylation using MAP-ERK kinase 1/2 inhibitor
decreased the DR5 level, indicating that ERK/RSK2 signaling is involved in DR5
upregulation. Furthermore, we detected the cleavage of PKCd, and the blockage of 
PKCd expression cut down DR5 upregulation and apoptosis. Importantly, knockdown
of PKCd expression decreased the induction of ER stress and the phosphorylation
of ERK1/2 and RSK2, suggesting that PKCd regulates DR5 expression through
ERK/RSK2 signaling and ATF4-CHOP/ATF3 axis. Collectively, we show that PS-341
induces PKCd-dependent DR5 expression through activation of ERK/RSK2 and ER
stress signaling pathway.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22848091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Nutr Biochem. 2013 Apr;24(4):664-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2012.03.016. Epub
2012 Jul 21.

3,3'-diindolylmethane induces activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) via ATF4
in human colorectal cancer cells.

Lee SH(1), Min KW, Zhang X, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Diagnostic Sciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996-4542, USA.

3,3'-Diindolylmethane (DIM) is a major in vivo condensation product of
indole-3-carbinol, which is present in cruciferous vegetables. Although these
compounds have been widely implicated in antitumorigenic and proapoptotic
properties in animal as well as in vitro models of cancer, the underlying
cellular mechanisms regulated by DIM are only partially understood. Activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is a member of the ATF/c-AMP response
element-binding (CREB) subfamily of the basic-region leucine zipper family and
has been known to induce apoptosis in human colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. The
present study was performed to elucidate the molecular mechanism of ATF3
induction by DIM in human CRC cells. The DIM treatment induced apoptosis and
induced ATF3 gene expression at protein and messenger RNA levels. DIM increased
ATF3 promoter activity, and the region of -84 to +34 within ATF3 promoter was
responsible for promoter activation by DIM. This region contained an ATF binding 
site. Deletion and point mutation of the ATF binding site (-23 to -16) abolished 
ATF3 promoter activation by DIM, and overexpression of ATF4 enhanced ATF3
transactivation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay confirmed the binding of
ATF4 in the ATF3 promoter. Inhibition of ATF4 expression by small interference
RNA results in repression of DIM-induced ATF3 expression. The current study
demonstrates that DIM stimulates ATF3 expression through ATF4-mediated pathway
and subsequently induces apoptosis in human CRC cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3481000
PMID: 22819556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cell Rep. 2012 Jun 28;1(6):676-88. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.04.010. Epub 2012
May 24.

Brain-specific disruption of the eIF2a kinase PERK decreases ATF4 expression and 
impairs behavioral flexibility.

Trinh MA(1), Kaphzan H, Wek RC, Pierre P, Cavener DR, Klann E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA.

Translational control depends on phosphorylation of eIF2a by PKR-like ER kinase
(PERK). To examine the role of PERK in cognitive function, we selectively
disrupted PERK expression in the adult mouse forebrain. In the prefrontal cortex 
(PFC) of PERK-deficient mice, eIF2a phosphorylation and ATF4 expression were
diminished and were associated with enhanced behavioral perseveration, decreased 
prepulse inhibition, reduced fear extinction, and impaired behavioral
flexibility. Treatment with the glycine transporter inhibitor SSR504734
normalized eIF2a phosphorylation, ATF4 expression, and behavioral flexibility in 
PERK-deficient mice. Moreover, the expression levels of PERK and ATF4 were
reduced in the frontal cortex of human patients with schizophrenia. Together, our
findings reveal that PERK plays a critical role in information processing and
cognitive function and that modulation of eIF2a phosphorylation and ATF4
expression may represent an effective strategy for treating behavioral
inflexibility associated with several neurological disorders such as
schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3401382
PMID: 22813743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Int J Biol Sci. 2012;8(7):935-44. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.4499. Epub 2012 Jul 7.

The role of a-synuclein and tau hyperphosphorylation-mediated autophagy and
apoptosis in lead-induced learning and memory injury.

Zhang J(1), Cai T, Zhao F, Yao T, Chen Y, Liu X, Luo W, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational & Environmental Health and Ministry of Education
Key Lab of Hazard Assessment and Control in Special Operational Environment,
School of Public Health, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, 710032,
China.

Lead (Pb) is a well-known heavy metal in nature. Pb can cause pathophysiological 
changes in several organ systems including central nervous system. Especially, Pb
can affect intelligence development and the ability of learning and memory of
children. However, the toxic effects and mechanisms of Pb on learning and memory 
are still unclear. To clarify the mechanisms of Pb-induced neurotoxicity in
hippocampus, and its effect on learning and memory, we chose Sprague-Dawley rats 
(SD-rats) as experimental subjects. We used Morris water maze to verify the
ability of learning and memory after Pb treatment. We used
immunohistofluorescence and Western blotting to detect the level of tau
phosphorylation, accumulation of a-synuclein, autophagy and related signaling
molecules in hippocampus. We demonstrated that Pb can cause abnormally
hyperphosphorylation of tau and accumulation of a-synuclein, and these can induce
hippocampal injury and the ability of learning and memory damage. To provide the 
new insight into the underlying mechanisms, we showed that Grp78, ATF4,
caspase-3, autophagy-related proteins were induced and highly expressed following
Pb-exposure. But mTOR signaling pathway was suppressed in Pb-exposed groups. Our 
results showed that Pb could cause hyperphosphorylation of tau and accumulation
of a-synuclein, which could induce ER stress and suppress mTOR signal pathway.
These can enhance type II program death (autophgy) and type I program death
(apoptosis) in hippocampus, and impair the ability of learning and memory of
rats. This is the first evidence showing the novel role of autophagy in the
neurotoxicity of Pb.

PMCID: PMC3399316
PMID: 22811615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 31;109(31):12432-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1208616109. Epub 2012 Jul 16.

Quantitative profiling of caspase-cleaved substrates reveals different
drug-induced and cell-type patterns in apoptosis.

Shimbo K(1), Hsu GW, Nguyen H, Mahrus S, Trinidad JC, Burlingame AL, Wells JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94114, USA.

Proapoptotic drugs are a mainstay of cancer drug treatment. These drugs stress
cells and ultimately trigger the activation of caspases, cysteine-class proteases
that cleave after aspartic acid and deconstruct the cell. It is well known that
cells respond differently to proapoptotic cancer drug treatments. Here, using a
global and unbiased quantitative N-terminomics technology, we show that ~500
products of caspase cleavage and their kinetics vary dramatically between cell
type and cytotoxic drug treatment. It is likely that variations arise from
differences in baseline proteome composition of the cell type and the alterations
induced by drug treatments to yield a unique cohort of proteins that caspases
finally target. Many targets are specific to both drug treatment and cell type,
providing candidate-specific biomarkers for apoptosis. For example, in multiple
myeloma cells treated with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, levels of
activating transcription factor-4 increase dramatically early in drug treatment
and then decrease upon cleavage by activated caspases. Thus, caspase-derived
cleavage products are a sensitive reflection of cell-type and drug-induced
stress, and provide useful fingerprints for mechanisms of drug action and
response.

PMCID: PMC3412033
PMID: 22802652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Apoptosis. 2012 Oct;17(10):1039-49. doi: 10.1007/s10495-012-0744-z.

Expression of the hyperphosphorylated tau attenuates ER stress-induced apoptosis 
with upregulation of unfolded protein response.

Liu XA(1), Song J, Jiang Q, Wang Q, Tian Q, Wang JZ.

Author information: 
(1)Pathophysiology Department, Key Laboratory of Neurological Disease of National
Education Ministry and Hubei Province, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, 430030 Wuhan, China. xinanliu@scripps.edu

The neural dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease (AD) could arise from endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress and deficits of the unfolded protein response (UPR). To
explore whether tau hyperphosphorylation, a hallmark of AD brain pathologies,
plays a role in ER stress-induced alterations of cell viability, we established
cell lines with stable expression of human tau (HEK293/tau) or the vector
(HEK293/vec) and treated the cells with thapsigargin (TG), an ER stress inducer. 
We observed that the HEK293/tau cells were more resistant than the HEK293/vec
cells to the TG-induced apoptosis, importantly, a time dependent increase of tau 
phosphorylation at Thr205 and Thr231 sites was positively correlated with the
inhibition of apoptosis. We also observed that expression of tau upregulated
phosphorylation of PERK, eIF2 and IRE1 with an increased cleavage of ATF6 and
ATF4. The potentiation of UPR was also detected in HEK293/tau cells treated with 
other ER stress inducers, including staurosporine, camptothecin and hydrogen
peroxide, in which a suppressed apoptosis was also shown. Our data suggest that
tau hyperphosphorylation could attenuate the ER stress-induced apoptosis with the
mechanism involving upregulation of UPR system.

PMID: 22802092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2013 Jan;18(1):11-23. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0351-5.
Epub 2012 Jul 18.

Gene regulatory network of unfolded protein response genes in endoplasmic
reticulum stress.

Takayanagi S(1), Fukuda R, Takeuchi Y, Tsukada S, Yoshida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Meiji University, 1-1-1 Higashimita, Tama-ku,
Kawasaki, Kanagawa, 214-8571, Japan.

In the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), secretory and membrane proteins are properly
folded and modified, and the failure of these processes leads to ER stress. At
the same time, unfolded protein response (UPR) genes are activated to maintain
homeostasis. Despite the thorough characterization of the individual gene
regulation of UPR genes to date, further investigation of the mutual regulation
among UPR genes is required to understand the complex mechanism underlying the ER
stress response. In this study, we aimed to reveal a gene regulatory network
formed by UPR genes, including immunoglobulin heavy chain-binding protein (BiP), 
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), C/EBP [CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein]-homologous
protein (CHOP), PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK), inositol-requiring 
1 (IRE1), activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6), and ATF4. For this purpose,
we focused on promoter-luciferase reporters for BiP, XBP1, and CHOP genes, which 
bear an ER stress response element (ERSE), and p5<U+2009>×<U+2009>ATF6-GL3, which bears an
unfolded protein response element (UPRE). We demonstrated that the luciferase
activities of the BiP and CHOP promoters were upregulated by all the UPR genes,
whereas those of the XBP1 promoter and p5<U+2009>×<U+2009>ATF6-GL3 were upregulated by all the 
UPR genes except for BiP, CHOP, and ATF4 in HeLa cells. Therefore, an ERSE- and
UPRE-centered gene regulatory network of UPR genes could be responsible for the
robustness of the ER stress response. Finally, we revealed that BiP protein was
degraded when cells were treated with DNA-damaging reagents, such as etoposide
and doxorubicin; this finding suggests that the expression level of BiP is
tightly regulated at the post-translational level, rather than at the
transcriptional level, in the presence of DNA damage.

PMCID: PMC3508129
PMID: 22802018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2012 Nov;17(6):743-55. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0347-1.
Epub 2012 Jul 14.

Heat shock factor 1 is inactivated by amino acid deprivation.

Hensen SM(1), Heldens L, van Enckevort CM, van Genesen ST, Pruijn GJ, Lubsen NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.

Mammalian cells respond to a lack of amino acids by activating a transcriptional 
program with the transcription factor ATF4 as one of the main actors. When cells 
are faced with cytoplasmic proteotoxic stress, a quite different transcriptional 
response is mounted, the heat shock response, which is mediated by HSF1. Here, we
show that amino acid deprivation results in the inactivation of HSF1. In amino
acid deprived cells, active HSF1 loses its DNA binding activity as demonstrated
by EMSA and ChIP. A sharp decrease in the transcript level of HSF1 target genes
such as HSPA1A (Hsp70), DNAJB1 (Hsp40), and HSP90AA1 is also seen. HSPA1A mRNA,
but not DNAJB1 mRNA, was also destabilized. In cells cultured with limiting
leucine, HSF1 activity also declined. Lack of amino acids thus could lead to a
lower chaperoning capacity and cellular frailty. We show that the nutrient
sensing response unit of the ASNS gene contains an HSF1 binding site, but we
could not detect binding of HSF1 to this site in vivo. Expression of either an
HSF1 mutant lacking the activation domain (HSF379) or an HSF1 mutant unable to
bind DNA (K80Q) had only a minor effect on the transcript levels of amino acid
deprivation responsive genes.

PMCID: PMC3468675
PMID: 22797943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2012;76(6):1150-4. Epub 2012 Jun 7.

Concentrated bovine milk whey active proteins facilitate osteogenesis through
activation of the JNK-ATF4 pathway.

Tsuji-Naito K(1), Jack RW.

Author information: 
(1)DHC Corporation Laboratories, Chiba, Japan. knaito@dhc.co.jp

Concentrated fractions of low molecular weight whey proteins (1-30 kDa), that is 
concentrated bovine milk whey active proteins (CBP), have been found to enhance
bone formation in both in vivo and clinical studies, but the underlying
mechanisms are poorly understood. In this study, we found that CBP promoted
osteoblastic differentiation in normal human osteoblasts, and determined the
involvement of the c-jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK)-activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4) pathway. We observed that alkaline phosphatase activity and
mineralization were significantly induced by CBP treatment. In addition, mRNA
expression of ATF4 was intensely elevated in CBP-treated osteoblasts, indicating 
that the late-phase events of differentiation were promoted. We found that CBP
activated the phosphorylation of JNK and extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK). Furthermore, pathway analyses using the various signaling pathway-specific
inhibitors revealed that JNK activation, but not ERK activation, is essential for
CBP-induced mineralization and ATF4 expression. Our results indicate that the
JNK-mediated ATF4 pathway is required for CBP-promotive osteogenesis.

PMID: 22790938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Atherosclerosis. 2012 Nov;225(1):50-5. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.06.016. Epub 2012 Jun 23.

Permissive role of miR-663 in induction of VEGF and activation of the ATF4 branch
of unfolded protein response in endothelial cells by oxidized phospholipids.

Afonyushkin T(1), Oskolkova OV, Bochkov VN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology and Thrombosis Research, Centre of Physiology
and Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Schwarzspanierstrasse 17, A-1090 
Vienna, Austria.

OBJECTIVE: Atherosclerotic lesions contain high concentrations of oxidized
phospholipids (OxPLs) known to induce VEGF via the ATF4 arm of unfolded protein
response (UPR), and to promote angiogenic reactions thus potentially contributing
to the progression and destabilization of atherosclerotic plaques. In order to
get further insights into the mechanisms of cellular stress-induced angiogenesis 
we studied the role of a specific microRNA (miR-663) in the mechanisms of VEGF
induction by OxPLs and inducers of UPR.
METHODS: miRNA and mRNA levels were determined using microarray profiling and
qRT-PCR methods. Proteins were analyzed by Western blotting. miR-663 levels were 
changed by transfecting cells with synthetic oligonucleotides.
RESULTS: OxPAPC elevated miR-663 in two types of human endothelial cells (ECs).
Knockdown of miR-663 inhibited upregulation of VEGF mRNA in ECs treated by
OxPAPC, OxPAPS or OxPAPA. In addition, silencing of miR-663 suppressed
upregulation by OxPAPC of ATF4 mRNA and protein, as well as a downstream gene
TRIB. Similarly to the inhibition of OxPAPC effects, knockdown of miR-663
suppressed elevation of ATF4, VEGF and TRIB in response to another inducer of
UPR, tunicamycin. Overexpression of miR-663 reversed the inhibition of VEGF
induction by miR-663 inhibitor.
CONCLUSION: miR-663 is critically important for 2 key events induced in ECs by
stress agents and oxidized lipids, namely induction of transcription factor ATF4 
and its downstream gene VEGF. These findings allow hypothesizing that miR-663
plays a general role in control of the ATF4 branch of UPR induced by different
agents.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22776647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Immunol. 2012 Aug 1;189(3):1510-20. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200166. Epub 2012
Jul 2.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress response promotes cytotoxic phenotype of CD8aß+
intraepithelial lymphocytes in a mouse model for Crohn's disease-like ileitis.

Chang JS(1), Ocvirk S, Berger E, Kisling S, Binder U, Skerra A, Lee AS, Haller D.

Author information: 
(1)Chair for Biofunctionality, Research Centre for Nutrition and Food Science,
Centre for Diet and Disease, Technical University of Munich, 85350
Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) unfolded protein responses (UPR) are implicated in the
pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease. Cytotoxic CD8aß(+) intraepithelial
lymphocytes (IEL) contribute to the development of Crohn's disease-like ileitis
in TNF(<U+0394>ARE/+) mice. In this study, we characterized the role of ER-UPR
mechanisms in contributing to the disease-associated phenotype of cytotoxic IEL
under conditions of chronic inflammation. Inflamed TNF(<U+0394>ARE/+) mice exhibited
increased expression of Grp78, ATF6, ATF4, and spliced XBP1 in CD8aß(+) IEL but
not in CD8aa(+) IEL or in lamina propria lymphocytes. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis in CD8aß(+) T cells showed selective recruitment of 
ER-UPR transducers to the granzyme B gene promoter. Heterozygous Grp78(-/+) mice 
exhibited an attenuated granzyme B-dependent cytotoxicity of CD8aß(+) T cells
against intestinal epithelial cells, suggesting a critical activity of this
ER-associated chaperone in maintaining a cytotoxic T cell phenotype. Granzyme
B-deficient CD8aß(+) T cells showed a defect in IL-2-mediated proliferation in
Grp78(-/+) mice. Adoptively transferred Grp78(-/+) CD8aß(+) T cells had a
decreased frequency of accumulation in the intestine of RAG2(-/-) recipient mice.
The tissue pathology in TNF(<U+0394>ARE/+) × Grp78(-/+) mice was similar to TNF(<U+0394>ARE/+) 
mice, even though the cytotoxic effector functions of CD8aß(+) T cells were
significantly reduced. In conclusion, ER stress-associated UPR mechanisms promote
the development and maintenance of the pathogenic cytotoxic CD8aß(+) IEL
phenotype in the mouse model of Crohn's disease-like ileitis.

PMID: 22753943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Cell Death Dis. 2012 Jun 28;3:e333. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2012.74.

Perk-dependent repression of miR-106b-25 cluster is required for ER
stress-induced apoptosis.

Gupta S(1), Read DE, Deepti A, Cawley K, Gupta A, Oommen D, Verfaillie T, Matus
S, Smith MA, Mott JL, Agostinis P, Hetz C, Samali A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine-Pathology, Clinical Science Institute, National University 
of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland. sanjeev.gupta@nuigalway.ie

Activation of the unfolded protein response sensor PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum
kinase (Perk) attenuates endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress levels. Conversantly, 
if the damage is too severe and ER function cannot be restored, this signaling
branch triggers apoptosis. Bcl-2 homology 3-only family member Bim is essential
for ER stress-induced apoptosis. However, the regulatory mechanisms controlling
Bim activation under ER stress conditions are not well understood. Here, we show 
that downregulation of the miR-106b-25 cluster contributes to ER stress-induced
apoptosis and the upregulation of Bim. Hypericin-mediated photo-oxidative ER
damage induced Perk-dependent cell death and led to a significant decrease in the
levels of miRNAs belonging to miR-106b-25 cluster in wild-type (WT) but not in
Perk<U+207B>/<U+207B> MEFs. Further, we show that expression of miR-106b-25 and Mcm-7 (host
gene of miR-106b-25) is co-regulated through the transcription factors Atf4
(activating transcription factor 4) and Nrf2 (nuclear factor-erythroid-2-related 
factor 2). ER stress increased the activity of WT Bim 3'UTR (untranslated region)
construct but not the miR-106b-25 recognition site-mutated Bim 3'UTR construct.
Overexpression of miR-106b-25 cluster inhibits ER stress-induced cell death in WT
but did not confer any further protection in Bim-knockdown cells. Further, we
show downregulation in the levels of miR-106b-25 cluster in the symptomatic
SOD1(G86R) transgenic mice. Our results suggest a molecular mechanism whereby
repression of miR-106b-25 cluster has an important role in ER stress-mediated
increase in Bim and apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3388242
PMID: 22739985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Autophagy. 2012 Jul 1;8(7):1085-97. doi: 10.4161/auto.20260. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

Dimethyl sulfoxide reduces hepatocellular lipid accumulation through autophagy
induction.

Song YM(1), Song SO, Jung YK, Kang ES, Cha BS, Lee HC, Lee BW.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science; Yonsei University College of
Medicine; Seoul, Korea.

Induction of autophagy is known not only to regulate cellular homeostasis but
also to decrease triglyceride accumulation in hepatocytes. The aim of this study 
is to investigate whether DMSO (dimethyl sulfoxide) has a beneficial role in free
fatty acid-induced hepatic fat accumulation. In HepG2 cells, treatment with 0.5
mM palmitate for six hours significantly increased lipid and triglyceride (TG)
accumulation, assessed by Oil-red O staining and TG quantification assay.
Treatment with 0.01% DMSO for 16 h statistically reduced palmitate-induced TG
contents. Pretreatment of 10 mM 3-methyladenine (3MA) for 2 h restored
hepatocellular lipid contents, which were attenuated by treatment with DMSO. DMSO
increased LC3-II conversion and decreased SQSTM1/p62 expression in a time and
dose-dependent manner. In addition, the number of autophagosomes and
autolysosomes, as seen under an electron microscopy, as well as the percentage of
RFP-LAMP1 colocalized with GFP-LC3 dots in cells transfected with both GFP-LC3
and RFP-LAMP1, as seen under a fluorescent microscopy, also increased in
DMSO-treated HepG2 cells. DMSO also suppressed p-eIF2a/p-EIF2S1, ATF4, p-AKT1,
p-MTOR and p-p70s6k/p-RPS6KB2 expression as assessed by western blotting.
Knockdown of ATF4 expression using siRNA suppressed ATF4 expression and
phosphorylation of AKT1, MTOR and RPS6KB2, but increased LC3-II conversion. DMSO 
reduced not only soluble but also insoluble mtHTT (mutant huntingtin aggregates) 
expressions, which were masked in the presence of autophagy inhibitor. DMSO, a
kind of chemical chaperone, activated autophagy by suppressing ATF4 expression
and might play a protective role in the development of fatty acid-induced
hepatosteatosis.

PMCID: PMC3429545
PMID: 22722716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Exp Eye Res. 2012 Sep;102:28-37. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2012.06.004. Epub 2012 Jun
17.

The unfolded protein response is activated in connexin 50 mutant mouse lenses.

Alapure BV(1), Stull JK, Firtina Z, Duncan MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, 327 Wolf Hall, The 
Green, Newark, DE 19716, USA.

The unfolded protein response is a set of cell signaling pathways recently
recognized to be activated in the lens during both normal development and
endoplasmic reticulum stress induced by either unfolded proteins or oxidative
damage. While mutations in the gene for connexin 50 are known to cause autosomal 
dominant cataracts, it has not been previously reported whether mutant connexins 
can activate the unfolded protein response in the lens. Mice homozygous for the
S50P or G22R mutation of connexin 50 have reduced amounts of connexin 50 protein 
at the cell membrane, with some intracellular staining consistent with retention 
in the endoplasmic reticulum. Connexin 50 mutants have elevated levels of BiP
expression in both lens epithelial and fiber cells from E15.5 with the most
robust elevation detected in newborns. While this elevation decreases in
magnitude postnatally, BiP expression is still abnormally high in adults,
particularly in the perinuclear endoplasmic reticulum of cell nuclei that are
inappropriately retained in adult homozygous mutant lenses. Xbp1 splicing was
elevated in lenses from both connexin mutants studied, while Atf4 and Atf6 levels
were not majorly affected. Overall, these data suggest that UPR may be a
contributing factor to the phenotype of connexin 50 mutant lenses even though the
relatively modest extent of the response suggests that it is unlikely to be a
major driver of the pathology.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3461258
PMID: 22713599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 10;287(33):27290-301. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.374777. Epub
2012 Jun 12.

Stress-induced skeletal muscle Gadd45a expression reprograms myonuclei and causes
muscle atrophy.

Ebert SM(1), Dyle MC, Kunkel SD, Bullard SA, Bongers KS, Fox DK, Dierdorff JM,
Foster ED, Adams CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of and Molecular Physiology and Biophysics and Fraternal Order of
Eagles Diabetes Research Center, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of
Medicine, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Diverse stresses including starvation and muscle disuse cause skeletal muscle
atrophy. However, the molecular mechanisms of muscle atrophy are complex and not 
well understood. Here, we demonstrate that growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible
45a protein (Gadd45a) is a critical mediator of muscle atrophy. We identified
Gadd45a through an unbiased search for potential downstream mediators of the
stress-inducible, pro-atrophy transcription factor ATF4. We show that Gadd45a is 
required for skeletal muscle atrophy induced by three distinct skeletal muscle
stresses: fasting, muscle immobilization, and muscle denervation. Conversely,
forced expression of Gadd45a in muscle or cultured myotubes induces atrophy in
the absence of upstream stress. We show that muscle-specific ATF4 knock-out mice 
have a reduced capacity to induce Gadd45a mRNA in response to stress, and as a
result, they undergo less atrophy in response to fasting or muscle
immobilization. Interestingly, Gadd45a is a myonuclear protein that induces
myonuclear remodeling and a comprehensive program for muscle atrophy. Gadd45a
represses genes involved in anabolic signaling and energy production, and it
induces pro-atrophy genes. As a result, Gadd45a reduces multiple barriers to
muscle atrophy (including PGC-1a, Akt activity, and protein synthesis) and
stimulates pro-atrophy mechanisms (including autophagy and caspase-mediated
proteolysis). These results elucidate a critical stress-induced pathway that
reprograms muscle gene expression to cause atrophy.

PMCID: PMC3431665
PMID: 22692209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Aug;1823(8):1395-404. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.06.001. Epub 2012 Jun 9.

Implication of Nrf2 and ATF4 in differential induction of CHOP by proteasome
inhibition in thyroid cancer cells.

Zong ZH(1), Du ZX, Li N, Li C, Zhang Q, Liu BQ, Guan Y, Wang HQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, China Medical University,
Shenyang, China.

Proteasome inhibition may cause endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, which has been
reported to be implicated in the antitumoral effects of proteasome inhibitors.
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) is induced by a variety 
of adverse physiological conditions including ER stress and is involved in
apoptosis. We have reported that distinct induction of CHOP contributes to the
responsiveness of thyroid cancer cells to proteasome inhibitors. However, the
mechanism underlying differential induction of CHOP by proteasome inhibitors in
thyroid cancer cells has not been well characterized. In the current study, we
characterized that proteasome inhibition primarily activated the amino acid
response element 1 (AARE1) on the CHOP promoter. We also demonstrated that
although proteasome inhibition caused similar accumulation of activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) in a panel of thyroid cancer cells, distinct
amounts of ATF4 were recruited to the AARE1 element of CHOP promoter. In
addition, we demonstrated that NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) was also implicated 
in the induction of CHOP by precluding the binding of ATF4 to the CHOP promoter. 
This study highlights the molecular mechanisms by which ATF4 and Nrf2 can control
CHOP induction in thyroid cancer cells by proteasome inhibition.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22691366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e38038. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038038. Epub 2012 May 31.

Acrolein induces endoplasmic reticulum stress and causes airspace enlargement.

Kitaguchi Y(1), Taraseviciene-Stewart L, Hanaoka M, Natarajan R, Kraskauskas D,
Voelkel NF.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Division, The Victoria Johnson Laboratory
for Obstructive Lung Disease Research, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, Virginia, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Given the relative abundance and toxic potential of acrolein in
inhaled cigarette smoke, it is surprising how little is known about the pulmonary
and systemic effects of acrolein. Here we test the hypothesis whether systemic
administration of acrolein could cause endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and
lung cell apoptosis, leading to the enlargement of the alveolar air spaces in
rats.
METHODS: Acute and chronic effects of intraperitoneally administered acrolein
were tested. Mean alveolar airspace area was measured by using light microscopy
and imaging system software. TUNEL staining and immunohistochemistry (IHC) for
active caspase 3 and Western blot analysis for active caspase 3, and caspase 12
were performed to detect apoptosis. The ER-stress related gene expression in the 
lungs was determined by Quantitative real-time PCR analysis. Acrolein-protein
adducts in the lung tissue were detected by IHC.
RESULTS: Acute administration of acrolein caused a significant elevation of
activated caspase 3, upregulation of VEGF expression and induced ER stress
proteins in the lung tissue. The chronic administration of acrolein in rats led
to emphysematous lung tissue remodeling. TUNEL staining and IHC for cleaved
caspase 3 showed a large number of apoptotic septal cells in the acrolein-treated
rat lungs. Chronic acrolein administration cause the endoplasmic reticulum stress
response manifested by significant upregulation of ATF4, CHOP and GADd34
expression. In smokers with COPD there was a considerable accumulation of
acrolein-protein adducts in the inflammatory, airway and vascular cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Systemic administration of acrolein causes endoplasmic reticulum
stress response, lung cell apoptosis, and chronic administration leads to the
enlargement of the alveolar air spaces and emphysema in rats. The substantial
accumulation of acrolein-protein adducts in the lungs of COPD patients suggest a 
role of acrolein in the pathogenesis of emphysema.

PMCID: PMC3364999
PMID: 22675432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Hypertension. 2012 Jul;60(1):71-80. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.112.192500. Epub
2012 Jun 4.

A novel role for epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase and its
downstream endoplasmic reticulum stress in cardiac damage and microvascular
dysfunction in type 1 diabetes mellitus.

Galán M(1), Kassan M, Choi SK, Partyka M, Trebak M, Henrion D, Matrougui K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Hypertension, and Renal Center of Excellence, Tulane
University, 1430 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. kmatroug@tulane.edu

Comment in
    Hypertension. 2012 Jul;60(1):20-1.

Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase (EGFRtk) and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress are important factors in cardiovascular complications.
Understanding whether enhanced EGFRtk activity and ER stress induction are
involved in cardiac damage, and microvascular dysfunction in type 1 diabetes
mellitus is an important question that has remained unanswered. Cardiac fibrosis 
and microvascular function were determined in C57BL/6J mice injected with
streptozotocin only or in combination with EGFRtk inhibitor (AG1478), ER stress
inhibitor (Tudca), or insulin for 2 weeks. In diabetic mice, we observed an
increase in EGFRtk phosphorylation and ER stress marker expression (CHOP, ATF4,
ATF6, and phosphorylated-eIF2a) in heart and mesenteric resistance arteries,
which were reduced with AG1478, Tudca, and insulin. Cardiac fibrosis, enhanced
collagen type I, and plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 were decreased with
AG1478, Tudca, and insulin treatments. The impaired endothelium-dependent
relaxation and -independent relaxation responses were also restored after
treatments. The inhibition of NO synthesis reduced endothelium-dependent
relaxation in control and treated streptozotocin mice, whereas the inhibition of 
NADPH oxidase improved endothelium-dependent relaxation only in streptozotocin
mice. Moreover, in mesenteric resistance arteries, the mRNA levels of Nox2 and
Nox4 and the NADPH oxidase activity were augmented in streptozotocin mice and
reduced with treatments. This study unveiled novel roles for enhanced EGFRtk
phosphorylation and its downstream ER stress in cardiac fibrosis and
microvascular endothelial dysfunction in type 1 diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC3915519
PMID: 22665120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Diabetologia. 2012 Sep;55(9):2533-45. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2594-1. Epub 2012
Jun 4.

Activating transcription factor 4 mediates hyperglycaemia-induced endothelial
inflammation and retinal vascular leakage through activation of STAT3 in a mouse 
model of type 1 diabetes.

Chen Y(1), Wang JJ, Li J, Hosoya KI, Ratan R, Townes T, Zhang SX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Endocrinology and Diabetes, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, 941 Stanton L Young Blvd, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: There is convincing evidence that endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress is implicated in the pathogenesis of diabetes and its complications;
however, the mechanisms are not fully understood. This study aimed to dissect the
role and signalling pathways of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) in
ER-stress-associated endothelial inflammation and diabetic retinopathy.
METHODS: ER stress and ATF4 activity were manipulated by complementary
pharmacological and genetic approaches in cultured retinal endothelial (TR-iBRB) 
cells. Diabetes was induced by streptozotocin in heterozygous Atf4 knockout and
wild-type mice. ER stress markers, inflammatory cytokines and adhesion molecules,
activation of the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)
pathway, and retinal vascular permeability were measured.
RESULTS: High-glucose treatment resulted in rapid induction of ER stress,
activation of ATF4, and increased production of inflammatory factors in TR-iBRB
cells. Suppressing ER stress or inhibiting ATF4 activity markedly attenuated
high-glucose-induced production of intercellular adhesion molecule 1, TNF-a and
vascular endothelial growth factor. Conversely, enhancing ER stress or
overexpressing Atf4 was sufficient to induce endothelial inflammation, which was,
at least in part, through activation of the STAT3 pathway. Furthermore, knockdown
of the Stat3 gene or inhibiting STAT3 activity restored ER homeostasis in cells
exposed to high glucose and prevented ATF4 activation, suggesting that STAT3 is
required for high-glucose-induced ER stress. Finally, we showed that
downregulation of Atf4 significantly ameliorated retinal inflammation, STAT3
activation and vascular leakage in a mouse model of type 1 diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Taken together, our data reveal a pivotal role of ER 
stress and the ATF4/STAT3 pathway in retinal endothelial inflammation in diabetic
retinopathy.

PMCID: PMC3412945
PMID: 22660795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Genes Nutr. 2013 Jan;8(1):99-104. doi: 10.1007/s12263-012-0299-1. Epub 2012 May
26.

Gene expression profile in bone of diabetes-prone BB/OK rats fed a high-fat diet.

Lange J(1), Barz T, Ekkernkamp A, Klöting I, Follak N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Trauma and Reconstructive Surgery, Medical Faculty, University
of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.

A high-fat diet (HFD) has been recognized as a risk factor for diseases such as
dyslipidemia, atherosclerosis, obesity, and osteoporosis. However, studies
analyzing gene expression after HFD in bone are rare. That prompted us to analyze
the expression of selected genes in bone of 4-week-old diabetes-prone
B(io)B(reeding) rats. Two breeding pairs were fed a HFD (+10 % tallow) or were
fed a normal diet (ND; Ssniff R-Z) before mating and afterward during pregnancy. 
After the birth of progeny, parents continued to be given HFD or ND until the
progeny was weaned (3 weeks). Thereafter, offspring were weaned and were fed the 
same food as their parents up to an age of 4 weeks. Body weight was measured at
an age of 4 weeks, and subsequently 13 HFD rats and 13 ND rats were killed and
the tibial bone was harvested to analyze the expression of 53 genes in bone. All 
rats fed HFD were significantly heavier than rats fed ND after 3 and 4 weeks. The
diet also influenced the expression of genes in bone. There were significant
differences in 20 out of 53 genes studied between rats fed HFD compared with rats
fed ND. Four out of 20 had a lower and 17 out of 20 genes a higher expression in 
HFD rats, but differences in gene expression showed obvious differences between
males and females. There were only two genes that were similarly different
between males and females: Bmp4 and Atf4. Two genes, Foxg1 and Npy, were
inversely expressed in males and females. It seems that the gene expression is
differently regulated by diet during pregnancy and later in life between males
and females. Nevertheless, it cannot be excluded that HFD also acts as an
epigenetic factor in the development of offspring in utero.

PMCID: PMC3535003
PMID: 22639302  [PubMed]


205. J Lipid Res. 2012 Aug;53(8):1543-52. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M025981. Epub 2012 May 23.

Activating transcription factor 4 regulates stearate-induced vascular
calcification.

Masuda M(1), Ting TC, Levi M, Saunders SJ, Miyazaki-Anzai S, Miyazaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, University of Colorado Denver,
Aurora, CO, USA.

Previously, we reported that stearate, a saturated fatty acid, promotes
osteoblastic differentiation and mineralization of vascular smooth muscle cells
(VSMC). In this study, we examined the molecular mechanisms by which stearate
promotes vascular calcification. ATF4 is a pivotal transcription factor in
osteoblastogenesis and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Increased stearate by
either supplementation of exogenous stearic acid or inhibition of stearoyl-CoA
desaturase (SCD) by CAY10566 induced ATF4 mRNA, phosphorylated ATF4 protein, and 
total ATF4 protein. Induction occurred through activation of the PERK-eIF2a
pathway, along with increased osteoblastic differentiation and mineralization of 
VSMCs. Either stearate or the SCD inhibitor but not oleate or other fatty acid
treatments also increased ER stress as determined by the expression of p-eIF2a,
CHOP, and the spliced form of XBP-1, which were directly correlated with ER
stearate levels. ATF4 knockdown by lentiviral ATF4 shRNA blocked osteoblastic
differentiation and mineralization induced by stearate and SCD inhibition.
Conversely, treatment of VSMCs with an adenovirus containing ATF4 induced
vascular calcification. Our results demonstrated that activation of ATF4 mediates
vascular calcification induced by stearate.

PMCID: PMC3540843
PMID: 22628618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(5):e1002708. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002708. Epub 2012 May
17.

Induction of GADD34 is necessary for dsRNA-dependent interferon-ß production and 
participates in the control of Chikungunya virus infection.

Clavarino G(1), Cláudio N, Couderc T, Dalet A, Judith D, Camosseto V, Schmidt EK,
Wenger T, Lecuit M, Gatti E, Pierre P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, UM2, Aix-Marseille Université,
Marseille, France.

Nucleic acid sensing by cells is a key feature of antiviral responses, which
generally result in type-I Interferon production and tissue protection. However, 
detection of double-stranded RNAs in virus-infected cells promotes two
concomitant and apparently conflicting events. The dsRNA-dependent protein kinase
(PKR) phosphorylates translation initiation factor 2-alpha (eIF2a) and inhibits
protein synthesis, whereas cytosolic DExD/H box RNA helicases induce expression
of type I-IFN and other cytokines. We demonstrate that the phosphatase-1
cofactor, growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible protein 34 (GADD34/Ppp1r15a), an
important component of the unfolded protein response (UPR), is absolutely
required for type I-IFN and IL-6 production by mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs)
in response to dsRNA. GADD34 expression in MEFs is dependent on PKR activation,
linking cytosolic microbial sensing with the ATF4 branch of the UPR. The
importance of this link for anti-viral immunity is underlined by the extreme
susceptibility of GADD34-deficient fibroblasts and neonate mice to Chikungunya
virus infection.

PMCID: PMC3355096
PMID: 22615568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Int J Gen Med. 2012;5:403-11. doi: 10.2147/IJGM.S25879. Epub 2012 May 4.

Serum levels of RBP4 and adipose tissue levels of PTP1B are increased in obese
men resident in northeast Scotland without associated changes in ER stress
response genes.

Hoggard N(1), Agouni A, Mody N, Delibegovic M.

Author information: 
(1)Rowett Institute of Nutrition and Health, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen,
UK.

BACKGROUND: Retinol-binding protein 4 (RBP4) is an adipokine identified as a
marker of insulin resistance in mice and humans. Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B 
(PTP1B) expression levels as well as other genes involved in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress response are increased in adipose tissue of obese,
high-fat-diet-fed mice. In this study we investigated if serum and/or adipose
tissue RBP4 protein levels and expression levels of PTP1B and other ER
stress-response genes are altered in obese and obese/diabetic men resident in
northeast Scotland.
METHODS: WE STUDIED THREE GROUPS OF MALE VOLUNTEERS: (1) normal/overweight (body 
mass index [BMI] < 30), (2) obese (BMI > 30), and (3) obese/diabetic (BMI > 30)
controlling their diabetes either by diet or the antidiabetic drug metformin. We 
analyzed their serum and adipose tissue RBP4 protein levels as well as adipose
tissue mRNA expression of PTP1B, binding immunoglobulin protein (BIP), activated 
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), and glucose-regulated protein 94 (GRP94) alongside
other markers of adiposity (percentage body fat, leptin, cholesterol,
triglycerides) and insulin resistance (oral glucose tolerance tests, insulin,
homeostatic model assessment-insulin resistance, C-reactive protein, and
adiponectin).
RESULTS: We found that obese Scottish subjects had significantly higher serum
RBP4 protein levels in comparison to the normal/overweight subjects (P < 0.01).
Serum RBP4 levels were normalized in obese/diabetic subjects treated with diet or
metformin (P < 0.05). Adipose tissue RBP4 protein levels were comparable between 
all three groups of subjects as were serum and adipose transthyretin levels.
Adipose tissue PTP1B mRNA levels were increased in obese subjects in comparison
to normal/overweight subjects (P < 0.05); however diet and/or metformin treatment
did not reverse this effect. Adipose tissue BIP, ATF4, and GRP94 expression
levels were unchanged in obese and obese/diabetic subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Human obesity results in an increase in serum but not adipose tissue
RBP4 protein levels, and these are normalized in obese/diabetic subjects, which
exhibit improvements in insulin sensitivity through diet or metformin treatment. 
However, while adipose tissue PTP1B mRNA levels increase in obese Scottish
subjects, these remain high in obese/diabetics on diet or metformin treatment.

PMCID: PMC3355846
PMID: 22615536  [PubMed]


208. J Bone Miner Metab. 2012 Sep;30(5):568-79. doi: 10.1007/s00774-012-0359-z. Epub
2012 May 19.

Salubrinal promotes healing of surgical wounds in rat femurs.

Zhang P(1), Hamamura K, Jiang C, Zhao L, Yokota H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis, SL220, 723 West Michigan Street, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA.

Phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2a (eIF2a), transiently activated
by various cellular stresses, is known to alleviate stress-induced cellular
damage. Here, we addressed a question: does elevation of eIF2a phosphorylation by
salubrinal (a pharmacological inhibitor of eIF2a dephosphorylation) enhance
healing of bone wounds? We hypothesized that salubrinal would accelerate a
closure of surgically generated bone holes by modifying expression of
stress-sensitive genes. To examine this hypothesis, we employed a rat wound
model. Surgical wounds were generated on anterior and posterior femoral cortexes,
and salubrinal was locally administered on the anterior side. The results showed 
that, compared to a contralateral control, the size of surgical wounds was
reduced by 10.8 % (day 10) and 18.0 % (day 20) on the anterior side (both
p < 0.001), and 4.1 % (day 10; p < 0.05) and 11.1 % (day 20; p < 0.001) on the
posterior side. In addition, salubrinal locally elevated cortical thickness and
increased BMD and BMC. Pharmacokinetic analysis revealed that subcutaneous
injection of salubrinal transiently increased its concentration in plasma
followed by a rapid decrease within 24 h, and its half-life in plasma was 1.2 h. 
Salubrinal altered the phosphorylation level of eIF2a as well as the mRNA levels 
of ATF3, ATF4, and CHOP, and suppressed cell death induced by stress to the
endoplasmic reticulum. In summary, the results herein demonstrate that
subcutaneous administration of salubrinal accelerates healing of surgically
generated bone holes through the modulation of eIF2a phosphorylation.

PMID: 22610062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Toxicol Lett. 2012 Jul 20;212(2):113-25. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2012.05.008. Epub 
2012 May 17.

Activation of the unfolded protein response contributed to the selective
cytotoxicity of oroxylin A in human hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2 cells.

Xu M(1), Lu N, Sun Z, Zhang H, Dai Q, Wei L, Li Z, You Q, Guo Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Intervention, China Pharmaceutical University, 24
Tongjiaxiang, Nanjing 210009, PR China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a refractory malignancy with a high incidence
and large mortality. Current strategy for the chemotherapy of HCC focuses on
developing agents with better efficacy and lower toxicity. In this study, we
demonstrated that the natural flavonoid oroxylin A preferentially inhibited the
viability of HCC cell line HepG2 but not the normal hepatic cell line L02. In
HepG2 but not L02 cells, oroxylin A induced substantial production of
intracellular H2O2 and inordinate activation of the PERK-eIF2a-ATF4-CHOP branch
of the unfolded protein response (UPR) pathway, which resulted in the induction
of TRB3 and causal reduction of p-AKT1/2/3 (Ser473). Moreover, these effects were
eliminated by either the stable knockdown of CHOP or the pretreatment and then
co-incubation with the specific H2O2 scavenger catalase. These results indicated 
that the H2O2-triggered overactivation of the UPR pathway and causal inactivation
of AKT signaling contributed to the preferential cytotoxicity of oroxylin A in
malignant HepG2 cells. Therefore, present study proposed an underlying molecular 
mechanism that implicated the selective antitumor effect of oroxylin A and
recommended oroxylin A as a prospect for improving the current chemotherapeutic
strategy for the treatment of HCC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22609744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Cell Signal. 2012 Sep;24(9):1797-802. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.05.006. Epub
2012 May 16.

CK2 regulates ATF4 and CHOP transcription within the cellular stress response
signalling pathway.

Schneider CC(1), Ampofo E, Montenarh M.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Biochemie und Molekularbiologie und Kompetenzzentrum Molekulare
Medizin (KOMM), Universität des Saarlandes, Homburg, Saarland 66424, Germany.
c.schneidercaro@web.de

Protein kinase CK2 is an ubiquitously expressed serine/threonine kinase. The
protein levels along with CK2 activity are highly elevated in tumour cells where 
it protects cells from apoptosis. Accordingly, inhibition of CK2 is known to
induce programmed cell death, making it a promising target for cancer therapy.
Analysis of the different behaviour of hormone sensitive LNCaP cells and hormone 
refractory PC-3 cells after CK2 inhibition revealed CHOP ((C/EBP)-homologous
protein) induction and therefore probably ER stress as crucial for apoptosis in
the LNCaP cells. In the present study we investigated which promoter element of
the CHOP promoter is responsible for its induction. ER stress can be generated by
the accumulation of unfolded proteins, by depletion of amino acids or by
oxidative stress. ER stress induces specific signalling pathways. In order to
analyse which pathway might be activated by CK2 inhibition we started to analyse 
the activation of the different CHOP promoter elements. By using mutated reporter
constructs of the CHOP promoter, it turned out that the amino acid response
element (AARE) is the most prominent element for CHOP induction after CK2
inhibition. The ER stress element, however, proves to be less crucial, and along 
with the AP-1 binding site, they do not seem to play any role. Further we found
an up-regulation of the transcription factor ATF4 after CK2 inhibition. ATF4 is
involved in ER stress signalling through the AARE, which further supports our
finding that CK2 inhibition provokes an amino acid induced response pathway.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22609407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Jun 20;53(7):3792-800. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-9235.

ER stress is involved in T17M rhodopsin-induced retinal degeneration.

Kunte MM(1), Choudhury S, Manheim JF, Shinde VM, Miura M, Chiodo VA, Hauswirth
WW, Gorbatyuk OS, Gorbatyuk MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of North Texas Health
Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE: The human rhodopsin (Rho) mutation T17M leads to autosomal dominant
retinitis pigmentosa (adRP). The goal of our study was to elucidate the role of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in retinal degeneration in hT17M Rho mice and
identify potential candidates for adRP gene therapy.
METHODS: We used transgenic mice expressing the ER stress-activated indicator
(ERAI) and hT17M Rho to evaluate the activation of ER stress responses.
Quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to analyze changes in
the expression of 30 unfolded protein response (UPR)-associated genes at P12, 15,
18, 21, and 25. The cytosolic fraction of hT17M Rho retinal cells was used to
measure the release of cytochrome C and apoptotic inducing factor-1 (AIF1) by
Western blotting. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) analysis was performed for
1-month-old hT17M Rho mice.
RESULTS: hT17M Rho was localized in the outer nuclear layer (ONL) of
T17M(+/-)ERAI(+/-) photoreceptors as well as C57BL/6 retinas injected with
AAV-hT17M Rho-GFP. In P15 hT17M Rho retinas, we observed an up-regulation of UPR 
genes (Atf4, Eif2a, Xbp1, Bip, Canx, and Hsp90), autophagy genes and proapoptotic
Bcl2 genes. OCT, and the downregulation of Nrl and Crx gene expression confirmed 
that cell death occurs in 55% of photoreceptors via the up-regulation of
caspase-3 and caspase-12, and the release of AIF1 from the mitochondria.
CONCLUSIONS: The ER stress response is involved in retinal degeneration in hT17M 
Rho mice. The final demise of photoreceptors occurs via apoptosis involving ER
stress-associated and mitochondria-induced caspase activation. We identified
Atg5, Atg7, Bax, Bid, Bik, and Noxa as potential therapeutic targets for adRP
treatment.

PMCID: PMC3390184
PMID: 22589437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Adv Nutr. 2012 May 1;3(3):307-21. doi: 10.3945/an.112.002113.

Eukaryotic initiation factor 2 phosphorylation and translational control in
metabolism.

Baird TD(1), Wek RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Regulation of mRNA translation is a rapid and effective means to couple changes
in the cellular environment with global rates of protein synthesis. In response
to stresses, such as nutrient deprivation and accumulation of misfolded proteins 
in the endoplasmic reticulum, phosphorylation of the a subunit of eukaryotic
initiation factor 2 (eIF2a~P) reduces general translation initiation while
facilitating the preferential translation of select transcripts, such as that
encoding activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a transcriptional activator of
genes subject to the integrated stress response (ISR). In this review, we
highlight the translational control processes regulated by nutritional stress,
with an emphasis on the events triggered by eIF2a~P, and describe the family of
eukaryotic initiation factor 2 kinases and the mechanisms by which each sense
different stresses. We then address 3 questions. First, what are the mechanisms
by which eIF2a~P confers preferential translation on select mRNA and what are the
consequences of the gene expression induced by the ISR? Second, what are the
molecular processes by which certain stresses can differentially activate eIF2a~P
and ATF4 expression? The third question we address is what are the modes of
cross-regulation between the ISR and other stress response pathways, such as the 
unfolded protein response and mammalian target of rapamycin, and how do these
regulatory schemes provide for gene expression programs that are tailored for
specific stresses? This review highlights recent advances in each of these areas 
of research, emphasizing how eIF2a~P and the ISR can affect metabolic health and 
disease.

PMCID: PMC3649462
PMID: 22585904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Neurosignals. 2013;21(1-2):99-111. doi: 10.1159/000336970. Epub 2012 May 15.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress and neurodegeneration in experimental cerebral
malaria.

Anand SS(1), Babu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad,
Hyderabad, India.

Experimental cerebral malaria (ECM) resulting from Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbA) 
infection in mice results in neuronal cell death. However, the precise mechanisms
leading to neuronal cell death in ECM have not been fully elucidated. In the
present study, we report the presence of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
markers and activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in the brain during
the pathogenesis of ECM. Specific findings included activation of PKR-like
ERkinase, inositol-requiring enzyme 1 and cleavage of activating transcription
factor (ATF) 6 indicating the activation of all three major arms of the UPR.
Further, we found changes in the protein levels of phosphorylated eukaryotic
initiation factor a (p-eIF2a), ATF4, growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible
protein 34, B cell lymphoma protein 2 (BCL-2), BCL-2-associated X protein,
caspase-7, cleavage of caspase-3, and caspase-12. Our results demonstrate that ER
stress-induced neuronal cell death in PbA-infected mice is associated with the
expression of the pro-apoptotic molecule CHOP and downregulation of
anti-apoptotic ER quality control molecules binding immunoglobulin protein,
calreticulin and calnexin. Further CHOP was found to be localized in neurons and 
plays an essential role in neuronal cell death as revealed by our Fluoro-Jade B
double staining. These results implicate an imbalance between ER stress-mediated 
pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic/survival signalling as a critical determinant of
neuronal cell death in ECM.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22584375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mol Pharmacol. 2012 Aug;82(2):264-70. doi: 10.1124/mol.112.079079. Epub 2012 May 
9.

Role of activating transcription factor-4 in 24-hour rhythm of serotonin
transporter expression in the mouse midbrain.

Ushijima K(1), Koyanagi S, Sato Y, Ogata T, Matsunaga N, Fujimura A, Ohdo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.

Serotonin (5-HT) transporter (5-HTT) plays a key role in the control of 5-HT
neuronal activity by reuptaking extracellular 5-HT from the synapse cleft. We
have previously demonstrated that 5-HTT mRNA expression levels and its uptake
activity in the mouse midbrain are significantly higher in the dark phase than
those in the light phase. However, the molecular mechanisms of time-dependent
expression of 5-HTT have not been clarified. In this study, expression of 5-HTT
mRNA in the mouse midbrain showed a significant 24-h rhythm and was higher in the
dark phase. Although such an oscillation was eliminated by a Clock gene mutation,
CLOCK and BMAL1 did not activate 5-HTT transcription in the luciferase reporter
assay. Activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4), a member of the ATF/cAMP
response element (CRE)-binding protein family, is a component responsible for
sustaining circadian oscillations of CRE-mediated gene expression. ATF4
significantly activated 5-HTT transcription in vitro and time dependently bound
to the CRE site in the 5-HTT promoter in the mouse midbrain. In addition,
mutation of the Clock gene disrupted temporal binding of ATF4 to the CRE site in 
the 5-HTT promoter. These results indicated that the circuit of circadian-basis
molecular regulation between the clockwork system and mouse 5-HTT gene was
connected by the ATF4 signaling pathway.

PMID: 22572884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 22;287(26):21936-49. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.351783. Epub
2012 May 3.

Transcriptional repression of ATF4 gene by CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß
(C/EBPß) differentially regulates integrated stress response.

Dey S(1), Savant S, Teske BF, Hatzoglou M, Calkhoven CF, Wek RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Different environmental stresses induce the phosphorylation of eIF2 (eIF2~P),
repressing global protein synthesis coincident with preferential translation of
ATF4. ATF4 is a transcriptional activator of genes involved in metabolism and
nutrient uptake, antioxidation, and regulation of apoptosis. Because ATF4 is a
common downstream target that integrates signaling from different eIF2 kinases
and their respective stress signals, the eIF2~P/ATF4 pathway is collectively
referred to as the integrated stress response. Although eIF2~P elicits
translational control in response to many different stresses, there are selected 
stresses, such as exposure to UV irradiation, that do not increase ATF4
expression despite robust eIF2~P. The rationale for this discordant induction of 
ATF4 expression and eIF2~P in response to UV irradiation is that transcription of
ATF4 is repressed, and therefore ATF4 mRNA is not available for preferential
translation. In this study, we show that C/EBPß is a transcriptional repressor of
ATF4 during UV stress. C/EBPß binds to critical elements in the ATF4 promoter,
resulting in its transcriptional repression. Expression of C/EBPß increases in
response to UV stress, and the liver-enriched inhibitory protein (LIP) isoform of
C/EBPß, but not the liver-enriched activating protein (LAP) version, represses
ATF4 transcription. Loss of the liver-enriched inhibitory protein isoform results
in increased ATF4 mRNA levels in response to UV irradiation and subsequent
recovery of ATF4 translation, leading to enhanced expression of its target genes.
Together these results illustrate how eIF2~P and translational control combined
with transcription factors regulated by alternative signaling pathways can direct
programs of gene expression that are specifically tailored to each environmental 
stress.

PMCID: PMC3381154
PMID: 22556424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Dairy Sci. 2012 May;95(5):2562-6. doi: 10.3168/jds.2011-4806.

Short communication: Endoplasmic reticulum stress gene network expression in
bovine mammary tissue during the lactation cycle.

Invernizzi G(1), Naeem A, Loor JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian NutriPhysioGenomics, Division of Nutritional Sciences, Department of
Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) has a crucial role in cellular metabolism. Recent 
studies in nonruminants discovered that components of the ER stress pathway,
induced during the unfolded protein response, play critical roles in regulating
lipogenesis. The bovine mammary gland faces extreme metabolic stress at the onset
of lactation due primarily to the increase in flux through pathways associated
with milk fat and protein synthesis. Our objective was to study, via quantitative
real-time PCR, the expression of the ER stress pathway components P58IPK, PERK,
XBP1, ATF4, ATF3, ATF6, CHOP, MBTPS1, GRP94, and BiP in mammary tissue (n=7 cows 
× 5 time points) collected at -15, 1, 15, 60, and 240 d relative to parturition. 
Expression of P58IPK and ATF4 increased to a peak at d 60, followed by a decrease
by d 240 postpartum. Despite the decrease in expression by 240 d, P58IPK remained
higher than prepartal levels (d -15). Expression patterns of ATF3 and CHOP were
similar and peaked at d 15, followed by a decrease through d 240, at which point 
CHOP expression was still greater than prepartal levels. The sharp increase in
milk production postpartum (d 15) as well as apoptosis during late lactation (240
d) may have induced a pseudo unfolded protein response state. This is supported
by the similar expression patterns of P58IPK and PERK. In the context of
lactation, however, transcriptional changes in the ER stress pathway at different
stages of the lactation cycle are a normal aspect of the tissue's adaptation to
the changing physiological state.

Copyright © 2012 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22541483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2012 Jun 1;4(6). pii: a012278. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a012278.

New insights into translational regulation in the endoplasmic reticulum unfolded 
protein response.

Pavitt GD(1), Ron D.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, United Kingdom.
graham.pavitt@manchester.ac.uk

Homeostasis of the protein-folding environment in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
is maintained by signal transduction pathways that collectively constitute an
unfolded protein response (UPR). These affect bulk protein synthesis and thereby 
the levels of ER stress, but also culminate in regulated expression of specific
mRNAs, such as that encoding the transcription factor ATF4. Mechanisms linking
eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2) phosphorylation to control of unfolded
protein load in the ER were elucidated more than 10 years ago, but recent work
has highlighted the diversity of processes that impinge on eIF2 activity and
revealed that there are multiple mechanisms by which changes in eIF2 activity can
modulate the translation of individual mRNAs. In addition, the potential for
affecting this step of translation initiation pharmacologically is becoming
clearer. Furthermore, it is now clear that another strand of the UPR, controlled 
by the endoribonuclease inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1), also affects rates of
protein synthesis in stressed cells and that its effector function, mediated by
the transcription factor X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1), is subject to important 
mRNA-specific translational regulation. These new insights into the convergence
of translational control and the UPR will be reviewed here.

PMCID: PMC3367556
PMID: 22535228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Mol Reprod Dev. 2012 Jun;79(6):423-32. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22045. Epub 2012 May 4.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress is involved in granulosa cell apoptosis during
follicular atresia in goat ovaries.

Lin P(1), Yang Y, Li X, Chen F, Cui C, Hu L, Li Q, Liu W, Jin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Reproductive Endocrinology and Embryo Biotechnology
of the Ministry of Agriculture, College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F
University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China.

Follicular atresia is primarily induced by granulosa cell apoptosis, but
description of the apoptotic pathway in granulosa cells is incomplete. In this
study, we explored the possibility that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress could
be involved in granulosa cell apoptosis during goat follicular atresia.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that DNA damage-inducible transcript 3
(DDIT3) and glucose-regulated protein 78 (Grp78) were observed in scattered
apoptotic granulosa cells of atretic follicles. Grp78 and DDIT3 mRNA and protein 
were upregulated in granulosa cells during follicular atresia, although DDIT3 was
not significantly different between early atretic and progressed atretic
follicles. Spontaneous apoptosis was also observed in vitro in granulosa cells
induced by serum deprivation or by the ER stress agent tunicamycin, both inducing
similar increases in DDIT3 mRNA. Activating transcription factor-6 (ATF6) and
ATF4 mRNAs were significantly increased during granulosa cell apoptosis in vivo; 
in contrast to ATF6, ATF4 mRNA was attenuated after 16 hr of culture despite the 
persistence of ER stress. Taken together, ER stress-dependent DDIT3 pathways may 
play an important role in the regulation of selective granulosa cell apoptosis in
goat ovaries during early follicular atresia. Serum deprivation could also
increase apoptosis of cultured granulosa cells through the ER stress pathway as
both ATF6 and PERK/eIF2a/ATF4 signaling have been implicated in the granulosa
cell apoptosis of atretic follicles.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22532439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34412. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034412. Epub 2012 Apr 3.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B deficiency potentiates PERK/eIF2a signaling in
brown adipocytes.

Bettaieb A(1), Matsuo K, Matsuo I, Wang S, Melhem R, Koromilas AE, Haj FG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of California Davis, Davis, California,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) is a physiological regulator 
of glucose homeostasis and body mass, and has been implicated in endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. Herein, we assess the role of PTP1B in ER stress in brown 
adipocytes, which are key regulators of thermogenesis and metabolic response.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To determine the role of PTP1B in ER stress, we
utilized brown adipose tissue (BAT) from mice with adipose-specific PTP1B
deletion, and brown adipocytes deficient in PTP1B and reconstituted with PTP1B
wild type (WT) or the substrate-trapping PTP1B D181A (D/A) mutant. PTP1B
deficiency led to upregulation of PERK-eIF2a phosphorylation and IRE1a-XBP1
sub-arms of the unfolded protein response. In addition, PTP1B deficiency
sensitized differentiated brown adipocytes to chemical-induced ER stress.
Moreover, PERK activation and tyrosine phosphorylation were increased in BAT and 
adipocytes lacking PTP1B. Increased PERK activity resulted in the induction of
eIF2a phosphorylation at Ser51 and better translatability of ATF4 mRNA in
response to ER stress. At the molecular level, we demonstrate direct interaction 
between PTP1B and PERK and identify PERK Tyr615 as a mediator of this
association.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, the data demonstrate that PTP1B is a
physiologically-relevant modulator of ER stress in brown adipocytes and that
PTP1B deficiency modulates PERK-eIF2a phosphorylation and protein synthesis.

PMCID: PMC3317973
PMID: 22509299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 1;109(18):6904-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1204176109. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

Pyruvate kinase M2 promotes de novo serine synthesis to sustain mTORC1 activity
and cell proliferation.

Ye J(1), Mancuso A, Tong X, Ward PS, Fan J, Rabinowitz JD, Thompson CB.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY 10065, USA.

Despite the fact that most cancer cells display high glycolytic activity, cancer 
cells selectively express the less active M2 isoform of pyruvate kinase (PKM2).
Here we demonstrate that PKM2 expression makes a critical regulatory contribution
to the serine synthetic pathway. In the absence of serine, an allosteric
activator of PKM2, glycolytic efflux to lactate is significantly reduced in
PKM2-expressing cells. This inhibition of PKM2 results in the accumulation of
glycolytic intermediates that feed into serine synthesis. As a consequence,
PKM2-expressing cells can maintain mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1
activity and proliferate in serine-depleted medium, but PKM1-expressing cells
cannot. Cellular detection of serine depletion depends on general control
nonderepressible 2 kinase-activating transcription factor 4 (GCN2-ATF4) pathway
activation and results in increased expression of enzymes required for serine
synthesis from the accumulating glycolytic precursors. These findings suggest
that tumor cells use serine-dependent regulation of PKM2 and GCN2 to modulate the
flux of glycolytic intermediates in support of cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3345000
PMID: 22509023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Eur Heart J. 2012 Jul;33(13):1606-14. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs061. Epub 2012
Apr 16.

Effect of mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 genotype on cardioprotection in 
patients with congenital heart disease.

Zhang H(1), Gong DX, Zhang YJ, Li SJ, Hu S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Medicine, Fuwai Hospital, National
Center for Cardiovascular Disease, Beijing, China.

AIMS: About 40% of East Asians carry an aldehyde dehydrogenase-2*2 (ALDH2*2)
allele, and the influence of the ALDH2*2 allele on human cardioprotection has not
been studied. This study was designed to evaluate the effect of ALDH2*2 allele on
cardioprotection of patients with congenital heart diseases after open-heart
surgery.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The right atrial appendage was harvested before performing
cardiopulmonary bypass in cyanotic and acyanotic congenital heart disease groups 
(n = 20 per group). Tissues were assayed to determine the impact of cyanosis on
metabolic remodelling. A prospective cohort of Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) patients
(n = 118) was recruited to investigate the influence of the ALDH2*2 allele on
cardioprotection after surgical repair. Myocardium samples were dissected after
cardioplegia. ALDH2 activity, oxidative stress and glutathione (GSH) levels, and 
activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4) were analysed. After genotyping and
grouping, all of the experimental and clinical results were compared between
ALDH2*2 carriers and non-carriers. Cyanosis inhibited ALDH2 activity and led to
aldehyde accumulation in ALDH2*2 carriers. This accumulation in turn increased
expression of ATF4 and resulted in larger myocardium GSH pools. The differences
in ALDH2 activity and GSH level between carriers and non-carriers disappeared
during cardioplegic arrest, and more aldehydes accumulated in the non-carriers.
Consequently, ALDH2*2 carriers showed lower postoperative troponin I, inotrope
score, and shorter postoperative length of ICU and hospital stay.
CONCLUSIONS: ALDH2*2 carriers with cyanotic congenital heart disease were
associated with an induced metabolic remodelling phenotype and a compensatory
myocardium GSH pool. When ALDH2 activity was impaired during open-heart surgery, 
this larger GSH pool could lead to unexpectedly better cardioprotection. This may
aid in the prediction of cardioprotection outcomes and identification of
individualized cardioprotective strategies.

PMID: 22507973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Blood. 2012 May 31;119(22):5276-84. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-388132. Epub 2012 
Apr 12.

Heme-regulated eIF2a kinase activated Atf4 signaling pathway in oxidative stress 
and erythropoiesis.

Suragani RN(1), Zachariah RS, Velazquez JG, Liu S, Sun CW, Townes TM, Chen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Heme-regulated eIF2a kinase (Hri) is necessary for balanced synthesis of heme and
globin. In addition, Hri deficiency exacerbates the phenotypic severity of
ß-thalassemia intermedia in mice. Activation of Hri during heme deficiency and in
ß-thalassemia increases eIF2a phosphorylation and inhibits globin translation.
Under endoplasmic reticulum stress and nutrient starvation, eIF2a phosphorylation
also induces the Atf4 signaling pathway to mitigate stress. Although the function
of Hri in regulating globin translation is well established, its role in Atf4
signaling in erythroid precursors is not known. Here, we report the role of the
Hri-activated Atf4 signaling pathway in reducing oxidative stress and in
promoting erythroid differentiation during erythropoiesis. On acute oxidative
stress, Hri(-/-) erythroblasts suffered from increased levels of reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) and apoptosis. During chronic iron deficiency in vivo, Hri is
necessary both to reduce oxidative stress and to promote erythroid
differentiation. Hri(-/-) mice developed ineffective erythropoiesis during iron
deficiency with inhibition of differentiation at the basophilic erythroblast
stage. This inhibition is recapitulated during ex vivo differentiation of
Hri(-/-) fetal liver erythroid progenitors. Importantly, the Hri-eIF2aP-Atf4
pathway was activated and required for erythroid differentiation. We further
demonstrate the potential of modulating Hri-eIF2aP-Atf4 signaling with chemical
compounds as pharmaceutical therapies for ß-thalassemia.

PMCID: PMC3369616
PMID: 22498744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Virol. 2012 Jun;86(12):6712-23. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00200-12. Epub 2012 Apr 11.

Murine cytomegalovirus targets transcription factor ATF4 to exploit the
unfolded-protein response.

Qian Z(1), Xuan B, Chapa TJ, Gualberto N, Yu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, USA.

The unfolded-protein response (UPR), activated by sensor molecules PERK, ATF6,
and IRE1 to resolve endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, has emerged as a key
target for host cells and viruses to control the infection outcomes. The UPR
regulates ER protein folding, controls cell fate upon ER stress, and plays an
important role in innate immunity. We and others have shown that human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) modulates the UPR. We show here that murine CMV (MCMV),
the widely used CMV model for small animal infection, regulated the UPR in a
manner similar to that of HCMV. This modulatory ability was triggered by virion
entry and enhanced by viral immediate-early and early gene expression. Thus,
while vulnerable at early times, MCMV became resistant to exogenous ER stress at 
late times of infection. MCMV activated the PERK-ATF4 pathway but only induced a 
subset of representative ATF4 targets at levels somewhat lower than those by the 
ER stress inducer tunicamycin. Moreover, MCMV induced ER chaperone Bip but
actively blocked IRE1-mediated Xbp1(s) protein accumulation. ATF4 depletion
severely attenuated viral growth at a low multiplicity of infection by modestly
reducing viral DNA synthesis and more pronouncedly inhibiting late gene
transcription. Collectively, we show that the UPR is a conserved target of CMVs
and identify ATF4, a key UPR component, as a factor critical for MCMV infection. 
This work sets the stage for using the MCMV model to explore the role of this
stress response in CMV biology, particularly during infection of the host, which 
is difficult to study in HCMV.

PMCID: PMC3393534
PMID: 22496230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2011 Oct;151(6):713-6.

Comparative study of the expression of ATF-3 and ATF-4 genes in vessels involved 
into atherosclerosis process and in psoriatic skin.

Sobolev VV(1), Starodubtseva NL, Piruzyan AL, Minnibaev MT, Sautin ME, Tumanov
VP, Bruskin SA.

Author information: 
(1)N. I. Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow, Russia. sobolev_vl@mail.ru

Expression of ATF-3 and ATF-4 genes was examined quantitatively by real-time PCR 
and changes in the expression of these genes in atherosclerotic lesions and in
psoriatic skin were demonstrated. It was found that concomitant pathologies do
not affect the expression of these genes. Opposite changes in the expression of
ATF-3 and ATF-4 genes in atherosclerotic and psoriatic samples were revealed and 
a hypothesis was put forward that this parameter could be a criterion of
pathological process in both diseases.

PMID: 22485215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Jul;1820(7):900-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2012.02.016. 
Epub 2012 Mar 17.

In vivo up-regulation of the unfolded protein response after hypoxia.

Tagliavacca L(1), Caretti A, Bianciardi P, Samaja M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry, University of Milan, San Paolo 
Hospital, Milan, Italy. Tagliavacca.Luigina@hsr.it

BACKGROUND: Low oxygen (O2) availability, a condition called hypoxia, has
different and profound consequences in tissues and organs. Besides the
hypoxia-inducible response, mammalian cells induce a coordinated cytoprotective
pathway called Unfolded Protein Response (UPR). We studied the molecular basis of
UPR and apoptosis in animal models exposed to different hypoxic stresses and
assessed the ability of liver and myocardium to respond to low oxygen by
activating different arms of the UPR according to the severity of the insults in 
a tissue specific manner.
METHODS: We assessed the levels of several UPR markers in hypoxic animals by Real
Time PCR and Western blotting.
RESULTS: While the hepatocytes activate the apoptotic pathway mediated, in part, 
by CHOP and p-JNK, we could not detect an UPR-dependent apoptosis in myocytes.
Moreover, severe hypoxia results in ATF4 translation, and induction of CHOP and
GADD34 transcripts in liver, by contrast in the myocardium, the ATF4-CHOP-GADD34 
signaling pathway is not detectably activated.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Comparison of several UPR markers in liver and myocardium
enabled to underscore the ability of hepatocytes and myocites to selectively
activate and fine tune the UPR signaling pathway during hypoxia in vivo.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22450154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Fertil Steril. 2012 Jun;97(6):1438-43. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2012.02.034.
Epub 2012 Mar 20.

Exposure to lipid-rich follicular fluid is associated with endoplasmic reticulum 
stress and impaired oocyte maturation in cumulus-oocyte complexes.

Yang X(1), Wu LL, Chura LR, Liang X, Lane M, Norman RJ, Robker RL.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medical Center, Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yan-sen
University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the high lipid content of human follicular fluid 
influences oocyte maturation.
DESIGN: Mouse oocytes as substitutes for human oocytes were exposed to follicular
fluids of differing lipid content with outcome monitoring.
SETTING: Private infertility clinic and university laboratory.
PATIENT(S): Seventy-four women seeking assisted reproduction, and
gonadotropin-stimulated mice.
INTERVENTION(S): Assay of follicular fluids for triglyceride and free fatty
acids, and stimulation of mouse cumulus-oocyte complexes (COCs) to maturity in
vitro in the presence of lipid-rich or lipid-poor follicular fluid.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Oocyte lipid content, expression of endoplasmic
reticulum stress marker genes, and oocyte maturation assessed in mouse COCs
exposed to lipid-rich follicular fluid were compared with complexes exposed to
lipid-poor follicular fluid and complexes matured in vivo.
RESULT(S): Follicular fluids were obtained from women of known body mass index
undergoing oocyte aspiration at a private infertility clinic, and the follicular 
fluids were assayed for triglyceride and free fatty acids; those with the highest
and lowest levels of these lipids were selected. The mouse COCs exposed to
lipid-rich follicular fluid during their maturation had increased oocyte lipid
content, induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress markers, and impaired oocyte
nuclear maturation.
CONCLUSION(S): Increased body mass index is associated with elevated
triglycerides and free fatty acids in ovarian follicular fluid. Maturation within
this lipid-rich environment is detrimental to oocytes.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22440252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Biochem J. 2012 Jun 1;444(2):249-59. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111829.

AMPK and GCN2-ATF4 signal the repression of mitochondria in colon cancer cells.

Martínez-Reyes I(1), Sánchez-Aragó M, Cuezva JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid,
Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre, Spain.

Reprogramming of energetic metabolism is a phenotypic trait of cancer in which
mitochondrial dysfunction represents a key event in tumour progression. In the
present study, we show that the acquisition of the tumour-promoting phenotype in 
colon cancer HCT116 cells treated with oligomycin to inhibit ATP synthase is
exerted by repression of the synthesis of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins 
in a process that is regulated at the level of translation. Remarkably, the
synthesis of glycolytic proteins is not affected in this situation. Changes in
translational control of mitochondrial proteins are signalled by the activation
of AMPK (AMP-activated protein kinase) and the GCN2 (general control
non-derepressible 2) kinase, leading also to the activation of autophagy. Changes
in the bioenergetic function of mitochondria are mimicked by the activation of
AMPK and the silencing of ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4). These
findings emphasize the relevance of translational control for normal
mitochondrial function and for the progression of cancer. Moreover, they
demonstrate that glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation are controlled at
different levels of gene expression, offering the cell a mechanistic safeguard
strategy for metabolic adaptation under stressful conditions.

PMID: 22435535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2012 May 1;260(3):241-9. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2012.02.017.
Epub 2012 Mar 8.

The endoplasmic reticulum is a target organelle for trivalent dimethylarsinic
acid (DMAIII)-induced cytotoxicity.

Naranmandura H(1), Xu S, Koike S, Pan LQ, Chen B, Wang YW, Rehman K, Wu B, Chen
Z, Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Biochemical Pharmaceutics, College
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, and Zhejiang Hospital of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hangzhou 310058, China. narenman@zju.edu.cn

The purpose of present study was to characterize the endoplasmic reticulum stress
and generation of ROS in rat liver RLC-16 cells by exposing to trivalent
dimethylarsinous acid (DMAIII) and compared with that of trivalent arsenite
(iAsIII) and monomethylarsonous acid (MMAIII). Protein kinase-like endoplasmic
reticulum kinase (PERK) phosphorylation was significantly induced in cells
exposed to DMAIII, while there was no change in phosphorylated PERK (P-PERK)
detected in cells after exposure to iAsIII or MMAIII. The generation of reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) after DMAIII exposure was found to take place specifically
in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), while previous reports showed that ROS was
generated in mitochondria following exposure to MMAIII. Meanwhile, cycloheximide 
(CHX) which is an inhibitor of protein biosynthesis strongly inhibited the
DMAIII-induced intracellular ROS generation in the ER and the phosphorylation of 
PERK, suggesting the induction of ER stress probably occurs through the
inhibition of the protein folding process. Activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4) and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) mRNA were induced by all three arsenic
species, however, evidence suggested that they might be induced by different
pathways in the case of iAsIII and MMAIII. In addition, ER resident molecular
chaperone glucose-regulated protein78 (GRP78) was not affected by trivalent
arsenicals, while it was induced in positive control only at high concentration
(Thapsigargin;Tg), suggesting the GRP78 is less sensitive to low levels of ER
stress. In summary, our findings demonstrate that the endoplasmic reticulum is a 
target organelle for DMAIII-induced cytotoxicity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22425709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jun 15;21(12):2779-92. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds106. Epub 2012 Mar
15.

DISC1 variants 37W and 607F disrupt its nuclear targeting and regulatory role in 
ATF4-mediated transcription.

Malavasi EL(1), Ogawa F, Porteous DJ, Millar JK.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Molecular Medicine at the Medical Research Council Institute of
Genetics and Molecular Medicine, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

Disrupted-In-Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1), a strong genetic candidate for psychiatric 
illness, encodes a multicompartmentalized molecular scaffold that regulates
interacting proteins with key roles in neurodevelopment and plasticity. Missense 
DISC1 variants are associated with the risk of mental illness and with brain
abnormalities in healthy carriers, but the underlying mechanisms are unclear. We 
examined the effect of rare and common DISC1 amino acid substitutions on
subcellular targeting. We report that both the rare putatively causal variant 37W
and the common variant 607F independently disrupt DISC1 nuclear targeting in a
dominant-negative fashion, predicting that DISC1 nuclear expression is impaired
in 37W and 607F carriers. In the nucleus, DISC1 interacts with the transcription 
factor Activating Transcription Factor 4 (ATF4), which is involved in the
regulation of cellular stress responses, emotional behaviour and memory
consolidation. At basal cAMP levels, wild-type DISC1 inhibits the transcriptional
activity of ATF4, an effect that is weakened by both 37W and 607F independently, 
most likely as a consequence of their defective nuclear targeting. The common
variant 607F additionally reduces DISC1/ATF4 interaction, which likely
contributes to its weakened inhibitory effect. We also demonstrate that DISC1
modulates transcriptional responses to endoplasmic reticulum stress, and that
this modulatory effect is ablated by 37W and 607F. By showing that DISC1 amino
acid substitutions associated with psychiatric illness affect its regulatory
function in ATF4-mediated transcription, our study highlights a potential
mechanism by which these variants may impact on transcriptional events mediating 
cognition, emotional reactivity and stress responses, all processes of direct
relevance to psychiatric illness.

PMCID: PMC3363331
PMID: 22422769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cell Death Dis. 2012 Mar 15;3:e280. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2012.17.

C16 ceramide is crucial for triacylglycerol-induced apoptosis in macrophages.

Aflaki E(1), Doddapattar P, Radovic B, Povoden S, Kolb D, Vujic N, Wegscheider M,
Koefeler H, Hornemann T, Graier WF, Malli R, Madeo F, Kratky D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Center of Molecular Medicine,
Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.

Triacylglycerol (TG) accumulation caused by adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL)
deficiency or very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) loading of wild-type (Wt)
macrophages results in mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis. This phenotype is
correlated to depletion of Ca(2+) from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), an event
known to induce the unfolded protein response (UPR). Here, we show that ER stress
in TG-rich macrophages activates the UPR, resulting in increased abundance of the
chaperone GRP78/BiP, the induction of pancreatic ER kinase-like ER kinase,
phosphorylation and activation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2A,
the translocation of activating transcription factor (ATF)4 and ATF6 to the
nucleus and the induction of the cell death executor CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein homologous protein. C16:0 ceramide concentrations were increased in
Atgl-/- and VLDL-loaded Wt macrophages. Overexpression of ceramide synthases was 
sufficient to induce mitochondrial apoptosis in Wt macrophages. In accordance,
inhibition of ceramide synthases in Atgl-/- macrophages by fumonisin B1 (FB1)
resulted in specific inhibition of C16:0 ceramide, whereas intracellular TG
concentrations remained high. Although the UPR was still activated in Atgl-/-
macrophages, FB1 treatment rescued Atgl-/- macrophages from mitochondrial
dysfunction and programmed cell death. We conclude that C16:0 ceramide elicits
apoptosis in Atgl-/- macrophages by activation of the mitochondrial apoptosis
pathway.

PMCID: PMC3317349
PMID: 22419109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32972. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032972. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

Role of ER stress response in photodynamic therapy: ROS generated in different
subcellular compartments trigger diverse cell death pathways.

Moserova I(1), Kralova J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of 
Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.

We have analyzed the molecular mechanisms of photoinduced cell death using
porphyrins with similar structure differing only in the position of the ethylene 
glycol (EG) chain on the phenyl ring. Meta- and para-positioned EG chains
targeted porphyrins to different subcellular compartments. After photoactivation,
both types of derivatives induced death of tumor cells via reactive oxygen
species (ROS). Para derivatives pTPP(EG)4 and pTPPF(EG)4 primarily accumulated in
lysosomes activated the p38 MAP kinase cascade, which in turn induced the
mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. In contrast, meta porphyrin derivative mTPP(EG)4
localized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) induced dramatic changes in Ca(2+)
homeostasis manifested by Ca(2+) rise in the cytoplasm, activation of calpains
and stress caspase-12 or caspase-4. ER stress developed into unfolded protein
response. Immediately after irradiation the PERK pathway was activated through
phosphorylation of PERK, eIF2a and induction of transcription factors ATF4 and
CHOP, which regulate stress response genes. PERK knockdown and PERK deficiency
protected cells against mTPP(EG)4-mediated apoptosis, confirming the causative
role of the PERK pathway.

PMCID: PMC3293927
PMID: 22403731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 18;287(21):17224-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.333377. Epub
2012 Mar 6.

Intestinal expression of mouse Abcg2/breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) gene
is under control of circadian clock-activating transcription factor-4 pathway.

Hamdan AM(1), Koyanagi S, Wada E, Kusunose N, Murakami Y, Matsunaga N, Ohdo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

ABCG2, encoding breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP), is a member of the
ATP-binding cassette transporter family and is often associated with cancer
chemotherapeutic resistance. BCRP is also expressed in a variety of normal cells 
and acts as a xenobiotic efflux transporter. Because intestinal BCRP limits
systemic exposure to xenobiotics, alterations in the function and expression of
this transporter could account for part of the variation in oral drug absorption.
In this study, we show that ATF4, a molecular component of the circadian clock,
induces circadian expression of the Abcg2 gene in mouse small intestine. Three
types of leader exons (termed exons 1A, 1B, and 1C) are identified in the
5'-untranslated region of mouse Abcg2 transcripts. The exon 1B-containing Abcg2
transcript was the only isoform detected in mouse small intestine, and its mRNA
levels oscillated in a circadian time-dependent manner. ATF4 bound
time-dependently to the cAMP response element within the exon 1B promoter region 
of the Abcg2 gene, thereby causing the oscillation of BCRP protein abundance and 
its efflux pump function. The circadian clock-ATF4 pathway appears to enhance the
function of BCRP during a specific time window and to modulate intestinal drug
absorption. Our findings suggest a mechanism underlying circadian change in
xenobiotic detoxification.

PMCID: PMC3366834
PMID: 22396548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Apr;26(4):562-73. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1362. Epub 2012 Mar
1.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in cumulus-oocyte complexes impairs pentraxin-3
secretion, mitochondrial membrane potential (DeltaPsi m), and embryo development.

Wu LL(1), Russell DL, Norman RJ, Robker RL.

Author information: 
(1)The Robinson Institute, School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health,
Research Centre for Reproductive Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South 
Australia 5005, Australia.

Fatty acids such as palmitic acid at high levels are known to induce endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) stress and lipotoxicity in numerous cell types and thereby
contribute to cellular dysfunctions in obesity. To understand the impact of high 
fatty acids on oocytes, ER stress and lipotoxicity were induced in mouse
cumulus-oocyte complexes during in vitro maturation using the ER Ca(2+) channel
blocker thapsigargin or high physiological levels of palmitic acid; both of which
significantly induced ER stress marker genes (Atf4, Atf6, Xbp1s, and Hspa5) and
inositol-requiring protein-1a phosphorylation, demonstrating an ER stress
response that was reversible with the ER stress inhibitor salubrinal. Assessment 
of pentraxin-3, an extracellular matrix protein essential for fertilization, by
immunocytochemistry and Western blotting showed dramatically impaired secretion
concurrent with ER stress. Mitochondrial activity in oocytes was assessed by
5,5',6,6'-tetrachloro-1,1',3,3'-tetraethylbenzimidazolylcarbocyanine iodide
staining of inner mitochondrial membrane potential, and oocytes matured in
thapsigargin or high-dose palmitic acid had significantly reduced mitochondrial
activity, reduced in vitro fertilization rates, and were slower to develop to
blastocysts. The deficiencies in protein secretion, mitochondrial activity, and
oocyte developmental competence were each normalized by salubrinal, demonstrating
that ER stress is a key mechanism mediating fatty acid-induced defects in oocyte 
developmental potential.

PMID: 22383462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Nov;227(11):3539-45. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24075.

Role of fibroblast growth factor 2 and Wnt signaling in anabolic effects of
parathyroid hormone on bone formation.

Fei Y(1), Hurley MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
CT 06030, USA.

Osteoporosis poses enormous health and economic burden worldwide. One of the very
few anabolic agents for osteoporosis is parathyroid hormone (PTH). Although great
progress has been made since the FDA approved PTH in 2002, the detailed
mechanisms of the bone anabolic effects of intermittent PTH treatment is still
not well understood. PTH bone anabolic effect is regulated by extracellular
factors. Maximal bone anabolic effect of PTH requires fibroblast growth factor 2 
(FGF2) signaling, which might be mediated by transcription factor activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4). Maximal bone anabolic effect of PTH also requires 
Wnt signaling. Particularly, Wnt antagonists such as sclerostin, dickkopf 1
(DKK1) and secreted frizzled related protein 1 (sFRP1) are promising targets to
increase bone formation. Interestingly, FGF2 signaling modulates Wnt/ß-Catenin
signaling pathway in bone. Therefore, multiple signaling pathways utilized by PTH
are cross talking and working together to promote bone formation. Extensive
studies on the mechanisms of action of PTH will help to identify new pathways
that regulate bone formation, to improve available agents to stimulate bone
formation, and to identify potential new anabolic agents for osteoporosis.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3371283
PMID: 22378151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. BMC Proc. 2011 Nov 22;5 Suppl 8:O11. doi: 10.1186/1753-6561-5-S8-O11. eCollection
2011.

ATF4 over-expression increased IgG1 productivity in Chinese hamster ovary cells.

Haredy AM(1), Nishizawa A(1), Honda K(1), Ohya T(2), Ohtake H(1), Omasa T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University,
Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. (2)Tanabe Mitsubishi Pharma, Hirakata, Osaka,
Japan, 573-1153. (3)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, 
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan ; Institute of Technology and
Science, The University of Tokushima, Tokushima, 770-8506, Japan.

PMCID: PMC3284932
PMID: 22373151  [PubMed]


236. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31431. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031431. Epub 2012 Feb 17.

Activating transcription factor 4 confers a multidrug resistance phenotype to
gastric cancer cells through transactivation of SIRT1 expression.

Zhu H(1), Xia L, Zhang Y, Wang H, Xu W, Hu H, Wang J, Xin J, Gang Y, Sha S, Xu B,
Fan D, Nie Y, Wu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology,
Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, People's Republic of 
China.

BACKGROUND: Multidrug resistance (MDR) in gastric cancer remains a major
challenge to clinical treatment. Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is a
stress response gene involved in homeostasis and cellular protection. However,
the expression and function of ATF4 in gastric cancer MDR remains unknown. In
this study, we investigate whether ATF4 play a role in gastric cancer MDR and its
potential mechanisms.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We demonstrated that ATF4 overexpression confered
the MDR phenotype to gastric cancer cells, while knockdown of ATF4 in the MDR
variants induced re-sensitization. In this study we also showed that the
NAD(+)-dependent histone deacetylase SIRT1 was required for ATF4-induced MDR
effect in gastric cancer cells. We demonstrated that ATF4 facilitated MDR in
gastric cancer cells through direct binding to the SIRT1 promoter, resulting in
SIRT1 up-regulation. Significantly, inhibition of SIRT1 by small interfering RNA 
(siRNA) or a specific inhibitor (EX-527) reintroduced therapeutic sensitivity.
Also, an increased Bcl-2/Bax ratio and MDR1 expression level were found in
ATF4-overexpressing cells.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We showed that ATF4 had a key role in the regulation of
MDR in gastric cancer cells in response to chemotherapy and these findings
suggest that targeting ATF4 could relieve therapeutic resistance in gastric
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3281959
PMID: 22363646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Pharmacol Sci. 2012;118(3):363-72. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

A novel animal model of hearing loss caused by acute endoplasmic reticulum stress
in the cochlea.

Fujinami Y(1), Mutai H, Mizutari K, Nakagawa S, Matsunaga T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Auditory Disorders, National Institute of Sensory Organs (NISO),
National Tokyo Medical Center, 2-5-1 Higashigaoka, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8902,
Japan.

Many stimuli such as ischemia, hypoxia, heat shock, amino acid starvation, and
gene mutation, exhibit a cellular response called endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress. ER stress induces expression of a series of genes, leading to cell
survival or apoptosis. Previously, we found that in an animal model of hearing
loss caused by acute mitochondrial dysfunction, several ER stress markers
including C/EBP homologous protein were induced in the cochlear lateral wall. To 
elucidate the mechanism of hearing loss caused by ER stress, we established a
novel animal model of hearing loss by perilymphatic perfusion of tunicamycin, an 
ER stress activator that inhibits N-acetylglucosamine transferases. Subacute and 
progressive hearing loss was observed at all sound frequencies studied, and
stimulation of ER stress marker genes was noted in the cochlea. The outer hair
cells were the most sensitive to ER stress in the cochlea. Electron microscopic
analysis demonstrated degeneration of the subcellular organelles of the inner
hair cells and nerve endings of the spiral ganglion cells. This newly established
animal model of hearing loss from ER stress will provide additional insight into 
the mechanism of sensorineural hearing loss.

PMID: 22362185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Infect Immun. 2012 May;80(5):1803-14. doi: 10.1128/IAI.06164-11. Epub 2012 Feb
21.

Regulation of subtilase cytotoxin-induced cell death by an RNA-dependent protein 
kinase-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase-dependent proteasome pathway in HeLa
cells.

Yahiro K(1), Tsutsuki H, Ogura K, Nagasawa S, Moss J, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Infectiology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan. yahirok@faculty.chiba-u.jp

Shiga-toxigenic Escherichia coli (STEC) produces subtilase cytotoxin (SubAB),
which cleaves the molecular chaperone BiP in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
leading to an ER stress response and then activation of apoptotic signaling
pathways. Here, we show that an early event in SubAB-induced apoptosis in HeLa
cells is mediated by RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR)-like ER kinase (PERK),
not activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) or inositol-requiring enzyme
1(Ire1), two other ER stress sensors. PERK knockdown suppressed SubAB-induced
eIF2a phosphorylation, activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) expression,
caspase activation, and cytotoxicity. Knockdown of eIF2a by small interfering RNA
(siRNA) or inhibition of eIF2a dephosphorylation by Sal003 enhanced SubAB-induced
caspase activation. Treatment with proteasome inhibitors (i.e., MG132 and
lactacystin), but not a general caspase inhibitor (Z-VAD) or a lysosome inhibitor
(chloroquine), suppressed SubAB-induced caspase activation and poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) cleavage, suggesting that the ubiquitin-proteasome system
controls events leading to caspase activation, i.e., Bax/Bak conformational
changes, followed by cytochrome c release from mitochondria. Levels of
ubiquitinated proteins in HeLa cells were significantly decreased by SubAB
treatment. Further, in an early event, some antiapoptotic proteins, which
normally turn over rapidly, have their synthesis inhibited, and show enhanced
degradation via the proteasome, resulting in apoptosis. In PERK knockdown cells, 
SubAB-induced loss of ubiquitinated proteins was inhibited. Thus, SubAB-induced
ER stress is caused by BiP cleavage, leading to PERK activation, not by
accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins, which undergo PERK-dependent degradation 
via the ubiquitin-proteasome system.

PMCID: PMC3347452
PMID: 22354021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Cancer Biol Ther. 2012 Apr;13(6):435-42. doi: 10.4161/cbt.19295. Epub 2012 Apr 1.

Activating transcription factor 4 increases chemotherapeutics resistance of human
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhang Z(1), Yin J, Zhang C, Liang N, Bai N, Chang A, Liu Y, Li Z, Tan X, Li N, Lv
D, Xiang R, Tian Y, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The School of Medicine, Nankai University, Tianjin, 
China.

It has been reported that activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) increases the 
processes of tumor growth, metastasis and drug resistance. However, the role
played by ATF4 in chemoresistance of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains
unknown. Clarification of this role of ATF4 in HCC could greatly benefit the
efficacy of clinical treatment of HCC. In this study, we found that ATF4 was
overexpressed in about 50.7% of HCC tissues. In fact knockdown of ATF4
significantly increased the cytotoxicity of cisplatin in both in vitro and in
vivo assays, while overexpression of this molecule dramatically decreased the
sensitivity of HCC cell lines to cisplatin. Additionally, we found that synthesis
of glutathione was significantly reduced in HCC cell lines subjected to ATF4
knockdown. Taken together, these results demonstrate that ATF4 can increase
resistance to cisplatin in HCC by increased biosynthesis of glutathione, and that
this may be a potent novel target for the future development of anti-HCC drugs.

PMID: 22338651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 May 15;21(10):2245-62. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds040. Epub 2012 Feb
14.

Targeting the UPR transcription factor XBP1 protects against Huntington's disease
through the regulation of FoxO1 and autophagy.

Vidal RL(1), Figueroa A, Court FA, Thielen P, Molina C, Wirth C, Caballero B,
Kiffin R, Segura-Aguilar J, Cuervo AM, Glimcher LH, Hetz C.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Neuroscience Biomedical Institute, University of Chile,
Santiago, Chile.

Mutations leading to expansion of a poly-glutamine track in Huntingtin (Htt)
cause Huntington's disease (HD). Signs of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress have 
been recently reported in animal models of HD, associated with the activation of 
the unfolded protein response (UPR). Here we have investigated the functional
contribution of ER stress to HD by targeting the expression of two main UPR
transcription factors, XBP1 and ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4), in
full-length mutant Huntingtin (mHtt) transgenic mice. XBP1-deficient mice were
more resistant to developing disease features, associated with improved neuronal 
survival and motor performance, and a drastic decrease in mHtt levels. The
protective effects of XBP1 deficiency were associated with enhanced
macroautophagy in both cellular and animal models of HD. In contrast, ATF4
deficiency did not alter mHtt levels. Although, XBP1 mRNA splicing was observed
in the striatum of HD transgenic brains, no changes in the levels of classical ER
stress markers were detected in symptomatic animals. At the mechanistic level, we
observed that XBP1 deficiency led to augmented expression of Forkhead box O1
(FoxO1), a key transcription factor regulating autophagy in neurons. In agreement
with this finding, ectopic expression of FoxO1 enhanced autophagy and mHtt
clearance in vitro. Our results provide strong evidence supporting an involvement
of XBP1 in HD pathogenesis probably due to an ER stress-independent mechanism
involving the control of FoxO1 and autophagy levels.

PMCID: PMC3335312
PMID: 22337954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Cell Death Dis. 2012 Feb 16;3:e272. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2012.8.

Activation of the unfolded protein response enhances motor recovery after spinal 
cord injury.

Valenzuela V(1), Collyer E, Armentano D, Parsons GB, Court FA, Hetz C.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile,
Santiago, Chile.

Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a major cause of paralysis, and involves multiple
cellular and tissular responses including demyelination, inflammation, cell death
and axonal degeneration. Recent evidence suggests that perturbation on the
homeostasis of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is observed in different SCI
models; however, the functional contribution of this pathway to this pathology is
not known. Here we demonstrate that SCI triggers a fast ER stress reaction (1-3
h) involving the upregulation of key components of the unfolded protein response 
(UPR), a process that propagates through the spinal cord. Ablation of
X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) or activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4)
expression, two major UPR transcription factors, leads to a reduced locomotor
recovery after experimental SCI. The effects of UPR inactivation were associated 
with a significant increase in the number of damaged axons and reduced amount of 
oligodendrocytes surrounding the injury zone. In addition, altered microglial
activation and pro-inflammatory cytokine expression were observed in ATF4
deficient mice after SCI. Local expression of active XBP1 into the spinal cord
using adeno-associated viruses enhanced locomotor recovery after SCI, and was
associated with an increased number of oligodendrocytes. Altogether, our results 
demonstrate a functional role of the UPR in SCI, offering novel therapeutic
targets to treat this invalidating condition.

PMCID: PMC3288350
PMID: 22337234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Exp Diabetes Res. 2012;2012:762565. doi: 10.1155/2012/762565. Epub 2012 Jan 29.

Pentoxifylline attenuates methionine- and choline-deficient-diet-induced
steatohepatitis by suppressing TNF-a expression and endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Chae MK(1), Park SG, Song SO, Kang ES, Cha BS, Lee HC, Lee BW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine,
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Pentoxifylline (PTX) anti-TNF properties are known to exert
hepatoprotective effects in various liver injury models. The aim of this study
was to investigate whether PTX has beneficial roles in the development of
methionine- and choline-deficient-(MCD-) diet-induced NAFLD SD rats in vivo and
TNF-a-induced Hep3B cells in vitro.
METHODS: SD Rats were classified according to diet (chow or MCD diet) and
treatment (normal saline or PTX injection) over a period of 4 weeks: group I
(chow + saline, n = 4), group II (chow + PTX), group III (MCD + saline), and
group IV (MCD + PTX). Hep3B cells were treated with 100 ng/ml TNF-a (24 h) in the
absence or presence of PTX (1 mM).
RESULTS: PTX attenuated MCD-diet-induced serum ALT levels and hepatic steatosis. 
In real-time PCR and western blotting analysis, PTX decreased MCD-diet-induced
TNF-alpha mRNA expression and proapoptotic unfolded protein response by ER stress
(GRP78, p-eIF2, ATF4, IRE1a, CHOP, and p-JNK activation) in vivo. PTX (1 mM)
reduced TNF-a-induced activation of GRP78, p-eIF2, ATF4, IRE1a, and CHOP in
vitro.
CONCLUSION: PTX has beneficial roles in the development of MCD-diet-induced
steatohepatitis through partial suppression of TNF-a and ER stress.

PMCID: PMC3272795
PMID: 22319522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 21;109(8):3006-11. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1104491109. Epub 2012 Feb 6.

Protein phosphatase 1 subunit Ppp1r15a/GADD34 regulates cytokine production in
polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid-stimulated dendritic cells.

Clavarino G(1), Cláudio N, Dalet A, Terawaki S, Couderc T, Chasson L, Ceppi M,
Schmidt EK, Wenger T, Lecuit M, Gatti E, Pierre P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Aix-Marseille University, 13288
Marseille, France.

In response to inflammatory stimulation, dendritic cells (DCs) have a remarkable 
pattern of differentiation that exhibits specific mechanisms to control the
immune response. Here we show that in response to
polyriboinosinic:polyribocytidylic acid (pI:C), DCs mount a specific integrated
stress response during which the transcription factor ATF4 and the growth arrest 
and DNA damage-inducible protein 34 (GADD34/Ppp1r15a), a phosphatase 1 (PP1)
cofactor, are expressed. In agreement with increased GADD34 levels, an extensive 
dephosphorylation of the translation initiation factor eIF2a was observed during 
DC activation. Unexpectedly, although DCs display an unusual resistance to
protein synthesis inhibition induced in response to cytosolic dsRNA, GADD34
expression did not have a major impact on protein synthesis. GADD34, however, was
shown to be required for normal cytokine production both in vitro and in vivo.
These observations have important implications in linking further pathogen
detection with the integrated stress response pathways.

PMCID: PMC3286954
PMID: 22315398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 16;287(12):8757-68. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.282897. Epub 2012
Feb 1.

FoxO1 protein cooperates with ATF4 protein in osteoblasts to control glucose
homeostasis.

Kode A(1), Mosialou I, Silva BC, Joshi S, Ferron M, Rached MT, Kousteni S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Columbia University, New
York, New York 10032, USA.

The Forkhead transcription factor FoxO1 inhibits through its expression in
osteoblasts ß-cell proliferation, insulin secretion, and sensitivity. At least
part of the FoxO1 metabolic functions result from its ability to suppress the
activity of osteocalcin, an osteoblast-derived hormone favoring glucose
metabolism and energy expenditure. In searching for mechanisms mediating the
metabolic actions of FoxO1, we focused on ATF4, because this transcription factor
also affects glucose metabolism through its expression in osteoblasts. We show
here that FoxO1 co-localizes with ATF4 in the osteoblast nucleus, and physically 
interacts with and promotes the transcriptional activity of ATF4. Genetic
experiments demonstrate that FoxO1 and ATF4 cooperate to increase glucose levels 
and decrease glucose tolerance. These effects result from a synergistic effect of
the two transcription factors to suppress the activity of osteocalcin through
up-regulating expression of the phosphatase catalyzing osteocalcin inactivation. 
As a result, insulin production by ß-cells and insulin signaling in the muscle,
liver and white adipose tissue are compromised and fat weight increases by the
FoxO1/ATF4 interaction. Taken together these observations demonstrate that FoxO1 
and ATF4 cooperate in osteoblasts to regulate glucose homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3308768
PMID: 22298775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2012 Jul;17(4):473-83. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0324-8.
Epub 2012 Jan 20.

Herpes simplex virus-1 disarms the unfolded protein response in the early stages 
of infection.

Burnett HF(1), Audas TE, Liang G, Lu RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
ON, Canada, N1G 2W1.

Accumulation of mis- and unfolded proteins during viral replication can cause
stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and trigger the unfolded protein
response (UPR). If unchecked, this process may induce cellular changes
detrimental to viral replication. In the report, we investigated the impact of
HSV-1 on the UPR during lytic replication. We found that HSV-1 effectively
disarms the UPR in early stages of viral infection. Only ATF6 activation was
detected during early infection, but with no upregulation of target chaperone
proteins. Activity of the eIF2a/ATF4 signaling arm increased at the final stage
of HSV-1 replication, which may indicate completion of virion assembly and
egress, thus releasing suppression of the UPR. We also found that the promoter of
viral ICP0 was responsive to ER stress, an apparent mimicry of cellular UPR
genes. These results suggest that HSV-1 may use ICP0 as a sensor to modulate the 
cellular stress response.

PMCID: PMC3368031
PMID: 22270612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Biomed Sci. 2012 Jan 17;19:7. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-19-7.

Ischemic preconditioning reduces endoplasmic reticulum stress and upregulates
hypoxia inducible factor-1a in ischemic kidney: the role of nitric oxide.

Mahfoudh-Boussaid A(1), Zaouali MA, Hadj-Ayed K, Miled AH, Saidane-Mosbahi D,
Rosello-Catafau J, Ben Abdennebi H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of human physiology, faculty of pharmacy, university of Monastir,
Tunisia.

BACKGROUND: Although recent studies indicate that renal ischemic preconditioning 
(IPC) protects the kidney from ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury, the precise
protective mechanism remains unclear. In the current study, we investigated
whether early IPC could upregulate hypoxia inducible transcription factor-1a
(HIF-1a) expression and could reduce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress after
renal I/R and whether pharmacological inhibition of nitric oxide (NO) production 
would abolish these protective effects.
METHODS: Kidneys of Wistar rats were subjected to 60 min of warm ischemia
followed by 120 min of reperfusion (I/R group), or to 2 preceding cycles of 5 min
ischemia and 5 min reperfusion (IPC group), or to intravenously injection of
NG-nitro-L-arginine methylester (L-NAME, 5 mg/kg) 5 min before IPC (L-NAME+IPC
group). The results of these experimental groups were compared to those of a
sham-operated group. Sodium reabsorption rate, creatinine clearance, plasma
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity, tissues concentrations of malonedialdehyde 
(MDA), HIF-1a and nitrite/nitrate were determined. In addition, Western blot
analyses were performed to identify the amounts of Akt, endothelial nitric oxide 
synthase (eNOS) and ER stress parameters.
RESULTS: IPC decreased cytolysis, lipid peroxidation and improved renal function.
Parallelly, IPC enhanced Akt phosphorylation, eNOS, nitrite/nitrate and HIF-1a
levels as compared to I/R group. Moreover, our results showed that IPC increased 
the relative amounts of glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) and decreased those 
of RNA activated protein kinase (PKR)-like ER kinase (PERK), activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and TNF-receptor-associated factor 2 (TRAF2) as
judged to I/R group. However, pre treatment with L-NAME abolished these
beneficial effects of IPC against renal I/R insults.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that early IPC protects kidney against renal
I/R injury via reducing oxidative and ER stresses. These effects are associated
with phosphorylation of Akt, eNOS activation and NO production contributing thus 
to HIF-1a stabilization. The beneficial impact of IPC was abolished when NO
production is inhibited before IPC application.

PMCID: PMC3398272
PMID: 22252226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 May;364(1-2):115-29. doi: 10.1007/s11010-011-1211-9. Epub 
2012 Jan 15.

Saturated fatty acid induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress and apoptosis in
human liver cells via the PERK/ATF4/CHOP signaling pathway.

Cao J(1), Dai DL, Yao L, Yu HH, Ning B, Zhang Q, Chen J, Cheng WH, Shen W, Yang
ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 2nd Affiliated Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, No. 74 Linjiang Road, Chongqing 400010, China.

Accumulation of saturated fatty acids in the liver can cause nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease (NAFLD). This study investigated saturated fatty acid induction of 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and apoptosis in human liver cells and the
underlying causal mechanism. Human liver L02 and HepG2 cell lines were exposed to
the saturated fatty acid sodium palmitate. MTT assay was used for cell viability,
flow cytometry and Hoechst 33258 staining for apoptosis, RT-PCR for mRNA
expression, and Western blot for protein expression. Silence of PRK-like ER
kinase (PERK) expression in liver cells was through transient transfection of
PERK shRNA. Treatment of L02 and HepG2 cells with sodium palmitate reduced cell
viability through induction of apoptosis. Sodium palmitate also induced ER stress
in the cells, indicated by upregulation of PERK phosphorylation and expression of
BiP, ATF4, and CHOP proteins. Sodium palmitate had little effect on activating
XBP-1, a common target of the other two canonical sensors of ER stress, ATF6, and
IRE1. Knockdown of PERK gene expression suppressed the PERK/ATF4/CHOP signaling
pathway during sodium palmitate-induced ER stress and significantly inhibited
sodium palmitate-induced apoptosis in L02 and HepG2 cells. Saturated fatty
acid-induced ER stress and apoptosis in these human liver cells were enacted
through the PERK/ATF4/CHOP signaling pathway. Future study is warranted to
investigate the role of these proteins in mediating saturated fatty acid-induced 
NAFLD in animal models.

PMID: 22246806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Cell Death Differ. 2012 Jun;19(6):1013-26. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.189. Epub 2012
Jan 13.

TMBIM3/GRINA is a novel unfolded protein response (UPR) target gene that controls
apoptosis through the modulation of ER calcium homeostasis.

Rojas-Rivera D(1), Armisén R, Colombo A, Martínez G, Eguiguren AL, Díaz A,
Kiviluoto S, Rodríguez D, Patron M, Rizzuto R, Bultynck G, Concha ML, Sierralta
J, Stutzin A, Hetz C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile,
Santiago, Chile.

Transmembrane BAX inhibitor motif-containing (TMBIM)-6, also known as
BAX-inhibitor 1 (BI-1), is an anti-apoptotic protein that belongs to a putative
family of highly conserved and poorly characterized genes. Here we report the
function of TMBIM3/GRINA in the control of cell death by endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress. Tmbim3 mRNA levels are strongly upregulated in cellular and animal
models of ER stress, controlled by the PERK signaling branch of the unfolded
protein response. TMBIM3/GRINA synergies with TMBIM6/BI-1 in the modulation of ER
calcium homeostasis and apoptosis, associated with physical interactions with
inositol trisphosphate receptors. Loss-of-function studies in D. melanogaster
demonstrated that TMBIM3/GRINA and TMBIM6/BI-1 have synergistic activities
against ER stress in vivo. Similarly, manipulation of TMBIM3/GRINA levels in
zebrafish embryos revealed an essential role in the control of apoptosis during
neuronal development and in experimental models of ER stress. These findings
suggest the existence of a conserved group of functionally related cell death
regulators across species beyond the BCL-2 family of proteins operating at the ER
membrane.

PMCID: PMC3354055
PMID: 22240901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Biochem J. 2012 Apr 1;443(1):165-71. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111748.

Activating transcription factor 4-dependent induction of FGF21 during amino acid 
deprivation.

De Sousa-Coelho AL(1), Marrero PF, Haro D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy and the
Institute of Biomedicine of the University of Barcelona (IBUB), Av. Joan XXIII
s/n, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Nutrient deprivation or starvation frequently correlates with amino acid
limitation. Amino acid starvation initiates a signal transduction cascade
starting with the activation of the kinase GCN2 (general control
non-derepressible 2) phosphorylation of eIF2 (eukaryotic initiation factor 2),
global protein synthesis reduction and increased ATF4 (activating transcription
factor 4). ATF4 modulates a wide spectrum of genes involved in the adaptation to 
dietary stress. The hormone FGF21 (fibroblast growth factor 21) is induced during
fasting in liver and its expression induces a metabolic state that mimics
long-term fasting. Thus FGF21 is critical for the induction of hepatic fat
oxidation, ketogenesis and gluconeogenesis, metabolic processes which are
essential for the adaptive metabolic response to starvation. In the present
study, we have shown that FGF21 is induced by amino acid deprivation in both
mouse liver and cultured HepG2 cells. We have identified the human FGF21 gene as 
a target gene for ATF4 and we have localized two conserved ATF4-binding sequences
in the 5' regulatory region of the human FGF21 gene, which are responsible for
the ATF4-dependent transcriptional activation of this gene. These results add
FGF21 gene induction to the transcriptional programme initiated by increased
levels of ATF4 and offer a new mechanism for the induction of the FGF21 gene
expression under nutrient deprivation.

PMID: 22233381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 30;287(14):11398-409. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.320416. Epub
2012 Jan 6.

Lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal causes endothelial
activation by inducing endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Vladykovskaya E(1), Sithu SD, Haberzettl P, Wickramasinghe NS, Merchant ML, Hill 
BG, McCracken J, Agarwal A, Dougherty S, Gordon SA, Schuschke DA, Barski OA,
O'Toole T, D'Souza SE, Bhatnagar A, Srivastava S.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky
40202, USA.

Lipid peroxidation products, such as 4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal (HNE), cause
endothelial activation, and they increase the adhesion of the endothelium to
circulating leukocytes. Nevertheless, the mechanisms underlying these effects
remain unclear. We observed that in HNE-treated human umbilical vein endothelial 
cells, some of the protein-HNE adducts colocalize with the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) and that HNE forms covalent adducts with several ER chaperones that assist
in protein folding. We also found that at concentrations that did not induce
apoptosis or necrosis, HNE activated the unfolded protein response, leading to an
increase in XBP-1 splicing, phosphorylation of protein kinase-like ER kinase and 
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a, and the induction of ATF3 and ATF4. 
This increase in eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a phosphorylation was 
prevented by transfection with protein kinase-like ER kinase siRNA. Treatment
with HNE increased the expression of the ER chaperones, GRP78 and HERP. Exposure 
to HNE led to a depletion of reduced glutathione and an increase in the
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS); however, glutathione depletion and
ROS production by tert-butyl-hydroperoxide did not trigger the unfolded protein
response. Pretreatment with a chemical chaperone, phenylbutyric acid, or
adenoviral transfection with ATF6 attenuated HNE-induced monocyte adhesion and
IL-8 induction. Moreover, phenylbutyric acid and taurine-conjugated
ursodeoxycholic acid attenuated HNE-induced leukocyte rolling and their firm
adhesion to the endothelium in rat cremaster muscle. These data suggest that
endothelial activation by HNE is mediated in part by ER stress, induced by
mechanisms independent of ROS production or glutathione depletion. The induction 
of ER stress may be a significant cause of vascular inflammation induced by
products of oxidized lipids.

PMCID: PMC3322871
PMID: 22228760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Diabetes. 2012 Feb;61(2):492-504. doi: 10.2337/db11-0315. Epub 2012 Jan 6.

Activation of endoplasmic reticulum stress by hyperglycemia is essential for
Müller cell-derived inflammatory cytokine production in diabetes.

Zhong Y(1), Li J, Chen Y, Wang JJ, Ratan R, Zhang SX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Endocrinology, and Diabetes, Harold Hamm Oklahoma
Diabetes Center, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma, USA.

Inflammation plays an important role in diabetes-induced retinal vascular
leakage. The purpose of this study is to examine the role of endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress and the signaling pathway of ER stress-induced activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) in the regulation of Müller cell-derived
inflammatory mediators in diabetic retinopathy. In diabetic animals, elevated ER 
stress markers, ATF4, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression
were partially localized to Müller cells in the retina. In cultured Müller cells,
high glucose induced a time-dependent increase of ER stress, ATF4 expression, and
inflammatory factor production. Inducing ER stress or overexpressing ATF4
resulted in elevated intracellular adhesion molecule 1 and VEGF proteins in
Müller cells. In contrast, alleviation of ER stress or blockade of ATF4 activity 
attenuated inflammatory gene expression induced by high glucose or hypoxia.
Furthermore, we found that ATF4 regulated the c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase pathway
resulting in VEGF upregulation. ATF4 was also required for ER stress-induced and 
hypoxia-inducible factor-1a activation. Finally, we showed that administration of
chemical chaperone 4-phenylbutyrate or genetic inhibition of ATF4 successfully
attenuated retinal VEGF expression and reduced vascular leakage in mice with
STZ-induced diabetes. Taken together, our data indicate that ER stress and ATF4
play a critical role in retinal inflammatory signaling and Müller cell-derived
inflammatory cytokine production in diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3266398
PMID: 22228718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. IUBMB Life. 2012 Mar;64(3):226-30. doi: 10.1002/iub.605. Epub 2012 Jan 3.

Effects of activating transcription factor 4 deficiency on carbohydrate and lipid
metabolism in mammals.

Wang C(1), Guo F.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, The Graduate School of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.

It has been shown that the mammalian activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is 
involved in many different physiological events, such as eye development, stress 
response, learning, and memory. However, several recent studies have demonstrated
that ATF4 also plays an important role in the regulation of lipid and glucose
metabolism, energy homeostasis, insulin secretion, and sensitivity, suggesting
that ATF4 is a master regulator of metabolism. This review summarizes the most
recent progress in the understanding of the novel roles of ATF4 in the regulation
of metabolism.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22223547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 2;287(10):7603-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.304576. Epub 2012 
Jan 3.

Integrated stress response modulates cellular redox state via induction of
cystathionine <U+03B3>-lyase: cross-talk between integrated stress response and thiol
metabolism.

Dickhout JG(1), Carlisle RE, Jerome DE, Mohammed-Ali Z, Jiang H, Yang G, Mani S, 
Garg SK, Banerjee R, Kaufman RJ, Maclean KN, Wang R, Austin RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, McMaster University, St.
Joseph's Healthcare Hamilton and Hamilton Centre for Kidney Research, Hamilton,
Ontario L8N 4A6, Canada.

The integrated stress response mediated by eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 2a (eIF2a) phosphorylation maintains cellular homeostasis under
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. eIF2a phosphorylation induces activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a basic leucine zipper transcription factor that
regulates the expression of genes responsible for amino acid metabolism, cellular
redox state, and anti-stress responses. Cystathionine <U+03B3>-lyase (CSE) and
cystathionine ß-synthase are critical enzymes in the transsulfuration pathway,
which also regulate cellular redox status by modulating glutathione (GSH) levels.
To determine the link between the integrated stress response and the
transsulfuration pathway, we used homocysteine (Hcy) as an inducer of eIF2a
phosphorylation and ATF4 gene induction. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs)
lacking ATF4 (ATF4(-/-)) had reduced GSH levels and increased reactive oxygen
species and were susceptible to apoptotic cell death under normal culture
conditions. Further, ATF4(-/-) MEFs were more sensitive to Hcy-induced
cytotoxicity and showed significantly reduced intracellular GSH levels associated
with apoptosis. ATF4(-/-) MEFs could be rescued from l-Hcy-induced apoptosis by
ß-mercaptoethanol medium supplementation that increases cysteine levels and
restores GSH synthesis. ATF4(-/-) MEFs showed little or no CSE protein but did
express cystathionine ß-synthase. Further, ER stress-inducing agents, including
tunicamycin and thapsigargin, induced the expression of CSE in ATF4(+/+) MEFs.
Consistent with ATF4(-/-) MEFs, CSE(-/-) MEFs showed significantly greater
apoptosis when treated with tunicamycin, thapsigargin, and l-Hcy, compared with
CSE(+/+) MEFs. Liver and kidney GSH levels were also reduced in CSE(-/-) mice,
suggesting that CSE is a critical factor in GSH synthesis and may act to protect 
the liver and kidney from a variety of conditions that cause ER stress.

PMCID: PMC3293561
PMID: 22215680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 17;287(8):6025-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.311217. Epub 2012 
Jan 3.

Functional RNA interference (RNAi) screen identifies system A neutral amino acid 
transporter 2 (SNAT2) as a mediator of arsenic-induced endoplasmic reticulum
stress.

Oh RS(1), Pan WC, Yalcin A, Zhang H, Guilarte TR, Hotamisligil GS, Christiani DC,
Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Integrative Physiological Sciences, Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Exposure to the toxic metalloid arsenic is associated with diabetes and cancer
and causes proteotoxicity and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress at the cellular
level. Adaptive responses to ER stress are implicated in cancer and diabetes;
thus, understanding mechanisms of arsenic-induced ER stress may offer insights
into pathogenesis. Here, we identify genes required for arsenite-induced ER
stress response in a genome-wide RNAi screen. Using an shRNA library targeting
~20,000 human genes, together with an ER stress cell model, we performed flow
cytometry-based cell sorting to isolate cells with defective response to
arsenite. Our screen discovered several genes modulating arsenite-induced ER
stress, including sodium-dependent neutral amino acid transporter, SNAT2. SNAT2
expression and activity are up-regulated by arsenite, in a manner dependent on
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), an important mediator of the integrated
stress response. Inhibition of SNAT2 expression or activity or deprivation of its
primary substrate, glutamine, specifically suppressed ER stress induced by
arsenite but not tunicamycin. Induction of SNAT2 is coincident with the
activation of the nutrient-sensing mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway, 
which is at least partially required for arsenite-induced ER stress. Importantly,
inhibition of the SNAT2 or the System L transporter, LAT1, suppressed mTOR
activation by arsenite, supporting a role for these transporters in modulating
amino acid signaling. These findings reveal SNAT2 as an important and specific
mediator of arsenic-induced ER stress, and suggest a role for aberrant mTOR
activation in arsenic-related human diseases. Furthermore, this study
demonstrates the utility of RNAi screens in elucidating cellular mechanisms of
environmental toxins.

PMCID: PMC3285369
PMID: 22215663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Yi Chuan. 2011 Dec;33(12):1347-52.

[Association of porcine ATF4 gene polymorphism and production traits and analysis
of gene expression].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen C(1), Wu WJ, Xiong YZ.

Author information: 
(1)Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.
chenchao8341@webmail.hzau.edu.cn

In order to understand the function of gene ATF4 and identify new DNA markers
involved in pig production traits, the cDNA fragment of porcine ATF4 was cloned
and sequenced. Sequence comparison revealed an A159G substitution downstream of
the initiation codon (ATG). We then carried out PCR-Alu<U+2160>-RFLP analysis in Large
white, Landrace, Tongcheng and Meishan pigs, followed by association analysis in 
F2 "Large white ×Meishan" resource family. In all the individuals tested, Large
White and Landrace pigs possessed the AA genotype, while Meishan and Tongcheng
pigs pos-sessed the GG genotype. Association analysis in F2 resource family
showed that this site was highly associated with buttock fat thickness (BFT)
(Pamp;0.01) and had significant effect on thorax-waist fat thickness (TFT),
average backfat thickness (ABT), loin eye height (LEH), and loin eye area
(LEA)(Pamp;0.05). Real-time PCR was used to analyze the expression patterns of
porcine ATF4 gene in longissimus dorsi at different development stages of Large
White and Meishan pigs. The results showed that the gene expression levels of
ATF4 were low 65 days after conception and 3 days after birth, but no
signifi-cant differences were observed in both breeds. Meanwhile, the expression 
levels of porcine ATF4 gene were up-regulated 60 days and 120 days after birth in
both breeds and the expression level in Meishan pigs was obviously higher than
that in Large White pigs. These data could lay the foundation for further study
on the molecular mechanism of porcine ATF4 gene in lipid metabolism.

PMID: 22207380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Development. 2012 Feb;139(3):601-11. doi: 10.1242/dev.069575. Epub 2011 Dec 21.

Chondrocytic Atf4 regulates osteoblast differentiation and function via Ihh.

Wang W(1), Lian N, Ma Y, Li L, Gallant RC, Elefteriou F, Yang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Atf4 is a leucine zipper-containing transcription factor that activates
osteocalcin (Ocn) in osteoblasts and indian hedgehog (Ihh) in chondrocytes. The
relative contribution of Atf4 in chondrocytes and osteoblasts to the regulation
of skeletal development and bone formation is poorly understood. Investigations
of the Atf4(-/-);Col2a1-Atf4 mouse model, in which Atf4 is selectively
overexpressed in chondrocytes in an Atf4-null background, demonstrate that
chondrocyte-derived Atf4 regulates osteogenesis during development and bone
remodeling postnatally. Atf4 overexpression in chondrocytes of the
Atf4(-/-);Col2a1-Atf4 double mutants corrects the reduction in stature and limb
in Atf4(-/-) embryos and rectifies the decrease in Ihh expression, Hh signaling, 
proliferation and accelerated hypertrophy that characterize the Atf4(-/-)
developing growth plate cartilages. Unexpectedly, this genetic manipulation also 
restores the expression of osteoblastic marker genes, namely Ocn and bone
sialoprotein, in Atf4(-/-) developing bones. In Atf4(-/-);Col2a1-Atf4 adult mice,
all the defective bone parameters found in Atf4(-/-) mice, including bone volume,
trabecular number and thickness, and bone formation rate, are rescued. In
addition, the conditioned media of ex vivo cultures from wild-type or
Atf4(-/-);Col2a1-Atf4, but not Atf4(-/-) cartilage, corrects the differentiation 
defects of Atf4(-/-) bone marrow stromal cells and Ihh-blocking antibody
eliminates this effect. Together, these data indicate that Atf4 in chondrocytes
is required for normal Ihh expression and for its paracrine effect on osteoblast 
differentiation. Therefore, the cell-autonomous role of Atf4 in chondrocytes
dominates the role of Atf4 in osteoblasts during development for the control of
early osteogenesis and skeletal growth.

PMCID: PMC3252356
PMID: 22190639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2012;723:285-92. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0631-0_37.

Intermittent but not constant high glucose induces ER stress and inflammation in 
human retinal pericytes.

Zhong Y(1), Wang JJ, Zhang SX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Endocrinology and Diabetes, Harold Hamm Oklahoma
Diabetes Center, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK
73104, USA.

PMCID: PMC3243941
PMID: 22183344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Oncol Rep. 2012 Apr;27(4):1079-89. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1593. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

Recombinant Lz-8 from Ganoderma lucidum induces endoplasmic reticulum
stress-mediated autophagic cell death in SGC-7901 human gastric cancer cells.

Liang C(1), Li H, Zhou H, Zhang S, Liu Z, Zhou Q, Sun F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Frontier Medical Science of Jilin University, Changchun 130021,
PR China.

In Asia, the mushroom of the fungus Ganoderma lucidum has been widely used as a
traditional medicine for the past two millennia. The aim of this study was to
investigate the anticancer activity of recombinant Lz-8 (rLz-8), a protein
belonging to a family of fungal immunomodulatory proteins. We report that rLz-8
induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-mediated autophagic cell death in the
human gastric cancer cell line SGC-7901. Our results show that rLz-8 induces
autophagic cell death by aggregating in the ER, triggering ER stress and the
ATF4-CHOP pathway. A foreign protein, in the ER rLz-8 causes the activation of
the ubiquitine/proteasome ER-associated degradation (ERAD) system. The autophagic
arm of this system is then overstimulated by an excessive abundance of rLz-8 and 
causes the cell's death through an over-autophagic response. We also found that
caspase inhibitors do not prevent rLz-8-induced cell death, and therefore the
autophagic response induced by rLz-8 is independent of caspase activation.

PMCID: PMC3583434
PMID: 22179718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Neurochem Int. 2012 Nov;61(6):923-30. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2011.12.002. Epub
2011 Dec 9.

Cannabidiol affects the expression of genes involved in zinc homeostasis in BV-2 
microglial cells.

Juknat A(1), Rimmerman N, Levy R, Vogel Z, Kozela E.

Author information: 
(1)The Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Center for the Biology of Addictive
Diseases, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978,
Israel.

Cannabidiol (CBD) has been shown to exhibit anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and
neuroprotective properties. Unlike <U+0394>(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), CBD is devoid
of psychotropic effects and has very low affinity for both cannabinoid receptors,
CB(1) and CB(2). We have previously reported that CBD and THC have different
effects on anti-inflammatory pathways in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated BV-2
microglial cells, in a CB(1)/CB(2) independent manner. Moreover, CBD treatment of
BV-2 cells, was found to induce a robust change in the expression of genes
related to oxidative stress, glutathione deprivation and inflammation. Many of
these genes were shown to be controlled by Nrf2 and ATF4 transcription factors.
Using the Illumina MouseRef-8 BeadChip platform, DAVID Bioinformatics and
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis, we identified functional sets of genes and networks
affected by CBD. A subset of genes was found to be regulated by the metal
responsive element (MRE)-binding transcription factor-1 (MTF-1) and is shown to
be related to zinc homeostasis. We found that CBD upregulates the expression of
the mRNAs for metallothionein 2 (Mt2), N-myc-downstream regulated gene 1 and
matrix metalloproteinase 23 as well as of the zinc transporters ZnT1/Slc30a1 and 
Zip4/Slc39a4 but downregulates the expression of the mRNA for the zinc
transporter Zip10/Slc39a10 as well as for the zinc finger protein 472. Among
these genes, ZnT1, Mt2 and the zinc transporters ZIPs are known to function
together to control the intracellular zinc concentration. These results show that
CBD, but much less so THC, affects the expression of genes involved in zinc
homeostasis and suggest that the regulation of zinc levels could have an
important role through which CBD may exert its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory 
effects.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22178458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28946. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028946. Epub 2011 Dec 13.

Involvement of dopamine receptors in binge methamphetamine-induced activation of 
endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrial stress pathways.

Beauvais G(1), Atwell K, Jayanthi S, Ladenheim B, Cadet JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, National Institute on Drug Abuse,
Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Single large doses of methamphetamine (METH) cause endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress and mitochondrial dysfunctions in rodent striata. The dopamine D(1)
receptor appears to be involved in these METH-mediated stresses. The purpose of
this study was to investigate if dopamine D(1) and D(2) receptors are involved in
ER and mitochondrial stresses caused by single-day METH binges in the rat
striatum. Male Sprague-Dawley rats received 4 injections of 10 mg/kg of METH
alone or in combination with a putative D(1) or D(2) receptor antagonist,
SCH23390 or raclopride, respectively, given 30 min prior to each METH injection. 
Rats were euthanized at various timepoints afterwards. Striatal tissues were used
in quantitative RT-PCR and western blot analyses. We found that binge METH
injections caused increased expression of the pro-survival genes, BiP/GRP-78 and 
P58(IPK), in a SCH23390-sensitive manner. METH also caused up-regulation of
ER-stress genes, Atf2, Atf3, Atf4, CHOP/Gadd153 and Gadd34. The expression of
heat shock proteins (HSPs) was increased after METH injections. SCH23390
completely blocked induction in all analyzed ER stress-related proteins that
included ATF3, ATF4, CHOP/Gadd153, HSPs and caspase-12. The dopamine D(2)-like
antagonist, raclopride, exerted small to moderate inhibitory influence on some
METH-induced changes in ER stress proteins. Importantly, METH caused decreases in
the mitochondrial anti-apoptotic protein, Bcl-2, but increases in the
pro-apoptotic proteins, Bax, Bad and cytochrome c, in a SCH23390-sensitive
fashion. In contrast, raclopride provided only small inhibition of METH-induced
changes in mitochondrial proteins. These findings indicate that METH-induced
activation of striatal ER and mitochondrial stress pathways might be more related
to activation of SCH23390-sensitive receptors.

PMCID: PMC3236770
PMID: 22174933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Mar;5(3):739-44. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2011.700. Epub 2011 Dec 9.

A novel mono-carbonyl analogue of curcumin induces apoptosis in ovarian carcinoma
cells via endoplasmic reticulum stress and reactive oxygen species production.

Zhang X(1), Zhang HQ, Zhu GH, Wang YH, Yu XC, Zhu XB, Liang G, Xiao J, Li XK.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Biotechnology Pharmaceutical Engineering, School of
Pharmaceutical Science, Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325035, PR
China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the apoptosis of human ovarian
cancer cell lines, A2780 and CP70, induced by a novel curcumin analogue, B19. The
proliferation of cells was detected with methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT) assay
and apoptosis was examined by flow cytometry. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) were 
assessed by the fluorescent indicator DCF-DA. The protein expression of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress pathways, GRP78, XBP-1, ATF-4 and CHOP, was
examined with Western blotting. A growth inhibitory effect was observed after
treatment with B19 in a dose-dependent manner and with more potential than
curcumin. At 20 µM, B19 induced significant apoptosis in CP70 cells. Furthermore,
B19 induced the ER stress response, while curcumin had no effect on ER stress.
These results suggest that B19 has more effective antitumor properties than
curcumin, and is associated with the activation of ER stress and ROS in ovarian
cancer cells.

PMID: 22159410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 15;72(2):491-502. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-2076. Epub
2011 Dec 1.

Functional interaction between responses to lactic acidosis and hypoxia regulates
genomic transcriptional outputs.

Tang X(1), Lucas JE, Chen JL, LaMonte G, Wu J, Wang MC, Koumenis C, Chi JT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.

Within solid tumor microenvironments, lactic acidosis, and hypoxia each have
powerful effects on cancer pathophysiology. However, the influence that these
processes exert on each other is unknown. Here, we report that a significant
portion of the transcriptional response to hypoxia elicited in cancer cells is
abolished by simultaneous exposure to lactic acidosis. In particular, lactic
acidosis abolished stabilization of HIF-1a protein which occurs normally under
hypoxic conditions. In contrast, lactic acidosis strongly synergized with hypoxia
to activate the unfolded protein response (UPR) and an inflammatory response,
displaying a strong similarity to ATF4-driven amino acid deprivation responses
(AAR). In certain breast tumors and breast tumor cells examined, an integrative
analysis of gene expression and array CGH data revealed DNA copy number
alterations at the ATF4 locus, an important activator of the UPR/AAR pathway. In 
this setting, varying ATF4 levels influenced the survival of cells after exposure
to hypoxia and lactic acidosis. Our findings reveal that the condition of lactic 
acidosis present in solid tumors inhibits canonical hypoxia responses and
activates UPR and inflammation responses. Furthermore, these data suggest that
ATF4 status may be a critical determinant of the ability of cancer cells to adapt
to oxygen and acidity fluctuations in the tumor microenvironment, perhaps linking
short-term transcriptional responses to long-term selection for copy number
alterations in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3261313
PMID: 22135092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Clin Calcium. 2011 Dec;21(12):103-12. doi: CliCa111218531862.

[Bone and calcium update; bone research update. Regulatory mechanisms in
osteoblast differentiation].

[Article in Japanese]

Nishimura R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University Graduate
School of Dentistry, Japan.

Differentiation process of osteoblasts, which play a central role in bone
formation, is harmoniously controlled by several cytokines and hormones.
Particularly, Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) , Indian Hedgehog (Ihh) , and Wnt 
family proteins are important cytokines for osteoblast differentiation.
Understandings of molecular mechanisms by which these cytokines stimulate
osteoblast differentiation have been extensively investigated. BMP/Smad
signaling, canonical Wnt pathway, non-canonical Wnt pathway and Ihh/Gli signaling
play critical role in osteoblast differentiation. Furthermore, biochemical and
genetic studies have demonstrated important roles of Runt related transcription
factor 2 (Runx2) , Osterix, Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) , Msh
homeobox 2 (Msx2) and Oasis for osteoblast differentiation. Thus, these milestone
studies have dramatically progressed in our understanding of the cellular and
molecular mechanisms of osteoblast differentiation for 20 years.

PMID: 22133830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Blood. 2012 Jan 19;119(3):826-37. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-366492. Epub 2011
Nov 29.

Activation of ATF4 mediates unwanted Mcl-1 accumulation by proteasome inhibition.

Hu J(1), Dang N, Menu E, De Bruyne E, Xu D, Van Camp B, Van Valckenborgh E,
Vanderkerken K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Medical School of Xi'an Jiaotong
University, China.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2014 Jul 24;124(4):663. De Bryune, Elke [corrected to De Bruyne, Elke].

Myeloid cell leukemia-1 (Mcl-1) protein is an anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family protein
that plays essential roles in multiple myeloma (MM) survival and drug resistance.
In MM, it has been demonstrated that proteasome inhibition can trigger the
accumulation of Mcl-1, which has been shown to confer MM cell resistance to
bortezomib-induced lethality. However, the mechanisms involved in this unwanted
Mcl-1 accumulation are still unclear. The aim of the present study was to
determine whether the unwanted Mcl-1 accumulation could be induced by the
unfolded protein response (UPR) and to elucidate the role of the endoplasmic
reticulum stress response in regulating Mcl-1 expression. Using quantitative
RT-PCR and Western blot, we found that the translation of activating
transcription factor-4 (ATF4), an important effector of the UPR, was also greatly
enhanced by proteasome inhibition. ChIP analysis further revealed that bortezomib
stimulated binding of ATF4 to a regulatory site (at position -332 to -324) at the
promoter of the Mcl-1 gene. Knocking down ATF4 was paralleled by down-regulation 
of Mcl-1 induction by bortezomib and significantly increased bortezomib-induced
apoptosis. These data identify the UPR and, more specifically, its ATF4 branch as
an important mechanism mediating up-regulation of Mcl-1 by proteasome inhibition.

PMID: 22128141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Dec 16;416(3-4):362-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.11.042. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress enhances <U+03B3>-secretase activity.

Ohta K(1), Mizuno A, Li S, Itoh M, Ueda M, Ohta E, Hida Y, Wang MX, Furoi M,
Tsuzuki Y, Sobajima M, Bohmoto Y, Fukushima T, Kobori M, Inuzuka T, Nakagawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu,
Japan.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) copes with unfolded proteins in the lumen (ER
stress) by activating three distinct intracellular signaling pathways of unfolded
protein response (UPR). ER stress contributes to the pathogenesis of obesity and 
diabetes, which are risk factors for Alzheimer's disease (AD) that accelerate the
pathogenesis of AD. However, whether ER stress is involved in the development of 
AD remains unclear. In this study, we demonstrate that ER stress induces
presenilin-1 expression through activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4),
resulting in increased amyloid-ß (Aß) secretion by <U+03B3>-secretase activity, which is
suppressed by quercetin by modifying UPR signaling. This result suggests that ER 
stress may be stimulated in obesity and type 2 diabetes, thereby enhancing
<U+03B3>-secretase activity that is the underlying molecular mechanism affecting the
pathogenesis of AD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22115781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Dis Model Mech. 2012 Mar;5(2):259-69. doi: 10.1242/dmm.008110. Epub 2011 Nov 22.

Metformin differentially activates ER stress signaling pathways without inducing 
apoptosis.

Quentin T(1), Steinmetz M, Poppe A, Thoms S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Pediatric Intensive Care Medicine,
University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. thomas.quentin@med.uni-goettingen.de

Endoplasmic reticulum stress signaling (ERSS) plays an important role in the
pathogenesis of diabetes and heart disease. The latter is a common comorbidity of
diabetes and worsens patient outcome. Results from clinical studies suggest
beneficial effects of metformin - a widely used oral drug for the treatment of
type 2 diabetes - on the heart of diabetic patients with heart failure. We
therefore analyzed the effect of metformin on ERSS in primary rat cardiomyocytes.
We found that metformin activates the PERK-ATF4 but not the ATF6 or IRE1-XBP1
branch in ERSS and leads to a strong upregulation of CHOP mRNA and protein.
Surprisingly, long-term induction of CHOP by metformin is not accompanied by
apoptosis even though CHOP is regarded to be a mediator of ER-stress-induced
apoptosis. In conclusion, metformin induces distinct ER stress pathways in
cardiomyocytes and our results indicate that CHOP is not necessarily a mediator
of apoptosis. Metformin might exert its cardioprotective effect through selective
activation of ERSS pathways in the cardiomyocyte.

PMCID: PMC3291647
PMID: 22107872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Oncogene. 2012 Aug 2;31(31):3621-34. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.522. Epub 2011 Nov 21.

The unfolded protein response controls induction and activation of ADAM17/TACE by
severe hypoxia and ER stress.

Rzymski T(1), Petry A, Kracun D, Rieß F, Pike L, Harris AL, Görlach A.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Molecular Pediatric Cardiology, German Heart Center Munich at
the Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany.

The family of ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase) proteins has been
implicated in tumor initiation and progression. ADAM17/tumor necrosis factor-a
(TNFa)-converting enzyme (TACE) has been initially recognized to release TNFa as 
well as its receptors (TNFRs) from the membrane. ADAM17, TNFa and TNFR have been 
found upregulated in cancer patients, although the underlying mechanisms remain
largely unknown. As hypoxia is a hallmark of cancer that can lead to severe
stress conditions accumulating in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and the
unfolded protein response (UPR), we investigated the role of these stress
conditions in the regulation of ADAM17 and release of TNFR1.We found that severe 
hypoxia induced ADAM17 expression and activity. Although hypoxia-inducible factor
1a (HIF1a) was important to maintain basal ADAM17 mRNA levels during moderate
hypoxia, it was not sufficient to induce ADAM17 levels under severe hypoxia.
Instead, we found that ADAM17 induction by severe hypoxia can be mimicked by ER
stressors such as Thapsigargin and occurs as a consequence of the activation of
the PERK/eIF2a/ATF4 and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) arms of UPR in
several tumor cell lines. ADAM17 expression was also increased in xenografts
displaying ER stress because of treatment with the vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) inhibitory antibody Bevacizumab. Additionally, severe hypoxia and
ER stress activated ADAM17 and ectodomain shedding of TNFR1 involving
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases and reactive oxygen species (ROS).
Collectively, these results show that ADAM17 is a novel UPR-regulated gene in
response to severe hypoxia and ER stress, which is actively involved in the
release of TNFR1 under these conditions. These data provide a novel link between 
severe hypoxic stress conditions and inflammation in the tumor environment.

PMID: 22105359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 15;72(2):395-401. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1891. Epub
2011 Nov 18.

Stress-regulated transcription factor ATF4 promotes neoplastic transformation by 
suppressing expression of the INK4a/ARF cell senescence factors.

Horiguchi M(1), Koyanagi S, Okamoto A, Suzuki SO, Matsunaga N, Ohdo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Many cancers overexpress ATF4, a stress-induced transcription factor that
promotes cell survival under hypoxic conditions and other stresses of the tumor
microenvironment, but the potential contributions of ATF4 to oncogenesis itself
have been little explored. Here, we report that ATF4 promotes oncogene-induced
neoplastic transformation by suppressing the expression of cellular
senescence-associated genes. Strikingly, primary embryo fibroblasts from
ATF4-deficient mice were resistant to transformation by coexpression of
H-ras(V12) and SV40 large T antigen. In wild-type cells these oncogenes induced
expression of the murine Atf4 gene along with the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor Cdkn2a, which encodes the cell senescence-associated proteins p16INK4
and p19ARF. Elevated levels of ATF4 were sufficient to suppress expression of
these proteins and drive oncogenic transformation. Conversely, genetic ablation
of ATF4 led to constitutive expression of p16INK4a and p19ARF, triggering
cellular senescence. Our findings define a central function for ATF4 in promoting
oncogenic transformation by suppressing a central pathway of cellular senescence.

PMID: 22102693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Cell Death Differ. 2012 May;19(5):847-58. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.165. Epub 2011
Nov 18.

Mutation of ATF4 mediates resistance of neuronal cell lines against oxidative
stress by inducing xCT expression.

Lewerenz J(1), Sato H, Albrecht P, Henke N, Noack R, Methner A, Maher P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
jan.lewerenz@googlemail.com

Selecting neuronal cell lines for resistance against oxidative stress might
recapitulate some adaptive processes in neurodegenerative diseases where
oxidative stress is involved like Parkinson's disease. We recently reported that 
in hippocampal HT22 cells selected for resistance against oxidative glutamate
toxicity, the cystine/glutamate antiporter system x(c)(-), which imports cystine 
for synthesis of the antioxidant glutathione, and its specific subunit, xCT, are 
upregulated. (Lewerenz et al., J Neurochem 98(3):916-25). Here, we show that in
these glutamate-resistant HT22 cells upregulation of xCT mediates glutamate
resistance, and xCT expression is induced by upregulation of the transcription
factor ATF4. The mechanism of ATF4 upregulation consists of a 13<U+2009>bp deletion in
the upstream open reading frame (uORF2) overlapping the ATF4 open reading frame. 
The resulting uORF2-ATF4 fusion protein is efficiently translated even at a low
phosphorylation levels of the translation initiation factor eIF2a, a condition
under which ATF4 translation is normally suppressed. A similar ATF4 mutation
associated with prominent upregulation of xCT expression was identified in PC12
cells selected for resistance against amyloid ß-peptide. Our data indicate that
ATF4 has a central role in regulating xCT expression and resistance against
oxidative stress. ATF4 mutations might have broader significance as upregulation 
of xCT is found in tumor cells and associated with anticancer drug resistance.

PMCID: PMC3321624
PMID: 22095285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2011 Nov;1237:11-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06197.x.

Combinatorial control of ATF4-dependent gene transcription in osteoblasts.

St-Arnaud R(1), Hekmatnejad B.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children, Montreal, Canada.
rst-arnaud@shriners.mcgill.ca

Osteoblast-specific gene transcription requires interaction between bone
cell-specific transcription factors and more widely expressed transcriptional
regulators. This is particularly evident for the basic domain-leucine zipper
factor activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), whose activity can be enhanced
or inhibited through interaction with other leucine zipper proteins, intermediate
filament proteins, components of the basic transcriptional machinery, nuclear
matrix attachment molecules, or ubiquitously expressed transcription factors. We 
discuss the results supporting the relevance of these interactions and present
the first evidence of a functional interaction between ATF4, FIAT
(factor-inhibiting ATF4-mediated transcription), and aNAC (nascent
polypeptide-associated complex and coactivator alpha), three proteins that have
been previously shown to associate using various protein-protein interaction
assays.

© 2011 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 22082360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Amino Acids. 2012 Aug;43(2):845-55. doi: 10.1007/s00726-011-1141-6. Epub 2011 Nov
13.

Beneficial effect of taurine on hypoxia- and glutamate-induced endoplasmic
reticulum stress pathways in primary neuronal culture.

Pan C(1), Prentice H, Price AL, Wu JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Florida Atlantic University, Boca
Raton, FL 33431, USA. cpan@fau.edu

Stroke (hypoxia) is one of the leading causes of mortality in the developed
countries, and it can induce excessive glutamate release and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. Taurine, as a free amino acid, present in high
concentrations in a range of organs in mammals, can provide protection against
multiple neurological diseases. Here, we present a study to investigate the
potential protective benefits of taurine against ER stress induced by glutamate
and hypoxia/reoxygenation in primary cortical neuronal cultures. We found that
taurine suppresses the up-regulation of caspase-12 and GADD153/CHOP induced by
hypoxia/reoxygenation, suggesting that taurine may exert a protective function
against hypoxia/reoxygenation by reducing the ER stress. Moreover, taurine can
down-regulate the ratio of cleaved ATF6 and full length ATF6, and p-IRE1
expression, indicating that taurine inhibits the ER stress induced by
hypoxia/reoxygenation and glutamate through suppressing ATF6 and IRE1 pathways.

PMID: 22080215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Nov 25;415(3):519-25. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.10.113. Epub 2011 Nov 3.

Sigma-1Rs are upregulated via PERK/eIF2a/ATF4 pathway and execute protective
function in ER stress.

Mitsuda T(1), Omi T, Tanimukai H, Sakagami Y, Tagami S, Okochi M, Kudo T, Takeda 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Psychiatry, Department of Integrated Medicine, Division of Internal Medicine, 
Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
te_mitsu@yahoo.co.jp

Sigma-1 receptors (Sig-1Rs) are the ER resident proteins. Sig-1Rs in the brain
have been reported to be significantly reduced in patients with schizophrenia.
The impediment of regulating Sig-1Rs expression levels increases the risk for
schizophrenia. Thus elucidating the mechanism regulating Sig-1Rs expression might
provide the strategy to prevent mental disorders. In this study, we have
demonstrated that Sig-1Rs were transcriptionally upregulated by ATF4 in ER
stress. Moreover, ATF4 directly bounds to the 5' flanking region of Sig-1R gene. 
The reporter activities using this region were enhanced in ER stress, or by ATF4 
alone. The reporter activities with the pathogenic polymorphisms (GC-241-240TT,
T-485A) were reduced. In addition, the processing of Caspase-4 was inhibited by
Sig-1Rs. These results indicate that Sig-1Rs are transcriptionally upregulated
via the PERK/eIF2a/ATF4 pathway and ameliolate cell death signaling. This study
is the first report identifying the transcription factor regulating Sig-1Rs
expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22079628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Cell Struct Funct. 2011;36(2):247-59. Epub 2011 Nov 8.

Vertebrate unfolded protein response: mammalian signaling pathways are conserved 
in Medaka fish.

Ishikawa T(1), Taniguchi Y, Okada T, Takeda S, Mori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Japan.

The accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) activates
the unfolded protein response (UPR). The ER stress signal is sensed and
transmitted by a transmembrane protein(s) in the ER. The number of these
transducers has increased with evolution, one in yeast, three in worm and fly,
and five in mammals. Here, we examined medaka fish, Oryzias latipes, as a
vertebrate model organism, and found that the medaka genome encodes five UPR
transducers. Analysis of a medaka embryonic cell line revealed that the mammalian
UPR signaling mechanisms are very well conserved. Thus, XBP1 mRNA, which encodes 
the transcription factor XBP1 downstream of the IRE1 pathway, was spliced in
response to ER stress, resulting in production of the active form of XBP1.
Translation was generally attenuated in response to ER stress, which
paradoxically induced the translation of ATF4, the transcription factor
downstream of the PERK pathway. ATF6 was constitutively synthesized as a
transmembrane protein and activated by ER stress-induced proteolysis. Results
obtained with the overexpression of active ATF6a, ATF6ß, and XBP1 strongly
suggested that ATF6a plays a major role in upregulating the major ER chaperone
BiP, contrary to the case in non-vertebrates, in which the IRE1 pathway is
essential to the induction of BiP. Physiological ER stress occurring during
embryonic development was visualized using transgenic medaka carrying the
enhanced green fluorescent protein gene under the control of the BiP promoter.
Thus, analysis of the vertebrate UPR using medaka will help provide a more
comprehensive understanding of the biology and physiology of the UPR.

PMID: 22067999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Lab Invest. 2012 Feb;92(2):200-13. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2011.163. Epub 2011 Nov
7.

ERp29 induces breast cancer cell growth arrest and survival through modulation of
activation of p38 and upregulation of ER stress protein p58IPK.

Gao D(1), Bambang IF, Putti TC, Lee YK, Richardson DR, Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore.

Endoplasmic reticulum protein 29 (ERp29) is an ER luminal protein that has a role
in protein unfolding and secretion, but its role in cancer is unclear. Recently, 
we reported that overexpression of ERp29 significantly inhibited cell
proliferation and prevented tumorigenesis in highly proliferative MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells. Here, we show that ERp29-induced cancer cell growth arrest
is modulated by the interplay between the concomitant phosphorylation of p38 and 
upregulation of the inhibitor of the interferon-induced, double-stranded
RNA-activated protein kinase, p58(IPK). In this cell model, ERp29 overexpression 
significantly downregulates modulators of cell proliferation, namely urokinase
plasminogen activator receptor, ß(1)-integrin and epidermal growth factor
receptor. Furthermore, ERp29 significantly (P<0.001) increases phosphorylation of
p38 (p-p38) and reduces matrix metalloproteinase-9 secretion. The role of ERp29
in upregulating cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (p15 and p21) and in
downregulating cyclin D(2) is demonstrated in slowly proliferating
ERp29-overexpressing MDA-MB-231 cells, whereas the opposite response was observed
in ERp29-knockdown MCF-7 cells. Pharmacological inhibition of p-p38 downregulates
p15 and p21 and inhibits eIF2a phosphorylation, indicating a role for p-p38 in
this process. Furthermore, p58(IPK) expression was increased in
ERp29-overexpressing MDA-MB-231 cells and highly decreased in ERp29-knockdown
MCF-7 cells. This upregulation of p58(IPK) by ERp29 suppresses the activation of 
p-p38/p-PERK/p-eIF2a by repressing eIF2a phosphorylation. In fact, reduction of
p58(IPK) expression by RNA interference stimulated eIF2a phosphorylation. The
repression of eIF2a phosphorylation by p58(IPK) prevents ERp29-transfected cells 
from undergoing ER-dependent apoptosis driven by the activation of
ATF4/CHOP/caspase-3. Hence, the interplay between p38 phosphorylation and
p58(IPK) upregulation has key roles in modulating ERp29-induced cell-growth
arrest and survival.

PMID: 22064321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Neurosci Res. 2012 Mar;90(3):641-7. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22777. Epub 2011 Nov 4.

TDP-43 toxicity is mediated by the unfolded protein response-unrelated induction 
of C/EBP homologous protein expression.

Suzuki H(1), Matsuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

Transactive response DNA-binding protein-43 (TDP-43) neuronal toxicity plays an
essential role in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and
frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions. In our
previous study, we showed that low-grade overexpression of TDP-43, which is
thought to mimic the gain-of-function of TDP-43, caused neuronal death, mediated 
by the upregulation of Bim and the downregulation of Bcl-xL in vitro. In this
study, we show that TDP-43 overexpression caused the upregulation of
C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP) and that disruption of the CHOP gene markedly
attenuated TDP-43-induced cell death. These results indicate that increases in
CHOP expression contribute to TDP-43-induced cell death. We also show that the
TDP-43-induced upregulation of CHOP expression is mediated by both the
upregulation of the mRNA level of CHOP and the attenuation of thedegradation of
CHOP, which is independent on the PERK/eIF2a/ATF4 or other pathway related to the
unfolded protein response (UPR) to endoplasmic reticulum stress. This study
provides the first example of the CHOP-mediated cell death that is independent of
the UPR. © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22057717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Feb;5(2):357-62. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2011.657. Epub 2011 Nov 2.

Elevated p-CREB-2 (ser 245) expression is potentially associated with
carcinogenesis and development of breast carcinoma.

Fan CF(1), Mao XY, Wang EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital and College of Basic
Medical Sciences of China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, PR China.

CREB-2, also known as ATF-4, belongs to the CREB proteins, a family of
transcription factors phosphorylated at serine residues by protein kinase A
(PKA). This family is known to stimulate the transcription of genes containing
CRE elements. Recently, some studies have demonstrated elevated CREB-2 expression
in certain tumor types, including breast carcinoma, compared to their
corresponding non-tumor tissues. However, the expression and clinical
significance in malignant tumors, including breast carcinoma, of p-CREB-2 (ser
245), a phosphorylated form of the CREB-2 protein at serine 245 site, which is
believed to be an active type of this protein, have not been clearly documented. 
In the present study, we investigated the expression of p-CREB-2 (ser 245) in a
group of tumor and non-tumor breast tissues, including normal breast epithelia,
hyperplasia, dysplasia, carcinoma in situ and infiltrating carcinoma of the
breast using tissue microarray and immunohistochemistry (IHC). p-CREB-2 (ser 245)
immunostaining was detected in the nucleus and cytoplasm of these tissues.
Compared to normal breast epithelia and breast hyperplasia (total positive rate
13.3%), there was increased expression of p-CREB-2 (ser 245) in dysplasia,
carcinoma in situ (total positive rate 35.7%) and infiltrating carcinoma of the
breast (total positive rate 60.0%) (p<0.05). The highest expression of p-CREB-2
(ser 245) was found in infiltrating breast carcinoma (total positive rate 60%)
compared to normal breast epithelia and all types of non-infiltrating lesions
(total positive rate 27.6%) (p<0.05). In addition, increased expression of
p-CREB-2 (ser 245) was found to be associated with lymph node metastasis in
infiltrating breast carcinoma (p<0.05). Immunofluorescent staining confirmed
stronger staining of p-CREB-2 (ser 245) in breast cancer MCF 7 and MDA-MB-231
cells compared with normal breast epithelial MCF 10A cells. Western blotting
revealed elevated expression levels of p-CREB-2 (ser 245) in 17 cases of breast
carcinoma compared with corresponding normal breast tissues (p<0.05). These
results indicate that elevated expression of p-CREB-2 (ser 245) may potentially
contribute to carcinogenesis and cancer development of breast carcinoma.

PMID: 22052162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2012 Aug;28(8):907-12. doi: 10.1089/AID.2011.0252.
Epub 2012 Feb 3.

Short communication: activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) promotes HIV type 1
activation.

Caselli E(1), Benedetti S, Gentili V, Grigolato J, Di Luca D.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Microbiology, Department of Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine,
University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. csb@unife.it

Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is a central factor in the cellular
response to multiple stresses, including altered metabolic conditions, anoxia and
hypoxia, and redox stress. ATF4 is triggered by endoplasmic reticulum stress and 
consequent unfolded protein response. This report identifies for the first time
ATF4 as a transcription factor upregulated by HIV-1 infection. Upregulation of
ATF4 enhances HIV replication, by synergistic interactions with HIV Tat.
Moreover, in specific cell lines ATF4 has a direct transactivating potential on
the LTR, even in the absence of Tat. We also provide evidence that expression of 
ATF4 induces HIV reactivation in chronically infected cell lines. These results
show for the first time that ATF4 induction might have an important role in HIV
replication, and suggest that ATF4 might represent a convergent signaling
molecule for different stressors important in regulating the HIV-1 cycle.

PMID: 22050711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. FASEB J. 2012 Feb;26(2):938-46. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-186700. Epub 2011 Nov 2.

Loss of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE)
induces apoptotic processes in pancreatic carcinoma cells.

Kemmner W(1), Kessel P, Sanchez-Ruderisch H, Möller H, Hinderlich S, Schlag PM,
Detjen K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Surgical Oncology, Experimental and Clinical Research Center,
Charité Campus Buch, Berlin, Germany. wkemmner@mdc-berlin.de

Early invasive growth and metastasis are features of pancreatic cancer that rely 
on its resistance to anoikis, an apoptosis program activated on loss of matrix
anchorage. How anoikis is regulated is unclear.
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine-kinase (GNE) was
silenced, or p16 was overexpressed, in human pancreatic carcinoma cells. Gene
expression profiling, enzymatic assays, Western blotting, and cell cycle analysis
were conducted. Silencing of GNE, the key enzyme of sialic acid biosynthesis,
sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to anoikis. Accordingly, we observed a loss of
GNE enzyme activity in cells, which became anoikis susceptible after transfection
with the tumor suppressor p16. Similarly, studies of another cell line with low
GNE activity revealed strong anoikis susceptibility, confirming the association
of low GNE activity and anoikis susceptibility. Gene expression profiling
demonstrated that the loss of GNE triggered the transcriptional activation of the
ATF4-ATF3-CHOP pathway, leading to apoptosis in the framework of the unfolded
protein response. In silico analysis showed that GNE up-regulation occurred
predominantly in pancreatic cancer but also in other malignancies. Delineation of
GNE-dependent signaling pathways may provide targets that control anchorage
dependence and/or restore drug efficacy, which is of utmost relevance for the
treatment of pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 22049060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Zoolog Sci. 2011 Nov;28(11):828-33. doi: 10.2108/zsj.28.828.

Characterization of cAMP response element-like sequence in gonadal specific
aromatase promoter sequence of Xenopus embryos.

Onoe M(1), Iwabuchi J, Nagasawa K, Tajima M, Ouwashi M, Dan K, Miyata S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, College of Humanities and
Sciences, Nihon University, 3-25-40 Sakurajosui, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-8550,
Japan.

The p450 aromatase gene has a tissue-specific promoter that is regulated by
specific transcriptional factors. In rats and humans, a cAMP response
element-like sequence (CLS) and an NR5A1/NR5A2 binding sequence have been
identified as cis elements in the aromatase promoter; these cis elements mediate 
cAMP-induced expression in the ovaries and testes. CLS is recognized by a
cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) as the principal component. In
this study, we performed a gel shift assay to analyze the proteins that interact 
with the cis-element in Xenopus aromatase. An electrophpretic mobility gel shift 
assay (EMSA) and matrix-associated laser desorption ionization time of flight
(MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of the proteins responsible for
retarding the mobility of CLS revealed that ATF4 interacted in vitro with CLS in 
gonadal specific aromatase promoter sequence of Xenopus embryos. Although a
significant difference was observed in aromatase mRNA expression between male and
female gonads, no difference in the expression of ATF4 was observed between them 
at stage 50. With regard to aromatase expression in the gonad of Xenopus embryos,
ATF4 might act in combination with multiple transcription factors as a
trans-element of CLS in place of CREB.

PMID: 22035305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e24669. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024669. Epub 2011 Oct 18.

APOE genotype-function relationship: evidence of -491 A/T promoter polymorphism
modifying transcription control but not type 2 diabetes risk.

Geng H(1), Law PP, Ng MC, Li T, Liang LY, Ge TF, Wong KB, Liang C, Ma RC, So WY, 
Chan JC, Ho YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New
Territories, Hong Kong SAR, China.

BACKGROUND: The apolipoprotein E gene (APOE) coding polymorphism modifies the
risks of Alzheimer's disease, type 2 diabetes, and coronary heart disease. Aside 
from the coding variants, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the APOE
promoter has also been shown to modify the risk of Alzheimer's disease.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study we investigate the
genotype-function relationship of APOE promoter polymorphism at molecular level
and at physiological level: i.e., in transcription control of the gene and in the
risk of type 2 diabetes. In molecular studies, the effect of the APOE -491A/T
(rs449647) polymorphism on gene transcription was accessed by dual-luciferase
reporter gene assays. The -491 A to T substitution decreased the activity
(p<0.05) of the cloned APOE promoter (-1017 to +406). Using the -501 to -481
nucleotide sequence of the APOE promoter as a 'bait' to screen the human brain
cDNA library by yeast one-hybrid system yielded ATF4, an endoplasmic reticulum
stress response gene, as one of the interacting factors.
Electrophoretic-mobility-shift assays (EMSA) and chromatin immuno-precipitation
(ChIP) analyses further substantiated the physical interaction between ATF4 and
the APOE promoter. Over-expression of ATF4 stimulated APOE expression whereas
siRNA against ATF4 suppressed the expression of the gene. However, interaction
between APOE promoter and ATF4 was not -491A/T-specific. At physiological level, 
the genotype-function relationship of APOE promoter polymorphism was studied in
type 2 diabetes. In 630 cases and 595 controls, three APOE promoter SNPs -491A/T,
-219G/T (rs405509), and +113G/C (rs440446) were genotyped and tested for
association with type 2 diabetes in Hong Kong Chinese. No SNP or haplotype
association with type 2 diabetes was detected.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: At molecular level, polymorphism -491A/T and ATF4
elicit independent control of APOE gene expression. At physiological level, no
genotype-risk association was detected between the studied APOE promoter SNPs and
type 2 diabetes in Hong Kong Chinese.

PMCID: PMC3196492
PMID: 22028770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Lipids Health Dis. 2011 Oct 25;10:190. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-10-190.

Tetradecylthioacetic acid inhibits proliferation of human SW620 colon cancer
cells--gene expression profiling implies endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Lundemo AG(1), Pettersen CH, Berge K, Berge RK, Schønberg SA.

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Children's and Women's Health, PO Box 8905,
N-7491 Trondheim, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Previous reports have shown an antiproliferative effect of the
synthetic, 3-thia fatty acid tetradecylthioacetic acid (TTA) on different cancer 
cells in vitro and in vivo. The mechanisms behind the observed effects are poorly
understood. We therefore wanted to explore the molecular mechanisms involved in
TTA-induced growth inhibition of the human colon cancer cell line SW620 by gene
expression profiling.
METHODS: An antiproliferative effect of TTA on SW620 cells in vitro was displayed
in real time using the xCELLigence System (Roche). Affymetrix gene expression
profiling was performed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms behind the
antiproliferative effect of TTA. Changes in gene expression were verified at
protein level by western blotting.
RESULTS: TTA reduced SW620 cell growth, measured as baseline cell index, by 35%
and 55% after 48 h and 72 h, respectively. We show for the first time that TTA
induces an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response in cancer cells. Gene
expression analysis revealed changes related to ER stress and unfolded protein
response (UPR). This was verified at protein level by phosphorylation of
eukaryote translation initiation factor 2 alpha (eIF2a) and downstream
up-regulation of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). Transcripts for
positive and negative cell cycle regulators were down- and up-regulated,
respectively. This, together with a down-regulation of Cyclin D1 at protein
level, indicates inhibition of cell cycle progression. TTA also affected
transcripts involved in calcium homeostasis. Moreover, mRNA and protein level of 
the ER stress inducible C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP), Tribbles homolog 3
(Drosophila) (TRIB3) and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPß) were
enhanced, and the C/EBPß LIP/LAP ratio was significantly increased. These results
indicate prolonged ER stress and a possible link to induction of cell death.
CONCLUSION: We find that TTA-induced growth inhibition of SW620 cells seems to be
mediated through induction of ER stress and activation of the UPR pathway.

PMCID: PMC3235040
PMID: 22027281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Arch Virol. 2012 Jan;157(1):63-74. doi: 10.1007/s00705-011-1144-3. Epub 2011 Oct 
21.

Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is upregulated by human herpesvirus 8
infection, increases virus replication and promotes proangiogenic properties.

Caselli E(1), Benedetti S, Grigolato J, Caruso A, Di Luca D.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Microbiology, Department of Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine,
University of Ferrara, via L. Borsari 46, 44100 Ferrara, Italy. csb@unife.it

Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) triggers proangiogenic behaviour in endothelial cells
by inducing monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP-1) through activation of
Nuclear Factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B). However, NF-<U+03BA>B inhibition still results in partial
MCP-1 induction and consequent angiogenesis, suggesting the involvement of
another transcriptional pathway. We analysed activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4), since it is central in the cellular response to stress and is involved in
angiogenesis. The results show that HHV-8 upregulates ATF4 expression, which in
turn promotes HHV-8 infection, and induces MCP-1 production and proangiogenic
properties in endothelial cells. By contrast, ATF4 silencing decreases virus
replication and inhibits virus-induced MCP-1 production and induction of
tube-like structures. Therefore, ATF4 plays a role in HHV-8 replication and
associated virus-induced angiogenesis. The elucidation of molecular pathways
involved in this process will result in a better understanding of the
virus-induced angiogenic process and might help in designing novel therapies to
reduce tumour growth.

PMID: 22016052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Jan;44(1):101-12. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2011.10.003. Epub 2011 Oct 13.

Multiple ways to die: delineation of the unfolded protein response and apoptosis 
induced by Surfactant Protein C BRICHOS mutants.

Maguire JA(1), Mulugeta S, Beers MF.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4539, United States.

Epithelial cell dysfunction is now recognized as an important mechanism in the
pathogenesis of interstitial lung diseases. Surfactant Protein C (SP-C), an
alveolar type II cell specific protein, has contributed to this concept with the 
observation that heterozygous expression of SFTPC gene mutations are associated
with chronic interstitial lung disease. We have shown that transient expression
of aggregation prone mutant SP-C isoforms (SP-C BRICHOS) destabilize ER quality
control mechanisms resulting in the intracellular accumulation of aggregating
propeptide, inhibition of the ubiquitin/proteasome system, and activation of
apoptosis. The goal of the present study was to define signaling pathways linking
the unfolded protein response (UPR) and subsequent ER stress with intrinsic
apoptosis events observed following mutant SP-C expression. In vitro expression
of the SP-C BRICHOS mutant, SP-C(<U+0394>exon4), was used as a model system. Here we
show stimulation of a broad ER stress response in both transfected A549 and
HEK293 cells with activation of all 3 canonical sensing pathways, IRE1/XBP-1,
ATF6, and PERK/eIF2a. SP-C(<U+0394>exon4) expression also resulted in activation of
caspase 3, but failed to stimulate expression of the apoptosis mediating
transcription factors ATF4/CHOP. However, inhibition of either caspase 4 or c-jun
kinase (JNK) each blocked caspase 3 mediated cell death. Taken together, these
results suggest that expression of SP-C BRICHOS mutants induce apoptosis through 
multiple UPR signaling pathways, and provide new therapeutic targets for the
amelioration of ER stress induced cytotoxicity observed in fibrotic lung
remodeling.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3243113
PMID: 22016030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Cancer Res. 2011 Dec 15;71(24):7525-36. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1821. Epub 
2011 Oct 17.

Androgen receptor and nutrient signaling pathways coordinate the demand for
increased amino acid transport during prostate cancer progression.

Wang Q(1), Bailey CG, Ng C, Tiffen J, Thoeng A, Minhas V, Lehman ML, Hendy SC,
Buchanan G, Nelson CC, Rasko JE, Holst J.

Author information: 
(1)Origins of Cancer Laboratory, Centenary Institute, Newtown, NSW, Australia.

L-Type amino acid transporters such as LAT1 and LAT3 mediate the uptake of
essential amino acids. Here, we report that prostate cancer cells coordinate the 
expression of LAT1 and LAT3 to maintain sufficient levels of leucine needed for
mTORC1 signaling and cell growth. Inhibiting LAT function was sufficient to
decrease cell growth and mTORC1 signaling in prostate cancer cells. These cells
maintained levels of amino acid influx through androgen receptor-mediated
regulation of LAT3 expression and ATF4 regulation of LAT1 expression after amino 
acid deprivation. These responses remained intact in primary prostate cancer, as 
indicated by high levels of LAT3 in primary disease, and by increased levels of
LAT1 after hormone ablation and in metastatic lesions. Taken together, our
results show how prostate cancer cells respond to demands for increased essential
amino acids by coordinately activating amino acid transporter pathways vital for 
tumor outgrowth.

PMID: 22007000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Dongwuxue Yanjiu. 2011 Oct;32(5):485-91. doi: 10.3724/SP.J.1141.2011.05485.

Over-expression of atf4 in Xenopus embryos interferes with neurogenesis and eye
formation.

Liu JT(1), Yang Y, Guo XG, Chen M, Ding HZ, Chen YL, Wang MR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pharmacology, College of Veterinary Medicine, South
China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China.

Accumulated evidence indicates that the activating transcription factor 4 (atf4) 
is a developmentally relevant gene. Here, we report on the characterization of
atf4 in Xenopus embryos, which is differentially expressed in the central nervous
system, eyes, blood, and the pronephros, as well as in developing endodermal
organs such as the stomach, duodenum, liver, and pancreas. Ectopic expression of 
atf4 in the animal hemisphere of Xenopus embryos had no obvious effects on the
induction of neural progenitors, but suppressed neurogenesis and eye formation
without promoting apoptosis. Our data suggest that tightly controlled atf4
activities may be crucial for normal neurogenesis and early eye patterning.

PMID: 22006799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Infect Dis. 2011 Nov;204 Suppl 3:S953-6. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir325.

The Ebolavirus VP24 protein blocks phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase.

Halfmann P(1), Neumann G, Kawaoka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Influenza Research Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA.

Type I interferon (IFN) signaling is mediated through several signaling pathways,
including the Janus kinase and signal transducer and activator (JAK-STAT) and p38
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathways. The VP24 protein of Ebolavirus
is an IFN antagonist, blocking type I IFN signaling through the JAK-STAT pathway.
Here, we show that, in 293 cells, VP24 also interferes with the p38 MAP kinase
pathway by blocking IFN-ß-stimulated phosphorylation of p38-a. Similar inhibition
was not observed in HeLa cells, suggesting cell type-specific differences in
signal transduction.

PMCID: PMC3189987
PMID: 21987775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2012 Jan 1;302(1):L27-35. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00174.2011. Epub 2011 Oct 7.

Hyperoxia-induced activation of the integrated stress response in the newborn rat
lung.

Konsavage WM(1), Zhang L, Wu Y, Shenberger JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Pennsylvania State College of Medicine, Hershey,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Diverse environmental stresses stimulate eukaryotic translation initiation factor
2a (eIF2a) phosphorylation, leading to a stress-resistant state characterized by 
global attenuation of protein synthesis and induction of cytoprotective genes.
The signal transduction network culminating in these effects is referred to as
the integrated stress response (ISR) or, when initiated by misfolded proteins
within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the unfolded protein response (UPR). Given
that we previously reported that exposure of 4-day-old Sprague-Dawley rats to 95%
O(2) (Ox) diminishes global pulmonary protein synthesis and increases eIF2a
phosphorylation, we conducted the current study to determine whether Ox activates
the ISR or UPR. We found that Ox-induced alterations in ER morphology of alveolar
type II cells and interstitial fibroblasts were not associated with activation of
the UPR sensors PERK or activating transcription factor (ATF) 6 or with X-box
binding protein-1 mRNA splicing in whole lung extracts. Exposure to Ox enhanced
ATF4 immunoreactivity and nuclear protein content, followed by a 2- and 5-fold
increase in ATF3 protein and mRNA expression, respectively. The accumulation of
nuclear ATF4 protein coincided with induction of glutamate-cysteine ligase
catalytic subunit, an ISR-responsive gene. Immunohistochemistry revealed that
changes in ATF3/4 expression were prominent in the alveolus, whereas primary cell
culture implicated epithelial and endothelial cells as targets. Finally,
induction of ISR intermediates in the intact lung occurred in the absence of the 
phosphorylation of PKR, JNK, ERK1/2, and p38 MAPK. These findings demonstrate
that Ox activates the ISR within the newborn lung and highlight regional and
cell-specific alterations in the expression ISR transcription factors that
regulate redox balance.

PMID: 21984568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25378. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025378. Epub 2011 Sep 23.

Hepatitis E virus ORF2 protein activates the pro-apoptotic gene CHOP and
anti-apoptotic heat shock proteins.

John L(1), Thomas S, Herchenröder O, Pützer BM, Schaefer S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vectorology and Experimental Gene Therapy, Biomedical Research
Center, University of Rostock Medical School, Rostock, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is a non-enveloped plus-strand RNA virus that
causes acute hepatitis. The capsid protein open reading frame 2 (ORF2) is known
to induce endoplasmic reticulum stress in ORF2 expressing cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study we found that HEV ORF2 activates
the expression of the pro-apoptotic gene C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP). ORF2
stimulates the CHOP promoter mainly through AARE (amino acid response elements)
and to a minor extent the ERSE (endoplasmic reticulum stress response elements). 
Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) protein binds and activates the AARE
regulatory sites of the CHOP promoter. ORF2 expression also leads to increased
phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha (eIF2a) that in turn
initiates the translation of ATF4 mRNA. The pro-apoptotic gene CHOP is an
important trigger to initiate endoplasmic reticulum stress induced apoptosis.
However, the activation of CHOP by ORF2 in this study did not induce apoptosis,
nor did BCL2-associated X protein (Bax) translocate to mitochondria. Microarray
analysis revealed an ORF2 specific increased expression of chaperones Hsp72,
Hsp70B', and co-chaperone Hsp40. Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) and in silico
molecular docking analysis suggests that HEV ORF2 interacts with Hsp72. In
addition, Hsp72 shows nuclear accumulation in ORF2 expressing cells.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These data provide new insight into simultaneously
occurring counter-acting effects of HEV ORF2 that may be part of a strategy to
prevent host suicide before completion of the viral replication cycle.

PMCID: PMC3179511
PMID: 21966512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Dec 10;317(20):2789-99. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.09.005. Epub
2011 Sep 17.

PHD1 interacts with ATF4 and negatively regulates its transcriptional activity
without prolyl hydroxylation.

Hiwatashi Y(1), Kanno K, Takasaki C, Goryo K, Sato T, Torii S, Sogawa K, Yasumoto
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku 
University, Aoba-ku Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

Cellular response to hypoxia plays an important role in both circulatory and
pulmonary diseases and cancer. Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) are major
transcription factors regulating the response to hypoxia. The a-subunits of HIFs 
are hydroxylated by members of the prolyl-4-hydroxylase domain (PHD) family,
PHD1, PHD2, and PHD3, in an oxygen-dependent manner. Here, we report on the
identification of ATF4 as a protein interacting with PHD1 as well as PHD3, but
not with PHD2. The central region of ATF4 including the Zipper II domain, ODD
domain and ß-TrCP recognition motif were involved in the interaction with PHD1.
Coexistence of PHD1 stabilized ATF4, as opposed to the destabilization of ATF4 by
PHD3. Moreover, coexpression of ATF4 destabilized PHD3, whereas PHD1 stability
was not affected by the presence of ATF4. Mutations to alanine of proline
residues in ATF4 that satisfied hydroxylation consensus by PHDs did not affect
binding activity of ATF4 to PHD1 and PHD3. Furthermore, in vitro prolyl
hydroxylation assay clearly indicated that ATF4 did not serve as a substrate of
both PHD1 and PHD3. Coexpression of PHD1 or PHD3 with ATF4 repressed the
transcriptional activity of ATF4. These results suggest that PHD1 and PHD3
control the transactivation activity of ATF4.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21951999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24660. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024660. Epub 2011 Sep 19.

HCV causes chronic endoplasmic reticulum stress leading to adaptation and
interference with the unfolded protein response.

Merquiol E(1), Uzi D, Mueller T, Goldenberg D, Nahmias Y, Xavier RJ, Tirosh B,
Shibolet O.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Unit, Division of Medicine, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel.

BACKGROUND: The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the cellular site for protein
folding. ER stress occurs when protein folding capacity is exceeded. This stress 
induces a cyto-protective signaling cascades termed the unfolded protein response
(UPR) aimed at restoring homeostasis. While acute ER stress is lethal, chronic
sub-lethal ER stress causes cells to adapt by attenuation of UPR activation.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV), a major human pathogen, was shown to cause ER stress,
however it is unclear whether HCV induces chronic ER stress, and if so whether
adaptation mechanisms are initiated. We wanted to characterize the kinetics of
HCV-induced ER stress during infection and assess adaptation mechanisms and their
significance.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: The HuH7.5.1 cellular system and HCV-transgenic (HCV-Tg)
mice were used to characterize HCV-induced ER stress/UPR pathway activation and
adaptation. HCV induced a wave of acute ER stress peaking 2-5 days
post-infection, which rapidly subsided thereafter. UPR pathways were activated
including IRE1 and EIF2a phosphorylation, ATF6 cleavage and XBP-1 splicing.
Downstream target genes including GADD34, ERdj4, p58ipk, ATF3 and ATF4 were
upregulated. CHOP, a UPR regulated protein was activated and translocated to the 
nucleus. Remarkably, UPR activity did not return to baseline but remained
elevated for up to 14 days post infection suggesting that chronic ER stress is
induced. At this time, cells adapted to ER stress and were less responsive to
further drug-induced ER stress. Similar results were obtained in HCV-Tg mice.
Suppression of HCV by Interferon-a 2a treatment, restored UPR responsiveness to
ER stress tolerant cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows, for the first time, that HCV induces adaptation to 
chronic ER stress which was reversed upon viral suppression. These finding
represent a novel viral mechanism to manipulate cellular response pathways.

PMCID: PMC3176279
PMID: 21949742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Hepatogastroenterology. 2011 Sep-Oct;58(110-111):1670-9. doi: 10.5754/hge10845.
Epub 2011 Jul 15.

Reduced glutathione protects human hepatocytes from palmitate-mediated injury by 
suppressing endoplasmic reticulum stress response.

Ning B(1), Bai M, Shen W.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology and Hepatology Department, Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The aim of this study was to investigate the protective role of 
reduced glutathione (GSH) in hepatocytes by suppressing palmitate-induced
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress.
METHODOLOGY: Human L02 hepatocytes were co-cultured with palmitate and reduced
GSH. Cell viability and apoptosis were measured by the
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay and
Annexin V/ PI (propidium iodide) staining with flow cytometry, respectively.
Lipid peroxidation was assessed by malonaldehyde (MDA) and oxidized glutathione
(GSSG) measurements. Levels of ER stress signaling proteins (phosphorylated
PRK-like ER kinase, activating transcription factor 4 and glucose regulating
protein 78) as well as Caspase-4 activity were also analyzed.
RESULTS: Palmitate caused an increased lipid peroxidation level and cytotoxic
effect in hepatocytes in a concentration-dependent and time-dependent manner.
However, a significant cell protective effect was observed after GSH treatment.
The protein levels of GRP78, pPERK and AFT4 as well as the mRNA level of ATF4
were significantly increased after palmitate treatment, and these levels
decreased after GSH addition. Additionally, Caspase-4 activity significantly
increased after palmitate addition and strongly decreased after the addition of
GSH.
CONCLUSIONS: ER stress provoked by lipid peroxidation is a key event that
mediates palmitate cytotoxicity in hepatocytes. Reduced GSH has a protective
effect by suppressing palmitate-induced ER stress.

PMID: 21940336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Neurotrauma. 2012 Feb 10;29(3):579-88. doi: 10.1089/neu.2011.1940. Epub 2011
Nov 21.

Deletion of the pro-apoptotic endoplasmic reticulum stress response effector CHOP
does not result in improved locomotor function after severe contusive spinal cord
injury.

Ohri SS(1), Maddie MA, Zhang Y, Shields CB, Hetman M, Whittemore SR.

Author information: 
(1)Kentucky Spinal Cord Injury Research Center, University of Louisville, School 
of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky, USA.

Manipulation of various components of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
response (ERSR) has led to functional recovery in diabetes, cancer, and several
neurodegenerative diseases, indicating its use as a potential therapeutic
intervention. One of the downstream pro-apoptotic transcription factors activated
by the ERSR is CCAAT enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) homologous protein (CHOP). 
Recently, we showed significant recovery in hindlimb locomotion function after
moderate contusive spinal cord injury (SCI) in mice null for CHOP. However, more 
than 40% of human SCI are complete. Thus the present study examined the potential
therapeutic modulation of CHOP in a more severe SCI injury. Contused wild-type
spinal cords showed a rapid activation of PERK, ATF6, and IRE-1, the three arms
of the ERSR signaling pathway, specifically at the injury epicenter. Confocal
images of phosphorylated EIF2a, GRP78, CHOP, ATF4, and GADD34 localized the
activation of the ERSR in neurons and oligodendrocytes at the injury epicenter.
To directly determine the role of CHOP, wild-type and CHOP-null mice with severe 
contusive SCI were analyzed for improvement in hindlimb locomotion. Despite the
loss of CHOP, the other effectors in the ERSR pathway were significantly
increased beyond that observed previously with moderate injury. Concomitantly,
Basso Mouse Scale (BMS) scores and white matter sparing between the wild-type and
CHOP-null mice revealed no significant differences. Given the complex
pathophysiology of severe SCI, ablation of CHOP alone is not sufficient to rescue
functional deficits. These data raise the caution that injury severity may be a
key variable in attempting to translate preclinical therapies to clinical
practice.

PMCID: PMC3282015
PMID: 21933012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2010 Nov;50(11):881.

[Involvement of endoplasmic reticulum stress in pathogenesis after cerebral
ischemia].

[Article in Japanese]

Hara H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, Gifu, Japan.

PMID: 21921487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Mol Biol Cell. 2011 Nov;22(22):4390-405. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E11-06-0510. Epub 2011 
Sep 14.

The eIF2 kinase PERK and the integrated stress response facilitate activation of 
ATF6 during endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Teske BF(1), Wek SA, Bunpo P, Cundiff JK, McClintick JN, Anthony TG, Wek RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Disruptions of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that perturb protein folding cause 
ER stress and elicit an unfolded protein response (UPR) that involves
translational and transcriptional changes in gene expression aimed at expanding
the ER processing capacity and alleviating cellular injury. Three ER stress
sensors (PERK, ATF6, and IRE1) implement the UPR. PERK phosphorylation of the a
subunit of eIF2 during ER stress represses protein synthesis, which prevents
further influx of ER client proteins. Phosphorylation of eIF2a (eIF2a~P) also
induces preferential translation of ATF4, a transcription activator of the
integrated stress response. In this study we show that the PERK/eIF2a~P/ATF4
pathway is required not only for translational control, but also for activation
of ATF6 and its target genes. The PERK pathway facilitates both the synthesis of 
ATF6 and trafficking of ATF6 from the ER to the Golgi for intramembrane
proteolysis and activation of ATF6. As a consequence, liver-specific depletion of
PERK significantly reduces both the translational and transcriptional phases of
the UPR, leading to reduced protein chaperone expression, disruptions of lipid
metabolism, and enhanced apoptosis. These findings show that the regulatory
networks of the UPR are fully integrated and help explain the diverse biological 
defects associated with loss of PERK.

PMCID: PMC3216664
PMID: 21917591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Zhonghua Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jun;46(6):360-4. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1002-0098.2011.06.011.

[Role of transcription factor special AT-rich binding protein 2 in the
osteoblasts differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Q(1), Yu YC, Gu ZY, Bi W, Sun J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology of Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of transcription factor special AT-rich
binding protein 2 (SATB2) in the osteoblasts differentiation of bone marrow
stromal cells (BMSC) in vitro.
METHODS: Rats bone marrow stromal cells were isolated by Percoll sedimentation
and the cells were placed and allowed to attach for three times. After passages, 
expression plasmid pBABE-hygro-satb2 was constructed, then transfected into BMSC.
BMSCs were inoculated in conditioned medium and osteogenic factors were detected 
by western blotting and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: The morphological observation of BMSC showed either spindle or polygonal
pattern. The cellular phenotypic marker of the third passage was CD29 positive
and CD34 negative. The growth curve possessed "S" pattern. The intensity of
calfilication in BMSC was higher in SATB2 transfection group (IA value 125974 ±
241) than that in the control groups (IA value 178486 ± 406). Moreover, cell
migration rate increased in SATB2 transfection group [width of scratch (0.72 ±
0.01) mm] compared with control group [width of scratch (0.83 ± 0.03) mm]. In
addition, the mRNA expression of osteogenic factors runt-related transcription
factor 2, Osterix, activating transcription factor 4, integrin-binding
sialoprotein were upregulated.
CONCLUSIONS: Cells cultured with this method have general biological
characteristics and osteogenic differentiation potential in vitro. SATB2 can
promote osteoblasts differentiation of BMSC.

PMID: 21914381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Cancer Res. 2011 Nov 1;71(21):6796-806. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0759. Epub 
2011 Sep 12.

2-deoxyglucose induces Noxa-dependent apoptosis in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma.

Ramírez-Peinado S(1), Alcázar-Limones F, Lagares-Tena L, El Mjiyad N,
Caro-Maldonado A, Tirado OM, Muñoz-Pinedo C.

Author information: 
(1)Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet, Barcelona,
Spain.

Alveolar and embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas are childhood tumors that do not respond
well to current chemotherapies. Here, we report that the glycolytic inhibitor
2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) can efficiently promote cell death in alveolar, but not
embryonal, rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines. Notably, 2-DG also induced cell
differentiation accompanied by downregulation of PAX3/FOXO1a, the chromosome
translocation-encoded fusion protein that is a central oncogenic driver in this
disease. Cell death triggered by 2-DG was associated with its ability to activate
Bax and Bak. Overexpression of the antiapoptotic Bcl-2 homologues Bcl-x(L) and
Mcl-1 prevented apoptosis, indicating that cell death proceeds through the
mitochondrial pathway. Mechanistic investigations indicated that Mcl-1
downregulation and Noxa upregulation were critical for 2-DG-induced apoptosis. In
addition, 2-DG promoted eIF2a phosphorylation and inactivation of the mTOR
pathway. Mcl-1 loss and cell death were prevented by downregulation of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-induced protein ATF4 and by incubating cells in
the presence of mannose, which reverted 2-DG-induced ER stress but not ATP
depletion. Thus, energetic stresses created by 2-DG were not the primary cause of
cell death. Together, our findings suggest that glycolysis inhibitors such as
2-DG may be highly effective in treating alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma and that Noxa 
could offer a prognostic marker to monitor the efficacy of such agents.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21911456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011 Dec;4(12):2101-9. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0343. Epub 2011 Sep 12.

Unfolded protein response signaling and MAP kinase pathways underlie pathogenesis
of arsenic-induced cutaneous inflammation.

Li C(1), Xu J, Li F, Chaudhary SC, Weng Z, Wen J, Elmets CA, Ahsan H, Athar M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Skin Diseases Research Center, The University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Arsenic exposure through drinking water is a major global public health problem
and is associated with an enhanced risk of various cancers including skin cancer.
In human skin, arsenic induces precancerous melanosis and keratosis, which may
progress to basal cell and squamous cell carcinoma. However, the mechanism by
which these pathophysiologic alterations occur remains elusive. In this study, we
showed that subchronic arsenic exposure to SKH-1 mice induced unfolded protein
response (UPR) signaling regulated by proteins, inositol-requiring enzyme-1
(IRE1), PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK) and activating transcription
factor 6 (ATF6). Arsenic activated all three UPR regulatory proteins in the skin.
Arsenic induced IRE1 phosphorylation which resulted in augmented splicing of
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP-1) leading to its migration to the nucleus, and also
enhanced transcriptional activation of downstream target proteins.
Hyperphosphorylation of PERK which induces eukaryotic translation initial factor 
2a (eIF2a) in a phosphorylation-dependent manner enhanced translation of ATF4, in
addition to augmenting proteolytic activation of ATF6 in arsenic-treated skin. A 
similar increase in the expression of CHOP was observed. Enhanced XBP-1s, ATF4,
and ATF6 regulated downstream chaperones GRP94 and GRP78. In addition, arsenic
induced inflammation-related p38/MAPKAPK-2 MAPK signaling and alterations in
Th-1/Th-2/Th-17 cytokines/chemokines and their receptors. Antioxidant N-acetyl
cysteine blocked arsenic-induced reactive oxygen species, with a concomitant
attenuation of UPR and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling and
proinflammatory cytokine/chemokine signatures. Our results identify novel
pathways involved in the pathogenesis of arsenic-mediated cutaneous inflammation 
which may also be related to enhanced cancer risk in arsenic exposed cohorts.

2011 AACR

PMCID: PMC3232315
PMID: 21911445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2012 Apr;38(2):175-200. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2990.2011.01215.x.

Activation status of integrated stress response pathways in neurones and
astrocytes of HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) cortex.

Akay C(1), Lindl KA, Shyam N, Nabet B, Goenaga-Vazquez Y, Ruzbarsky J, Wang Y,
Kolson DL, Jordan-Sciutto KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Dental Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6030, USA.

AIMS: Combined anti-retroviral therapy (cART) has led to a reduction in the
incidence of HIV-associated dementia (HAD), a severe motor/cognitive disorder
afflicting HIV(+) patients. However, the prevalence of subtler forms of
neurocognitive dysfunction, which together with HAD are termed HIV-associated
neurocognitive disorders (HAND), continues to escalate in the post-cART era. The 
microgliosis, astrogliosis, dendritic damage, and synaptic and neuronal loss
observed in autopsy cases suggest an underlying neuroinflammatory process, due to
the neurotoxic factors released by HIV-infected/activated macrophages/microglia
in the brain, might underlie the pathogenesis of HAND in the post-cART era. These
factors are known to induce the integrated stress response (ISR) in several
neurodegenerative diseases; we have previously shown that BiP, an indicator of
general ISR activation, is upregulated in cortical autopsy tissue from
HIV-infected patients. The ISR is composed of three pathways, each with its own
initiator protein: PERK, IRE1a and ATF6.
METHODS: To further elucidate the specific ISR pathways activated in the central 
nervous system of HAND patients, we examined the protein levels of several ISR
proteins, including ATF6, peIF2a and ATF4, in cortical tissue from HIV-infected
patients.
RESULTS: The ISR does not respond in an all-or-none fashion in HAND, but rather
demonstrates a nuanced activation pattern. Specifically, our studies implicate
the ATF6 pathway of the ISR as a more likely candidate than the PERK pathway for 
increases in BiP levels in astrocytes.
CONCLUSION: These findings begin to characterize the nature of the ISR response
in HAND and provide potential targets for therapeutic intervention in this
disease.

© 2011 The Authors. Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology © 2011 British
Neuropathological Society.

PMCID: PMC3708539
PMID: 21883374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Sep 16;413(1):24-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.08.028. Epub 2011 Aug 16.

Amino acid deprivation regulates the stress-inducible gene p8 via the GCN2/ATF4
pathway.

Averous J(1), Lambert-Langlais S, Cherasse Y, Carraro V, Parry L, B'chir W,
Jousse C, Maurin AC, Bruhat A, Fafournoux P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Nutrition Humaine, UMR1019, INRA de Theix, 63122 Saint-Genès
Champanelle, France. julien.averous@clermont.inra.fr

In mammals, the GCN2/ATF4 pathway has been described as the main pathway involved
in the regulation of gene expression upon amino acid limitation. This regulation 
is notably conferred by the presence of a cis-element called Amino Acid Response 
Element (AARE) in the promoter of specific genes. In vivo, the notion of amino
acid limitation is not limited to nutritional context, indeed several
pathological situations are associated with alteration of endogenous amino acid
availability. This is notably true in the context of tumour in which the
alteration of the microenvironment can lead to a perturbation in nutrient
availability. P8 is a small weakly folded multifunctional protein that is
overexpressed in several kinds of cancers and whose expression is induced by
different stresses. In this study we have demonstrated that amino acid starvation
was also able to induce p8 expression. Moreover, we brought the evidence, in
vitro and in vivo, that the GCN2/ATF4 pathway is involved in this regulation
through the presence of an AARE in p8 promoter.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21867687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Jan;113(1):70-9. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23329.

The basic helix loop helix transcription factor Twist1 is a novel regulator of
ATF4 in osteoblasts.

Danciu TE(1), Li Y, Koh A, Xiao G, McCauley LK, Franceschi RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics and Oral Medicine, University of Michigan School of
Dentistry, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1245, USA. tdanciu@umich.edu

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is an essential regulator of endochondral bone
formation and an important anabolic agent for the reversal of bone loss. PTH
mediates its functions in part by regulating binding of the bone-related
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) to the osteoblast-specific gene,
osteocalcin. The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors Twist1 and Twist2 also
regulate osteocalcin transcription in part through the interaction of the
C-terminal "box" domain in these factors and Runx2. In this study, we discovered 
a novel function of PTH: its ability to dramatically decrease Twist1
transcription. Since ATF4 is a major regulator of the PTH response in
osteoblasts, we assessed the mutual regulation between these factors and
determined that Twist proteins and ATF4 physically interact in a manner that
affects ATF4 DNA binding function. We mapped the interaction domain of Twist
proteins to the C-terminal "box" domain and of ATF4, to the N-terminus.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that Twist1 overexpression in osteoblasts attenuates 
ATF4 binding to the osteocalcin promoter in response to PTH. This study thus
identifies Twist proteins as novel inhibitory binding partners of ATF4 and
explores the functional significance of this interaction.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3414260
PMID: 21866569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Aug 24;13(4):R82. doi: 10.1186/bcr2934.

Tribbles homolog 3 denotes a poor prognosis in breast cancer and is involved in
hypoxia response.

Wennemers M(1), Bussink J, Scheijen B, Nagtegaal ID, van Laarhoven HW, Raleigh
JA, Varia MA, Heuvel JJ, Rouschop KM, Sweep FC, Span PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. m.wennemers@labgk.umcn.nl

INTRODUCTION: Hypoxia in solid tumors is associated with treatment resistance,
resulting in poor prognosis. Tribbles homolog 3 (TRIB3) is induced during hypoxia
and is involved in multiple cellular pathways involved in cell survival. Here, we
investigated the role of TRIB3 in breast cancer.
METHODS: TRIB3 mRNA expression was measured in breast tumor tissue from 247
patients and correlated with clinicopathological parameters and clinical outcome.
Furthermore, we studied TRIB3 expression regulation in cell lines, xenografts
tissues and human breast cancer material using Reverse transcriptase,
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) and immunohistochemical
staining. Finally, the effect of small interfering RNA (siRNA) mediated TRIB3
knockdown on hypoxia tolerance was assessed.
RESULTS: Breast cancer patients with low, intermediate or high TRIB3 expression
exhibited a mean disease free survival (DFS) of 80 (95% confidence interval [CI] 
= 74 to 86), 74 (CI = 67 to 81), and 63 (CI = 55 to 71) months respectively (P = 
.002, Mantel-Cox log-rank). The prognostic value of TRIB3 was limited to those
patients that had received radiotherapy as part of their primary treatment (n =
179, P = .005) and remained statistically significant after correction for other 
clinicopathological parameters (DFS, Hazard Ratio = 1.90, CI = 1.17 to 3.08, P = 
.009). In breast cell lines TRIB3 expression was induced by hypoxia, nutrient
starvation, and endoplasmic reticulum stress in an hypoxia inducible factor 1
(HIF-1) independent manner. TRIB3 induction after hypoxia did not increase with
decreasing oxygen levels. In breast tumor xenografts and human breast cancer
tissues TRIB3 co-localized with the hypoxic cell marker pimonidazole. The
induction of TRIB3 by hypoxia was shown to be regulated via the PERK/ATF4/CHOP
pathway of the unfolded protein response and knockdown of TRIB3 resulted in a
dose-dependent increase in hypoxia sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: TRIB3 is independently associated with poor prognosis of breast
cancer patients, possibly through its association with tumor cell hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC3236345
PMID: 21864376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Mol Med. 2011;17(11-12):1295-305. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2011.00131. Epub 2011 Aug
19.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress implicated in the development of renal fibrosis.

Chiang CK(1), Hsu SP, Wu CT, Huang JW, Cheng HT, Chang YW, Hung KY, Wu KD, Liu
SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Diagnostics and Therapeutics, National Taiwan
University Hospital and National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei,
Taiwan.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-associated apoptosis plays a role in organ
remodeling after insult. The effect of ER stress on renal tubular damage and
fibrosis remains controversial. This study aims to investigate whether ER stress 
is involved in tubular destruction and interstitial fibrosis in vivo. Renal cell 
apoptosis was proven by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick
end-labeling (TUNEL) stain and poly-ADP ribose polymerase expression in the
unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) kidney. ER stress was evoked and confirmed 
by the upregulation of glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) and the common
Lys-Asp-Glu-Leu (KDEL) motif of ER retention proteins after UUO. ER
stress-associated proapoptotic signals, including B-cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL)/lymphoma 2-associated × protein (BAX) expression, caspase-12 and
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) phosphorylation, were activated in the UUO kidney. 
Prolonged ER stress attenuated both unsplicing and splicing X-box binding protein
1 (XBP-1) protein expression, but continued to activate inositol-requiring 1a
(IRE1a)-JNK phosphorylation, protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase
(PERK), eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a subunit (eIF2a), activating
transcription factor (ATF)-4, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) homologous
protein (CHOP) and cleavage activating transcription factor 6 (cATF6)-CHOP
signals, which induce ER stress-related apoptosis but attenuate adaptive unfolded
protein responses in UUO kidneys. However, renal apoptosis and fibrosis were
attenuated in candesartan-treated UUO kidney. Candesartan was associated with
maintenance of XBP-1 expression and attenuated ATF4, cATF6 and CHOP protein
expression. Taken together, results show that overwhelming ER stress leads to
renal cell apoptosis and subsequent fibrosis; and candesartan, at least in part, 
restores renal integrity by blocking ER stress-related apoptosis. Reducing ER
stress may present a way to attenuate renal fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC3324175
PMID: 21863214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 21;286(42):36724-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.277673. Epub
2011 Aug 23.

Auto-activation of c-JUN gene by amino acid deprivation of hepatocellular
carcinoma cells reveals a novel c-JUN-mediated signaling pathway.

Fu L(1), Balasubramanian M, Shan J, Dudenhausen EE, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shands Cancer Center,
University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

Mammalian cells respond to protein or amino acid (AA) limitation by activating a 
number of signaling pathways, collectively referred to as the AA response (AAR), 
that modulate a range of cellular functions, including transcriptional induction 
of target genes. This study demonstrates that in hepatocellular carcinoma cells, 
expression of c-JUN, JUN-B, c-FOS, and FOS-B was induced by the AAR, whereas
JUN-D, FRA-1, and FRA-2 were not. Of the four activated FOS/JUN members, c-JUN
made the largest contribution to the induction of several known AAR target genes.
For several human liver, prostate, and ovarian cell lines, the AAR-induced
increase in c-JUN expression was greater in transformed cells compared with
nontransformed counterparts, an effect independent of cell growth rate. Thus far,
the best characterized AA-responsive genes are all transcriptionally activated by
ATF4, but the AAR-dependent induction of c-JUN transcription was
ATF4-independent. The increased expression of c-JUN was dependent on ATF2 and on 
activation of the MEK-ERK and JNK arms of the MAPK signaling pathways. Formation 
of c-JUN-ATF2-activated heterodimers was increased after AA limitation, and c-JUN
or ATF2 knockdown suppressed the induction of c-JUN and other AAR target genes.
AA deprivation triggers a feed-forward process that involves phosphorylation of
existing c-JUN protein by JNK and subsequent auto-activation of the c-JUN gene by
recruitment of c-JUN and ATF2 to two AP-1 sites within the proximal promoter. The
results document the novel observation that AP-1 sequences within the c-JUN gene 
can function as transcriptional amino acid-response elements.

PMCID: PMC3196148
PMID: 21862593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23512. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023512. Epub 2011 Aug 10.

An atypical unfolded protein response in heat shocked cells.

Heldens L(1), Hensen SM, Onnekink C, van Genesen ST, Dirks RP, Lubsen NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The heat shock response (HSR) and the unfolded protein response (UPR)
are both activated by proteotoxic stress, although in different compartments, and
share cellular resources. How these resources are allocated when both responses
are active is not known. Insight in possible crosstalk will help understanding
the consequences of failure of these systems in (age-related) disease.
RESULTS: In heat stressed HEK293 cells synthesis of the canonical UPR
transcription factors XBP1s and ATF4 was detected as well as HSF1 independent
activation of the promoters of the ER resident chaperones HSPA5 (BiP) and DNAJB9 
(ERdj4). However, the heat stress activation of the DNAJB9 promoter, a XBP1s
target, was not blocked in cells expressing a dominant negative IRE1a mutant, and
thus did not require XBP1s. Furthermore, the DNA element required for heat stress
activation of the DNAJB9 promoter is distinct from the ATF4 and ATF6 target
elements; even though inhibition of eIF2a phosphorylation resulted in a decreased
activation of the DNAJB9 promoter upon heat stress, suggesting a role for an
eIF2a phosphorylation dependent product.
CONCLUSIONS: The initial step in the UPR, synthesis of transcription factors, is 
activated by heat stress but the second step, transcriptional transactivation by 
these factors, is blocked and these pathways of the UPR are thus not productive. 
Expression of canonical ER chaperones is part of the response of heat stressed
cells but another set of transcription factors has been recruited to regulate
expression of these ER chaperones.

PMCID: PMC3154502
PMID: 21853144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Neuroscience. 2011 Oct 13;193:377-86. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.07.059.
Epub 2011 Jul 28.

Activating transcription factor 4, a mediator of the integrated stress response, 
is increased in the dorsal root ganglia following painful facet joint
distraction.

Dong L(1), Guarino BB, Jordan-Sciutto KL, Winkelstein BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA.

Chronic neck pain is one of the most common musculoskeletal disorders in the US. 
Although biomechanical and clinical studies have implicated the facet joint as a 
primary source of neck pain, specific cellular mechanisms still remain
speculative. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether a mediator
(activating transcription factor; 4ATF4) of the integrated stress response (ISR) 
is involved in facet-mediated pain. Holtzman rats underwent C6/C7 facet joint
loading that produces either painful (n=16) or nonpainful (n=8) responses. A sham
group (n=9) was also included as surgical controls. Behavioral sensitivity was
measured and the C6 dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) were harvested on day 7 to
evaluate the total and neuronal ATF4 expression. In separate groups, an
intra-articular ketorolac injection was administered either immediately (D0
ketorolac) or 1 day (D1 ketorolac) after painful facet joint loading. Allodynia
was measured at days 1 and 7 after injury to assess the effects on behavioral
responses. ATF4 and BiP (an indicator of ISR activation) were separately
quantified at day 7. Facet joint loading sufficient to elicit behavioral
hypersensitivity produced a threefold increase in total and neuronal ATF4
expression in the DRG. After ketorolac treatment at the time of injury, ATF4
expression was significantly (P<0.01) reduced despite not producing any
attenuation of behavioral responses. Interestingly, ketorolac treatment at day 1 
significantly (P<0.001) alleviated behavioral sensitivity at day 7, but did not
modify ATF4 expression. BiP expression was unchanged after either intervention
time. Results suggest that ATF4-dependent activation of the ISR does not directly
contribute to persistent pain, but it may sensitize neurons responsible for pain 
initiation. These behavioral and immunohistochemical findings imply that
facet-mediated pain may be sustained through other pathways of the ISR.

Copyright © 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3171593
PMID: 21821103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Arch Toxicol. 2012 Jan;86(1):37-44. doi: 10.1007/s00204-011-0742-x. Epub 2011 Aug
2.

Effects of salubrinal on cadmium-induced apoptosis in HK-2 human renal proximal
tubular cells.

Komoike Y(1), Inamura H, Matsuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene and Public Health I, Tokyo Women's Medical University,
Japan.

Cadmium exposure is known to cause endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. In our
current study, we examined the effects of salubrinal, a selective inhibitor of
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 subunit a (eIF2a) dephosphorylation,
on apoptotic cell death and ER stress-signaling events in HK-2 human renal
proximal tubular cells exposed to cadmium chloride (CdCl(2)). Using
phase-contrast microscopy and a cell viability assay, we observed that salubrinal
suppressed CdCl(2)-induced cellular damage and cell death. Treatment with
salubrinal reduced the number of TUNEL-positive cells and the cleavages of
caspase-3 and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, but not the cleavage of light chain
3B, indicating protection from CdCl(2)-induced apoptosis but not autophagy.
Although eIF2a remained phosphorylated after CdCl(2) exposure to
salubrinal-treated HK-2 cells, the expression of activating transcription factor 
4 (ATF4) and the 78 kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP78) was not increased. On
the other hand, CdCl(2)-induced expression of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) was
reduced by salubrinal treatment. Expression of ATF4, an upstream regulator of
GRP78 and CHOP, appeared to be a prerequisite for full protection by salubrinal
against cadmium cytotoxicity, because CdCl(2)-induced cellular damage was not
fully suppressed in ATF4-deficient cells. Phosphorylated forms of
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), including c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase 
(JNK), p38, and extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK), increased
after CdCl(2) exposure, whereas salubrinal suppressed the phosphorylation of JNK 
and p38 but not ERK. These results suggest that salubrinal protects
CdCl(2)-exposed HK-2 cells from apoptosis by suppressing cell death signal
transduction pathways.

PMID: 21809093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Aug 19;412(1):160-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.07.066. Epub 2011 Jul 22.

The impaired bone anabolic effect of PTH in the absence of endogenous FGF2 is
partially due to reduced ATF4 expression.

Fei Y(1), Xiao L, Hurley MM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030, USA.
yfei@student.uchc.edu

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is currently the only approved anabolic agent for
osteoporosis pharmacotherapy in the USA. However, the molecular and cellular
mechanisms underlying which intermittent PTH stimulates bone formation are not
fully established. Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) was recently
identified to be a downstream target of PTH signaling in osteoblasts and FGF2 is 
able to rapidly increase ATF4 mRNA and protein expression in osteoblasts.
Furthermore, ATF4 expression is markedly reduced in Fgf2(-/-) osteoblasts. In
addition, FGF2 is required for the anabolic action of PTH on bone formation.
Therefore, we hypothesize that the impaired anabolic effect of PTH in Fgf2(-/-)
mice is partially due to reduced ATF4 expression. To test this hypothesis, we
examined the ability of PTH to increase ATF4 expression in vitro and in vivo. In 
vitro data showed that PTH induced a significant increase in ATF4 mRNA expression
as early as 15 min in Fgf2(+/+) primary bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) but not
in Fgf2(-/-) BMSCs. In vivo data showed that treatment with PTH (1-34) (40
µg/kg/d) treatment for 2 weeks in 21-23 months female mice increased lumbar
vertebrae bone mineral density in Fgf2(+/+) (13.8% increase). In contrast there
was a 2.1% decrease in Fgf2(-/-) mice. Interestingly, basal ATF4 mRNA expression 
in tibiae was significantly lower in Fgf2(-/-) mice (46% decrease) compared to
Fgf2(+/+) mice. PTH treatment increased ATF4 mRNA by 97% (p<0.05) in Fgf2(+/+)
compared to 8% (p=0.57) in Fgf2(-/-) mice. Immunohistochemistry of vertebrae
showed less ATF4 staining in Fgf2(-/-) tissue, and treatment with PTH increased
ATF4 staining in Fgf2(+/+) but the increase was attenuated in Fgf2(-/-) tissue.
In summary, reduced ATF4 expression may result in decreased osteoblast
differentiation, and possibly contribute to the impaired stimulation of PTH on
bone formation in Fgf2(-/-) mice.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3568701
PMID: 21806973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Jul;16(7):1618-28. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01401.x.

Salermide up-regulates death receptor 5 expression through the ATF4-ATF3-CHOP
axis and leads to apoptosis in human cancer cells.

Liu G(1), Su L, Hao X, Zhong N, Zhong D, Singhal S, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan, China.

Sirtuins (a class III histone deacetylase) have emerged as novel targets for
cancer therapy. Salermide, a reverse amide compound that inhibits Sirtuin 1
(Sirt1) and Sirtuin 2 (Sirt2), has been shown to induce apoptosis in human cancer
cells. The mechanism underlying cellular apoptotic signalling by salermide
remains unclear. In this study, we show that salermide up-regulates the
expression of death receptor 5 (DR5) in human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
cells. Blocking DR5 expression by gene silencing technology results in a decrease
in activated forms of several pro-apoptotic proteins (caspase-8, caspase-9,
caspase-3, PARP). Increasing DR5 protein expression correlates with
salermide-induced apoptosis in human NSCLC cells. We discovered that IRE-1a, Bip,
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF4), activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) are induced by salermide, which
suggests that DR5-dependent apoptosis is induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress.
Moreover, knockdown of Sirt1 and Sirt2 expression resulted in up-regulation of
ATF4, CHOP and DR5. Transfected NSCLC cells with ATF4, ATF3 or CHOP siRNA results
in a decline in pro-apoptotic proteins (such as caspase-8, caspase-9, caspase-3
and PARP) despite salermide treatment. We demonstrate that salermide induces
expression of ATF4, and ATF4 up-regulates ATF3 and subsequently modulates CHOP.
This suggests that DR5 is modulated by the ATF4-ATF3-CHOP axis in NSCLC after
Sirt1/2 inhibition or salermide treatment. This study highlights the importance
of DR5 up-regulation in apoptosis induced by Sirt1/2 inhibition and elucidates
the underlying mechanism in human NSCLC cells.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3823229
PMID: 21801305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2011 Jan;31(1):18-24. doi: 10.1016/j.etap.2010.08.005.
Epub 2010 Sep 15.

Phosphorylation of the a-subunit of the eukaryotic initiation factor-2 (eIF2a)
alleviates benzo[a]pyrene-7,8-diol-9,10-epoxide induced cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis in human cells.

Wang Q(1), Jiang H, Fan Y, Huang X, Shen J, Qi H, Li Q, Lu X, Shao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Zhejiang University School of
Medicine, 388 Yuhang Tang Road, Hangzhou 310058, PR China.

Benzo[a]pyrene-7,8-diol-9,10-epoxide (BPDE) is a carcinogen causing bulky-adduct 
DNA damage and inducing extensive cell responses regulating cell cycle, cell
survival and apoptosis. However, the mechanism of cellular responses to BPDE
exposure is not fully understood. In this study, we demonstrated the involvement 
of the phosphorylation of the a-subunit of the eukaryotic initiation factor-2
(eIF2a) in the cellular response to BPDE exposure and addressed the role of eIF2a
phosphorylation in the regulation of the cellular stress. Phosphorylation of
eIF2a was induced in a normal human FL amnion epithelial cell line, and the
expression of ATF4, a conserved downstream transcriptional factor of eIF2a
phosphorylation, was up-regulated after BPDE exposure; however, the four known
primary kinases for eIF2a phosphorylation (GCN2, HRI, PKR, and PERK) were not
found activated. While BPDE induced severe cell cycle arrest and apoptosis and
decreased cell viability in FL cells, salubrinal, a selective inhibitor of eIF2a 
dephosphorylation, maintained the eIF2a phosphorylation and attenuated cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis and promoted cell survival. The findings reveal that when
BPDE causes cellular damages, it induces eIF2a phosphorylation as well, which
produces a pro-survival and anti-apoptotic effect to alleviate the cellular
damages. Thus, the present study proposes a new cellular defensive mechanism
during the environmental mutagen and carcinogen attack.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21787665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Oct;1809(10):549-56. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.07.003. Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Gestational low protein diet selectively induces the amino acid response pathway 
target genes in the liver of offspring rats through transcription factor binding 
and histone modifications.

Zhou D(1), Pan YX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illnois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

The amino acid response (AAR) pathway detects a deficiency of dietary amino acid 
or protein. To investigate the impact of gestational protein restriction on the
AAR pathway in offspring, pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were fed a control (C) or 
low protein (LP) diet during gestation. Livers of female offspring were collected
on postnatal d 38. The mRNA amount of Atf3 in LP offspring increased
significantly compared with C offspring, while Asns did not differ between the
two groups. ATF4 and p-eIF2a were both induced in LP offspring, whereas p-ERK was
significantly decreased. Additionally, amino acid limitation (-AA) in HepG2 cells
increased p-ERK and AAR pathway-related genes, while U0126 decreased p-ERK but
did not completely reverse the activation of AAR pathway-related genes. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated an increased association of both RNA
polymerase II (Pol II) and ATF4 at the Atf3 promoter in LP offspring, while
acetylated histone H4, tri-methyl histone H3 at lysine 9, ATF4, ATF3, C/EBPß, and
CHOP, but not Pol II, were all increased at the Asns promoter in LP offspring. In
-AA HepG2 cells, C/EBPß siRNA treatment did not prevent the activation of either 
ATF3 or ASNS in response to -AA, while ATF4 siRNA prevented the activation of
ASNS but not ATF3. Our data demonstrates that a maternal LP diet programs the AAR
pathway in the liver of offspring rats. The differential priming of the
downstream target genes of the AAR pathway in response to maternal LP diet
presents a novel regulatory mechanism related to nutrient-gene interactions.

2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21777709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 16;286(37):32416-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.258970. Epub
2011 Jul 18.

cAMP-response element (CRE)-mediated transcription by activating transcription
factor-4 (ATF4) is essential for circadian expression of the Period2 gene.

Koyanagi S(1), Hamdan AM, Horiguchi M, Kusunose N, Okamoto A, Matsunaga N, Ohdo
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Activating transcription factor (ATF)/cAMP-response element (CRE)-binding (CREB) 
proteins induce the CRE-mediated gene transcription depending on the cAMP
stimulation. cAMP-dependent signaling oscillates in a circadian manner, which in 
turn also sustains core oscillation machinery of the circadian clock. Here, we
show that among the ATF/CREB family proteins, ATF4 is essential for the circadian
expression of the Period2 (Per2) gene, a key component of the circadian clock.
Transcription of the Atf4 gene was regulated by core components of the circadian 
clock, and its expression exhibited circadian oscillation in mouse tissues as
well as embryonic fibroblasts. ATF4 bound to the CRE of the Per2 promoter in a
circadian time-dependent manner and periodically activated the transcription of
the Per2 gene. Consequently, the oscillation of the Per2 expression was
attenuated in embryonic cells prepared from Atf4-null mice. Furthermore, the loss
of ATF4 also disrupted the rhythms in the expression of other clock genes. These 
results suggest that ATF4 is a component responsible for sustaining circadian
oscillation of CRE-mediated gene expression and also constitute a molecular link 
connecting cAMP-dependent signaling to the circadian clock.

PMCID: PMC3173173
PMID: 21768648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Circ Res. 2011 Aug 19;109(5):e27-41. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.241869. Epub
2011 Jul 7.

Network for activation of human endothelial cells by oxidized phospholipids: a
critical role of heme oxygenase 1.

Romanoski CE(1), Che N, Yin F, Mai N, Pouldar D, Civelek M, Pan C, Lee S, Vakili 
L, Yang WP, Kayne P, Mungrue IN, Araujo JA, Berliner JA, Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
casey.romanoski@ucla.edu

RATIONALE: Oxidized palmitoyl arachidonyl phosphatidylcholine (Ox-PAPC)
accumulates in atherosclerotic lesions, is proatherogenic, and influences the
expression of more than 1000 genes in endothelial cells.
OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the major pathways involved in Ox-PAPC action, we
conducted a systems analysis of endothelial cell gene expression after exposure
to Ox-PAPC.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We used the variable responses of primary endothelial cells 
from 149 individuals exposed to Ox-PAPC to construct a network that consisted of 
11 groups of genes, or modules. Modules were enriched for a broad range of Gene
Ontology pathways, some of which have not been identified previously as major
Ox-PAPC targets. Further validating our method of network construction, modules
were consistent with relationships established by cell biology studies of Ox-PAPC
effects on endothelial cells. This network provides novel hypotheses about
molecular interactions, as well as candidate molecular regulators of inflammation
and atherosclerosis. We validated several hypotheses based on network connections
and genomic association. Our network analysis predicted that the hub gene CHAC1
(cation transport regulator homolog 1) was regulated by the ATF4 (activating
transcription factor 4) arm of the unfolded protein response pathway, and here we
showed that ATF4 directly activates an element in the CHAC1 promoter. We showed
that variation in basal levels of heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1) contribute to the
response to Ox-PAPC, consistent with its position as a hub in our network. We
also identified G-protein-coupled receptor 39 (GPR39) as a regulator of HMOX1
levels and showed that it modulates the promoter activity of HMOX1. We further
showed that OKL38/OSGN1 (oxidative stress-induced growth inhibitor), the hub gene
in the blue module, is a key regulator of both inflammatory and antiinflammatory 
molecules.
CONCLUSIONS: Our systems genetics approach has provided a broad view of the
pathways involved in the response of endothelial cells to Ox-PAPC and also
identified novel regulatory mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3163234
PMID: 21737788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Orthop Sci. 2011 Sep;16(5):629-37. doi: 10.1007/s00776-011-0117-4. Epub 2011
Jun 29.

The effects of systemic chemical sympathectomy on local bone loss induced by
sciatic neurectomy.

Huang TH(1), Lin HS, Chen HI, Yang RS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physical Education, Health and Leisure Studies, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) is
involved in bone metabolism and that blockade of the SNS could reduce bone loss
and stimulate bone formation. However, the question of whether suppression of SNS
tone could compensate for mechanical unloading-induced bone loss must be further 
clarified. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether systemically
inhibiting sympathetic nervous system (SNS) tone could prevent bone loss from
mechanical-inactivity-induced osteopenia.
METHODS: Female Wistar rats (12 weeks old) were randomly assigned to three
groups: the SN group (n = 10), or single leg sciatic neurectomy group; the SNP
group (n = 12), or single leg sciatic neurectomy + propranolol treatment (0.5 g/L
in dietary water) group; and the CON group (n = 10), or single leg sham-operated 
group. Animals were fed with distilled water or propranolol in water, in
accordance with their group design, for 30 days. Histomorphometry, geometry,
tissue weight, and serum markers were assessed.
RESULTS: Propranolol-treated animals drank significantly less water, but did not 
differ in daily chow consumption or body weight gain. In histomorphometric
analysis, the spongy bone volume ratio in proximal tibiae was significantly lower
in the two sciatic neurectomy groups, but there was no difference between the SN 
and SNP groups. Architecture analysis showed that the SN group had significantly 
thinner trabeculae and fewer trabeculae than the CON group (p < 0.05), but there 
was no difference between the SNP and CON groups. There were no significant
differences for tissue weight, geometric measurement, or serum markers assay.
CONCLUSION: It was observed that blockade of the SNS prevented neurectomy-induced
bone resorption, as demonstrated by various histomorphometric data, although the 
difference between SN and SNP did not reach significance. In further work it
would be valuable to study possible gender, age, and dose-dependent efficacy of
propranolol on bone metabolism.

PMID: 21713423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Sep;31(17):3616-29. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05164-11. Epub 2011 Jun 
27.

PERK integrates autophagy and oxidative stress responses to promote survival
during extracellular matrix detachment.

Avivar-Valderas A(1), Salas E, Bobrovnikova-Marjon E, Diehl JA, Nagi C, Debnath
J, Aguirre-Ghiso JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Tisch Cancer Institute, Black Family Stem Cell
Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York,
NY 10029, USA.

Mammary epithelial cells (MECs) detached from the extracellular matrix (ECM)
produce deleterious reactive oxygen species (ROS) and induce autophagy to
survive. The coordination of such opposing responses likely dictates whether
epithelial cells survive ECM detachment or undergo anoikis. Here, we demonstrate 
that the endoplasmic reticulum kinase PERK facilitates survival of ECM-detached
cells by concomitantly promoting autophagy, ATP production, and an antioxidant
response. Loss-of-function studies show that ECM detachment activates a canonical
PERK-eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a)-ATF4-CHOP pathway that
coordinately induces the autophagy regulators ATG6 and ATG8, sustains ATP levels,
and reduces ROS levels to delay anoikis. Inducible activation of an Fv2E-<U+0394>NPERK
chimera by persistent activation of autophagy and reduction of ROS results in
lumen-filled mammary epithelial acini. Finally, luminal P-PERK and LC3 levels are
reduced in PERK-deficient mammary glands, whereas they are increased in human
breast ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) versus normal breast tissues. We propose
that the normal proautophagic and antioxidant PERK functions may be hijacked to
promote the survival of ECM-detached tumor cells in DCIS lesions.

PMCID: PMC3165554
PMID: 21709020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Pathol. 2011 Oct;225(2):285-92. doi: 10.1002/path.2918. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Ribosomal protein RPL41 induces rapid degradation of ATF4, a transcription factor
critical for tumour cell survival in stress.

Wang A(1), Xu S, Zhang X, He J, Yan D, Yang Z, Xiao S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

By activating protective pathways, tumour cells are not only capable of survival 
in stress, but often associated with increased aggressiveness and metastasis.
Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is a major coordinator of tumour cell
survival in stress and is commonly overexpressed in tumours. Numerous studies
suggested that the ATF4 is a potential therapeutic target for cancer. In this
report, we describe that a small ribosomal peptide, RPL41, induced rapid ATF4
degradation. By immunofluorescence staining, RPL41 induced ATF4 relocation from
nuclei to cytoplasm, where ATF4 co-stained with a proteasome marker; the
RPL41-induced ATF4 relocation and degradation were blocked by the proteasome
inhibitor MG132. An in vivo phosphorylation study showed that RPL41 induced ATF4 
phosphorylation and serine 219 of ATF4 was essential for RPL41-induced ATF4
degradation. Cells with RPL41 knockdown had significantly increased ATF4,
suggesting that RPL41 could play a physiological role in regulating the cellular 
ATF4 level. RPL41 was capable of inducing tumour cell death and cell cycle
arrest; at low dose, RPL41 sensitized tumour cells A549 to the DNA damage agent
cisplatin. These studies suggest that RPL41, a small peptide that is chemically
synthesizable and capable of self-cell penetration, may have potential as an
anti-ATF4 agent for cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21706477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Toxicology. 2011 Sep 5;287(1-3):105-12. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2011.06.005. Epub 2011
Jun 15.

Induction of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein by cigarette smoke
through the superoxide anion-triggered PERK-eIF2a pathway.

Tagawa Y(1), Hiramatsu N, Kato H, Sakoh T, Nakajima S, Hayakawa K, Saito Y, Johno
H, Takahashi S, Gu L, Yao J, Kitamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Signaling, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Shimokato 1110, Chuo,
Yamanashi 409-3898, Japan.

Cigarette smoke triggers apoptosis through oxidative stress- and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress-dependent induction of CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein-homologous protein (CHOP) (Tagawa et al., 2008. Free Radic. Biol. Med.
45, 50-59). We investigated roles of individual reactive oxygen/nitrogen species 
in the transcriptional induction of CHOP by cigarette smoke. Exposure of
bronchial epithelial cells to O(2)(-), ONOO(-) or H(2)O(2) induced expression of 
CHOP, whereas NO alone did not. Induction of CHOP mRNA by cigarette smoke extract
(CSE) was attenuated by scavengers for O(2)(-), ONOO(-) or NO, whereas scavenging
H(2)O(2) did not affect the induction of CHOP. Like CSE, O(2)(-) and ONOO(-)
caused activation of the CHOP gene promoter. Scavengers for O(2)(-), ONOO(-) or
NO attenuated CSE-triggered activation of the CHOP gene promoter. CSE, O(2)(-)
and ONOO(-) induced phosphorylation of protein kinase-like ER kinase (PERK) and
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) and caused induction of
downstream activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). Scavengers for O(2)(-),
ONOO(-) or NO attenuated induction of ATF4 by CSE. Furthermore, dominant-negative
inhibition of the PERK-eIF2a pathway exclusively suppressed CSE-triggered
induction of CHOP and consequent apoptosis. These results suggest that O(2)(-)
and ONOO(-) are selectively involved in CSE-triggered induction of CHOP and that 
the PERK-eIF2a pathway plays a crucial role in the induction of CHOP and
apoptosis downstream of the particular reactive oxygen species.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21703327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2011;6:309-19. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S19599. Epub
2011 Jun 2.

Induction of the unfolded protein response by cigarette smoke is primarily an
activating transcription factor 4-C/EBP homologous protein mediated process.

Geraghty P(1), Wallace A, D'Armiento JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Divisions of Molecular and Pulmonary Medicine,
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.

PURPOSE: Cigarette smoke is the major risk factor associated with the development
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Recent studies propose a link
between endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and emphysema, demonstrated by
increased ER stress markers under smoking conditions. Here, we investigate
whether cigarette smoke-induced ER stress is cell specific and correlates with
acute and chronic cigarette smoke exposure.
METHODS: Gene and protein expression changes in human primary lung cell cultures 
following cigarette smoke extract (CSE) exposure were monitored by qPCR and
Western blot analysis. Mice and guinea pigs were exposed to cigarette smoke and
ER stress markers examined in whole lung homogenates. Inflammatory cells from the
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of 10 days smoke exposed mice were also examined.
RESULTS: Cigarette smoke induced a trend increase in the ER stress response
through an activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) mediated induction of C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP) in primary small airway epithelial cells. Bronchial
epithelial cells and macrophages responded similarly to CSE. Wild-type mice and
guinea pigs exposed to acute levels of cigarette smoke exhibited increased levels
of CHOP but not at significant levels. However, after long-term chronic cigarette
smoke exposure, CHOP expression was reduced. Interestingly, inflammatory cells
from smoke exposed mice had a significant increase in CHOP/ATF4 expression.
CONCLUSION: A trend increase in CHOP levels appear in multiple human lung cell
types following acute cigarette smoke exposure in vitro. In vivo, inflammatory
cells, predominately macrophages, demonstrate significant cigarette smoke-induced
ER stress. Early induction of CHOP in cigarette smoke may play a pivotal role in 
early induction of lung disease, however in vivo long-term cigarette smoke
exposure exhibited a reduction in the ER stress response.

PMCID: PMC3119106
PMID: 21697995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 19;286(33):29408-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.197665. Epub
2011 Jun 22.

Modulation of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous protein (CHOP)-dependent 
DR5 expression by nelfinavir sensitizes glioblastoma multiforme cells to tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL).

Tian X(1), Ye J, Alonso-Basanta M, Hahn SM, Koumenis C, Dorsey JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology and the Radiation Biology and Imaging Program
of the Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Human glioblastoma multiforme cells demonstrate varying levels of sensitivity to 
tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)-induced
apoptosis. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been shown to trigger cell death
through apoptosis. We therefore pursued a strategy of integrating clinically
relevant investigational agents that cooperate mechanistically through the
regulation of ER stress and apoptosis pathways. Nelfinavir belongs to the
protease inhibitor class of drugs currently used to treat patients with HIV and
is in clinical trials as an anti-tumor agent. We found that Nelfinavir treatment 
led to ER stress-induced up-regulation of the DR5 receptor. This transactivation 
was mediated by the transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
homologous protein (CHOP). We also determined that ER stress-induced ATF4
up-regulation was responsible for modulation of CHOP. In contrast, DR4 receptor
expression was unchanged by Nelfinavir treatment. Combining Nelfinavir with TRAIL
led to a significantly enhanced level of apoptosis that was abrogated by siRNA
silencing of DR5. We provide evidence that Nelfinavir-induced ER stress modulates
DR5 expression in human glioblastoma multiforme cells and can enhance TRAIL
efficacy. These studies provide a potential mechanistic rationale for the use of 
the Food and Drug Administration-approved agent Nelfinavir in combination with
DR5 agonists to induce apoptosis in human malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3190746
PMID: 21697087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Aug;32(8):1268-78. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr112. Epub 2011 Jun
21.

Apoptosis-related protein-2 triggers melanoma cell death by a mechanism including
both endoplasmic reticulum stress and mitochondrial dysregulation.

Selimovic D(1), Ahmad M, El-Khattouti A, Hannig M, Haïkel Y, Hassan M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U977, and Department of Operative Dentistry and Endodontics, Dental
Faculty, University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

Metastatic cancers including melanoma are frequently associated with increased
resistance to apoptosis induced by various therapeutic modalities, and the
success of systemic therapy for the treatment of metastatic melanoma is minimal. 
In the present study, we demonstrated the ability of apoptosis-related protein
(APR)-2 to trigger cell death via mechanism mediated by both endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress [as evidenced by the increase of intracellular Ca(2+)
release, the activation of both, inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a) and calpain
and cleavage of caspase-4] and mitochondrial dysregulation as evidenced by the
loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, Cytochrome c release and cleavage of
caspases-9 and -3, and poly adenosine diphosphate ribose polymerase (PARP). Also,
the activation of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase (ASK) 1, c-jun-N-terminal
kinase (JNK) and the transcription factors AP-1 and p53, and the induction of Bax
expression were noted in APR-2-expressing cells. Both immune fluorescence
staining and western blotting revealed the localization of APR-2 at ER and Bax
protein at both mitochondria and ER. However, data of inhibitory experiments
demonstrated that APR-2-induced apoptosis of melanoma cells is mediated by three 
parallel pathways: one of them IRE1/tumour necrosis factor receptor-associated
factor 2/ASK1/JNK/Cyt.c/caspase-9/caspase-3/PARP) seems to be mitochondrial
dependent, whereas, the other two pathways namely
calpain/caspase-4/caspase-9/caspase-3/PARP and protein kinase RNA-like ER
kinase/ATF4/C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP)/Bim seem to be mitochondrial
independent. In conclusion, our data provide insight into the molecular mechanism
of APR-2-induced apoptosis and suggest APR-2 gene transfer as an alternative
approach for the treatment of chemoresistance melanoma metastasis.

PMID: 21693538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Jul;1809(7):306-15. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.05.016.
Epub 2011 Jun 13.

Dickkopf homolog 1, a Wnt signaling antagonist, is transcriptionally up-regulated
via an ATF4-independent and MAPK/ERK-dependent pathway following amino acid
deprivation.

Zhou D(1), Zhang Y, Pan YX, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

Amino acid response (AAR) pathway is activated when cells are deprived of amino
acids. In the present study, using the human colon cancer cell line SW480, we
observed that DKK1, an antagonist of the Wnt pathway, was significantly induced
at the mRNA level after the removal of amino acids from the medium. Addition of
the amino alcohol histidinol, which prevents the formation of
histidinyl-tRNA(His), also increased DKK1 mRNA to a level similar to that
observed when cells were deprived of all amino acids. Transcriptional activity
and stability of DKK1 mRNA were both increased in the amino acid-deprived
condition. The induction of DKK1 gene expression was confirmed by the increased
immunofluorescent staining of the DKK1 protein in the amino acid deprived
condition. Although chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed increased RNA
Polymerase II binding at the DKK1 promoter in amino acid-limited conditions, ATF4
binding to the promoter is absent. Luciferase reporter assays did not detect any 
functional AARE within the DKK1 gene structure. Knockdown of ATF4 by siRNA did
not affect the increase of DKK1 mRNA during amino acid limitation. Inhibition of 
ERK phosphorylation abolished the induction of DKK1. Our study revealed that DKK1
is a novel target gene in the response to amino acid deficiency and that the
expression of DKK1 is up-regulated through an ATF4-independent and an
ERK-dependent pathway.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3199130
PMID: 21683813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2011 Oct;301(4):C954-67. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00061.2011. Epub 2011 Jun 15.

Deficiency of Prdx6 in lens epithelial cells induces ER stress response-mediated 
impaired homeostasis and apoptosis.

Fatma N(1), Singh P, Chhunchha B, Kubo E, Shinohara T, Bhargavan B, Singh DP.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Univ. of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, 68198-5840, USA.

The multifunctional cytoprotective protein peroxiredoxin 6 (Prdx6) maintains
cellular homeostasis and membrane integrity by regulating expression of
intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) and phospholipid turnover. Using
cells derived from targeted inactivation of Prdx6 gene or its depletion by RNA
interference or aging, we showed that Prdx6 deficiency in cells evoked unfolded
protein response (UPR), evidenced by increased expression or activation of
proapoptotic factors, CHOP, ATF4, PERK, IRE-a and eIF2-a and by increased
caspases 3 and 12 processing. Those cells displayed enhanced and sustained
expression of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-related chaperon proteins,
Bip/glucose-regulated protein 78, calnexin, and calreticulin. Under cellular
stress induced by hypoxia (1% O(2) or CoCl(2) treatment) or tunicamycin,
Prdx6-deficient cells exhibited aberrant activation of ER stress-responsive
genes/protein with higher expression of ROS, and died with apoptosis. Wild-type
cells exposed to tunicamycin or hypoxia remained relatively insensitive with
lower expression of ROS and ER-responsive genes than did Prdx6-deficient cells,
but upregulation of ER stress responsive proteins or chaperones mimicked the UPR 
response of Prdx6-deficient or aging cells. Expression of Prdx6 blocked ER
stress-induced deleterious signaling by optimizing physiologically aberrant
expression of ER stress responsive genes/proteins in Prdx6-deficient cells or
cells facing stressors, and rescued the cells from apoptosis. These findings
demonstrate that impaired homeostasis and progression of pathogenesis in
Prdx6-deficient lens epithelial cells or in aging cells should be blocked by a
supply of Prdx6. The results provide a new molecular basis for understanding the 
etiology of several age-associated degenerative disorders, and potentially for
developing antioxidant Prdx6-based therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3191562
PMID: 21677259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2012 Jan;69(1):195-206. doi:
10.1007/s00280-011-1686-9. Epub 2011 Jun 10.

5, 7-Dimethoxyflavone sensitizes TRAIL-induced apoptosis through DR5 upregulation
in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Yang JF(1), Cao JG, Tian L, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College, Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410013, China.

PURPOSE: 5, 7-dimethoxyflavone (DMF) has been reported to induce apoptosis in
various cancer cells. The aim of this study was to examine whether DMF sensitizes
human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells to tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)-mediated apoptosis and its mechanism.
METHODS: Human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines Hep3B, Huh-7, and Hep G2 and
human embryo liver L-02 cells were cultured in vitro. The cytotoxic activities
were determined using MTT assay. The apoptotic cell death was examined using Flow
cytometry using PI staining and DNA agarose gel electrophoresis. The activities
of caspase-3, caspase-8, and caspase-9 were measured using ELISA. Intracellular
ROS was measured by FCM using the fluorescent probe DCHF-DA, and the expression
of DR4, DR5, CHOP, GPR78, and ATF4 proteins was analyzed using Western blot.
RESULTS: Our results demonstrated subtoxic concentrations of DMF sensitize HCC
cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis and induce the death receptor 5 (DR5) expression
level, accompanying the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the
upregulation of CHOP, GPR78, and ATF4 protein expression. Pretreatment with
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) inhibited DMF-induced upregulation of DR5, CHOP, GPR78,
and ATF4 protein expression and blocked the cotreatment-induced apoptosis.
Furthermore, DMF-mediated sensitization of HCC cells to TRAIL was reduced by
administration of a blocking antibody or small interfering RNAs for DR5,
salubrinal, an inhibitor of ER stress, and the small interfering RNAs for CHOP.
However, DMF could not induce the upregulation of DR5 expression, generation of
ROS, and sensitization of TRAIL-induced apoptotic cell death in human embryo
liver L-02 cells or normal human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs).
CONCLUSION: The present study demonstrates that DMF selectively enhances
TRAIL-induced apoptosis by ROS-stimulated ER-stress triggering CHOP-mediated DR5 
upregulation in HCC.

PMID: 21660448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Biochem J. 2011 Sep 1;438(2):283-9. doi: 10.1042/BJ20110263.

ATF4 deficiency protects mice from high-carbohydrate-diet-induced liver
steatosis.

Li H(1), Meng Q, Xiao F, Chen S, Du Y, Yu J, Wang C, Guo F.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, the Graduate School of the Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Chronic feeding of HCD (high-carbohydrate diet) is one of the major contributors 
to the prevailing of metabolic diseases. ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4)
has been shown to play an important role in the regulation of glucose metabolism 
and obesity development; however, it is unclear how ATF4(-/-) mice respond to
HCD. In the present study, we show that 8 weeks of HCD results in significant
higher accumulation of TAGs (triacylglycerols) in livers and impairment in
glucose tolerance in ATF4(+/+) mice, but not in ATF4(-/-) mice, compared with
those on a normal diet. Meanwhile, energy expenditure is further enhanced by HCD 
in ATF4(-/-) mice. Moreover, we show that ATF4 deficiency suppresses HCD-induced 
SCD1 (stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1) expression, furthermore, oral supplementation of
the main product of SCD1 oleate (18:1) increases TAG accumulation in livers of
ATF4(-/-) mice. Taken together, these results suggest that ATF4 deficiency is
protective for HCD-induced hepatic steatosis and impairment of glucose tolerance 
and insulin sensitivity. Furthermore, the resistance to hepatic steatosis is at
least in part due to suppression of SCD1 expression under HCD.

PMID: 21644928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 29;286(30):26638-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.241323. Epub
2011 Jun 2.

Impaired nutrient signaling and body weight control in a Na+ neutral amino acid
cotransporter (Slc6a19)-deficient mouse.

Bröer A(1), Juelich T, Vanslambrouck JM, Tietze N, Solomon PS, Holst J, Bailey
CG, Rasko JE, Bröer S.

Author information: 
(1)Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra,
Australian Capital Territory 0200, Australia. Stefan.broer@anu.edu.au

Amino acid uptake in the intestine and kidney is mediated by a variety of amino
acid transporters. To understand the role of epithelial neutral amino acid uptake
in whole body homeostasis, we analyzed mice lacking the apical broad-spectrum
neutral (0) amino acid transporter B(0)AT1 (Slc6a19). A general neutral
aminoaciduria was observed similar to human Hartnup disorder which is caused by
mutations in SLC6A19. Na(+)-dependent uptake of neutral amino acids into the
intestine and renal brush-border membrane vesicles was abolished. No compensatory
increase of peptide transport or other neutral amino acid transporters was
detected. Mice lacking B(0)AT1 showed a reduced body weight. When adapted to a
standard 20% protein diet, B(0)AT1-deficient mice lost body weight rapidly on
diets containing 6 or 40% protein. Secretion of insulin in response to food
ingestion after fasting was blunted. In the intestine, amino acid signaling to
the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway was reduced, whereas the
GCN2/ATF4 stress response pathway was activated, indicating amino acid
deprivation in epithelial cells. The results demonstrate that epithelial amino
acid uptake is essential for optimal growth and body weight regulation.

PMCID: PMC3143628
PMID: 21636576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Circulation. 2011 Jun 21;123(24):2838-47. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.012211.
Epub 2011 May 31.

Calcineurin splicing variant calcineurin Aß1 improves cardiac function after
myocardial infarction without inducing hypertrophy.

Felkin LE(1), Narita T, Germack R, Shintani Y, Takahashi K, Sarathchandra P,
López-Olañeta MM, Gómez-Salinero JM, Suzuki K, Barton PJ, Rosenthal N, Lara-Pezzi
E.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Science Centre, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Calcineurin is a calcium-regulated phosphatase that plays a major
role in cardiac hypertrophy. We previously described that alternative splicing of
the calcineurin Aß (CnAß) gene generates the CnAß1 isoform, with a unique
C-terminal region that is different from the autoinhibitory domain present in all
other CnA isoforms. In skeletal muscle, CnAß1 is necessary for myoblast
proliferation and stimulates regeneration, reducing fibrosis and accelerating the
resolution of inflammation. Its role in the heart is currently unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We generated transgenic mice overexpressing CnAß1 in
postnatal cardiomyocytes under the control of the a-myosin heavy chain promoter. 
In contrast to previous studies using an artificially truncated calcineurin,
CnAß1 overexpression did not induce cardiac hypertrophy. Moreover, transgenic
mice showed improved cardiac function and reduced scar formation after myocardial
infarction, with reduced neutrophil and macrophage infiltration and decreased
expression of proinflammatory cytokines. Immunoprecipitation and Western blot
analysis showed interaction of CnAß1 with the mTOR complex 2 and activation of
the Akt/SGK cardioprotective pathway in a PI3K-independent manner. In addition,
gene expression profiling revealed that CnAß1 activated the transcription factor 
ATF4 downstream of the Akt/mTOR pathway to promote the amino acid biosynthesis
program, to reduce protein catabolism, and to induce the antifibrotic and
antiinflammatory factor growth differentiation factor 15, which protects the
heart through Akt activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Calcineurin Aß1 shows a unique mode of action that improves cardiac 
function after myocardial infarction, activating different cardioprotective
pathways without inducing maladaptive hypertrophy. These features make CnAß1 an
attractive candidate for the development of future therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 21632490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Pathol. 2011 Oct;225(2):276-84. doi: 10.1002/path.2917. Epub 2011 Jun 1.

Reduced Paneth cell antimicrobial protein levels correlate with activation of the
unfolded protein response in the gut of obese individuals.

Hodin CM(1), Verdam FJ, Grootjans J, Rensen SS, Verheyen FK, Dejong CH, Buurman
WA, Greve JW, Lenaerts K.

Author information: 
(1)NUTRIM School for Nutrition, Toxicology and Metabolism, Department of Surgery,
Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

The intestinal microbiota is increasingly acknowledged to play a crucial role in 
the development of obesity. A shift in intestinal microbiota composition
favouring the presence of Firmicutes over Bacteroidetes has been observed in
obese subjects. A similar shift has been reported in mice with deficiency of
active Paneth cell a-defensins. We aimed at investigating changes in Paneth cell 
antimicrobial levels in the gut of obese subjects. Next, we studied activation of
the unfolded protein response (UPR) as a possible mechanism involved in altered
Paneth cell function. Paneth cell numbers were counted in jejunal sections of 15 
severely obese (BMI > 35) and 15 normal weight subjects. Expression of Paneth
cell antimicrobials human a-defensin 5 (HD5) and lysozyme were investigated using
immunohistochemistry, qPCR, and western blot. Activation of the UPR was assessed 
with western blot. Severely obese subjects showed decreased protein levels of
both HD5 and lysozyme, while Paneth cell numbers were unchanged. Lysozyme protein
levels correlated inversely with BMI. Increased expression of HD5 (DEFA5) and
lysozyme (LYZ) transcripts in the intestine of obese subjects prompted us to
investigate a possible translational block caused by UPR activation. Binding
protein (BiP) and activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) levels were increased,
confirming activation of the UPR in the gut of obese subjects. Furthermore,
levels of both proteins correlated with BMI. Involvement of the UPR in the
lowered antimicrobial protein levels in obese subjects was strongly suggested by 
a negative correlation between BiP levels and lysozyme levels. Additionally,
indications of ER stress were apparent in Paneth cells of obese subjects. Our
findings provide the first evidence for altered Paneth cell function in obesity, 
which may have important implications for the obesity-associated shift in
microbiota composition. In addition, we show activation of the UPR in the
intestine of obese subjects, which may underlie the observed Paneth cell
compromise.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21630271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 15;286(28):24882-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.255828. Epub
2011 May 31.

Multiple BH3 mimetics antagonize antiapoptotic MCL1 protein by inducing the
endoplasmic reticulum stress response and up-regulating BH3-only protein NOXA.

Albershardt TC(1), Salerni BL, Soderquist RS, Bates DJ, Pletnev AA, Kisselev AF, 
Eastman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, 
New Hampshire 03756, USA.

BH3 mimetics are small molecules designed or discovered to mimic the binding of
BH3-only proteins to the hydrophobic groove of antiapoptotic BCL2 proteins. The
selectivity of these molecules for BCL2, BCL-X(L), or MCL1 has been established
in vitro; whether they inhibit these proteins in cells has not been rigorously
investigated. In this study, we used a panel of leukemia cell lines to assess the
ability of seven putative BH3 mimetics to inhibit antiapoptotic proteins in a
cell-based system. We show that ABT-737 is the only BH3 mimetic that inhibits
BCL2 as assessed by displacement of BAD and BIM from BCL2. The other six BH3
mimetics activate the endoplasmic reticulum stress response inducing ATF4, ATF3, 
and NOXA, which can then bind to and inhibit MCL1. In most cancer cells,
inhibition of one antiapoptotic protein does not acutely induce apoptosis.
However, by combining two BH3 mimetics, one that inhibits BCL2 and one that
induces NOXA, apoptosis is induced within 6 h in a BAX/BAK-dependent manner.
Because MCL1 is a major mechanism of resistance to ABT-737, these results suggest
a novel strategy to overcome this resistance. Our findings highlight a novel
signaling pathway through which many BH3 mimetics inhibit MCL1 and suggest the
potential use of these agents as adjuvants in combination with various
chemotherapy strategies.

PMCID: PMC3137063
PMID: 21628457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Biochem J. 2011 Sep 1;438(2):369-78. doi: 10.1042/BJ20110373.

Liver-specific deletion of protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) 1B improves
obesity- and pharmacologically induced endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Agouni A(1), Mody N, Owen C, Czopek A, Zimmer D, Bentires-Alj M, Bence KK,
Delibegovic M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological and Environmental Sciences, College of Life Sciences
and Medicine, University of Aberdeen, UK.

Obesity is associated with induction of the ER (endoplasmic reticulum)-stress
response signalling and insulin resistance. PTP1B (protein tyrosine phosphatase
1B) is a major regulator of adiposity and insulin sensitivity. The aim of the
present study was to investigate the role of L-PTP1B (liver-specific PTP1B) in
chronically HFD (high-fat diet) and pharmacologically induced (tunicamycin and
thapsigargin) ER-stress response signalling in vitro and in vivo. We assessed the
effects of ER-stress response induction on hepatic PTP1B expression, and
consequences of hepatic-PTP1B deficiency, in cells and mouse liver, on components
of ER-stress response signalling. We found that PTP1B protein and mRNA expression
levels were up-regulated in response to acute and/or chronic ER stress, in vitro 
and in vivo. Silencing PTP1B in hepatic cell lines or mouse liver (L-PTP1B(-/-)) 
protected against induction of pharmacologically induced and/or obesity-induced
ER stress. The HFD-induced increase in CHOP (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
homologous protein) and BIP (binding immunoglobulin protein) mRNA levels were
partially inhibited, whereas ATF4 (activated transcription factor 4), GADD34
(growth-arrest and DNA-damage-inducible protein 34), GRP94 (glucose-regulated
protein 94), ERDJ4 (ER-localized DnaJ homologue) mRNAs and ATF6 protein cleavage 
were completely suppressed in L-PTP1B(-/-) mice relative to control littermates. 
L-PTP1B(-/-) mice also had increased nuclear translocation of spliced XBP-1 (X
box-binding protein-1) via increased p85a binding. We demonstrate that the
ER-stress response and L-PTP1B expression are interlinked in obesity- and
pharmacologically induced ER stress and this may be one of the mechanisms behind 
improved insulin sensitivity and lower lipid accumulation in L-PTP1B(-/-) mice.

PMCID: PMC3744093
PMID: 21605081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011 Aug 1;82(3):216-26. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.04.011. Epub 
2011 May 13.

Sorafenib induces apoptotic cell death in human non-small cell lung cancer cells 
by down-regulating mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)-dependent survivin
expression.

Kim YS(1), Jin HO, Seo SK, Woo SH, Choe TB, An S, Hong SI, Lee SJ, Lee KH, Park
IC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Cancer Research, Korea Institute of Radiological &
Medical Sciences, 215-4 Gongneung-dong, Nowon-gu, Seoul 139-706, Republic of
Korea.

Sorafenib, a multikinase inhibitor, is emerging as a promising targeted agent
that may possess antitumor activity against a broad range of cancers. The
mechanism by which sorafenib induces lung cancer cell death and apoptosis,
however, is not understood. In the present study, we provide evidence that
sorafenib acts through inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) to
down-regulate survivin and promote apoptotic cell death in human non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. Sorafenib induced ATF4-mediated Redd1 expression,
leading to mTOR inhibition-the upstream signal for down-regulation of survivin.
Overexpression of survivin reduced sorafenib-induced apoptosis, whereas silencing
survivin using small interfering RNA (siRNA) enhanced it, supporting the
interpretation that down-regulation of survivin is involved in sorafenib-induced 
cell death in human NSCLC cells. Furthermore, sorafenib abolished the induction
of survivin that normally accompanies IGF-1-stimulated mTOR activation. We
further found that Redd1-induced mTOR down-regulation and ATF4/CHOP-induced
expression of the TRAIL receptor DR5 associated with sorafenib treatment helped
sensitize cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Our study suggests that sorafenib
mediates apoptotic cell death in human NSCLC cells through Redd1-induced
inhibition of mTOR and subsequent down-regulation of survivin, events that are
associated with sensitization to TRAIL-induced apoptotic cell death.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21601561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Cell Death Differ. 2011 Dec;18(12):1876-88. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.63. Epub 2011
May 20.

Aberrant, differential and bidirectional regulation of the unfolded protein
response towards cell survival by 3'-deoxyadenosine.

Kitamura M(1), Kato H, Saito Y, Nakajima S, Takahashi S, Johno H, Gu L, Katoh R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Signaling, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Yamanashi, Japan.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is involved in a diverse range of pathologies
triggered by endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Endeavor to seek selective
regulators of the UPR is a promising challenge towards therapeutic intervention
in ER stress-related disorders. In the present report, we describe aberrant,
differential and bidirectional regulation of the UPR by 3'-deoxyadenosine
(cordycepin) towards cell survival. 3'-Deoxyadenosine blocked ER stress-induced
apoptosis via inhibiting the IRE1-JNK pro-apoptotic pathway. 3'-Deoxyadenosine
also inhibited apoptosis through reinforcement of the pro-survival eIF2a
signaling without affecting PERK activity. It was associated with depression of
GADD34 that dephosphorylates eIF2a, and dephosphorylation of eIF2a by salubrinal 
mimicked the anti-apoptotic effect of 3'-deoxyadenosine. Unexpectedly, although
3'-deoxyadenosine caused activation of eIF2a, it inhibited downstream
pro-apoptotic events including induction of ATF4 and expression of CHOP.
Cooperation of adenosine transporter and A3 adenosine receptor, but not A1/A2
receptors, mediated the pluripotent effects of 3'-deoxyadenosine. In mice, ER
stress caused activation of JNK, expression of CHOP and induction of apoptosis in
renal tubules. The apoptosis was significantly attenuated by administration with 
3'-deoxyadenosine, and it was correlated with blunted induction of JNK and CHOP
in the kidney. These results disclosed atypical pro-survival regulation of the
UPR by 3'-deoxyadenosine, which may be advantageous for the treatment of
intractable, ER stress-related disorders.

PMCID: PMC3214911
PMID: 21597460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Phytomedicine. 2011 Sep 15;18(12):1075-85. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2011.03.009.
Epub 2011 May 18.

Molecular evidence of anti-leukemia activity of gypenosides on human myeloid
leukemia HL-60 cells in vitro and in vivo using a HL-60 cells murine xenograft
model.

Lin JJ(1), Hsu HY, Yang JS, Lu KW, Wu RS, Wu KC, Lai TY, Chen PY, Ma CY, Wood WG,
Chung JG.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Chinese Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung
404, Taiwan.

We have shown that gypenosides (Gyp) induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in
many human cancer cell lines. However, there are no reports showing that show Gyp
acts on human leukemia HL-60 cells in vitro and in a murine xenograft model in
vivo. In the present study effects of Gyp on cell morphological changes and
viability, cell cycle arrest and induction of apoptosis in vitro and effects on
Gyp in an in vivo murine xenograft model. Results indicated that Gyp induced
morphological changes, decreased cell viability, induced G0/G1 arrest, DNA
fragmentation and apoptosis (sub-G1 phase) in HL-60 cells. Gyp increased reactive
oxygen species production and Ca(2+) levels but reduced mitochondrial membrane
potential in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Gyp also changed one of the
primary indicators of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress due to the promotion of
ATF6-a and ATF4-a associated with Ca(2+) release. Gyp reduced the ratio of Bcl-2 
to Bax due to an increase in the pro-apoptotic protein Bax and inhibited levels
of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2. Oral consumption of Gyp reduced tumor size
of HL-60 cell xenograft mode mice in vivo. These results provide new information 
on understanding mechanisms by which Gyp induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis 
in vitro and in vivo.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21596541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. RNA Biol. 2011 Jul-Aug;8(4):648-64. doi: 10.4161/rna.8.4.15583. Epub 2011 Jul 1.

Gene expression profiling indicate role of ER stress in miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster 
induced apoptosis in HEK293T cells.

Chhabra R(1), Dubey R, Saini N.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Unit, Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology,
Delhi, India.

Previously, we had reported that overexpression of miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster
induces caspase-dependent and -independent apoptosis via JNK in human embryonic
kidney (HEK293T) cells. Herein, we describe the molecular mechanism(s)
responsible for miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster induced apoptosis. Gene expression
profiling was used to characterize the transcriptional response to
miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster overexpression in HEK293T cells. The microarray analysis
gave 1,025 differentially expressed genes and analysis of the gene expression
data with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software revealed p53 signaling,
oxidative stress response and mitochondrial dysfunction among the top processes
being affected. This data substantiates our previous study where we had reported 
increase of ROS and the release of proapoptotic factors such as cytochrome c (cyt
c) and apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) from the mitochondria to cytosol.
Additionally, components of ER stress-mediated apoptosis pathway i.e., C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP/DDIT3/GADD153) and TRIB3, an Akt inhibitor were found to
be significantly enriched. Also, the enhanced expression of ATF3 and ATF4 was
observed at RNA as well as protein level in miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster
overexpressed HEK293T cells. Induction of BIM appeared to be specific, because ER
stress caused only a minor change in the expression of the related BH3-only
proteins BID or PUMA. The fact that miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster triggered
endoplasmic reticulum stress (ER stress) was further established by the increase 
in cytosolic calcium levels after overexpression of this cluster in HEK293T
cells. These findings were also supported by PANTHER analysis wherein biological 
process categories of apoptosis and stress response were enriched. Taken
together, this work underlines the role of ER stress in miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster 
mediated apoptosis in HEK293T cells. Since the detailed knowledge of this cluster
induced apoptosis has now been elucidated, the in vivo study of this cluster
would help evaluate the prospect of its use as a therapeutic in diseases known to
occur because of deregulation of apoptosis.

PMID: 21593605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Br J Pharmacol. 2012 Apr;165(8):2512-28. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2011.01461.x.

Differential transcriptional profiles mediated by exposure to the cannabinoids
cannabidiol and <U+0394>9-tetrahydrocannabinol in BV-2 microglial cells.

Juknat A(1), Pietr M, Kozela E, Rimmerman N, Levy R, Coppola G, Geschwind D,
Vogel Z.

Author information: 
(1)The Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Center for the Biology of Addictive
Diseases, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Apart from their effects on mood and reward, cannabinoids
exert beneficial actions such as neuroprotection and attenuation of inflammation.
The immunosuppressive activity of cannabinoids has been well established.
However, the underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. We previously showed that
the psychoactive cannabinoid <U+0394>(9) -tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and the
non-psychoactive cannabidiol (CBD) differ in their anti-inflammatory signalling
pathways.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: To characterize the transcriptional effects of CBD and
THC, we treated BV-2 microglial cells with these compounds and performed
comparative microarray analysis using the Illumina MouseRef-8 BeadChip platform. 
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis was performed to identify functional subsets of genes 
and networks regulated by CBD and/or THC.
KEY RESULTS: Overall, CBD altered the expression of many more genes; from the
1298 transcripts found to be differentially regulated by the treatments, 680 gene
probe sets were up-regulated by CBD and 58 by THC, and 524 gene products were
down-regulated by CBD and only 36 by THC. CBD-specific gene expression profile
showed changes associated with oxidative stress and glutathione depletion,
normally occurring under nutrient limiting conditions or proteasome inhibition
and involving the GCN2/eIF2a/p8/ATF4/CHOP-TRIB3 pathway. Furthermore,
CBD-stimulated genes were shown to be controlled by nuclear factors known to be
involved in the regulation of stress response and inflammation, mainly via the
(EpRE/ARE)-Nrf2/ATF4 system and the Nrf2/Hmox1 axis.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: These observations indicated that CBD, but much
less than THC, induced a cellular stress response in microglial cells and
suggested that this effect could underlie its anti-inflammatory activity.
LINKED ARTICLES: This article is part of a themed section on Cannabinoids in
Biology and Medicine. To view the other articles in this section visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/bph.2012.165.issue-8. To view Part I of Cannabinoids in
Biology and Medicine visit http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/bph.2011.163.issue-7.

© 2011 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2011 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3423229
PMID: 21542829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011 Jul;111(1):135-42. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01408.2010. Epub 2011 Apr 28.

Skeletal muscle amino acid transporter expression is increased in young and older
adults following resistance exercise.

Drummond MJ(1), Fry CS, Glynn EL, Timmerman KL, Dickinson JM, Walker DK,
Gundermann DM, Volpi E, Rasmussen BB.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Medical Branch, Department of Nutrition and Metabolism,
Division of Rehabilitation Sciences, Sealy Center on Aging, 301 Univ. Blvd.,
Galveston, TX 77555-1144, USA. mjdrummo@utmb.edu

Amino acid transporters and mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1)
signaling are important contributors to muscle protein anabolism. Aging is
associated with reduced mTORC1 signaling following resistance exercise, but the
role of amino acid transporters is unknown. Young (n = 13; 28 ± 2 yr) and older
(n = 13; 68 ± 2 yr) subjects performed a bout of resistance exercise. Skeletal
muscle biopsies (vastus lateralis) were obtained at basal and 3, 6, and 24 h
postexercise and were analyzed for amino acid transporter mRNA and protein
expression and regulators of amino acid transporter transcription utilizing
real-time PCR and Western blotting. We found that basal amino acid transporter
expression was similar in young and older adults (P > 0.05). Exercise increased
L-type amino acid transporter 1/solute-linked carrier (SLC) 7A5, CD98/SLC3A2,
sodium-coupled neutral amino acid transporter 2/SLC38A2, proton-assisted amino
acid transporter 1/SLC36A1, and cationic amino acid transporter 1/SLC7A1 mRNA
expression in both young and older adults (P < 0.05). L-type amino acid
transporter 1 and CD98 protein increased only in younger adults (P < 0.05).
eukaryotic initiation factor 2 a-subunit (S52) increased similarly in young and
older adults postexercise (P < 0.05). Ribosomal protein S6 (S240/244) and
activating transcription factor 4 nuclear protein expression tended to be higher 
in the young, while nuclear signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(STAT3) (Y705) was higher in the older subjects postexercise (P < 0.05). These
results suggest that the rapid upregulation of amino acid transporter expression 
following resistance exercise may be regulated differently between the age
groups, but involves a combination of mTORC1, activating transcription factor 4, 
eukaryotic initiation factor 2 a-subunit, and STAT3. We propose an increase in
amino acid transporter expression may contribute to enhanced amino acid
sensitivity following exercise in young and older adults. In older adults, the
increased nuclear STAT3 phosphorylation may be indicative of an exercise-induced 
stress response, perhaps to export amino acids from muscle cells.

PMCID: PMC3137547
PMID: 21527663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Cell Death Dis. 2011 Apr 28;2:e149. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2011.31.

Induction of ER stress in response to oxygen-glucose deprivation of cortical
cultures involves the activation of the PERK and IRE-1 pathways and of
caspase-12.

Badiola N(1), Penas C, Miñano-Molina A, Barneda-Zahonero B, Fadó R, Sánchez-Opazo
G, Comella JX, Sabriá J, Zhu C, Blomgren K, Casas C, Rodríguez-Alvarez J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Neurociencies and Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain.

Disturbance of calcium homeostasis and accumulation of misfolded proteins in the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) are considered contributory components of cell death
after ischemia. However, the signal-transducing events that are activated by ER
stress after cerebral ischemia are incompletely understood. In this study, we
show that caspase-12 and the PERK and IRE pathways are activated following
oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) of mixed cortical cultures or neonatal
hypoxia-ischemia (HI). Activation of PERK led to a transient phosphorylation of
eIF2a, an increase in ATF4 levels and the induction of gadd34 (a subunit of an
eIF2a-directed phosphatase). Interestingly, the upregulation of ATF4 did not lead
to an increase in the levels of CHOP. Additionally, IRE1 activation was mediated 
by the increase in the processed form of xbp1, which would be responsible for the
observed expression of edem2 and the increased levels of the chaperones GRP78 and
GRP94. We were also able to detect caspase-12 proteolysis after HI or OGD.
Processing of procaspase-12 was mediated by NMDA receptor and calpain activation.
Moreover, our data suggest that caspase-12 activation is independent of the
unfolded protein response activated by ER stress.

PMCID: PMC3122062
PMID: 21525936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Endocr J. 2011;58(5):409-20. Epub 2011 Apr 14.

Ghrelin suppresses tunicamycin- or thapsigargin-triggered endoplasmic reticulum
stress-mediated apoptosis in primary cultured rat cortical neuronal cells.

Chung H(1), Chung HY, Bae CW, Kim CJ, Park S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Core Research Laboratory, Clinical Research Institute, The
East-West Neo Medical Center, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University,
Gangdong-gu, Seoul, Korea.

Ghrelin functions as a neuroprotective agent and rescues neurons from various
insults. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying ghrelin neuroprotection
remains to be elucidated. An accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) leads to ER stress and then induces ER stress-mediated cell death.
Here, we report that acylated ghrelin inhibited tunicamycin- or
thapsigargin-triggered ER stress-induced apoptotic cell death in primary rat
cortical neurons. An analysis using a specific inhibitor of
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K), LY294002, showed that ghrelin prevented
apoptosis via the activation of PI3K signaling pathway. Ghrelin suppressed
tunicamycin- or thapsigargin-induced upregulation and nuclear translocation of
C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP). Ghrelin also inhibited tunicamycin or
thapsigargin induction of PRK-like ER kinase (PERK), eukaryotic translation
initiation factor-2a (eIF2a) and activating transcription factor (ATF) 4.
Exposure of cells to tunicamycin or thapsigargin resulted in nuclear
translocation of forkhead box protein O1 (Foxo1), which was reduced by
pretreatment with ghrelin. The protective effect of ghrelin was accompanied by an
increased phosphorylation of Akt and glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3ß.
Furthermore, ghrelin phosphorylated and inactivated pro-apoptotic BAD and Foxo1. 
In addition, phospho-Akt was translocated to the nucleus in response to ghrelin
and PI3K inhibition by LY294002 prevented ghrelin-induced effect on phospho-Akt
localization. Our study suggests that suppression of CHOP activation via the
inhibition of PERK/eIF2a/ATF4 pathway and prevention of Foxo1 activation and
nuclear translocation may contribute to ghrelin-mediated neuroprotection during
ER stress responses. Our data also suggest that PI3K/Akt-mediated inactivation of
GSK-3ß, BAD and Foxo1 may be associated with the anti-apoptotic effect of
ghrelin.

PMID: 21490406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2011 Jul;19(7):1366-73. doi: 10.1038/oby.2011.71. Epub
2011 Apr 7.

Infusion of glucose and lipids at physiological rates causes acute endoplasmic
reticulum stress in rat liver.

Boden G(1), Song W, Duan X, Cheung P, Kresge K, Barrero C, Merali S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology/Diabetes/Metabolism and the Clinical Research
Center, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
bodengh@tuhs.temple.edu

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has recently been implicated as a cause for
obesity-related insulin resistance; however, what causes ER stress in obesity has
remained uncertain. Here, we have tested the hypothesis that macronutrients can
cause acute (ER) stress in rat liver. Examined were the effects of intravenously 
infused glucose and/or lipids on proximal ER stress sensor activation (PERK,
eIF2-a, ATF4, Xbox protein 1 (XBP1s)), unfolded protein response (UPR) proteins
(GRP78, calnexin, calreticulin, protein disulphide isomerase (PDI), stress
kinases (JNK, p38 MAPK) and insulin signaling (insulin/receptor substrate (IRS)
1/2 associated phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)) in rat liver. Glucose and/or
lipid infusions, ranging from 23.8 to 69.5 kJ/4 h (equivalent to between ~17% and
~50% of normal daily energy intake), activated the proximal ER stress sensor PERK
and ATF6 increased the protein abundance of calnexin, calreticulin and PDI and
increased two GRP78 isoforms. Glucose and glucose plus lipid infusions induced
comparable degrees of ER stress, but only infusions containing lipid activated
stress kinases (JNK and p38 MAPK) and inhibited insulin signaling (PI3K). In
summary, physiologic amounts of both glucose and lipids acutely increased ER
stress in livers 12-h fasted rats and dependent on the presence of fat, caused
insulin resistance. We conclude that this type of acute ER stress is likely to
occur during normal daily nutrient intake.

PMID: 21475143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Oncogene. 2011 Sep 1;30(35):3792-801. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.102. Epub 2011 Apr 4.

TXNIP potentiates Redd1-induced mTOR suppression through stabilization of Redd1.

Jin HO(1), Seo SK, Kim YS, Woo SH, Lee KH, Yi JY, Lee SJ, Choe TB, Lee JH, An S, 
Hong SI, Park IC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Cancer Research, Korea Institute of Radiological &
Medical Sciences, Seoul. hyeonok@kirams.re.kr

The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a highly conserved serine-threonine
kinase activated in response to growth factors and nutrients. Because of frequent
dysregulation of the mTOR signaling pathway in diverse human cancers, this kinase
is a key therapeutic target. Redd1 is a negative regulator of mTOR, mediating
dissociation of 14-3-3 from tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC)2, which allows
formation of a TSC-TSC2 complex. In the present study, we identify TXNIP that
inhibits mTOR activity by binding to and stabilizing Redd1 protein. Redd1 and
TXNIP expression was induced by a synthetic glucose analog, 2-deoxyglucose
(2-DG). Moreover, Redd1 expression in response to 2-DG was regulated by
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). Overexpression of TXNIP was associated 
with reduced mTOR activity mediated by an increase in Redd1 level, whereas
knockdown of TXNIP using small interfering RNA resulted in recovery of mTOR
activity via downregulation of Redd1 during treatment with 2-DG. Interestingly,
Redd1 was additionally stabilized via interactions with N-terminal-truncated
TXNIP, leading to suppression of mTOR activity. Our results collectively
demonstrate that TXNIP stabilizes Redd1 protein induced by ATF4 in response to
2-DG, resulting in potentiation of mTOR suppression. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first study to identify TXNIP as a novel member of the
mTOR upstream that acts as a negative regulator in response to stress signals.

PMID: 21460850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Blood. 2011 Jun 9;117(23):6297-303. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-332379. Epub 2011 
Mar 29.

Bortezomib induction of C/EBPß mediates Epstein-Barr virus lytic activation in
Burkitt lymphoma.

Shirley CM(1), Chen J, Shamay M, Li H, Zahnow CA, Hayward SD, Ambinder RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is associated with a variety of lymphoid malignancies.
Bortezomib activates EBV lytic gene expression. Bortezomib, a proteasome
inhibitor, leads to increased levels of CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteinß (C/EBPß) 
in a variety of tumor cell lines. C/EBPß activates the promoter of the EBV lytic 
switch gene ZTA. Bortezomib treatment leads to increased binding of C/EBP to
previously recognized binding sites in the ZTA promoter. Knockdown of C/EBPß
inhibits bortezomib activation of EBV lytic gene expression. Bortezomib also
induces the unfolded protein response (UPR), as evidenced by increases in ATF4,
CHOP10, and XBP1s and cleavage of ATF6. Thapsigargin, an inducer of the UPR that 
does not interfere with proteasome function, also induces EBV lytic gene
expression. The effects of thapsigargin on EBV lytic gene expression are also
inhibited by C/EBPß knock-down. Therefore, C/EBPß mediates the activation of EBV 
lytic gene expression associated with bortezomib and another UPR inducer.

PMCID: PMC3122948
PMID: 21447826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Exp Med. 2011 Apr 11;208(4):841-51. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102608. Epub 2011 Mar
28.

Genetic determination of the cellular basis of the sympathetic regulation of bone
mass accrual.

Kajimura D(1), Hinoi E, Ferron M, Kode A, Riley KJ, Zhou B, Guo XE, Karsenty G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA.

The sympathetic nervous system, whose activity is regulated by leptin signaling
in the brain, is a major regulator of bone mass accrual. To determine the
identity of the cell type in which the sympathetic tone signals to inhibit bone
mass accrual, we performed a systematic, cell-specific analysis of the function
of the ß2 adrenergic receptor (Adrß2) and various genes implicated in the pathway
in the mouse. This was followed by leptin intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusion 
and bone histomorphometric analyses of bone parameters. We show that the
sympathetic tone signals in the osteoblasts to inhibit CREB (cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein) phosphorylation and thus decrease osteoblast
proliferation and to promote ATF4 phosphorylation and thus increase RANKL
(receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand) expression, which then stimulates osteoclast
differentiation. Leptin ICV infusion in various mouse models established that
leptin-dependent inhibition of bone mass accrual relies on both transcriptional
events taking place in osteoblasts. Thus, this study formally identifies the
osteoblast as the major cell type in which the molecular events triggered by the 
sympathetic regulation of bone mass accrual take place. As such, it suggests that
inhibiting sympathetic signaling could be beneficial in the treatment of low bone
mass conditions.

PMCID: PMC3135354
PMID: 21444660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Cell Death Differ. 2011 Oct;18(10):1617-27. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.24. Epub 2011
Mar 25.

Autophagy, and BiP level decrease are early key events in retrograde degeneration
of motoneurons.

Penas C(1), Font-Nieves M, Forés J, Petegnief V, Planas A, Navarro X, Casas C.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Neuroplasticity and Regeneration, Institute of Neurosciences,
Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades
Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Spain.

Disconnection of the axon from the soma of spinal motoneurons (MNs) leads either 
to a retrograde degenerative process or to a regenerative reaction, depending on 
the severity and the proximity to the soma of the axonal lesion. The endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) is a continuous membranous network that extends from the nucleus
to the entire cytoplasm of the neuronal soma, axon and dendrites. We investigated
whether axonal injury is sensed by the ER and triggers the activation of
protective mechanisms, such as the unfolded protein response (UPR) and autophagy.
We found early (at 3 days) accumulation of beclin1, LC3II and Lamp-1, hallmarks
of autophagy, in both degenerating MNs after spinal root avulsion and in
non-degenerating MNs after distal nerve section, although Lamp-1 disappeared by 5
days only in the former. In contrast, only degenerating MNs presented early
activation of IRE1a, revealed by an increase of the spliced isoform of Xbp1 and
accumulation of ATF4 in their nucleus, two branches of the UPR, and late BiP
downregulation in association with cytoskeletal and organelle disorganization. We
conclude that BiP decrease is a signature of the degenerating process, as its
overexpression led to an increase in MN survival after root avulsion. Besides,
Bcl2 is strongly implicated in the survival pathway activated by BiP
overexpression.

PMCID: PMC3172115
PMID: 21436843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 8;6(2):e17344. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017344.

New modularity of DAP-kinases: alternative splicing of the DRP-1 gene produces a 
ZIPk-like isoform.

Shoval Y(1), Berissi H, Kimchi A, Pietrokovski S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

DRP-1 and ZIPk are two members of the Death Associated Protein Ser/Thr Kinase
(DAP-kinase) family, which function in different settings of cell death including
autophagy. DAP kinases are very similar in their catalytic domains but differ
substantially in their extra-catalytic domains. This difference is crucial for
the significantly different modes of regulation and function among DAP kinases.
Here we report the identification of a novel alternatively spliced kinase isoform
of the DRP-1 gene, termed DRP-1ß. The alternative splicing event replaces the
whole extra catalytic domain of DRP-1 with a single coding exon that is closely
related to the sequence of the extra catalytic domain of ZIPk. As a consequence, 
DRP-1ß lacks the calmodulin regulatory domain of DRP-1, and instead contains a
leucine zipper-like motif similar to the protein binding region of ZIPk. Several 
functional assays proved that this new isoform retained the biochemical and
cellular properties that are common to DRP-1 and ZIPk, including myosin light
chain phosphorylation, and activation of membrane blebbing and autophagy. In
addition, DRP-1ß also acquired binding to the ATF4 transcription factor, a
feature characteristic of ZIPk but not DRP-1. Thus, a splicing event of the DRP-1
produces a ZIPk like isoform. DRP-1ß is highly conserved in evolution, present in
all known vertebrate DRP-1 loci. We detected the corresponding mRNA and protein
in embryonic mouse brains and in human embryonic stem cells thus confirming the
in vivo utilization of this isoform. The discovery of module conservation within 
the DAPk family members illustrates a parsimonious way to increase the functional
complexity within protein families. It also provides crucial data for modeling
the expansion and evolution of DAP kinase proteins within vertebrates, suggesting
that DRP-1 and ZIPk most likely evolved from their ancient ancestor gene DAPk by 
two gene duplication events that occurred close to the emergence of vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC3050894
PMID: 21408167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Jul 1;317(11):1621-8. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.02.012. Epub
2011 Feb 26.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 regulates endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-induced
CHOP expression in neuronal cells.

Meares GP(1), Mines MA, Beurel E, Eom TY, Song L, Zmijewska AA, Jope RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurobiology, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, AL 35294-0017, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, often resulting from cellular accumulation of 
misfolded proteins, occurs in many neurodegenerative disorders, in part because
of the relatively long lifetime of neurons. Excessive accumulation of misfolded
proteins activates the unfolded protein response (UPR) that dampens protein
synthesis and promotes removal of misfolded proteins to support survival of
ER-stressed cells. However, the UPR also initiates apoptotic signaling to kill
cells if recovery is not achieved. Thus, there is much interest in identifying
determinants of the life-death switch and interventions that promote recovery and
survival. One intervention that has consistently been shown to protect cells from
ER stress-induced apoptosis is application of inhibitors of glycogen synthase
kinase-3 (GSK3). Therefore, we examined where in the UPR pathway GSK3 inhibitors 
intercede to impede signaling towards apoptosis. Apoptosis following UPR
activation can be mediated by activation of two transcription factors, ATF4 and
ATF6, that activate expression of the death-inducing transcription factor C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP/GADD153) following ER stress. We found that ER stress
activated ATF6 and ATF4, but these responses were not inhibited by pretreatment
with GSK3 inhibitors. However, inhibition of GSK3 effectively reduced the
expression of CHOP, and this was apparent in several types of neural-related
cells and was evident after application of several structurally diverse GSK3
inhibitors. Therefore, reduction of CHOP activation provides one mechanism by
which inhibitors of GSK3 are capable of shifting cell fate towards survival
instead of apoptosis following ER stress.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3103628
PMID: 21356208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Cancer Sci. 2011 Jun;102(6):1115-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.01914.x. Epub 
2011 Mar 18.

Tribbles in disease: Signaling pathways important for cellular function and
neoplastic transformation.

Yokoyama T(1), Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.

The tribbles family of genes encodes pseudokinase proteins that are highly
conserved in evolution. Instead of direct phosphorylation of target proteins,
tribbles act as adaptors in signaling pathways for important cellular processes. 
These include mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MAPKK),
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP), activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) 
and C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP). Trib1 and Trib2 have been identified as
myeloid oncogenes, and both may be involved in human leukemia. Tribbles proteins 
are also involved in a series of non-neoplastic disorders including metabolic and
neurological diseases. The RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway
molecules (in particular MAPK/ERK kinase 1 (MEK1) and C/EBP transcription
factors) include tribbles-binding proteins that are involved in leukemogenesis,
and the role of Trib1 as a linker between MAPK signaling and C/EBP degradation is
proposed. Although the molecular function of tribbles is still under
investigation, the research on tribbles in cellular processes, homeostasis of
organisms and human diseases will provide valuable information for therapy of
cancer as well as non-neoplastic disorders.

© 2011 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 21338441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Methods Enzymol. 2011;491:261-92. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385928-0.00015-8.

Measuring signaling by the unfolded protein response.

Cox DJ(1), Strudwick N, Ali AA, Paton AW, Paton JC, Schröder M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Durham University, Durham,
United Kingdom.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is activated by accumulation of unfolded
proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The unfolded protein response is
associated with many diseases, including cancer, metabolic diseases such as type 
II diabetes and fatty liver diseases, and neurodegenerative diseases, for
example, Alzheimer's disease. The UPR is also activated by numerous toxic
chemicals and modulates drug action. Therefore, the UPR becomes increasingly
important in toxicological and pharmacological research. In mammals, the UPR is
transduced through three parallel signaling pathways originating at the
ER-resident transmembrane protein kinase-endoribonucleases (RNase) IRE1, the
protein kinase PERK, and a family of type II transmembrane transcription factors,
whose most prominent member is ATF6a. We discuss methods to experimentally
activate the UPR in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and in cultured mammalian 
cells. We summarize methods to monitor activation of the three arms of the UPR,
while providing detailed protocols for select, reliable assays. To monitor
activation of the IRE1 branch, a Northern blotting protocol to monitor splicing
of HAC1 mRNA in yeast and a reverse transcriptase-PCR assay for processing of the
IRE1 RNase substrate XBP1 in mammalian cells are presented. Activation of the
IRE1 kinase activity can be assayed by immunoblotting for IRE1
autophosphorylation. Activation of the PERK branch is monitored via
phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor eIF2a, induction of CHOP at 
the mRNA and protein level, and induction of ATF4 at the protein level.
Activation of ATF6 is assayed in Western blots through the appearance of its
processed 50 kDa soluble cytosolic fragment. We summarize reverse
transcriptase-PCR protocols to measure activation of target genes selectively
induced by the three branches of the UPR and histological assays for UPR
activation in tissue sections. This repertoire of methods will enable the
newcomer to the UPR field to comprehensively assess the activation status of the 
UPR.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21329805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 1;286(13):10939-49. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.216093. Epub 2011
Feb 1.

Phosphorylation of eIF2 facilitates ribosomal bypass of an inhibitory upstream
ORF to enhance CHOP translation.

Palam LR(1), Baird TD, Wek RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

In response to different environmental stresses, phosphorylation of eukaryotic
initiation factor-2 (eIF2) rapidly reduces protein synthesis, which lowers energy
expenditure and facilitates reprogramming of gene expression to remediate stress 
damage. Central to the changes in gene expression, eIF2 phosphorylation also
enhances translation of ATF4, a transcriptional activator of genes subject to the
integrated stress response (ISR). The ISR increases the expression of genes
important for alleviating stress or alternatively triggering apoptosis. One ISR
target gene encodes the transcriptional regulator CHOP whose accumulation is
critical for stress-induced apoptosis. In this study, we show that eIF2
phosphorylation induces preferential translation of CHOP by a mechanism involving
a single upstream ORF (uORF) located in the 5'-leader of the CHOP mRNA. In the
absence of stress and low eIF2 phosphorylation, translation of the uORF serves as
a barrier that prevents translation of the downstream CHOP coding region.
Enhanced eIF2 phosphorylation during stress facilitates ribosome bypass of the
uORF due to its poor start site context, and instead it allows scanning ribosomes
to translate CHOP. This new mechanism of translational control explains how
expression of CHOP and the fate of cells are tightly linked to the levels of
phosphorylated eIF2 and stress damage.

PMCID: PMC3064149
PMID: 21285359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Liver Transpl. 2011 Feb;17(2):189-200. doi: 10.1002/lt.22220.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress is a mediator of posttransplant injury in severely
steatotic liver allografts.

Anderson CD(1), Upadhya G, Conzen KD, Jia J, Brunt EM, Tiriveedhi V, Xie Y,
Ramachandran S, Mohanakumar T, Davidson NO, Chapman WC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, Washington University, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.
andersonc@wudosis.wustl.edu

Hepatic steatosis continues to present a major challenge in liver
transplantation. These organs have been shown to have increased susceptibility to
cold ischemia/reperfusion (CIR) injury in comparison with otherwise comparable
lean livers; the mechanisms governing this increased susceptibility to CIR injury
are not fully understood. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is an important link 
between hepatic steatosis, insulin resistance, and metabolic syndrome. In this
study, we investigated ER stress signaling and blockade in the mediation of CIR
injury in severely steatotic rodent allografts. Steatotic allografts from
genetically leptin-resistant rodents had increased ER stress responses and
increased markers of hepatocellular injury after liver transplantation into
strain-matched lean recipients. ER stress response components were reduced by the
chemical chaperone taurine-conjugated ursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA), and this
resulted in an improvement in the allograft injury. TUDCA treatment decreased
nuclear factor kappa B activation and the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin-6
and interleukin-1ß. However, the predominant response was decreased expression of
the ER stress cell death mediator [CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous
protein (CHOP)]. Furthermore, activation of inflammation-associated caspase-11
was decreased, and this linked ER stress/CHOP to proinflammatory cytokine
production after steatotic liver transplantation. These data confirm ER stress in
steatotic allografts and implicate this as a mediating mechanism of inflammation 
and hepatocyte death in the steatotic liver allograft.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3056557
PMID: 21280192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Cell Tissue Res. 2011 Mar;343(3):545-58. doi: 10.1007/s00441-010-1120-3. Epub
2011 Jan 27.

Development and characterization of a mouse floxed Bmp2 osteoblast cell line that
retains osteoblast genotype and phenotype.

Wu LA(1), Feng J, Wang L, Mu YD, Baker A, Donly KJ, Harris SE, MacDougall M, Chen
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Dental School, The University of Texas
Health Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX
78229-3900, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein 2 (Bmp2) is essential for osteoblast differentiation
and osteogenesis. Generation of floxed Bmp2 osteoblast cell lines is a valuable
tool for studying the effects of Bmp2 on osteoblast differentiation and its
signaling pathways during skeletal metabolism. Due to relatively limited sources 
of primary osteoblasts, we have developed cell lines that serve as good surrogate
models for the study of osteoblast cell differentiation and bone mineralization. 
In this study, we established and characterized immortalized mouse floxed Bmp2
osteoblast cell lines. Primary mouse floxed Bmp2 osteoblasts were transfected
with pSV3-neo and clonally selected. These transfected cells were verified by PCR
and immunohistochemistry. To determine the genotype and phenotype of the
immortalized cells, cell morphology, proliferation, differentiation and
mineralization were analyzed. Also, expression of osteoblast-related gene markers
including Runx2, Osx, ATF4, Dlx3, bone sialoprotein, dentin matrix protein 1,
osteonectin, osteocalcin and osteopontin were examined by quantitative RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry. These results showed that immortalized floxed Bmp2
osteoblasts had a higher proliferation rate but preserved their genotypic and
phenotypic characteristics similar to the primary cells. Thus, we, for the first 
time, describe the development of immortalized mouse floxed Bmp2 osteoblast cell 
lines and present a useful model to study osteoblast biology mediated by BMP2 and
its downstream signaling transduction pathways.

PMCID: PMC3050048
PMID: 21271257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Feb;41(2):491-502. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040677. Epub 2010 Dec 
29.

Protein synthesis in plasma cells is regulated by crosstalk between endoplasmic
reticulum stress and mTOR signaling.

Goldfinger M(1), Shmuel M, Benhamron S, Tirosh B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Drug Research, The School of Pharmacy, The Hebrew University,
Jerusalem, Israel.

Plasma cells (PCs) secrete copious levels of immunoglobulins. To achieve this,
their endoplasmic reticulum (ER) undergoes expansion in a process that requires
continuous ER stress and activation of the unfolded protein response. It is
important that protein synthesis, the driver of ER stress, is regulated in a
manner that does not induce apoptosis. We followed protein synthesis in murine
splenic B cells activated in vitro with LPS. Total protein synthesis levels
increased and then steeply decreased when the cells acquired a secretory
phenotype. We explored the involvement of two mechanisms in controlling protein
synthesis levels, namely ER stress-mediated phosphorylation of eukaryote
initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) and the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
pathway, which attenuate or activate mRNA translation, respectively. We show that
induction of ER stress in activated B cells counter-intuitively led to
dephosphorylation of eIF2a. Despite the reduction in phosphorylated eIF2a,
expression of activating transcription factor 4, an effector of hyper eIF2a
phosphorylation, was induced. In addition, ER stress attenuated the mTOR pathway,
which ultimately reduced protein synthesis. Finally, B cells engineered to
overactivate the mTOR pathway exhibited higher apoptosis in the course of LPS
stimulation. We conclude that protein synthesis in PCs is controlled by an ER
stress-mediated mTOR regulation, which is needed for optimal cell viability.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21268018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Methods Enzymol. 2011;490:333-56. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385114-7.00019-2.

Methods for analyzing eIF2 kinases and translational control in the unfolded
protein response.

Teske BF(1), Baird TD, Wek RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress induces a program of translational and
transcriptional regulation, designated the unfolded protein response (UPR), that 
collectively remedies stress damage and restores ER homeostasis. The protein
kinase PERK facilitates the translational control arm of the UPR by
phosphorylation of eIF2, a translation initiation factor that combines with GTP
to escort initiator Met-tRNA(i)(Met) to the ribosomal machinery during the
initiation of protein synthesis. Phosphorylation of the alpha subunit of eIF2 on 
serine-51 inhibits global translation initiation, which reduces the influx of
nascent polypeptides into the overloaded ER. eIF2 phosphorylation also
facilitates the preferential translation of stress-related mRNAs, such as ATF4
which in turn activates the transcription of UPR genes. In this chapter, we
present experimental strategies and methods for establishing and characterizing
global and gene-specific translation control induced by eIF2 phosphorylation
(eIF2a~P) during ER stress. These methods include assays for the detection of
eIF2a~P and its target genes. We also discuss strategies to address whether a
given ER stress condition triggers eIF2a~P through PERK, as opposed to other
stress conditions activating alternative members of the eIF2 kinase family.
Additionally, experimental descriptions are provided for detecting and
quantifying a repression in global translation initiation, and identifying
stress-induced preferential translation, such as that described for ATF4.
Together, these experimental descriptions will provide a useful molecular
"toolkit" to study each feature of the translational control processes invoked
during ER stress.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21266259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Methods Enzymol. 2011;489:147-64. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385116-1.00009-1.

Measuring the impact of cigarette smoke on the UPR.

Zhao H(1), Yang J, Shan L, Jorgensen ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York, USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a set of pathways activated by the
accumulation of improperly folded proteins. It can be triggered by a broad range 
of stressful conditions which disrupt successful maturation of proteins in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by interfering with proper folding, assembly, and
posttranslational modification. Recent studies have demonstrated the induction of
ER stress and activation of elements of the UPR in human lung cells exposed to
diesel exhaust particles, airborne particulate matter, and tobacco smoke. ER
stress has been found to play a role in a variety of lung maladies, including
cancer, infections, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Lung cancer is one of the few diseases where the etiological
agent, cigarette smoke (CS), is well known. It is, therefore, desirable to
measure dysregulation of the UPR pathway in samples representing both the
earliest events (cells exposed to CS in vitro) and in clinical samples from
healthy smokers and individuals with smoking-related lung diseases. We hereby
provide a detailed description of methods for assessing the degree and timing of 
cellular response to CS with respect to the three major UPR pathways.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21266229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Biochem J. 2011 Apr 15;435(2):431-9. doi: 10.1042/BJ20102071.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress induced by hepatitis B virus X protein enhances
cyclo-oxygenase 2 expression via activating transcription factor 4.

Cho HK(1), Cheong KJ, Kim HY, Cheong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735,
South Korea.

Chronic hepatitis B is a disease of the liver that can progress to cirrhosis and 
liver cancer. The HBx (hepatitis B virus X) protein of hepatitis B virus is a
multifunctional regulator that induces ER (endoplasmic reticulum) stress by
previously unknown mechanisms. ER stress plays a critical role in inflammatory
induction and COX2 (cyclo-oxygenase 2) is an important mediator of this
inflammation. In the present study, we demonstrate the molecular mechanisms of
HBx on induction of ER stress and COX2 expression. In addition, HBx reduced
expression of enzymes which are involved in mitochondrial ß-oxidation of fatty
acids and the mitochondrial inner membrane potential. The reduction in
intracellular ATP levels by HBx induced the unfolded protein response and COX2
expression through the eIF2a (eukaryotic initiation factor 2a)/ATF4 (activating
transcription factor 4) pathway. We confirmed that ATF4 binding to the COX2
promoter plays a critical role in HBx-mediated COX2 induction. The results of the
present study suggest that HBV infection contributes to induction of hepatic
inflammation through dysfunction of cellular organelles including the ER and
mitochondria.

PMID: 21244365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 21;5(12):e15716. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015716.

Amino acid availability controls TRB3 transcription in liver through the
GCN2/eIF2a/ATF4 pathway.

Carraro V(1), Maurin AC, Lambert-Langlais S, Averous J, Chaveroux C, Parry L,
Jousse C, Ord D, Ord T, Fafournoux P, Bruhat A.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR 1019 Nutrition Humaine, Saint Genès Champanelle, France.

In mammals, plasma amino acid concentrations are markedly affected by dietary or 
pathological conditions. It has been well established that amino acids are
involved in the control of gene expression. Up to now, all the information
concerning the molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of gene
transcription by amino acid availability has been obtained in cultured cell
lines. The present study aims to investigate the mechanisms involved in
transcriptional activation of the TRB3 gene following amino acid limitation in
mice liver. The results show that TRB3 is up-regulated in the liver of mice fed a
leucine-deficient diet and that this induction is quickly reversible. Using
transient transfection and chromatin immunoprecipitation approaches in hepatoma
cells, we report the characterization of a functional Amino Acid Response Element
(AARE) in the TRB3 promoter and the binding of ATF4, ATF2 and C/EBPß to this AARE
sequence. We also provide evidence that only the binding of ATF4 to the AARE
plays a crucial role in the amino acid-regulated transcription of TRB3. In mouse 
liver, we demonstrate that the GCN2/eIF2a/ATF4 pathway is essential for the
induction of the TRB3 gene transcription in response to a leucine-deficient diet.
Therefore, this work establishes for the first time that the molecular mechanisms
involved in the regulation of gene transcription by amino acid availability are
functional in mouse liver.

PMCID: PMC3006201
PMID: 21203563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Neurochem. 2011 Apr;117(1):38-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07162.x. Epub
2011 Feb 11.

Gadolinium-induced oxidative stress triggers endoplasmic reticulum stress in rat 
cortical neurons.

Xia Q(1), Feng X, Huang H, Du L, Yang X, Wang K.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs and Department of
Chemical Biology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University Health
Science Center, Beijing, China. xqing@bjmu.edu.cn

Introduction of Gadolinium (Gd) to the nervous system is linked to the
development of neurotoxicity involving both oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress. Gd levels (0.2-20 µm) in the form of gadolinium trichloride
(GdCl(3)) cause neurotoxicity in vitro. We investigated the signaling pathways in
primary cultured rat cortical neurons and tested whether GdCl(3) induced
oxidative and ER stress. Results showed that Gd-induced neural cell death
followed a rapid accumulation of intracellular reactive oxygen species. In
addition, Gd exposure resulted in spliced X-box binding protein 1 mRNA and
increased expression of binding immunoglobulin protein, thus activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), ATF6, and C/EBP homologous protein mRNA.
Up-regulated expression of binding immunoglobulin protein is a hallmark of ER
stress and C/EBP homologous protein is an ER stress-related pro-apoptotic
transcription factor. Activation of ER stress downstream substrates,
inositol-requiring kinase 1 and ATF6, was also observed in Gd-treated cells. The 
neurotoxic effects of Gd were blocked by the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine.
Results demonstrated that Gd-induced cytotoxicity in neurons occurs via oxidative
injury and ER stress-related signal transduction, thus offering new insight into 
the neurotoxicology of gadolinium.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 21198628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Front Biosci (Schol Ed). 2011 Jan 1;3:126-35.

Transcriptional regulation of bone formation.

Baek WY(1), Kim JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Cell and Matrix Research Institute, BK21
Medical Education Program for Human Resources, Kyungpook National University
School of Medicine, Daegu 700-422, Korea.

Bone formation in vertebrates depends on the proliferation and differentiation of
chondrocytes and osteoblasts, which are derived from a mesenchymal precursor
cells and are required for skeletal development. This process relies on many
transcription factor genes that have functions in bone cell proliferation and
differentiation. Over the years, various transcription factors that play
essential roles for skeletal formation have been identified in in vivo and/or in 
vitro molecular and genetic studies. In regulation of bone formation, signaling
pathways with these factors have also been established. Major transcription
factors including Sox9, Runx2, and Osterix, which are active in chondrocytes or
osteoblasts or even in both cells, are indispensable for chondrocyte and/or
osteoblast differentiation. Here, the transcriptional regulation of these genes
for bone formation will be reviewed on the basis of in vivo mouse models.

PMID: 21196363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Neurosci. 2010 Dec 15;30(50):16938-48. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1598-10.2010.

Neuronal apoptosis induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress is regulated by
ATF4-CHOP-mediated induction of the Bcl-2 homology 3-only member PUMA.

Galehdar Z(1), Swan P, Fuerth B, Callaghan SM, Park DS, Cregan SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

An increasing body of evidence points to a key role of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress in acute and chronic neurodegenerative conditions. Extensive ER stress can
trigger neuronal apoptosis, but the signaling pathways that regulate this cell
death remain unclear. In the present study, we demonstrate that PUMA, a Bcl-2
homology 3 (BH3)-only member of the Bcl-2 family, is transcriptionally activated 
in cortical neurons by ER stress and is essential for ER-stress-induced cell
death. PUMA is known to be a key transcriptional target of p53, but we have found
that ER stress triggers PUMA induction and cell death through a p53-independent
mechanism mediated by the ER-stress-inducible transcription factor ATF4
(activating transcription factor 4). Specifically, we demonstrate that ectopic
expression of ATF4 sensitizes mouse cortical neurons to ER-stress-induced
apoptosis and that ATF4-deficient neurons exhibit markedly reduced levels of PUMA
expression and cell death. However, chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments
suggest that ATF4 does not directly regulate the PUMA promoter. Rather, we found 
that ATF4 induces expression of the transcription factor CHOP (C/EBP homologous
protein) and that CHOP in turn activates PUMA induction. Specifically, we
demonstrate that CHOP binds to the PUMA promoter during ER stress and that CHOP
knockdown attenuates PUMA induction and neuronal apoptosis. In summary, we have
identified a key signaling pathway in ER-stress-induced neuronal death involving 
ATF4-CHOP-mediated transactivation of the proapoptotic Bcl-2 family member PUMA. 
We propose that this pathway may be an important therapeutic target relevant to a
number of neurodegenerative conditions.

PMID: 21159964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 15;186(2):1001-10. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002240. Epub 2010
Dec 8.

Negative regulation of IRF7 activation by activating transcription factor 4
suggests a cross-regulation between the IFN responses and the cellular integrated
stress responses.

Liang Q(1), Deng H, Sun CW, Townes TM, Zhu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL
32306, USA.

Cells react to viral infection by exhibiting IFN-based innate immune responses
and integrated stress responses, but little is known about the interrelationships
between the two. In this study, we report a linkage between these two
host-protective cellular mechanisms. We found that IFN regulatory factor (IRF)7, 
the master regulator of type I IFN gene expression, interacts with activating
transcription factor (ATF)4, a key component of the integrated stress responses
whose translation is induced by viral infection and various stresses. We have
demonstrated that IRF7 upregulates ATF4 activity and expression, whereas ATF4 in 
return inhibits IRF7 activation, suggesting a cross-regulation between the IFN
response and the cellular integrated stress response that controls host innate
immune defense against viral infection.

PMCID: PMC3057134
PMID: 21148039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Hepatol. 2011 Apr;54(4):729-37. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.07.023. Epub 2010 Sep 
29.

ATF4 and the integrated stress response are induced by ethanol and cytochrome
P450 2E1 in human hepatocytes.

Magne L(1), Blanc E, Legrand B, Lucas D, Barouki R, Rouach H, Garlatti M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR-S 747, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Molecular mechanisms underlying alcoholic liver disease (ALD) 
are still not fully understood. Activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4) is the
master coordinator of the integrated stress response (ISR), an adaptive pathway
triggered by multiple stressors. which can promote cell death and induce
metabolic dysregulation if the stress is intense or prolonged. The aim of this
study was to assess the effect of alcohol on the ISR signaling pathway in human
liver cells and to define the role of cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) in this
response.
METHODS: Primary cultured human hepatocytes and human HepG2 cells over-expressing
CYP2E1 by adenoviral infection were exposed to ethanol (25-100mM) for 8-48h.
RESULTS: Ethanol treatment of both liver cells up-regulated ATF4 as well as the
pro-survival and the pro-apoptotic transcriptional program of the ISR. Indeed, in
CYP2E1-expressing HepG2 cells exposed to ethanol, the expression of ISR target
genes (HMOX-1, GCLC, AsnS, IGFBP-1, GADD34,CHOP, ATF3, CHAC1) was induced.
Up-regulation of ATF4 and the ISR transcriptional program was decreased by
addition of the anti-oxidant glutathione. Several mechanisms mediated ATF4
protein induction, including, at early times, the phosphorylation of eIF2a which 
controls ATF4 translation, and, at later times, increased mRNA level and
increased stability of the protein. A decrease in cell survival was also
observed.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that both CYP2E1 and ethanol induce ATF4 and
the integrated stress response, a pathway which coordinates signals from multiple
stresses, as well as established risk factors for ALD, and can display
detrimental cellular effects upon prolonged activation.

Copyright © 2010 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21146245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Hepatol. 2011 Apr;54(4):795-809. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.11.005. Epub 2010 Nov
13.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress in liver disease.

Malhi H(1), Kaufman RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is activated upon the accumulation of
misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that are sensed by the
binding immunoglobulin protein (BiP)/glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78). The
accumulation of unfolded proteins sequesters BiP so it dissociates from three
ER-transmembrane transducers leading to their activation. These transducers are
inositol requiring (IRE) 1a, PKR-like ER kinase (PERK), and activating
transcription factor (ATF) 6a. PERK phosphorylates eukaryotic initiation factor 2
alpha (eIF2a) resulting in global mRNA translation attenuation, and concurrently 
selectively increases the translation of several mRNAs, including the
transcription factor ATF4, and its downstream target CHOP. IRE1a has kinase and
endoribonuclease (RNase) activities. IRE1a autophosphorylation activates the
RNase activity to splice XBP1 mRNA, to produce the active transcription factor
sXBP1. IRE1a activation also recruits and activates the stress kinase JNK. ATF6a 
transits to the Golgi compartment where it is cleaved by intramembrane
proteolysis to generate a soluble active transcription factor. These UPR pathways
act in concert to increase ER content, expand the ER protein folding capacity,
degrade misfolded proteins, and reduce the load of new proteins entering the ER. 
All of these are geared toward adaptation to resolve the protein folding defect. 
Faced with persistent ER stress, adaptation starts to fail and apoptosis occurs, 
possibly mediated through calcium perturbations, reactive oxygen species, and the
proapoptotic transcription factor CHOP. The UPR is activated in several liver
diseases; including obesity associated fatty liver disease, viral hepatitis, and 
alcohol-induced liver injury, all of which are associated with steatosis, raising
the possibility that ER stress-dependent alteration in lipid homeostasis is the
mechanism that underlies the steatosis. Hepatocyte apoptosis is a pathogenic
event in several liver diseases, and may be linked to unresolved ER stress. If
this is true, restoration of ER homeostasis prior to ER stress-induced cell death
may provide a therapeutic rationale in these diseases. Herein we discuss each
branch of the UPR and how they may impact hepatocyte function in different
pathologic states.

Copyright © 2010 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3375108
PMID: 21145844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 11;286(6):4809-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.152900. Epub 2010 
Dec 6.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress response mediated by the PERK-eIF2(alpha)-ATF4
pathway is involved in osteoblast differentiation induced by BMP2.

Saito A(1), Ochiai K, Kondo S, Tsumagari K, Murakami T, Cavener DR, Imaizumi K.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry, Division of Genome Radiobiology and
Medical Science, Graduate School of Biomedical Science, University of Hiroshima, 
Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

To avoid excess accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER), eukaryotic cells have signaling pathways from the ER to the cytosol or
nucleus. These processes are collectively termed the ER stress response. Double
stranded RNA activated protein kinase (PKR)-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase
(PERK) is a major transducer of the ER stress response and directly
phosphorylates eIF2a, resulting in translational attenuation. Phosphorylated
eIF2a specifically promotes the translation of the transcription factor ATF4.
ATF4 plays important roles in osteoblast differentiation and bone formation.
Perk(-/-) mice are reported to exhibit severe osteopenia, and the phenotypes
observed in bone tissues are very similar to those of Atf4(-/-) mice. However,
the involvement of the PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 signaling pathway in osteogenesis is
unclear. Phosphorylated eIF2a and ATF4 protein levels were attenuated in
Perk(-/-) calvariae, and the gene expression levels of osteocalcin (Ocn) and bone
sialoprotein (Bsp), which are targets for ATF4, were also down-regulated.
Treatment of wild-type primary osteoblasts with BMP2, which is required for
osteoblast differentiation, induced ER stress, leading to an increase in ATF4
protein expression levels. In contrast, the level of ATF4 in Perk(-/-)
osteoblasts was severely diminished. The results indicate that PERK signaling is 
required for ATF4 activation during osteoblast differentiation. Perk(-/-)
osteoblasts exhibited decreased alkaline phosphatase activities and delayed
mineralized nodule formation relative to wild-type cultures. These abnormalities 
were almost completely restored by the introduction of ATF4 into Perk(-/-)
osteoblasts. Taken together, ER stress occurs during osteoblast differentiation
and activates the PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 signaling pathway followed by the promotion of 
gene expression essential for osteogenesis, such as Ocn and Bsp.

PMCID: PMC3039352
PMID: 21135100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Cell Death Differ. 2011 May;18(5):769-82. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2010.142. Epub 2010
Nov 26.

Parkin is transcriptionally regulated by ATF4: evidence for an interconnection
between mitochondrial stress and ER stress.

Bouman L(1), Schlierf A, Lutz AK, Shan J, Deinlein A, Kast J, Galehdar Z,
Palmisano V, Patenge N, Berg D, Gasser T, Augustin R, Trümbach D, Irrcher I, Park
DS, Wurst W, Kilberg MS, Tatzelt J, Winklhofer KF.

Author information: 
(1)Adolf Butenandt Institute, Neurobiochemistry, Ludwig Maximilians University,
Schillerstrasse 44, Munich, Germany.

Loss of parkin function is responsible for the majority of autosomal recessive
parkinsonism. Here, we show that parkin is not only a stress-protective, but also
a stress-inducible protein. Both mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress induce an increase in parkin-specific mRNA and protein levels. The
stress-induced upregulation of parkin is mediated by ATF4, a transcription factor
of the unfolded protein response (UPR) that binds to a specific CREB/ATF site
within the parkin promoter. Interestingly, c-Jun can bind to the same site, but
acts as a transcriptional repressor of parkin gene expression. We also present
evidence that mitochondrial damage can induce ER stress, leading to the
activation of the UPR, and thereby to an upregulation of parkin expression. Vice 
versa, ER stress results in mitochondrial damage, which can be prevented by
parkin. Notably, the activity of parkin to protect cells from stress-induced cell
death is independent of the proteasome, indicating that proteasomal degradation
of parkin substrates cannot explain the cytoprotective activity of parkin. Our
study supports the notion that parkin has a role in the interorganellar crosstalk
between the ER and mitochondria to promote cell survival under stress, suggesting
that both ER and mitochondrial stress can contribute to the pathogenesis of
Parkinson's disease.

PMCID: PMC3131924
PMID: 21113145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Int J Oncol. 2011 Jan;38(1):179-88.

HARP<U+0394>111-136 enhances radiation-induced apoptosis of U87MG glioblastoma by
induction of the proapoptotic protein CHOP.

Karaky R(1), Gobbo E, Opolon P, Delbé J, Courty J, Griscelli F, Perricaudet M,
Martel-Renoir D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UMR 8121, Vectorologie et Transfert de Gènes, Institut Gustave Roussy,
39 rue Camille Desmoulins, Villejuif, France.

We previously demonstrated, using the glioblastoma cell line U87MG as an
experimental model, that the adenoviral mediated overexpression of the truncated 
protein HARP<U+0394>111-136 inhibits the proliferation of these cells in vitro as well
as tumor growth and angiogenesis in vivo. This study focused on identifying the
underlying mechanisms for the observed antitumoral effect. The present study
demonstrated that HARP<U+0394>111-136 induced the ATF4/ATF3/CHOP cascade resulting in a 
strong expression of the proapoptotic protein CHOP, leading to tumor cell
apoptosis as demonstrated by PARP cleavage and FACS analysis. siRNA-mediated CHOP
gene silencing abolished Ad-HARP<U+0394>111-136 induced apoptosis. Moreover,
Ad-HARP<U+0394>111-136 increased the expression of the death receptor DR5 and enhanced
U87MG cells sensitivity in vitro to TRAIL a DR5 ligand with subsequent activation
of caspase 8. Infection of U87MG cells with Ad-HARP<U+0394>111-136 also enhanced
radiation-induced apoptosis. In vivo, the combination of Ad-HARP<U+0394>111-136 and
radiation therapy resulted in a striking inhibition (92%) of the growth of U87MG 
xenografts, resulting from the potent effect on tumor angiogenesis and tumor cell
apoptosis as determined by TUNEL analysis. Taken together, our results indicated 
that the inhibitor HARP<U+0394>111-136 sensitized U87MG cells to apoptosis.

PMID: 21109939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Mar 2;52(3):1226-34. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-5775.

Transcriptional regulation of activating transcription factor 4 under oxidative
stress in retinal pigment epithelial ARPE-19/HPV-16 cells.

Miyamoto N(1), Izumi H, Miyamoto R, Bin H, Kondo H, Tawara A, Sasaguri Y, Kohno
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, Japan, Fukuoka, Japan.

PURPOSE: Oxidative stress plays an important role in the pathogenesis of various 
ocular diseases such as retinopathy, glaucoma, and age-related macular
degeneration. Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is induced by various
stressors, including endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and oxidative stress, and ATF4
expression is regulated translationally through the PERK pathway of eIF2a
phosphorylation. Transcriptional regulation of the ATF4 gene under oxidative
stress was investigated in human papillomavirus 16 (HPV-16)-transformed retinal
pigment epithelial ARPE-19/HPV-16 cells.
METHODS: Retinal pigment epithelial cells, trabecular meshwork cells, and corneal
endothelial cells were treated with anoxia and thapsigargin (TG). Gene expression
of ATF4 and nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2) and transcription 
factors was investigated by Western blot analysis, reporter assays, chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, and small interfering (si)RNA strategies.
Cellular sensitivity to oxidative stress was determined.
RESULTS: The expression of two transcriptional factors, ATF4 and Nrf2, was
significantly induced by anoxia and TG. The Nrf2 regulator Keap1 was
downregulated by anoxia. Downregulation of Nrf2 abolished ATF4 expression. On the
other hand, downregulation of Keap1 enhanced the expression of both Nrf2 and
ATF4. The promoter activity of ATF4 was transactivated by the co-transfection of 
Nrf2 expression plasmids and reduced by the transfection of Nrf2-specific siRNA. 
The ChIP assays demonstrated that Nrf2 bound to the promoter of the ATF4 gene.
Nrf2 downregulation nearly abolished the ATF4 induction by anoxia and TG.
Consistent with these findings, the promoter activity of ATF4 was augmented by
treatment with TG, HCA, H(2)O(2), and anoxia. However, stress induction of ATF4
promoter activity was observed, even when a mutation was introduced into the
antioxidant-responsive elements site. Furthermore, stress induction of the ATF4
promoter was completely abolished when the 5' untranslated region of the ATF4
gene was deleted. Downregulation of ATF4 rendered ARPE-19/HPV-16 cells sensitive 
to oxidative stress.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the stress induction of ATF4 is
significantly regulated transcriptionally through a Nrf2-dependent mechanism and 
may be a double-edged sword in the pathogenesis of various retinopathies.

PMID: 21087962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2011 Jan;300(1):R92-100. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00169.2010. Epub 2010 Nov 10.

UPR induces transient burst of apoptosis in islets of early lactating rats
through reduced AKT phosphorylation via ATF4/CHOP stimulation of TRB3 expression.

Bromati CR(1), Lellis-Santos C, Yamanaka TS, Nogueira TC, Leonelli M, Caperuto
LC, Gorjão R, Leite AR, Anhê GF, Bordin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Endocrine pancreas from pregnant rats undergoes several adaptations that comprise
increase in ß-cell number, mass and insulin secretion, and reduction of
apoptosis. Lactogens are the main hormones that account for these changes.
Maternal pancreas, however, returns to a nonpregnant state just after the
delivery. The precise mechanism by which this reversal occurs is not settled but,
in spite of high lactogen levels, a transient increase in apoptosis was already
reported as early as the 3rd day of lactation (L3). Our results revealed that
maternal islets displayed a transient increase in DNA fragmentation at L3, in
parallel with decreased RAC-alpha serine/threonine-protein kinase (AKT)
phosphorylation (pAKT), a known prosurvival kinase. Wortmannin completely
abolished the prosurvival action of prolactin (PRL) in cultured islets. Decreased
pAKT in L3-islets correlated with increased Tribble 3 (TRB3) expression, a
pseudokinase inhibitor of AKT. PERK and eIF2a phosphorylation transiently
increased in islets from rats at the first day after delivery, followed by an
increase in immunoglobulin heavy chain-binding protein (BiP), activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) in islets from
L3 rats. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and Re-ChIP experiments further
confirmed increased binding of the heterodimer ATF4/CHOP to the TRB3 promoter in 
L3 islets. Treatment with PBA, a chemical chaperone that inhibits UPR, restored
pAKT levels and inhibited the increase in apoptosis found in L3. Moreover, PBA
reduced CHOP and TRB3 levels in ß-cell from L3 rats. Altogether, our study
collects compelling evidence that UPR underlies the physiological and transient
increase in ß-cell apoptosis after delivery. The UPR is likely to counteract
prosurvival actions of PRL by reducing pAKT through ATF4/CHOP-induced TRB3
expression.

PMID: 21068199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Endocrine. 2010 Oct;38(2):167-73. doi: 10.1007/s12020-010-9362-0. Epub 2010 Jul
11.

Atypical induction of the unfolded protein response by mifepristone.

Dioufa N(1), Kassi E, Papavassiliou AG, Kiaris H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Athens Medical School, M. Asias 75, 
115 27, Athens, Greece.

Mifepristone is a synthetic progesterone antagonist that is being used widely for
the treatment of various conditions such as endometriosis, glaucoma, meningiomas,
breast, ovarian and prostate cancer, as well as for research purposes, in the
conditional induction of gene expression by using artificial plasmid-based
systems. Here, we report that exposure of A549 human lung cancer cells to
mifepristone caused an atypical induction of the cellular unfolded protein
response, as evidenced by the time-dependent stimulation of RNA levels of the
chaperone Grp94 and PDIa, as well as the endoplasmic reticulum stress-associated 
receptors ATF6, PERK and eIF2 but not of their downstream target, transcription
factor ATF4. This profile was very different from that of progesterone, which at 
the same dose as mifepristone, failed to induce all of the ER-stress-related
genes examined, apart from PERK. Furthermore, XBP1, a transcription factor that
is regulated predominantly by alternative splicing by the IRE1 receptor, remains 
unspliced and therefore inactive either by mifepristone or progesterone
treatment. Finally, the pro-apoptotic molecules CHOP and BIM are only induced in 
the presence of tunicamycin in the culture medium. Tunicamycin, the most commonly
used pharmacologic inducer of ER stress that triggers the canonical ER stress
response, was used for comparison purposes. Our results suggest that mifepristone
can elicit an atypical ER stress response when used at different doses and for
different time points. The subsequent induction of UPR should be taken into
consideration when this agent is being used either for therapeutic or for
experimental uses.

PMID: 21046477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 31;285(53):41310-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.153775. Epub 2010
Nov 2.

ERK/ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK) signaling positively regulates death receptor 5
expression through co-activation of CHOP and Elk1.

Oh YT(1), Liu X, Yue P, Kang S, Chen J, Taunton J, Khuri FR, Sun SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University School of
Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Death receptor 5 (DR5) is a death domain-containing transmembrane receptor that
triggers apoptosis upon binding to its ligand or when overexpressed. Its
expression is induced by certain small molecule drugs, including celecoxib,
through mechanisms that have not been fully elucidated. The current study has
revealed a novel ERK/ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK)-dependent mechanism that regulates
DR5 expression primarily using celecoxib as a DR5 inducer. Both C/EBP homologous 
protein (CHOP) and Elk1 are required for celecoxib-induced DR5 expression based
on promoter deletion and mutation analysis and siRNA-mediated gene silencing
results. Co-expression of both CHOP and Elk1 exhibited enhanced effects on
increasing DR5 promoter activity and DR5 expression, indicating that CHOP and
Elk1 co-operatively regulate DR5 expression. Because Elk1 is an ERK-regulated
protein, we accordingly found that celecoxib increased the levels of
phosphorylated ERK1/2, RSK2, and Elk1. Inhibition of either ERK signaling with a 
MEK inhibitor or ERK1/2 siRNA, or RSK2 signaling with an RSK2 inhibitor or RSK2
siRNA abrogated DR5 up-regulation by celecoxib as well as other agents. Moreover,
these inhibitions suppressed celecoxib-induced CHOP up-regulation. Thus,
ERK/RSK-dependent, CHOP and Elk1-mediated mechanisms are critical for DR5
induction. Additionally, celecoxib increased CHOP promoter activity in an
ATF4-dependent manner, and siRNA-mediated blockade of ATF4 abrogated both CHOP
induction and DR5 up-regulation, indicating that ATF4 is involved in
celecoxib-induced CHOP and DR5 expression. Collectively, we conclude that small
molecules such as celecoxib induce DR5 expression through activating ERK/RSK
signaling and subsequent Elk1 activation and ATF4-dependent CHOP induction.

PMCID: PMC3009856
PMID: 21044953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Gene Expr Patterns. 2011 Jan-Feb;11(1-2):135-43. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2010.10.005. 
Epub 2010 Oct 31.

Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) is activated during normal lens development.

Firtina Z(1), Duncan MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716,
USA.

The lens of the eye is a transparent structure responsible for focusing light
onto the retina. It is composed of two morphologically different cell types,
epithelial cells found on the anterior surface and the fiber cells that are
continuously formed by the differentiation of epithelial cells at the lens
equator. The differentiation of an epithelial precursor cell into a fiber cell is
associated with a dramatic increase in membrane protein synthesis. How the
terminally differentiating fiber cells cope with the increased demand on the
endoplasmic reticulum for this membrane protein synthesis is not known. In the
present study, we have found evidence of Unfolded Protein Response (UPR)
activation during normal lens development and differentiation in the mouse. The
ER-resident chaperones, immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein (BiP) and
protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), were expressed at high levels in the newly
forming fiber cells of embryonic lenses. These fiber cells also expressed the
UPR-associated molecules; XBP1, ATF6, phospho-PERK and ATF4 during embryogenesis.
Moreover, spliced XBP1, cleaved ATF6, and phospho-eIF2a were detected in
embryonic mouse lenses suggesting that UPR pathways are active in this tissue.
These results propose a role for UPR activation in lens fiber cell
differentiation during embryogenesis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3039068
PMID: 21044701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Exp Mol Pathol. 2011 Feb;90(1):123-30. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2010.10.013. Epub
2010 Oct 29.

Proteasome inhibitor up regulates liver antioxidative enzymes in rat model of
alcoholic liver disease.

Bardag-Gorce F(1), Oliva J, Lin A, Li J, French BA, French SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, LABioMed at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA 
90502, USA. fgorce@labiomed.org

Oxidative stress occurs in the liver of rats fed with alcohol chronically due to 
ethanol metabolism by CYP2E1, causing liver injury. The proteasome is considered 
as an antioxidant defense in the cell because of its activity in removing damaged
and oxidized proteins, but a growing body of evidence shows that proteasome
inhibitor treatment, at a non toxic low dose, provides protection against
oxidative stress. In the present study, rats were fed with ethanol for 4 weeks
and were treated with the proteasome inhibitor PS-341 (Bortezomib, Velcade®).
Exposure to proteasome inhibitor elicited the elevation of antioxidative defense 
by enhancing the levels of mRNA and protein expression transcripts of glutathione
reductase (GSR), glutathione synthetase (GSS), glutathione peroxidase 2 (GPX2),
and superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) in the liver of rats fed with ethanol
chronically, while ethanol alone did not increase these genes' mRNA. Our results 
also showed that glutamate cysteine ligase catalytic subunit (GCLC), a
rate-limiting enzyme in glutathione biosynthesis, was also up regulated in the
liver of rats fed with ethanol and injected with PS-431. Nrf2 mRNA level was
significantly decreased in the liver of ethanol fed rats, as well as in the
livers of animal fed with ethanol and treated with proteasome inhibitor,
indicating that the mechanism by which proteasome inhibitor up regulates the
antioxidant response element is not due to regulation of Nrf2. However, ATF4, a
major regulator of antioxidant response elements, was significantly up regulated 
by proteasome inhibitor treatment. The beneficial effects of proteasome inhibitor
treatment also reside in the reversibility of the drug because the proteasome
activity was significantly increased 72 h post treatment. In conclusion,
proteasome inhibitor treatment used at a non toxic low dose has potential
protective effects against oxidative stress due to chronic ethanol feeding.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3025748
PMID: 21036165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Nov 26;402(4):755-61. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.10.103. Epub 2010 Oct 29.

Molecular mechanisms of the inhibitory effect of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on
osteoblast differentiation.

Bandow K(1), Maeda A, Kakimoto K, Kusuyama J, Shamoto M, Ohnishi T, Matsuguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Field of Developmental Medicine, Kagoshima
University, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Sakuragaoka,
Kagoshima, Japan.

Osteoblasts express Toll like receptor (TLR) 4 and produce osteoclast-activating 
cytokines in response to the stimulation by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). It has
recently been reported that LPS exerts an inhibitory effect on osteoblast
differentiation into osteocytes. However, the molecular mechanisms of this
inhibitory effect remain ambiguous. The downstream signals of TLR4 are mediated
by adaptor molecules including myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88), leading
to the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), such as
extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs), whose activation by LPS requires
the upstream serine/threonine kinase, Cot/Tpl2. To determine the signal molecules
responsible for the inhibitory effects of LPS on osteoblast differentiation, we
examined the in vitro differentiation of the primary osteoblasts from myd88(-/-) 
and cot/tpl2(-/-) mice. The matrix mineralization by the wild-type and
cot/tpl2(-/-) osteoblasts was significantly inhibited by LPS, whereas that of
myd88(-/-) was not affected. During differentiation, LPS suppressed the mRNA
expression of runt related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), osterix (Sp7), and
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) in the wild-type, but not in the
myd88(-/-) osteoblasts. The inhibitory effect of LPS on the mRNA expression of
these transcription factors was absent in the early phase but partially impaired 
in the late phase of differentiation in the cot/tpl2(-/-) osteoblasts. Thus, the 
inhibitory effect of LPS on osteoblast differentiation is Myd88-dependent,
whereas the degree of its requirement for Cot/Tpl2 varies depending on the
differentiation phase.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21036155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Nutr. 2010 Dec;140(12):2116-20. doi: 10.3945/jn.110.127803. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

A low-protein diet during gestation in rats activates the placental mammalian
amino acid response pathway and programs the growth capacity of offspring.

Strakovsky RS(1), Zhou D, Pan YX.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

Placental efficiency is a predictor of fetal growth and development, which is
also controlled by maternal gestational health and diet. The present study
investigated the effects of a gestational low-protein diet on offspring growth
capacity as well as the diet's contribution to altered expression of placental
genes associated with the mammalian amino acid response (AAR) pathway. To assess 
these outcomes, timed-pregnant Sprague Dawley rats were fed a control (C) diet
with 18% protein or a low-protein (LP) diet with 9% protein throughout gestation 
(Expt. 1) or throughout gestation and lactation (Expt. 2). Placentas were
collected during natural delivery and quantitative RT-PCR and Western-blot
analyses were performed to determine placental mRNA and protein levels. By the
end of the lactation period, offspring of dams fed the LP diet had stunted growth
in both experiments. mRNA expression of target genes in the AAR pathway, such as 
activating transcription factor-3 (Atf3), asparagine synthetase (Asns), and
Sodium-dependent neutral amino acid transporter-2 (Snat2), was greater in
placentas of rats fed the LP diet compared with controls, as were placental ATF4 
and p-eIF2a protein levels. The increase in mRNA expression of AAR
pathway-associated genes was correlated with the stunting of offspring growth
(Atf3: R(2) = 0.32, P = 0.086; Asns: R(2) = 0.44, P < 0.05; Snat2: R(2) = 0.33, P
= 0.084). Our study showed that the mammalian AAR pathway in placenta is
upregulated by a maternal low-protein diet and this activation may act as a cue
for the fetus to develop an adaptive response suited to their predicted postnatal
environment, i.e. a more favorable phenotype for their survival.

PMID: 20980649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Neurochem Int. 2011 Jan;58(1):35-43. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2010.10.006. Epub 2010
Oct 23.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress inducers provide protection against
6-hydroxydopamine-induced cytotoxicity.

Hara H(1), Kamiya T, Adachi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Pharmaceutics, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, Gifu,
Japan. harah@gifu-pu.ac.jp

6-Hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) is a neurotoxin used to establish experimental models 
of Parkinson's disease. Exposure to 6-OHDA results in cell death associated with 
oxidative stress. Pretreatments with sublethal oxidative stress and some
pharmacological drugs have been shown to exert preconditioning effects on
cytotoxicity caused by 6-OHDA. In this study, we investigated whether endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress exerts preconditioning effects on 6-OHDA-induced
cytotoxicity in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. Pretreatment with ER stress
inducers, thapsigargin (Tg) and tunicamycin (Tm), promoted GRP78 mRNA induction
and ATF4 translation, which are ER stress markers, under our experimental
conditions and protected against the cytotoxicity. The protective effect of Tg
was more potent than that of Tm. We also found that Tg induced the expression of 
the antioxidant gene heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) in a dose-dependent manner, whereas 
Tm had a weak effect on HO-1 induction. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that
reactive oxygen species generated by 6-OHDA were more effectively suppressed in
cells pretreated with Tg than with Tm. Therefore, it is likely that Tg enhances
antioxidative defenses in SH-SY5Y cells compared with Tm. Because actinomycin D
inhibited HO-1 induction by Tg, the induction of HO-1 may be regulated at the
transcriptional level. Moreover, the specific eIF2a phosphatase inhibitor
salubrinal augmented Tg-induced HO-1 expression. Therefore, the downstream
signaling pathway of eIF2a might be involved in Tg-induced HO-1 expression. On
the other hand, the reporter assay revealed that Tg stimulated the antioxidant
response element (ARE) that is located in regulatory regions of antioxidant genes
such as HO-1. Taken together, our data suggest that preconditioning effects
induced by Tg mediate an adaptive response to 6-OHDA-induced cytotoxicity via
phosphorylation of eIF2a and activation of the ARE.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20974203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. BMC Neurol. 2010 Oct 19;10:94. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-10-94.

Evaluation of the endoplasmic reticulum-stress response in eIF2B-mutated
lymphocytes and lymphoblasts from CACH/VWM patients.

Horzinski L(1), Kantor L, Huyghe A, Schiffmann R, Elroy-Stein O, Boespflug-Tanguy
O, Fogli A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de Médecine, INSERM U931-CNRS 6247-Génétique, Reproduction et
Développement, Clermont-Ferrand, France.

BACKGROUND: Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2B (eIF2B), a guanine
nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) and a key regulator of translation initiation
under normal and stress conditions, causes an autosomal recessive leukodystrophy 
of a wide clinical spectrum. EBV-immortalised lymphocytes (EIL) from
eIF2B-mutated patients exhibit a decrease in eIF2B GEF activity. eIF2B-mutated
primary fibroblasts have a hyper-induction of activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4) which is involved in the protective unfolded protein response (UPR), also 
known as the ER-stress response. We tested the hypothesis that EIL from
eIF2B-mutated patients also exhibit a heightened ER-stress response.
METHODS: We used thapsigargin as an ER-stress agent and looked at polysomal
profiles, rate of protein synthesis, translational activation of ATF4, and
transcriptional induction of stress-specific mRNAs (ATF4, CHOP, ASNS, GRP78) in
normal and eIF2B-mutated EIL. We also compared the level of stress-specific mRNAs
between EIL and primary lymphocytes (PL).
RESULTS: Despite the low eIF2B GEF activity in the 12 eIF2B-mutated EIL cell
lines tested (range 40-70% of normal), these cell lines did not differ from
normal EIL in their ATF4-mediated ER-stress response. The absence of
hyper-induction of ATF4-mediated ER-stress response in eIF2B-mutated EIL in
contrast to primary fibroblasts is not related to their transformation by EBV.
Indeed, PL exhibited a higher induction of the stress-specific mRNAs in
comparison to EIL, but no hyper-induction of the UPR was noticed in the
eIF2B-mutated cell lines in comparison to controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together with work of others, our results demonstrate the
absence of a major difference in ER-stress response between controls and
eIF2B-mutated cells. Therefore, components of the ER-stress response cannot be
used as discriminatory markers in eIF2B-related disorders.

PMCID: PMC2967530
PMID: 20958979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Lipid Res. 2011 Jan;52(1):98-103. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M009480. Epub 2010 Oct 8.

Involvement of CK2 in activation of electrophilic genes in endothelial cells by
oxidized phospholipids.

Afonyushkin T(1), Oskolkova OV, Binder BR, Bochkov VN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology and Thrombosis Research, Center for
Biomolecular Medicine and Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria.

Oxidized phospholipids (OxPLs) are increasingly recognized as pleiotropic lipid
mediators demonstrating a variety of biological activities. In particular, OxPLs 
induce electrophilic stress response and stimulate expression of NF-E2-related
factor 2 (NRF2)-dependent genes. The mechanisms of NRF2 upregulation in response 
to OxPLs, however, are incompletely understood. Here we show that upregulation of
NRF2 by OxPLs depends on the activity of the CK2 protein kinase. Inactivation of 
CK2 by chemical inhibitors or gene silencing resulted in diminished accumulation 
of NRF2 and its target genes, GCLM, HMOX1, and NQO1, downstream in response to
OxPLs. Furthermore, inhibition of CK2 suppressed NRF2-dependent induction of ATF4
and its downstream gene VEGF. Thus, inactivation of CK2 in OxPL-treated
endothelial cells results in inhibition of the NRF2-ATF4-VEGF axis and is likely 
to produce antiangiogenic effects. This work characterizes novel cross-talk
between CK2 and cellular stress pathways, which may provide additional insights
into the mechanisms of beneficial action and side-effects of CK2 inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC2999922
PMID: 20934988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Nov 12;402(2):235-40. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.09.132. Epub 2010 Oct 8.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress increases the expression and function of toll-like
receptor-2 in epithelial cells.

Shimasaki S(1), Koga T, Shuto T, Suico MA, Sato T, Watanabe K, Morino-Koga S,
Taura M, Okada S, Mori K, Kai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Global COE Cell Fate Regulation Research and Education Unit, Kumamoto University,
5-1 Oe-Honmachi, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is involved in a wide range of pathological
conditions including neurodegenerative disorders, diabetes mellitus,
atherosclerosis, inflammation, and infection. The ability of ER stress to induce 
an inflammatory response is considered to play a role in the pathogenesis of
these diseases. However, its role in regulating the gene expression and function 
of toll-like receptors (TLRs), host defense receptors that recognize invading
pathogens, remains unknown. Here we showed that several well-characterized ER
stress inducers (thapsigargin, tunicamycin, and dithiothreitol) increase the
expression of TLR2 in epithelial cells. Ligand-responsiveness of TLR2 was also
enhanced by ER stress inducers, implying a contributory role of ER stress for the
regulation of TLR2-dependent inflammatory responses. Furthermore, there was
significant increase of TLR2 mRNA level in the livers of tunicamycin-treated mice
and high-fat diet-fed mice, suggesting an impact of ER stress in vivo on the
expression of TLR2. Overexpression and knockdown experiments showed the
importance of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), an ER stress-induced
transcription factor, in the induction of TLR2 expression during ER stress. This 
was confirmed by the increased expression and function of TLR2 during treatment
with salubrinal, an activator of ATF4 pathway. Taken together, our study provides
further insights into the role of ER stress in enhancing host bacterial response 
or in exaggerating the inflammatory condition via up-regulating TLR2 expression.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20933500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Toxicol Lett. 2010 Dec 15;199(3):333-40. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2010.09.016. Epub 
2010 Nov 2.

Pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC)/Cu complex induces lung epithelial cell
apoptosis through mitochondria and ER-stress pathways.

Chen YW(1), Chen KL, Chen CH, Wu HC, Su CC, Wu CC, Way TD, Hung DZ, Yen CC, Yang 
YT, Lu TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, and Graduate Institute of Basic Medical Science,
College of Medicine, China Medical University, No. 91 Hsueh-Shih Road, Taichung
40402, Taiwan. ywc@mail.cmu.edu.tw

Pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC) is widely used in pesticides, fungicides,
insecticides, and herbicides. Copper (Cu) is a toxic heavy metal in the
environment, and an essential trace metal element in the body, which is involved 
in many biological processes as a catalytic cofactor. The present study is
designed to investigate the cellular toxicity of PDTC, CuCl(2), and PDTC/Cu
complex exposure in lung alveolar epithelial cells that serve primary structural 
and functional roles in the lungs. The results showed that PDTC or CuCl(2) alone 
did not affect cell viability, but PDTC/Cu complex significantly decreased lung
alveolar epithelial cell viability. PDTC/Cu complex also significantly increased 
intracellular copper concentration, but PDTC or CuCl(2) alone had low levels of
copper. PDTC/Cu complex dramatically enhanced the JNK protein phosphorylation and
ERK protein phosphorylation proteins. PDTC/Cu complex did not affect the p38
protein phosphorylation. PDTC/Cu complex was capable of activating the
apoptosis-related caspases including caspase-9, caspase-7, and caspase-3, which
could be reversed by the addition of JNK inhibitor SP600125 or transfection of
MAPK8 short hairpin RNA. PDTC/Cu complex also increased cytosolic cytochrome c
and decreased mitochondrial transmembrane potential. The Bcl-2 mRNA and protein
expressions were decreased in lung epithelial cells treated with PDTC/Cu complex,
which could be reversed by SP600125. Furthermore, PDTC/Cu complex could trigger
the expressions of ER stress-associated signaling molecules including Grp78,
Grp94, caspase-12, ATF4, and CHOP, which could be reversed by SP600125. Taken
together, these results indicate that exposure to PDTC/Cu complex induces
cytotoxicity and apoptosis in alveolar epithelial cells via the mitochondria- and
ER-stress-related signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20920558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2011 Feb 1;14(3):415-23. doi: 10.1089/ars.2010.3330. Epub 
2010 Sep 29.

Jejunum inflammation in obese and diabetic mice impairs enteric glucose detection
and modifies nitric oxide release in the hypothalamus.

Duparc T(1), Naslain D, Colom A, Muccioli GG, Massaly N, Delzenne NM, Valet P,
Cani PD, Knauf C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), Toulouse, 
France.

Intestinal detection of nutrients is a crucial step to inform the whole body of
the nutritional status. In this paradigm, peripheral information generated by
nutrients is transferred to the brain, which in turn controls physiological
functions, including glucose metabolism. Here, we investigated the effect of
enteric glucose sensors stimulation on hypothalamic nitric oxide (NO) release in 
lean or in obese/diabetic (db/db) mice. By using specific NO amperometric probes 
implanted directly in the hypothalamus of mice, we demonstrated that NO release
is stimulated in response to enteric glucose sensors activation in lean but not
in db/db mice. Alteration of gut to hypothalamic NO signaling in db/db mice is
associated with a drastic increase in inflammatory, oxidative/nitric oxide (iNOS,
IL-1ß), and endoplasmic reticulum stress (CHOP, ATF4) genes expression in the
jejunum. Although we could not exclude the importance of the hypothalamic
inflammatory state in obese and diabetic mice, our results provide compelling
evidence that enteric glucose sensors could be considered as potential targets
for metabolic diseases.

PMID: 20879900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Endocrinology. 2010 Nov;151(11):5438-45. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0551. Epub 2010 Sep
22.

High-fat diet causes lipotoxicity responses in cumulus-oocyte complexes and
decreased fertilization rates.

Wu LL(1), Dunning KR, Yang X, Russell DL, Lane M, Norman RJ, Robker RL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pediatrics and Reproductive Health, Robinson Institute, University
of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia.

In obesity, accumulation of lipid in nonadipose tissues, or lipotoxicity, is
associated with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and
ultimately apoptosis. We have previously shown that obese women have increased
triglycerides in follicular fluid; thus, the present study examined whether
high-fat diet-induced obesity causes lipotoxicity in granulosa cells and the
cumulus-oocyte complex (COC). Oocytes of mice fed a high-fat diet had
dramatically increased lipid content and reduced mitochondrial membrane potential
compared to those of mice fed a control diet. COCs from mice fed a high-fat diet 
had increased expression of ER stress marker genes ATF4 and GRP78. Apoptosis was 
increased in granulosa and cumulus cells of mice fed a high-fat diet. Mice fed a 
high-fat diet also exhibited increased anovulation and decreased in vivo
fertilization rates. Thus, lipid accumulation, ER stress, mitochondrial
dysfunction, and apoptosis are markedly increased in ovarian cells of mice fed a 
high-fat diet. ER stress markers were also analyzed in granulosa cells and
follicular fluid from women with varying body mass indices (BMI). ATF4 was
increased in granulosa cells and [Ca(2+)] in follicular fluid from obese women
compared to nonobese women. These results indicate that lipotoxicity may be
occurring in ovarian cells of obese women and may contribute to the reduced
pregnancy rates observed in response to obesity.

PMID: 20861227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Apr;226(4):991-8. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22412.

Developmentally regulated inhibition of cell cycle progression by glucocorticoids
through repression of cyclin A transcription in primary osteoblast cultures.

Gabet Y(1), Noh T, Lee C, Frenkel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

Synthetic glucocorticoids (GCs) like dexamethasone (DEX) are effective
immunosuppressants indicated for autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. However,
they often promote osteoporosis and bone fractures. Here, we investigated the
anti-mitogenic effect of GCs in primary osteoblast cultures. DEX did not affect
cell cycle progression in confluent (day 2), or early post-confluent cultures.
Starting on day 5, however, DEX strongly inhibited the G1/S cell cycle
transition. Day 5 also marked the beginning of a ~2-day commitment stage, during 
which cultures acquired resistance to the inhibitory effect of DEX on
mineralization. Considering the importance of Wnt signaling in osteoblast
development, we analyzed the effect of DEX on the Wnt pathway. DEX treatment did 
not inhibit the TOPGAL Wnt reporter before, but only during and after the
commitment stage. However, this inhibition was not associated with repression of 
neither cyclin D1 nor c-Myc mRNA, well-established Wnt targets regulating cell
cycle progression. On the other hand, acute (24-h) and chronic (7 days) DEX
treatment significantly reduced both the mRNA and protein levels of cyclin A,
another cell cycle regulator. Moreover, cyclin A repression by DEX was not
observed before, but only during and after the commitment stage. Using gel shift 
and reporter assays, we identified an ATF/CREB-binding site critical for the
DEX-mediated repression of cyclin A transcription. Furthermore, and similar to
cyclin A, Atf4 expression was repressed by DEX only during and after commitment. 
Our data suggest that GCs attenuate cell cycle progression in osteoblasts in a
developmental stage-specific manner by repressing Atf4-dependent cyclin A gene
expression.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20857405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Cancer Cell Int. 2010 Sep 9;10:32. doi: 10.1186/1475-2867-10-32.

Activating Transcription Factor 3 regulates in part the enhanced tumour cell
cytotoxicity of the histone deacetylase inhibitor M344 and cisplatin in
combination.

St Germain C(1), O'Brien A, Dimitroulakos J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, 501 Smyth 
Road, Ottawa, K1H 8L6, Canada. jdimitroulakos@ohri.ca.

BACKGROUND: Activating Transcription Factor (ATF) 3 is a key regulator of the
cellular integrated stress response whose expression has also been correlated
with pro-apoptotic activities in tumour cell models. Combination treatments with 
chemotherapeutic drugs, such as cisplatin, and histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors have been demonstrated to enhance tumour cell cytotoxicity. We
recently demonstrated a role for ATF3 in regulating cisplatin-induced apoptosis
and others have shown that HDAC inhibition can also induce cellular stress. In
this study, we evaluated the role of ATF3 in regulating the co-operative
cytotoxicity of cisplatin in combination with an HDAC inhibitor.
RESULTS: The HDAC inhibitor M344 induced ATF3 expression at the protein and mRNA 
level in a panel of human derived cancer cell lines as determined by Western blot
and quantitative RT-PCR analyses. Combination treatment with M344 and cisplatin
lead to increased induction of ATF3 compared with cisplatin alone. Utilizing the 
MTT cell viability assay, M344 treatments also enhanced the cytotoxic effects of 
cisplatin in these cancer cell lines. The mechanism of ATF3 induction by M344 was
found to be independent of MAPKinase pathways and dependent on ATF4, a known
regulator of ATF3 expression. ATF4 heterozygote (+/-) and knock out (-/-) mouse
embryonic fibroblast (MEF) as well as chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
were utilized in determining the mechanistic induction of ATF3 by M344. We also
demonstrated that ATF3 regulates the enhanced cytotoxicity of M344 in combination
with cisplatin as evidenced by attenuation of cytotoxicity in shRNAs targeting
ATF3 expressing cells.
CONCLUSION: This study identifies the pro-apoptotic factor, ATF3 as a novel
target of M344, as well as a mediator of the co-operative effects of cisplatin
and M344 induced tumour cell cytotoxicity.

PMCID: PMC2945341
PMID: 20828393  [PubMed]


380. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 2;5(9). pii: e12521. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012521.

Transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of proangiogenic factors by
the unfolded protein response.

Pereira ER(1), Liao N, Neale GA, Hendershot LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics & Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Inadequate extracellular conditions can adversely affect the
environment of the ER and impinge on the maturation of nascent proteins. The
resultant accumulation of unfolded proteins activates a signal transduction
pathway, known as the unfolded protein response, which serves primarily to
protect the cell during stress and helps restore homeostasis to the ER.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Microarray analysis of the unfolded protein response in a
human medulloblastoma cell line treated with thapsigargin revealed that, in
addition to known targets, a large number of proangiogenic factors were
up-regulated. Real-Time PCR analyses confirmed that four of these factors, VEGFA,
FGF2, angiogenin and IL8, were transcriptionally up-regulated in multiple cell
lines by various ER stress inducers. Our studies on VEGFA regulation revealed
that XBP-1(S), a UPR-inducible transcription factor, bound to two regions on the 
VEGFA promoter, and analysis of XBP-1 null mouse embryonic fibroblasts revealed
that it contributes to VEGFA expression in response to ER stress. ATF4, another
UPR-inducible transcription factor, also binds to the VEGFA gene, although its
contribution to VEGFA transcription appeared to be fairly modest. We also found
that VEGFA mRNA stability is increased in response to UPR activation, via
activation of AMP kinase, demonstrating that increased mRNA levels occur at two
regulatory points. In keeping with the mRNA levels, we found that VEGFA protein
is secreted at levels as high as or higher than that achieved in response to
hypoxia.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: Our results indicate that the UPR plays a
significant role in inducing positive regulators of angiogenesis. It also
regulates VEGFA expression at transcriptional, post-transcriptional and
post-translational levels and is likely to have widespread implications for
promoting angiogenesis in response to normal physiological cues as well as in
pathological conditions like cancer.

PMCID: PMC2932741
PMID: 20824063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2011 Apr 15;14(8):1449-65. doi: 10.1089/ars.2010.3600.
Epub 2011 Feb 3.

Control of redox state and redox signaling by neural antioxidant systems.

Lewerenz J(1), Maher P.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Neurology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany.

The glutathione/glutathione disulfide (GSH/GSSG) redox pair forms the major redox
couple in cells and as such plays a critical role in regulating redox-dependent
cellular functions. Not only does GSH act as an antioxidant but it can also
modulate the activity of a variety of different proteins. An impairment in GSH
status is thought to be the precipitating event in a wide range of neurological
disorders. Therefore, understanding how to maintain GSH in the CNS could provide 
a valuable therapeutic approach. Intracellular GSH levels are regulated by a
complex series of pathways that include substrate transport and availability,
rates of synthesis and regeneration, GSH utilization, and GSH efflux. To date,
the most effective approaches for maintaining GSH levels in the CNS include
enhancing cyst(e)ine uptake both directly and indirectly via transcriptional
upregulation of system x(c)(-), increasing GSH synthesis via transcriptional
upregulation of the rate limiting enzyme in GSH biosynthesis, and decreasing GSH 
utilization. Among the transcription factors that play critical roles in GSH
metabolism are NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) and activating transcription factor 
4 (ATF4). Thus, compounds that can upregulate these transcription factors may be 
particularly useful in promoting the functional maintenance of the CNS through
their effects on GSH metabolism.

PMID: 20812872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Jan 25;52(1):527-40. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-5731.
Print 2011 Jan.

Sigma receptor 1 modulates endoplasmic reticulum stress in retinal neurons.

Ha Y(1), Dun Y, Thangaraju M, Duplantier J, Dong Z, Liu K, Ganapathy V, Smith SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology and Anatomy, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, GA 30912-2000, USA.

PURPOSE: To investigate the mechanism of s receptor 1 (sR1) neuroprotection in
retinal neurons.
METHODS: Oxidative stress, which is implicated in diabetic retinopathy, was
induced in mouse primary ganglion cells (GCs) and RGC-5 cells, and the effect of 
the sR1 ligand (+)-pentazocine on pro- and anti-apoptotic and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress gene expression was examined. Binding of sR1 to BiP, an ER 
chaperone protein, and sR1 phosphorylation status were examined by
immunoprecipitation. Retinas were harvested from Ins2Akita/+ diabetic mice
treated with (+)-pentazocine, and the expression of ER stress genes and of the
retinal transcriptome was evaluated.
RESULTS: Oxidative stress induced the death of primary GCs and RGC-5 cells. The
effect was decreased by the application of (+)-pentazocine. Stress increased sR1 
binding to BiP and enhanced sR1 phosphorylation in RGC-5 cells. BiP binding was
prevented, and sR1 phosphorylation decreased in the presence of (+)-pentazocine. 
The ER stress proteins PERK, ATF4, ATF6, IRE1a, and CHOP were upregulated in
RGC-5 cells during oxidative stress, but decreased in the presence of
(+)-pentazocine. A similar phenomenon was observed in retinas of Ins2Akita/+
diabetic mice. Retinal transcriptome analysis of Ins2Akita/+ mice compared with
wild-type revealed differential expression of the genes critically involved in
oxidative stress, differentiation, and cell death. The expression profile of
those genes was reversed when the Ins2Akita/+ mice were treated with
(+)-pentazocine.
CONCLUSIONS: In retinal neurons, the molecular chaperone sR1 binds BiP under
stressful conditions; (+)-pentazocine may exert its effects by dissociating sR1
from BiP. As stress in retinal cells increases, phosphorylation of sR1 is
increased, which is attenuated when agonists bind to the receptor.

PMCID: PMC3053296
PMID: 20811050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 22;285(43):33165-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.167213. Epub
2010 Aug 23.

Both transcriptional regulation and translational control of ATF4 are central to 
the integrated stress response.

Dey S(1), Baird TD, Zhou D, Palam LR, Spandau DF, Wek RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

In response to different environmental stresses, phosphorylation of eIF2 (eIF2~P)
represses global translation coincident with preferential translation of ATF4.
ATF4 is a transcriptional activator of the integrated stress response, a program 
of gene expression involved in metabolism, nutrient uptake, anti-oxidation, and
the activation of additional transcription factors, such as CHOP/GADD153, that
can induce apoptosis. Although eIF2-P elicits translational control in response
to many different stress arrangements, there are selected stresses, such as
exposure to UV irradiation, that do not increase ATF4 expression despite robust
eIF2~P. In this study we addressed the underlying mechanism for variable
expression of ATF4 in response to eIF2~P during different stress conditions and
the biological significance of omission of enhanced ATF4 function. We show that
in addition to translational control, ATF4 expression is subject to
transcriptional regulation. Stress conditions such as endoplasmic reticulum
stress induce both transcription and translation of ATF4, which together enhance 
expression of ATF4 and its target genes in response to eIF2~P. By contrast, UV
irradiation represses ATF4 transcription, which diminishes ATF4 mRNA available
for translation during eIF2~P. eIF2~P enhances cell survival in response to UV
irradiation. However, forced expression of ATF4 and its target gene CHOP leads to
increased sensitivity to UV irradiation. This combination of transcriptional
regulation and translational control allows the eIF2 kinase pathway to
selectively repress or activate key regulatory genes subject to preferential
translation, providing the integrated stress response versatility to direct the
transcriptome that is essential for maintaining the balance between stress
remediation and apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2963398
PMID: 20732869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 22;285(43):33324-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.140699. Epub
2010 Aug 19.

Control of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) persistence by multisite
phosphorylation impacts cell cycle progression and neurogenesis.

Frank CL(1), Ge X, Xie Z, Zhou Y, Tsai LH.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, the Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Organogenesis is a highly integrated process with a fundamental requirement for
precise cell cycle control. Mechanistically, the cell cycle is composed of
transitions and thresholds that are controlled by coordinated post-translational 
modifications. In this study, we describe a novel mechanism controlling the
persistence of the transcription factor ATF4 by multisite phosphorylation.
Proline-directed phosphorylation acted additively to regulate multiple aspects of
ATF4 degradation. Stabilized ATF4 mutants exhibit decreased ß-TrCP degron
phosphorylation, ß-TrCP interaction, and ubiquitination, as well as elicit early 
G(1) arrest. Expression of stabilized ATF4 also had significant consequences in
the developing neocortex. Mutant ATF4 expressing cells exhibited positioning and 
differentiation defects that were attributed to early G(1) arrest, suggesting
that neurogenesis is sensitive to ATF4 dosage. We propose that precise regulation
of the ATF4 dosage impacts cell cycle control and impinges on neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2963346
PMID: 20724472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Planta Med. 2011 Jan;77(2):141-5. doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1250179. Epub 2010 Aug 17.

Arctigenin suppresses unfolded protein response and sensitizes glucose
deprivation-mediated cytotoxicity of cancer cells.

Sun S(1), Wang X, Wang C, Nawaz A, Wei W, Li J, Wang L, Yu DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast and Thyroid Surgery, Wuhan University Renmin Hospital,
Wuhan, China.

The involvement of unfolded protein response (UPR) activation in tumor survival
and resistance to chemotherapies suggests a new anticancer strategy targeting UPR
pathway. Arctigenin, a natural product, has been recently identified for its
antitumor activity with selective toxicity against cancer cells under glucose
starvation with unknown mechanism. Here we found that arctigenin specifically
blocks the transcriptional induction of two potential anticancer targets, namely 
glucose-regulated protein-78 (GRP78) and its analog GRP94, under glucose
deprivation, but not by tunicamycin. The activation of other UPR pathways, e.g., 
XBP-1 and ATF4, by glucose deprivation was also suppressed by arctigenin. A
further transgene experiment showed that ectopic expression of GRP78 at least
partially rescued arctigenin/glucose starvation-mediated cell growth inhibition, 
suggesting the causal role of UPR suppression in arctigenin-mediated cytotoxicity
under glucose starvation. These observations bring a new insight into the
mechanism of action of arctigenin and may lead to the design of new anticancer
therapeutics.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 20717870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Toxicology. 2010 Nov 9;277(1-3):1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2010.08.006. Epub 2010
Aug 13.

Activation of PERK signaling through fluoride-mediated endoplasmic reticulum
stress in OS732 cells.

Xu H(1), Zhou YL, Zhang XY, Lu P, Li GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endemic Diseases, Jilin University, 1163 Xinmin Street,
Changchun 130021, PR China. huixujlu@yahoo.com

Our proteomical analysis of osteoblasts exposed to fluoride revealed a
distinctive upregulation of proteins in osteoblast. These upregulated proteins
play key roles in the protein folding. The PRK-like ER kinase (PERK) signaling,
one branch of unfolded protein response (UPR) to combat ER stress, is a
transcription factor needed for osteoblast proliferation and differentiation. The
mechanism of skeletal fluorosis by which fluoride regulates osteoblast is not
fully defined. Here we studied the effect of fluoride on PERK signaling genes and
x-box binding protein 1 (xbp-1) in OS7232 cells (human osteoblast-like cell
line). Meantime, genes associated with bone turnover were examined in this study.
We found that early and continuous fluoride exposure increased the binding
immunoglobulin protein (BiP) expression and activated the PERK signaling pathway,
resulting in activation of transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and nuclear factor
erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2). The altered expression of cbfa1,
osteoprotegerin (OPG)/nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL) were viewed in this
study. These results showed fluoride impelled a distinctive ER stress response in
OS732 cells, primarily by activating PERK and PERK-dependent signaling. Little
effects were viewed for activating xbp-1, a common target of the other two
canonical sensors of ER stress, ATF6 and IRE1. In this study the altered
expression of bone turnover genes were consistent with activation of ER stress
and PERK signaling. This study proved that PERK signaling play major roles in
action of fluoride on osteoblast, and suggested that bone response in skeletal
fluorosis may be due in part to PERK signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20709135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Virol. 2010 Oct;84(20):10681-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01027-10. Epub 2010 Aug 11.

The African swine fever virus DP71L protein recruits the protein phosphatase 1
catalytic subunit to dephosphorylate eIF2alpha and inhibits CHOP induction but is
dispensable for these activities during virus infection.

Zhang F(1), Moon A, Childs K, Goodbourn S, Dixon LK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, Ash Road, Pirbright, Surrey
GU24 0NF, United Kingdom.

The African swine fever virus (ASFV) DP71L protein is present in all isolates as 
either a short form of 70 to 72 amino acids or a long form of about 184 amino
acids, and both of these share sequence similarity to the C-terminal domain of
the herpes simplex virus ICP34.5 protein and cellular protein GADD34. In the
present study we expressed DP71L in different mammalian cells and demonstrated
that DP71L causes dephosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2
alpha (eIF2a) in resting cells and during chemical-induced endoplasmic reticulum 
stress and acts to enhance expression of cotransfected reporter genes. We showed 
that DP71L binds to all the three isoforms (a, ß, and <U+03B3>) of the protein
phosphatase 1 catalytic subunit (PP1c) and acts by recruiting PP1c to eIF2a. We
also showed that DP71L inhibits the induction of ATF4 and its downstream target, 
CHOP. We investigated the eIF2a phosphorylation status and induction of CHOP in
porcine macrophages infected by two ASFV field isolates, Malawi Lil20/1 and Benin
97/1, and two DP71L deletion mutants, Malawi<U+0394>NL and E70<U+0394>NL. Our results showed
that deletion of the DP71L gene did not cause an increase in the level of eIF2a
phosphorylation or induction of CHOP, indicating that DP71L is not the only
factor required by the virus to control the phosphorylation level of eIF2a during
infection. We therefore hypothesize that ASFV has other mechanisms to prevent the
eIF2a phosphorylation and the subsequent protein synthesis inhibition.

PMCID: PMC2950568
PMID: 20702639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Integr Cancer Ther. 2011 Mar;10(1):101-12. doi: 10.1177/1534735410377198. Epub
2010 Aug 11.

An experimental study on the antileukemia effects of gypenosides in vitro and in 
vivo.

Hsu HY(1), Yang JS, Lu KW, Yu CS, Chou ST, Lin JJ, Chen YY, Lin ML, Chueh FS,
Chen SS, Chung JG.

Author information: 
(1)China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: Gypenosides (Gyp), found in Gynostemma pentaphyllum Makino, have been
used as folk medicine for centuries and have exhibited diverse pharmacological
effects, including antileukemia effects in vitro and in vivo. In the present
study, Gyp were used to examine effects on cell viability, cell cycle, and
induction of apoptosis in vitro. They were administered in the diet to mice
injected with WEHI-3 cells in vivo.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Effects of Gyp on WEHI-3 cells were determined by flow
cytometric assay and Western blotting.
RESULTS: Gyp inhibited the growth of WEHI-3 cells. These effects were associated 
with the induction of G0/G1 arrest, morphological changes, DNA fragmentation, and
increased sub-G1 phase. Gyp promoted the production of reactive oxygen species,
increased Ca(2+) levels, and induced the depolarization of the mitochondrial
membrane potential. The effects of Gyp were dose and time dependent. Moreover,
Gyp increased levels of the proapoptotic protein Bax, reduced levels of the
antiapoptotic proteins Bcl-2, and stimulated release of cytochrome c, AIF
(apoptosis-inducing factor), and Endo G (endonuclease G) from mitochondria. The
levels of GADD153, GRP78, ATF6-a, and ATF4-a were increased by Gyp, resulting in 
ER (endoplasmic reticular) stress in WEHI-3 cells. Oral consumption of Gyp
increased the survival rate of mice injected with WEHI-3 cells used as a mouse
model of leukemia.
CONCLUSIONS: Results of these experiments provide new information on
understanding mechanisms of Gyp-induced effects on cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis in vitro and in an in vivo animal model.

© The Author(s) 2011

PMID: 20702487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;647:37-74. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60761-738-9_3.

Review of molecular mechanisms involved in the activation of the Nrf2-ARE
signaling pathway by chemopreventive agents.

Giudice A(1), Arra C, Turco MC.

Author information: 
(1)G. Pascale Foundation National Cancer Institute, Naples, Italy.
aldo.giudice@libero.it

Human exposures to environmental toxicants have been associated with etiology of 
many diseases including inflammation, cancer, and cardiovascular and
neurodegenerative disorders. To counteract the detrimental effect of
environmental insults, mammalian cells have evolved a hierarchy of sophisticated 
sensing and signaling mechanisms to turn on or off endogenous antioxidant
responses accordingly. One of the major cellular antioxidant responses is the
induction of antioxidative and carcinogen-detoxification enzymes through the
cytoplasmic oxidative stress system (Nrf2-Keap1) activated by a variety of
natural and synthetic chemopreventive agents. Under normal conditions, Keap1
anchors the Nrf2 transcription factor within the cytoplasm targeting it for
ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation to maintain low levels of Nrf2 that
mediate the constitutive expression of Nrf2 downstream genes. When cells are
exposed to chemopreventive agents and oxidative stress, a signal involving
phosphorylation and/or redox modification of critical cysteine residues in Keap1 
inhibits the enzymatic activity of the Keap1-Cul3-Rbx1 E3 ubiquitin ligase
complex, resulting in decreased Nrf2 ubiquitination and degradation. As a
consequence, free Nrf2 translocates into the nucleus and in combination with
other transcription factors (e.g., sMaf, ATF4, JunD, PMF-1) transactivates the
antioxidant response elements (AREs)/electrophile response elements (EpREs) of
many cytoprotective genes, as well as Nrf2 itself. Upon recovery of cellular
redox homeostasis, Keap1 travels into the nucleus to dissociate Nrf2 from the
ARE. Subsequently, the Nrf2-Keap1 complex is exported out of the nucleus by the
nuclear export sequence (NES) in Keap1. Once in the cytoplasm, the Nrf2-Keap1
complex associates with the Cul3-Rbx1 core ubiquitin machinery, resulting in
degradation of Nrf2 and termination of the Nrf2/ARE signaling pathway. The
discovery of multiple nuclear localization signals (NLSs) and nuclear export
signals (NESs) in Nrf2 also suggests that the nucleocytoplasm translocation of
transcription factors is the consequence of a dynamic equilibrium of multivalent 
NLSs and NESs. On the other hand, Keap1 may provide an additional regulation of
the quantity of Nrf2 both in basal and inducible conditions. This chapter
summarizes the current body of knowledge regarding the molecular mechanisms
through which ARE inducers (chemopreventive agents) regulate the coordinated
transcriptional induction of genes encoding phase II and antioxidant enzymes as
well as other defensive proteins, via the nuclear factor-erythroid 2
(NF-E2-p45)-related factor 2(Nrf2)/(ARE) signaling pathway.

PMID: 20694660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2010 Oct;299(4):F712-9. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00690.2009. Epub 2010 Jul 28.

Vasopressin increases expression of UT-A1, UT-A3, and ER chaperone GRP78 in the
renal medulla of mice with a urinary concentrating defect.

Cai Q(1), Nelson SK, McReynolds MR, Diamond-Stanic MK, Elliott D, Brooks HL.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Physiology, College of Medicine, Univ. of Arizona, Tucson, AZ
85724-5218, USA.

Activation of V2 receptors (V2R) during antidiuresis increases the permeability
of the inner medullary collecting duct to urea and water. Extracellular
osmolality is elevated as the concentrating capacity of the kidney increases.
Osmolality is known to contribute to the regulation of collecting duct water
(aquaporin-2; AQP2) and urea transporter (UT-A1, UT-A3) regulation. AQP1KO mice
are a concentrating mechanism knockout, a defect attributed to the loss of high
interstitial osmolality. A V2R-specific agonist, deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin
(dDAVP), was infused into wild-type and AQP1KO mice for 7 days. UT-A1 mRNA and
protein abundance were significantly increased in the medullas of wild-type and
AQP1KO mice following dDAVP infusion. The mRNA and protein abundance of UT-A3,
the basolateral urea transporter, was significantly increased by dDAVP in both
wild-type and AQP1KO mice. Semiquantitative immunoblots revealed that dDAVP
infusion induced a significant increase in the medullary expression of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperone GRP78. Immunofluorescence studies
demonstrated that GRP78 expression colocalized with AQP2 in principal cells of
the papillary tip of the renal medulla. Using immunohistochemistry and immunogold
electron microscopy, we demonstrate that vasopressin induced a marked apical
targeting of GRP78 in medullary principal cells. Urea-sensitive genes, GADD153
and ATF4 (components of the ER stress pathway), were significantly increased in
AQP1KO mice by dDAVP infusion. These findings strongly support an important role 
of vasopressin in the activation of an ER stress response in renal collecting
duct cells, in addition to its role in activating an increase in UT-A1 and UT-A3 
abundance.

PMCID: PMC2957250
PMID: 20668095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. FEBS Lett. 2010 Aug 20;584(16):3649-54. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.07.040. Epub 
2010 Jul 25.

Insulin modulates induction of glucose-regulated protein 78 during endoplasmic
reticulum stress via augmentation of ATF4 expression in human neuroblastoma
cells.

Inageda K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene and Public Health I, Tokyo Women's Medical University,
8-1 Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan. inageda@research.twmu.ac.jp

The effect of insulin on endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress was investigated.
Insulin protected cell death induced by ER stress and increased glucose-regulated
protein 78 (GRP78) mRNA and protein levels. Insulin also significantly increased 
activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4) protein in the nucleus, which was
inhibited by LY294002, a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI-3 kinase) inhibitor.
The increase of ATF4 protein by insulin was not due to transcriptional or
translational up-regulation but to a post-translational mechanism. Knockdown of
ATF4 by siRNA significantly inhibited GRP78 induction by insulin. These results
indicate that insulin modulated ER stress-induced GRP78 expression occurs via
ATF4 up-regulation.

Copyright 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20667453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Clin Invest. 2010 Aug;120(8):2755-66. doi: 10.1172/JCI42106. Epub 2010 Jul 12.

Activating transcription factor 4 regulates osteoclast differentiation in mice.

Cao H(1), Yu S, Yao Z, Galson DL, Jiang Y, Zhang X, Fan J, Lu B, Guan Y, Luo M,
Lai Y, Zhu Y, Kurihara N, Patrene K, Roodman GD, Xiao G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
USA.

Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is a critical transcription factor for
osteoblast (OBL) function and bone formation; however, a direct role in
osteoclasts (OCLs) has not been established. Here, we targeted expression of ATF4
to the OCL lineage using the Trap promoter or through deletion of Atf4 in mice.
OCL differentiation was drastically decreased in Atf4-/- bone marrow monocyte
(BMM) cultures and bones. Coculture of Atf4-/- BMMs with WT OBLs or a high
concentration of RANKL failed to restore the OCL differentiation defect.
Conversely, Trap-Atf4-tg mice displayed severe osteopenia with dramatically
increased osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption. We further showed that ATF4 was
an upstream activator of the critical transcription factor Nfatc1 and was
critical for RANKL activation of multiple MAPK pathways in OCL progenitors.
Furthermore, ATF4 was crucial for M-CSF induction of RANK expression on BMMs, and
lack of ATF4 caused a shift in OCL precursors to macrophages. Finally, ATF4 was
largely modulated by M-CSF signaling and the PI3K/AKT pathways in BMMs. These
results demonstrate that ATF4 plays a direct role in regulating OCL
differentiation and suggest that it may be a therapeutic target for treating bone
diseases associated with increased OCL activity.

PMCID: PMC2912190
PMID: 20628199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Cell Death Differ. 2011 Jan;18(1):133-44. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2010.82. Epub 2010 Jul
9.

The TSC1 and TSC2 tumor suppressors are required for proper ER stress response
and protect cells from ER stress-induced apoptosis.

Kang YJ(1), Lu MK, Guan KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Moores Cancer Center, University of California 
at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC)1 and TSC2 are tumor suppressors that inhibit
cell growth and mutation of either gene causes benign tumors in multiple tissues.
The TSC1 and TSC2 gene products form a functional complex that has
GTPase-activating protein (GAP) activity toward Ras homolog enriched in brain
(Rheb) to inhibit mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1), which is
constitutively activated in TSC mutant tumors. We found that cells with mutation 
in either TSC1 or TSC2 are hypersensitive to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
and undergo apoptosis. Although the TSC mutant cells show elevated eIF2a
phosphorylation, an early ER stress response marker, at both basal and induced
conditions, induction of other ER stress response markers, including ATF4, ATF6
and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), is severely compromised. The defects in ER
stress response are restored by raptor knockdown but not by rapamycin treatment
in the TSC mutant cells, indicating that a rapamycin-insensitive mTORC function
is responsible for the defects in ER stress response. Consistently, activation of
Rheb sensitizes cells to ER stress. Our data show an important role of TSC1/TSC2 
and Rheb in unfolded protein response and cell survival. We speculate that an
important physiological function of the TSC1/2 tumor suppressors is to protect
cells from harmful conditions. These observations indicate a potential
therapeutic application of using ER stress agents to selectively kill TSC1 or
TSC2 mutant cells for TSC treatment.

PMCID: PMC3131877
PMID: 20616807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Neuroscience. 2010 Sep 15;169(4):1831-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.06.016.
Epub 2010 Jun 19.

Activation of eukaryotic initiation factor-2 a-kinases in okadaic acid-treated
neurons.

Kim SM(1), Yoon SY, Choi JE, Park JS, Choi JM, Nguyen T, Kim DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor-2 alpha (eIF2 alpha) is increased
in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and this protein can be phosphorylated by several
kinases, including double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR), PKR-like
endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK), amino acids-regulated eIF2 alpha kinase
(GCN2) and heme-regulated eIF2 alpha kinase (HRI). PKR and PERK especially are
activated in the AD brain, and GCN2 is reported to increase presenilin-1 (PS1)
activity. Okadaic acid (OA), a protein phosphatase-2A (PP2A) inhibitor, is known 
to increase tau phosphorylation, beta-amyloid (A beta) deposition and neuronal
death, which are the pathological characteristics of AD. Here, we show that the
phosphorylation of eIF2 alpha is increased and its kinases, PKR, PERK and GCN2
are activated in rat neurons by OA. Activating transcription factor (ATF4) which 
induces apoptosis in response to eIF2 alpha phosphorylation was increased and
translocated to nuclei in OA-treated neurons. These results suggest that the
successive events of activation of eIF2 alpha kinases and eIF2 alpha
phosphorylation leading to ATF4 nuclear translocation may contribute to neuronal 
death. However, PKR inhibitors did not reduce eIF2 alpha phosphorylation or
neuronal toxicity despite inhibiting PKR activity. These results suggest that PKR
might not be the most responsible kinase for eIF2 alpha phosphorylation or cell
death in PP2A-inhibited conditions such as AD.

(c) 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20600673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Clin Invest. 2010 Aug;120(8):2876-88. doi: 10.1172/JCI36849. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

The pseudokinase tribbles homolog 3 interacts with ATF4 to negatively regulate
insulin exocytosis in human and mouse beta cells.

Liew CW(1), Bochenski J, Kawamori D, Hu J, Leech CA, Wanic K, Malecki M, Warram
JH, Qi L, Krolewski AS, Kulkarni RN.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Islet Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Harvard Medical School, Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Insufficient insulin secretion and reduced pancreatic beta cell mass are
hallmarks of type 2 diabetes (T2DM). Here, we confirm that a previously
identified polymorphism (rs2295490/Q84R) in exon 2 of the pseudokinase-encoding
gene tribbles 3 (TRB3) is associated with an increased risk for T2DM in 2
populations of people of mixed European descent. Carriers of the 84R allele had
substantially reduced plasma levels of C-peptide, the product of proinsulin
processing to insulin, suggesting a role for TRB3 in beta cell function.
Overexpression of TRB3 84R in mouse beta cells, human islet cells, and the murine
beta cell line MIN6 revealed reduced insulin exocytosis, associated with a marked
reduction in docked insulin granules visualized by electron microscopy.
Conversely, knockdown of TRB3 in MIN6 cells restored insulin secretion and
expression of exocytosis genes. Further analysis in MIN6 cells demonstrated that 
TRB3 interacted with the transcription factor ATF4 and that this complex acted as
a competitive inhibitor of cAMP response element-binding (CREB) transcription
factor in the regulation of key exocytosis genes. In addition, the 84R TRB3
variant exhibited greater protein stability than wild-type TRB3 and increased
binding affinity to Akt. Mice overexpressing TRB3 84R in beta cells displayed
decreased beta cell mass, associated with reduced proliferation and enhanced
apoptosis rates. These data link a missense polymorphism in human TRB3 to
impaired insulin exocytosis and thus increased risk for T2DM.

PMCID: PMC2912176
PMID: 20592469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Cell Biochem Funct. 2010 Jul;28(5):387-93. doi: 10.1002/cbf.1667.

The JNK pathway modulates expression and phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 in MIN6
pancreatic beta-cells under oxidative stress conditions.

Tominaga R(1), Yamaguchi S, Satake C, Usui M, Tanji Y, Kondo K, Katagiri H, Oka
Y, Ishihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Metabolism and Diabetes, Tohoku University Graduate
School of Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.

Stress-mediated apoptosis may play a crucial role in loss of pancreatic beta-cell
mass, contributing to the development of diabetes. We have recently identified
that translational control involving the translational suppressor eIF4E binding
protein-1 (4E-BP1) which is important for beta-cell survival under endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. The Eif4ebp1 gene, encoding 4E-BP1, is a direct target of 
a transcription factor activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4), a master
regulator of gene expression in stress responses. In the current study, we
investigated 4E-BP1 expression in mouse insulinoma line 6 (MIN6) cells treated
with arsenite, an inducer of oxidative stress which is another contributor of
beta-cell loss. We found that arsenite-induced 4E-BP1 expression level was lower 
than that induced by thapsigargin, an ER stress inducer, although ATF4 was
similarly induced by these agents. The ratio of the dephosphorylated form of
4E-BP1, which has the highest activity, to phosphorylated forms was, however,
greater in MIN6 cells treated with arsenite as compared to that in
thapsigargin-treated cells. Arsenite-induced 4E-BP1 mRNA and protein expressions 
were augmented by simultaneous treatment with a c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)
specific inhibitor, SP600125. The agent also suppressed the level of the
dephosphrylated form of 4E-BP1 in arsenite-treated MIN6 cells. Thus, JNK
activated by oxidative stress is involved in the modulation of 4E-BP1 expression 
and phosphorylation in MIN6 cells, which may contribute to fine tuning of
translational control under stress conditions.

Copyright 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 20589738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 Jul;9(7):2007-15. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-10-0257. Epub 
2010 Jun 29.

ABT-737 overcomes resistance to immunotoxin-mediated apoptosis and enhances the
delivery of pseudomonas exotoxin-based proteins to the cell cytosol.

Traini R(1), Ben-Josef G, Pastrana DV, Moskatel E, Sharma AK, Antignani A,
Fitzgerald DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA.

Pseudomonas exotoxin (PE)-based immunotoxins (antibody-toxin fusion proteins)
have achieved frequent complete remissions in patients with hairy cell leukemia
but far fewer objective responses in other cancers. To address possible
mechanisms of resistance, we investigated immunotoxin activity in a model system 
using the colon cancer cell line, DLD1. Despite causing complete inhibition of
protein synthesis, there was no evidence that an immunotoxin targeted to the
transferrin receptor caused apoptosis in these cells. To address a possible
protective role of prosurvival Bcl-2 proteins, the BH3-only mimetic, ABT-737, was
tested alone or in combination with immunotoxins. Neither the immunotoxin nor
ABT-737 alone activated caspase 3, whereas the combination exhibited substantial 
activation. In other epithelial cell lines, ABT-737 enhanced the cytotoxicity of 
PE-related immunotoxins by as much as 20-fold, but did not enhance diphtheria
toxin or cycloheximide. Because PE translocates to the cytosol via the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the other toxins do not, ABT-737-mediated effects 
on the ER were investigated. ABT-737 treatment stimulated increased levels of ER 
stress response factor, ATF4. Because of its activity in the ER, ABT-737 might be
particularly well suited for enhancing the activity of immunotoxins that
translocate from the ER to the cell cytosol.

(c)2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2943340
PMID: 20587662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Dev Biol. 2010 Aug 15;344(2):658-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.05.492. Epub 2010 
May 24.

Stabilization of ATF4 protein is required for the regulation of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of the avian neural crest.

Suzuki T(1), Osumi N, Wakamatsu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational and Advanced Animal Research on Human Diseases,
Division of Developmental Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Tohoku
University, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) permits neural crest cells to delaminate 
from the epithelial ectoderm and to migrate extensively in the embryonic
environment. In this study, we have identified ATF4, a basic-leucine-zipper
transcription factor, as one of the neural crest EMT regulators. Although ATF4
alone was not sufficient to drive the formation of migratory neural crest cells, 
ATF4 cooperated with Sox9 to induce neural crest EMT by controlling the
expression of cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix adhesion molecules. This
was likely, at least in part, by inducing the expression of Foxd3, which encodes 
another neural crest transcription factor. We also found that the ATF4 protein
level was strictly regulated by proteasomal degradation and p300-mediated
stabilization, allowing ATF4 protein to accumulate in the nuclei of neural crest 
cells undergoing EMT. Thus, our results emphasize the importance of the
regulation of protein stability in the neural crest EMT.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20580702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 10;285(37):28826-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.099424. Epub
2010 Jun 22.

Deficiency of chemokine receptor CCR1 causes osteopenia due to impaired functions
of osteoclasts and osteoblasts.

Hoshino A(1), Iimura T, Ueha S, Hanada S, Maruoka Y, Mayahara M, Suzuki K, Imai
T, Ito M, Manome Y, Yasuhara M, Kirino T, Yamaguchi A, Matsushima K, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)International Clinical Research Center, Research Institute, International
Medical Center of Japan, Tokyo 162-8655, Japan.

Chemokines are characterized by the homing activity of leukocytes to targeted
inflammation sites. Recent research indicates that chemokines play more divergent
roles in various phases of pathogenesis as well as immune reactions. The
chemokine receptor, CCR1, and its ligands are thought to be involved in
inflammatory bone destruction, but their physiological roles in the bone
metabolism in vivo have not yet been elucidated. In the present study, we
investigated the roles of CCR1 in bone metabolism using CCR1-deficient mice.
Ccr1(-/-) mice have fewer and thinner trabecular bones and low mineral bone
density in cancellous bones. The lack of CCR1 affects the differentiation and
function of osteoblasts. Runx2, Atf4, Osteopontin, and Osteonectin were
significantly up-regulated in Ccr1(-/-) mice despite sustained expression of
Osterix and reduced expression of Osteocalcin, suggesting a lower potential for
differentiation into mature osteoblasts. In addition, mineralized nodule
formation was markedly disrupted in cultured osteoblastic cells isolated from
Ccr1(-/-) mice. Osteoclastogenesis induced from cultured Ccr1(-/-) bone marrow
cells yielded fewer and smaller osteoclasts due to the abrogated cell-fusion.
Ccr1(-/-) osteoclasts exerted no osteolytic activity concomitant with reduced
expressions of Rank and its downstream targets, implying that the defective
osteoclastogenesis is involved in the bone phenotype in Ccr1(-/-) mice. The
co-culture of wild-type osteoclast precursors with Ccr1(-/-) osteoblasts failed
to facilitate osteoclastogenesis. This finding is most likely due to a reduction 
in Rankl expression. These observations suggest that the axis of CCR1 and its
ligands are likely to be involved in cross-talk between osteoclasts and
osteoblasts by modulating the RANK-RANKL-mediated interaction.

PMCID: PMC2937910
PMID: 20571024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Bone Miner Res. 2010 Nov;25(11):2489-503. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.159.

Transcriptional upregulation of DDR2 by ATF4 facilitates osteoblastic
differentiation through p38 MAPK-mediated Runx2 activation.

Lin KL(1), Chou CH, Hsieh SC, Hwa SY, Lee MT, Wang FF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Deficiency of the collagen receptor discoidin domain receptor tyrosine kinase
(DDR2) in mice and humans results in dwarfism and short limbs, of which the
mechanism remains unknown. Here we report that DDR2 is a key regulator of
osteoblast differentiation. DDR2 mRNA expression was increased at an early stage 
of induced osteoblast differentiation. In the subchondral bone of human
osteoarthritic knee, DDR2 was detected in osteoblastic cells. In mouse embryos,
DDR2 expression was found from E11 to E15, preceding osteocalcin (OCN) and
coinciding with Runx2 expression. Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4)
enhanced DDR2 mRNA expression, and knockdown of ATF4 expression delayed DDR2
induction during osteoblast differentiation. A CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP) binding site at -1150 bp in the DDR2 promoter was required for
ATF4-mediated DDR2 activation. C/EBPß bound to and cooperated with ATF4 in
stimulating DDR2 transcription; accordingly, the ATF4 mutants deficient of C/EBPß
binding were incapable of transactivating DDR2. Overexpression of DDR2 increased 
osteoblast-specific gene expression. Conversely, knockdown of DDR2 suppressed
osteogenic marker gene expression and matrix mineralization during the induced
osteogenesis. The stimulation of p38 MAPK by DDR2 was required for DDR2-induced
activation of Runx2 and OCN promoters. Together our findings uncover a pathway in
which ATF4, by binding to C/EBPß transcriptionally upregulates DDR2 expression,
and DDR2, in turn, activates Runx2 through p38 MAPK to promote osteoblast
differentiation.

© 2010 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 20564243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. EMBO J. 2010 Jun 16;29(12):1946-7. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.110.

How do tumours adapt to nutrient stress?

Wek RC(1), Staschke KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. rwek@iupui.edu

Comment on
    EMBO J. 2010 Jun 16;29(12):2082-96.

PMCID: PMC2892365
PMID: 20551969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Oncogene. 2010 Aug 5;29(31):4424-35. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.191. Epub 2010 May 31.

Regulation of autophagy by ATF4 in response to severe hypoxia.

Rzymski T(1), Milani M, Pike L, Buffa F, Mellor HR, Winchester L, Pires I,
Hammond E, Ragoussis I, Harris AL.

Author information: 
(1)Growth Factor Group, Cancer Research UK, Weatherall Institute of Molecular
Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford, UK.

Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is a transcription factor induced under 
severe hypoxia and a component of the PERK pathway involved in the unfolded
protein response (UPR), a process that protects cells from the negative
consequences of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. In this study, we have used
small interfering RNA (siRNA) and microarray analysis to provide the first
whole-genome analysis of genes regulated by ATF4 in cancer cells in response to
severe and prolonged hypoxic stress. We show that ATF4 is required for ER stress 
and hypoxia-induced expansion of autophagy. MAP1LC3B (LC3B) is a key component of
the autophagosomal membrane, and in this study we demonstrate that ATF4
facilitates autophagy through direct binding to a cyclic AMP response element
binding site in the LC3B promoter, resulting in LC3B upregulation. Previously, we
have shown that Bortezomib-induced ATF4 stabilization, which then upregulated
LC3B expression and had a critical role in activating autophagy, protecting cells
from Bortezomib-induced cell death. We also showed that severe hypoxia stabilizes
ATF4. In this study, we demonstrate that severe hypoxia leads to ER stress and
induces ATF4-dependent autophagy through LC3 as a survival mechanism. In summary,
we show that ATF4 has a key role in the regulation of autophagy in response to ER
stress and provide a direct mechanistic link between the UPR and the autophagic
machinery.

PMID: 20514020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Nov;225(3):654-63. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22255.

Cannabinoid receptor 1 mediates palmitic acid-induced apoptosis via endoplasmic
reticulum stress in human renal proximal tubular cells.

Lim JC(1), Lim SK, Han HJ, Park SH.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-therapy Human Resources Center, Department of Veterinary Physiology,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Korea.

The endocannabinoid system (ECS) is activated at the onset of obesity and diverse
metabolic diseases. Endocannabinoids mediate their physiological and behavioral
effects by activating specific cannabinoid receptors, mainly cannabinoid receptor
1 (CB(1)R). Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is induced by hyperlipidemia, and renal
proximal tubule cells are an important site for the onset of DN. However, the
pathophysiology of CB(1)R, especially in the hyperlipidemia of DN, has not been
elucidated. Therefore, we examined the effect of palmitic acid (PA) on CB(1)R
expression and its related signal pathways in human renal proximal tubular cells 
(HK-2 cells). PA significantly increased CB(1)R mRNA and protein levels and
induced CB(1)R internalization. PA-induced activation of CB(1)R is prevented by
the treatment of AACOCF(3) (a cPLA(2) inhibitor), indomethacin and NS398 (a COX 2
inhibitors). Indeed, PA increased cPLA(2), and COX-2 but not COX-1. We also
investigated whether the PA-induced activation of CB(1)R is linked to apoptosis. 
As a result, AM251 (a CB(1)R antagonist) attenuated PA-mediated apoptosis in a
concentration-dependent manner. Furthermore, PA decreased GRP78 expression and
induced increases in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress signaling pathways
p-PERK, p-eIF2a, p-ATF4, and CHOP, which were blocked by AM251 treatment.
Moreover, PA increased the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio, cleaved PARP, and caspase-3 levels.
The PA-induced apoptotic effects were decreased with CB(1)R-specific antagonist
(AM251) treatment and CB1 si-RNA transfection. In conclusion, PA induced
apoptosis through ER stress via CB(1)R expression in human proximal tubule cells.
Our results provide evidence that CB(1)R blockade may be a potential
anti-diabetic therapy for the treatment of DN.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20506110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Nov;299(5):E695-705. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00038.2010. Epub 2010 May 25.

The unfolded protein response is activated in skeletal muscle by high-fat
feeding: potential role in the downregulation of protein synthesis.

Deldicque L(1), Cani PD, Philp A, Raymackers JM, Meakin PJ, Ashford ML, Delzenne 
NM, Francaux M, Baar K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurosciences, UCLouvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

High-fat diets are known to decrease muscle protein synthesis, the adaptation to 
overload, and insulin sensitivity. Conditions that disrupt endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) homeostasis lead to the activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR)
that is associated with decreases in protein synthesis, chronic inflammation, and
insulin resistance. The purpose of the present study was to establish whether ER 
stress is induced by a high-fat diet in skeletal muscle and whether ER stress can
decrease mTORC1 activity and protein synthesis in muscle cells. Two independent
protocols of high-fat feeding activated the UPR in mice. In the first study, mice
consuming a high-fat diet containing 70% fat and <1% carbohydrates for 6 wk
showed higher markers of the UPR (BiP, IRE1a, and MBTPS2) in the soleus and in
the tibialis anterior muscles and ATF4 in the tibialis anterior (P < 0.05). In
the second study, a 20-wk high-fat diet containing 46% fat and 36% carbohydrates 
also increased BiP, IRE1a, and phospho-PERK protein and the expression of ATF4,
CHOP, and both the spliced and unspliced forms of XBP1 in the plantar flexors (P 
< 0.05). In C(2)C(12) muscle cells, tunicamycin, thapsigargin, and palmitic acid 
all increased UPR markers and decreased phosphorylation of S6K1 (P < 0.05).
Collectively, these data show that a high-fat diet activates the UPR in mouse
skeletal muscle in vivo. In addition, in vitro studies indicate that palmitic
acid, and other well-known ER stress inducers, triggered the UPR in myogenic
cells and led to a decrease in protein synthesis and mTORC1 activity.

PMID: 20501874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Endocrinol. 2010 Aug;206(2):183-93. doi: 10.1677/JOE-09-0356. Epub 2010 May 20.

UPR-mediated TRIB3 expression correlates with reduced AKT phosphorylation and
inability of interleukin 6 to overcome palmitate-induced apoptosis in RINm5F
cells.

Nicoletti-Carvalho JE(1), Nogueira TC, Gorjão R, Bromati CR, Yamanaka TS,
Boschero AC, Velloso LA, Curi R, Anhê GF, Bordin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Sao Paulo, Prof. Lineu Prestes Ave #1524, 05508-900 Sao Paulo, SP, 
Brazil.

Unfolded protein response (UPR)-mediated pancreatic beta-cell death has been
described as a common mechanism by which palmitate (PA) and pro-inflammatory
cytokines contribute to the development of diabetes. There are evidences that
interleukin 6 (IL6) has a protective action against beta-cell death induced by
pro-inflammatory cytokines; the effects of IL6 on PA-induced apoptosis have not
been investigated yet. In the present study, we have demonstrated that PA
selectively disrupts IL6-induced RAC-alpha serine/threonine-protein kinase (AKT) 
activation without interfering with signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 phosphorylation in RINm5F cells. The inability of IL6 to activate
AKT in the presence of PA correlated with an inefficient protection against
PA-induced apoptosis. In contrast to PA, IL6 efficiently reduced apoptosis
induced by pro-inflammatory cytokines. In addition, we have demonstrated that IL6
is unable to overcome PA-stimulated UPR, as assessed by activating transcription 
factor 4 (ATF4) and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) expression, X-box binding
protein-1 gene mRNA splicing, and pancreatic eukaryotic initiation factor-2 alpha
kinase phosphorylation, whereas no significant induction of UPR by
pro-inflammatory cytokines was detected. This unconditional stimulation of UPR
and apoptosis by PA was accompanied by the stimulation of CHOP and tribble3
(TRIB3) expression, irrespective of the presence of IL6. These findings suggest
that IL6 is unable to protect pancreatic beta-cells from PA-induced apoptosis
because it does not repress UPR activation. In this way, CHOP and ATF4 might
mediate PA-induced TRIB3 expression and, by extension, the suppression of IL6
activation of pro-survival kinase AKT.

PMID: 20488947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. EMBO J. 2010 Jun 16;29(12):2082-96. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.81. Epub 2010 May 14.

The GCN2-ATF4 pathway is critical for tumour cell survival and proliferation in
response to nutrient deprivation.

Ye J(1), Kumanova M, Hart LS, Sloane K, Zhang H, De Panis DN, Bobrovnikova-Marjon
E, Diehl JA, Ron D, Koumenis C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2010 Jun 16;29(12):1946-7.

The transcription factor ATF4 regulates the expression of genes involved in amino
acid metabolism, redox homeostasis and ER stress responses, and it is
overexpressed in human solid tumours, suggesting that it has an important
function in tumour progression. Here, we report that inhibition of ATF4
expression blocked proliferation and survival of transformed cells, despite an
initial activation of cytoprotective macroautophagy. Knockdown of ATF4
significantly reduced the levels of asparagine synthetase (ASNS) and
overexpression of ASNS or supplementation of asparagine in trans, reversed the
proliferation block and increased survival in ATF4 knockdown cells. Both amino
acid and glucose deprivation, stresses found in solid tumours, activated the
upstream eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha (eIF2alpha) kinase GCN2 to
upregulate ATF4 target genes involved in amino acid synthesis and transport. GCN2
activation/overexpression and increased phospho-eIF2alpha were observed in human 
and mouse tumours compared with normal tissues and abrogation of ATF4 or GCN2
expression significantly inhibited tumour growth in vivo. We conclude that the
GCN2-eIF2alpha-ATF4 pathway is critical for maintaining metabolic homeostasis in 
tumour cells, making it a novel and attractive target for anti-tumour approaches.

PMCID: PMC2892366
PMID: 20473272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 16;285(29):21922-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.132027. Epub
2010 May 12.

The eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) 4G HEAT domain promotes translation
re-initiation in yeast both dependent on and independent of eIF4A mRNA helicase.

Watanabe R(1), Murai MJ, Singh CR, Fox S, Ii M, Asano K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology Program, Division of Biology,
Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506, USA.

Translation re-initiation provides the molecular basis for translational control 
of mammalian ATF4 and yeast GCN4 mediated by short upstream open reading (uORFs) 
in response to eIF2 phosphorylation. eIF4G is the major adaptor subunit of eIF4F 
that binds the cap-binding subunit eIF4E and the mRNA helicase eIF4A and is also 
required for re-initiation in mammals. Here we show that the yeast eIF4G2
mutations altering eIF4E- and eIF4A-binding sites increase re-initiation at GCN4 
and impair recognition of the start codons of uORF1 or uORF4 located after uORF1.
The increase in re-initiation at GCN4 was partially suppressed by increasing the 
distance between uORF1 and GCN4, suggesting that the mutations decrease the
migration rate of the scanning ribosome in the GCN4 leader. Interestingly, eIF4E 
overexpression suppressed both the phenotypes caused by the mutation altering
eIF4E-binding site. Thus, eIF4F is required for accurate AUG selection and
re-initiation also in yeast, and the eIF4G interaction with the mRNA-cap appears 
to promote eIF4F re-acquisition by the re-initiating 40 S subunit. However, eIF4A
overexpression suppressed the impaired AUG recognition but not the increase in
re-initiation caused by the mutations altering eIF4A-binding site. These results 
not only provide evidence that mRNA unwinding by eIF4A stimulates start codon
recognition, but also suggest that the eIF4A-binding site on eIF4G made of the
HEAT domain stimulates the ribosomal scanning independent of eIF4A. Based on the 
RNA-binding activities identified within the unstructured segments flanking the
eIF4G2 HEAT domain, we discuss the role of the HEAT domain in scanning beyond
loading eIF4A onto the pre-initiation complex.

PMCID: PMC2903371
PMID: 20463023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Drug Resist Updat. 2010 Jun;13(3):87-92. doi: 10.1016/j.drup.2010.04.003. Epub
2010 May 11.

Macroautophagy modulates cellular response to proteasome inhibitors in cancer
therapy.

Wu WK(1), Sakamoto KM, Milani M, Aldana-Masankgay G, Fan D, Wu K, Lee CW, Cho CH,
Yu J, Sung JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Digestive Diseases, LKS Institute of Health and Department of
Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
wukakei@cuhk.edu.hk

Macroautophagy and the ubiquitin-proteasome system are two complementary pathways
for protein degradation. The former degrades long-lived proteins and damaged
organelles while the later degrades short-lived proteins. Recent findings
indicate that suppression of the ubiquitin-proteasome system by proteasome
inhibitors induces macroautophagy through multiple pathways, including (1)
accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins and activation of HDAC6; (2) activation of
the IRE1-JNK pathway; (3) proteasomal stabilization of ATF4; (4) inhibition of
mTOR complex 1 signaling; (5) reduced proteasomal degradation of LC3. Induction
of macroautophagy attenuates the antitumor effect of proteasome inhibitors in
various types of cancer. These findings suggest that inhibition of macroautophagy
may represent a novel strategy to enhance cellular sensitivity to proteasome
inhibition.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20462785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 9;285(28):21329-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.095299. Epub 2010
May 6.

The endoplasmic reticulum stress response factor CHOP-10 protects against
hypoxia-induced neuronal death.

Halterman MW(1), Gill M, DeJesus C, Ogihara M, Schor NF, Federoff HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester,
New York 14642, USA. marc_halterman@urmc.rochester.edu

Hypoxia-induced gene expression is a critical determinant of neuron survival
after stroke. Understanding the cell autonomous genetic program controlling
adaptive and pathological transcription could have important therapeutic
implications. To identify the factors that modulate delayed neuronal apoptosis
after hypoxic injury, we developed an in vitro culture model that recapitulates
these divergent responses and characterized the sequence of gene expression
changes using microarrays. Hypoxia induced a disproportionate number of bZIP
transcription factors and related targets involved in the endoplasmic reticulum
stress response. Although the temporal and spatial aspects of ATF4 expression
correlated with neuron loss, our results did not support the anticipated
pathological role for delayed CHOP expression. Rather, CHOP deletion enhanced
neuronal susceptibility to both hypoxic and thapsigargin-mediated injury and
attenuated brain-derived neurotrophic factor-induced neuroprotection. Also,
enforced expression of CHOP prior to the onset of hypoxia protected wild-type
cultures against subsequent injury. Collectively, these findings indicate CHOP
serves a more complex role in the neuronal response to hypoxic stress with
involvement in both ischemic preconditioning and delayed neuroprotection.

PMCID: PMC2898390
PMID: 20448044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Neurosci Lett. 2010 Jun 30;478(1):32-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.04.062. Epub
2010 May 2.

EIF2alpha and caspase-12 activation are involved in oxygen-glucose-serum
deprivation/restoration-induced apoptosis of spinal cord astrocytes.

Zhang A(1), Zhang J, Sun P, Yao C, Su C, Sui T, Huang H, Cao X, Ge Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing 210029, China.

Astrocytes play an important role in protecting neurons during ischemia and
reperfusion in the central nervous system. Although many studies have shown that 
oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) can induce astrocyte apoptosis, the role of
PERK/eIF2 alpha/ATF4 integrated stress response (ISR) in astrocyte apoptosis
mediated by oxygen-glucose-serum deprivation (OGSD)/restoration remains
uncertain. Astrocytes were subjected to a combination of oxygen, glucose, and
serum deprivation for 8h followed by restoration. Hoechst 33342 staining was
performed to quantify apoptotic astrocytes and cell viability was assessed with
Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK8). Immunocytochemical analysis and Western blotting for 
some related molecules, including pancreatic ER stress kinase (PERK), p-PERK,
eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha (eIF2 alpha), p-eIF2 alpha, activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), caspase-12, were examined. Caspase activation and 
apoptosis were detected in neonatal rat astrocytes from spinal cord subjected to 
OGSD/restoration. We also observed an increase in cytoplasmic staining of p-eIF2 
alpha in astrocytes (8h OGSD/15 min restoration) compared with that of
non-treated cells. In addition, we found the sequential activation of PERK, eIF2 
alpha, and ATF4 during OGSD/restoration by Western blotting. These results
indicate that both the PERK/eIF2 alpha/ATF4 ISR and activation of caspase-12 may 
be involved in apoptosis of spinal cord astrocytes induced by OGSD/restoration.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20444431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Cancer Lett. 2010 Oct 1;296(1):123-31. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.04.002.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress contributes to vitamin E succinate-induced apoptosis
in human gastric cancer SGC-7901 cells.

Huang X(1), Zhang Z, Jia L, Zhao Y, Zhang X, Wu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.

Vitamin E succinate (RRR-alpha-tocopheryl succinate, VES), an efficient inducer
of apoptosis, acts as a potent agent for cancer therapy. However, the mechanism
by which VES mediates the effects are not yet fully understood. Here we studied
the effect of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and unfolded protein response
(UPR) on VES-induced apoptosis of SGC-7901 human gastric cancer cells. VES caused
cytological changes typical of apoptosis, increased ER dilation and cytosolic
Ca(2+) concentration. And endogenous ER stress markers, GRP78 and GRP94 were
transcriptionally and translationally altered. In response to VES, induction of
CHOP, activation of caspase-4 and JNK were observed. Furthermore, VES also
triggered activation of UPR components, including RNA-dependent protein kinase
(PKR)-like ER kinase (PERK), activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6),
X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1), and ATF4 in a concentration- and time-dependent
manner. Consequently, our results suggest that VES-induced apoptosis is coupled
to ER stress and UPR activation in SGC-7901 human gastric cancer cells.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20435408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. ScientificWorldJournal. 2010 Apr 13;10:624-32. doi: 10.1100/tsw.2010.58.

Recent insights into the implication of nitric oxide in osteoblast
differentiation and proliferation during bone development.

Saura M(1), Tarin C, Zaragoza C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiologia, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Alcala,
Madrid, Spain.

Bone tissue renovation is a dynamic event in which osteoblasts and osteoclasts
are responsible for the turnover between bone formation and bone resorption,
respectively. During bone development, extracellular matrix remodeling is
required for osteoblast differentiation and the process is largely mediated by
the proteolytic activity of extracellular matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which
play a fundamental role in osteoblast migration, unmineralized matrix
degradation, and cell invasion. The recent advances towards investigation in
osteogenesis have provided significant information about the transcriptional
regulation of several genes, including MMPs, by the expression of crucial
transcription factors like NFAT, ATF4, osterix, TAZ, and Cbfa-1-responsive
elements. Evidence from gene knock-out studies have shown that bone formation is,
at least in part, mediated by nitric oxide (NO), since mice deficient in
endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) and mice deficient in the eNOS
downstream effector (cGMP)-dependent protein kinase (PKG) show bone
abnormalities, while inducible NOS (iNOS) null mice also show imbalances in bone 
osteogenesis and abnormalities in bone healing. Recently, in vitro data showed
that Cbfa-1 and the MAPK pathways were crucial for osteoblastic cell
differentiation, and NO was found to play a significant role. This article sheds 
light on some of the mechanisms that may influence NO-mediated actions in bone
development.

PMID: 20419275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Apoptosis. 2010 Jul;15(7):864-76. doi: 10.1007/s10495-010-0498-4.

IL-1beta induces ER stress in a JNK dependent manner that determines cell death
in human pancreatic epithelial MIA PaCa-2 cells.

Verma G(1), Datta M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (IGIB), CSIR, Mall Road, Delhi, 
110 007, India.

The proinflammatory cytokine, IL-1beta (Interleukin-1beta) is a significant
determinant of pancreatic apoptosis and cell death that are common
characteristics during diabetes. Using human derived pancreatic MIA PaCa-2 cells,
we describe one of the underlying molecular mechanisms behind this observation.
Incubation of these cells with IL-1beta at doses from 0.5 to 3.0 ng/ml caused
significant cell death at 36 h. This was accompanied with marked increases in JNK
and p38 phosphorylation together with increased levels of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress markers, namely BiP, CHOP, GADD34, ATF4 and sXBP1. IL-1beta
also led to increased phosphorylation of eIF2alpha and all these events could be 
prevented by pretreatment with the JNK inhibitor, SP600125. A time course study
indicated that while IL-1beta mediated JNK phosphorylation was induced as early
as 2 h of IL-1beta treatment, induction of the ER stress markers was evident at
later time points. IL-1beta stimulated JNK phosphorylation was observed even in
the presence of the ER stress inhibitor, 4-phenyl butyrate and the decrease in
cell viability was significantly prevented in the presence of the JNK inhibitor. 
All these suggest that JNK activation is a pre-requisite for ER stress induction 
and cell death. Reports till date have consistently demonstrated JNK activation
as a consequence of ER stress induction by IL-1beta in the pancreas. We show here
for the first time that the activation of JNK by IL-1beta is a prelude to the
subsequent induction of ER stress and cell death. These therefore suggest that
the JNK-ER stress axis is critical in deciding the decreased survival status by
IL-1beta in MIA PaCa-2 cells.

PMID: 20411335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Biochem J. 2010 Jul 1;429(1):215-24. doi: 10.1042/BJ20100286.

Temporal regulation of Cat-1 (cationic amino acid transporter-1) gene
transcription during endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Huang CC(1), Li Y, Lopez AB, Chiang CM, Kaufman RJ, Snider MD, Hatzoglou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH 044106, USA.

Expression of the Cat-1 gene (cationic amino acid transporter-1) is induced in
proliferating cells and in response to a variety of stress conditions. The
expression of the gene is mediated via a TATA-less promoter. In the present study
we show that an Sp1 (specificity protein 1)-binding site within a GC-rich region 
of the Cat-1 gene controls its basal expression and is important for induction of
the gene during the UPR (unfolded protein response). We have shown previously
that induction of Cat-1 gene expression during the UPR requires phosphorylation
of the translation initiation factor eIF2alpha (eukaryotic initiation factor
2alpha) by PERK (protein-kinase-receptor-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase), one 
of the signalling pathways activated during the UPR. This leads to increased
translation of the transcription factor ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4).
We also show that a second signalling pathway is required for sustained
transcriptional induction of the Cat-1 gene during the UPR, namely activation of 
IRE1 (inositol-requiring enzyme 1) leading to alternative splicing of the mRNA
for the transcription factor XBP1 (X-box-binding protein 1). The resulting XBP1s 
(spliced XBP1) can bind to an ERSE
(endoplasmic-reticulum-stress-response-element), ERSE-II-like, that was
identified within the Cat-1 promoter. Surprisingly, eIF2alpha phosphorylation is 
required for accumulation of XBP1s. We propose that the signalling via
phosphorylated eIF2alpha is required for maximum induction of Cat-1 transcription
during the UPR by inducing the accumulation of both ATF4 and XBP1s.

PMCID: PMC3684439
PMID: 20408811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 Mar;1192:338-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05211.x.

FIAT, the factor-inhibiting ATF4-mediated transcription, also represses the
transcriptional activity of the bZIP factor FRA-1.

St-Arnaud R(1), Mandic V, Elchaarani B.

Author information: 
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
rst-arnaud@shriners.mcgill.ca

FIAT is a leucine zipper protein whose name was coined for its interaction with
ATF4 and subsequent blockage of ATF4-directed osteocalcin gene transcription.
FIAT lacks a basic DNA-binding domain but contains three leucine zippers; it
heterodimerizes with ATF4 to prohibit binding to DNA. FIAT could also potentially
interact with additional basic domain-leucine zipper transcriptional regulators
of osteoblast activity, such as FRA-1. We have found that FIAT inhibits
transcriptional activation by a FRA-1/c-JUN heterodimer without affecting
transcription mediated by a c-JUN homodimer. The repressor effect of FIAT on
FRA-1-dependent transcription was measured using reporter constructs for the
natural FRA-1 targets, Mmp-9 and Mgp. The FIAT-FRA-1 interaction is mediated
through the second leucine zipper of FIAT. These data confirm an additional
target of the FIAT transcriptional repressor activity and suggest that FIAT can
both modulate early osteoblast activity by interacting with ATF4 and regulate
later osteoblast function through inhibition of FRA-1.

PMID: 20392257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2010 Jul 15;182(2):207-19. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200909-1414OC. Epub 2010 Apr 8.

Epithelial stress and apoptosis underlie Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome-associated
interstitial pneumonia.

Mahavadi P(1), Korfei M, Henneke I, Liebisch G, Schmitz G, Gochuico BR, Markart
P, Bellusci S, Seeger W, Ruppert C, Guenther A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, University of Giessen Lung Center (UGLC), 
Klinikstrasse 36, 35392 Giessen, Germany.

RATIONALE: The molecular mechanisms underlying Hermansky-Pudlak
syndrome-associated interstitial pneumonia (HPSIP) are poorly understood but, as 
in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, may be linked to chronic alveolar epithelial
type II cell (AECII) injury.
OBJECTIVES: We studied the development of fibrosis and the role of AECII injury
in various murine models of HPS.
METHODS: HPS1, HPS2, and HPS6 monomutant mice, and HPS1/2 and HPS1/6
double-mutant and genetic background mice, were killed at 3 and 9 months of age. 
Quantitative morphometry was undertaken in lung sections stained with
hemalaun-eosin. The extent of lung fibrosis was assessed by trichrome staining
and hydroxyproline measurement. Surfactant lipids were analyzed by electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry. Surfactant proteins, apoptosis, and lysosomal and
endoplasmic reticulum stress markers were studied by Western blotting and
immunohistochemistry. Cell proliferation was measured by water-soluble
tetrazolium salt-1 and bromodeoxyuridine assays.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Spontaneous and slowly progressive HPSIP was
observed in HPS1/2 double mutants, but not in other HPS mutants, with subpleural 
onset at 3 months and full-blown fibrosis at 9 months. In these mice, extensive
surfactant abnormalities were encountered in AECII and were paralleled by early
lysosomal stress (cathepsin D induction), late endoplasmic reticulum stress
(activating transcription factor-4 [ATF4], C/EBP homologous protein [CHOP]
induction), and marked apoptosis. These findings were fully corroborated in human
HPSIP. In addition, cathepsin D overexpression resulted in apoptosis of MLE-12
cells and increased proliferation of NIH 3T3 fibroblasts incubated with
conditioned medium of the transfected cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Extensively impaired surfactant trafficking and secretion underlie
lysosomal and endoplasmic reticulum stress with apoptosis of AECII in HPSIP,
thereby causing the development of HPSIP.

PMCID: PMC2913235
PMID: 20378731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Oncol Rep. 2010 May;23(5):1435-41.

Synthesis and biological analysis of a new curcumin analogue for enhanced
anti-tumor activity in HepG 2 cells.

Xiao J(1), Chu Y, Hu K, Wan J, Huang Y, Jiang C, Liang G, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Biotechnology Pharmaceutical Engineering, school of
pharmaceutical science, Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou 325035, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the apoptosis of human
hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG 2 induced by a new curcumin analogue,
GL63. HepG 2 cells were treated with increasing doses of GL63 and curcumin for 48
h. The proliferation of cells was detected with MTT. The apoptosis were examined 
by flow cytometry. The caspase-3 activity was detected by western blotting. ER
calcium stores were assessed by the fluorescent calcium indicator fura-2/AM. The 
protein expression of ER stress pathway, GRP78, XBP-1, ATF-4 and CHOP were
examined with western blotting. Growth inhibitory effect was observed for
treatment with GL63 in a dose-dependent manner and with more potential than
curcumin. GL63 at 20 microM induced significant apoptosis in HepG 2 cells.
Furthermore, GL63 induced the ER stress response, up-regulation of CHOP, XBP-1,
ATF-4 and GRP78 expression in a dose-dependent, while curcumin had no effect on
ER stress. These results suggest that GL63 has more potent anti-tumor activity
than curcumin, which is associated with activation of ER stress and induction of 
apoptosis in HepG 2 cells.

PMID: 20372861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 Apr;9(4):942-52. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-0988. Epub
2010 Apr 6.

Treatment with panobinostat induces glucose-regulated protein 78 acetylation and 
endoplasmic reticulum stress in breast cancer cells.

Rao R(1), Nalluri S, Kolhe R, Yang Y, Fiskus W, Chen J, Ha K, Buckley KM, Balusu 
R, Coothankandaswamy V, Joshi A, Atadja P, Bhalla KN.

Author information: 
(1)MCG Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia, 1120 15th Street, CN-2133,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Increased levels of misfolded polypeptides in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
triggers the dissociation of glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) from the three 
transmembrane ER-stress mediators, i.e., protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase
(PERK), activating transcription factor-6 (ATF6), and inositol-requiring enzyme
1alpha, which results in the adaptive unfolded protein response (UPR). In the
present studies, we determined that histone deacetylase-6 (HDAC6) binds and
deacetylates GRP78. Following treatment with the pan-histone deacetylase
inhibitor panobinostat (Novartis Pharmaceuticals), or knockdown of HDAC6 by short
hairpin RNA, GRP78 is acetylated in 11 lysine residues, which dissociates GRP78
from PERK. This is associated with the activation of a lethal UPR in human breast
cancer cells. Coimmunoprecipitation studies showed that binding of HDAC6 to GRP78
requires the second catalytic and COOH-terminal BUZ domains of HDAC6. Treatment
with panobinostat increased the levels of phosphorylated-eukaryotic translation
initiation factor (p-eIF2alpha), ATF4, and CAAT/enhancer binding protein
homologous protein (CHOP). Panobinostat treatment also increased the proapoptotic
BIK, BIM, BAX, and BAK levels, as well as increased the activity of caspase-7.
Knockdown of GRP78 sensitized MCF-7 cells to bortezomib and panobinostat-induced 
UPR and cell death. These findings indicate that enforced acetylation and
decreased binding of GRP78 to PERK is mechanistically linked to
panobinostat-induced UPR and cell death of breast cancer cells. Mol Cancer Ther; 
9(4); 942-52. (c)2010 AACR.

PMID: 20371724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Amino Acids. 2011 Jun;41(1):159-71. doi: 10.1007/s00726-010-0571-x. Epub 2010 Apr
2.

Gene expression and integrated stress response in HepG2/C3A cells cultured in
amino acid deficient medium.

Sikalidis AK(1), Lee JI, Stipanuk MH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

The integrated stress response (ISR), a defense mechanism cells employ when under
stress (e.g., amino acid deprivation), causes suppression of global protein
synthesis along with the paradoxical increased expression of a host of proteins
that are useful in combating various stresses. Genes that were similarly
differentially expressed under conditions of either leucine- or
cysteine-depletion were identified. Many of the genes known to contain an amino
acid response element and to be induced in response to eIF2a phosphorylation and 
ATF4 heterodimer binding (ATF3, C/EBPß, SLC7A1, SLC7A11, and TRIB3), as well as
others shown to be induced downstream of eIF2a phosphorylation (C/EBP<U+03B3>, CARS,
SARS, CLCN3, CBX4, and PPP1R15A) were among the upregulated genes. Evidence for
the induction of the ISR in these cells also included the increased
phosphorylation of eIF2a and increased protein abundance of ATF4, ATF3, and ASNS 
in cysteine- and leucine-depleted cells. Based on genes highly differentially
expressed in both leucine- and cysteine-deficient cells, a list of 67
downregulated and 53 upregulated genes is suggested as likely targets of
essential amino acid deprivation in mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC3119335
PMID: 20361218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Synapse. 2010 Aug;64(8):579-93. doi: 10.1002/syn.20763.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress responses differ in meninges and associated
vasculature, striatum, and parietal cortex after a neurotoxic amphetamine
exposure.

Thomas M(1), George NI, Saini UT, Patterson TA, Hanig JP, Bowyer JF.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Toxicological Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration,
Jefferson, AR 72079-9502, USA.

Amphetamine (AMPH) is used to treat attention deficit and hyperactivity
disorders, but it can produce neurotoxicity and adverse vascular effects at high 
doses. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response (ERSR) entails the unfolded
protein response, which helps to avoid or minimize ER dysfunction. ERSR is often 
associated with toxicities resulting from the accumulation of unfolded or
misfolded proteins and has been associated with methamphetamine toxicity in the
striatum. The present study evaluates the effect of AMPH on several ERSR elements
in meninges and associated vasculature (MAV), parietal cortex, and striatum.
Adult, male Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed to saline, environmentally induced
hyperthermia (EIH) or four consecutive doses of AMPH that produce hyperthermia.
Expression changes (mRNA and protein levels) of key ERSR-related genes in MAV,
striatum, and parietal cortex at 3 h or 1 day postdosing were monitored. AMPH
increased the expression of some ERSR-related genes in all tissues. Atf4
(activating transcription factor 4, an indicator of Perk pathway activation),
Hspa5/Grp78 (Glucose regulated protein 78, master regulator of ERSR), Pdia4
(protein disulfide isomerase, protein-folding enzyme), and Nfkb1 (nuclear factor 
of kappa b, ERSR sensor) mRNA increased significantly in MAV and parietal cortex 
3 h after AMPH. In striatum, Atf4 and Hspa5/Grp78 mRNA significantly increased 3 
h after AMPH, but Pdia4 and Nfkb11 did not. Thus, AMPH caused a robust activation
of the Perk pathway in all tissues, but significant Ire1 pathway activation
occurred only after AMPH treatment in the parietal cortex and striatum.
Ddit3/Chop, a downstream effector of the ERSR pathway related to the
neurotoxicity, was only increased in striatum and parietal cortex. Conversely,
Pdia4, an enzyme protective in the ERSR, was only increased in MAV. The overall
ERSR manifestation varied significantly between MAV, striatum, and parietal
cortex after a neurotoxic exposure to AMPH.

PMID: 20340164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. BMC Med. 2010 Mar 24;8:19. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-8-19.

The cytoprotective drug amifostine modifies both expression and activity of the
pro-angiogenic factor VEGF-A.

Dedieu S(1), Canron X, Rezvani HR, Bouchecareilh M, Mazurier F, Sinisi R, Zanda
M, Moenner M, Bikfalvi A, North S.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U920, Talence, F-33400, France.

BACKGROUND: Amifostine (WR-2721, delivered as Ethyol) is a phosphorylated
aminothiol compound clinically used in addition to cis-platinum to reduce the
toxic side effects of therapeutic treatment on normal cells without reducing
their efficacy on tumour cells. Its mechanism of action is attributed to the free
radical scavenging properties of its active dephosphorylated metabolite WR-1065. 
However, amifostine has also been described as a potent hypoxia-mimetic compound 
and as a strong p53 inducer; both effects are known to potently modulate vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF-A) expression. The angiogenic properties of this 
drug have not been clearly defined.
METHODS: Cancer cell lines and endothelial cells were used in culture and treated
with Amifostine in order to study (i) the expression of angiogenesis related
genes and proteins and (ii) the effects of the drug on VEGF-A induced in vitro
angiogenesis.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that the treatment of several human cancer cell lines
with therapeutical doses of WR-1065 led to a strong induction of different VEGF-A
mRNA isoforms independently of HIF-1alpha. VEGF-A induction by WR-1065 depends on
the activation of the eIF2alpha/ATF4 pathway. This up-regulation of VEGF-A mRNA
was accompanied by an increased secretion of VEGF-A proteins fully active in
stimulating vascular endothelial cells (EC). Nevertheless, direct treatment of EC
with amifostine impaired their ability to respond to exogenous VEGF-A, an effect 
that correlated to the down-regulation of VEGFR-2 expression, to the reduction in
cell surface binding of VEGF-A and to the decreased phosphorylation of the
downstream p42/44 kinases.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results indicate that amifostine treatment
modulates tumour angiogenesis by two apparently opposite mechanisms - the
increased VEGF-A expression by tumour cells and the inhibition of EC capacity to 
respond to VEGF-A stimulation.

PMCID: PMC2859403
PMID: 20334641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Mol Med (Berl). 2010 Jun;88(6):545-52. doi: 10.1007/s00109-010-0615-4. Epub
2010 Mar 21.

Activation transcription factor-4 and the acute vascular response to injury.

Malabanan KP(1), Khachigian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW,
2052, Australia.

Atherosclerosis is a complex fibroproliferative-inflammatory process triggered by
vascular injury. Transcription factors play an important role in the control of
genes that effect critical changes in the vessel wall. Recent evidence indicates 
an emerging role for activation transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a master regulator
for evolutionarily conserved mammalian stress response pathways, in
cardiovascular pathologic settings. For example, in endothelial cells, ATF4 is
induced by atherogenic factors such as oxidised phospholipids and homocysteine,
and in monocytes, ATF4 is activated by hypoxia. In this context, ATF4 is thought 
to regulate pro-inflammatory signalling cascades and subsequent apoptosis. ATF4
is induced in aortic smooth muscle cells by fibroblast growth factor 2 and in the
intact vessel wall following balloon angioplasty. Our own work indicates that
ATF4 knockdown blocks injury-inducible intimal proliferation. Furthermore,
studies in ATF4-deficient mice have established a role for ATF4 in diet-induced
diabetes and hyperlipidaemia. In this article, we will review recent developments
on the regulation of this intriguing nuclear protein and its transcriptional
roles in the context of vascular injury and related disease.

PMID: 20306012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Cell Cycle. 2010 Apr 1;9(7):1399-410. Epub 2010 Apr 1.

Novel combination of celecoxib and proteasome inhibitor MG132 provides
synergistic antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects in human liver tumor
cells.

Cusimano A(1), Azzolina A, Iovanna JL, Bachvarov D, McCubrey JA, D'Alessandro N, 
Montalto G, Cervello M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine and Molecular Immunology Alberto Monroy, Palermo,
Italy.

Molecular targeted therapy has shown promise as a treatment for advanced
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Celecoxib (Celebrex®) exhibits antitumor effects 
in human HCC cells, and its mechanism of action is mediated either by its ability
to inhibit cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) or by a number of various other COX-2
independent effects. Proteasome inhibitors (PIs) can exert cell growth inhibitory
and apoptotic effects in different tumor cell types, including HCC cells. The
present study examined the interaction between celecoxib and the PI MG132 in two 
human liver tumor cell lines HepG2 and HA22T/VGH. Our data showed that each
inhibitor reduced proliferation and induced apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner 
in both cell lines. Moreover, the combination of celecoxib with MG132
synergistically inhibited cell viability and increased apoptosis, as documented
by caspase 3 and 7 activation, PARP cleavage, and down-regulation of Bcl-2.
Celecoxib and MG132, both alone and synergistically in combination, induced
expression of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress genes ATF4, CHOP, TRB3 and
promoted the splicing of XBP1 mRNA. Knockdown of TRB3 mRNA expression by small
interference RNA significantly decreased combination-induced cell death in
HA22T/VGH cells, whereas it increased combination-induced cell death in HepG2
cells, suggesting that activation of the ER stress response might have either a
detrimental or a protective role in liver tumor cell survival. In conclusion, our
data indicate that combination treatment with celecoxib and MG132 resulted in
synergistic antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects against liver cancer
cells, providing a rational basis for the clinical use of this combination in the
treatment of liver cancer.

PMID: 20305374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2010 May;298(5):E1011-8. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00690.2009. Epub 2010 Feb 9.

An increase in essential amino acid availability upregulates amino acid
transporter expression in human skeletal muscle.

Drummond MJ(1), Glynn EL, Fry CS, Timmerman KL, Volpi E, Rasmussen BB.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Medical Branch, Department of Physical Therapy, Division
of Rehabilitation Sciences, Sealy Center on Aging, 301 Univ. Blvd., Galveston, TX
77555-1144, USA.

Essential amino acids (EAA) stimulate skeletal muscle mammalian target of
rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling and protein synthesis. It has recently
been reported that an increase in amino acid (AA) transporter expression during
anabolic conditions is rapamycin-sensitive. The purpose of this study was to
determine whether an increase in EAA availability increases AA transporter
expression in human skeletal muscle. Muscle biopsies were obtained from the
vastus lateralis of seven young adult subjects (3 male, 4 female) before and 1-3 
h after EAA ingestion (10 g). Blood and muscle samples were analyzed for leucine 
kinetics using stable isotopic techniques. Quantitative RT-PCR, and
immunoblotting were used to determine the mRNA and protein expression,
respectively, of AA transporters and members of the general AA control pathway
[general control nonrepressed (GCN2), activating transcription factor (ATF4), and
eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF2) alpha-subunit (Ser(52))]. EAA ingestion
increased blood leucine concentration, delivery of leucine to muscle, transport
of leucine from blood into muscle, intracellular muscle leucine concentration,
ribosomal protein S6 (Ser(240/244)) phosphorylation, and muscle protein
synthesis. This was followed with increased L-type AA transporter (LAT1), CD98,
sodium-coupled neutral AA transporter (SNAT2), and proton-coupled amino acid
transporter (PAT1) mRNA expression at 1 h (P < 0.05) and modest increases in LAT1
protein expression (3 h post-EAA) and SNAT2 protein expression (2 and 3 h
post-EAA, P < 0.05). Although there were no changes in GCN2 expression and eIF2
alpha phosphorylation, ATF4 protein expression reached significance by 2 h
post-EAA (P < 0.05). We conclude that an increase in EAA availability upregulates
human skeletal muscle AA transporter expression, perhaps in an mTORC1-dependent
manner, which may be an adaptive response necessary for improved AA intracellular
delivery.

PMCID: PMC2867366
PMID: 20304764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Nature. 2010 Mar 18;464(7287):374-9. doi: 10.1038/nature08815.

Skp2 targeting suppresses tumorigenesis by Arf-p53-independent cellular
senescence.

Lin HK(1), Chen Z, Wang G, Nardella C, Lee SW, Chan CH, Yang WL, Wang J, Egia A, 
Nakayama KI, Cordon-Cardo C, Teruya-Feldstein J, Pandolfi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2010 Jul 15;466(7304):398. Chan, Chan-Hsin [corrected to Chan,
Chia-Hsin].

Comment in
    Nature. 2010 Mar 18;464(7287):363-4.

Cellular senescence has been recently shown to have an important role in opposing
tumour initiation and promotion. Senescence induced by oncogenes or by loss of
tumour suppressor genes is thought to critically depend on induction of the
p19(Arf)-p53 pathway. The Skp2 E3-ubiquitin ligase can act as a proto-oncogene
and its aberrant overexpression is frequently observed in human cancers. Here we 
show that although Skp2 inactivation on its own does not induce cellular
senescence, aberrant proto-oncogenic signals as well as inactivation of tumour
suppressor genes do trigger a potent, tumour-suppressive senescence response in
mice and cells devoid of Skp2. Notably, Skp2 inactivation and
oncogenic-stress-driven senescence neither elicit activation of the p19(Arf)-p53 
pathway nor DNA damage, but instead depend on Atf4, p27 and p21. We further
demonstrate that genetic Skp2 inactivation evokes cellular senescence even in
oncogenic conditions in which the p19(Arf)-p53 response is impaired, whereas a
Skp2-SCF complex inhibitor can trigger cellular senescence in p53/Pten-deficient 
cells and tumour regression in preclinical studies. Our findings therefore
provide proof-of-principle evidence that pharmacological inhibition of Skp2 may
represent a general approach for cancer prevention and therapy.

PMCID: PMC2928066
PMID: 20237562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Jul;224(1):33-40. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22085.

Arctigenin blocks the unfolded protein response and shows therapeutic antitumor
activity.

Kim JY(1), Hwang JH, Cha MR, Yoon MY, Son ES, Tomida A, Ko B, Song SW, Shin-ya K,
Hwang YI, Park HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology, Kyungnam University, Masan,
Korea.

Cancer cells in poorly vascularized solid tumors are constantly or intermittently
exposed to stressful microenvironments, including glucose deprivation, hypoxia,
and other forms of nutrient starvation. These tumor-specific conditions,
especially glucose deprivation, activate a signaling pathway called the unfolded 
protein response (UPR), which enhances cell survival by induction of the stress
proteins. We have established a screening method to discover anticancer agents
that could preferentially inhibit tumor cell viability under glucose-deprived
conditions. Here we identify arctigenin (ARC-G) as an active compound that shows 
selective cytotoxicity and inhibits the UPR during glucose deprivation. Indeed,
ARC-G blocked expression of UPR target genes such as phosphorylated-PERK, ATF4,
CHOP, and GRP78, which was accompanied by enhanced phosphorylation of eIF2 alpha 
during glucose deprivation. The UPR inhibition led to apoptosis involving a
mitochondrial pathway by activation of caspase-9 and -3. Furthermore, ARC-G
suppressed tumor growth of colon cancer HT-29 xenografts. Our results demonstrate
that ARC-G can be served as a novel type of antitumor agent targeting the UPR in 
glucose-deprived solid tumors.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20232300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 8;5(3):e9575. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009575.

Transcriptional regulation of VEGF-A by the unfolded protein response pathway.

Ghosh R(1), Lipson KL, Sargent KE, Mercurio AM, Hunt JS, Ron D, Urano F.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Gene Function and Expression, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Angiogenesis is crucial to many physiological and pathological
processes including development and cancer cell survival. Vascular endothelial
growth factor-A (VEGFA) is the predominant mediator of angiogenesis in the VEGF
family. During development, adverse environmental conditions like nutrient
deprivation, hypoxia and increased protein secretion occur. IRE1alpha, PERK, and 
ATF6alpha, master regulators of the unfolded protein response (UPR), are
activated under these conditions and are proposed to have a role in mediating
angiogenesis.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show that IRE1alpha, PERK, and ATF6alpha powerfully
regulate VEGFA mRNA expression under various stress conditions. In Ire1alpha(-/-)
and Perk(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts and ATF6alpha-knockdown HepG2 cells,
induction of VEGFA mRNA by endoplasmic reticulum stress is attenuated as compared
to control cells. Embryonic lethality of Ire1alpha-/- mice is due to the lack of 
VEGFA induction in labyrinthine trophoblast cells of the developing placenta.
Rescue of IRE1alpha and PERK in Ire1alpha(-/-) and Perk(-/-) cells respectively, 
prevents VEGFA mRNA attenuation. We further report that the induction of VEGFA by
IRE1alpha, PERK and ATF6 involves activation of transcription factors,
spliced-XBP-1, ATF4 and cleaved ATF6 respectively.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results reveal that the IRE1alpha-XBP-1, PERK-ATF4,
and ATF6alpha pathways constitute novel upstream regulatory pathways of
angiogenesis by modulating VEGF transcription. Activation of these pathways helps
the rapidly growing cells to obtain sufficient nutrients and growth factors for
their survival under the prevailing hostile environmental conditions. These
results establish an important role of the UPR in angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2833197
PMID: 20221394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2010 Mar 15;42(3):173-6.

Involvement of CENP-F in histone methylation.

Du J(1), Li Y, Zhu X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

CENP-F (also named mitosin) is a multifunctional protein of 350 kDa. In
interphase, it is a nuclear protein, whereas in M phase it localizes to the
kinetochore, the major microtubule-binding structure on chromosomes essential for
chromosome segregation. CENP-F is also critical for myocyte differentiation
through the interaction with Rb. It binds to ATF4 and negatively regulates the
transcriptional activity of ATF4. It is also important for mitotic progression.
Here we show that depletion of CENP-F by RNAi markedly downregulated the
methylation of histone H3 at K4 and K9. Consistently, association of HP1a with
mitotic chromosomes was largely decreased. These results uncover a novel role of 
CENP-F in regulation of epigenetic modification on histone H3.

PMID: 20213041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Apr;24(4):790-9. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0345. Epub 2010 Mar 2.

The transcription factor ATF4 promotes skeletal myofiber atrophy during fasting.

Ebert SM(1), Monteys AM, Fox DK, Bongers KS, Shields BE, Malmberg SE, Davidson
BL, Suneja M, Adams CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of
Medicine, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Prolonged fasting alters skeletal muscle gene expression in a manner that
promotes myofiber atrophy, but the underlying mechanisms are not fully
understood. Here, we examined the potential role of activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4), a transcription factor with an evolutionarily ancient role in
the cellular response to starvation. In mouse skeletal muscle, fasting increases 
the level of ATF4 mRNA. To determine whether increased ATF4 expression was
required for myofiber atrophy, we reduced ATF4 expression with an inhibitory RNA 
targeting ATF4 and found that it reduced myofiber atrophy during fasting.
Likewise, reducing the fasting level of ATF4 mRNA with a
phosphorylation-resistant form of eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha decreased
myofiber atrophy. To determine whether ATF4 was sufficient to reduce myofiber
size, we overexpressed ATF4 and found that it reduced myofiber size in the
absence of fasting. In contrast, a transcriptionally inactive ATF4 construct did 
not reduce myofiber size, suggesting a requirement for ATF4-mediated
transcriptional regulation. To begin to determine the mechanism of ATF4-mediated 
myofiber atrophy, we compared the effects of fasting and ATF4 overexpression on
global skeletal muscle mRNA expression. Interestingly, expression of ATF4
increased a small subset of five fasting-responsive mRNAs, including four of the 
15 mRNAs most highly induced by fasting. These five mRNAs encode proteins
previously implicated in growth suppression (p21(Cip1/Waf1), GADD45alpha, and
PW1/Peg3) or titin-based stress signaling [muscle LIM protein (MLP) and cardiac
ankyrin repeat protein (CARP)]. Taken together, these data identify ATF4 as a
novel mediator of skeletal myofiber atrophy during starvation.

PMCID: PMC2852358
PMID: 20197309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 May;30(5):1007-13. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.204354. Epub 2010 Feb 25.

Oxidized phospholipids regulate expression of ATF4 and VEGF in endothelial cells 
via NRF2-dependent mechanism: novel point of convergence between electrophilic
and unfolded protein stress pathways.

Afonyushkin T(1), Oskolkova OV, Philippova M, Resink TJ, Erne P, Binder BR,
Bochkov VN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology and Thrombosis Research, Center for
Biomolecular Medicine and Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna,
Schwarzspanierstrasse 17, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

OBJECTIVE: The ATF4 arm of the unfolded protein response is increasingly
recognized for its relevance to pathology, and in particular to angiogenic
reactions. Oxidized phospholipids (OxPLs), known to accumulate in atherosclerotic
vessels, were shown to upregulate vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and
induce angiogenesis via an ATF4-dependent mechanism. In this study, we analyzed
the mechanism of ATF4 upregulation by OxPLs and more specifically the involvement
of NRF2, the major transcriptional mediator of electrophilic stress response.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using reverse transcription/real-time polymerase chain
reaction and Western blotting, we found that OxPLs induced upregulation of ATF4
mRNA and protein in several types of endothelial cells and that these effects
were suppressed by short interfering RNA (siRNA) against NRF2. Electrophilic
(iso)prostaglandins and oxidized low-density lipoprotein, similarly to OxPLs,
elevated ATF4 mRNA levels in an NRF2-dependent mode. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed OxPL-dependent binding of NRF2 to a putative
antioxidant response element site in the ATF4 gene promoter. Knockdown of NRF2
inhibited OxPL-induced elevation of VEGF mRNA and endothelial cell sprout
formation.
CONCLUSION: Our data characterize NRF2 as a positive regulator of ATF4 and
identify a novel cross-talk between electrophilic and unfolded protein responses,
which may play a role in stress-induced angiogenesis.

PMID: 20185790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Int J Cell Biol. 2010;2010:170215. doi: 10.1155/2010/170215. Epub 2010 Feb 7.

Mechanisms of ER Stress-Mediated Mitochondrial Membrane Permeabilization.

Gupta S(1), Cuffe L, Szegezdi E, Logue SE, Neary C, Healy S, Samali A.

Author information: 
(1)Apoptosis Research Centre, School of Natural Sciences, National University of 
Ireland, Galway, Ireland.

During apoptosis, the process of mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization
(MOMP) represents a point-of-no-return as it commits the cell to death. Here we
have assessed the role of caspases, Bcl-2 family members and the mitochondrial
permeability transition pore on ER stress-induced MOMP and subsequent cell death.
Induction of ER stress leads to upregulation of several genes such as Grp78,
Edem1, Erp72, Atf4, Wars, Herp, p58ipk, and ERdj4 and leads to caspase
activation, release of mitochondrial intermembrane proteins and dissipation of
mitochondrial transmembrane potential (DeltaPsim). Mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs) from caspase-9, -2 and, -3 knock-out mice were resistant to ER
stress-induced apoptosis which correlated with decreased processing of
pro-caspase-3 and -9. Furthermore, pretreatment of cells with caspase inhibitors 
(Boc-D.fmk and DEVD.fmk) attenuated ER stress-induced loss of DeltaPsim. However,
only deficiency of caspase-9 and -2 could prevent ER stress-mediated loss of
DeltaPsim. Bcl-2 overexpression or pretreatment of cells with the cell permeable 
BH4 domain (BH4-Tat) or the mitochondrial permeability transition pore
inhibitors, bongkrekic acid or cyclosporine A, attenuated the ER stress-induced
loss of DeltaPsim. These data suggest a role for caspase-9 and -2, Bcl-2 family
members and the mitochondrial permeability transition pore in loss of
mitochondrial membrane potential during ER stress-induced apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2821636
PMID: 20169117  [PubMed]


432. Autophagy. 2010 Apr;6(3):345-52. Epub 2010 Apr 11.

Autophagy impairment stimulates PS1 expression and gamma-secretase activity.

Ohta K(1), Mizuno A, Ueda M, Li S, Suzuki Y, Hida Y, Hayakawa-Yano Y, Itoh M,
Ohta E, Kobori M, Nakagawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu,
Japan.

Gamma-secretase plays an important role in the development of Alzheimer disease
(AD). Gamma-secretase activity is enriched in autophagic vacuoles and it augments
amyloid-beta (Abeta) synthesis. Autophagy-lysosomal dysfunction has been
implicated in AD, but whether gamma-secretase activity is affected by autophagy
remains unclear. Here we report that gamma-secretase activity is enhanced in
basal autophagy-disturbed cells through the alpha subunit of eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2alpha) kinase, general control
nonderepressible 2 (GCN2). Presenilin-1 (PS1) expression was increased even in
the presence of nutrients in autophagy-related 5 knockdown (Atg5KD) human
embryonic kidney (HE K293) cells expressing a short hairpin RNA as well as in
chloroquine-treated HE K293 cells. However, PS1 expression induction was
prevented in GCN2KD and ATF4KD cells. Furthermore, Atg5KD cells showed an
increase in Abeta production and Notch1 cleavage. These were reduced by an
autophagy inducer, resveratrol. Thus, we conclude that the autophagy-lysosomal
system regulates gamma-secretase activity through GCN2.

PMID: 20168091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Neurosci. 2010 Feb 17;30(7):2582-94. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3971-09.2010.

eIF2alpha Phosphorylation-dependent translation in CA1 pyramidal cells impairs
hippocampal memory consolidation without affecting general translation.

Jiang Z(1), Belforte JE, Lu Y, Yabe Y, Pickel J, Smith CB, Je HS, Lu B, Nakazawa 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Unit on the Genetics of Cognition and Behavior, Mood and Anxiety Disorders
Program, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

Protein synthesis inhibitor antibiotics are widely used to produce amnesia, and
have been recognized to inhibit general or global mRNA translation in the basic
translational machinery. For instance, anisomycin interferes with protein
synthesis by inhibiting peptidyl transferase or the 80S ribosomal function.
Therefore, de novo general or global protein synthesis has been thought to be
necessary for long-term memory formation. However, it is unclear which mode of
translation-gene-specific translation or general/global translation-is actually
crucial for the memory consolidation process in mammalian brains. Here, we
generated a conditional transgenic mouse strain in which double-strand
RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR)-mediated phosphorylation of eIF2alpha, a key
translation initiation protein, was specifically increased in hippocampal CA1
pyramidal cells by the chemical inducer AP20187. Administration of AP20187
significantly increased activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) translation and 
concomitantly suppressed CREB-dependent pathways in CA1 cells; this led to
impaired hippocampal late-phase LTP and memory consolidation, with no obvious
reduction in general translation. Conversely, inhibition of general translation
by low-dose anisomycin failed to block hippocampal-dependent memory
consolidation. Together, these results indicated that CA1-restricted genetic
manipulation of particular mRNA translations is sufficient to impair the
consolidation and that consolidation of memories in CA1 pyramidal cells through
eIF2alpha dephosphorylation depends more on transcription/translation of
particular genes than on overall levels of general translation. The present study
sheds light on the critical importance of gene-specific translations for
hippocampal memory consolidation.

PMCID: PMC2836228
PMID: 20164343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Apoptosis. 2010 Jun;15(6):679-92. doi: 10.1007/s10495-010-0474-z.

Phosphorylation of eIF2 alpha in Sf9 cells: a stress, survival and suicidal
signal.

Aarti I(1), Rajesh K, Ramaiah KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India.

An analysis of the stress-induced phosphorylation of the alpha-subunit of
eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF2alpha) involved in translation regulation, in
the ovarian cells of Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) for its role in cell survival
and death reveals that it stimulates casapase activation and cell death in the
absence of BiP, a chaperone and stress marker of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). 
While Phospho-JNK and GADD-153 levels are elevated in non-ER stress-induced
eIF2alpha phosphorylation-mediated cell death, ATF4 levels are elevated both in
response to ER and non-ER stress-induced eIF2alpha phosphorylation. Infection of 
Sf9 cells by wt and a mutant Deltapk2 baculovirus that harbor the anti-apoptotic 
p35 gene induces BiP expression. However, UV-induced eIF2alpha phosphorylation
and caspase activation are mitigated more efficiently by wt, but not by Deltapk2 
baculovirus that lacks pk2, an inhibitor of eIF2alpha kinase. z-VAD-fmk, a
caspase inhibitor reduces the late stages, but not the initial stages of non-ER
stress-induced eIF2alpha phosphorylation, thereby suggesting that eIF2alpha
phosphorylation is a cause and consequence of caspase activation. The importance 
of BiP affecting the delicate balance between eIF2alpha phosphorylation-mediated 
cell survival and death is further supported by the findings that
tunicamycin-treated cells expressing BiP resist eIF2alpha
phosphorylation-mediated cell death and addition of a purified recombinant mutant
phosphomimetic form, but not wt eIF2alpha, stimulates caspase activation in cell 
extracts devoid of BiP. These findings therefore suggest that eIF2alpha
phosphorylation is primarily a stress signal and evokes adaptive or apoptotic
responses depending on its cellular location, changes in gene expression,
coincident signaling activities, and inter-protein interactions.

PMID: 20162453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Acta Orthop. 2010 Apr;81(2):263-7. doi: 10.3109/17453671003587085.

Taurine protects against lung damage following limb ischemia reperfusion in the
rat by attenuating endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis.

Men X(1), Han S, Gao J, Cao G, Zhang L, Yu H, Lu H, Pu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, North China Coal Medical College, Tangshan,
China. xiulimen@hotmail.com

Erratum in
    Acta Orthop. 2010 Oct;80(5):647.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: CHOP is a C/EBP family transcription factor involved in
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-mediated apoptosis. Several studies have
demonstrated that ischemia reperfusion results in apoptosis. Oxidative stress is 
central to ischemia reperfusion-induced apoptosis. Taurine protects against lung 
injury after limb ischemia reperfusion (LIR) through antioxidation. The effects
of taurine on ER stress-induced apoptosis have not been well explored, however.
We studied the effects of taurine in ER stress-induced apoptosis following LIR.
METHODS: Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats (n = 40) were randomized into 4 groups:
(1) a control group, (2) an LIR group, (3) an LIR group treated with taurine, and
(4) an LIR group treated with saline. Bilateral hindlimb ischemia was induced by 
application of a rubber band proximal to the level of the greater trochanters for
4 h. The treatment groups received either taurine (200 mg/kg as a 4% solution in 
0.9% saline) or saline alone prior to reperfusion. Following 4h of reperfusion,
blood oxygen was analyzed. The animals were killed and plasma and lung tissue
were harvested for evaluation.
RESULTS: Taurine statistically significantly attenuated lung injury following
LIR, as shown by reduced malondialdehyde content, reduced cell apoptosis, and
expression of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), X-box binding protein 1
(XBP1), and transcriptional activators of the CHOP gene. Furthermore, partial
pressure values of oxygen in arterial blood and the activities of superoxide
dismutase and catalase were higher in the taurine pretreatment group than in the 
group of rats that underwent LIR alone.
INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that taurine attenuates endoplasmic reticulum
stress-induced apoptosis in the lungs of rats after limb ischemia reperfusion.

PMCID: PMC2895349
PMID: 20148646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Theor Appl Genet. 2010 May;120(8):1611-9. doi: 10.1007/s00122-010-1280-2. Epub
2010 Feb 9.

SRAP polymorphisms associated with superior freezing tolerance in alfalfa
(Medicago sativa spp. sativa).

Castonguay Y(1), Cloutier J, Bertrand A, Michaud R, Laberge S.

Author information: 
(1)Crops and Soils Research and Development Center, Agriculture and Agri-Food
Canada, 2560 Hochelaga Blvd, Quebec, QC, G1V 2J3, Canada.
yves.castonguay@agr.gc.ca

Sequence-related amplified polymorphism (SRAP) analysis was used to uncover
genetic polymorphisms among alfalfa populations recurrently selected for superior
tolerance to freezing (TF populations). Bulk DNA samples (45 plants/bulk) from
each of the cultivar Apica (ATF0), and populations ATF2, ATF4, ATF5, and ATF6
were evaluated with 42 different SRAP primer pairs. Several polymorphisms that
progressively intensified or decreased with the number of recurrent cycles were
identified. Four positive polymorphisms (F10-R14, Me4-R8, F10-R8 and F11-R9)
that, respectively, yielded 540-, 359-, 213-, and 180-bp fragments were selected 
for further analysis. SRAP amplifications with genotypes within ATF populations
confirmed that the polymorphisms identified with bulk DNA samples were reflecting
changes in the frequency of their occurrence in response to selection. In
addition, the number of genotypes cumulating multiple polymorphisms markedly
increased in response to recurrent selection. Independent segregation of the four
SRAP polymorphisms suggests location at unlinked loci. Homology search gave
matches with BAC clones from syntenic Medicago truncatula for the four SRAP
fragments. Analysis of the relationship with low temperature tolerance showed
that multiple SRAP polymorphisms are more frequent in genotypes that maintain
superior regrowth after freezing. These results show that SRAP analysis of bulk
DNA samples from recurrent selections is an effective approach for the
identification of genetic polymorphisms associated with quantitative traits in
allogamous species. These polymorphisms could be useful tools for indirect
selection of freezing tolerance in alfalfa.

PMID: 20143042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Cell Metab. 2010 Feb 3;11(2):147-60. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2010.01.001.

FoxO1 is a positive regulator of bone formation by favoring protein synthesis and
resistance to oxidative stress in osteoblasts.

Rached MT(1), Kode A, Xu L, Yoshikawa Y, Paik JH, Depinho RA, Kousteni S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, College of Physicians and
Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Osteoporosis, a disease of low bone mass, is associated with decreased osteoblast
numbers and increased levels of oxidative stress within osteoblasts. Since
transcription factors of the FoxO family confer stress resistance, we
investigated their potential impact on skeletal integrity. Here we employ
cell-specific deletion and molecular analyses to show that, among the three FoxO 
proteins, only FoxO1 is required for proliferation and redox balance in
osteoblasts and thereby controls bone formation. FoxO1 regulation of osteoblast
proliferation occurs through its interaction with ATF4, a transcription factor
regulating amino acid import, as well as through its regulation of a
stress-dependent pathway influencing p53 signaling. Accordingly, decreasing
oxidative stress levels or increasing protein intake normalizes bone formation
and bone mass in mice lacking FoxO1 specifically in osteoblasts. These results
identify FoxO1 as a crucial regulator of osteoblast physiology and provide a
direct mechanistic link between oxidative stress and the regulation of bone
remodeling.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2820405
PMID: 20142102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Neoplasia. 2010 Jan;12(1):80-6.

Activation of the unfolded protein response contributes toward the antitumor
activity of vorinostat.

Kahali S(1), Sarcar B, Fang B, Williams ES, Koomen JM, Tofilon PJ, Chinnaiyan P.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors represent an emerging class of anticancer
agents progressing through clinical trials. Although their primary target is
thought to involve acetylation of core histones, several nonhistone substrates
have been identified, including heat shock protein (HSP) 90, which may contribute
towards their antitumor activity. Glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) is a
member of the HSP family of molecular chaperones and plays a central role in
regulating the unfolded protein response (UPR). Emerging data suggest that GRP78 
is critical in cellular adaptation and survival associated with oncogenesis and
may serve as a cancer-specific therapeutic target. On the basis of shared
homology with HSP family proteins, we sought to determine whether GRP78 could
serve as a molecular target of the HDAC inhibitor vorinostat. Vorinostat
treatment led to GRP78 acetylation, dissociation, and subsequent activation of
its client protein double-stranded RNA-activated protein-like endoplasmic
reticulum kinase (PERK). Investigations in a panel of cancer cell lines
identified that UPR activation after vorinostat exposure is specific to certain
lines. Mass spectrometry performed on immunoprecipitated GRP78 identified
lysine-585 as a specific vorinostat-induced acetylation site of GRP78. Downstream
activation of the UPR was confirmed, including eukaryotic initiating factor
2alpha phosphorylation and increase in ATF4 and C/EBP homologous protein
expression. To determine the biologic relevance of UPR activation after
vorinostat, RNA interference of PERK was performed, demonstrating significantly
decreased sensitivity to vorinostat-induced cytotoxicity. Collectively, these
findings indicate that GRP78 is a biologic target of vorinostat, and activation
of the UPR through PERK phosphorylation contributes toward its antitumor
activity.

PMCID: PMC2805886
PMID: 20072656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Cell Res. 2010 Feb;20(2):174-84. doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.4. Epub 2010 Jan 12.

ATF4 regulates lipid metabolism and thermogenesis.

Wang C(1), Huang Z, Du Y, Cheng Y, Chen S, Guo F.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institute for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) has been shown to play key roles in many
physiological processes. There are no reports, however, demonstrating a direct
link between ATF4 and lipid metabolism. We noticed that Atf4-deficient mice are
lean, suggesting a possible role for ATF4 in regulating lipid metabolism. The
goal of our current study is to investigate the involvement of ATF4 in lipid
metabolism and elucidate the underlying mechanisms. Studies using Atf4-deficient 
mice revealed increased energy expenditure, as measured by oxygen consumption.
These mice also showed increases in lipolysis, expression of uncoupling protein 2
(UCP2) and beta-oxidation genes and decreases in expression of lipogenic genes in
white adipose tissue (WAT), suggesting increased utilization and decreased
synthesis of fatty acids, respectively. Expression of UCP1, 2 and 3 was also
increased in brown adipose tissue (BAT), suggesting increased thermogenesis. The 
effect of ATF4 deletion on expression of UCPs in BAT suggests that increased
thermogenesis may underlie increased energy expenditure. Thus, our study
identifies a possible new function for ATF4 in regulating lipid metabolism and
thermogenesis.

PMID: 20066008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Feb 12;392(3):289-94. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.12.175. Epub 2010 Jan 11.

Anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome-cdh1 mediates the ubiquitination and
degradation of TRB3.

Ohoka N(1), Sakai S, Onozaki K, Nakanishi M, Hayashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, 3-1
Tanabe-dori, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8603, Japan.

We have recently demonstrated that TRB3, a novel endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-inducible protein, is induced by CHOP and ATF4 to regulate their function 
and ER stress-induced cell death; however, the regulation of TRB3 function has
not been well characterized. Here we demonstrate that TRB3 is an unstable protein
regulated by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. The carboxyl-terminal domain of
TRB3 is necessary for protein degradation, and in this region, we found the
typical D-box motif, which is a critical sequence for the anaphase-promoting
complex/cyclosome (APC/C) dependent proteolysis. TRB3 proteins were stabilized by
deletion of its D-box motif and interacted with APC/C coactivator proteins, Cdc20
and Cdh1. The expression level of TRB3 protein is down-regulated by
over-expression of Cdh1 but not by that of Cdc20. In addition, knockdown of Cdh1 
enhanced the endogenous TRB3 expression level and suppressed its ubiquitination
level. These results suggest that APC/C(Cdh1) is involved in ubiquitination and
down-regulating the stability of TRB3 protein.

PMID: 20064487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Zoolog Sci. 2010 Jan;27(1):19-23. doi: 10.2108/zsj.27.19.

Characterization of an activating transcription factor 4 gene containing a
consensus phosphorylation site for PKA in the gonads of Xenopus embryos.

Komatsuzaki E(1), Kitamura T, Murayama I, Saigo Y, Ojima K, Akatsuka N, Iwabuchi 
J, Miyata S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, College of Humanities and
Sciences, Nihon University, 3-25-40 Sakurajosui, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Activating transcription factor / cyclic-AMP response element-binding protein
(ATF/CREB) has been implicated as a key regulator in the transcriptional control 
of many genes. In this study, we isolated and characterized a full-length cDNA
that encodes a CRE-binding protein 2 (CREB2) called ATF4 in Xenopus embryos. Like
other CREB 2 transcription factors, the 342-amino acid ATF4 protein contains a
carboxyl terminal leucine-zipper motif, an adjacent basic domain, and an amino
terminal leucine-zipper motif. Unlike other CREB2 (ATF4) proteins, the ATF4
isolated from the gonads of Xenopus embryos contains a consensus phosphorylation 
site for protein kinase A (PKA). In a gel shift analysis, ATF4 bound to a CLS
sequence in the promoter of Xenopus aromatase.

PMID: 20064004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Br J Cancer. 2010 Feb 2;102(3):561-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605491. Epub 2010 Jan 
5.

Circulating tumour cells demonstrate an altered response to hypoxia and an
aggressive phenotype.

Ameri K(1), Luong R, Zhang H, Powell AA, Montgomery KD, Espinosa I, Bouley DM,
Harris AL, Jeffrey SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305-5494, USA. kurosh.ameri@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Tumours contain hypoxic regions that select for an aggressive cell
phenotype; tumour hypoxia induces metastasis-associated genes. Treatment
refractory patients with metastatic cancer show increased numbers of circulating 
tumour cells (CTCs), which are also associated with disease progression. The aim 
of this study was to examine the as yet unknown relationship between hypoxia and 
CTCs.
METHODS: We generated human MDA-MB-231 orthotopic xenografts and, using a new
technology, isolated viable human CTCs from murine blood. The CTCs and parental
MDA-MB-231 cells were incubated at 21 and 0.2% (hypoxia) oxygen, respectively.
Colony formation was assayed and levels of hypoxia- and anoxia-inducible factors 
were measured. Xenografts generated from CTCs and parental cells were compared.
RESULTS: MDA-MB-231 xenografts used to generate CTCs were hypoxic, expressing
hypoxia factors: hypoxia-inducible factor1 alpha (HIF1alpha) and glucose
transporter protein type 1 (GLUT1), and anoxia-induced factors: activating
transcription factor 3 and 4 (ATF3 and ATF4). Parental MDA-MB-231 cells induced
ATF3 in hypoxia, whereas CTCs expressed it constitutively. Asparagine synthetase 
(ASNS) expression was also higher in CTCs. Hypoxia induced ATF4 and the HIF1alpha
target gene apelin in CTCs, but not in parental cells. Hypoxia induced lower
levels of carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX), GLUT1 and BCL2/adenovirus E1B 19-KD
protein-interacting protein 3 (BNIP3) proteins in CTCs than in parental cells,
supporting an altered hypoxia response. In chronic hypoxia, CTCs demonstrated
greater colony formation than parental cells. Xenografts generated from CTCs were
larger and heavier, and metastasised faster than MDA-MB-231 xenografts.
CONCLUSION: CTCs show an altered hypoxia response and an enhanced aggressive
phenotype in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2805847
PMID: 20051957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Clin Invest. 2010 Jan;120(1):127-41. doi: 10.1172/JCI40027. Epub 2009 Dec 14.

The unfolded protein response protects human tumor cells during hypoxia through
regulation of the autophagy genes MAP1LC3B and ATG5.

Rouschop KM(1), van den Beucken T, Dubois L, Niessen H, Bussink J, Savelkouls K, 
Keulers T, Mujcic H, Landuyt W, Voncken JW, Lambin P, van der Kogel AJ,
Koritzinsky M, Wouters BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology (Maastro Lab), GROW School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University,Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Tumor hypoxia is a common microenvironmental factor that adversely influences
tumor phenotype and treatment response. Cellular adaptation to hypoxia occurs
through multiple mechanisms, including activation of the unfolded protein
response (UPR). Recent reports have indicated that hypoxia activates a lysosomal 
degradation pathway known as autophagy, and here we show that the UPR enhances
the capacity of hypoxic tumor cells to carry out autophagy, and that this
promotes their survival. In several human cancer cell lines, hypoxia increased
transcription of the essential autophagy genes microtubule-associated protein 1
light chain 3beta (MAP1LC3B) and autophagy-related gene 5 (ATG5) through the
transcription factors ATF4 and CHOP, respectively, which are regulated by
PKR-like ER kinase (PERK, also known as EIF2AK3). MAP1LC3B and ATG5 are not
required for initiation of autophagy but mediate phagophore expansion and
autophagosome formation. We observed that transcriptional induction of MAP1LC3B
replenished MAP1LC3B protein that was turned over during extensive
hypoxia-induced autophagy. Correspondingly, cells deficient in PERK signaling
failed to transcriptionally induce MAP1LC3B and became rapidly depleted of
MAP1LC3B protein during hypoxia. Consistent with these data, autophagy and
MAP1LC3B induction occurred preferentially in hypoxic regions of human tumor
xenografts. Furthermore, pharmacological inhibition of autophagy sensitized human
tumor cells to hypoxia, reduced the fraction of viable hypoxic tumor cells, and
sensitized xenografted human tumors to irradiation. Our data therefore
demonstrate that the UPR is an important mediator of the hypoxic tumor
microenvironment and that it contributes to resistance to treatment through its
ability to facilitate autophagy.

PMCID: PMC2798689
PMID: 20038797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. FEBS Lett. 2010 Feb 19;584(4):745-52. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.12.028. Epub
2009 Dec 22.

Mechanical stimulation suppresses phosphorylation of eIF2alpha and PERK-mediated 
responses to stress to the endoplasmic reticulum.

Hirasawa H(1), Jiang C, Zhang P, Yang FC, Yokota H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Cellular perturbations such as stress to the endoplasmic reticulum induce an
integrated stress response, which activates phosphorylation of eIF2alpha and
leads to alleviation of cellular injury or apoptosis. This study investigated the
role of mechanical stimulation in the regulation of eIF2alpha and cell death.
Mechanical stimulation was applied to mouse ulnae, MC3T3 cells, and mesenchymal
stem cells. The results demonstrate that mechanical stimulation reduces
phosphorylation of eIF2alpha through inactivation of Perk. Furthermore, flow
pre-treatment reduces thapsigargin-induced cell mortality through suppression of 
phosphorylation of Perk. However, H(2)O(2)-driven cell mortality, which is not
mediated by Perk, is not suppressed by mechanical stimulation. Taken together,
our observations suggest a pro-survival role of mechanical stimulation in
Perk-mediated stress responses.

Copyright 2009 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20034494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jan 15;391(3):1352-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.12.059. Epub 2009 Dec 22.

Amino acid deprivation induces CREBZF/Zhangfei expression via an AARE-like
element in the promoter.

Zhang Y(1), Jin Y, Williams TA, Burtenshaw SM, Martyn AC, Lu R.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi, PR China.

CREBZF (also called ZF or Zhangfei) is a basic region-leucine zipper
transcription factor that has been implicated in the herpesvirus infection cycle 
and related cellular processes. Since ATF4 is known to play a key role in
cellular responses to various ER stresses as well as amino acid deprivation, we
sought to examine the potential involvement of CREBZF in the amino acid response 
(AAR). We found that the CREBZF protein was induced by amino acid deprivation in 
the canine MDCK cells. We subsequently cloned a canine CREBZF promoter region
(-1767bp to +1bp) that responds to amino acid limitation. Using deletion mapping 
and site-directed mutagenesis, we identified a 9-bp sequence 5'-ATTCACTCA-3' in
the promoter (-1227 to -1219), deletion of which resulted in a complete loss of
inducibility by amino acid deprivation. This sequence is similar to the known
amino acid response elements (AAREs) found in other AAR-inducible genes, such as 
CHOP (C/EBP homologous protein, also known as GADD153). These results suggest
that CREBZF may be an amino acid stress sensor. Considering the AARE-like
sequence found in CREBZF and other similarities between CREBZF and CHOP, we
postulate that CREBZF and CHOP may be two sensors that regulate different yet
related signaling pathways governing the AAR.

Crown Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20026304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Neurochem Int. 2010 Feb;56(3):487-94. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2009.12.008. Epub
2009 Dec 21.

Enhanced expression of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) precedes degeneration of
fibrocytes in the lateral wall after acute cochlear mitochondrial dysfunction
induced by 3-nitropropionic acid.

Fujinami Y(1), Mutai H, Kamiya K, Mizutari K, Fujii M, Matsunaga T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Auditory Disorders, National Institute of Sensory Organs,
National Tokyo Medical Center, 2-5-1 Higashigaoka, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8902,
Japan.

We previously reported that treatment of the rat cochlea with a mitochondrial
toxin, 3-nitropropionic acid (3-NP), causes temporary to permanent hearing loss
depending on the amount of the drug. Furthermore, apoptosis of cochlear lateral
wall fibrocytes, which are important for maintaining the endolymph, is a
predominant pathological feature in this animal model. 3-NP is known to induce
oxidative stress as well as neuronal apoptosis. C/EBP homologous protein gene
(chop) is one of the marker genes induced during endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress, and is also considered to be involved in apoptosis. To elucidate the
molecular mechanism of cochlear fibrocyte apoptosis induced by 3-NP, we studied
spatiotemporal expression of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) and other signaling 
molecules related to ER stress as well as the appearance of apoptotic cells in
the cochlear lateral wall after 3-NP treatment. Quantitative real-time PCR
revealed that chop and activating transcription factor 4 gene (atf-4) showed
marked increase within 6h, whereas expression of other ER stress-responsive genes
such as grp78 and grp94 did not change. Immunohistochemistry showed that 3-NP
treatment caused up-regulation of CHOP, especially in type II and type IV
fibrocytes, followed by the appearance of terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
mediated dUTP nick end-labeling (TUNEL)-positive apoptotic cells in the same
confined area. Thus, apoptosis of lateral wall fibrocytes induced by 3-NP is
likely to be mediated by induction of CHOP. These results contribute
clarification of pathological mechanism of cochlear fibrocytes and may lead to
development of novel therapeutic strategy for hearing loss.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20026213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 26;285(9):6091-100. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.014092. Epub 2009
Dec 18.

Regulation of endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced cell death by ATF4 in
neuroectodermal tumor cells.

Armstrong JL(1), Flockhart R, Veal GJ, Lovat PE, Redfern CP.

Author information: 
(1)Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United
Kingdom. J.L.Armstrong@ncl.ac.uk

The neuroectodermal tumors neuroblastoma and melanoma represent biologically
aggressive and chemoresistant cancers. The chemotherapeutic agents fenretinide
and bortezomib induce apoptosis through endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in
these tumor types. The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that the
early events of ER stress signaling and response pathways induced by fenretinide 
and bortezomib are mediated by the eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha
(eIF2alpha)-ATF4 signaling pathway. Treatment of neuroblastoma and melanoma cell 
lines with fenretinide, bortezomib, or thapsigargin resulted in induction of
eIF2alpha signaling, characterized by increased expression of phosphorylated
eIF2alpha, ATF4, ATF3, and GADD34. These events correlated with induction of the 
pro-apoptotic protein Noxa. The cytotoxic response, characterized by
up-regulation of Noxa and cell death, was dependent on ATF4, but not the
ER-related pro-death signaling pathways involving GADD153 or IRE1. Although
PERK-dependent phosphorylation of eIF2alpha enhanced ATF4 protein levels during
ER stress, cell death in response to fenretinide, bortezomib, or thapsigargin was
not abrogated by inhibition of eIF2alpha phosphorylation through PERK knockdown
or overexpression of wild-type eIF2alpha. Furthermore, ATF4 induction in response
to ER stress was dependent primarily on transcriptional activation, which
occurred in a PERK- and phosphorylated eIF2alpha-independent manner. These
results demonstrate that ATF4 mediates ER stress-induced cell death of
neuroectodermal tumor cells in response to fenretinide or bortezomib.
Understanding the complex regulation of cell death pathways in response to ER
stress-inducing drugs has the potential to reveal novel therapeutic targets, thus
allowing the development of improved treatment strategies to overcome
chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC2825403
PMID: 20022965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. PLoS One. 2009 Dec 17;4(12):e8342. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008342.

The SARS Coronavirus 3a protein causes endoplasmic reticulum stress and induces
ligand-independent downregulation of the type 1 interferon receptor.

Minakshi R(1), Padhan K, Rani M, Khan N, Ahmad F, Jameel S.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi, India.

The Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (SARS-CoV) is reported to cause
apoptosis of infected cells and several of its proteins including the 3a
accessory protein, are pro-apoptotic. Since the 3a protein localizes to the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-Golgi compartment, its role in causing ER stress was
investigated in transiently transfected cells. Cells expressing the 3a proteins
showed ER stress based on activation of genes for the ER chaperones GRP78 and
GRP94. Since ER stress can cause differential modulation of the unfolded protein 
response (UPR), which includes the inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE-1),
activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) and PKR-like ER kinase (PERK) pathways, 
these were individually tested in 3a-expressing cells. Only the PERK pathway was 
found to be activated in 3a-expressing cells based on (1) increased
phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha (eIF2alpha) and
inhibitory effects of a dominant-negative form of eIF2alpha on GRP78 promoter
activity, (2) increased translation of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4)
mRNA, and (3) ATF4-dependent activation of the C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP)
gene promoter. Activation of PERK affects innate immunity by suppression of type 
1 interferon (IFN) signaling. The 3a protein was found to induce serine
phosphorylation within the IFN alpha-receptor subunit 1 (IFNAR1) degradation
motif and to increase IFNAR1 ubiquitination. Confocal microscopic analysis showed
increased translocation of IFNAR1 into the lysosomal compartment and flow
cytometry showed reduced levels of IFNAR1 in 3a-expressing cells. These results
provide further mechanistic details of the pro-apoptotic effects of the SARS-CoV 
3a protein, and suggest a potential role for it in attenuating interferon
responses and innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC2791231
PMID: 20020050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Feb 15;109(3):453-9. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22435.

FIAT control of osteoblast activity.

St-Arnaud R(1), Mandic V.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G
1A6. rst-rnaud@shriners.mcgill.ca

The basic domain-leucine zipper transcription factor activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4) regulates most functions of the osteoblast. It is therefore not
surprising that its activity should be regulated through several mechanisms.
Factor inhibiting ATF4-mediated transcription (FIAT) is a leucine zipper nuclear 
molecule lacking a basic domain for DNA binding that interacts with ATF4 to
repress its transcriptional activity. FIAT expression was monitored in parallel
with ATF4 during osteoblastogenesis. The mechanism of ATF4 repression by FIAT was
investigated through structure-function analysis. The physiological significance 
of FIAT expression in osteoblasts was studied through silencing FIAT in
osteoblasts by RNA interference, as well as through characterization of two
genetic mouse models: FIAT transgenic mice which overexpress FIAT in osteoblasts,
and FIAT knockout mice. Studies to date show that FIAT and ATF4 are co-expressed 
in osteoblasts, and that FIAT inhibition of matrix mineralization requires
dimerization with ATF4 through the second leucine zipper. Furthermore, transgenic
mice overexpressing FIAT exhibit osteopenia. The phenotype of FIAT knockout mice 
is still under evaluation but the salient aspects are discussed here. Taken
together, the results accumulated to date support the hypothesis that FIAT is a
transcriptional repressor that modulates osteoblast function.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20013796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Int J Cancer. 2010 May 15;126(10):2268-81. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25102.

Ras inhibits endoplasmic reticulum stress in human cancer cells with amplified
Myc.

Yaari-Stark S(1), Shaked M, Nevo-Caspi Y, Jacob-Hircsh J, Shamir R, Rechavi G,
Kloog Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, The George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences,
Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.

In neuroblastoma LAN-1 cells harboring an amplified MycN gene, disruption of
cooperation between Ras and MycN proteins by the Ras inhibitor
farnesylthiosalicylic acid (FTS, Salirasib) reportedly arrests cell growth. Our
aim was to establish whether this is a general phenomenon. We examined the
effects of FTS on gene-expression profiles, growth and death of NCIH929 myeloma
cells and K562 leukemia cells, which-like LAN-1 cells-exhibit Myc gene
amplification and harbor active Ras. Under specified conditions, FTS reduced Ras 
and Myc and induced cell growth arrest and death in all Myc-amplified cell lines 
but not in SHEP, a neuroblastoma cell line without Myc gene amplification.
Gene-expression analysis revealed a common pattern of FTS-induced endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, known as the unfolded protein response (UPR), in
Myc-amplified cells, but not in SHEP. Thus, Ras negatively regulates ER stress in
cells with amplified Myc. ER stress was also inducible by dominant-negative
(DN)-Ras or shRNA to Ras isoforms, all of which induced an increase in BIP (the
master regulator of ER stress) and its downstream targets Nrf2 and eIF2alpha,
both regulated by active p-PERK. FTS also induced an increase in p-PERK, while
small interfering RNA to PERK reduced Nrf2 and ATF4 and rescued cells from
FTS-induced death. BIP and its downstream targets were also increased by
inhibitors of MAPK p38 and MEK. Ras, acting through MAPK p38 and MEK, negatively 
regulates the ER stress cascades BIP/PERK/Nrf2 and eIF2alpha/ATF4/ATF3. These
findings can explain the Ras-dependent protection of Myc-amplified cells from ER 
stress-associated death.

PMID: 19998334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. IUBMB Life. 2009 Dec;61(12):1153-8. doi: 10.1002/iub.271.

Nuclear protein 1 induced by ATF4 in response to various stressors acts as a
positive regulator on the transcriptional activation of ATF4.

Jin HO(1), Seo SK, Woo SH, Choe TB, Hong SI, Kim JI, Park IC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Cancer Research, Korea Institute of Radiological and
Medical Sciences, Nowon-gu, Seoul, Korea.

Nuclear protein 1 (NUPR1) was originally identified as p8, a member of the family
of HMG-I/Y transcription factors induced in response to various cellular
stressors. However, the signaling pathway underlying NUPR1 induction by cellular 
stresses remains to be established. In this study, we found that the expression
of NUPR1 by various stresses induced by activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4).
Loss of ATF4 using siRNA significantly diminished NUPR1 expression.
Overexpression of ATF4 caused NUPR1 levels to rise. NUPR1 expression was
associated with enhanced transcriptional activation of genes of ATF4 downstream, 
suggesting that the protein promoted the transcription of stress-regulated genes 
via positive feedback on the ATF4 pathway.

(c) 2009 IUBMB

PMID: 19946894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jan;38(3):764-77. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp1034. Epub 2009 Nov
24.

Differential regulation of CHOP translation by phosphorylated eIF4E under stress 
conditions.

Chen YJ(1), Tan BC, Cheng YY, Chen JS, Lee SC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Cells respond to environmental stress by inducing translation of a subset of
mRNAs important for survival or apoptosis. CHOP, a downstream transcriptional
target of stress-induced ATF4, is also regulated translationally in a
uORF-dependent manner under stress. Low concentration of anisomycin induces CHOP 
expression at both transcriptional and translational levels. To study
specifically the translational aspect of CHOP expression, and further clarify the
regulatory mechanisms underlying stress-induced translation initiation, we
developed a CMV promoter-regulated, uORF(chop)-driven reporter platform. Here we 
show that anisomycin-induced CHOP expression depends on phosphorylated eIF4E/S209
and eIF2alpha/S51. Contrary to phospho-eIF2alpha/S51, phospho-eIF4E/S209 is not
involved in thapsigargin-induced CHOP expression. Studies using various kinase
inhibitors and mutants uncovered that both the p38MAPK-Mnk and mTOR signaling
pathways contribute to stress-responsive reporter and CHOP expression. We also
demonstrated that anisomycin-induced translation is tightly regulated by partner 
binding preference of eIF4E. Furthermore, mutating the uORF sequence abolished
the anisomycin-induced association of chop mRNA with phospho-eIF4E and polysomes,
thus demonstrating the significance of this cis-regulatory element in conferring 
on the transcript a stress-responsive translational inducibility. Strikingly,
although insulin treatment activated ERK-Mnk and mTOR pathways, and consequently 
eIF4E/S209 phosphorylation, it failed to induce phospho-eIF2alpha/S51 and
reporter translation, thus pinpointing a crucial determinant in stress-responsive
translation.

PMCID: PMC2817461
PMID: 19934253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Rinsho Byori. 2009 Oct;57(10):978-86.

[Cisplatin sensitivity transcriptional factor and mitochondrial DNA maintenance
protein].

[Article in Japanese]

Uchiumi T(1), Knag D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Graduated School of 
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
uchiumi@cclm.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Cisplatin is one of the most commonly used chemotherapeutic agents, with
demonstrated activity against a diverse spectrum of malignancies, including
testicular cancer, ovarian carcinoma, and head/neck tumors. However, the
therapeutic efficacy of the drug is limited by the severity of its side effects
and the potential progression of tumor cells to a cisplatin-resistant state. We
found that the transcription factors of genes involved in cisplatin resistance
are often overexpressed or activated in cisplatin-resistant cells. In this paper,
we describe ATF4, Clock, ZNF143, and YB-1 as cisplatin resistance genes. Clock
and the ATF4 transcription system might play an important role in multidrug
resistance through the glutathione-dependent redox system, and the physiological 
potential of the Clock-controlled redox system might be important to better
understand oxidative stress-associated disorders including cancer and systemic
chronotherapy. We also describe the basis for understanding the effects of
cisplatin on mitochondrial activity and the mechanisms of cellular toxicity and
resistance caused by this drug.

PMID: 19928495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Acta Diabetol. 2011 Jun;48(2):103-11. doi: 10.1007/s00592-009-0170-z. Epub 2009
Nov 19.

The role of endoplasmic reticulum stress in the early stage of diabetic
retinopathy.

Li B(1), Wang HS, Li GG, Zhao MJ, Zhao MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, People's Republic of China.
scotopsin@yahoo.com.cn

The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress in diabetic retinopathy (DR) using in vitro and in vivo models. For the in
vivo studies, diabetes was induced in rats, and retinal expression of
glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4),
C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in
groups of rats at 1, 3, and 6 months was assessed. For the in vitro studies,
human retinal capillary endothelial cells (HRCECs) were cultured in the presence 
of varying glucose concentrations, and the expression of mRNA and protein for
GRP78, ATF4, CHOP, and VEGF was assessed. The chosen glucose concentrations were 
reflective of those apparent in diabetic patients. Expression of VEGF and CHOP
mRNA levels were significantly increased in diabetic rats compared to control
rats at 1, 3, and 6 months (P < 0.05). In HRCECs cultured in the presence of high
as well as variable glucose concentrations, CHOP expression and apoptosis were
significantly increased (P < 0.05). However, GRP78 and ATF4 expression levels
were unchanged. Our findings suggest that early progression of DR may be mediated
by ER stress, but probably does not involve changes in ATF4 or GRP78.

PMID: 19924374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jan 1;391(1):335-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.059. Epub 2009 Nov 12.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 positively regulates expression of activating
transcription factor 4 in osteoblasts.

Fei Y(1), Xiao L, Hurley MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, 263
Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030-1850, USA. yfei@student.uchc.edu

Our previous studies showed that basic fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) null
mice display markedly reduced bone mass and bone formation. However, the
mechanism by which FGF2 regulates bone mass or bone formation is not fully
defined. Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), one member of activating
transcription factor/cAMP response element binding family, is a transcription
factor required for osteoblast terminal differentiation. Here we investigate the 
ability of FGF2 to increase expression of ATF4 in bone marrow stromal cells
(BMSCs) and examine ATF4 expression in Fgf2(-/-) BMSCs. We found that FGF2
stimulated ATF4 mRNA expression as early as 20 min and increased ATF4 protein
expression after three hours of treatment. BMSCs from Fgf2(+/+) and Fgf2(-/-)
mice were cultured in osteogenesis medium. We observed reduced alkaline
phosphatase staining, decreased mineralized nodules and reduced osteocalcin
expression, and reduced expression of ATF4 in Fgf2(-/-) BMSC cultures compared to
Fgf2(+/+) BMSCs. This study is the first demonstration that ATF4 expression can
be stimulated by FGF2 in osteoblasts and that ATF4 expression is significantly
reduced in differentiated Fgf2(-/-) BMSCs. These results suggest that impaired
bone mass and bone formation in Fgf2 null mice may be due in part to reduced ATF4
expression.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2930756
PMID: 19913500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Development. 2009 Dec;136(24):4143-53. doi: 10.1242/dev.043281. Epub 2009 Nov 11.

Atf4 regulates chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation during endochondral 
ossification by activating Ihh transcription.

Wang W(1), Lian N, Li L, Moss HE, Wang W, Perrien DS, Elefteriou F, Yang X.

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt Center for Bone Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
1225F Medical Research Building IV, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Activating transcription factor 4 (Atf4) is a leucine-zipper-containing protein
of the cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) family. Ablation of Atf4
(Atf4(-/-)) in mice leads to severe skeletal defects, including delayed
ossification and low bone mass, short stature and short limbs. Atf4 is expressed 
in proliferative and prehypertrophic growth plate chondrocytes, suggesting an
autonomous function of Atf4 in chondrocytes during endochondral ossification. In 
Atf4(-/-) growth plate, the typical columnar structure of proliferative
chondrocytes is disturbed. The proliferative zone is shortened, whereas the
hypertrophic zone is transiently expanded. The expression of Indian hedgehog
(Ihh) is markedly decreased, whereas the expression of other chondrocyte marker
genes, such as type II collagen (Col2a1), PTH/PTHrP receptor (Pth1r) and type X
collagen (Col10a1), is normal. Furthermore, forced expression of Atf4 in
chondrocytes induces endogenous Ihh mRNA, and Atf4 directly binds to the Ihh
promoter and activates its transcription. Supporting these findings, reactivation
of Hh signaling pharmacologically in mouse limb explants corrects the Atf4(-/-)
chondrocyte proliferation and short limb phenotypes. This study thus identifies
Atf4 as a novel transcriptional activator of Ihh in chondrocytes that paces
longitudinal bone growth by controlling growth plate chondrocyte proliferation
and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2781050
PMID: 19906842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Curr Top Med Chem. 2009;9(16):1560-80.

Polyisoprenylated benzophenones from Clusiaceae: potential drugs and lead
compounds.

Acuña UM(1), Jancovski N, Kennelly EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Lehman College and The Graduate Center, The
City University of New York, Bronx, New York 10468, USA.

Many new polyisoprenylated benzophenones with a
bicyclo[3.3.1]-nonane-2,4,9-trione core structure have been isolated from plants 
in the Clusiaceae family, and their potent biological properties have been the
subject of several studies. This review summarizes the biological activities
reported for these secondary metabolites including cytotoxic, antimicrobial,
antioxidant, and anti-inflammatory activities. Our efforts during the past years 
have foremost been directed towards isolating new polyisoprenylated
benzophenones, as well as understanding the possible target and mechanism of
action through which these compounds arrest cancer cells and inhibit the
progression of the cell-cycle. The transcription of genes is affected in cancer
cells treated with polyisoprenylated benzophenones; the oncogene c-Myb is
down-regulated and endoplasmatic stress genes XBP1, ATF4, and DDIT3/CHOP are
turned on. Consequently, the expression of iNOS and cell cycle regulators such as
cyclin D and E are reduced. Evidence presented by independent investigators
suggests that polyisoprenylated benzophenones affect the mediators in the
Akt/mTOR stress pathway, although the specific target remains to be discovered.
In addition, benzophenones isolated from plants display high antioxidant capacity
and protect cells from oxidative stress and the formation of ROS involved during 
the inflammatory process. Since antiviral activity was initially reported for
guttiferone A, potent synthetic analogues have been developed as effective new
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI) to treat drug resistant
HIV-1. In addition, benzophenones exert antimicrobial effects particularly
against MRSA. The structure-activity relationships of polyisoprenylated
benzophenones from natural sources and those of synthetic analogues are included 
in this review. Absorption, metabolism, and elimination of benzophenones are also
discussed.

PMID: 19903162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Cell Cycle. 2009 Dec;8(23):3838-47. Epub 2009 Dec 15.

Role of ATF4 in regulation of autophagy and resistance to drugs and hypoxia.

Rzymski T(1), Milani M, Singleton DC, Harris AL.

Author information: 
(1)Experimentelle Kinderkardiologie, Deutsches Herssentrum München an der
Technischen, Universität München, München, Germany.

Tumor hypoxia confers resistance to many modalities of anticancer therapy. The
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is highly sensitive to severe hypoxic stress and
results in the activation of the unfolded protein response. ATF4 is the main
transcriptional regulator of the cellular hypoxic response to the Unfolded
Protein Response (UPR) and activates genes that promote restoration of normal ER 
function and survival under hypoxia. Elevated expression of ATF4 is associated
with resistance to current chemotherapeutic drugs including DNA-interactive and
damaging agents, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and proteasome inhibitors. 
ATF4 decreases the antitumor activity of chemotherapy by mechanisms involving
expression of genes involved in oxidative stress resistance, redox homeostasis
and inhibitors of apoptosis. ATF4 plays also a crucial role in resistance to
proteasomal inhibitor bortezomib (PS-341) by the induction of prosurvival
pathways, such as autophagy, that can relieve the protein overload in bortezomib 
treated cells. Inhibition of ATF4 represents an attractive stand-alone therapy as
well as an opportunity to enhance the efficacy of current chemotherapeutic agents
without causing high tissue toxicity to normal tissues.

PMID: 19887912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Nat Cell Biol. 2009 Dec;11(12):1473-80. doi: 10.1038/ncb1996. Epub 2009 Oct 25.

Adaptive suppression of the ATF4-CHOP branch of the unfolded protein response by 
toll-like receptor signalling.

Woo CW(1), Cui D, Arellano J, Dorweiler B, Harding H, Fitzgerald KA, Ron D, Tabas
I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) unfolded protein response (UPR) restores
equilibrium to the ER, but prolonged expression of the UPR effector CHOP
(GADD153) is cytotoxic. We found that CHOP expression induced by ER stress was
suppressed by prior engagement of toll-like receptor (TLR) 3 or 4 through a
TRIF-dependent pathway. TLR engagement did not suppress phosphorylation of PERK
or eIF-2alpha, which are upstream of CHOP, but phospho-eIF-2alpha failed to
promote translation of the CHOP activator ATF4. In mice subjected to systemic ER 
stress, pretreatment with low dose lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a TLR4 ligand,
suppressed CHOP expression and apoptosis in splenic macrophages, renal tubule
cells and hepatocytes, and prevented renal dysfunction and hepatosteatosis. This 
protective effect of LPS did not occur in Trif(-/-) mice or in wild-type mice in 
which CHOP expression was genetically restored. Thus, TRIF-mediated signals from 
TLRs selectively attenuate translational activation of ATF4 and its downstream
target gene CHOP. We speculate that this mechanism evolved to promote survival of
TLR-expressing cells that experience prolonged levels of physiological ER stress 
in the course of the host response to invading pathogens.

PMCID: PMC2787632
PMID: 19855386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 23;4(10):e7583. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007583.

Critical role of activating transcription factor 4 in the anabolic actions of
parathyroid hormone in bone.

Yu S(1), Franceschi RT, Luo M, Fan J, Jiang D, Cao H, Kwon TG, Lai Y, Zhang J,
Patrene K, Hankenson K, Roodman GD, Xiao G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
United States of America.

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is a potent anabolic agent for the treatment of
osteoporosis. However, its mechanism of action in osteoblast and bone is not well
understood. In this study, we show that the anabolic actions of PTH in bone are
severely impaired in both growing and adult ovariectomized mice lacking
bone-related activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). Our study demonstrates
that ATF4 deficiency suppresses PTH-stimulated osteoblast proliferation and
survival and abolishes PTH-induced osteoblast differentiation, which, together,
compromise the anabolic response. We further demonstrate that the PTH-dependent
increase in osteoblast differentiation is correlated with ATF4-dependent
up-regulation of Osterix. This regulation involves interactions of ATF4 with a
specific enhancer sequence in the Osterix promoter. Furthermore, actions of PTH
on Osterix require this same element and are associated with increased binding of
ATF4 to chromatin. Taken together these experiments establish a fundamental role 
for ATF4 in the anabolic actions of PTH on the skeleton.

PMCID: PMC2762317
PMID: 19851510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Virology. 2009 Dec 20;395(2):255-67. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.09.026. Epub 2009 
Oct 28.

A human coronavirus OC43 variant harboring persistence-associated mutations in
the S glycoprotein differentially induces the unfolded protein response in human 
neurons as compared to wild-type virus.

Favreau DJ(1), Desforges M, St-Jean JR, Talbot PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroimmunovirology, INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier,531 boulevard
des Prairies, Laval, Québec, Canada H7V 1B7.

We have reported that human respiratory coronavirus OC43 (HCoV-OC43) is
neurotropic and neuroinvasive in humans and mice, and that neurons are the
primary target of infection in mice, leading to neurodegenerative disabilities.
We now report that an HCoV-OC43 mutant harboring two persistence-associated S
glycoprotein point mutations (H183R and Y241H), induced a stronger unfolded
protein response (UPR) and translation attenuation in infected human neurons.
There was a major contribution of the IRE1/XBP1 pathway, followed by caspase-3
activation and nuclear fragmentation, with no significant role of the ATF6 and
eIF2-alpha/ATF4 pathways. Our results show the importance of discrete molecular
viral S determinants in virus-neuronal cell interactions that lead to increased
production of viral proteins and infectious particles, enhanced UPR activation,
and increased cytotoxicity and cell death. As this mutant virus is more
neurovirulent in mice, our results also suggest that two mutations in the S
glycoprotein could eventually modulate viral neuropathogenesis.

PMID: 19846189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Circ Res. 2009 Nov 20;105(11):1118-27. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.206607. Epub
2009 Oct 8.

Metabolic remodeling induced by mitochondrial aldehyde stress stimulates
tolerance to oxidative stress in the heart.

Endo J(1), Sano M, Katayama T, Hishiki T, Shinmura K, Morizane S, Matsuhashi T,
Katsumata Y, Zhang Y, Ito H, Nagahata Y, Marchitti S, Nishimaki K, Wolf AM,
Nakanishi H, Hattori F, Vasiliou V, Adachi T, Ohsawa I, Taguchi R, Hirabayashi Y,
Ohta S, Suematsu M, Ogawa S, Fukuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine and Advanced Cardiac Therapeutics, Keio
University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582,
Japan.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2009 Nov 20;105(11):1044-6.

RATIONALE: Aldehyde accumulation is regarded as a pathognomonic feature of
oxidative stress-associated cardiovascular disease.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated how the heart compensates for the accelerated
accumulation of aldehydes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2) has a major role in
aldehyde detoxification in the mitochondria, a major source of aldehydes.
Transgenic (Tg) mice carrying an Aldh2 gene with a single nucleotide polymorphism
(Aldh2*2) were developed. This polymorphism has a dominant-negative effect and
the Tg mice exhibited impaired ALDH activity against a broad range of aldehydes. 
Despite a shift toward the oxidative state in mitochondrial matrices, Aldh2*2 Tg 
hearts displayed normal left ventricular function by echocardiography and,
because of metabolic remodeling, an unexpected tolerance to oxidative stress
induced by ischemia/reperfusion injury. Mitochondrial aldehyde stress stimulated 
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2alpha phosphorylation. Subsequent
translational and transcriptional activation of activating transcription factor-4
promoted the expression of enzymes involved in amino acid biosynthesis and
transport, ultimately providing precursor amino acids for glutathione
biosynthesis. Intracellular glutathione levels were increased 1.37-fold in
Aldh2*2 Tg hearts compared with wild-type controls. Heterozygous knockout of Atf4
blunted the increase in intracellular glutathione levels in Aldh2*2 Tg hearts,
thereby attenuating the oxidative stress-resistant phenotype. Furthermore,
glycolysis and NADPH generation via the pentose phosphate pathway were activated 
in Aldh2*2 Tg hearts. (NADPH is required for the recycling of oxidized
glutathione.)
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of the present study indicate that mitochondrial
aldehyde stress in the heart induces metabolic remodeling, leading to activation 
of the glutathione-redox cycle, which confers resistance against acute oxidative 
stress induced by ischemia/reperfusion.

PMID: 19815821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Nov;20(9):436-43. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2009.05.008.
Epub 2009 Sep 30.

ATF4-dependent transcription mediates signaling of amino acid limitation.

Kilberg MS(1), Shan J, Su N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Box 100245, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610-0245, USA. mkilberg@ufl.edu

Mammals respond to dietary nutrient fluctuations; for example, deficiency of
dietary protein or an imbalance of essential amino acids activates an amino acid 
response (AAR) signal transduction pathway, consisting of detection of uncharged 
tRNA by the GCN2 kinase, eIF2alpha phosphorylation and ATF4 expression. In
concert with heterodimerization partners, ATF4 activates specific genes via a
CCAAT-enhancer binding protein-activating transcription factor response element
(CARE). This review outlines the ATF4-dependent transcriptional mechanisms
associated with the AAR, focusing on progress during the past 5 years. Recent
evidence suggests that maternal nutrient deprivation not only has immediate
metabolic effects on the fetus, but also triggers gene expression changes in
adulthood, possibly through epigenetic mechanisms. Therefore, understanding the
transcriptional programs initiated by amino acid limitation is crucial and
timely.

PMCID: PMC3587693
PMID: 19800252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Neurotox Res. 2010 Feb;17(2):189-202. doi: 10.1007/s12640-009-9110-5.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress plays critical role in brain damage after cerebral
ischemia/reperfusion in rats.

Nakka VP(1), Gusain A, Raghubir R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, India.

The endoplasmic reticulum(ER) stress plays a vital role in mediating ischemic
neuronal cell death. However, very little is known about the role of ER stress in
mediating pathophysiological reactions to acute brain injuries. An attempt was
therefore made to assess the role of cerebral ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) induced 
ER stress and its modulation on outcome of ischemic insult. Focal cerebral
ischemia was induced in rats by middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) for 2 h
followed by varying time points of reperfusion. The brain loci specific and
time-dependent alterations were seen in the expression pattern of molecular
markers, i.e., heat-shock protein 70 (HSP70) for cytoplasmic dysfunction,
glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), Caspase-12, C/EBP homologous protein/growth
arrest and DNA damage-inducible gene 153 (CHOP/GADD153), activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF-4), and Processed X-box protein 1 (xbp1) mRNA for ER dysfunction.
Further, histological examinations indicated pronounced brain damage, massive
neuronal loss, and DNA fragmentation predominantly in the striatum and cortex.
The enhanced expression of GRP78, Caspase-12, CHOP/GADD153, ATF4 and processing
of xbp1 mRNA in the affected brain regions clearly indicate the critical
involvement of ER-mediated cell death/survival mechanisms and also collectively
demonstrated the activation of unfolded protein response (UPR). Moreover,
Salubrinal, a selective inhibitor of eIF2alpha dephosphorylation was used to
counteract ER stress, which significantly increased the phosphorylation of
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 subunit alpha (eIF2alpha), leading to 
reduced brain damage after I/R injury. Therefore, inhibition of ER stress
following I/R injury may be used as key therapeutic target for neuroprotection.

PMID: 19763736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. BMC Cell Biol. 2009 Sep 15;10:64. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-10-64.

Inhibition of eIF2alpha dephosphorylation inhibits ErbB2-induced deregulation of 
mammary acinar morphogenesis.

Sequeira SJ(1), Wen HC, Avivar-Valderas A, Farias EF, Aguirre-Ghiso JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Tisch Cancer
Institute at Mount Sinai, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy
Place, New York, NY 10029, USA. ss7267@albany.edu

BACKGROUND: The ErbB2/Her2/Neu receptor tyrosine kinase is amplified in
approximately 30% of human breast cancers. Phosphorylation of the translation
initiation factor, eIF2alpha inhibits global protein synthesis and activates a
stress signaling and growth suppressive program. We have shown that forced
phosphorylation of eIF2alpha can suppress head and neck, colorectal carcinoma and
multiple myeloma tumor growth and/or survival. Here we explore whether ErbB2
modulates eIF2alpha phosphorylation and whether forced phosphorylation of the
latter can antagonize ErbB2 deregulation of mammary acinar morphogenesis.
RESULTS: We tested whether ErbB2 signaling influenced eIF2alpha signaling and
whether enhanced phosphorylation of the latter affected ErbB2-deregulated mammary
acinar development. We obtained stable MCF10A cells overexpressing wild-type (Wt)
Neu/ErbB2 or a constitutively active (CA) variant via retroviral delivery or
mammary tumor cells from MMTV-Neu tumors. Western blotting, RT-PCR and confocal
microscopy were used to analyze the effects of ErbB2 activation on eIF2alpha
signaling and the effect of the GADD34-PP1C inhibitor salubrinal. Wt- and
MMTV-Neu cells formed aberrant acini structures resembling DCIS, while CA-ErbB2
overexpression induced invasive lesions. In these structures we found that
CA-ErbB2 but not the Wt variant significantly down-regulated the pro-apoptotic
gene CHOP. This occurred without apparent modulation of basal phosphorylation of 
PERK and eIF2alpha or induction of its downstream target ATF4. However,
inhibition of eIF2alpha dephosphorylation with salubrinal was sufficient to
inhibit Wt- and CA-ErbB2- as well as MMTV-Neu-induced deregulation of acinar
growth. This was linked to enhanced CHOP expression, inhibition of proliferation,
induction of apoptosis and luminal clearing in Wt-ErbB2 and to inhibition of
cyclin D1 levels and subsequent proliferation in CA-ErbB2 cells.
CONCLUSION: Depending on the strength of ErbB2 signaling there is a differential 
regulation of CHOP and eIF2alpha phosphorylation. ErbB2 uncouples in basal
conditions eIF2alpha phosphorylation from CHOP induction. However, this signal
was restored by salubrinal treatment in Wt-ErbB2 expressing MCF10A cells as these
DCIS-like structures underwent luminal clearing. In CA-ErbB2 structures apoptosis
is not induced by salubrinal and instead a state of quiescence with reduced
proliferation was achieved. Treatments that stabilize P-eIF2alpha levels may be
effective in treating ErbB2 positive cancers without severely disrupting normal
tissue function and structure.

PMCID: PMC2754445
PMID: 19754954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Sep;1173 Suppl 1:E20-30. doi:
10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05061.x.

An Osteoblast-dependent mechanism contributes to the leptin regulation of insulin
secretion.

Hinoi E(1), Gao N, Jung DY, Yadav V, Yoshizawa T, Kajimura D, Myers MG Jr, Chua
SC Jr, Wang Q, Kim JK, Kaestner KH, Karsenty G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, New
York, USA.

Erratum in
    Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2011 Oct;1234(1):174.

Our work focuses on genetic and molecular mechanisms for the reciprocal
regulation of bone and energy metabolism orchestrated by leptin and osteocalcin. 
In the context of this reciprocal regulation, the finding that leptin inhibits
insulin secretion by beta cells while osteocalcin favors it is surprising. In
exploring the molecular bases of this paradox we found that leptin, as is the
case for most of its functions, uses a neuronal relay to inhibit insulin
secretion. Cell-specific gene-deletion experiments revealed that a component of
this neuronal regulation is the sympathetic innervation to osteoblasts. Under the
control of leptin the sympathetic tone favors expression in osteoblasts of Esp,
which inhibits the metabolic activity of osteocalcin. We further identify ATF4 as
a transcription factor that regulates Esp expression and thereby insulin
secretion and sensitivity. Taken together these data illustrate the tight
connections between bone remodeling and energy metabolism and add further
credence to the notion that the osteoblast is a bona fide endocrine cell type.

PMID: 19751411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Bone. 2010 Jan;46(1):81-90. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2009.08.055. Epub 2009 Sep 3.

Inorganic pyrophosphatase induces type I collagen in osteoblasts.

Polewski MD(1), Johnson KA, Foster M, Millán JL, Terkeltaub R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rheumatology Section, VA Health Care System/UCSD, San 
Diego, CA 92161, USA. mpolewski@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: The physiologic selectivity of calcification in bone tissue
reflects selective co-expression by osteoblasts of fibrillar collagen I and of
tissue nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP), which hydrolyzes the
calcification inhibitor pyrophosphate (PP(i)) and generates phosphate (P(i)).
Humans and mice deficient in the PP(i)-generating ecto-enzyme NPP1 demonstrate
soft tissue calcification, occurring at sites of extracellular matrix expansion. 
Significantly, the function in osteoblasts of cytosolic inorganic pyrophosphatase
(abbreviated iPP(i)ase), which generates P(i) via PP(i) hydrolysis with neutral
pH optimum, remains unknown. We assessed iPP(i)ase in Enpp1(-/-) and wild type
(WT) mouse osteoblasts and we tested the hypothesis that iPP(i)ase regulates
collagen I expression.
METHODS: We treated mouse calvarial osteoblasts with ascorbate and beta-glycerol 
phosphate to promote calcification, and we assessed cytosolic P(i) and PP(i)
levels, sodium-dependent P(i) uptake, Pit-1 P(i) co-transporter expression, and
iPP(i)ase and TNAP activity and expression. We also assessed the function of
transfected Ppa1 in osteoblasts.
RESULTS: Inorganic pyrophosphatase but not TNAP was elevated in Enpp1(-/-)
calvariae in situ. Cultured primary Enpp1(-/-) calvarial osteoblasts demonstrated
increased calcification despite flat TNAP activity rather than physiologic TNAP
up-regulation seen in WT osteoblasts. Despite decreased cytosolic PP(i) in early 
culture, Enpp1(-/-) osteoblasts maintained cytosolic P(i) levels comparable to WT
osteoblasts, in association with increased iPP(i)ase, enhanced sodium-dependent
P(i) uptake and expression of Pit-1, and markedly increased collagen I synthesis.
Suppression of collagen synthesis in Enpp1(-/-) osteoblasts using
3,4-dehydroproline markedly suppressed calcification. Last, transfection of Ppa1 
in WT osteoblasts increased cytosolic P(i) and decreased cytosolic but not
extracellular PP(i), and induced both collagen I synthesis and calcification.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased iPP(i)ase is associated with "P(i) hunger" and increased
calcification by NPP1-deficient osteoblasts. Furthermore, iPP(i)ase induces
collagen I at the levels of mRNA expression and synthesis and, unlike TNAP,
stimulates calcification by osteoblasts without reducing the extracellular
concentration of the hydroxyapatite crystal inhibitor PP(i).

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC2818162
PMID: 19733704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Clin Invest. 2009 Sep;119(9):2807-17. doi: 10.1172/JCI39366. Epub 2009 Aug 10.

The transcription factor ATF4 regulates glucose metabolism in mice through its
expression in osteoblasts.

Yoshizawa T(1), Hinoi E, Jung DY, Kajimura D, Ferron M, Seo J, Graff JM, Kim JK, 
Karsenty G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York, USA.

The recent demonstration that osteoblasts have a role in controlling energy
metabolism suggests that they express cell-specific regulatory genes involved in 
this process. Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is a transcription factor 
that accumulates predominantly in osteoblasts, where it regulates virtually all
functions linked to the maintenance of bone mass. Since Atf4-/- mice have smaller
fat pads than littermate controls, we investigated whether ATF4 also influences
energy metabolism. Here, we have shown, through analysis of Atf4-/- mice, that
ATF4 inhibits insulin secretion and decreases insulin sensitivity in liver, fat, 
and muscle. Several lines of evidence indicated that this function of ATF4
occurred through its osteoblastic expression. First, insulin sensitivity is
enhanced in the liver of Atf4-/- mice, but not in cultured hepatocytes from these
mice. Second, mice overexpressing ATF4 in osteoblasts only [termed here
alpha1(I)Collagen-Atf4 mice] displayed a decrease in insulin secretion and were
insulin insensitive. Third, the alpha1(I)Collagen-Atf4 transgene corrected the
energy metabolism phenotype of Atf4-/- mice. Fourth, and more definitely, mice
lacking ATF4 only in osteoblasts presented the same metabolic abnormalities as
Atf4-/- mice. Molecularly, ATF4 favored expression in osteoblasts of Esp, which
encodes a product that decreases the bioactivity of osteocalcin, an
osteoblast-specific secreted molecule that enhances secretion of and sensitivity 
to insulin. These results provide a transcriptional basis to the observation that
osteoblasts fulfill endocrine functions and identify ATF4 as a regulator of most 
functions of osteoblasts.

PMCID: PMC2735903
PMID: 19726872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 30;284(44):30518-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.052373. Epub
2009 Sep 2.

Vimentin inhibits ATF4-mediated osteocalcin transcription and osteoblast
differentiation.

Lian N(1), Wang W, Li L, Elefteriou F, Yang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Center for Bone Biology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is an osteoblast-enriched transcription 
factor that regulates osteocalcin transcription and osteoblast terminal
differentiation. To identify functional partners of ATF4, we applied ROS17/2.8
osteoblast nuclear extracts and purified recombinant His-ATF4 onto a Ni(+)
affinity matrix chromatography column. Vimentin was identified by liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry. Coimmunoprecipitation and pulldown assays
revealed that vimentin interacted with ATF4 with its first leucine zipper domain.
DNA cotransfection and gel retardation demonstrated that vimentin inhibited the
transactivation activity of ATF4 on osteocalcin by preventing it to bind OSE1,
the ATF4 binding site on the osteocalcin promoter. Northern hybridization
revealed that vimentin was expressed at a high level in immature osteoblasts and 
a low level in fully differentiated osteoblasts. Down-regulation of vimentin by
small interfering RNA induced endogenous osteocalcin transcription in immature
osteoblasts. Conversely, ectopic overexpression of vimentin in osteoblasts
inhibited osteoblast differentiation as shown by lower alkaline phosphatase
activity, delayed mineralization, and decreased expression of osteoblast marker
genes such as bone sialoprotein and osteocalcin. Together, our data uncover a
novel mechanism whereby a cytoskeletal protein, vimentin, acts as a break on
differentiation in immature osteoblasts by interacting with ATF4.

PMCID: PMC2781606
PMID: 19726676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Radiother Oncol. 2009 Sep;92(3):450-9. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2009.08.017. Epub
2009 Aug 31.

Hypoxic activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) induces expression of
the metastasis-associated gene LAMP3.

Mujcic H(1), Rzymski T, Rouschop KM, Koritzinsky M, Milani M, Harris AL, Wouters 
BG.

Author information: 
(1)Maastricht Radiation Oncology (MaastRO) Lab, Maastricht University, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Tumour hypoxia contributes to failure of cancer treatment
through its ability to protect against therapy and adversely influence tumour
biology. In particular, several studies suggest that hypoxia promotes metastasis.
Hypoxia-induced cellular changes are mediated by oxygen-sensitive signaling
pathways that activate downstream transcription factors. We have investigated the
induction and transcriptional regulation of a novel metastasis-associated gene,
LAMP3 during hypoxia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Microarray, quantitative PCR, Western blot analysis and
immunohistochemistry were used to investigate hypoxic regulation of LAMP3. The
mechanism for LAMP3 induction was investigated using transient RNAi and stable
shRNA targeting components of the hypoxic response. Endoplasmic reticulum stress 
inducing agents, including proteasome inhibitors were assessed for their ability 
to regulate LAMP3.
RESULTS: LAMP3 is strongly induced by hypoxia at both the mRNA and protein levels
in a large panel of human tumour cell lines. Induction of LAMP3 occurs as a
consequence of the activation of the PERK/eIF2alpha/ATF4 arm of the unfolded
protein response (UPR) and is independent of HIF-1alpha. LAMP3 is expressed
heterogeneously within the microenvironment of tumours, overexpressed in breast
cancer, and increases in tumours treated with avastin.
CONCLUSIONS: These data identify LAMP3 as a novel hypoxia-inducible gene
regulated by the UPR. LAMP3 is a new candidate biomarker of UPR activation by
hypoxia in tumours and is a potential mediator of hypoxia-induced metastasis.

PMID: 19726095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Mol Carcinog. 2010 Jan;49(1):68-74. doi: 10.1002/mc.20578.

N-acetyl cysteine and penicillamine induce apoptosis via the ER stress
response-signaling pathway.

Guan D(1), Xu Y, Yang M, Wang H, Wang X, Shen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.

N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) and penicillamine (PEN) have been shown to induce
apoptosis in multiple types of human cancer cells; however, the molecular
mechanism underlying this activity is unclear. This study was designed to
identify the genes responsible for apoptosis induction by NAC and PEN. We found
that glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) was upregulated in HeLa cells following
treatment with NAC or PEN. GRP78 is a central regulator of endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) stress and has been used as a marker of ER stress. Additionally, both the
activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) protein and X box-binding protein 1
(XBP1) mRNA were processed, which facilitates the expression of C/EBP homologous 
protein (CHOP), a key-signaling component of ER stress-induced apoptosis.
Furthermore, the PERK-ATF4 pathway, which also induces the expression of CHOP,
was activated in NAC-treated cells. The role of the ER stress pathway was further
confirmed through the small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of CHOP,
which attenuated NAC and PEN-induced apoptosis. These results demonstrate that
NAC- and PEN-induced apoptosis in HeLa cells is mediated by the ER stress
pathway.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19722195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Biol Chem. 2009 Nov 20;284(47):32312-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.024471. Epub
2009 Aug 31.

A bifunctional intronic element regulates the expression of the arginine/lysine
transporter Cat-1 via mechanisms involving the purine-rich element binding
protein A (Pur alpha).

Huang CC(1), Chiribau CB, Majumder M, Chiang CM, Wek RC, Kelm RJ Jr, Khalili K,
Snider MD, Hatzoglou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4954, USA.

Expression of the arginine/lysine transporter Cat-1 is highly induced in
proliferating and stressed cells via mechanisms that include transcriptional
activation. A bifunctional INE (intronic element) within the first intron of the 
Cat-1 gene was identified and characterized in this study. The INE had high
sequence homology to an amino acid response element and was shown to act as a
transcriptional enhancer in unstressed cells by binding the transcription factor,
purine-rich element binding protein A (Pur alpha). During endoplasmic reticulum
stress, binding of Pur alpha to the INE decreased; the element acted as a
positive regulator in early stress by binding of the transcription factor ATF4
and as a negative regulator in prolonged stress by binding the stress-induced
C/EBP family member, CHOP. We conclude that transcriptional control of the Cat-1 
gene is tightly controlled by multiple cis-DNA elements, contributing to
regulation of cationic amino acid transport for cell growth and proliferation. In
addition, we propose that genes may use stress-response elements such as the INE 
to support basal expression in the absence of stress.

PMCID: PMC2781645
PMID: 19720825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Diabetes. 2009 Nov;58(11):2565-73. doi: 10.2337/db09-0335. Epub 2009 Aug 18.

Atf4 regulates obesity, glucose homeostasis, and energy expenditure.

Seo J(1), Fortuno ES 3rd, Suh JM, Stenesen D, Tang W, Parks EJ, Adams CM, Townes 
T, Graff JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.

OBJECTIVE: We evaluate a potential role of activating transcription factor 4
(Atf4) in invertebrate and mammalian metabolism.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: With two parallel approaches-a fat body-specific
green fluorescent protein enhancer trap screen in D. melanogaster and expression 
profiling of developing murine fat tissues-we identified Atf4 as expressed in
invertebrate and vertebrate metabolic tissues. We assessed the functional
relevance of the evolutionarily conserved expression by analyzing Atf4 mutant
flies and Atf4 mutant mice for possible metabolic phenotypes.
RESULTS: Flies with insertions at the Atf4 locus have reduced fat content,
increased starvation sensitivity, and lower levels of circulating carbohydrate.
Atf4 null mice are also lean, and they resist age-related and diet-induced
obesity. Atf4 null mice have increased energy expenditure potentially accounting 
for the lean phenotype. Atf4 null mice are hypoglycemic, even before substantial 
changes in fat content, indicating that Atf4 regulates mammalian carbohydrate
metabolism. In addition, the Atf4 mutation blunts diet-induced diabetes as well
as hyperlipidemia and hepatosteatosis. Several aspects of the Atf4 mutant
phenotype resemble mice with mutations in components of the target of rapamycin
(TOR) pathway. Consistent with the phenotypic similarities, Atf4 null mice have
reduced expression of genes that regulate intracellular amino acid concentrations
and lower intracellular concentration of amino acids, a key TOR input. Further,
Atf4 mutants have reduced S6K activity in liver and adipose tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Atf4 regulates age-related and diet-induced obesity as well as
glucose homeostasis in mammals and has conserved metabolic functions in flies.

PMCID: PMC2768187
PMID: 19690063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Aug;8(8):2296-307. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-0347. Epub
2009 Aug 11.

Induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress response by TZD18, a novel dual ligand 
for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha/gamma, in human breast
cancer cells.

Zang C(1), Liu H, Bertz J, Possinger K, Koeffler HP, Elstner E, Eucker J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology/Hematology, Department of Hematology and Oncology,
University Medicine Charité,Berlin, Germany. chuanbing.zang@charite.de

Previously we reported that the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
alpha/gamma dual ligand TZD18 inhibited growth and induced apoptosis of leukemia 
and glioblastoma cells. Now we show that TZD18 also has the same effects against 
six human breast cancer cell lines. To obtain insights into the mechanism
involved in TZD18-induced growth inhibition and apoptosis in breast cancer, the
gene expression profiles of TZD18-treated and untreated MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231
cells were compared by microarray analysis. Results reveal that many genes
implicated in endoplasmic reticulum stress signaling, such as CHOP (also known as
DDIT3 or GADD153), GRP78 (HSPA5), and ATF4, are highly up-regulated, suggesting
endoplasmic reticulum stress is induced. This is supported by our data that
treatment of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells with TZD18 induces phosphorylation of
PERK and the alpha subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2alpha), as well
as an up-regulation of GRP78 and an activation of ATF6, all of which are specific
markers for endoplasmic reticulum stress. Furthermore, this ligand increases the 
endoplasmic reticulum stress-related cell death-regulators such as CHOP, DR5,
GADD34, Bax, and Bak in these cells. Importantly, knockdown of CHOP by small
interference RNA antagonizes the TZD18-induced apoptosis, indicating a crucial
role of CHOP in the apoptotic process triggered by TZD18. In addition, TZD18 also
activates stress-sensitive mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways
including p38, ERK, and JNK. The specific inhibitors of these MAPKs attenuated
the TZD18-induced growth inhibition in these cells. These results clearly show
that activation of these MAPKs is important for TZD18-induced growth inhibition. 
In summary, TZD18-treatment leads to the activation of endoplasmic reticulum
stress response and, subsequently, growth arrest and apoptosis in breast cancer
cells.

PMID: 19671747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 2;284(40):27273-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.014464. Epub 2009
Aug 7.

Apolipoprotein E4 domain interaction induces endoplasmic reticulum stress and
impairs astrocyte function.

Zhong N(1), Ramaswamy G, Weisgraber KH.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, San Francisco, California 94158, 
USA.

Domain interaction, a structural property of apolipoprotein E4 (apoE4), is
predicted to contribute to the association of apoE4 with Alzheimer disease.
Arg-61 apoE mice, a gene-targeted mouse model specific for domain interaction,
have lower brain apoE levels and synaptic, functional, and cognitive deficits. We
hypothesized that domain interaction elicits an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
in astrocytes and an unfolded protein response that targets Arg-61 apoE for
degradation. Primary Arg-61 apoE astrocytes had less intracellular apoE than
wild-type astrocytes, and unfolded protein response markers OASIS (old astrocyte 
specifically induced substance), ATF4, and XBP-1 and downstream effectors were
up-regulated. ER stress appears to cause global astrocyte dysfunction as glucose 
uptake was decreased in Arg-61 apoE astrocytes, and astrocyte-conditioned medium 
promoted neurite outgrowth less efficiently than wild-type medium in Neuro-2a
cell cultures. We showed age-dependent up-regulation of brain OASIS levels and
processing in Arg-61 apoE mice. ER stress and astrocyte dysfunction represent a
new paradigm underlying the association of apoE4 with neurodegeneration.

PMCID: PMC2785655
PMID: 19666463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 9;284(41):27933-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.025742. Epub 2009
Jul 31.

Injury-induced platelet-derived growth factor receptor-alpha expression mediated 
by interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) release and cooperative transactivation by
NF-kappaB and ATF-4: IL-1beta facilitates HDAC-1/2 dissociation from promoter.

Zhang N(1), Khachigian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052,
Australia.

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 9;285(28):21902.

Platelet-derived growth factors are a family of potent mitogens and
chemoattractants for fibroblasts and other cells of mesenchymal origin.
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) dimeric ligands (composed of A-, B-, C-,
and D-chains) exert their biological activity through high affinity interactions 
with cell surface receptor subunits (alpha and beta). PDGF-receptor-alpha is
widely implicated in the pathogenesis of hyperplastic fibrotic disease, yet the
molecular mechanisms controlling its expression in response to injury are poorly 
understood. Here we show that PDGF-R alpha expression is induced in fibroblasts
by mechanical injury and interleukin (IL)-1beta, which was abolished by
neutralizing IL-1beta antibodies in the culture supernatant or inhibitors of
NF-kappaB. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays revealed the existence of a new NF-kappaB binding site at -531/-521 bp in 
the PDGF-R alpha promoter. We have recently shown that ATF-4 is also induced by
injury (Malabanan, K. P., Kanellakis, P., Bobik, A., and Khachigian, L. M. (2008)
Circ. Res. 103, 378-387), and we demonstrate here that ATF-4 binds a novel
element -259/-254 and stimulates PDGF-R alpha transcription. ATF-4 and NF-kappaB 
interact, occupy the PDGF-R alpha promoter, and induce PDGF-R alpha transcription
in a cooperative manner. IL-1beta facilitates the dissociation of histone
deacetylase (HDAC)-1/2 from the PDGF-R alpha promoter, whereas the HDAC
inhibitors suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid and trichostatin A potentiate IL-1beta
induction of PDGF-R alpha transcription. These findings, taken together,
demonstrate that injury stimulates IL-1beta secretion by fibroblasts, which
activates NF-kappaB and ATF-4 and stimulates interaction with the PDGF-R alpha
promoter, triggering PDGF-R alpha transcription. Physical and functional
interactions between NF-kappaB and ATF-4 have not been reported in any gene. This
is also the first report of HDAC regulation of PDGF-R alpha transcription.

PMCID: PMC2788845
PMID: 19648113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Seikagaku. 2009 Jun;81(6):474-85.

[Stress responses in pancreatic beta-cells: roles of translational control].

[Article in Japanese]

Ishihara H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Nihon University 
School of Medicine, 30-1 Oyaguchi-kamimachi, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610, Japan.

PMID: 19618871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Cell Death Differ. 2009 Nov;16(11):1505-14. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.90. Epub 2009
Jul 17.

alphaNAC depletion as an initiator of ER stress-induced apoptosis in hypoxia.

Hotokezaka Y(1), van Leyen K, Lo EH, Beatrix B, Katayama I, Jin G, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology and Cancer Biology, Nagasaki University School of
Dentistry, 1-7-1 Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8588, Japan.

Accumulation of unfolded proteins triggers endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and 
is considered a part of the cellular responses to hypoxia. The nascent
polypeptide-associated complex (NAC) participates in the proper maturation of
newly synthesized proteins. However, thus far, there have been no comprehensive
studies on NAC involvement in hypoxic stress. Here, we show that hypoxia
activates glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta) and that the activated
GSK-3beta destabilizes alphaNAC with the subsequent apoptosis of the cell.
Hypoxia of various cell types and the mouse ischemic brain was associated with
rapid downregulation of alphaNAC and ER stress responses involving PERK, ATF4,
gamma-taxilin, elF2alpha, Bip, and CHOP. Depletion of alphaNAC by RNA
interference specifically activated ER stress responses and caused mitochondrial 
dysfunction, which resulted in apoptosis through caspase activation.
Interestingly, we found that the hypoxic conditions activated GSK-3beta, and that
GSK-3beta inhibition prevented alphaNAC protein downregulation in hypoxic cells
and rescued the cells from apoptosis. In addition, alphaNAC overexpression
increased the viability of hypoxic cells. Taken together, these results suggest
that alphaNAC degradation triggers ER stress responses and initiates apoptotic
processes in hypoxic cells, and that GSK-3beta may participate upstream in this
mechanism.

PMID: 19609276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Development. 2009 Aug;136(16):2747-56. doi: 10.1242/dev.033571. Epub 2009 Jul 15.

Regulation of bone formation and remodeling by G-protein-coupled receptor 48.

Luo J(1), Zhou W, Zhou X, Li D, Weng J, Yi Z, Cho SG, Li C, Yi T, Wu X, Li XY, de
Crombrugghe B, Höök M, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Biomedical Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China
Normal University, Shanghai, China.

G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) 48 (Gpr48; Lgr4), a newly discovered member of 
the glycoprotein hormone receptor subfamily of GPCRs, is an orphan GPCR of
unknown function. Using a knockout mouse model, we have characterized the
essential roles of Gpr48 in bone formation and remodeling. Deletion of Gpr48 in
mice results in a dramatic delay in osteoblast differentiation and
mineralization, but not in chondrocyte proliferation and maturation, during
embryonic bone formation. Postnatal bone remodeling is also significantly
affected in Gpr48(-/-) mice, including the kinetic indices of bone formation
rate, bone mineral density and osteoid formation, whereas the activity and number
of osteoclasts are increased as assessed by tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase
staining. Examination of the molecular mechanism of Gpr48 action in bone
formation revealed that Gpr48 can activate the cAMP-PKA-CREB signaling pathway to
regulate the expression level of Atf4 in osteoblasts. Furthermore, we show that
Gpr48 significantly downregulates the expression levels of Atf4 target
genes/proteins, such as osteocalcin (Ocn; Bglap2), bone sialoprotein (Bsp; Ibsp) 
and collagen. Together, our data demonstrate that Gpr48 regulates bone formation 
and remodeling through the cAMP-PKA-Atf4 signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC2730404
PMID: 19605502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2010 Jan;37(1):51-5. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1681.2009.05229.x. Epub 2009 Jun 29.

Tribble 3, a novel oxidized low-density lipoprotein-inducible gene, is induced
via the activating transcription factor 4-C/EBP homologous protein pathway.

Shang YY(1), Zhong M, Zhang LP, Guo ZX, Wang ZH, Zhang Y, Deng JT, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodelling and
Function Research, Chinese Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Public
Health, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Ji'nan, China.

1. C/EBP homologueueueous protein (CHOP), an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-inducible protein, has a critical role in regulation of the cell cycle and
apoptosis by forming heterodimers with other C/EBP proteins. However, how CHOP
function is regulated remains to be determined. The human homologue of Drosophila
tribbles (TRIB3) is associated with CHOP and is upregulated by oxidized
low-density lipoprotein (ox-LDL). The aim of the present study was to investigate
the role of CHOP in ox-LDL-induced TRIB3 expression in macrophages. 2. Human
monocyte-derived macrophages were treated with various concentrations of ox-LDL
(0, 2.5, 5, 10, 25 and 50 microg/mL) or 2 microg/mL tunicamycin for 0, 4, 8, 16, 
24 and 48 h or were transfected with CHOP or TRIB3 expression plasmid and TRIB3
targeting short interference RNA (siRNA). The expression of CHOP and activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) mRNA in treated cells was detected by quantitative 
real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). 3. The expression of CHOP and ATF4
mRNA increased with increasing concentrations of ox-LDL and duration of time. The
ox-LDL-induced expression of TRIB3 mRNA was upregulated later than the expression
of CHOP and ATF4 mRNA. Overexpression of CHOP increased the mRNA expression of
TRIB3, which was further increased in CHOP-overexpressing macrophages treated
with ox-LDL. Overexpression of TRIB3 suppressed the expression of CHOP, whereas
TRIB3 silencing increased CHOP expression following ox-LDL stimulation by a
negative feedback mechanism. 4. In conclusion, the expression of ATF4 and CHOP is
upregulated by ox-LDL in a dose- and time-dependent manner in naturally
differentiated human macrophages. Oxidized LDL induces TRIB3 expression via an
ATF4/CHOP-dependent ER stress pathway.

PMID: 19566842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. PLoS One. 2009 Jun 30;4(6):e6092. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006092.

Methamphetamine induces dopamine D1 receptor-dependent endoplasmic reticulum
stress-related molecular events in the rat striatum.

Jayanthi S(1), McCoy MT, Beauvais G, Ladenheim B, Gilmore K, Wood W 3rd, Becker
K, Cadet JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, National Institute of Drug Abuse,
National Institutes of Health (NIH)/Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS), Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Methamphetamine (METH) is an illicit toxic psychostimulant which is widely
abused. Its toxic effects depend on the release of excessive levels of dopamine
(DA) that activates striatal DA receptors. Inhibition of DA-mediated
neurotransmission by the DA D1 receptor antagonist, SCH23390, protects against
METH-induced neuronal apoptosis. The initial purpose of the present study was to 
investigate, using microarray analyses, the influence of SCH23390 on
transcriptional responses in the rat striatum caused by a single METH injection
at 2 and 4 hours after drug administration. We identified 545 out of a total of
22,227 genes as METH-responsive. These include genes which are involved in
apoptotic pathways, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and in transcription
regulation, among others. Of these, a total of 172 genes showed SCH23390-induced 
inhibition of METH-mediated changes. Among these SCH23390-responsive genes were
several genes that are regulated during ER stress, namely ATF3, HSP27, Hmox1,
HSP40, and CHOP/Gadd153. The secondary goal of the study was to investigate the
role of DA D1 receptor stimulation on the expression of genes that participate in
ER stress-mediated molecular events. We thus used quantitative PCR to confirm
changes in the METH-responsive ER genes identified by the microarray analyses. We
also measured the expression of these genes and of ATF4, ATF6, BiP/GRP78, and of 
GADD34 over a more extended time course. SCH23390 attenuated or blocked
METH-induced increases in the expression of the majority of these genes. Western 
blot analysis revealed METH-induced increases in the expression of the
antioxidant protein, Hmox1, which lasted for about 24 hours after the METH
injection. Additionally, METH caused DA D1 receptor-dependent transit of the
Hmox1 regulator protein, Nrf2, from cytosolic into nuclear fractions where the
protein exerts its regulatory functions. When taken together, these findings
indicate that SCH23390 can provide protection against neuronal apoptosis by
inhibiting METH-mediated DA D1 receptor-mediated ER stress in the rat striatum.
Our data also suggest that METH-induced toxicity might be a useful model to
dissect molecular mechanisms involved in ER stress-dependent events in the rodent
brain.

PMCID: PMC2699544
PMID: 19564919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 4;284(36):24204-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.006510. Epub 2009
Jun 29.

Hypoxia-induced expression of carbonic anhydrase 9 is dependent on the unfolded
protein response.

van den Beucken T(1), Koritzinsky M, Niessen H, Dubois L, Savelkouls K, Mujcic H,
Jutten B, Kopacek J, Pastorekova S, van der Kogel AJ, Lambin P, Voncken W,
Rouschop KM, Wouters BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology (Maastro Lab), Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Adaptation to tumor hypoxia is mediated in large part by changes in protein
expression. These are driven by multiple pathways, including activation of the
hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) transcription factor and the PKR-like
endoplasmic reticulum kinase PERK, a component of the unfolded protein response. 
Through gene expression profiling we discovered that induction of the HIF-1
target gene CA9 was defective in mouse embryo fibroblasts derived from mice
harboring an eIF2alpha S51A knock-in mutation. This finding was confirmed in two 
isogenic human cell lines with an engineered defect in eIF2alpha phosphorylation.
We show that impaired CA9 expression was not due to changes in HIF activity or
CA9 mRNA stability. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation we show that the
eIF2alpha-dependent translationally regulated gene ATF4 binds directly to the CA9
promoter and is associated with loss of the transcriptional repressive histone 3 
lysine 27 tri-methylation mark. Loss or overexpression of ATF4 confirmed its role
in CA9 induction during hypoxia. Our data indicate that expression of CA9 is
regulated through both the HIF-1 and unfolded protein response hypoxia response
pathways in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2782014
PMID: 19564335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Mol Pharmacol. 2009 Sep;76(3):667-78. doi: 10.1124/mol.109.055830. Epub 2009 Jun 
26.

Dual mechanisms of sHA 14-1 in inducing cell death through endoplasmic reticulum 
and mitochondria.

Hermanson D(1), Addo SN, Bajer AA, Marchant JS, Das SG, Srinivasan B, Al-Mousa F,
Michelangeli F, Thomas DD, Lebien TW, Xing C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, USA.

HA 14-1 is a small-molecule Bcl-2 antagonist that promotes apoptosis in malignant
cells, but its mechanism of action is not well defined. We recently reported that
HA 14-1 has a half-life of only 15 min in vitro, which led us to develop a stable
analog of HA 14-1 (sHA 14-1). The current study characterizes its mode of action.
Because of the antiapoptotic function of Bcl-2 family proteins on the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) and mitochondria, the effect of sHA 14-1 on both organelles was
evaluated. sHA 14-1 induced ER calcium release in human leukemic cells within 1
min, followed by induction of the ER stress-inducible transcription factor ATF4. 
Similar kinetics and stronger intensity of ER calcium release were induced by the
sarcoendoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA) inhibitor thapsigargin,
accompanied by similar kinetics and intensity of ATF4 induction. sHA 14-1
directly inhibited SERCA enzymatic activity but had no effect on the inositol
triphosphate receptor. Evaluation of the mitochondrial pathway showed that sHA
14-1 triggered a loss of mitochondrial transmembrane potential (Delta psi m) and 
weak caspase-9 activation, whereas thapsigargin had no effect.
(R)-4-(3-Dimethylamino-1-phenylsulfanylmethyl-propylamino)-N-{4-[4-(4'-chloro-bip
henyl-2-ylmethyl)-piperazin-1-yl]-benzoyl}-3-nitrobenzenesulfonamide (ABT-737), a
well established small-molecule Bcl-2 antagonist, rapidly induced loss of Delta
psi m and caspase-9 activation but had no effect on the ER. The pan-caspase
inhibitor N-benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Ala-Asp-fluoromethyl ketone had some protective
effect on sHA 14-1-induced cell death. These collective results suggest a unique 
dual targeting mechanism of sHA 14-1 on the apoptotic resistance machinery of
tumor cells that includes antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins and SERCA proteins.

PMCID: PMC2730395
PMID: 19561125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 4;284(36):24306-19. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.026583. Epub 2009
Jun 26.

The thioxotriazole copper(II) complex A0 induces endoplasmic reticulum stress and
paraptotic death in human cancer cells.

Tardito S(1), Isella C, Medico E, Marchiò L, Bevilacqua E, Hatzoglou M, Bussolati
O, Franchi-Gazzola R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of General and Clinical Pathology, Department of Experimental Medicine,
University of Parma, Parma, Italy.

The copper(II) complex A0 induces a type of non-apoptotic cell death also known
as paraptosis. Paraptosis involves extensive endoplasmic reticulum vacuolization 
in the absence of caspase activation. A wide panel of human cancer cell lines was
used to demonstrate differences in cytotoxicity by the paraptosis-inducing drug
A0 and the metal-based pro-apoptotic drug cisplatin. Gene expression profiling of
the human fibrosarcoma HT1080 cells showed that, while cisplatin induced p53
targets, A0 up-regulated genes involved in the unfolded protein response (UPR)
and response to heavy metals. The cytotoxic effects of A0 were associated with
inhibition of the ubiquitin-proteasome system and accumulation of ubiquitinylated
proteins, in a manner dependent on protein synthesis. Cycloheximide inhibited the
accumulation of ubiquitinylated proteins and hampered A0-induced cell death
process. The occurrence of the UPR during A0-induced death process was shown by
the increased abundance of spliced XBP1 mRNA, transient eIF2alpha
phosphorylation, and a series of downstream events, including attenuation of
global protein synthesis and increased expression of ATF4, CHOP, BIP, and GADD34.
Mouse embryonic fibroblasts expressing a mutant eIF2alpha, which could not be
phosphorylated, were more resistant to A0 than wild type cells, pointing to a
pro-death role of eIF2alpha phosphorylation. A0 may thus represent the
prototypical member of a new class of compounds that cause paraptotic cell death 
via mechanisms involving eIF2alpha phosphorylation and the UPR.

PMCID: PMC2782024
PMID: 19561079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Curr Mol Med. 2009 May;9(4):411-6.

ATF4, an ER stress and hypoxia-inducible transcription factor and its potential
role in hypoxia tolerance and tumorigenesis.

Ye J(1), Koumenis C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Hypoxia/anoxia promotes tumor aggressiveness and negatively impacts tumor
response to therapy. Coordinate regulation of HIF-dependent and HIF-independent
pathways has been shown to contribute to cellular adaptation to hypoxic stress,
and to couple macromolecular synthesis rates to reduced energy availability. An
important component of this type of adaptation is the activation of the
endoplasmic reticulum kinase PERK by acute or prolonged hypoxia. Activated PERK
subsequently induces phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor
eIF2alpha and translational upregulation of the transcription factor ATF4. ATF4
is a basic leucine-zipper (bZip) transcription factor, which regulates amino acid
metabolism, cellular redox state, and anti-stress responses. ATF4 expression can 
be regulated at transcriptional, translational, and post-translational levels.
The functional activation of ATF4 under hypoxia and the overexpression of ATF4 in
hypoxic areas of clinical samples of human tumors suggest that ATF4 plays a role 
in tumor hypoxic adaptation. Here we summarize recent findings regarding the
regulation of ATF4 in transformed cells, clinical tumor samples and tumor models,
and speculate on its potential role in tumor progression and chemoresistance.

PMID: 19519398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Biol Chem. 2009 Aug 7;284(32):21241-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.011338. Epub 2009 
Jun 9.

Elevated ATF4 expression, in the absence of other signals, is sufficient for
transcriptional induction via CCAAT enhancer-binding protein-activating
transcription factor response elements.

Shan J(1), Ord D, Ord T, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, Shands
Cancer Center and Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College 
of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Protein limitation in vivo or amino acid deprivation of cells in culture causes a
signal transduction cascade consisting of activation of the kinase GCN2 (general 
control nonderepressible 2), phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2,
and increased synthesis of activating transcription factor (ATF) 4 by a
translational control mechanism. In a self-limiting transcriptional program, ATF4
transiently activates a wide range of downstream target genes involved in
transport, cellular metabolism, and other cell functions. Simultaneous activation
of other signal transduction pathways by amino acid deprivation led to the
question of whether or not the increased abundance of ATF4 alone was sufficient
to trigger the transcriptional control mechanisms. Using 293 cells that
ectopically express ATF4 in a tetracycline-inducible manner showed that ATF4
target genes were activated in the absence of amino acid deprivation. Ectopic
expression of ATF4 alone resulted in effective recruitment of the general
transcription machinery, but some reduction in histone modification was observed.
These data document that ATF4 alone is sufficient to trigger the amino
acid-responsive transcriptional control program. However, the absolute amount of 
ectopic ATF4 required to achieve the same degree of transcriptional activation
observed after amino acid limitation was greater, suggesting that other factors
may serve to enhance ATF4 function.

PMCID: PMC2755847
PMID: 19509279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Aug 14;386(1):89-95. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.05.144. Epub 2009 Jun 6.

Immortalization and characterization of mouse floxed Bmp2/4 osteoblasts.

Wu LA(1), Yuan G, Yang G, Ortiz-Gonzalez I, Yang W, Cui Y, MacDougall M, Donly
KJ, Harris S, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, The University of Texas Health Science
Center at San Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA.

Generation of a floxed Bmp2/4 osteoblast cell line is a valuable tool for
studying the modulatory effects of Bmp2 and Bmp4 on osteoblast differentiation as
well as relevant molecular events. In this study, primary floxed Bmp2/4 mouse
osteoblasts were cultured and transfected with simian virus 40 large T-antigen.
Transfection was verified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
immunohistochemistry. To examine the characteristics of the transfected cells,
morphology, proliferation and mineralization were analyzed, expression of
cell-specific genes including Runx2, ATF4, Dlx3, Osx, dentin matrix protein 1,
bone sialoprotein, osteopontin, osteocalcin, osteonectin and collagen type I was 
detected. These results show that transfected floxed Bmp2/4 osteoblasts bypassed 
senescence with a higher proliferation rate, but retain the genotypic and
phenotypic characteristics similar to the primary cells. Thus, we for the first
time demonstrate the establishment of an immortalized mouse floxed Bmp2/4
osteoblast cell line.

PMCID: PMC2745638
PMID: 19501574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Science. 2009 Jun 5;324(5932):1334-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1172638.

Halofuginone inhibits TH17 cell differentiation by activating the amino acid
starvation response.

Sundrud MS(1), Koralov SB, Feuerer M, Calado DP, Kozhaya AE, Rhule-Smith A,
Lefebvre RE, Unutmaz D, Mazitschek R, Waldner H, Whitman M, Keller T, Rao A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School and Immune Disease Institute, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2009 Jun 5;324(5932):1282-3.

A central challenge for improving autoimmune therapy is preventing inflammatory
pathology without inducing generalized immunosuppression. T helper 17 (TH17)
cells, characterized by their production of interleukin-17, have emerged as
important and broad mediators of autoimmunity. Here we show that the small
molecule halofuginone (HF) selectively inhibits mouse and human TH17
differentiation by activating a cytoprotective signaling pathway, the amino acid 
starvation response (AAR). Inhibition of TH17 differentiation by HF is rescued by
the addition of excess amino acids and is mimicked by AAR activation after
selective amino acid depletion. HF also induces the AAR in vivo and protects mice
from TH17-associated experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. These results
indicate that the AAR pathway is a potent and selective regulator of inflammatory
T cell differentiation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2803727
PMID: 19498172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Free Radic Biol Med. 2009 Apr 15;46(8):1158-67. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2009.01.015. Epub 2009 Jan 27.

Activating transcription factor 4 and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-beta
negatively regulate the mammalian target of rapamycin via Redd1 expression in
response to oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Jin HO(1), Seo SK, Woo SH, Kim ES, Lee HC, Yoo DH, An S, Choe TB, Lee SJ, Hong
SI, Rhee CH, Kim JI, Park IC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Cancer Research, Korea Institute of Radiological &
Medical Sciences, Nowon-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Regulation of mRNA translation in mammalian cells involves the coordinated
control of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling. At present, limited
information is available on the potential relevance of mTOR regulation, although 
translation inhibition during oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is 
clearly important. In this study, we show that activating transcription factor 4 
(ATF4) and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-beta (C/EBP-beta) negatively regulate
mTOR via Redd1 expression in response to oxidative and ER stress. Oxidative and
ER stress conditions induce rapid and significant activation of ATF4 downstream
of eIF2alpha phosphorylation, which is responsible for Redd1 expression. In our
experiment, overexpression of ATF4 was associated with reduced mTOR activity via 
Redd1 expression, whereas suppression of ATF4 levels with small interfering RNA
led to the recovery of decreased mTOR activity mediated by downregulation of
Redd1 during oxidative and ER stress. We additionally identified Redd1 as a
downstream effector of C/EBP-beta stimulated by ATF4 activated under the stress
conditions examined. RNA interference studies provided further evidence of the
requirement of C/EBP-beta for Redd1 expression. We conclude that the Redd1 gene
is transactivated by the ATF4 and C/EBP family of transcription factors, leading 
to mTOR inhibition in response to oxidative and ER stress.

PMID: 19439225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Cancer Res. 2009 May 15;69(10):4225-34. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2689. Epub 
2009 May 12.

Chemical genomics identifies the unfolded protein response as a target for
selective cancer cell killing during glucose deprivation.

Saito S(1), Furuno A, Sakurai J, Sakamoto A, Park HR, Shin-Ya K, Tsuruo T, Tomida
A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo,
Japan.

Glucose deprivation, a cell condition that occurs in solid tumors, activates the 
unfolded protein response (UPR). A key feature of the UPR is the transcription
program activation, which allows the cell to survive under stress conditions.
Here, we show that the UPR transcription program is disrupted by the antidiabetic
biguanides metformin, buformin, and phenformin depending on cellular glucose
availability. These drugs inhibit production of the UPR transcription activators 
XBP1 and ATF4 and induce massive cell death during glucose deprivation as did the
antitumor macrocyclic compound versipelostatin. Gene expression profiling shows
remarkable similarity in the modes of action of biguanides and versipelostatin
determined by the broad range of glucose deprivation-inducible genes.
Importantly, during glucose deprivation, most of the biguanide suppression genes 
overlap with the genes induced by tunicamycin, a chemical UPR inducer. Gene
expression profiling also identifies drug-driven signatures as a tool for
discovering pharmacologic UPR modulators. Our findings show that disrupting the
UPR during glucose deprivation could be an attractive approach for selective
cancer cell killing and could provide a chemical genomic basis for developing
UPR-targeting drugs against solid tumors.

PMID: 19435925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Cancer Res. 2009 May 15;69(10):4415-23. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2839. Epub 
2009 May 5.

The role of ATF4 stabilization and autophagy in resistance of breast cancer cells
treated with Bortezomib.

Milani M(1), Rzymski T, Mellor HR, Pike L, Bottini A, Generali D, Harris AL.

Author information: 
(1)Growth Factor Group, Cancer Research UK, Molecular Oncology Laboratories,
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe 
Hospital, Headington, Oxford, UK.

The ubiquitin-proteasome system plays a key regulatory role in cellular
homeostasis. The inhibition of the 26S proteasome by Bortezomib leads to the
accumulation of misfolded proteins, resulting in endoplasmic reticulum stress
followed by a coordinated cellular response called unfolded protein response
(UPR). Endoplasmic reticulum stress is also a potent inducer of macroautophagy.
Bortezomib is a selective and potent inhibitor of the 26S proteasome and is
approved for the treatment of multiple myeloma. Clinical trials with Bortezomib
have shown promising results for some types of cancers, but not for some others, 
including those of the breast. In this study, we show that Bortezomib induces the
UPR and autophagy in MCF7 breast cancer cells. Surprisingly, Bortezomib did not
induce phosphorylation of PERK, a key initial step of the UPR. We show that
induction of autophagy by Bortezomib is dependent on the proteasomal
stabilisation of ATF4 and up-regulation of LC3B by ATF4. We show that ATF4 and
LC3B play a critical role in activating autophagy and protecting cells from
Bortezomib-induced cell death. Our experiments also reveal that HDAC6 knockdown
results in decreased LC3B protein and reduced autophagy. Our work shows that the 
induction of autophagy through ATF4 may be an important resistance mechanism to
Bortezomib treatment in breast cancer, and targeting autophagy may represent a
novel approach to sensitize breast cancers to Bortezomib.

PMID: 19417138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Diabetologia. 2009 Jun;52(6):1102-11. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1329-4. Epub 2009
Apr 8.

Amyloid formation in human IAPP transgenic mouse islets and pancreas, and human
pancreas, is not associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Hull RL(1), Zraika S, Udayasankar J, Aston-Mourney K, Subramanian SL, Kahn SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and Nutrition, VA Puget Sound Health
Care System (151), Seattle, WA 98108, USA. rhull@u.washington.edu

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Supraphysiological levels of the amyloidogenic peptide human
islet amyloid polypeptide have been associated with beta cell endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. However, in human type 2 diabetes, levels of human IAPP
are equivalent or decreased relative to matched controls. Thus, we sought to
investigate whether ER stress is induced during amyloidogenesis at physiological 
levels of human IAPP.
METHODS: Islets from human IAPP transgenic mice that develop amyloid, and
non-transgenic mice that do not, were cultured for up to 7 days in 11.1, 16.7 and
33.3 mmol/l glucose. Pancreases from human IAPP transgenic and non-transgenic
mice and humans with or without type 2 diabetes were also evaluated. Amyloid
formation was determined histologically. ER stress was determined in islets by
quantifying mRNA levels of Bip, Atf4 and Chop (also known as Ddit3) and alternate
splicing of Xbp1 mRNA, or in pancreases by immunostaining for immunoglobulin
heavy chain-binding protein (BIP), C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) and X-box
binding protein 1 (XBP1).
RESULTS: Amyloid formation in human IAPP transgenic islets was associated with
reduced beta cell area in a glucose- and time-dependent manner. However, amyloid 
formation was not associated with significant increases in expression of ER
stress markers under any culture condition. Thapsigargin treatment, a positive
control, did result in significant ER stress. Amyloid formation in vivo in
pancreas samples from human IAPP transgenic mice or humans was not associated
with upregulation of ER stress markers.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our data suggest that ER stress is not an obligatory 
pathway mediating the toxic effects of amyloid formation at physiological levels 
of human IAPP.

PMCID: PMC2734275
PMID: 19352619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Exp Mol Med. 2009 Jun 30;41(6):440-52. doi: 10.3858/emm.2009.41.6.049.

Induction of unfolded protein response during neuronal induction of rat bone
marrow stromal cells and mouse embryonic stem cells.

Cho YM(1), Jang YS, Jang YM, Chung SM, Kim HS, Lee JH, Jeong SW, Kim IK, Kim JJ, 
Kim KS, Kwon OJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, 2MRC for Cell Death Disease Research Center,
Korea.

When we treated rat bone marrow stromal cells (rBMSCs) with neuronal
differentiation induction media, typical unfolded protein response (UPR) was
observed. BIP/GRP78 protein expression was time-dependently increased, and three 
branches of UPR were all activated. ATF6 increased the transcription of XBP1
which was successfully spliced by IRE1. PERK was phosphorylated and it was
followed by eIF2alpha phosphorylation. Transcription of two downstream targets of
eIF2alpha, ATF4 and CHOP/GADD153, were transiently up-regulated with the peak
level at 24 h. Immunocytochemical study showed clear coexpression of BIP and ATF4
with NeuN and Map2, respectively. UPR was also observed during the neuronal
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells. Finally, chemical
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress inducers, thapsigargin, tunicamycin, and
brefeldin A, dose-dependently increased both mRNA and protein expressions of
NF-L, and, its expression was specific to BIP-positive rBMSCs. Our results
showing the induction of UPR during neuronal differentiations of rBMSCs and mES
cells as well as NF-L expression by ER stress inducers strongly suggest the
potential role of UPR in neuronal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2705864
PMID: 19322020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 24;284(17):11224-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806470200. Epub 2009
Feb 24.

SNAT2 amino acid transporter is regulated by amino acids of the SLC6
gamma-aminobutyric acid transporter subfamily in neocortical neurons and may play
no role in delivering glutamine for glutamatergic transmission.

Grewal S(1), Defamie N, Zhang X, De Gois S, Shawki A, Mackenzie B, Chen C,
Varoqui H, Erickson JD.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Center, Louisiana State University Health Science Center, New
Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA.

System A transporters SNAT1 and SNAT2 mediate uptake of neutral alpha-amino acids
(e.g. glutamine, alanine, and proline) and are expressed in central neurons. We
tested the hypothesis that SNAT2 is required to support neurotransmitter
glutamate synthesis by examining spontaneous excitatory activity after inducing
or repressing SNAT2 expression for prolonged periods. We stimulated de novo
synthesis of SNAT2 mRNA and increased SNAT2 mRNA stability and total SNAT2
protein and functional activity, whereas SNAT1 expression was unaffected.
Increased endogenous SNAT2 expression did not affect spontaneous excitatory
action-potential frequency over control. Long term glutamine exposure strongly
repressed SNAT2 expression but increased excitatory action-potential frequency.
Quantal size was not altered following SNAT2 induction or repression. These
results suggest that spontaneous glutamatergic transmission in pyramidal neurons 
does not rely on SNAT2. To our surprise, repression of SNAT2 activity was not
limited to System A substrates. Taurine, gamma-aminobutyric acid, and
beta-alanine (substrates of the SLC6 gamma-aminobutyric acid transporter family) 
repressed SNAT2 expression more potently (10x) than did System A substrates;
however, the responses to System A substrates were more rapid. Since ATF4
(activating transcription factor 4) and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein are known 
to bind to an amino acid response element within the SNAT2 promoter and mediate
induction of SNAT2 in peripheral cell lines, we tested whether either factor was 
similarly induced by amino acid deprivation in neurons. We found that glutamine
and taurine repressed the induction of both transcription factors. Our data
revealed that SNAT2 expression is constitutively low in neurons under
physiological conditions but potently induced, together with the taurine
transporter TauT, in response to depletion of neutral amino acids.

PMCID: PMC2670127
PMID: 19240036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Neurobiol Dis. 2009 May;34(2):357-65. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.02.005. Epub 2009
Feb 20.

Inhibition of mitochondrial function induces an integrated stress response in
oligodendroglia.

Silva JM(1), Wong A, Carelli V, Cortopassi GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of California, Davis, 95616,
USA.

Maternal inheritance of a pathogenic point mutation within complex I of the
mitochondrial genome causes Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON), resulting
in the neurodegeneration and demyelination of the optic nerve. The integrated
stress response (ISR), a signaling pathway that responds to various stresses by
activating a common set of genes, has been linked to both mitochondrial defects
and demyelinating diseases. Therefore, we wanted to determine whether
mitochondrial dysfunction induced by complex I inhibition with rotenone can
activate the ISR, specifically by the ER kinase PERK, in oligodendroglial cells. 
Our complex I-deficient oligodendroglial model reproduced similar biochemical
defects as in LHON by decreasing ATP synthesis and ATP levels. The same doses of 
rotenone that reduced ATP production also induced dose-dependent increases in
PERK and eIF2alpha phosphorylation as well as activated the ISR stress genes,
ATF4 and CHOP. In addition, complex I inhibition at these same concentrations
induced a PERK-dependent activation of the cell death kinase, JNK, and inhibited 
oligodendroglial proliferation. Taken together, our results demonstrate that
activation of the ISR may be one example of mitochondrial retrograde signaling in
response to complex I deficiency and we suggest that this response mechanism may 
be relevant to the pathophysiology of LHON.

PMID: 19233273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Jun;9(5):335-40. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2009.02.002. Epub
2009 Feb 14.

FIAT is co-expressed with its dimerization target ATF4 in early osteoblasts, but 
not in osteocytes.

Yu VW(1), Akhouayri O, St-Arnaud R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children, 1529 Cedar Avenue, Montreal,
Que., Canada H3G 1A6.

FIAT represses osteocalcin gene transcription by heterodimerizing with ATF4 and
preventing it from binding to DNA. We report here the expression profiles of FIAT
and ATF4 during osteoblastogenesis. Messenger RNA levels for the osteoblast
transcriptional regulators Satb2, Runx2, Fiat, and Atf4 were quantified using
real-time reverse-transcription PCR (RT-qPCR) and respective protein levels
monitored by immunodetection in differentiating primary osteoblast cultures.
Satb2, Fiat, and Atf4 mRNA levels remained constant throughout the
differentiation sequence, whereas Runx2 transcript levels were significantly
increased by 12 days post-confluency. Using immunofluorescence, the SATB2, RUNX2,
and ATF4 signals appeared to increase as a function of time in culture. FIAT
protein expression was readily detected in early cultures, but signal intensity
decreased thereafter. When immunoblotting was used to quantify the relative
amounts of FIAT and ATF4 proteins, the expression levels of the two proteins were
found to be inversely correlated. The decrease in FIAT protein levels coincided
with increased binding of ATF4 to the osteocalcin gene promoter, and with
increased osteocalcin expression measured by RT-qPCR or immunoblotting.
Immunohistochemistry of long bones from mice at E16.5 and 2 days post-natal
revealed that both proteins are initially expressed in osteoblasts. In adult
bone, FIAT was detected in osteocytes, while ATF4 expression was observed in
active osteoblasts and lining cells, but not in osteocytes. Taken together, these
data support the idea that a stoichiometric excess of ATF4 over FIAT in mature
osteoblasts releases ATF4 from sequestration by FIAT, thereby allowing ATF4
homodimerization and subsequent transactivation of the osteocalcin gene.

PMCID: PMC2692570
PMID: 19232401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Virus Res. 2009 Apr;141(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2008.12.019. Epub 2009
Feb 5.

An improved in vitro and in vivo Sindbis virus expression system through host and
virus engineering.

Nivitchanyong T(1), Tsai YC, Betenbaugh MJ, Oyler GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, United States. Tarangsri.niv@biotec.or.th

The Sindbis viral expression system enables the rapid production of high levels
of recombinant protein in mammalian cells; however, this expression is typically 
limited to transient production due to the cytotoxicity of the virus. Limiting
the lethality inherent in the Sindbis virus vector in order to enable long term, 
sustained expression of recombinant proteins may be possible. In this study,
modifications to virus and host have been combined in order to reduce the
cytopathic effects. Non-cytopathic replication competent viruses of two Sindbis
viral strains, TE and 633, were developed using a non-structural protein (nsP)
P726S point mutation in order to obtain persistent heterologous gene expression
in infected Baby Hamster Kidney (BHK) cells and Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO)
cells. Cells infected with the P726S variant viruses were able to recover after
infection, while cells infected with normal virus died within 3 days. The P726S
mutation did not reduce the susceptibility of 5- and 14-day-old mice to 633 and
TE viruses in vivo. In addition, animal survival with the P726S variant viruses
was increased and GFP expression was sustained for at least 14 days while the 633
and TE infection resulted in short-term GFP expression or an earlier mortality.
Modifications to the host BHK and CHO cells themselves were subsequently
undertaken by including the anti-apoptotic gene Bcl-2 and a deletion mutant of
Bcl-2 (Bcl-2Delta) as another method for limiting the cytopathic effects of the
Sindbis virus. The inclusion of anti-apoptotic genes permitted higher production 
of heterologous GFP protein following Sindbis virus infection, and the
combination of the TE-P726S virus and the CHO-Bcl-2Delta cell line showed the
greatest improvement in cell survival. Sindbis virus infection also induced ER
stress in mammalian cells as detected by increased PERK phosphorylation and ATF4 
translation. Overexpression of Parkin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase that can protect
cells against agents that induce ER stress, suppressed Sindbis virus-induced cell
death in both BHK cells and in vivo studies in mice. Such findings show that
viral and host modifications can improve cell survival and production of
heterologous proteins, change viral behavior in vitro and in vivo, and assist in 
the development of new expression or gene delivery vehicles.

PMCID: PMC2730471
PMID: 19200810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Virol. 2009 Apr;83(8):3463-74. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02307-08. Epub 2009 Feb 4.

Human cytomegalovirus protein pUL38 induces ATF4 expression, inhibits persistent 
JNK phosphorylation, and suppresses endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced cell
death.

Xuan B(1), Qian Z, Torigoi E, Yu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a key organelle involved in sensing and
responding to stressful conditions, including those resulting from infection of
viruses, such as human cytomegalovirus (HCMV). Three signaling pathways
collectively termed the unfolded protein response (UPR) are activated to resolve 
ER stress, but they will also lead to cell death if the stress cannot be
alleviated. HCMV is able to modulate the UPR to promote its infection. The
specific viral factors involved in such HCMV-mediated modulation, however, were
unknown. We previously showed that HCMV protein pUL38 was required to maintain
the viability of infected cells, and it blocked cell death induced by
thapsigargin. Here, we report that pUL38 is an HCMV-encoded regulator to modulate
the UPR. In infection, pUL38 allowed HCMV to upregulate phosphorylation of
PKR-like ER kinase (PERK) and the alpha subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor 2
(eIF-2alpha), as well as induce robust accumulation of activating transcriptional
factor 4 (ATF4), key components of the PERK pathway. pUL38 also allowed the virus
to suppress persistent phosphorylation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), which
was induced by the inositol-requiring enzyme 1 pathway. In isolation, pUL38
overexpression elevated eIF-2alpha phosphorylation, induced ATF4 accumulation,
limited JNK phosphorylation, and suppressed cell death induced by both
thapsigargin and tunicamycin, two drugs that induce ER stress by different
mechanisms. Importantly, ATF4 overexpression and JNK inhibition significantly
reduced cell death in pUL38-deficient virus infection. Thus, pUL38 targets ATF4
expression and JNK activation, and this activity appears to be critical for
protecting cells from ER stress induced by HCMV infection.

PMCID: PMC2663240
PMID: 19193809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Mutat Res. 2009 Jul-Aug;682(1):7-12. doi: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2009.01.001. Epub 2009 
Jan 9.

Translational regulation mechanisms of AP-1 proteins.

Vesely PW(1), Staber PB, Hoefler G, Kenner L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, Auenbruggerplatz 25, A-8036 Graz, Austria.
paul.vesely@klinikum-graz.at

The activator protein 1 (AP-1) transcription factor is assembled from jun-jun,
jun-fos, or jun-atf family protein homo- or heterodimers. AP-1 belongs to the
class of basic leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors. It binds to promoters
of its target genes in a sequence-specific manner, and transactivates or
represses them. AP-1 proteins are implicated in the regulation of a variety of
cellular processes including proliferation and survival, differentiation, growth,
apoptosis, cell migration, and transformation. The decision if a given AP-1
factor is positively or negatively regulating a specific target gene is made upon
abundance of dimerization partners, dimer-composition, post-translational
regulation, and interaction with accessory proteins. In this review we describe
translational control mechanisms that can regulate the abundance of AP-1
proteins. The Atf4/5, and JunD (mRNAs) are regulated by upORF dependent
mechanisms. JUNB (mRNA) translation is controlled via mTOR. Translation
efficiency of the unstable c-Fos (mRNA) can be decreased by the miRNA mir7B,
while its perinuclear translation might facilitate efficient nuclear c-fos
protein import. c-Jun (mRNA) appears to be regulated by both, m7G cap
(CAP)-dependent and CAP-independent translational control mechanisms, via
putative internal ribosome entry segments (IRES). IRES elements were also
proposed to play a role in the regulation of JunD (mRNA). We conclude that in
addition to transcriptional and post-translational control mechanisms
translational regulation contributes to the balanced production of AP-1 proteins,
in order to maintain physiological cellular conditions.

PMID: 19167516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 17;106(7):2200-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0807611106. Epub 2009 Jan 22.

ERAD inhibitors integrate ER stress with an epigenetic mechanism to activate
BH3-only protein NOXA in cancer cells.

Wang Q(1), Mora-Jensen H, Weniger MA, Perez-Galan P, Wolford C, Hai T, Ron D,
Chen W, Trenkle W, Wiestner A, Ye Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The ubiquitin-proteasome system has recently emerged as a major target for drug
development in cancer therapy. The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib has clinical
activity in multiple myeloma and mantle cell lymphoma. Here we report that
Eeyarestatin I (EerI), a chemical inhibitor that blocks endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-associated protein degradation, has antitumor and biologic activities
similar to bortezomib and can synergize with bortezomib. Like bortezomib,
EerI-induced cytotoxicity requires the up-regulation of the Bcl-2 homology3
(BH3)-only pro-apoptotic protein NOXA. We further demonstrate that both EerI and 
bortezomib activate NOXA via an unanticipated mechanism that requires cooperation
between two processes. First, these agents elicit an integrated stress response
program at the ER to activate the CREB/ATF transcription factors ATF3 and ATF4.
We show that ATF3 and ATF4 form a complex capable of binding to the NOXA
promoter, which is required for NOXA activation. Second, EerI and bortezomib also
block ubiquitination of histone H2A to relieve its inhibition on NOXA
transcription. Our results identify a class of anticancer agents that integrate
ER stress response with an epigenetic mechanism to induce cell death.

PMCID: PMC2629785
PMID: 19164757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 13;284(11):6661-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806735200. Epub 2009 
Jan 8.

An upstream open reading frame regulates translation of GADD34 during cellular
stresses that induce eIF2alpha phosphorylation.

Lee YY(1), Cevallos RC, Jan E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z3, Canada.

Cellular stress such as endoplasmic reticulum stress, hypoxia, and viral
infection activates an integrated stress response, which includes the
phosphorylation of the eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha (eIF2alpha) to inhibit
overall protein synthesis. Paradoxically, this leads to translation of a subset
of mRNAs, like transcription factor ATF4, which in turn induces transcription of 
downstream stress-induced genes such as growth arrest DNA-inducible gene 34
(GADD34). GADD34 interacts with protein phosphatase 1 to dephosphorylate
eIF2alpha, resulting in a negative feedback loop to recover protein synthesis and
allow translation of stress-induced transcripts. Here, we show that GADD34 is not
only transcriptionally induced but also translationally regulated to ensure
maximal expression during eIF2alpha phosphorylation. GADD34 mRNAs are
preferentially associated with polysomes during eIF2alpha phosphorylation, which 
is mediated by its 5'-untranslated region (5'UTR). The human GADD34 5'UTR
contains two non-overlapping upstream open reading frames (uORFs), whereas the
mouse version contains two overlapping and out of frame uORFs. Using 5'UTR GADD34
reporter constructs, we show that the downstream uORF mediates repression of
basal translation and directs translation during eIF2alpha phosphorylation.
Furthermore, we show that the upstream uORF is poorly translated and that a
proportion of scanning ribosomes bypasses the upstream uORF to recognize the
downstream uORF. These findings suggest that GADD34 translation is regulated by a
unique 5'UTR uORF mechanism to ensure proper GADD34 expression during eIF2alpha
phosphorylation. This mechanism may serve as a model for understanding how other 
5'UTR uORF-containing mRNAs are regulated during cellular stress.

PMCID: PMC2652341
PMID: 19131336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. PLoS One. 2009;4(1):e4161. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004161. Epub 2009 Jan 8.

Synergistic apoptosis induction in leukemic cells by the phosphatase inhibitor
salubrinal and proteasome inhibitors.

Drexler HC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Biomedicine, Muenster, Germany. hannes.drexler@mpi-muenster.mpg.de

BACKGROUND: Cells adapt to endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-stress by arresting global 
protein synthesis while simultaneously activating specific transcription factors 
and their downstream targets. These processes are mediated in part by the
phosphorylation-dependent inactivation of the translation initiation factor
eIF2alpha. Following restoration of homeostasis protein synthesis is resumed when
the serine/threonine-protein phosphatase PP1 dephosphorylates and reactivates
eIF2alpha. Proteasome inhibitors, used to treat multiple myeloma patients evoke
ER-stress and apoptosis by blocking the ER-associated degradation of misfolded
proteins (ERAD), however, the role of eIF2alpha phosphorylation in leukemic cells
under conditions of proteasome inhibitor-mediated ER stress is currently unclear.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Bcr-Abl-positive and negative leukemic cell
lines were used to investigate the functional implications of PP1-related
phosphatase activities on eIF2alpha phosphorylation in proteasome
inhibitor-mediated ER stress and apoptosis. Rather unexpectedly, salubrinal, a
recently identified PP1 inhibitor capable to protect against ER stress in various
model systems, strongly synergized with proteasome inhibitors to augment
apoptotic death of different leukemic cell lines. Salubrinal treatment did not
affect the phosphorlyation status of eIF2alpha. Furthermore, the proapoptotic
effect of salubrinal occurred independently from the chemical nature of the
proteasome inhibitor, was recapitulated by a second unrelated phosphatase
inhibitor and was unaffected by overexpression of a dominant negative eIF2alpha
S51A variant that can not be phosphorylated. Salubrinal further aggravated
ER-stress and proteotoxicity inflicted by the proteasome inhibitors on the
leukemic cells since characteristic ER stress responses, such as ATF4 and CHOP
synthesis, XBP1 splicing, activation of MAP kinases and eventually apoptosis were
efficiently abrogated by the translational inhibitor cycloheximide.
CONCLUSIONS: Although PP1 activity does not play a major role in regulating the
ER stress response in leukemic cells, phosphatase signaling nevertheless
significantly limits proteasome inhibitor-mediated ER-stress and apoptosis.
Inclusion of specific phosphatase inhibitors might therefore represent an option 
to improve current proteasome inhibitor-based treatment modalities for
hematological cancers.

PMCID: PMC2613525
PMID: 19129918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biol Reprod. 2009 May;80(5):944-53. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.072546. Epub 2009
Jan 7.

The unfolded protein response contributes to preimplantation mouse embryo death
in the DDK syndrome.

Hao L(1), Vassena R, Wu G, Han Z, Cheng Y, Latham KE, Sapienza C.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
Medical School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

DDK syndrome is the polar-lethal embryonic death that occurs at the
morula-blastocyst transition when female mice of the DDK strain are mated with
males from many other inbred strains (so-called alien males). Embryonic death is 
caused by incompatibility between a DDK oocyte factor and an alien male gene,
both of which map to the Om locus on mouse chromosome 11. We compared global
transcription patterns of DDK x DDK embryos (high viability) and DDK x C57BL/6
embryos (low viability) at the morula stage, approximately 24 h before any
morphological manifestations of DDK syndrome are observed. Of the transcripts
that are differentially more abundant in the DDK x C57BL/6 embryos, many are the 
products of genes induced by the "unfolded protein response." We confirmed by
quantitative RT-PCR that a number of genes in this pathway are upregulated in the
DDK x C57BL/6 embryos. Immunostaining of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) marker
BIP/GRP78 (immunoglobin-binding protein/glucose-regulated protein of 78 kDa),
official symbol HSPA5, heat shock protein 5 revealed an accompanying abnormal
HSPA5 accumulation and ER structure in the DDK x C57BL/6 embryos. Immunostaining 
for HERPUD1 (homocysteine-inducible, ER stress-inducible, ubiquitin-like domain
member 1) and ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4) also revealed accumulation
of these stress-response products. Our results indicate that the unfolded protein
response is induced in embryos destined to die of DDK syndrome and that the
embryonic death observed is associated with inability to resolve the associated
ER stress.

PMCID: PMC2723760
PMID: 19129515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS One. 2009;4(1):e4135. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004135. Epub 2009 Jan 6.

Protein palmitoylation regulates osteoblast differentiation through BMP-induced
osterix expression.

Leong WF(1), Zhou T, Lim GL, Li B.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Developmental Biology Division, The Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), Singapore,
Singapore.

Osteoporosis is one of the most common diseases and can be treated by either
anti-resorption drugs, anabolic drugs, or both. To search for anabolic drug
targets for osteoporosis therapy, it is crucial to understand the biology of bone
forming cells, osteoblasts, in terms of their proliferation, differentiation, and
function. Here we found that protein palmitoylation participates in signaling
pathways that control osterix expression and osteoblast differentiation. Mouse
calvarial osteoblasts express most of the 24 palmitoyl transferases, with some
being up-regulated during differentiation. Inhibition of protein palmitoylation, 
with a substrate-analog inhibitor, diminished osteoblast differentiation and
mineralization, but not proliferation or survival. The decrease in
differentiation capacity is associated with a reduction in osterix, but not Runx2
or Atf4. Inhibition of palmitoyl transferases had little effect in p53(-/-)
osteoblasts that show accelerated differentiation due to overexpression of
osterix, suggesting that osterix, at least partially, mediated the effect of
inhibition of palmitoyl transferases on osteoblast differentiation. BMPs are the 
major driving force of osteoblast differentiation in the differentiation assays. 
We found that inhibition of palmitoyl transferases also compromised BMP2-induced 
osteoblast differentiation through down-regulating osterix induction. However,
palmitoyl transferases inhibitor did not inhibit Smad1/5/8 activation. Instead,
it compromised the activation of p38 MAPK, which are known positive regulators of
osterix expression and differentiation. These results indicate that protein
palmitoylation plays an important role in BMP-induced MAPK activation, osterix
expression, and osteoblast differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2607547
PMID: 19125191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cell Struct Funct. 2009;34(1):1-10. Epub 2009 Jan 1.

pXBP1(U), a negative regulator of the unfolded protein response activator
pXBP1(S), targets ATF6 but not ATF4 in proteasome-mediated degradation.

Yoshida H(1), Uemura A, Mori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan. hide@biophysics.mbox.media.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Cells from yeast to humans activate unconventional mRNA splicing when unfolded
proteins accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) under ER stress conditions.
The substrate of this splicing in mammalian cells is XBP1 mRNA, which encodes the
unfolded protein response (UPR)-specific transcription factor XBP1. The
C-terminal region of XBP1 is switched as a result of the splicing. Thus,
unspliced and spliced mRNAs produce pXBP1(U) of 261 aa and pXBP1(S) of 376 aa,
respectively, with the N-terminal region containing the DNA-binding domain
shared. As the pXBP1(S)-specific C-terminal region functions as an activation
domain, pXBP1(S) can activate transcription efficiently. We recently found that
pXBP1(U) shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm, owing to the presence of a
nuclear exclusion signal in the pXBP1(U)-specific C-terminal region, in marked
contrast to the exclusively nuclear localization of pXBP1(S). pXBP1(U) can
associate with pXBP1(S), and pXBP1(U)-pXBP1(S) complex is rapidly degraded by the
proteasome. Two other transcription factors are activated in response to ER
stress, namely ATF6 and ATF4. ATF6 is a UPR-specific transcription factor,
whereas ATF4 is activated by not only ER stress but also various other stimuli.
In this study, we show that pXBP1(U) targets the active form of ATF6 but not ATF4
for destruction by the proteasome via direct association. This enhanced
degradation is mediated by the degradation domain located at the
pXBP1(U)-specific C-terminal end. We conclude that pXBP1(U) functions as a
negative regulator of the UPR-specific transcription factors ATF6 and pXBP1(S).

PMID: 19122331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Feb 6;379(2):451-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.12.079. Epub 2008 Dec 27.

ATF4 is necessary and sufficient for ER stress-induced upregulation of REDD1
expression.

Whitney ML(1), Jefferson LS, Kimball SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, The Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, P.O. Box 850, 500 University Drive, Hershey, PA
17033, USA.

In response to a variety of cell stresses, e.g. endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress, expression of REDD1 (regulated in development and DNA damage responses)
is transcriptionally upregulated. However, the mechanism through which ER stress 
acts to upregulate REDD1 expression is unknown. In the present study, REDD1
expression was found to be upregulated by ER stress in several cell lines.
However, in MEF cells lacking the eIF2alpha kinase PERK, ER stress failed to
upregulate REDD1 expression, demonstrating that phosphorylation of eIF2alpha was 
necessary for the effect. Moreover, ER stress led to upregulated expression of
the transcription factor ATF4, but in MEF cells lacking ATF4, REDD1 mRNA
expression was not increased by ER stress. In contrast, exogenous expression of
ATF4 was sufficient to induce REDD1 expression. Overall, the results suggest that
REDD1 expression is upregulated during ER stress through a mechanism involving
activation of PERK, phosphorylation of eIF2alpha, and increased ATF4 expression.

PMCID: PMC2656673
PMID: 19114033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 13;284(11):7232-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809064200. Epub 2008 
Dec 24.

Peroxisome deficiency causes a complex phenotype because of hepatic SREBP/Insig
dysregulation associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Kovacs WJ(1), Tape KN, Shackelford JE, Wikander TM, Richards MJ, Fliesler SJ,
Krisans SK, Faust PL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, ETH Zürich, CH-8093 Zürich, Switzerland.
werner.kovacs@cell.biol.ethz.ch

Regulation of hepatic cholesterol biosynthesis, lipogenesis, and insulin
signaling intersect at the transcriptional level by control of SREBP and Insig
genes. We previously demonstrated that peroxisome-deficient PEX2-/- mice activate
SREBP-2 pathways but are unable to maintain normal cholesterol homeostasis. In
this study, we demonstrate that oral bile acid treatment normalized hepatic and
plasma cholesterol levels and hepatic cholesterol synthesis in early postnatal
PEX2 mutants, but SREBP-2 and its target gene expressions remained increased.
SREBP-2 pathway induction was also observed in neonatal and longer surviving PEX2
mutants, where hepatic cholesterol levels were normal. Abnormal expression
patterns for SREBP-1c and Insig-2a, and novel regulation of Insig-2b, further
demonstrate that peroxisome deficiency widely affects the regulation of related
metabolic pathways. We have provided the first demonstration that peroxisome
deficiency activates hepatic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress pathways,
especially the integrated stress response mediated by PERK and ATF4 signaling.
Our studies suggest a mechanism whereby ER stress leads to dysregulation of the
endogenous sterol response mechanism and concordantly activates oxidative stress 
pathways. Several metabolic derangements in peroxisome-deficient PEX2-/- liver
are likely to trigger ER stress, including perturbed flux of mevalonate
metabolites, altered bile acid homeostasis, changes in fatty acid levels and
composition, and oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC2652311
PMID: 19110480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 1;182(1):466-76.

CHAC1/MGC4504 is a novel proapoptotic component of the unfolded protein response,
downstream of the ATF4-ATF3-CHOP cascade.

Mungrue IN(1), Pagnon J, Kohannim O, Gargalovic PS, Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, CA 90095,
USA. imungrue@yahoo.com

To understand pathways mediating the inflammatory responses of human aortic
endothelial cells to oxidized phospholipids, we previously used a combination of 
genetics and genomics to model a coexpression network encompassing >1000 genes.
CHAC1 (cation transport regulator-like protein 1), a novel gene regulated by
ox-PAPC (oxidized 1-palmitoyl-2-arachidonyl-sn-3-glycero-phosphorylcholine), was 
identified in a co-regulated group of genes enriched for components of the ATF4
(activating transcription factor 4) arm of the unfolded protein response pathway.
Herein, we characterize the role of CHAC1 and validate the network model. We
first define the activation of CHAC1 mRNA by chemical unfolded protein
response-inducers, but not other cell stressors. We then define activation of
CHAC1 by the ATF4-ATF3-CHOP (C/EBP homologous protein), and not parallel XBP1 (X 
box-binding protein 1) or ATF6 pathways, using siRNA and/or overexpression
plasmids. To examine the subset of genes downstream of CHAC1, we used expression 
microarray analysis to identify a list of 227 differentially regulated genes. We 
validated the activation of TNFRSF6B (tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily,
member 6b), a FASL decoy receptor, in cells treated with CHAC1 small interfering 
RNA. Finally, we showed that CHAC1 overexpression enhanced apoptosis, while CHAC1
small interfering RNA suppressed apoptosis, as determined by TUNEL, PARP
(poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase) cleavage, and AIF (apoptosis-inducing factor)
nuclear translocation.

PMCID: PMC2846782
PMID: 19109178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Arch Oral Biol. 2009 Mar;54(3):279-86. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2008.11.003.
Epub 2008 Dec 19.

Involvement of p38 MAPK in regulation of MMP13 mRNA in chondrocytes in response
to surviving stress to endoplasmic reticulum.

Hamamura K(1), Goldring MB, Yokota H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

MMP13 is enriched in mature chondrocytes and considered a prime cause of ECM
degradation in the osteoarthritic articular cartilage in temporomandibular
joints. We asked whether surviving stress to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) would
upregulate transcription of MMP13, and if so, whether a cross-talk would exist
between surviving ER stress and p38 MAPK pathways. Using C28/I2 chondrocyte cell 
line, ER stress was induced by thapsigargin and tunicamycin and upregulation of
phosphorylated eIF2alpha and ATF4 protein was observed. Both thapsigargin and
tunicamycin elevated the mRNA level of MMP13 and phosphorylation of p38 MAPK.
Thapsigargin-induced MMP13 mRNA upregulation was significantly suppressed by
SB203580, while its upregulation by tunicamycin was completely attenuated by
SB203580. Those results support that homeostasis of chondrocytes is affected by
the surviving ER stress through p38 MAPK pathways, suggesting a potential role of
ER stress in joint diseases such as osteoarthritis.

PMCID: PMC2662326
PMID: 19100962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2008;3(12):e3951. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003951. Epub 2008 Dec 16.

Pyrvinium targets the unfolded protein response to hypoglycemia and its
anti-tumor activity is enhanced by combination therapy.

Yu DH(1), Macdonald J, Liu G, Lee AS, Ly M, Davis T, Ke N, Zhou D, Wong-Staal F, 
Li QX.

Author information: 
(1)iTherX Pharmaceuticals, Inc., San Diego, California, United States of America.
yu@itherx.com

We identified pyrvinium pamoate, an old anthelminthic medicine, which
preferentially inhibits anchorage-independent growth of cancer cells over
anchorage-dependent growth (approximately 10 fold). It was also reported by
others to have anti-tumor activity in vivo and selective toxicity against cancer 
cells under glucose starvation in vitro, but with unknown mechanism. Here, we
provide evidence that pyrvinium suppresses the transcriptional activation of
GRP78 and GRP94 induced by glucose deprivation or 2-deoxyglucose (2DG, a
glycolysis inhibitor), but not by tunicamycin or A23187. Other UPR pathways
induced by glucose starvation, e.g. XBP-1, ATF4, were also found suppressed by
pyrvinium. Constitutive expression of GRP78 via transgene partially protected
cells from pyrvinium induced cell death under glucose starvation, suggesting that
suppression of the UPR is involved in pyrvinium mediated cytotoxicity under
glucose starvation. Xenograft experiments showed rather marginal overall
anti-tumor activity for pyrvinium as a monotherapy. However, the combination of
pyrvinium and Doxorubicin demonstrated significantly enhanced efficacy in vivo,
supporting a mechanistic treatment concept based on tumor hypoglycemia and UPR.

PMCID: PMC2597738
PMID: 19079611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 13;284(7):4158-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806051200. Epub 2008
Dec 10.

Up-regulation of S100P expression by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and
its role in anti-tumorigenic effects.

Namba T(1), Homan T, Nishimura T, Mima S, Hoshino T, Mizushima T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

Epidemiological studies have revealed that prolonged use of non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) reduces the risk of cancer. Various mechanisms, 
including induction of apoptosis and inhibition of the growth and invasion of
cancer cells, have been implicated in this anti-tumorigenic activity. In this
study we focused on S100P, which is known to be overexpressed in clinically
isolated tumors and which functions through both intracellular and extracellular 
mechanisms. We showed the up-regulation of S100P expression in human gastric
carcinoma cells treated with various NSAIDs, including celecoxib. The
celecoxib-mediated up-regulation of S100P was suppressed by the transfection of
cells with small interfering RNA for activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a 
transcription factor involved in the endoplasmic reticulum stress response.
Furthermore, deletion of ATF4 binding consensus sequence located in the promoter 
of the S100P gene resulted in inhibition of celecoxibmediated transcriptional
activation of the gene. These results suggest that celecoxib up-regulates the
expression of S100P through an ATF4-mediated endoplasmic reticulum stress
response. Celecoxib inhibited the growth and induced apoptosis, and these actions
could be either suppressed or stimulated by transfection of cells with S100P
overexpression plasmid or small interfering RNA, respectively. Celecoxib also
inhibited the invasive activity of the cells. Cromolyn, which inhibits the
binding of S100P to its receptor, enhanced the celecoxib-mediated inhibition of
cell invasion and growth but did not affect apoptosis. These results suggest that
S100P affects apoptosis, cell growth, and invasion through either an
intracellular or an extracellular mechanism and that the up-regulation of S100P
expression by NSAIDs reduces their anti-tumorigenic activity.

PMID: 19073601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cancer Sci. 2009 Feb;100(2):327-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.01036.x.

Preventing the unfolded protein response via aberrant activation of 4E-binding
protein 1 by versipelostatin.

Matsuo J(1), Tsukumo Y, Sakurai J, Tsukahara S, Park HR, Shin-ya K, Watanabe T,
Tsuruo T, Tomida A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, 3-10-6
Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

We recently isolated a macrocyclic compound, versipelostatin (VST), that exerts
in vivo antitumor activity. VST shows unique, selective cytotoxicity to
glucose-deprived tumor cells by preventing the unfolded protein response (UPR).
Here we show that eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1 (4E-BP1), a
negative regulator of eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-mediated protein
translation, plays a role in the UPR-inhibitory action of VST. Indeed, 4E-BP1 is 
aberrantly activated by VST. This activation occurs specifically during glucose
deprivation and results in profound translation repression and prevents induction
of the typical UPR markers glucose-regulated protein (GRP) 78 and activating
transcription factor (ATF) 4. Our overexpression and knockdown experiments showed
that 4E-BP1 can regulate GRP78 and ATF4 expression. These mechanisms appear to be
specific for VST. By contrast, rapamycin, which activates 4E-BP1 regardless of
cellular glucose availability, has only marginal effects on the expression of
GRP78 and ATF4. Our present findings demonstrate that aberrant 4E-BP1 activation 
can contribute to UPR preventing by VST, possibly through a mechanism that does
not operate in rapamycin-treated cells.

PMID: 19068091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Cell. 2008 Dec 5;32(5):641-51. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.11.014.

Role of SERCA1 truncated isoform in the proapoptotic calcium transfer from ER to 
mitochondria during ER stress.

Chami M(1), Oulès B, Szabadkai G, Tacine R, Rizzuto R, Paterlini-Bréchot P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 807, Paris F-75015, France. mounia.chami@inserm.fr

Among the new players at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-mitochondria interface
regulating interorganelle calcium signaling, those specifically involved during
ER stress are not known at present. We report here that the truncated variant of 
the sarcoendoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase 1 (S1T) amplifies ER stress through 
the PERK-eIF2alpha-ATF4-CHOP pathway. S1T, which is localized in the
ER-mitochondria microdomains, determines ER Ca(2+) depletion due to increased
Ca(2+) leak, an increased number of ER-mitochondria contact sites, and inhibition
of mitochondria movements. This leads to increased Ca(2+) transfer to
mitochondria in both resting and stimulated conditions and activation of the
mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Interestingly, S1T knockdown was shown to
prevent ER stress, mitochondrial Ca(2+) overload, and subsequent apoptosis. Thus,
by bridging ER stress to apoptosis through increased ER-mitochondria Ca(2+)
transfer, S1T acts as an essential determinant of cellular fate.

PMCID: PMC2676567
PMID: 19061639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. FEBS Lett. 2009 Jan 5;583(1):123-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.11.035. Epub 2008
Dec 6.

SP600125 negatively regulates the mammalian target of rapamycin via ATF4-induced 
Redd1 expression.

Jin HO(1), Seo SK, Woo SH, Kim ES, Lee HC, Yoo DH, Choe TB, Hong SI, Kim JI, Park
IC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Radiation Biology, Korea Institute of Radiological and
Medical Sciences, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

SP600125 (SAPK Inhibitor II) is reported to function as a reversible ATP
competitive inhibitor of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). In the present study, we 
show that SP600125 induces a dose-dependent decrease in mTOR activity, as
assessed by reduced phosphorylation of the downstream targets S6K1 and S6, and a 
significant increase in the expression of Redd1. Knockdown of Redd1 expression by
siRNA resulted in a recovery of decreased S6 phosphorylation by SP600125.
Overexpression of ATF4 upregulated the expression of Redd1, while suppression of 
ATF4 expression by siRNA enhanced the level of S6 phosphorylation by
downregulating the SP600125-induced increase in Redd1 expression. Together, these
results indicate that SP600125 inhibits mTOR activity via an ATF4-induced
increase in Redd1 expression.

PMID: 19059405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS One. 2008;3(11):e3783. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003783. Epub 2008 Nov 21.

A point mutation in translation initiation factor 2B leads to a continuous hyper 
stress state in oligodendroglial-derived cells.

Kantor L(1), Pinchasi D, Mintz M, Hathout Y, Vanderver A, Elroy-Stein O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Research & Immunology, George S. Wise Faculty of Life
Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2B (eIF2B)
cause Childhood Ataxia with CNS Hypomyelination (CACH), also known as Vanishing
White Matter disease (VWM). The disease is manifested by loss of brain myelin
upon physiological stress. In a previous study, we showed that fibroblasts
isolated from CACH/VWM patients are hypersensitive to pharmacologically-induced
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Since brain cells from affected individuals
are not available for research, we wished to assess the effect of eIF2B mutation 
on oligodendroglial-derived cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A rat oligodendroglial-derived cell line was used
for a stable knock-down of eIF2B5 followed by stable expression of mutated
eIF2B5(R195H) cDNA. In response to a pharmacological ER-stress agent,
eIF2B5(R195H) expressing cells exhibited heightened ER-stress response
demonstrated by hyper induction of ATF4, GADD34, Bip, PDIA1, PDIA3, PDIA4 and
PDIA6 proteins. Moreover, even in the absence of a pharmacological stress agent, 
eIF2B5(R195H)-expressing cells exhibited high basal levels of ATF4, GADD34 and
ER-associated Bip, PDIA1 and PDIA3.
SIGNIFICANCE: The data provide evidence that oligodendroglial-derived cells
expressing a mutated eIF2B constantly use their stress response mechanism as an
adaptation mean in order to survive. The current study is the first to
demonstrate the effects of eIF2B5 mutation on ER homeostasis in
oligodendroglial-derived cells.

PMCID: PMC2583043
PMID: 19023445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Lipids. 2009 Feb;44(2):103-13. doi: 10.1007/s11745-008-3263-5. Epub 2008 Nov 20.

The antiproliferative effect of EPA in HL60 cells is mediated by alterations in
calcium homeostasis.

Slagsvold JE(1), Pettersen CH, Follestad T, Krokan HE, Schønberg SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Children's and Women's Health, Norwegian
University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Erling Skjalgssons gate 1, 7006
Trondheim, Norway.

Studies show that n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) inhibit proliferation
and induce apoptosis in cancer cells. Recent reports indicate that this effect is
due to activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR). However, what causes
this activation has been unclear. We examined the effects of eicosapentaenoic
acid (EPA) on the human leukemia cell line HL60 and the econazole (Ec) resistant 
HL60 clone E2R2. Ec depletes Ca(2+) from the ER and blocks Ca(2+) influx in
mammalian cells, leading to activation of the UPR and apoptosis. EPA inhibited
growth of HL60 cells strongly, while E2R2 cells were much less affected. Gene
expression analysis of HL60 cells revealed extensive changes in transcripts
related to the ER homeostasis, Ca(2+)-homeostasis and cell cycle/apoptosis.
Protein levels of phosphorylated eIF2alpha, a selective translation inhibitor and
UPR hallmark, activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and sequestosome-1 were
moderately increased, whereas the cell cycle/progression protein cyclin D1 was
decreased in HL60. In contrast, EPA concentrations that strongly inhibited and
caused activation of the UPR in HL60 cells had no effect on the expression level 
of these UPR markers in E2R2 cells. Given that the only known difference between 
these cells is Ec-resistance, our results strongly suggest that the inhibitory
effect of EPA on HL60 cells is initially meditated through alterations of the
Ca(2+)-homeostasis followed by activation of the UPR.

PMID: 19020915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cancer Sci. 2008 Dec;99(12):2395-401. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00970.x. Epub
2008 Nov 17.

Insulin-like growth factor stimulation increases radiosensitivity of a pancreatic
cancer cell line through endoplasmic reticulum stress under hypoxic conditions.

Isohashi F(1), Endo H, Mukai M, Inoue T, Inoue M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular
Diseases, 1-3-3 Nakamichi, Higashinari-ku, Osaka 537-8511, Japan.

Tumor hypoxia is an obstacle to radiotherapy. Radiosensitivity under hypoxic
conditions is determined by molecular oxygen levels, as well as by various
biological cellular responses. The insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling
pathway is a widely recognized survival signal that confers radioresistance.
However, under hypoxic conditions the role of IGF signaling in radiosensitivity
is still poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that IGF-II stimulation
decreases clonogenic survival under hypoxic conditions in the pancreatic cancer
cell lines AsPC-1 and Panc-1, and in the human breast cancer cell line MCF-7. IGF
treatment under hypoxic conditions suppressed increased radiation sensitivity in 
these cell lines by pharmacologically inhibiting the phosphoinositide
3-kinase-mammalian target of rapamycin pathway, a major IGF signal-transduction
pathway. Meanwhile, IGF-II induced the endoplasmic reticulum stress response
under hypoxia, including increased protein levels of CHOP and ATF4, mRNA levels
of CHOP, GADD34, and BiP, as well as splicing levels of XBP-1. The response was
suppressed by inhibiting phosphoinositide 3-kinase and mammalian target of
rapamycin activity. Overexpression of CHOP in AsPC-1 cells increased radiation
sensitivity by IGF-II simulation under hypoxic conditions, whereas suppression of
CHOP expression levels with small hairpin RNA or a dominant negative form of a
proline-rich extensin-like receptor protein kinase in hypoxia decreased
IGF-induced radiosensitivity. IGF-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress
contributed to radiosensitization independent of cell cycle status. Taken
together, IGF stimulation increased radiosensitivity through the endoplasmic
reticulum stress response under hypoxic conditions.

PMID: 19018773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 9;284(2):1106-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807325200. Epub 2008
Nov 18.

Basal levels of eIF2alpha phosphorylation determine cellular antioxidant status
by regulating ATF4 and xCT expression.

Lewerenz J(1), Maher P.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Neurobiology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

eIF2alpha is part of a multimeric complex that regulates cap-dependent
translation. Phosphorylation of eIF2alpha (phospho-eIF2alpha) is induced by
various forms of cell stress, resulting in changes to the proteome of the cell
with two diametrically opposed consequences, adaptation to stress or initiation
of programmed cell death. In contrast to the robust eIF2alpha phosphorylation
seen in response to acute insults, less is known about the functional role of
basal levels of eIF2alpha phosphorylation. Here we show that mouse embryonic
fibroblasts expressing a nonphosphorylatable eIF2alpha have enhanced sensitivity 
to diverse toxic insults, including amyloid beta-(1-42) peptide (Abeta), a key
factor in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease. This correlates with impaired
glutathione metabolism because of down-regulation of the light chain, xCT, of the
cystine/glutamate antiporter system X(-)(c). The mechanistic link between the
absence of phospho-eIF2alpha and xCT expression is nuclear factor ATF4.
Consistent with these findings, long term activation of the
phospho-eIF2alpha/ATF4/xCT signaling module by the specific eIF2alpha phosphatase
inhibitor, salubrinal, induces resistance against oxidative glutamate toxicity in
the hippocampal cell line HT22 and primary cortical neurons. Furthermore, in PC12
cells selected for resistance against Abeta, increased activity of the
phospho-eIF2alpha/ATF4/xCT module contributes to the resistant phenotype. In
wild-type PC12 cells, activation of this module by salubrinal ameliorates the
response to Abeta. Furthermore, in human brains, ATF4 and phospho-eIF2alpha
levels are tightly correlated and up-regulated in Alzheimer disease, most
probably representing an adaptive response against disease-related cellular
stress rather than a correlate of neurodegeneration.

PMCID: PMC2613630
PMID: 19017641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Bone Miner Res. 2009 Mar;24(3):398-410. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.081107.

JNK activity is essential for Atf4 expression and late-stage osteoblast
differentiation.

Matsuguchi T(1), Chiba N, Bandow K, Kakimoto K, Masuda A, Ohnishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Field of Developmental Medicine, Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan.
tmatsugu@denta.hal.kagoshima-u.ac.jp

Osteoblasts differentiate from mesodermal progenitors and play a pivotal role in 
bone formation and mineralization. Several transcription factors including
runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2), Osterix (OSX), and activating
transcription factor4 (ATF4) are known to be crucial for the process, whereas the
upstream signal transduction controlling the osteoblast differentiation sequence 
is largely unknown. Here, we explored the role of c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)
in osteoblast differentiation using in vitro differentiation models of primary
osteoblasts and MC3T3-E1 cells with ascorbic acid/beta-glycerophosphate
treatment. Terminal osteoblast differentiation, represented by matrix
mineralization, was significantly inhibited by the inactivation of JNK with its
specific inhibitor and exogenous overexpression of MKP-M (MAP kinase phosphatase 
isolated from macrophages), which preferentially inactivates JNK. Conversely,
enhanced mineral deposition was observed by inducible overexpression of
p54(JNK2), whereas it was not observed by the overexpression of p46(JNK1) or
p46(JNK2), indicating a distinct enhancing role of p54(JNK2) in osteoblast
differentiation. Inactivation of JNK significantly inhibited late-stage molecular
events of osteoblast differentiation, including gene expression of osteocalcin
(Ocn) and bone sialoprotein (Bsp). In contrast, earlier differentiation events
including alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activation and osteopontin (Opn) expression 
were not inhibited by JNK inactivation. Although the expression levels of two
transcription factor genes, Runx2 and Osx, were not significantly affected by JNK
inactivation, induction of Atf4 mRNA during osteoblast differentiation was
significantly inhibited. Taken together, these data indicate that JNK activity is
specifically required for the late-stage differentiation events of osteoblasts.

PMID: 19016586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Jan 1;106(1):186-92. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21995.

FIAT inhibition increases osteoblast activity by modulating Atf4-dependent
functions.

Yu VW(1), El-Hoss J, St-Arnaud R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G
1A6.

The ATF4 transcription factor is a key regulator of osteoblast differentiation
that controls osteocalcin gene transcription and type I collagen protein
synthesis. We have characterized factor-inhibiting ATF4-mediated transcription
(FIAT), a leucine zipper protein that dimerizes with ATF4 to form inactive dimers
that cannot bind DNA. Overexpression of FIAT in osteoblasts of transgenic mice
inhibited osteocalcin gene transcription and reduced osteoblastic activity,
leading to osteopenia (Yu et al. [2005] J Cell Biol 169:591-601). We therefore
hypothesized that inhibition of FIAT would enhance ATF4 activity, leading to
increased osteocalcin transcription, type I collagen synthesis, and
mineralization. We used small interfering RNAs (siRNA) to knockdown FIAT in pools
of MC3T3-E1 cells stably transfected with 1.3 kb of the mouse osteocalcin gene
promoter driving expression of luciferase. Stable expression of the FIAT siRNA
sequence inhibited FIAT expression without significantly affecting the level of
total or Ribosomal S6 Kinase-2-phosphorylated ATF4 protein. Occupancy of the
osteocalcin proximal promoter by ATF4 was increased and transcription of the
osteocalcin-promoter-dependent luciferase reporter showed earlier onset and
increased levels. Similarly, endogenous osteocalcin gene expression was enhanced 
in primary osteoblasts transfected with the FIAT siRNA. FIAT knockdown cells also
displayed higher expression of bone sialoprotein, increased type I collagen
protein synthesis, and enhanced mineralization. These data suggest that
inhibition of FIAT expression increases ATF4 activity and confirm the important
role of FIAT in osteoblast function.

2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19016261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cancer Res. 2008 Nov 15;68(22):9323-30. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2873.

Preferential cytotoxicity of bortezomib toward hypoxic tumor cells via
overactivation of endoplasmic reticulum stress pathways.

Fels DR(1), Ye J, Segan AT, Kridel SJ, Spiotto M, Olson M, Koong AC, Koumenis C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6072, USA.

Hypoxia is a dynamic feature of the tumor microenvironment that contributes to
drug resistance and cancer progression. We previously showed that components of
the unfolded protein response (UPR), elicited by endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress, are also activated by hypoxia in vitro and in vivo animal and human
patient tumors. Here, we report that ER stressors, such as thapsigargin or the
clinically used proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, exhibit significantly higher
cytotoxicity toward hypoxic compared with normoxic tumor cells, which is
accompanied by enhanced activation of UPR effectors in vitro and UPR reporter
activity in vivo. Treatment of cells with the translation inhibitor
cycloheximide, which relieves ER load, ameliorated this enhanced cytotoxicity,
indicating that the increased cytotoxicity is ER stress-dependent. The mode of
cell death was cell type-dependent, because DLD1 colorectal carcinoma cells
exhibited enhanced apoptosis, whereas HeLa cervical carcinoma cells activated
autophagy, blocked apoptosis, and eventually led to necrosis. Pharmacologic or
genetic ablation of autophagy increased the levels of apoptosis. These results
show that hypoxic tumor cells, which are generally more resistant to genotoxic
agents, are hypersensitive to proteasome inhibitors and suggest that combining
bortezomib with therapies that target the normoxic fraction of human tumors can
lead to more effective tumor control.

PMCID: PMC3617567
PMID: 19010906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Pathol. 2009 Mar;217(4):507-15. doi: 10.1002/path.2465.

Up-regulation of gamma-synuclein contributes to cancer cell survival under
endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Hua H(1), Xu L, Wang J, Jing J, Luo T, Jiang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Signal Transduction and Molecular Targeting Therapy, State Key
Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
610041, China.

Previous studies have demonstrated that gamma-synuclein is overexpressed in a
variety of human malignancies. Overexpression of gamma-synuclein in human breast 
cancer cells leads to an increase in cell motility, resistance to
chemotherapeutic drugs, and mitotic checkpoint dysfunction. We report in this
study that gamma-synuclein is up-regulated by endoplasmic reticulum stress. The
up-regulation of gamma-synuclein expression by endoplasmic reticulum stress is
mediated, at least in part, by activation transcription factor (ATF) 4. Knockdown
of gamma-synuclein sensitized human breast cancer cells to endoplasmic reticulum 
stress-induced apoptosis. Induction of apoptosis by endoplasmic reticulum stress 
when gamma-synuclein was inhibited was dependent on JNK or caspase activation,
with caspase-3 and caspase-7 being involved. Treatment with the JNK or caspase-3 
and caspase-7 inhibitor partially blocked endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced
apoptosis in breast cancer cells transfected with or without the siRNA against
gamma-synuclein. Taken together, these data suggest that gamma-synuclein may
promote cancer progression by suppressing endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced
apoptosis.

PMID: 19009586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Amino Acids. 2009 May;37(1):79-88. doi: 10.1007/s00726-008-0199-2. Epub 2008 Nov 
14.

Specificity of amino acid regulated gene expression: analysis of genes subjected 
to either complete or single amino acid deprivation.

Palii SS(1), Kays CE, Deval C, Bruhat A, Fafournoux P, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, Shands
Cancer Center and Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida, College
of Medicine, Box 100245, Gainesville, FL 32610-0245, USA.

Amino acid deprivation activates the amino acid response (AAR) pathway that
enhances transcription of genes containing an amino acid response element (AARE).
The present data reveal a quantitative difference in the response to deprivation 
of individual amino acids. The AAR leads to increased eukaryotic initiation
factor 2alpha (eIF2alpha) phosphorylation and ATF4 translation. When HepG2 cells 
were deprived of an individual essential amino acid, p-eIF2alpha and activating
transcription factor 4 were increased, but the correlation was relatively weak.
Complete amino acid starvation in either Earle's balanced salt solution or
Krebs-Ringer bicarbonate buffer (KRB) resulted in activation of transcription
driven by a SNAT2 genomic fragment that contained an AARE. However, for the KRB, 
a proportion of the transcription was AARE-independent suggesting that amino
acid-independent mechanisms were responsible. Therefore, activation of
AARE-driven transcription is triggered by a deficiency in any one of the
essential amino acids, but the response is not uniform. Furthermore, caution must
be exercised when using a medium completely devoid of amino acids.

PMCID: PMC3595573
PMID: 19009228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Science. 2008 Nov 7;322(5903):874-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1167228.

Eppendorf winner. Switching memories ON and OFF.

Costa-Mattioli M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, 77030.
costamat@bcm.edu

PMID: 18988834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Dec 26;377(4):1091-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.120. Epub 2008 Nov 5.

DISC1, PDE4B, and NDE1 at the centrosome and synapse.

Bradshaw NJ(1), Ogawa F, Antolin-Fontes B, Chubb JE, Carlyle BC, Christie S,
Claessens A, Porteous DJ, Millar JK.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Section, Molecular Medicine Centre, Crewe Road, Edinburgh EH4
2XU, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jul 3;384(3):400.

Disrupted-In-Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) is a risk factor for schizophrenia and other
major mental illnesses. Its protein binding partners include the Nuclear
Distribution Factor E Homologs (NDE1 and NDEL1), LIS1, and phosphodiesterases 4B 
and 4D (PDE4B and PDE4D). We demonstrate that NDE1, NDEL1 and LIS1, together with
their binding partner dynein, associate with DISC1, PDE4B and PDE4D within the
cell, and provide evidence that this complex is present at the centrosome. LIS1
and NDEL1 have been previously suggested to be synaptic, and we now demonstrate
localisation of DISC1, NDE1, and PDE4B at synapses in cultured neurons. NDE1 is
phosphorylated by cAMP-dependant Protein Kinase A (PKA), whose activity is, in
turn, regulated by the cAMP hydrolysis activity of phosphodiesterases, including 
PDE4. We propose that DISC1 acts as an assembly scaffold for all of these
proteins and that the NDE1/NDEL1/LIS1/dynein complex is modulated by cAMP levels 
via PKA and PDE4.

PMID: 18983980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Nov 4;105(44):17175-80. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0803906105. Epub 2008 Oct 28.

Importin-mediated retrograde transport of CREB2 from distal processes to the
nucleus in neurons.

Lai KO(1), Zhao Y, Ch'ng TH, Martin KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, Brain Research Institute,
University of California, BSRB 390B, 615 Charles E. Young Drive S, Los Angeles,
CA 90095-1737, USA.

Signals received at distal synapses of neurons must be conveyed to the nucleus to
initiate the changes in transcription that underlie long-lasting synaptic
plasticity. The presence of importin nuclear transporters and of select
transcription factors at synapses raises the possibility that importins directly 
transport transcription factors from synapse to nucleus to modulate gene
expression. Here, we show that cyclic AMP response element binding protein 2
(CREB2)/activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a transcriptional repressor
that modulates long-term synaptic plasticity and memory, localizes to distal
dendrites of rodent hippocampal neurons and neurites of Aplysia sensory neurons
(SNs) and binds to specific importin alpha isoforms. Binding of CREB2 to importin
alpha is required for its transport from distal dendrites to the soma and for its
translocation into the nucleus. CREB2 accumulates in the nucleus during long-term
depression (LTD) but not long-term potentiation of rodent hippocampal synapses,
and during LTD but not long-term facilitation (LTF) of Aplysia sensory-motor
synapses. Time-lapse microscopy of CREB2 tagged with a photoconvertible
fluorescent protein further reveals retrograde transport of CREB2 from distal
neurites to the nucleus of Aplysia SN during
phenylalanine-methionine-arginine-phenylalanine-amide (FMRFamide)-induced LTD.
Together, our findings indicate that CREB2 is a novel cargo of importin alpha
that translocates from distal synaptic sites to the nucleus after stimuli that
induce LTD of neuronal synapses.

PMCID: PMC2579397
PMID: 18957537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 26;283(52):36687-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800721200. Epub 2008
Oct 27.

Inactivation of G-protein-coupled receptor 48 (Gpr48/Lgr4) impairs definitive
erythropoiesis at midgestation through down-regulation of the ATF4 signaling
pathway.

Song H(1), Luo J, Luo W, Weng J, Wang Z, Li B, Li D, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Department of Molecular and Cellular 
Medicine, Texas A&M University Health Science Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), one of the most versatile groups of cell
surface receptors, can recognize specific ligands from neural, hormonal, and
paracrine organs and regulate cell growth, proliferation, and differentiation.
Gpr48/LGR4 is a recently identified orphan GPCR with unknown functions. To reveal
the functions of Gpr48 in vivo, we generated Gpr48-/- mice and found that
Gpr48-/- fetuses displayed transient anemia during midgestation and abnormal
definitive erythropoiesis. The dramatic decrease of definitive erythroid
precursors (Ter119pos population) in Gpr48-/- fetal liver at E13.5 was confirmed 
by histological analysis and blood smear assays. Real-time PCR analyses showed
that in Gpr48-/- mice both adult hemoglobin alpha and beta chains were decreased 
while embryonic hemoglobin chains (zeta, betaH1, and epsilony) were increased,
providing another evidence for the impairment of definitive erythropoiesis.
Furthermore, proliferation was suppressed in Gpr48-/- fetal liver with decreased 
c-Myc and cyclin D1 expression, whereas apoptosis was unaffected. ATF4, a key
transcription factor in erythropoiesis, was down-regulated in Gpr48-/- fetal
livers during midgestation stage through the cAMP-PKA-CREB pathway, suggesting
that Gpr48 regulated definitive erythropoiesis through ATF4-mediated definitive
erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2605983
PMID: 18955481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Circ Res. 2008 Oct 24;103(9):e118; author reply e119. doi:
10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.186544.

Regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor A by activating transcription
factor 4.

Abcouwer SF, Roybal CN.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2008 Aug 15;103(4):378-87.

PMID: 18948622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 12;283(50):35106-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806874200. Epub 2008
Oct 21.

C/EBP homology protein (CHOP) interacts with activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4) and negatively regulates the stress-dependent induction of the asparagine 
synthetase gene.

Su N(1), Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shands Cancer Center and
Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

C/EBP homology protein (CHOP), a stress-induced transcription factor, is involved
in transcriptional regulation, cell cycle, and apoptosis. The present studies
identified CHOP as an interacting partner of activating transcription factor
(ATF) 4 in a yeast two-hybrid screen and confirmed their interaction in HEK293T
cells. CHOP protein levels rose modestly and transiently during amino acid
deprivation, whereas endoplasmic reticulum stress caused a much higher and
sustained expression of CHOP protein. Exogenous CHOP expression enhanced the TRB3
gene induction by amino acid deprivation. Conversely, CHOP suppressed the
induction of the endogenous asparagine synthetase (ASNS) gene and inhibited
transcription from a reporter gene driven by the ASNS promoter following
activation by ATF4 or amino acid deprivation. Short interfering RNA-mediated
knockdown of CHOP further enhanced the induction of ASNS by either amino acid
deprivation or endoplasmic reticulum stress. The CHOP-dependent repression of the
ASNS gene required the entire CHOP protein, arguing against the possibility of
simple sequestration of ATF4 by the CHOP leucine zipper domain, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis showed association of CHOP with the ASNS and TRB3
promoters. Interestingly, chromatin immunoprecipitation also showed that CHOP was
associated with the C/EBP-ATF composite site regions of the SNAT2, VEGF, and
CAT-1 genes, despite no significant effect on their expression after exogenous
CHOP overexpression. Collectively, the results document that CHOP is a member of 
the transcription factor network that controls the stress-induced regulation of
specific C/EBP-ATF-containing genes, such as ASNS.

PMCID: PMC2596379
PMID: 18940792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Immunobiology. 2008;213(9-10):899-908. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2008.07.016. Epub
2008 Aug 30.

Effects of hypoxia on transcription factor expression in human monocytes and
macrophages.

Elbarghati L(1), Murdoch C, Lewis CE.

Author information: 
(1)Tumour Targeting Group, Academic Unit of Pathology, University of Sheffield
Medical School, Beech Hill Road, Sheffield S10 2RX, UK.

The presence of multiple areas of hypoxia (low oxygen tension) is a hallmark
feature of human and experimental tumours. Monocytes are continually recruited
into tumours where they differentiate into tumour-associated macrophages (TAM)
and often accumulate in hypoxic and/or necrotic areas. A number of recent studies
have shown that macrophages respond to hypoxia by up-regulating transcription
factors such as HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha, which in turn up-regulate the
expression of a broad array of mitogenic, pro-invasive, pro-angiogenic and
pro-metastatic genes. Here we show that primary human macrophages but not
monocytes rapidly up-regulate HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha proteins upon exposure to
hypoxia, and that these proteins then translocate to the nucleus. We also
demonstrate differences in the temporal expression and responses to
re-oxygenation for HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha in macrophages. Here we found that, 
compared to HIF-1alpha, HIF-2alpha expression was prolonged and persisted with
re-oxygenation. ATF-4 and Egr-1 were also found to be hypoxia-responsive
transcription factors in macrophages but not monocytes, but only early after
exposure to hypoxia. Taken together, these findings indicate that a number of
transcription factors work together in a tightly regulated fashion to control
macrophage activities in ischaemic areas of diseased tissues.

PMID: 18926304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Dec;19(12):5373-86. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-03-0329. Epub 2008
Oct 8.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta promotes osteoblast differentiation by
enhancing Runx2 activity with ATF4.

Tominaga H(1), Maeda S, Hayashi M, Takeda S, Akira S, Komiya S, Nakamura T,
Akiyama H, Imamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Cancer Institute of the Japanese Foundation
for Cancer Research, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan.

Although CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta) is involved in
osteocalcin gene expression in osteoblast in vitro, the physiological importance 
of and molecular mechanisms governing C/EBPbeta in bone formation remain to be
elucidated. In particular, it remains unclear whether C/EBPbeta acts as a
homodimer or a heterodimer with other proteins during osteoblast differentiation.
Here, deletion of the C/EBPbeta gene from mice resulted in delayed bone formation
with concurrent suppression of chondrocyte maturation and osteoblast
differentiation. The expression of type X collagen as well as chondrocyte
hypertrophy were suppressed in mutant bone, providing new insight into the
possible roles of C/EBPbeta in chondrocyte maturation. In osteoblasts, luciferase
reporter, gel shift, DNAP, and ChIP assays demonstrated that C/EBPbeta
heterodimerized with activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), another basic
leucine zipper transcription factor crucial for osteoblast maturation. This
complex interacted and transactivated osteocalcin-specific element 1 (OSE1) of
the osteocalcin promoter. C/EBPbeta also enhanced the synergistic effect of ATF4 
and Runx2 on osteocalcin promoter transactivation by enhancing their interaction.
Thus, our results provide evidence that C/EBPbeta is a crucial cofactor in the
promotion of osteoblast maturation by Runx2 and ATF4.

PMCID: PMC2592674
PMID: 18843047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Biochem J. 2009 Feb 1;417(3):695-703. doi: 10.1042/BJ20081706.

Transcriptional induction of the human asparagine synthetase gene during the
unfolded protein response does not require the ATF6 and IRE1/XBP1 arms of the
pathway.

Gjymishka A(1), Su N, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, Shands
Cancer Center and Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College 
of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

The UPR (unfolded protein response) pathway comprises three signalling cascades
mediated by the ER (endoplasmic reticulum) stress-sensor proteins PERK [PKR
(double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase)-like ER kinase], IRE1
(inositol-requiring kinase 1) and ATF6 (activating transcription factor 6). The
present study shows that ASNS (asparagine synthetase) transcription activity was 
up-regulated in HepG2 cells treated with the UPR activators thapsigargin and
tunicamycin. ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) analysis demonstrated that
during ER stress, ATF4, ATF3 and C/EBPbeta (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta) 
bind to the ASNS proximal promoter region that includes the genomic sequences
NSRE (nutrient-sensing response element)-1 and NSRE-2, previously implicated by
mutagenesis in UPR activation. Consistent with increased ASNS transcription, ChIP
analysis also demonstrated that UPR signalling resulted in enhanced recruitment
of general transcription factors, including RNA Pol II (polymerase II), to the
ASNS promoter. The ASNS gene is also activated by the AAR (amino acid response)
pathway following amino acid deprivation of tissue or cells. Immunoblot analysis 
of HepG2 cells demonstrated that simultaneous activation of the AAR and UPR
pathways did not further increase the ASNS or ATF4 protein abundance when
compared with triggering either pathway alone. In addition, siRNA (small
interfering RNA)-mediated knockdown of XBP1 (X-box-binding protein 1), ATF6alpha 
or ATF6beta expression did not affect ASNS transcription, whereas siRNA against
ATF4 suppressed ASNS transcription during UPR activation. Collectively, these
results indicate that the PERK/p-eIF2alpha (phosphorylated eukaryotic initiation 
factor 2alpha)/ATF4 signalling cascade is the only arm of the UPR that is
responsible for ASNS transcriptional induction during ER stress. Consequently,
ASNS NSRE-1 and NSRE-2, in addition to ERSE (ER stress response element)-I,
ERSE-II and the mUPRE (mammalian UPR element), function as mammalian
ER-stress-responsive sequences.

PMCID: PMC3595601
PMID: 18840095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cardiovasc Res. 2009 Jan 1;81(1):148-58. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvn262. Epub 2008 Sep
24.

Salvianolic acid B protects human endothelial cells from oxidative stress damage:
a possible protective role of glucose-regulated protein 78 induction.

Wu HL(1), Li YH, Lin YH, Wang R, Li YB, Tie L, Song QL, Guo DA, Yu HM, Li XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Health Science
Center, Peking University, Xueyuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100083, PR
China.

AIMS: The purposes of the present study were to both evaluate the protective
effects of Salvianolic acid B (Sal B) and to determine the possible molecular
mechanisms by which Sal B protects endothelial cells from damage caused by
oxidative stress.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Pretreatment with Sal B markedly attenuated H(2)O(2)-induced
viability loss, lactate dehydrogenase leakage and apoptosis in human umbilical
vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). The mechanism of Sal B protection was studied
using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis coupled with hybrid quadrupole
time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Database searching implicated that
glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), a central regulator for endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, was up-regulated in Sal B-exposed HUVECs. GRP78 expression
regulation was confirmed by western blot and RT-PCR (reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction) analyses. Additionally, GRP94, which
shares significant sequence homology with GRP78, was also up-regulated in Sal
B-treated cells. Sal B caused pancreatic ER kinase (PKR)-like ER kinase (PERK)
activation followed by the phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 2 alpha (eIF2 alpha) and the expression of activating transcription factor
4 (ATF4). Knockdown of endogenous ATF4 expression partially repressed Sal
B-induced GRP78 induction. Further investigation showed that ATF6 was also
activated by Sal B. Knockdown of GRP78 by siRNA significantly reduced the
protective effects of Sal B.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that Sal B induces the expression of GRP78 by
activating ATF6 and the PERK-eIF2 alpha-ATF4 pathway. Furthermore, up-regulation 
of GRP78 by Sal B may play an important role in protecting human endothelial
cells from oxidative stress-induced cellular damage.

PMID: 18815184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 7;283(45):31153-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805056200. Epub 2008 
Sep 3.

Hypoxic reactive oxygen species regulate the integrated stress response and cell 
survival.

Liu L(1), Wise DR, Diehl JA, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, USA.

Under hypoxic conditions, cells suppress energy-intensive mRNA translation by
modulating the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and pancreatic eIF2alpha
kinase (PERK) pathways. Much is known about hypoxic inhibition of mTOR activity; 
however, the cellular processes activating PERK remain unclear. Since hypoxia is 
known to increase intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS), we hypothesized
that hypoxic ROS regulate mTOR and PERK to control mRNA translation and cell
survival. Our data indicate that although exogenous ROS inhibit mTOR, eIF2alpha, 
and eEF2, mTOR and eEF2 were largely refractory to ROS generated under moderate
hypoxia (0.5% O(2)). In direct contrast, the PERK/eIF2alpha/ATF4 integrated
stress response (ISR) was activated by hypoxic ROS and contributed to global
protein synthesis inhibition and adaptive ATF4-mediated gene expression. The ISR 
as well as exogenous growth factors were critical for cell viability during
extended hypoxia, since ISR inhibition decreased the viability of cells deprived 
of O(2) and growth factors. Collectively, our data support an important role for 
ROS in hypoxic cell survival. Under conditions of moderate hypoxia, ROS induce
the ISR, thereby promoting energy and redox homeostasis and enhancing cellular
survival.

PMCID: PMC2576535
PMID: 18768473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2008;9:183-96. doi:
10.1146/annurev.genom.9.081307.164437.

Transcriptional control of skeletogenesis.

Karsenty G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA. gk2172@columbia.edu

The skeleton contains three specific cell types: chondrocytes in cartilage and
osteoblasts and osteoclasts in bone. Our understanding of the transcriptional
mechanisms that lead to cell differentiation along these three lineages has
increased considerably in the past ten years. In the case of chondrocytes and
osteoblasts advances have been made possible largely through the molecular
elucidation of human skeletal dysplasias. This review discusses the key
transcription factors that regulate skeletogenesis and highlights their function,
mode of action, and regulation by other factors, with a special emphasis on how
human genetics has contributed to this knowledge.

PMID: 18767962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Mol Psychiatry. 2008 Dec;13(12):1138-48, 1069. doi: 10.1038/mp.2008.101. Epub
2008 Sep 2.

Nuclear DISC1 regulates CRE-mediated gene transcription and sleep homeostasis in 
the fruit fly.

Sawamura N(1), Ando T, Maruyama Y, Fujimuro M, Mochizuki H, Honjo K, Shimoda M,
Toda H, Sawamura-Yamamoto T, Makuch LA, Hayashi A, Ishizuka K, Cascella NG,
Kamiya A, Ishida N, Tomoda T, Hai T, Furukubo-Tokunaga K, Sawa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

Disrupted-in-schizophrenia-1 (DISC1) is one of major susceptibility factors for a
wide range of mental illnesses, including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, major 
depression and autism spectrum conditions. DISC1 is located in several
subcellular domains, such as the centrosome and the nucleus, and interacts with
various proteins, including NudE-like (NUDEL/NDEL1) and activating transcription 
factor 4 (ATF4)/CREB2. Nevertheless, a role for DISC1 in vivo remains to be
elucidated. Therefore, we have generated a Drosophila model for examining normal 
functions of DISC1 in living organisms. DISC1 transgenic flies with preferential 
accumulation of exogenous human DISC1 in the nucleus display disturbance in sleep
homeostasis, which has been reportedly associated with CREB
signaling/CRE-mediated gene transcription. Thus, in mammalian cells, we
characterized nuclear DISC1, and identified a subset of nuclear DISC1 that
colocalizes with the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) bodies, a nuclear compartment
for gene transcription. Furthermore, we identified three functional cis-elements 
that regulate the nuclear localization of DISC1. We also report that DISC1
interacts with ATF4/CREB2 and a corepressor N-CoR, modulating CRE-mediated gene
transcription.

PMCID: PMC2727926
PMID: 18762802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Oct;36(17):5571-80. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn538. Epub 2008
Aug 30.

Activated transcription via mammalian amino acid response elements does not
require enhanced recruitment of the Mediator complex.

Thiaville MM(1), Dudenhausen EE, Awad KS, Gjymishka A, Zhong C, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, Shands
Cancer Center, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, 
USA.

It is unclear whether Mediator complex in yeast is necessary for all RNA
polymerase II (Pol II) transcription or if it is limited to genes activated by
environmental stress. In mammals, amino acid limitation induces SNAT2
transcription through ATF4 binding at an amino acid response element. ATF4 is the
functional counterpart to the yeast amino acid-dependent regulator GCN4 and GCN4 
recruits Mediator during transcriptional activation. Consistent with enhanced
SNAT2 transcription activity, the present data demonstrate that amino acid
limitation increased SNAT2 promoter association of the general transcription
factors that make up the preinitiation complex, including Pol II, but there was
no increase in Mediator recruitment. Furthermore, siRNA knockdown of eight
Mediator subunits caused no significant decrease in SNAT2 transcription. The
estrogen-dependent pS2 gene was used as a positive control for both the ChIP and 
the siRNA approaches and the data demonstrated the requirement for Mediator
recruitment. These results document that activation of the SNAT2 gene by the
mammalian amino acid response pathway occurs independently of enhanced Mediator
recruitment.

PMCID: PMC2553592
PMID: 18757893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Oct 15;105(3):885-95. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21888.

Activating transcription factor 4 is critical for proliferation and survival in
primary bone marrow stromal cells and calvarial osteoblasts.

Zhang X(1), Yu S, Galson DL, Luo M, Fan J, Zhang J, Guan Y, Xiao G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15240, USA.

Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is essential for bone formation.
However, the mechanism of its actions in bone is poorly understood. The present
study examined the role for ATF4 in the regulation of proliferation and survival 
of primary mouse bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) and osteoblasts. Results
showed that Atf4(-/-) cells display a severe proliferative defect as measured by 
multiple cell proliferation assays. Cell cycle progression of Atf4(-/-) BMSCs was
largely delayed with significant G1 arrest. Expression of cyclin D1 was decreased
both at the mRNA and protein level. A similar proliferation defect was observed
in Atf4(-/-) calvarial periosteal osteoblasts when compared with wt control.
Knocking down Atf4 mRNA by small interfering RNA in MC3T3-E1 subclone 4
preosteoblasts markedly reduced expression of cyclin D1 and cell proliferation.
In contrast, overexpression of ATF4 increased cyclin D1 expression as well as
cell proliferation in Atf4(-/-) BMSCs. In addition, apoptosis was significantly
increased in Atf4(-/-) BMSCs and calvarial periosteal osteoblasts relative to wt 
controls. Taken together, these results for the first time demonstrate that ATF4 
is a critical regulator of proliferation and survival in BMSCs and osteoblasts in
vitro and in vivo.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2704124
PMID: 18729081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cells Tissues Organs. 2009;189(1-4):144-52. doi: 10.1159/000151747. Epub 2008 Aug
27.

Transcriptional regulation of osteoblasts.

Franceschi RT(1), Ge C, Xiao G, Roca H, Jiang D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich. 48109-1078, USA.
rennyf@umich.edu

The differentiation of osteoblasts from mesenchymal precursors requires a series 
of cell fate decisions controlled by a hierarchy of transcription factors. These 
include RUNX2, Osterix (OSX), ATF4 and a large number of nuclear coregulators.
During bone development, initial RUNX2 expression coincides with the formation of
mesenchymal condensations and precedes the branching of chondrogenic and
osteogenic lineages. Given its central role in bone development, it is not
surprising that RUNX2 is subject to a variety of controls. These include
posttranslational modification, especially phosphorylation, and interactions with
accessory nuclear factors. Specific examples of RUNX2 regulation to be reviewed
include phosphorylation by the ERK/MAP kinase pathway and interactions with DLX5.
RUNX2 is regulated via phosphorylation of critical serine residues in the
proline/serine/threonine domain. In vivo, the transgenic expression of
constitutively active MAP kinase in osteoblasts accelerated skeletal development,
while a dominant-negative MAPK retarded development in a RUNX2-dependent manner. 
DLX5-RUNX2 complexes can be detected in osteoblasts and this interaction plays a 
critical role in maintaining osteoblast-specific expression of the bone
sialoprotein gene. These studies allow us to begin understanding the complex
mechanisms necessary to fine-tune bone formation as mesenchymal progenitors
progress down the osteoblast lineage.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3512205
PMID: 18728356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Circ Res. 2008 Aug 15;103(4):331-3. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.182246.

ATF-4 and vascular injury: integration of growth factor signaling and the
cellular stress response.

Chin MT.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2008 Aug 15;103(4):378-87.

PMCID: PMC2747631
PMID: 18703783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 10;283(41):27736-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803781200. Epub 2008
Aug 12.

Despite increased ATF4 binding at the C/EBP-ATF composite site following
activation of the unfolded protein response, system A transporter 2 (SNAT2)
transcription activity is repressed in HepG2 cells.

Gjymishka A(1), Palii SS, Shan J, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, Shands
Cancer Center and Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College 
of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610-0245, USA.

The activated amino acid response (AAR) and unfolded protein response (UPR)
stress signaling pathways converge at the phosphorylation of translation
initiation factor eIF2alpha. This eIF2alpha modification suppresses global
protein synthesis but enhances translation of selected mRNAs such as that for
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). An ATF4 target gene, SNAT2 (system A
sodium-dependent neutral amino acid transporter 2), contains a C/EBP-ATF site
that binds ATF4 and triggers increased transcription during the AAR. However, the
present studies show that despite increased ATF4 binding to the SNAT2 gene during
UPR activation in HepG2 human hepatoma cells, transcription activity was not
enhanced. Hyperacetylation of histone H3 and recruitment of the general
transcription factors at the HepG2 SNAT2 promoter occurred in response to the AAR
but not the UPR. In contrast, the UPR did enhance transcription from a
plasmid-based reporter gene driven by a SNAT2 genomic fragment containing the
C/EBP-ATF site. Simultaneous activation of the AAR and the UPR pathways revealed 
that the UPR actually suppressed the increased SNAT2 transcription by the AAR
pathway, demonstrating that the UPR pathway generates a repressive signal that
acts downstream of ATF4 binding.

PMCID: PMC2562058
PMID: 18697751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Dec;217(3):693-707. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21543.

PERK is essential for neonatal skeletal development to regulate osteoblast
proliferation and differentiation.

Wei J(1), Sheng X, Feng D, McGrath B, Cavener DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Loss of function mutations of Perk (eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2
alpha kinase 3) in humans and mice cause severe neonatal developmental defects,
including diabetes, growth retardation and multiple skeletal dysplasias.
Comprehensive analyses on bone tissue, at the cellular and molecular level in
PERK-deficient mice demonstrated that neonatal Perk-/- mice are severely
osteopenic, which is caused by a deficiency in the number of mature osteoblasts, 
impaired osteoblast differentiation, and reduced type I collagen secretion.
Impaired differentiation of osteoblasts in Perk KO mice was associated with
decreased expression of Runx2 and Osterix, key regulators of osteoblast
development. Reduced cell proliferation and reduced expression of key cell cycle 
factors including cyclin D, cyclin E, cyclin A, Cdc2, and CDK2 occur in parallel 
with the differentiation defect in mutant osteoblasts. In addition, the
trafficking and secretion of type I collagen is compromised as manifested by
abnormal retention of procollagen I in the endoplasmic reticulum, and reduced
mature collagen production and mineralization. Taken together, these studies
identify PERK as a novel regulator of skeletal development and osteoblast
biology.

PMID: 18683826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Oct 15;105(3):859-65. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21881.

FIAT represses bone matrix mineralization by interacting with ATF4 through its
second leucine zipper.

Yu VW(1), Gauthier C, St-Arnaud R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

We have characterized FIAT, a 66 kDa leucine zipper (LZ) protein that dimerizes
with activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) to form inactive dimers that cannot
bind DNA. Computer analysis identifies three putative LZ motifs within the FIAT
amino acid sequence. We have used deletion- and/or site-specific mutagenesis to
individually inactivate these motifs in order to identify the functional LZ that 
mediates the FIAT-ATF4 interaction. Amino acids 194-222 that encode the FIAT LZ2 
were deleted (mutant FIAT ZIP2 DEL). We inactivated each zipper individually by
replacing two or three leucine residues within each zipper by alanine residues.
The engineered mutations were L142A/L149A (mutant M1, first zipper),
L208A/L215A/L222A (mutant M2, second zipper), and L441A/L448A (mutant M3, third
zipper). MC3T3-E1 osteoblastic cells with an integrated 1.3 kb mouse osteocalcin 
gene promoter fragment driving expression of luciferase were transfected with
expression vectors for ATF4 and the various FIAT deletion- or site-specific
mutants. Inhibition of ATF4-mediated transcription was compared between wild-type
(WT) and LZ FIAT mutants. The deletion mutant FIAT ZIP2 DEL and the
sequence-specific M2 mutant did not interact with ATF4 and were unable to inhibit
ATF4-mediated transcription. The M1 or M3 mutations did not affect the ability of
FIAT to contact ATF4 or to inhibit its transcriptional activity. Stable
expression of WT FIAT in osteoblastic cells inhibited mineralization, but not
expression of the FIAT ZIP2 DEL and M2 mutants. This structure-function analysis 
reveals that FIAT interacts with ATF4 and modulates its activity through its
second leucine zipper motif.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2574876
PMID: 18680144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Biochem. 2008 Oct;144(4):477-86. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvn091. Epub 2008 Jul 29.

Human HRD1 promoter carries a functional unfolded protein response element to
which XBP1 but not ATF6 directly binds.

Yamamoto K(1), Suzuki N, Wada T, Okada T, Yoshida H, Kaufman RJ, Mori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan.

Quality control of proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is achieved by two 
mechanisms, the productive folding mechanism, which is assisted by a number of
ER-localized molecular chaperones and folding enzymes (collectively termed ER
chaperones), and the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) mechanism, by which
misfolded proteins are degraded by the ubiquitin-dependent proteasome system in
the cytosol. Accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER activates the unfolded
protein response (UPR), resulting in transcriptional induction of ER chaperones
and ERAD components. In mammals, three signalling pathways operate for the UPR,
namely the IRE1-XBP1, PERK-ATF4 and ATF6 pathways. Analysis of mouse embryonic
fibroblasts deficient in UPR signalling molecule indicates that transcriptional
induction of ERAD components depends on the IRE1-XBP1 pathway. However, the
molecular basis of this finding remains unclear. Here, we analysed the promoter
of human HRD1, which encodes an E3 ubiquitin ligase, an important component of
ERAD. We found that induction of HRD1 is mediated by two cis-acting elements, a
canonical ER stress response element and a novel element we designate as UPR
element II. The presence of UPR element II to which XBP1 but not ATF6 directly
binds explains at least in part the dependency of HRD1 induction on the IRE1-XBP1
pathway.

PMCID: PMC2755579
PMID: 18664523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Free Radic Res. 2008 Jul;42(7):674-87. doi: 10.1080/10715760802277396.

Gamma-tocopheryl quinone, not alpha-tocopheryl quinone, induces adaptive response
through up-regulation of cellular glutathione and cysteine availability via
activation of ATF4.

Ogawa Y(1), Saito Y, Nishio K, Yoshida Y, Ashida H, Niki E.

Author information: 
(1)Human Stress Signal Research Center (HSSRC), National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Ikeda, Osaka, Japan.

alpha-Tocopheryl quinone (alpha-TQ) and gamma-TQ are oxidized metabolites of the 
corresponding tocopherol (T) isoforms, which are vitamin E homologues. Unlike
alpha-TQ, gamma-TQ functions as an arylating agent that reacts with nucleophiles 
such as reduced sulphydryl groups and it has unique biological properties such as
high toxicity. Increasing evidence indicates that reactive oxygen species and
other physiologically existing oxidative stimuli upregulate the antioxidant
system, thereby triggering the adaptive response. The present study used PC12
cells and immature primary cortical cells to examine the possible adaptive
cytoprotective effects of gamma-TQ against oxidative stress. Pre-treatment with
gamma-TQ at sub-lethal concentrations resulted in cytoprotective effects against 
oxidative stress. gamma-TQ induced a significant increase in the cellular
glutathione (GSH) levels while alpha-TQ did not. gamma-TQ did not induce any
considerable change in the activity of glutamate-cysteine ligase (GCL), the
rate-limiting enzyme in GSH synthesis, whereas it increased the cellular GSH
levels by facilitating the availability of cysteine through the induction of xCT,
which is the core sub-unit of the x(c)(-) high-affinity cystine transporter
system. An activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4)-small interfering RNA
effectively attenuated the xCT mRNA level as well as the increase in cellular
cysteine levels induced by gamma-TQ, while the NF-E2-related factor (Nrf2)-small 
interfering RNA treatment did not. Collectively, these findings indicate that
gamma-TQ acts as a signal messenger to induce adaptive response through the
upregulation of intracellular GSH synthesis via transcriptional activation of
ATF4 in order to cope with the forthcoming oxidative insult.

PMID: 18654882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Arch Toxicol. 2008 Aug;82(8):513-24. doi: 10.1007/s00204-008-0331-9. Epub 2008
Jul 25.

Cadmium, cobalt and lead cause stress response, cell cycle deregulation and
increased steroid as well as xenobiotic metabolism in primary normal human
bronchial epithelial cells which is coordinated by at least nine transcription
factors.

Glahn F(1), Schmidt-Heck W, Zellmer S, Guthke R, Wiese J, Golka K, Hergenröder R,
Degen GH, Lehmann T, Hermes M, Schormann W, Brulport M, Bauer A, Bedawy E,
Gebhardt R, Hengstler JG, Foth H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Toxicology, Martin-Luther-University,
Halle-Wittenberg, Halle/Saale, Germany. felix.glahn@medizin.uni-halle.de

Workers occupationally exposed to cadmium, cobalt and lead have been reported to 
have increased levels of DNA damage. To analyze whether in vivo relevant
concentrations of heavy metals cause systematic alterations in RNA expression
patterns, we performed a gene array study using primary normal human bronchial
epithelial cells. Cells were incubated with 15 microg/l Cd(II), 25 microg/l
Co(II) and 550 microg/l Pb(II) either with individual substances or in
combination. Differentially expressed genes were filtered out and used to
identify enriched GO categories as well as KEGG pathways and to identify
transcription factors whose binding sites are enriched in a given set of
promoters. Interestingly, combined exposure to Cd(II), Co(II) and Pb(II) caused a
coordinated response of at least seven stress response-related transcription
factors, namely Oct-1, HIC1, TGIF, CREB, ATF4, SRF and YY1. A stress response was
further corroborated by up regulation of genes involved in glutathione
metabolism. A second major response to heavy metal exposure was deregulation of
the cell cycle as evidenced by down regulation of the transcription factors ELK-1
and the Ets transcription factor GABP, as well as deregulation of genes involved 
in purine and pyrimidine metabolism. A third and surprising response was up
regulation of genes involved in steroid metabolism, whereby promoter analysis
identified up regulation of SRY that is known to play a role in sex
determination. A forth response was up regulation of xenobiotic metabolising
enzymes, particularly of dihydrodiol dehydrogenases 1 and 2 (AKR1C1, AKR1C2).
Incubations with individual heavy metals showed that the response of AKR1C1 and
AKR1C2 was predominantly caused by lead. In conclusion, we have shown that in
vivo relevant concentrations of Cd(II), Co(II) and Pb(II) cause a complex and
coordinated response in normal human bronchial epithelial cells. This study gives
an overview of the most responsive genes.

PMID: 18654764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Oct 15;178(8):838-46. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200802-313OC. Epub 2008 Jul 17.

Epithelial endoplasmic reticulum stress and apoptosis in sporadic idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis.

Korfei M(1), Ruppert C, Mahavadi P, Henneke I, Markart P, Koch M, Lang G, Fink L,
Bohle RM, Seeger W, Weaver TE, Guenther A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Giessen Lung Center, Department of Internal Medicine II,
Klinikstrasse 36, 35392 Giessen, Germany.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Oct 15;178(8):782-3.

RATIONALE: The molecular pathomechanisms underlying idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
(IPF) are elusive, but chronic epithelial injury has recently been suggested as
key event.
OBJECTIVES: We investigated the possible implication of endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress-mediated apoptosis in sporadic IPF.
METHODS: We analyzed peripheral explanted lung tissues from patients with
sporadic IPF (n = 24), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (n = 9), and 
organ donors (n = 12) for expression of major ER stress mediators and apoptosis
markers by means of immunoblotting, semiquantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction, immunohistochemistry, and the TUNEL
method.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Compared with COPD and donor lungs, protein levels
of ER stress mediators, such as processed p50 activating transcription factor
(ATF)-6 and ATF-4 and the apoptosis-inductor CHOP (C/EBP-homologous protein), as 
well as transcript levels of spliced X-box binding protein (XBP)-1, were
significantly elevated in lung homogenates and type II alveolar epithelial cells 
(AECIIs) of IPF lungs. Proapoptotic, oligomeric forms of Bax, which play a key
role in ER stress-mediated apoptosis downstream of CHOP induction, as well as
caspase-3 cleavage, could be detected in IPF lungs. By means of
immunohistochemistry, exclusive induction of active ATF-6, ATF-4, and CHOP in
AECIIs was encountered in IPF but not in COPD or donor lungs. Immunoreactivity
was most prominent in the epithelium near dense zones of fibrosis and fibroblast 
foci, where these ER stress markers colocalized with markers of apoptosis (TUNEL,
cleaved caspase-3).
CONCLUSIONS: Severe ER stress response in the AECIIs of patients with sporadic
IPF may underlie the apoptosis of this cell type and development of fibrosis in
this disease.

PMCID: PMC2566794
PMID: 18635891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Circ Res. 2008 Aug 15;103(4):378-87. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.107.168682. Epub
2008 Jul 10.

Activation transcription factor-4 induced by fibroblast growth factor-2 regulates
vascular endothelial growth factor-A transcription in vascular smooth muscle
cells and mediates intimal thickening in rat arteries following balloon injury.

Malabanan KP(1), Kanellakis P, Bobik A, Khachigian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, University of New South Wales, Sydney, 2052,
Australia.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2008 Aug 15;103(4):331-3.
    Circ Res. 2008 Oct 24;103(9):e118; author reply e119.

Activation transcription factor (ATF)-4 is a member of the ATF/CREB family of
basic leucine zipper transcription factors that regulates cellular responses to a
variety of stresses. The role of ATF-4 in smooth muscle cells of the vessel wall 
is completely unknown. Here, we show that ATF-4 expression is induced in smooth
muscle cells in response to injury, both in vitro using a model of mechanical
injury and in the media of balloon-injured rat carotid arteries. We demonstrate
that ATF-4 is activated by fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2, an injury-induced
mitogen, through the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway. Injury also activates
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A, whose expression is stimulated by
ATF-4 overexpression and exposure to FGF-2. FGF-2 induces ATF-4 binding to a
recognition element located in the VEGF-A gene at +1767 bp and luciferase
reporter gene expression dependent on this site. Moreover, ATF-4 knockdown with
small interfering RNA or ATF-4 deficiency ameliorates FGF-2-inducible VEGF-A
expression. Intraluminal delivery of ATF-4 small interfering RNA in rat carotid
arteries blocks balloon injury-inducible ATF-4 and VEGF-A expression after 4
hours and intimal thickening after 14 days. These findings reveal, for the first 
time, the induction of ATF-4 by both vascular injury and FGF-2. ATF-4 serves as a
conduit for the inducible expression of 1 growth factor by another during the
process of intimal thickening.

PMID: 18617696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS Med. 2008 Jun 10;5(6):e117. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0050117.

A mechanism for the inhibition of neural progenitor cell proliferation by
cocaine.

Lee CT(1), Chen J, Hayashi T, Tsai SY, Sanchez JF, Errico SL, Amable R, Su TP,
Lowe RH, Huestis MA, Shen J, Becker KG, Geller HM, Freed WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Neurobiology Research Branch, Intramural Research Program, National
Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and 
Human Services, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America. clee@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Prenatal exposure of the developing brain to cocaine causes
morphological and behavioral abnormalities. Recent studies indicate that
cocaine-induced proliferation inhibition and/or apoptosis in neural progenitor
cells may play a pivotal role in causing these abnormalities. To understand the
molecular mechanism through which cocaine inhibits cell proliferation in neural
progenitors, we sought to identify the molecules that are responsible for
mediating the effect of cocaine on cell cycle regulation.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Microarray analysis followed by quantitative real-time
reverse transcription PCR was used to screen cocaine-responsive and cell
cycle-related genes in a neural progenitor cell line where cocaine exposure
caused a robust anti-proliferative effect by interfering with the G1-to-S
transition. Cyclin A2, among genes related to the G1-to-S cell cycle transition, 
was most strongly down-regulated by cocaine. Down-regulation of cyclin A was also
found in cocaine-treated human primary neural and A2B5+ progenitor cells, as well
as in rat fetal brains exposed to cocaine in utero. Reversing cyclin A
down-regulation by gene transfer counteracted the proliferation inhibition caused
by cocaine. Further, we found that cocaine-induced accumulation of reactive
oxygen species, which involves N-oxidation of cocaine via cytochrome P450,
promotes cyclin A down-regulation by causing an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
response, as indicated by increased phosphorylation of eIF2alpha and expression
of ATF4. In the developing rat brain, the P450 inhibitor cimetidine counteracted 
cocaine-induced inhibition of neural progenitor cell proliferation as well as
down-regulation of cyclin A.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that down-regulation of cyclin A underlies
cocaine-induced proliferation inhibition in neural progenitors. The
down-regulation of cyclin A is initiated by N-oxidative metabolism of cocaine and
consequent ER stress. Inhibition of cocaine N-oxidative metabolism by P450
inhibitors may provide a preventive strategy for counteracting the adverse
effects of cocaine on fetal brain development.

PMCID: PMC2504032
PMID: 18593214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Diabetes. 2008 Nov;57(11):3034-44. doi: 10.2337/db07-1802. Epub 2008 Jun 30.

Cytokine-induced beta-cell death is independent of endoplasmic reticulum stress
signaling.

Akerfeldt MC(1), Howes J, Chan JY, Stevens VA, Boubenna N, McGuire HM, King C,
Biden TJ, Laybutt DR.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research,
St. Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Cytokines contribute to beta-cell destruction in type 1 diabetes.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-mediated apoptosis has been proposed as a
mechanism for beta-cell death. We tested whether ER stress was necessary for
cytokine-induced beta-cell death and also whether ER stress gene activation was
present in beta-cells of the NOD mouse model of type 1 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: INS-1 beta-cells or rat islets were treated with the
chemical chaperone phenyl butyric acid (PBA) and exposed or not to interleukin
(IL)-1beta and gamma-interferon (IFN-gamma). Small interfering RNA (siRNA) was
used to silence C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) expression in INS-1 beta-cells.
Additionally, the role of ER stress in lipid-induced cell death was assessed.
RESULTS: Cytokines and palmitate triggered ER stress in beta-cells as evidenced
by increased phosphorylation of PKR-like ER kinase (PERK), eukaryotic initiation 
factor (EIF)2alpha, and Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) and increased expression 
of activating transcription factor (ATF)4 and CHOP. PBA treatment attenuated ER
stress, but JNK phosphorylation was reduced only in response to palmitate, not in
response to cytokines. PBA had no effect on cytokine-induced cell death but was
associated with protection against palmitate-induced cell death. Similarly,
siRNA-mediated reduction in CHOP expression protected against palmitate- but not 
against cytokine-induced cell death. In NOD islets, mRNA levels of several ER
stress genes were reduced (ATF4, BiP [binding protein], GRP94 [glucose regulated 
protein 94], p58, and XBP-1 [X-box binding protein 1] splicing) or unchanged
(CHOP and Edem1 [ER degradation enhancer, mannosidase alpha-like 1]).
CONCLUSIONS: While both cytokines and palmitate can induce ER stress, our results
suggest that, in contrast to lipoapoptosis, the PERK-ATF4-CHOP ER
stress-signaling pathway is not necessary for cytokine-induced beta-cell death.

PMCID: PMC2570400
PMID: 18591394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2008 Sep 15;125(1-2):82-91. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2008.05.008. Epub 2008 May 18.

Identification of differentially expressed immune-relevant genes in Chinese
soft-shelled turtle (Trionyx sinensis) infected with Aeromonas hydrophila.

Zhou X(1), Guo Q, Dai H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, People's
Republic of China.

Expressed sequence tag (EST) analysis is an efficient tool for gene discovery and
profiling gene expression. Aeromonas hydrophila, a ubiquitous waterborne
bacterium, is one of the most frequent pathogens isolated from diseased aquatic
organisms. In order to understand the molecular mechanism of anti-bacteria immune
response in reptile, we have investigated the differentially expressed genes in
Chinese soft-shelled turtle (Trionyx sinensis) experimentally infected with A.
hydrophila by suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH). Forty-two genes were
identified from more than 200 clones, of which 25 genes are found for the first
time in reptiles, and classified into 6 categories: 18 in defense/immunity, 4 in 
catalysis, 2 in retrotransposon; 2 in cell signal transduction, 5 in cell
metabolism, 10 in protein expression, and 1 in cell structure. Of the 42
differentially expressed genes, 6 genes, IL-8, serum amyloid A (SAA), CD9, CD59, 
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and cathepsin L genes, were further
observed to be up-regulated in the infected turtles by virtual Northern
hybridization and RT-PCR assays.

PMID: 18572252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Vis. 2008 Jul 13;14:1122-8.

P58(IPK) inhibition of endoplasmic reticulum stress in human retinal capillary
endothelial cells in vitro.

Li B(1), Li D, Li GG, Wang HW, Yu AX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, People's Republic of
China. scotopsin@yahoo.com.cn

PURPOSE: The goal of this research was to determine if P58(IPK), a member of the 
Hsp40 family that inhibits eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha (eIF2alpha),
inhibits endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and leads to downregulated expression 
of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and decreased apoptosis in human
retinal capillary endothelial cells (HRCECs).
METHODS: Recombinant vectors were constructed using P58 in adeno-associated virus
type 2 (rAAV2-P58 (IPK)) and P58 RNA in the plasmid pGIPZ (pGIPZ-P58(IPK)). The
four experimental groups were: (1) non-transfected/non ER stressed control; (2)
non-transfected/ER stressed; (3) rAAV2-P58(IPK)-transfected/ER stressed; and (4) 
pGIPZ- P58(IPK) RNAi transfected/ER stressed. ER stress was induced by treating
cells with tunicamycin. Expression of P58(IPK) was determined in transfected
cells. Expressions of the following factors were assessed: vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4), and glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78). Apoptosis levels were 
also determined.
RESULTS: Significantly increased expression of P58(IPK) was detected in cells
transfected with rAAV2-P58(IPK) (0.63+/-0.02) as compared to those transfected
with pGIPZ-P58(IPK) RNAi (0.23+/-0.01). P58(IPK) expression was not different
between the control transfected cells (rAAV2-GFP and pGIPZ-GFP). Following ER
stress, expression levels of ATF-4, GRP78, CHOP, and VEGF in cells overexpressing
P58(IPK) were not different from those in unstressed control cells. This
inhibitory effect of P58(IPK) on the expression of ER stress-related factors was 
suppressed in cells transfected with pGIPZ-P58(IPK) RNAi. Apoptosis was
significantly increased in cells transfected with pGIPZ-P58(IPK) RNAi but not
with rAAV2-P58(IPK).
CONCLUSIONS: The study demonstrates that P58(IPK) inhibits ER stress and plays an
important role in maintaining balance and stability of the ER in HRCECs.

PMCID: PMC2429979
PMID: 18568130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Cardiovasc Res. 2008 Oct 1;80(1):138-50. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvn160. Epub 2008 Jun
12.

HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors activate the unfolded protein response and induce
cytoprotective GRP78 expression.

Chen JC(1), Wu ML, Huang KC, Lin WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

AIMS: Since apoptosis of macrophages induced by stress to the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) contributes to advanced atherosclerotic lesions, we sought to
understand the effects of statins on the unfolded protein response (UPR).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We used pharmacological, biochemical, and siRNA (small
interfering ribonucleic acid) approaches to determine the signalling cascades of 
statin-induced 78 kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP78) gene transcription and
its role in cytoprotection. Exposure of RAW264.7 macrophages to statins increased
the expression of GRP78, activating transcription factor 6, X box protein-1, and 
phosphorylated eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2alpha, while it had no
effect on CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-homologous protein. GRP78 induction was 
abolished by co-treatment with mevalonate and 1,2-bis(o-aminophenoxy)ethane-N, N,
N',N'-tetraacetic acid, indicating the involvement of both
3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase-dependent and
-independent mechanisms. Studies on promoter activity measurements indicated that
phosphoinositide turnover, cellular homologue of v-src (c-Src), protein kinase C 
(PKC), extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), and p38 are involved in
upregulating GRP78 gene transcription. We also observed that elevation of
intracellular Ca(2+) and interruption of small G proteins are two bifurcated but 
cooperative signalling pathways for c-Src activation, leading to downstream
activation of phospholipase C, PKC, ERK, and p38. Functionally we demonstrated
that fluvastatin could protect macrophages from hypoxia-induced cell death
through GRP78 induction.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate a novel action of statins of inducing a cytoprotective
UPR, providing new insights into the clinical potential of statins for
ameliorating ER stress-related diseases.

PMID: 18556704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 15;283(33):22443-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801046200. Epub 2008
Jun 11.

Differential control of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta)
products liver-enriched transcriptional activating protein (LAP) and
liver-enriched transcriptional inhibitory protein (LIP) and the regulation of
gene expression during the response to endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Li Y(1), Bevilacqua E, Chiribau CB, Majumder M, Wang C, Croniger CM, Snider MD,
Johnson PF, Hatzoglou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, School of Medicine, Case Western University,
Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4954, USA.

The accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) triggers 
a stress response program that protects cells early in the response and can lead 
to apoptosis during prolonged stress. The basic leucine zipper transcription
factor, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta), is one of the genes with
increased expression during ER stress. Translation of the C/EBPbeta mRNA from
different initiation codons leads to the synthesis of two transcriptional
activators (LAP-1 and -2) and a transcriptional repressor (LIP). The LIP/LAP
ratio is a critical factor in C/EBPbeta-mediated gene transcription. It is shown 
here that the LIP/LAP ratio decreased by 5-fold during the early phase of ER
stress and increased by 20-fold during the late phase, mostly because of changes 
in LIP levels. The early decrease in LIP required degradation via the proteasome 
pathway and phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor, eIF2alpha. The 
increased LIP levels during the late phase were due to increased synthesis and
increased stability of the protein. It is proposed that regulation of synthesis
and degradation rates during ER stress controls the LIP/LAP ratio. The importance
of C/EBPbeta in the ER-stress response program was demonstrated using
C/EBPbeta-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts. It is shown that C/EBPbeta
attenuates expression of pro-survival ATF4 target genes in late ER stress and
enhances expression of cell death-associated genes downstream of CHOP. The
inhibitory effect of LIP on ATF4-induced transcription was demonstrated for the
cat-1 amino acid transporter gene. We conclude that regulation of LIP/LAP ratios 
during ER stress is a novel mechanism for modulating the cellular stress
response.

PMCID: PMC2504880
PMID: 18550528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2008 Sep 1;477(1):77-85. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2008.05.006.
Epub 2008 May 25.

Coping with the stress: expression of ATF4, ATF6, and downstream targets in
organs of hibernating ground squirrels.

Mamady H(1), Storey KB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Department of Biology, Carleton University, 1125
Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ont., Canada K1S 5B6.

Perturbation of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) protein folding apparatus via any 
one of several environmental or metabolic stresses rapidly triggers a complex
program of cellular responses that is termed the unfolded protein response (UPR).
Stresses that trigger this response in mammals can include low temperature,
hypoxia, ischemia, and oxidative stress. All of these can be natural features of 
mammalian hibernation, and hence the UPR might be integral to long term survival 
in a state of cold torpor. The present study analyzes changes in gene and/or
protein expression of multiple markers of the UPR in tissues of euthermic
(control) versus hibernating ground squirrels, Spermophilus tridecemlineatus.
Immunoblot analysis of ATF4 protein expression revealed strong increases of 1.9- 
to 2.5-fold in brown adipose tissue, skeletal muscle, and brain during
hibernation. However, transcript levels of atf4 were unchanged or lowered which
suggests that ATF4 protein levels were regulated at the translational level.
Subcellular localization studies showed that ATF4 translocated into the nucleus
during hibernation, as did its cofactor, the phosphorylated form of CREB-1, which
rose by 25- to 39-fold in nuclear extracts of brain and skeletal muscle of torpid
animals. The responses of other proteins involved in the UPR including p-PERK,
ATF6, GADD153, and GADD34 were also evaluated. The data suggest that ATF4
up-regulation may play an important role in coordinating gene expression
responses that support the hibernating phenotype.

PMID: 18541136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mutat Res. 2008 Jul 3;642(1-2):57-67. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2008.04.007. Epub
2008 May 2.

Expression profiles are different in carbon ion-irradiated normal human
fibroblasts and their bystander cells.

Iwakawa M(1), Hamada N, Imadome K, Funayama T, Sakashita T, Kobayashi Y, Imai T.

Author information: 
(1)RadGenomics Research Group, Research Center for Charged Particle Therapy,
National Institute of Radiological Sciences, 4-9-1 Anagawa, Chiba, Japan.
mayumii@nirs.go.jp

Evidence has accumulated that ionizing radiation induces biological effects in
non-irradiated bystander cells having received signals from directly irradiated
cells; however, energetic heavy ion-induced bystander response is incompletely
characterized. Here we performed microarray analysis of irradiated and bystander 
fibroblasts in confluent cultures. To see the effects in bystander cells, each of
1, 5 and 25 sites was targeted with 10 particles of carbon ions (18.3 MeV/u, 103 
keV/microm) using microbeams, where particles traversed 0.00026, 0.0013 and
0.0066% of cells, respectively. diated cells, cultures were exposed to 10%
survival dose (D), 0.1D and 0.01D of corresponding broadbeams (108 keV/microm).
Irrespective of the target numbers (1, 5 or 25 sites) and the time (2 or 6h
postirradiation), similar expression changes were observed in bystander cells.
Among 874 probes that showed more than 1.5-fold changes in bystander cells, 25%
were upregulated and the remainder downregulated. These included genes related to
cell communication (PIK3C2A, GNA13, FN1, ANXA1 and IL1RAP), stress response
(RAD23B, ATF4 and EIF2AK4) and cell cycle (MYCN, RBBP4 and NEUROG1). Pathway
analysis revealed serial bystander activation of G protein/PI-3 kinase pathways. 
Instead, genes related to cell cycle or death (CDKN1A, GADD45A, NOTCH1 and
BCL2L1), and cell communication (IL1B, TCF7 and ID1) were upregulated in
irradiated cells, but not in bystander cells. Our results indicate different
expression profiles in irradiated and bystander cells, and imply that
intercellular signaling between irradiated and bystander cells activate
intracellular signaling, leading to the transcriptional stress response in
bystander cells.

PMID: 18538798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Endocrinol. 2008 Jun;197(3):553-63. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0041.

Differential regulation of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response in
pancreatic beta-cells exposed to long-chain saturated and monounsaturated fatty
acids.

Diakogiannaki E(1), Welters HJ, Morgan NG.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, John
Bull Building, Plymouth PL6 8BU, UK.

Exposure of pancreatic beta-cells to long-chain fatty acids leads to the
activation of some components of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress pathway
and this mechanism may underlie the ability of certain fatty acids to promote
beta-cell death. We have studied ER stress in BRIN-BD11 beta-cells exposed to
either the saturated fatty acid palmitate (C16:0) or the monounsaturated
palmitoleate (C16:1). Palmitate (0.025-0.25 mM) induced the expression of various
markers of the RNA-dependent protein kinase-like ER eukaryotic initiation factor 
2 alpha (eIF2 alpha) kinase (PERK)-dependent pathway of ER stress (phospho-eIF2
alpha; ATF4, activating transcription factor 4 and C/EBP homologous protein
(CHOP-10)) although it failed to promote the expression of the ER chaperone
GRP78. By contrast, palmitoleate did not induce any markers of the ER stress
pathway even at concentrations as high as 1 mM. When palmitate and palmitoleate
were added in combination, a marked attenuation of the ER stress response
occurred. Under these conditions, the levels of phospho-eIF2 alpha, ATF4 and
CHOP-10 were reduced to less than those found in control cells. Palmitoleate also
attenuated the ER stress response to the protein glycosylation inhibitor,
tunicamycin, and improved the viability of the cells exposed to this agent.
Exposure of the BRIN-BD11 cells to the protein phosphatase inhibitor, salubrinal,
in the absence of fatty acids resulted in increased eIF2 alpha phosphorylation
but this was abolished by co-incubation with palmitoleate. We conclude that
saturated fatty acids activate components of the PERK-dependent ER stress pathway
in beta-cells, ultimately leading to increased apoptosis. This effect is
antagonised by monounsaturates that may exert their anti-apoptotic actions by
regulating the activity of one or more kinase enzymes involved in mediating the
phosphorylation of eIF2 alpha.

PMID: 18492819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jul 18;372(1):272-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.05.036. Epub 2008 May 16.

Inhibition of reactive oxygen species down-regulates protein synthesis in RAW
264.7.

Kimura K(1), Ito S, Nagino M, Isobe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 65
Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi 466-8550, Japan.

In order to examine the endoplasmic reticulum responses in macrophages, we
stimulate macrophage cell line RAW 264.7 by LPS. We found the phosphorylation of 
eukaryotic initiation factor eIF2alpha and the expression of ATF4, GADD34, and
GADD153 in RAW 264.7 cells in late time by the relatively large amount of LPS
stimulation. Unexpectedly LPS in the presence of ROS inhibitor
N-acetyl-L-cysteine rapidly induced phosphorylation of eIF2alpha and induction of
GADD34 expression. We measured intra-cytoplasmic TNFalpha production in LPS
stimulated RAW 264.7 cells. TNFalpha production induced by LPS stimulation was
greatly suppressed by N-acetyl-L-cysteine. This suppression occurred relatively
early, which correlated with early eIF2alpha phosphorylation indicating ER stress
mediated shutoff of protein synthesis.

PMID: 18486599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 11;283(28):19229-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801331200. Epub 2008
May 14.

Insulin signaling and the general amino acid control response. Two distinct
pathways to amino acid synthesis and uptake.

Malmberg SE(1), Adams CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of
Medicine, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

ATF4 is a transcription factor that induces a genetic program for amino acid
synthesis and amino acid uptake. Previous work demonstrated that ATF4 expression 
is increased either by insulin or by the general amino acid control (GAAC)
response, an evolutionarily ancient pathway that is activated when eukaryotic
cells are deprived of amino acids. It is not known whether insulin and the GAAC
pathway increase ATF4 expression by the same or different mechanisms. In these
studies, we demonstrate that insulin-mediated ATF4 expression occurs as part of a
coordinated anabolic program that does not require an essential component of the 
GAAC pathway, the protein kinase GCN2. Moreover, insulin and the GAAC pathway
have an additive effect on expression of ATF4 and downstream mRNAs for amino acid
synthesis and uptake. These data suggest that the GAAC pathway may facilitate
insulin-mediated anabolism when exogenous amino acids are limiting. We conclude
that insulin signaling and the GAAC response comprise two distinct yet
complimentary pathways to ATF4 expression, allowing anabolism to be finely tuned 
to amino acid availability.

PMID: 18480057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Int J Cancer. 2008 Aug 1;123(3):687-94. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23515.

Growth inhibition of colon cancer cells by polyisoprenylated benzophenones is
associated with induction of the endoplasmic reticulum response.

Protiva P(1), Hopkins ME, Baggett S, Yang H, Lipkin M, Holt PR, Kennelly EJ,
Bernard WI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, CT 06030-2817, USA. protiva@uchc.edu

Polyisoprenylated benzophenones derived from Garcinia xanthochymus have cytotoxic
activity in vitro and antitumor activity in rodent models, but the mechanism is
unknown. The purpose of our study was to examine in parallel molecular pathways
that are targeted by 3 Garcinia-derived benzophenones-xanthochymol (X),
guttiferone E (GE) and guttiferone H (GH), in 3 human colon cancer cell lines,
HCT116, HT29 and SW480. The IC50 concentrations were determined and the cells
were then treated with X, GE or GH at their respective IC50 or IC50x2
concentrations. Effects on the cell cycle, mitochondrial membrane potential and
apoptosis were assessed by flow cytometry and caspase activation. Changes in gene
expression were assessed with Illumina 24 K gene arrays. We found that X, GE and 
GH induced loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and G1 arrest at their IC50
concentrations and induced caspase activation at IC50 x 2 concentrations. An
analysis of the changes in gene expression revealed that with all 3 compounds and
all 3 cell lines there was a marked increase in expression of several genes,
including XBP1, ATF4 and DDIT3/CHOP, which are components of the endoplasmic
reticulum stress response. The DDIT4/REDD1 gene, an inhibitor of the mTOR
survival pathway, was also up-regulated. Therefore, X, GE and GH appear to
inhibit the growth of human colon cancer cells, at least in part, by activating
the endoplasmic reticulum stress response and inhibiting the mTOR cell survival
pathway. These combined effects may contribute to the anticancer activity of
these novel compounds.

PMID: 18470880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Bone Miner Metab. 2008;26(3):231-40. doi: 10.1007/s00774-007-0825-1. Epub 2008 
May 11.

Microarray analysis of thapsigargin-induced stress to the endoplasmic reticulum
of mouse osteoblasts.

Hamamura K(1), Liu Y, Yokota H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Indiana University-Purdue University,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) protein has a dual role in osteoblasts. 
It functions as a responder to stress to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) as well
as a transcription factor for bone formation. Little is known about molecular
pathways that can potentially lead to stress-induced apoptosis or homeostasis of 
extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules. Based on microarray-derived mRNA expression
data for mouse osteoblasts (MC3T3 E1 cells, clone 4), we analyzed the ER-stress
responses in the presence of 10 nM Thapsigargin using two computational
approaches: "Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)" and "Ingenuity Pathways
Analysis (IPA)." GSEA presented a strong linkage to an expression pattern
observed in the responses to hypoxia, and IPA identified two molecular pathways: 
ATF4-unlinked connective tissue development and ATF4-linked organ morphology.
Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Western blot analyses validated
eIF2alpha-driven translational regulation as well as ATF4-linked transcriptional 
activation of transcription factors and growth factors including FOS, FGF-9, and 
BMP-2. Consistent with the role of p38 MAPK in hypoxia, phosphorylation of p38
MAPK was activated in nonapoptotic osteoblasts under surviving ER stress.
Furthermore, the level of phosphorylated PERK was elevated. These results support
cross-talk between p38 MAPK and ER kinase, presenting a similarity to the
responses to hypoxia as well as a pathway toward connective tissue development
and organ morphology.

PMID: 18470663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Bone. 2008 Jul;43(1):101-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2008.03.012. Epub 2008 Mar 29.

Osteopenia in transgenic mice with osteoblast-targeted expression of the
inducible cAMP early repressor.

Chandhoke TK(1), Huang YF, Liu F, Gronowicz GA, Adams DJ, Harrison JR, Kream BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
CT 06030, USA. Chandhoke@student.uchc.edu

ICER is a member of the CREM family of basic leucine zipper transcription factors
that acts as a dominant negative regulator of gene transcription. Four different 
isoforms of ICER (I, Igamma, II and IIgamma) are transcribed from the P2 promoter
of the Crem gene. We previously found that each of the ICER isoforms is induced
by parathyroid hormone in osteoblasts. The goal of the present study was to
assess the function of ICER in bone by overexpressing ICER in osteoblasts of
transgenic mice. ICER I and ICER II cDNAs, each containing an N-terminal FLAG
epitope tag, were cloned downstream of a fragment containing 3.6 kb of the rat
Col1a1 promoter and most of the rat Col1a1 first intron to produce pOBCol3.6-ICER
I and pOBCol3.6-ICER II transgenes, respectively. Multiple lines of mice were
generated bearing the ICER I and ICER II transgenes. At 8 weeks of age, ICER I
and ICER II transgenic mice had lower body weights and decreased bone mineral
density of femurs and vertebrae. Further studies were done with ICER I transgenic
mice, which had greatly reduced trabecular bone volume and a markedly decreased
bone formation rate in femurs. Osteoblast differentiation and osteocalcin
expression were reduced in ex vivo bone marrow cultures from ICER I transgenic
mice. ICER I antagonized the activity of ATF4 at its consensus DNA binding site
in the osteocalcin promoter in vitro. Thus, transgenic mice with
osteoblast-targeted overexpression of ICER exhibited osteopenia caused primarily 
by reduced bone formation. We speculate that ICER regulates the activity and/or
expression of ATF/CREB factors required for normal bone formation.

PMCID: PMC2474743
PMID: 18460422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Exp Med. 2008 May 12;205(5):1227-42. doi: 10.1084/jem.20071460. Epub 2008 May
5.

ATF4 is an oxidative stress-inducible, prodeath transcription factor in neurons
in vitro and in vivo.

Lange PS(1), Chavez JC, Pinto JT, Coppola G, Sun CW, Townes TM, Geschwind DH,
Ratan RR.

Author information: 
(1)Burke Medical Research Institute, White Plains, NY 10605, USA.
phl2006@med.cornell.edu

Oxidative stress is pathogenic in neurological diseases, including stroke. The
identity of oxidative stress-inducible transcription factors and their role in
propagating the death cascade are not well known. In an in vitro model of
oxidative stress, the expression of the bZip transcription factor activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) was induced by glutathione depletion and localized 
to the promoter of a putative death gene in neurons. Germline deletion of ATF4
resulted in a profound reduction in oxidative stress-induced gene expression and 
resistance to oxidative death. In neurons, ATF4 modulates an early, upstream
event in the death pathway, as resistance to oxidative death by ATF4 deletion was
associated with decreased consumption of the antioxidant glutathione. Forced
expression of ATF4 was sufficient to promote cell death and loss of glutathione. 
In ATF4(-/-) neurons, restoration of ATF4 protein expression reinstated
sensitivity to oxidative death. In addition, ATF4(-/-) mice experienced
significantly smaller infarcts and improved behavioral recovery as compared with 
wild-type mice subjected to the same reductions in blood flow in a rodent model
of ischemic stroke. Collectively, these findings establish ATF4 as a
redox-regulated, prodeath transcriptional activator in the nervous system that
propagates death responses to oxidative stress in vitro and to stroke in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2373852
PMID: 18458112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Blood. 2008 Jul 15;112(2):330-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-09-112870. Epub 2008 May
1.

ATF4-dependent transcription is a key mechanism in VEGF up-regulation by oxidized
phospholipids: critical role of oxidized sn-2 residues in activation of unfolded 
protein response.

Oskolkova OV(1), Afonyushkin T, Leitner A, von Schlieffen E, Gargalovic PS, Lusis
AJ, Binder BR, Bochkov VN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology and Thrombosis Research, Center for
Biomolecular Medicine and Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria.

We have shown previously that oxidized phospholipids (OxPLs), known to accumulate
in atherosclerotic vessels, stimulate angiogenesis via induction of autocrine
mediators, such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). We now address the 
pathways mediating up-regulation of VEGF in human endothelial cells treated with 
OxPLs. Analysis of structure-function relationship using individual species of
OxPLs demonstrated a close relation between induction of VEGF and activation of
the unfolded protein response (UPR). Inducers of UPR up-regulated VEGF, whereas
inhibition of UPR by chemical chaperones or knock-down of cochaperone HTJ-1
inhibited elevation of VEGF mRNA induced by OxPLs. OxPLs induced protein
expression of activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4), an important effector of 
UPR. Expression levels of VEGF in OxPL-treated cells strongly correlated with
induction of the ATF4 target genes ATF3 and TRB3. Knocking down ATF4 was
paralleled by loss of VEGF induction by OxPLs. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
demonstrated that OxPLs stimulated binding of ATF4 to a regulatory site in the
VEGFA gene. Taken together, these data characterize UPR and more specifically its
ATF4 branch as an important mechanism mediating up-regulation of VEGF by OxPLs,
and allow hypothesizing that the UPR cascade might play a role in pathologic
angiogenesis in atherosclerotic plaques.

PMCID: PMC2442744
PMID: 18451308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Endocrinology. 2008 Aug;149(8):3832-41. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0015. Epub 2008 May 
1.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced activation of activating transcription
factor 6 decreases insulin gene expression via up-regulation of orphan nuclear
receptor small heterodimer partner.

Seo HY(1), Kim YD, Lee KM, Min AK, Kim MK, Kim HS, Won KC, Park JY, Lee KU, Choi 
HS, Park KG, Lee IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kyungpook National University School of
Medicine, 50 Samduk-2ga, Jung-gu, Daegu 700-721, Republic of Korea.

The highly developed endoplasmic reticulum (ER) structure of pancreatic
beta-cells is a key factor in beta-cell function. Here we examined whether ER
stress-induced activation of activating transcription factor (ATF)-6 impairs
insulin gene expression via up-regulation of the orphan nuclear receptor small
heterodimer partner (SHP; NR0B2), which has been shown to play a role in
beta-cell dysfunction. We examined whether ER stress decreases insulin gene
expression, and this process is mediated by ATF6. A small interfering RNA that
targeted SHP was used to determine whether the effect of ATF6 on insulin gene
expression is mediated by SHP. We also measured the expression level of ATF6 in
pancreatic islets in Otsuka Long Evans Tokushima Fatty rats, a rodent model of
type 2 diabetes. High glucose concentration (30 mmol/liter glucose) increased ER 
stress in INS-1 cells. ER stress induced by tunicamycin, thapsigargin, or
dithiotreitol decreased insulin gene transcription. ATF6 inhibited insulin
promoter activity, whereas X-box binding protein-1 and ATF4 did not.
Adenovirus-mediated overexpression of active form of ATF6 in INS-1 cells impaired
insulin gene expression and secretion. ATF6 also down-regulated pancreatic
duodenal homeobox factor-1 and RIPE3b1/MafA gene expression and repressed the
cooperative action of pancreatic duodenal homeobox factor-1, RIPE3b1/MafA, and
beta-cell E box transactivator 2 in stimulating insulin transcription. The
ATF6-induced suppression of insulin gene expression was associated with
up-regulation of SHP gene expression. Finally, we found that expression of ATF6
was increased in the pancreatic islets of diabetic Otsuka Long Evans Tokushima
Fatty rats, compared with their lean, nondiabetic counterparts, Long-Evans
Tokushima Otsuka rats. Collectively, this study shows that ER stress-induced
activation of ATF6 plays an important role in the development of beta-cell
dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC2488228
PMID: 18450959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Learn Mem. 2008 Apr 25;15(5):335-47. doi: 10.1101/lm.984508. Print 2008 May.

Proteasome inhibition enhances the induction and impairs the maintenance of
late-phase long-term potentiation.

Dong C(1), Upadhya SC, Ding L, Smith TK, Hegde AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Wake Forest University Health
Sciences, Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, USA.

Protein degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway plays important roles in 
synaptic plasticity, but the molecular mechanisms by which proteolysis regulates 
synaptic strength are not well understood. We investigated the role of the
proteasome in hippocampal late-phase long-term potentiation (L-LTP), a model for 
enduring synaptic plasticity. We show here that inhibition of the proteasome
enhances the induction of L-LTP, but inhibits its maintenance. Proteasome
inhibitor-mediated enhancement of the early part of L-LTP requires activation of 
NMDA receptors and the cAMP-dependent protein kinase. Augmentation of L-LTP
induction by proteasome inhibition is blocked by a protein synthesis inhibitor
anisomycin and is sensitive to the drug rapamycin. Our findings indicate that
proteasome inhibition increases the induction of L-LTP by stabilizing locally
translated proteins in dendrites. In addition, our data show that inhibition of
the proteasome blocks transcription of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), 
which is a cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB)-inducible gene.
Furthermore, our results demonstrate that the proteasome inhibitors block
degradation of ATF4, a CREB repressor. Thus, proteasome inhibition appears to
hinder CREB-mediated transcription. Our results indicate that blockade of
proteasome activity obstructs the maintenance of L-LTP by interfering with
transcription as well as translation required to sustain L-LTP. Thus,
proteasome-mediated proteolysis has different roles during the induction and the 
maintenance of L-LTP.

PMCID: PMC2364605
PMID: 18441292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008 Jun;38(2):125-37. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.01.014. Epub
2008 Feb 13.

Loss of c/EBP-beta activity promotes the adaptive to apoptotic switch in hypoxic 
cortical neurons.

Halterman MW(1), De Jesus C, Rempe DA, Schor NF, Federoff HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. marc_halterman@urmc.rochester.edu

Understanding the mechanisms governing the switch between hypoxia-induced
adaptive and pathological transcription may reveal novel therapeutic targets for 
stroke. Using an in vitro hypoxia model that temporally separates these divergent
responses, we found apoptotic signaling was preceded by a decline in c/EBP-beta
activity and was associated with markers of ER-stress including transient
eIF2alpha phosphorylation, and the delayed induction of the bZIP proteins ATF4
and CHOP-10. Pretreatment with the eIF2alpha phosphatase inhibitor salubrinal
blocked the activation of caspase-3, indicating that ER-related stress responses 
are integral to this transition. Delivery of either full-length, or a
transcriptionally inactive form of c/EBP-beta protected cultures from hypoxic
challenge, in part by inducing levels of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2. These 
data indicate that the pathologic response in cortical neurons induced by hypoxia
involves both the loss of c/EBP-beta-mediated survival signals and activation of 
pro-death pathways originating from the endoplasmic reticulum.

PMCID: PMC2652244
PMID: 18439838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 20;283(25):17020-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802466200. Epub 2008 
Apr 21.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperone regulation and survival of cells
compensating for deficiency in the ER stress response kinase, PERK.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Larkin D, Lara-Lemus R, Ramos-Castañeda J, Liu M, Arvan P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Diabetes, University of Michigan
Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

The activity of PERK, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) transmembrane protein kinase,
assists in an ER stress response designed to inhibit general protein synthesis
while allowing upregulated synthesis of selective proteins such as the ATF4
transcription factor. PERK null mice exhibit phenotypes that especially affect
secretory cell types. Although embryonic fibroblasts from these mice are
difficult to transfect with high efficiency, we have generated 293 cells stably
expressing the PERK-K618A dominant negative mutant. 293/PERK-K618A cells, in
response to ER stress: (a) do not properly inhibit general protein synthesis, (b)
exhibit defective/delayed induction of ATF4 and BiP, and (c) exhibit exuberant
splice activation of XBP1 and robust cleavage activation of ATF6, with abnormal
regulation of calreticulin levels. The data suggest compensatory mechanisms
allowing for cell survival in the absence of functional PERK. Interestingly,
although induction of CHOP (a transcription factor implicated in apoptosis) is
notably delayed after onset of ER stress, 293/PERK-K618A cells eventually produce
CHOP at normal or even supranormal levels and exhibit increased apoptosis either 
in response to general ER stress or, more importantly, to specific misfolded
secretory proteins.

PMCID: PMC2427336
PMID: 18426796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Oncogene. 2008 Jul 31;27(33):4532-43. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.100. Epub 2008 Apr
14.

Multiple pathways are involved in the anoxia response of SKIP3 including
HuR-regulated RNA stability, NF-kappaB and ATF4.

Rzymski T(1), Paantjens A, Bod J, Harris AL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Laboratories, Cancer Research UK, Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

Under anoxia a coordinated, cytoprotective program is induced, called the
unfolded protein response (UPR). Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is a
mediator of the UPR and activates a gene expression program, promoting tumour
growth and survival under anoxia. A key gene induced by ATF4 under normoxic
conditions is SKIP3. We characterized the induction of SKIP3 during anoxic
exposure to determine whether UPR alone was sufficient or there was a more
complex regulatory response to anoxia. There was temporal separation of acute
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1alpha- and chronic ATF4-dependent gene expression
programs. SKIP3 was regulated by chronic (48 h) rather than acute anoxia (<24 h) 
by a complex set of pathways and mechanisms, besides ATF4 induced by the
classical UPR, there was transcriptional regulation by nuclear factor-kappa B
(NF-kappaB) and RNA stabilization by HuR. Temporal activation of the NF-kappaB
pathway under anoxia protected cells from negative consequences of the oxygen
stress and involved the canonical signalling pathways that promote IkappaBA
phosphorylation and degradation, and reduced mRNA level of the inhibitory protein
IkappaBA followed by the translational repression of IkappaBA. We also show that 
SKIP3 acts as an inhibitor of NF-kappaB and ATF4-dependent transcription under
anoxia and provides a regulatory feedback loop. Repression of the survival
pathway NF-kappaB by SKIP3 sensitized cells to metabolic consequences of the
anoxic stress. Thus, the response to anoxia is mediated by three pathways
independently of HIF, suggesting that combined therapeutic approaches would be
needed to maximize effects against this pathway.

PMID: 18408768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. FEBS Lett. 2008 Apr 30;582(10):1537-41. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.03.050. Epub 
2008 Apr 7.

Role of the repressor JDP2 in the amino acid-regulated transcription of CHOP.

Chérasse Y(1), Chaveroux C, Jousse C, Maurin AC, Carraro V, Parry L, Fafournoux
P, Bruhat A.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 1019 of Human Nutrition, INRA de Theix, 63122 Saint Genès Champanelle,
France.

The transcriptional activation of CHOP (C/EBP-homologous protein) by amino acid
deprivation involves ATF2 and ATF4 binding at the amino acid response element
within the promoter. In this report, we investigate the role of JDP2 (Jun
Dimerization Protein 2) in the amino acid control of CHOP transcription following
amino acid starvation. Our results show that JDP2 binds to the CHOP AARE in
unstimulated cells and that its binding decreases following amino acid
starvation. We demonstrate that JDP2 acts as a repressor and suggest that it
could be functionally associated with HDAC3 to inhibit CHOP transcription.

PMID: 18396163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Endocrinol. 2008 Apr;197(1):1-10. doi: 10.1677/JOE-07-0606.

Mechanisms of glucocorticoid-induced myopathy.

Schakman O(1), Gilson H, Thissen JP.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Diabétologie et Nutrition, Faculté de Médecine, Université Catholique
de Louvain, 54 Avenue Hippocrate, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium.

Glucocorticoid-induced muscle atrophy is characterized by fast-twitch or type II 
muscle fiber atrophy illustrated by decreased fiber cross-sectional area and
reduced myofibrillar protein content. Muscle proteolysis, in particular through
the ubiquitin- proteasome system (UPS), is considered to play a major role in the
catabolic action of glucocorticoids. The stimulation by glucocorticoids of the
UPS is mediated through the increased expression of several atrogenes ('genes
involved in atrophy'), such as atrogin-1 and MuRF-1, two ubiquitin ligases
involved in the targeting of protein to be degraded by the proteasome machinery. 
Glucocorticoids also exert an anti-anabolic action by blunting muscle protein
synthesis. These changes in protein turnover may result from changes in the
production of two growth factors which control muscle mass, namely IGF-I and
myostatin respectively anabolic and catabolic toward the skeletal muscle. The
decreased production of IGF-I as well as the increased production of myostatin
have been both demonstrated to contribute to the muscle atrophy caused by
glucocorticoids. At the molecular level, IGF-I antagonizes the catabolic action
of glucocorticoids by inhibiting, through the PI3-kinase/Akt pathway, the
activity of the transcription factor FOXO, a major switch for the stimulation of 
several atrogenes. These recent progress in the understanding of the
glucocorticoid-induced muscle atrophy should allow to define new therapies aiming
to minimize this myopathy. Promising new therapeutic approaches for treating
glucocorticoid-induced muscle atrophy are also presented in this review.

PMID: 18372227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;28(11):3729-41. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02284-07. Epub 2008 Mar 
24.

Hypoxic inhibition of nonsense-mediated RNA decay regulates gene expression and
the integrated stress response.

Gardner LB(1).

Author information: 
(1)New York University School of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division of
Hematology, New York City, New York 10016, USA. lawrence.gardner@med.nyu.edu

Nonsense-mediated RNA decay (NMD) rapidly degrades both mutated mRNAs and
nonmutated cellular mRNAs in what is thought to be a constitutive fashion. Here
we demonstrate that NMD is inhibited in hypoxic cells and that this inhibition is
dependent on phosphorylation of the alpha subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor
2 (eIF2alpha). eIF2alpha phosphorylation is known to promote translational and
transcriptional up-regulation of genes important for the cellular response to
stress. We show that the mRNAs of several of these stress-induced genes are NMD
targets and that the repression of NMD stabilizes these mRNAs, thus demonstrating
that the inhibition of NMD augments the cellular stress response. Furthermore,
hypoxia-induced formation of cytoplasmic stress granules is also dependent on
eIF2alpha phosphorylation, and components of the NMD pathway are relocalized to
these granules in hypoxic cells, providing a potential mechanism for the hypoxic 
inhibition of NMD. Our demonstration that NMD is inhibited in hypoxic cells
reveals that the regulation of NMD can dynamically alter gene expression and also
establishes a novel mechanism for hypoxic gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC2423288
PMID: 18362164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Reprod Dev. 2008 Nov;75(11):1637-52. doi: 10.1002/mrd.20902.

Integration of CREB and bHLH transcriptional signaling pathways through direct
heterodimerization of the proteins: role in muscle and testis development.

Muir T(1), Wilson-Rawls J, Stevens JD, Rawls A, Schweitzer R, Kang C, Skinner MK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington 99164-4231, USA.

The cAMP response element binding protein/activating transcription factor
(CREB/ATF) family of transcription factors is hormone responsive and critical for
nearly all mammalian cell types. The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of
transcription factors is important during the development and differentiation of 
a wide variety of cell types. Independent studies of the role of the bHLH protein
scleraxis in testicular Sertoli cells and paraxis in muscle development using
yeast-2-hybrid screens provided the novel observation that bHLH proteins can
directly interact with ATF/CREB family members. Analysis of the interactions
demonstrated the helix-loop-helix domain of bHLH proteins directly interacts with
the leucine zipper (ZIP) region of CREB2/ATF4 to form heterodimers. The direct
bHLH-CREB2 binding interactions were supported using co-immunoprecipitation of
recombinant proteins. Structural analysis of bHLH and ATF4 heterodimer using
previous crystal structures demonstrated the heterodimer likely involves the HLH 
and Zip domains and has the potential capacity to bind DNA. Transfection assays
demonstrated CREB2/ATF4 over-expression blocked stimulatory actions of scleraxis 
or paraxis. CREB1 inhibited MyoD induced myogenic conversion of C3H10T1/2 cells. 
CREB2/ATF4 and scleraxis are expressed throughout embryonic and postnatal testis 
development, with scleraxis specifically expressed in Sertoli cells. ATF4 and
scleraxis null mutant mice both had similar adult testis phenotypes of reduced
spermatogenic capacity. In summary, bHLH and CREB family members were found to
directly heterodimerize and inhibit the actions of bHLH dimers on Sertoli cells
and myogenic precursor cells. The observations suggest a mechanism for direct
cross-talk between cAMP induced and bHLH controlled cellular differentiation.

PMID: 18361414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Br J Haematol. 2008 May;141(4):494-503. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07066.x.
Epub 2008 Mar 12.

Redox homeostasis modulates the sensitivity of myeloma cells to bortezomib.

Nerini-Molteni S(1), Ferrarini M, Cozza S, Caligaris-Cappio F, Sitia R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics-Molecular Biology, San Rafaelle Scientific
Institute, Milan, Italy.

The use of proteasome inhibitors have been a major advance in the treatment of
multiple myeloma (MM), but their mechanisms of action remain largely unclear. A
better understanding of the cellular events downstream of proteasome inhibition
is essential to improve the response and identify new combination therapies for
MM and other malignancies. This study analysed the relationships between redox
homeostasis and bortezomib treatment in MM cells. Our data showed that decreasing
intracellular glutathione through buthionine sulfoximine treatment strongly
enhances bortezomib toxicity, whilst antioxidants protect MM cells from
bortezomib-mediated cell death. Bortezomib treatment decreases intracellular
glutathione both in MM cell lines and in malignant plasma cells obtained from MM 
patients. Glutamate-cysteine ligase (GCLM) and haem-oxygenase-1 (HMOX1), two
genes involved in the Nrf-2-mediated antioxidant response, as well as two
eIF2alpha-downstream transcription factors, activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4) and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), are upregulated, indicating that
redox-related adaptive responses are initiated in bortezomib-treated MM cells.
These findings demonstrate tight links between sensitivity to proteasome
inhibition and redox homeostasis in MM cells and have potential implications for 
treatment.

PMID: 18341633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Drug Metab Dispos. 2008 Jun;36(6):1063-72. doi: 10.1124/dmd.107.019380. Epub 2008
Mar 10.

ATF5 is a highly abundant liver-enriched transcription factor that cooperates
with constitutive androstane receptor in the transactivation of CYP2B6:
implications in hepatic stress responses.

Pascual M(1), Gómez-Lechón MJ, Castell JV, Jover R.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Hepatología Experimental, Centro de Investigación, Hospital
Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain.

Activating transcription factor (ATF) 5 is a member of the ATF/cAMP response
element-binding protein family, which has been associated with differentiation,
proliferation, and survival in several tissues and cell types. However, its role 
in the liver has not yet been investigated. We show herein that ATF5 is a highly 
abundant liver-enriched transcription factor (LETF) whose expression declines in 
correlation with the level of dedifferentiation in cultured human hepatocytes and
cell lines. Re-expression of ATF5 in human HepG2 cells by adenoviral transduction
resulted in a marked selective up-regulation of CYP2B6. Moreover, adenoviral
cotransfection of ATF5 and constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) caused an
additive increase in CYP2B6 mRNA. These results were confirmed in cultured human 
hepatocytes, where the cooperation of ATF5 and CAR not only increased CYP2B6
basal expression but also enhanced the induced levels after phenobarbital or
6-(4-chloropheny-l)-imidazo[2,1-b][1,3]thiazole-5-carbaldehyde
O-(3,4-dichlorobenzyl)oxime (CITCO). Comparative sequence analysis of ATF5 and
ATF4, its closest homolog, showed a large conservation of the mRNA
5'-untranslated region organization, suggesting that ATF5 might be up-regulated
by stress responses through a very similar translational mechanism. To
investigate this possibility, we induced endoplasmic reticulum stress by means of
amino acid limitation or selective chemicals, and assessed the time course
response of ATF5 and CYP2B6. We found a post-transcriptional up-regulation of
ATF5 and a parallel induction of CYP2B6 mRNA. Our findings uncover a new LETF
coupled to the differentiated hepatic phenotype that cooperates with CAR in the
regulation of drug-metabolizing CYP2B6 in the liver. Moreover, ATF5 and its
target gene CYP2B6 are induced under different stress conditions, suggesting a
new potential mechanism to adapt hepatic cytochrome P450 expression to diverse
endobiotic/xenobiotic harmful stress.

PMID: 18332083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Eur J Hum Genet. 2008 Jun;16(6):750-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.11. Epub 2008 Mar
5.

Homozygosity mapping in a family presenting with schizophrenia, epilepsy and
hearing impairment.

Knight HM(1), Maclean A, Irfan M, Naeem F, Cass S, Pickard BS, Muir WJ, Blackwood
DH, Ayub M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Psychiatry, University of Edinburgh, Royal Edinburgh Hospital,
Edinburgh, UK. s0343996@sms.ed.ac.uk

Homozygosity mapping within consanguineous families is a powerful method of
localising genes for autosomal recessive disease. We investigated a family from
Punjab, Pakistan, a region where consanguineous marriages are frequent. The
parents have no detectable clinical disorders. However, five out of six children 
present with schizophrenia, epilepsy or hearing impairment either alone or in
combination. This unusual phenotype in several offspring of first cousins is
strongly suggestive of a rare, Mendelian recessive disorder. Two genome-wide
scans initially using low-density microsatellites, and subsequently high-density 
SNP markers were used to map homozygous-by-descent regions in affected
individuals. Candidate genes within these loci were subsequently screened for
mutations. Homozygosity analysis and inbreeding coefficients were investigated to
give an estimate of consanguinity. Two putative disease loci were mapped to
22q12.3-q13.3 and 2p24.3. The candidate locus on chromosome 2p24 overlaps with a 
deafness locus, DFNB47, linked to autosomal recessive hearing impairment, while
positive findings reported for affective psychosis and schizophrenia cluster in a
region of 4-5 cM on 22q13.1 within our second candidate locus. Sequence analysis 
of three candidate genes (KCNF1 (2p); ATF4, CACNG2 (22q)) did not reveal any
exonic mutations. Inbreeding coefficients calculated for each family member
support a very high degree of ancestral and recent inbreeding. The screening of
other candidate genes located within these newly identified disease intervals on 
Chr2p24.3 and 22q12.3-q13.3 may lead to the discovery of causative variants, and 
consequent disrupted molecular pathways associated with this rare phenotype.

PMID: 18322454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Cell Metab. 2008 Mar;7(3):269-76. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2008.01.008.

ATF4-mediated induction of 4E-BP1 contributes to pancreatic beta cell survival
under endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Yamaguchi S(1), Ishihara H, Yamada T, Tamura A, Usui M, Tominaga R, Munakata Y,
Satake C, Katagiri H, Tashiro F, Aburatani H, Tsukiyama-Kohara K, Miyazaki J,
Sonenberg N, Oka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Metabolism and Diabetes, Tohoku University Graduate
School of Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-mediated apoptosis may play a crucial role in
loss of pancreatic beta cell mass, contributing to the development of diabetes.
Here we show that induction of 4E-BP1, the suppressor of the mRNA 5' cap-binding 
protein eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E), is involved in beta cell
survival under ER stress. 4E-BP1 expression was increased in islets under ER
stress in several mouse models of diabetes. The Eif4ebp1 gene encoding 4E-BP1 was
revealed to be a direct target of the transcription factor ATF4. Deletion of the 
Eif4ebp1 gene increased susceptibility to ER stress-mediated apoptosis in MIN6
beta cells and mouse islets, which was accompanied by deregulated translational
control. Furthermore, Eif4ebp1 deletion accelerated beta cell loss and
exacerbated hyperglycemia in mouse models of diabetes. Thus, 4E-BP1 induction
contributes to the maintenance of beta cell homeostasis during ER stress and is a
potential therapeutic target for diabetes.

PMID: 18316032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Neurosci. 2008 Feb 27;28(9):2025-32. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5273-07.2008.

Induction of activating transcription factors (ATFs) ATF2, ATF3, and ATF4 in the 
nucleus accumbens and their regulation of emotional behavior.

Green TA(1), Alibhai IN, Unterberg S, Neve RL, Ghose S, Tamminga CA, Nestler EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9070, USA.

Previous research has shown that cAMP response element (CRE) binding protein
(CREB) in the nucleus accumbens gates behavioral responses to emotional stimuli. 
For example, overexpression of CREB decreases anxiety, sucrose preference, and
sensitivity to drugs of abuse and increases depression-like behavior, whereas
blocking CREB via overexpression of inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) or
other dominant-negative inhibitors of CRE-mediated transcription has the opposite
effects. However, CREB and ICER are but two members of a larger family of leucine
zipper-containing transcription factors composed of multiple products of the
creb, crem (cAMP response element modulator), and atf (activating transcription
factor) genes. We demonstrate here that ATF2, ATF3, and ATF4 are each robustly
induced in the nucleus accumbens and dorsal striatum by restraint stress or by
amphetamine administration. In contrast, little induction is seen for ATF1 or
CREM. Using viral-mediated gene transfer, we show that ATF2 overexpression in
nucleus accumbens produces increases in emotional reactivity and
antidepressant-like responses, a behavioral phenotype similar to that caused by
dominant-negative antagonists of CREB. In contrast, ATF3 or ATF4 overexpression
in nucleus accumbens decreases emotional reactivity and increases depression-like
behavior, consistent with the behavioral phenotype induced by CREB. Because
amphetamine and stress induce ATF2, ATF3, and ATF4 in nucleus accumbens, and
overexpression of these transcription factors in this brain region in turn alters
behavioral responsiveness to amphetamine and stress, our findings support novel
roles for these ATF family members in regulating emotional behavior.

PMID: 18305237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 18;283(16):10848-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708320200. Epub 2008
Feb 20.

MEK signaling is required for phosphorylation of eIF2alpha following amino acid
limitation of HepG2 human hepatoma cells.

Thiaville MM(1), Pan YX, Gjymishka A, Zhong C, Kaufman RJ, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, Shands
Cancer Center and Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College 
of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

The mammalian amino acid response (AAR) pathway is up-regulated by protein or
amino acid depletion. This pathway involves detection of uncharged tRNA by the
GCN2 kinase, phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor eIF2alpha
(eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha), and, through subsequent translational
control, enhanced de novo synthesis of the transcription factor ATF4. The present
studies demonstrate that inhibition of MEK activation in HepG2 human hepatoma
cells by PD98059 or U0126 blocked the increased phosphorylation of eIF2alpha and 
ATF4 synthesis triggered by amino acid limitation, showing that the AAR requires 
activation of the MEK-ERK pathway. Inhibitors of the JNK or p38 MAPK pathways
were ineffective. Consequently, inhibition of MEK activation blocked
transcriptional induction of ATF4 target genes, but the induction was rescued by 
overexpression of ATF4 protein. Furthermore, the enhanced ERK phosphorylation
following amino acid deprivation required GCN2 kinase activity and eIF2alpha
phosphorylation. Inhibition of protein phosphatase 1 action on phospho-eIF2alpha 
by knockdown of GADD34 did not block the sensitivity to PD98059, suggesting that 
MEK functions to enhance GCN2-dependent eIF2alpha phosphorylation rather than
suppressing dephosphorylation. Collectively, these results document a critical
interdependence between the MEK-ERK MAPK signaling pathway and the amino acid
stress-activated pathway.

PMCID: PMC2447663
PMID: 18287093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Physiol Genomics. 2008 Apr 22;33(2):218-29. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00263.2007. Epub 2008 Feb 19.

HepG2/C3A cells respond to cysteine deprivation by induction of the amino acid
deprivation/integrated stress response pathway.

Lee JI(1), Dominy JE Jr, Sikalidis AK, Hirschberger LL, Wang W, Stipanuk MH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, 
USA.

To further define genes that are differentially expressed during cysteine
deprivation and to evaluate the roles of amino acid deprivation vs. oxidative
stress in the response to cysteine deprivation, we assessed gene expression in
human hepatoma cells cultured in complete or cysteine-deficient medium. Overall, 
C3A cells responded to cysteine deprivation by activation of the eukaryotic
initiation factor (eIF)2alpha kinase-mediated integrated stress response to
inhibit global protein synthesis; increased expression of genes containing amino 
acid response elements (ASNS, ATF3, CEBPB, SLC7A11, and TRIB3); increased
expression of genes for amino acid transporters (SLC7A11, SLC1A4, and SLC3A2),
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (CARS), and, to a limited extent, amino acid
metabolism (ASNS and CTH); increased expression of genes that act to suppress
growth (STC2, FOXO3A, GADD45A, LNK, and INHBE); and increased expression of
several enzymes that favor glutathione synthesis and maintenance of protein thiol
groups (GCLC, GCLM, SLC7A11, and TXNRD1). Although GCLC, GCLM, SLC7A11, HMOX, and
TXNRD1 were upregulated, most genes known to be upregulated via oxidative stress 
were not affected by cysteine deprivation. Because most genes known to be
upregulated in response to eIF2alpha phosphorylation and activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4) synthesis were differentially expressed in response to cysteine
deprivation, it is likely that many responses to cysteine deprivation are
mediated, at least in part, by the general control nondepressible 2
(GCN2)/ATF4-dependent integrated stress response. This conclusion was supported
by the observation of similar differential expression of a subset of genes in
response to leucine deprivation. A consequence of sulfur amino acid restriction
appears to be the upregulation of the cellular capacity to cope with oxidative
and chemical stresses via the integrated stress response.

PMID: 18285520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Lipid Res. 2008 May;49(5):985-94. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M700465-JLR200. Epub 2008
Feb 8.

Apoptosis induced by t10,c12-conjugated linoleic acid is mediated by an atypical 
endoplasmic reticulum stress response.

Ou L(1), Wu Y, Ip C, Meng X, Hsu YC, Ip MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY, USA.

Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) inhibits rat mammary carcinogenesis, in part by
inducing apoptosis of preneoplastic and neoplastic mammary epithelial cells. The 
current study focused on the mechanism by which apoptosis is induced. In TM4t
mammary tumor cells, trans-10,cis-12 (t10,c12)-CLA induced proapoptotic
C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP) concurrent with the cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) 
polymerase. Knockdown of CHOP attenuated t10,c12-CLA-induced apoptosis.
Furthermore, t10,c12-CLA induced the cleavage of endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-resident caspase-12, and a selective inhibitor of caspase-12 significantly
alleviated t10,c12-CLA-induced apoptosis. Using electron microscopy, we observed 
that t10,c12-CLA treatment resulted in marked dilatation of the ER lumen.
Together, these data suggest that t10,c12-CLA induces apoptosis through ER
stress. To further explore the ER stress pathway, we examined the expression of
the following upstream ER stress signature markers in response to CLA treatment: 
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA (unspliced and spliced), phospho-eukaryotic
initiation factor (eIF) 2 alpha, activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), and
BiP proteins. We found that t10,c12-CLA induced the expression and splicing of
XBP1 mRNA as well as the phosphorylation of eIF2 alpha. In contrast, ATF4 was
induced modestly, but not significantly, and BiP was not altered. In summary, our
data demonstrate that apoptosis induced by t10,c12-CLA is mediated, at least in
part, through an atypical ER stress response that culminates in the induction of 
CHOP and the cleavage of caspase-12.

PMCID: PMC2311448
PMID: 18263853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Comp Neurol. 2008 Apr 10;507(5):1811-30. doi: 10.1002/cne.21652.

Distribution of the protein IMPACT, an inhibitor of GCN2, in the mouse, rat, and 
marmoset brain.

Bittencourt S(1), Pereira CM, Avedissian M, Delamano A, Mello LE, Castilho BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
04023-062, Brazil.

IMPACT is an inhibitor of GCN2, a kinase that phosphorylates the alpha subunit of
the translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2 alpha). GCN2 has been implicated in
regulating feeding behavior and learning and memory in mice. IMPACT is highly
abundant in the brain, suggesting its relevance in the control of GCN2 activation
in the central nervous system. We describe here the distribution of IMPACT in the
brain of rodents (mice and rats) and of a primate (marmoset) using highly
specific antibodies raised against the mouse IMPACT protein. Neurons expressing
high levels of IMPACT were found in most areas of the brain. In the hippocampal
formation the lack of IMPACT in the dentate gyrus granule cells was striking. The
hypothalamus is exceptionally rich in neurons expressing high levels of IMPACT,
particularly in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. The only exception to this pattern
was the ventromedial nucleus. The thalamic neurons are mostly devoid of IMPACT,
with the exception of the paraventricular, reuniens and reticular nuclei, and
intergeniculate leaf. The brainstem displayed high levels of IMPACT. For the
marmoset, IMPACT expression in the brain is not as prominent when compared to
other organs. In the marmoset brain the pattern of IMPACT expression was similar 
to rodents in most areas, except for the very strong labeling of the Purkinje
cells, the lack of IMPACT-positive neurons in the nucleus reuniens, and weak
labeling of interneurons in the hippocampus. GCN1, the activator of GCN2 to which
IMPACT binds, is widely distributed in all neuronal populations, and all
IMPACT-positive cells were also GCN1-positive. The data presented herein suggest 
that IMPACT may be involved in biochemical homeostatic mechanisms that would
prevent GCN2 activation and therefore ATF4 (CREB-2) synthesis in neurons.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18260151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Virol. 2008 Apr;82(8):3932-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00430-07. Epub 2008 Feb 6.

Modulation of beta-catenin and E-cadherin interaction by Vpu increases human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 particle release.

Salim A(1), Ratner L.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Molecular Microbiology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

Vpu (viral protein U) is a 17-kDa human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
accessory protein that enhances the release of particles from the surfaces of
infected cells. Vpu recruits beta-transducin repeat-containing protein
(beta-TrCP) and mediates proteasomal degradation of CD4. By sequestering
beta-TrCP away from other cellular substrates, Vpu leads to the stabilization of 
beta-TrCP substrates such as beta-catenin, IkappaBalpha, ATF4, and Cdc25A, but
not of other substrates such as Emi1. This study shows that in addition to
stabilizing beta-catenin, Vpu leads to the depression of both total and
beta-catenin-associated E-cadherin levels through beta-TrCP-dependent
stabilization of the transcriptional repressor Snail. We showed that both
downregulation of overall E-cadherin levels and dissociation of E-cadherin from
beta-catenin result in enhanced viral release. By contrast, the overexpression of
E-cadherin or the prevention of the dissociation of E-cadherin from beta-catenin 
results in depressed levels of virus release. Since E-cadherin is expressed only 
in dendritic cells and macrophages, and not in T cells, our data suggest that the
HIV-1 vpu gene may have evolved to counteract different restrictions to assembly 
in different cells.

PMCID: PMC2292983
PMID: 18256147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. ChemMedChem. 2008 May;3(5):742-4. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.200700317.

Rapid identification of a putative interaction between beta2-adrenoreceptor
agonists and ATF4 using a chemical genomics approach.

Ladwa SR(1), Dilly SJ, Clark AJ, Marsh A, Taylor PC.

Author information: 
(1)a2sp Ltd, Warwick HRI, Wellesbourne, Warwickshire, CV35 9EF, UK.
sweta.ladwa@magic-tag.co.uk

PMID: 18241077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Free Radic Biol Med. 2008 Mar 15;44(6):1097-107. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2007.12.009. Epub 2007 Dec 23.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress induced by aqueous extracts of cigarette smoke in
3T3 cells activates the unfolded-protein-response-dependent PERK pathway of cell 
survival.

Hengstermann A(1), Müller T.

Author information: 
(1)Philip Morris Research Laboratories GmbH, Fuggerstr. 3, D-51149 Cologne,
Germany.

Cigarette smoke (CS) generally places severe stress on cells, as reflected by
gene expression profiling and pathway analysis, which, among other effects, also 
suggested activation of the unfolded protein response pathway triggered by the
stressed endoplasmic reticulum (ER stress). Here, we present data indicating that
noncytotoxic concentrations of aqueous extracts of CS induce a distinct ER stress
response in immortalized nontransformed Swiss 3T3 cells, primarily by activating 
the PERK pathway of global protein synthesis inhibition. Activation of PERK and
PERK-dependent signaling by aqueous extracts of CS was demonstrated by (i) the
inhibition of protein synthesis, (ii) the phosphorylation of PERK and its
substrate eIF2alpha, (iii) the activation of ATF4, and (iv) the expression of
ATF4-dependent target genes chop, gadd34, BiP, and atf3. Within the dose range
tested, all effects appeared to be transient in nature, while the periods of
recovery from ER stress were clearly concentration dependent. In contrast to
these data and to the effects seen with thapsigargin (used as positive control), 
only minor effects were observed for the activation of xbp-1, a common target of 
the other two canonical sensors of ER stress, i.e., ATF6 and IRE1. In mechanistic
terms, neither the disruption of energy levels nor a contribution of arylating
quinones played a major role under the experimental conditions tested. Notably
however, the effects of aqueous extracts of CS on the ER could be mimicked in the
presence of acrolein at CS-relevant concentrations, indicating that CS interferes
with proper ER function, presumably due mainly to changes in cellular redox
homeostasis. Since ER stress has been linked to diseases that are also related to
CS exposure, these data are relevant in the discussion of a general molecular
mechanism of CS-induced disease.

PMID: 18206657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 14;283(11):7064-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708530200. Epub 2008 
Jan 14.

Phosphorylation of eIF2 directs ATF5 translational control in response to diverse
stress conditions.

Zhou D(1), Palam LR, Jiang L, Narasimhan J, Staschke KA, Wek RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2) is an important
mechanism regulating global and gene-specific translation in response to
different environmental stresses. Central to the eIF2 kinase response is the
preferential translation of ATF4 mRNA, encoding a transcriptional activator of
genes involved in stress remediation. In this report, we addressed whether there 
are additional transcription factors whose translational expression is regulated 
by eIF2 kinases. We show that the expression of the basic zipper transcriptional 
regulator ATF5 is induced in response to many different stresses, including
endoplasmic reticulum stress, arsenite exposure, and proteasome inhibition, by a 
mechanism requiring eIF2 phosphorylation. ATF5 is subject to translational
control as illustrated by the preferential association of ATF5 mRNA with large
polyribosomes in response to stress. ATF5 translational control involves two
upstream open reading frames (uORFs) located in the 5'-leader of the ATF5 mRNA, a
feature shared with ATF4. Mutational analyses of the 5'-leader of ATF5 mRNA fused
to a luciferase reporter suggest that the 5'-proximal uORF1 is positive-acting,
allowing scanning ribosomes to reinitiate translation of a downstream ORF. During
non-stressed conditions, when eIF2 phosphorylation is low, ribosomes reinitiate
translation at the next ORF, the inhibitory uORF2. Phosphorylation of eIF2 during
stress delays translation reinitiation, allowing scanning ribosomes to bypass
uORF2, and instead translate the ATF5 coding region. In addition to translational
control, ATF5 mRNA levels are significantly reduced in ATF4-/- mouse embryo
fibroblasts, suggesting that ATF4 contributes to basal ATF5 transcription. These 
results demonstrate that eIF2 kinases direct the translational expression of
multiple transcription regulators by a mechanism involving delayed translation
reinitiation.

PMID: 18195013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Jun 5;147B(4):500-4. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30617.

Lithium response and genetic variation in the CREB family of genes.

Mamdani F(1), Alda M, Grof P, Young LT, Rouleau G, Turecki G.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Group for Suicide Studies-Depressive Disorders Group, Douglas Hospital,
Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Bipolar disorder (BD) is a severe psychiatric disorder that affects 1% of the
population. Recently, there have been many attempts to identify specific genes
that are involved in BD; however, the task of finding susceptibility genes is not
easy due to the complexity of the disorder. Since lithium (Li) has been used for 
over 40 years now as an effective prophylactic agent and response to Li treatment
seems to be, at least in part, genetically determined, classification according
to Li response is a manner through which more homogeneous populations can be
obtained for investigation. It has previously been suggested that Li exerts an
effect on signal transduction pathways, such as the cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) pathway. We carried out an association study of BD with
CREB1, CREB2 and CREB3 genes, located at ch 2q32.3-q34, 22q13.1 and 9pter-p22.1, 
respectively. A total of three promoter single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP), 14
SNPs in the UTR, 6 exonic and 15 intronic SNPs were investigated for their
frequency and haplotype distribution in a BD sample of 180 lithium responders and
69 nonresponders and 127 controls using a SNaPshot multiplex reaction from
Applied Biosystems, a modified fluorescent single base pair extension procedure. 
Following correction for multiple testing, our results suggest that the CREB1-1H 
SNP (G/A change, P < 0.002) and the CREB1-7H SNP (T/C change, P < 0.002) may be
associated with BD and/or lithium response.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3549998
PMID: 18189280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Endocrinology. 2008 Apr;149(4):1960-8. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-1573. Epub 2008 Jan
10.

Parathyroid hormone increases activating transcription factor 4 expression and
activity in osteoblasts: requirement for osteocalcin gene expression.

Yu S(1), Franceschi RT, Luo M, Zhang X, Jiang D, Lai Y, Jiang Y, Zhang J, Xiao G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15240, USA.

PTH is an important peptide hormone regulator of calcium homeostasis and
osteoblast function. However, its mechanism of action in osteoblasts is poorly
understood. Our previous study demonstrated that PTH activates mouse osteocalcin 
(Ocn) gene 2 promoter through the osteoblast-specific element 1 site, a recently 
identified activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4) -binding element. In the
present study, we examined effects of PTH on ATF4 expression and activity as well
as the requirement for ATF4 in the regulation of Ocn by PTH. Results show that
PTH elevated levels of ATF4 mRNA and protein in a dose- and time-dependent
manner. This PTH regulation requires transcriptional activity but not de novo
protein synthesis. PTH also increased binding of nuclear extracts to
osteoblast-specific element 1 DNA. PTH stimulated ATF4-dependent transcriptional 
activity mainly through protein kinase A with a lesser requirement for protein
kinase C and MAPK/ERK pathways. Lastly, PTH stimulation of Ocn expression was
lost by small interfering RNA down-regulation of ATF4 in MC-4 cells and Atf4(-/-)
bone marrow stromal cells. Collectively, these studies for the first time
demonstrate that PTH increases ATF4 expression and activity and that ATF4 is
required for PTH induction of Ocn expression in osteoblasts.

PMCID: PMC2276723
PMID: 18187540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Gene Expr Patterns. 2008 Feb;8(3):181-98. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2007.10.009. Epub
2007 Nov 4.

An in situ hybridization-based screen for heterogeneously expressed genes in
mouse ES cells.

Carter MG(1), Stagg CA, Falco G, Yoshikawa T, Bassey UC, Aiba K, Sharova LV,
Shaik N, Ko MS.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genomics and Aging Section, Laboratory of Genetics, National
Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

We previously reported that Zscan4 showed heterogeneous expression patterns in
mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. To identify genes that show similar expression
patterns, we carried out high-throughput in situ hybridization assays on ES cell 
cultures for 244 genes. Most of the genes are involved in transcriptional
regulation, and were selected using microarray-based comparisons of gene
expression profiles in ES and embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells versus
differentiated cell types. Pou5f1 (Oct4, Oct3/4) and Krt8 (EndoA) were used as
controls. Hybridization signals were detected on ES cell colonies for 147 genes
(60%). The majority (136 genes) of them showed relatively homogeneous expression 
in ES cell colonies. However, we found that two genes unequivocally showed
Zscan4-like spotted expression pattern (spot-in-colony pattern; Whsc2 and Rhox9).
We also found that nine genes showed relatively heterogeneous expression pattern 
(mosaic-in-colony pattern: Zfp42/Rex1, Rest, Atf4, Pa2g4, E2f2, Nanog,
Dppa3/Pgc7/Stella, Esrrb, and Fscn1). Among these genes, Zfp42/Rex1 showed
unequivocally heterogeneous expression in individual ES cells prepared by the
CytoSpin. These results show the presence of different types or states of cells
within ES cell cultures otherwise thought to be undifferentiated and homogeneous,
suggesting a previously unappreciated complexity in ES cell cultures.

PMCID: PMC2238805
PMID: 18178135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cancer Res. 2008 Jan 1;68(1):152-61. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2126.

Osteopontin promotes vascular endothelial growth factor-dependent breast tumor
growth and angiogenesis via autocrine and paracrine mechanisms.

Chakraborty G(1), Jain S, Kundu GC.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Cell Science, Pune, India.

Angiogenesis is the hallmark of cancer, and development of aggressiveness of
primary tumor depends on de novo angiogenesis. Here, using multiple in vitro and 
in vivo models, we report that osteopontin (OPN) triggers vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF)-dependent tumor progression and angiogenesis by activating
breast tumor kinase (Brk)/nuclear factor-inducing kinase/nuclear factor-kappaB
(NF-kappaB)/activating transcription factor-4 (ATF-4) signaling cascades through 
autocrine and paracrine mechanisms in breast cancer system. Our results revealed 
that both exogenous and tumor-derived OPN play significant roles in
VEGF-dependent tumor angiogenesis. Clinical specimen analysis showed that OPN and
VEGF expressions correlate with levels of neuropilin-1, Brk, NF-kappaB, and ATF-4
in different grades of breast cancer. Consequently, OPN plays essential role in
two key aspects of tumor progression: VEGF expression by tumor cells and
VEGF-stimulated neovascularization. Thus, targeting OPN and its regulated
signaling network could be a novel strategy to block tumor angiogenesis and may
develop an effective therapeutic approach for the management of breast cancer.

PMID: 18172307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 29;283(9):5542-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M705653200. Epub 2008
Jan 2.

General transcription factor IIA-gamma increases osteoblast-specific osteocalcin 
gene expression via activating transcription factor 4 and runt-related
transcription factor 2.

Yu S(1), Jiang Y, Galson DL, Luo M, Lai Y, Lu Y, Ouyang HJ, Zhang J, Xiao G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15240, USA.

ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4) is an osteoblast-enriched transcription 
factor that regulates terminal osteoblast differentiation and bone formation.
ATF4 knock-out mice have reduced bone mass (severe osteoporosis) throughout life.
Runx2 (runt-related transcription factor 2) is a runt domain-containing
transcription factor that is essential for bone formation during embryogenesis
and postnatal life. In this study, we identified general transcription factor IIA
gamma (TFIIA gamma) as a Runx2-interacting factor in a yeast two-hybrid screen.
Immunoprecipitation assays confirmed that TFIIA gamma interacts with Runx2 in
osteoblasts and when coexpressed in COS-7 cells or using purified glutathione
S-transferase fusion proteins. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay of MC3T3-E1
(clone MC-4) preosteoblast cells showed that in intact cells TFIIA gamma is
recruited to the region of the osteocalcin promoter previously shown to bind
Runx2 and ATF4. A small region of Runx2 (amino acids 258-286) was found to be
required for TFIIA gamma binding. Although TFIIA gamma interacts with Runx2, it
does not activate Runx2. Instead, TFIIA gamma binds to and activates ATF4.
Furthermore, TFIIA gamma together with ATF4 and Runx2 stimulates osteocalcin
promoter activity and endogenous mRNA expression. Small interfering RNA silencing
of TFIIA gamma markedly reduces levels of endogenous ATF4 protein and Ocn mRNA in
osteoblastic cells. Overexpression of TFIIA gamma increases levels of ATF4
protein. Finally, TFIIA gamma significantly prevents ATF4 degradation. This study
shows that a general transcription factor, TFIIA gamma, facilitates
osteoblast-specific gene expression through interactions with two important bone 
transcription factors ATF4 and Runx2.

PMCID: PMC2736298
PMID: 18171674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Sep 5;147B(6):732-6. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30675.

Associations of ATF4 gene polymorphisms with schizophrenia in male patients.

Qu M(1), Tang F, Wang L, Yan H, Han Y, Yan J, Yue W, Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Mental Health, Ministry of Health, Institute of Mental
Health, Peking University, Beijing, China.

Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is considered as a positional candidate 
gene for schizophrenia due to its location at chromosome 22q13, a region linked
to schizophrenia. Furthermore, as protein interaction partner of ATF4, disrupted 
in schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) and its signal pathway implicated in the
pathophysiology of schizophrenia have been widely supported by a number of
genetic and neurobiological studies. Our aim was to investigate whether ATF4 is
associated with schizophrenia in case-control samples of Han Chinese subjects
consisting of 352 schizophrenia patients and 357 healthy controls. We detected 18
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ATF4 locus, two of which were analyzed,
including one insertion at the putative core promoter region (rs17001266, -/C)
and one nonsynonymous variant in exon 1 (rs4894, C/A, Pro22Gln). Allele
distributions of two SNPs showed significant associations with schizophrenia in
male subjects (respectively, rs17001266: P = 0.021, OR = 1.58, 95% CI =
1.07-2.33; rs4894: P = 0.004, OR = 1.78, 95% CI = 1.19-2.67), but not in female
subjects as well as the entire population. Two haplotypes CC and -A constructed
of rs17001266-rs4894 also revealed significant associations with schizophrenia in
male group (global P = 0.0097). These findings support that ATF4 gene may be
involved in susceptibility to schizophrenia with sex-dependent effect in the
Chinese Han population and suggest that further functional assays are needed to
verify their relevance to the pathogenesis of schizophrenia.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18163433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact. 2007 Oct-Dec;7(4):326-7.

ATF4 is a key molecule linking food intake and skeletal development.

Sowa H(1), Karsenty G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA. hs2353@columbia.edu

PMID: 18094495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Nov;1116:208-15.

Identification of additional dimerization partners of FIAT, the factor inhibiting
ATF4-mediated transcription.

St-Arnaud R(1), Elchaarani B.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
rst-arnaud@shriners.mcgill.ca

FIAT is a leucine zipper protein whose name was coined for its interaction with
ATF4 and the subsequent blockage of ATF4-directed osteocalcin gene transcription.
FIAT is a nuclear protein that lacks a basic DNA-binding domain but contains
three identifiable leucine zipper domains. FIAT heterodimerizes with ATF4 through
one of these zippers and thereby prohibits ATF4 from binding to its cognate DNA
sequence. We tested whether FIAT also interacts with additional basic
domain-leucine zipper transcriptional regulators of osteoblast activity, such as 
the Fos family member Fra-1 or one of its dimerization partners, c-Jun. Transient
transfection assays in osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells with the heterologous
AP-1-tk-luciferase reporter revealed that FIAT does not affect c-Jun-mediated
transcription, even in the presence of the c-Jun coactivator alphaNAC. However,
FIAT inhibited transcriptional activation by a c-Jun~Fra-1 heterodimer. Thus FIAT
specifically inhibits Fra-1 transcriptional activity. These data identify a
second target of the FIAT transcriptional repressor activity and suggest that
FIAT can modulate early osteoblast activity by interacting with ATF4, as well as 
regulate later osteoblast function through inhibition of Fra-1.

PMID: 18083929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Nov;1116:196-207.

Transcriptional regulation of osteoblasts.

Franceschi RT(1), Ge C, Xiao G, Roca H, Jiang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics and Oral Medicine, University of Michigan School of
Dentistry, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1078, USA. rennyf@umich.edu

The differentiation of osteoblasts from mesenchymal precursors requires a series 
of cell fate decisions controlled by a hierarchy of transcription factors. Among 
these are RUNX2, Osterix (OSX), ATF4, and a large number of nuclear coregulators.
During bone development, initial RUNX2 expression coincides with the formation of
mesenchymal condensations well before the branching of chondrogenic and
osteogenic lineages. Given that RUNX2 is expressed so early and participates in
several stages of bone formation, it is not surprising that it is subject to a
variety of controls. These include regulation by nuclear accessory factors and
posttranslational modification, especially phosphorylation. Specific examples of 
RUNX2 regulation include interactions with DLX proteins and ATF4 and
phosphorylation by the ERK/MAP kinase pathway. RUNX2 is regulated via
phosphorylation of critical serine residues in the P/S/T domain. MAPK activation 
of RUNX2 was also found to occur in vivo. Transgenic expression of constitutively
active MEK1 in osteoblasts accelerated skeletal development while a
dominant-negative MEK1 retarded development in a RUNX2-dependent manner. These
studies allow us to begin understanding the complex mechanisms necessary to
fine-tune bone formation in response to extracellular stimuli including ECM
interactions, mechanical loads, and hormonal stimulation.

PMID: 18083928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Gastroenterology. 2008 Feb;134(2):568-76. Epub 2007 Oct 26.

Activation and dysregulation of the unfolded protein response in nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease.

Puri P(1), Mirshahi F, Cheung O, Natarajan R, Maher JW, Kellum JM, Sanyal AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Department of
Internal Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University Medical Center, Richmond,
Virginia, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Nonalcoholic fatty liver (NAFL) and nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH) are associated with known triggers of the unfolded protein
response (UPR). The aims were to (1) evaluate the activity of UPR in NAFL and
NASH and (2) correlate expression of UPR pathways with liver histology.
METHODS: Messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein expression were measured by
quantitative real-time PCR and Western blot, respectively. Apoptosis was assessed
by TUNEL assay. Liver histology was scored using the NASH clinical research
network criteria.
RESULTS: Compared with subjects with the metabolic syndrome and normal liver
histology (n = 17), both NAFL (n = 21) and NASH (n = 21) were associated with
increased eukaryotic initiation factor-2alpha (eIF-2alpha) phosphorylation.
Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) mRNA and protein, C/EBP homologous
protein (CHOP), and growth arrest, DNA damage-34 (GADD34) mRNA were not increased
in NAFL or NASH. Whereas immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein mRNA was
significantly increased in NASH, unspliced X-box protein-1 (XBP-1) protein did
not increase. Also, endoplasmic reticulum degradation-enhancing
alpha-mannosidase-like protein mRNA levels were inversely related to spliced
XBP-1 mRNA in NASH. NASH was specifically associated with low sXBP-1 protein and 
increased JNK phosphorylation. This correlated with increased TUNEL activity in
NASH. The histologic severity correlated with sXBP-1 mRNA and JNK
phosphorylation.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a variable degree of UPR activation in NAFL and NASH.
Although both NAFL and NASH are associated with eIF-2alpha phosphorylation, there
is a failure to activate downstream recovery pathways, ie, ATF4-CHOP-GADD34. NASH
is specifically associated with (1) failure to generate sXBP-1 protein and (2)
activation of JNK.

PMID: 18082745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2008 May;38(5):541-50. Epub 2007 Dec 13.

Cigarette smoke induces an unfolded protein response in the human lung: a
proteomic approach.

Kelsen SG(1), Duan X, Ji R, Perez O, Liu C, Merali S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Temple University Hospital, 3401 N. Broad Street, 
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA. kelsen@temple.edu

Cigarette smoking, which exposes the lung to high concentrations of reactive
oxidant species (ROS) is the major risk factor for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). Recent studies indicate that ROS interfere with protein folding
in the endoplasmic reticulum and elicit a compensatory response termed the
"unfolded protein response" (UPR). The importance of the UPR lies in its ability 
to alter expression of a variety of genes involved in antioxidant defense,
inflammation, energy metabolism, protein synthesis, apoptosis, and cell cycle
regulation. The present study used comparative proteomic technology to test the
hypothesis that chronic cigarette smoking induces a UPR in the human lung.
Studies were performed on lung tissue samples obtained from three groups of human
subjects: nonsmokers, chronic cigarette smokers, and ex-smokers. Proteomes of
lung samples from chronic cigarette smokers demonstrated 26 differentially
expressed proteins (20 were up-regulated, 5 were down-regulated, and 1 was
detected only in the smoking group) compared with nonsmokers. Several UPR
proteins were up-regulated in smokers compared with nonsmokers and ex-smokers,
including the chaperones, glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) and calreticulin; 
a foldase, protein disulfide isomerase (PDI); and enzymes involved in antioxidant
defense. In cultured human airway epithelial cells, GRP78 and the UPR-regulated
basic leucine zipper, transcription factors, ATF4 and Nrf2, which enhance
expression of important anti-oxidant genes, increased rapidly (< 24 h) with
cigarette smoke extract. These data indicate that cigarette smoke induces a UPR
response in the human lung that is rapid in onset, concentration dependent, and
at least partially reversible with smoking cessation. We speculate that
activation of a UPR by cigarette smoke may protect the lung from oxidant injury
and the development of COPD.

PMID: 18079489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2008 Jun 1;100(2):317-24.

Improved production of recombinant human antithrombin III in Chinese hamster
ovary cells by ATF4 overexpression.

Ohya T(1), Hayashi T, Kiyama E, Nishii H, Miki H, Kobayashi K, Honda K, Omasa T, 
Ohtake H.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Medical Protein Research Laboratory, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma
Corporation, 2-25-1 Shodai-Ohtani, Hirakata, Osaka 573-1153, Japan.
ohya.tomoshi@md.mt-pharma.co.jp

To improve the production of recombinant human antithrombin III (AT-III) in
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, the genes encoding transcription factors, ATF4
(activating transcription factor 4) and XBP-1s (the spliced form of X-box binding
protein 1), which were involved in the mammalian unfolded protein response (UPR),
were cloned from CHO-K1 cells. Overexpression of ATF4 significantly enhanced the 
production of recombinant AT-III in CHO 13D-35D cells. The specific rate of
AT-III production in the ATF4-overexpressed CHO 13D-35D cells reached
approximately 23 pg/cell/day. After 144 h of incubation, the AT-III concentration
in the culture supernatant was twofold greater compared to that observed with
parental CHO 13D-35D cells. In contrast, ectopic expression of XBP-1s failed to
enhance the production of recombinant AT-III in CHO 13D-35D cells. RT-PCR
analysis revealed that high levels of XBP-1s mRNA were present in the CHO cells, 
regardless of ectopic expression of XBP-1s. Our results indicate that
overexpression of the UPR transcription factor ATF4 is a promising means for
improving the production of secreted protein pharmaceuticals in CHO cells.

PMID: 18078289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biochemistry. 2008 Jan 8;47(1):14-29. Epub 2007 Dec 5.

Transfer-NMR and docking studies identify the binding of the peptide derived from
activating transcription factor 4 to protein ubiquitin ligase beta-TrCP.
Competition STD-NMR with beta-catenin.

Pons J(1), Evrard-Todeschi N, Bertho G, Gharbi-Benarous J, Tanchou V, Benarous R,
Girault JP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie et Biochimie Pharmacologiques et Toxicologiques,
Université Paris Descartes, UMR 8601 CNRS, 45 rue des Saint-Pères, 75270 Paris
Cedex 06, France.

ATF4 plays a crucial role in the cellular response to stress. The E3 ubiquitin
ligase, SCF beta-TrCP protein responsible for ATF4 degradation by the proteasome,
binds to ATF4 through a DpSGXXXpS phosphorylation motif, which is similar but not
identical to the DpSGXXpS motif found in most other substrates of beta-TrCP. NMR 
studies were performed on the free and bound forms of a peptide derived from this
ATF4 motif that enabled the elucidation of the conformation of the ligand
complexed to the beta-TrCP protein and its binding mode. Saturation transfer
difference (STD) NMR allowed the study of competition for binding to beta-TrCP,
between the phosphorylation motifs of ATF4 and beta-catenin, to characterize the 
ATF4 binding epitope. Docking protocols were performed using the crystal
structure of the beta-catenin-beta-TrCP complex as a template and NMR results of 
the ATF4-beta-TrCP complex. In agreement with the STD results, in order to bind
to beta-TrCP, the ATF4 DpSGIXXpSXE motif required the association of two
negatively charged areas, in addition to the hydrophobic interaction in the
beta-TrCP central channel. Docking studies showed that the ATF4 DpSGIXXpSXE motif
fits the binding pocket of beta-TrCP through an S-turning conformation. The
distance between the two phosphate groups is 17.8 A, which matched the
corresponding distance 17.1 A for the other extended DpSGXXpS motif in the
beta-TrCP receptor model. This study identifies the residues of the beta-TrCP
receptor involved in ligand recognition. Using a new concept of STD competition
experiment, we show that ATF4 competes and inhibits binding of beta-catenin to
beta-TrCP.

PMID: 18052253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Blood. 2008 Feb 15;111(4):2280-9. Epub 2007 Nov 27.

The LMP1 oncogene of EBV activates PERK and the unfolded protein response to
drive its own synthesis.

Lee DY(1), Sugden B.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The oncogene latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) without
a ligand drives proliferation of EBV-infected B cells. Its levels vary in cells
of clonal populations by more than 100-fold, which leads to multiple distinct
activities of the oncogene. At intermediate levels it drives proliferation, and
at high levels it inhibits general protein synthesis by inducing phosphorylation 
of eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha (eIF2alpha). We have found that LMP1
activates PERK to induce phosphorylation of eIF2alpha, which upregulates
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) expression. ATF4, in turn,
transactivates LMP1's own promoter. LMP1 activates not only PERK but also
inositol requiring kinase 1 (IRE1) and ATF6, 3 pathways of the unfolded protein
response (UPR). Increasing expression levels of LMP1 induced a dose-dependent
increase in IRE1 activity, as measured by its "splicing" of XBP-1. These infected
B cells secrete immunoglobins independent of the levels of LMP1, indicating that 
only a threshold level of XBP-1 is required for the secretion. These findings
indicate that LMP1's activation of the UPR is a normal event in a continuum of
LMP1's expression that leads both to stimulatory and inhibitory functions and
regulates the physiology of EBV-infected B cells in multiple, unexpected modes.

PMCID: PMC2234060
PMID: 18042799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Dev Neurobiol. 2008 Feb 1;68(2):195-208.

Effect of astrocyte-targeted production of IL-6 on traumatic brain injury and its
impact on the cortical transcriptome.

Quintana A(1), Molinero A, Borup R, Nielsen FC, Campbell IL, Penkowa M, Hidalgo
J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurosciences and Department of Cellular Biology, Physiology and 
Immunology, Animal Physiology Unit, Faculty of Sciences, Autonomous University of
Barcelona, Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain.

Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is one of the key players in the response of the brain
cortex to injury. We have described previously that astrocyte-driven production
of IL-6 (GFAP-IL6) in transgenic mice, although causing spontaneous
neuroinflammation and long term damage, is beneficial after an acute (freeze)
injury in the cortex, increasing healing and decreasing oxidative stress and
apoptosis. To determine the transcriptional basis for these responses here we
analyzed the global gene expression profile of the cortex, at 0 (unlesioned), 1
or 4 days post lesion (dpl), in both GFAP-IL6 mice and their control littermates.
GFAP-IL6 mice showed an increase in genes associated with the inflammatory
response both at 1 dpl (Iftm1, Endod1) and 4 dpl (Gfap, C4b), decreased
expression of proapoptotic genes (i.e. Gadd45b, Clic4, p21) as well as reduced
expression of genes involved in the control of oxidative stress (Atf4).
Furthermore, the presence of IL-6 altered the expression of genes involved in
hemostasis (Vwf), cell migration and proliferation (Cap2), and synaptic activity 
(Vamp2). All these changes in gene expression could underlie the phenotype of the
GFAP-IL6 mice after injury, but many other possible factors were also identified 
in this study, highlighting the utility of this approach for deciphering new
pathways orchestrated by IL-6.

PMID: 18000830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jan 4;283(1):469-75. Epub 2007 Nov 12.

Modulation of the eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha-subunit kinase PERK by
tyrosine phosphorylation.

Su Q(1), Wang S, Gao HQ, Kazemi S, Harding HP, Ron D, Koromilas AE.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, McGiIl University, Sir Mortimer B. 
Davis-Jewish General Hospital, 3999 Côte-Ste-Catherine Street, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident protein kinase PERK attenuates protein
synthesis in response to ER stress through the phosphorylation of translation
initiation factor eIF2alpha at serine 51. ER stress induces PERK
autophosphorylation at several serine/threonine residues, a process that is
required for kinase activation and phosphorylation of eIF2alpha. Herein, we
demonstrate that PERK also possesses tyrosine kinase activity. Specifically, we
show that PERK is capable of autophosphorylating on tyrosine residues in vitro
and in vivo. We further show that tyrosine 615, which is embedded in a highly
conserved region of the kinase domain of PERK, is essential for autocatalytic
activity. That is, mutation of Tyr-615 to phenylalanine compromises the
autophosphorylation capacity of PERK and the phosphorylation of eIF2alpha in
vitro and in vivo. The Y615F mutation also impairs the ability of PERK to induce 
translation of ATF4. Immunoblot analyses with a phosphospecific antibody confirm 
the phosphorylation of PERK at Tyr-615 both in vitro and in vivo. Thus, our data 
classify PERK as a dual specificity kinase whose regulation by tyrosine
phosphorylation contributes to its optimal activation in response to ER stress.

PMID: 17998206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Peptides. 2007 Dec;28(12):2253-67. Epub 2007 Sep 29.

Phosphorylation-dependent structure of ATF4 peptides derived from a human ATF4
protein, a member of the family of transcription factors.

Pons J(1), Evrard-Todeschi N, Bertho G, Gharbi-Benarous J, Benarous R, Girault
JP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie et Biochimie Pharmacologiques et Toxicologiques,
Université Paris Descartes, UMR 8601 CNRS, 45 rue des Saint-Pères, 75270 Paris
Cedex 06, France.

ATF4 plays a crucial role in the cellular response to stress and the F-box
protein beta-TrCP, the receptor component of the SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase
responsible for ATF4 degradation by the proteasome, binds to ATF4, and controls
its stability. Association between the two proteins depends on ATF4
phosphorylation of serine residues 219 and 224 present in the context of
DpSGXXXpS, which is similar but not identical to the DpSGXXpS motif found in most
other substrates of beta-TrCP. We used NMR spectroscopy to analyze the structure 
of the 23P-ATF4 peptide. The 3D structure of the ligand was determined on the
basis of NOESY restraints that provide an hairpin loop structure. In contrast, no
ordered structure was observed in the NMR experiments for the nonphosphorylated
23-ATF4 in solution. This structural study provides information, which could be
used to study the beta-TrCP receptor-ligand interaction in docking procedure.
Docking studies showed that the binding epitope of the ligand, is represented by 
the DpSGIXXpSXE motif. 23P-ATF4 peptide fits the binding pocket of protein
beta-TrCP very well, considering that the DpSGIXXpSXE motif adopts an S-turning
conformation contrary to the extended DpSGXXpS motif in the other known beta-TrCP
ligands.

PMID: 17996332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Front Biosci. 2008 Jan 1;13:2001-21.

Regulation of osteogenic differentiation during skeletal development.

Deng ZL(1), Sharff KA, Tang N, Song WX, Luo J, Luo X, Chen J, Bennett E, Reid R, 
Manning D, Xue A, Montag AG, Luu HH, Haydon RC, He TC.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Diagnostic Medicine and the Affiliated Hospitals of
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400046, China.

Bone formation during skeletal development involves a complex coordination among 
multiple cell types and tissues. Bone is of crucial importance for the human
body, providing skeletal support, and serving as a home for the formation of
hematopoietic cells and as a reservoir for calcium and phosphate. Bone is also
continuously remodeled in vertebrates throughout life. Osteoblasts and
osteoclasts are specialized cells responsible for bone formation and resorption, 
respectively. Early development of the vertebrate skeleton depends on genes that 
control the distribution and proliferation of cells from cranial neural crest,
sclerotomes, and lateral plate mesoderm into mesenchymal condensations, where
cells differentiate to osteoblasts. Significant progress has been made over the
past decade in our understanding of the molecular framework that controls
osteogenic differentiation. A large number of morphogens, signaling molecules,
and transcriptional regulators have been implicated in regulating bone
development. A partial list of these factors includes the Wnt/beta-catenin,
TGF-beta/BMP, FGF, Notch and Hedgehog signaling pathways, and Runx2, Osterix,
ATF4, TAZ, and NFATc1 transcriptional factors. A better understanding of
molecular mechanisms behind osteogenic differentiation would not only help us to 
identify pathogenic causes of bone and skeletal diseases but also lead to the
development of targeted therapies for these diseases.

PMID: 17981687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Neurosci Res. 2008 Mar;86(4):937-46.

Ethanol promotes endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced neuronal death: involvement
of oxidative stress.

Chen G(1), Ma C, Bower KA, Shi X, Ke Z, Luo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, West Virginia
University School of Medicine, Robert C. Byrd Health Sciences Center, Morgantown,
West Virginia 26506, USA.

One of the most devastating effects of ethanol exposure during development is the
loss of neurons in selected brain areas. The underlying cellular/molecular
mechanisms remain unclear. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is involved in
posttranslational protein processing and transport. The accumulation of unfolded 
or misfolded proteins in the ER lumen triggers ER stress, which is characterized 
by translational attenuation, synthesis of ER chaperone proteins such as GRP78,
and activation of transcription factors such as ATF4, ATF6, and CHOP. Sustained
ER stress ultimately leads to cell death. ER stress response can be induced
experimentally by treatment with tunicamycin and thapsigargin. Using SH-SY5Y
neuroblastoma cells and primary cerebellar granule neurons as in vitro models, we
demonstrated that exposure to ethanol alone had little effect on the expression
of markers for ER stress; however, ethanol drastically enhanced the expression of
GRP78, CHOP, ATF4, ATF6, and phosphorylated PERK and eIF2 alpha when induced by
tunicamycin and thapsigargin. Consistently, ethanol promoted tunicamycin- and
thapsigargin-induced cell death. Ethanol rapidly caused oxidative stress in
cultured neuronal cells; antioxidants blocked ethanol's potentiation of ER stress
and cell death, suggesting that the ethanol-promoted ER stress response is
mediated by oxidative stress. CHOP is a proapoptotic transcription factor. We
further demonstrated that CHOP played an important role in ethanol-promoted cell 
death. Thus, the effect of ethanol may be mediated by the interaction between
oxidative stress and ER stress.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3097119
PMID: 17941056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(24):8834-47. Epub 2007 Oct 15.

ATF4-dependent oxidative induction of the DNA repair enzyme Ape1 counteracts
arsenite cytotoxicity and suppresses arsenite-mediated mutagenesis.

Fung H(1), Liu P, Demple B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases, Harvard School of Public Health, 
665 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Arsenite is a human carcinogen causing skin, bladder, and lung tumors, but the
cellular mechanisms underlying these effects remain unclear. We investigated
expression of the essential base excision DNA repair enzyme apurinic endonuclease
1 (Ape1) in response to sodium arsenite. In mouse 10T(1/2) fibroblasts, Ape1
induction in response to arsenite occurred about equally at the mRNA, protein,
and enzyme activity levels. Analysis of the APE1 promoter region revealed an
AP-1/CREB binding site essential for arsenite-induced transcriptional activation 
in both mouse and human cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicated
that an ATF4/c-Jun heterodimer was the responsible transcription factor. RNA
interference targeting c-Jun or ATF4 eliminated arsenite-induced APE1
transcription. Suppression of Ape1 or ATF4 sensitized both mouse fibroblasts
(10T(1/2)) and human lymphoblastoid cells (TK6) to arsenite cytotoxicity.
Expression of Ape1 from a transgene did not efficiently restore arsenite
resistance in ATF4-depleted cells but did offset initial accumulation of abasic
DNA damage following arsenite treatment. Mutagenesis by arsenite (at the TK and
HPRT loci in TK6 cells) was observed only for ATF4-depleted cells, which was
strongly offset by Ape1 expression from a transgene. Therefore, the ATF4-mediated
up-regulation of Ape1 and other genes plays a key role against arsenite-mediated 
toxicity and mutagenesis.

PMCID: PMC2169401
PMID: 17938202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Shanghai Kou Qiang Yi Xue. 2007 Aug;16(4):422-6.

[Changes of mRNA and protein levels of activating transcription factor-4 after
centrifugal force stimulation in cultured human periodontal ligament cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang CL(1), Wei FL, Zhao YH, Guo J, Liu DX, Fu YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, School of Stomatology, Shandong University, Jinan 
250012, Shandong Province, China. wangchl@sdu.edu.cn

PURPOSE: This study was designed to examine the changes of mRNA and protein
levels of activating transcription factor-4 after centrifugal force stimulation
in cultured human periodontal ligament (PDL)cells.
METHODS: Human PDL cells were cultured by sequential digestio, and then
stimulated by centrifugal force (167g) for 10, 30, 60, 90, 120 and 240 minutes.
The changes of mRNA and protein levels of ATF4 were analyzed by semi-quantitative
RT-PCR and Western blotting. The data was analyzed with SPSS11.5 software package
for ANOVA.
RESULTS: Unstimulated human PDL cells exhibit an ATF4 mRNA expression, but very
low level of protein; Immediately 10 minutes after force application, the mRNA
and protein levels of ATF4 increased(P>0.05); at 30-minute,the mRNA level
increased significantly to a peak level(P<0.01), at 60-minute, the protein level 
increased significantly to a peak level(P<0.01); at 90-minute, mRNA and protein
levels decreased, but still higher than the control(P<0.01); after 120 minutes,
mRNA and protein levels decreased to control levels(P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: Centrifugal force stimulates ATF4 gene expression within a narrow
time frame: a temporary increase of ATF4 expression and a fast downregulation
back to its preloading level. This study demonstrates that ATF4 may play a
critical role in orthodontic alveolar bone remodeling.

PMID: 17924032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Proteomics. 2007 Nov;7(21):3906-18.

Pro-oxidative DEP chemicals induce heat shock proteins and an unfolding protein
response in a bronchial epithelial cell line as determined by DIGE analysis.

Jung EJ(1), Avliyakulov NK, Boontheung P, Loo JA, Nel AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, and David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Ambient particulate matter (PM) induces adverse health effects through the
ability of pro-oxidative chemicals to induce the production of oxygen radicals
and oxidant injury. Utilizing a proteomics strategy involving 2-D DIGE,
immunoblotting, and real-time PCR, we demonstrate that organic diesel exhaust
particle (DEP) chemicals induce an unfolding protein response (UPR) and
proinflammatory effects in the human bronchial epithelial cell line, BEAS-2B.
DIGE and MS showed the induction of at least 14 proteins, among which heat shock 
protein 70 (HSP70), HSP40, TPR2, and T-complex protein 1 (zeta-subunit) are known
to play a role in the UPR. Demonstrating increased HSP70 mRNA expression and
nuclear translocation of HSF1, the key transcription factor responsible for HSP
expression, further strengthened this notion. Immunoblotting demonstrated
increased expression of ATF4, an ER stress-associated transcriptional enhancer
responsible for differential protein translation under conditions of ER stress.
Finally, the DEP extract induced the expression of IL-6 and IL-8 in the culture
supernatant. The role of oxidative stress was demonstrated further by response
subtraction in the presence of the thiol antioxidant, N-acetyl cysteine. Our data
suggest that pro-oxidative DEP chemicals induce protein unfolding/misfolding that
lead to UPR and proinflammatory effects in a cell type that is targeted by PM in 
the lung.

PMID: 17922515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cardiovasc Hematol Disord Drug Targets. 2007 Sep;7(3):205-18.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress as a novel therapeutic target in heart diseases.

Toth A(1), Nickson P, Mandl A, Bannister ML, Toth K, Erhardt P.

Author information: 
(1)Boston Biomedical Research Institute, Watertown, MA, USA.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a multifunctional organelle responsible for the
synthesis and folding of proteins as well as calcium storage and signaling.
Perturbations of ER function cause ER stress leading to the unfolded protein
response (UPR), which includes inhibition of protein synthesis, protein refolding
and clearance of misfolded proteins. The UPR aims at restoring cellular
homeostasis, however, prolonged ER stress can trigger apoptosis. ER
stress-induced apoptosis has been implicated in the pathogenesis of various
diseases such as brain ischemia/reperfusion, neurodegeneration, diabetes and,
most recently, myocardial infarction and heart failure. Initial events leading to
UPR and apoptosis in the heart include protein oxidation and disturbed calcium
handling upon ischemia/reperfusion, and forced protein synthesis during cardiac
hypertrophy. While XBP-1 and ATF6-mediated induction of ER chaperones seems to
protect the heart from ischemia/reperfusion injury, the PERK/ATF4/CHOP branch of 
the UPR might transmit proapoptotic signals. The precise mechanism of ER
stress-induced cardiomyocyte apoptosis remains elusive, however, recent data
suggest that the mitochondrial apoptotic machinery is recruited through the
upregulation of Puma, a proapoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family. Importantly,
suppression of Puma activity prevented both ER stress and
ischemia/reperfusion-induced cardiomyocyte loss, highlighting the ER stress
pathways as potential therapeutic targets in cardiovascular diseases.

PMID: 17896961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Physiol Genomics. 2007 Nov 14;31(3):544-53. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

Trans-10, cis-12 conjugated linoleic acid activates the integrated stress
response pathway in adipocytes.

LaRosa PC(1), Riethoven JJ, Chen H, Xia Y, Zhou Y, Chen M, Miner J, Fromm ME.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska
68588-0665, USA.

Trans-10, cis-12 conjugated linoleic acid (t10c12 CLA) causes fat loss in mouse
white adipose tissue (WAT) and adipocytes in culture. The early transcriptome
changes in treated WAT and 3T3-L1 adipocytes were analyzed using high-density
microarrays to better characterize the signaling pathways responding to t10c12
CLA. Gene expression responses between 4 and 24 h after treatment showed a common
set of early gene expression changes indicative of an integrated stress response 
(ISR). The responses of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes treated with t10c12 CLA or
adipocytes treated with the cis-9, trans-11 isomer of CLA did not show the ISR,
indicating the effect is specific to adipocytes responding to t10c12 CLA. Western
blot analysis found increased phosphorylation of eIF2 alpha and increased
production of ATF4 confirming at least part of the response to t10c12 CLA is
mediated through the ISR pathway. Immunofluorescence microscopy found that the
cell type expressing ATF3, an indicator of the ISR, was early stage adipocytes
containing oil droplets but lacking the abundant levels of fatty acid binding
protein-4 (FABP4) (AP2) found in mature adipocytes. Our data suggests that the
ISR precedes and is possibly the cause of the later induction of proinflammatory 
cytokines observed in t10c12 CLA treated adipocytes. The release of
proinflammatory cytokines may explain how the ISR in early stage adipocytes
causes lipid loss in mature adipocytes.

PMID: 17878318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Arch Oral Biol. 2008 Jan;53(1):35-43. Epub 2007 Sep 10.

The effect of centrifugal force on the mRNA and protein levels of ATF4 in
cultured human periodontal ligament fibroblasts.

Wei F(1), Wang C, Zhou G, Liu D, Zhang X, Zhao Y, Zhang Y, Yang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Shandong University, Shandong Province, Jinan
250012, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to examine the changes of ATF4 expression in
cultured human periodontal ligament fibroblasts (hPDLF) after mechanical stimuli,
and to investigate whether ATF4 is essential for the mechanical stress-induced
hPDLF differentiation.
METHODS: Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western
blotting were used to examine mRNA and protein levels of ATF4 expression in
hPDLFs after application of centrifugal force. pMyc-ATF4 transfected cells were
subjected to centrifugal force for 30min, and the changes of alkaline phosphatase
(ALP) activity and osteocalcin (OCN), osteopontin (OPN), collagen I (COLI), bone 
sialoprotein (BSP) genes were measured to assess the differentiation of hPDLFs.
RESULTS: The mRNA and protein levels of ATF4 increased shortly and then decreased
rapidly towards its pre-pressure levels. Overexpression of pMyc-ATF4 exhibited a 
greater increase in ALP activity and all four osteogenic genes compared to the
untransfected cells in response to the centrifugal force.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that ATF4 is essential in response of hPDLFs to 
mechanical stress, resulting in increased differentiation of hPDLFs to
osteoblast-like cells.

PMID: 17826733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Sep-Oct;1769(9-10):593-602. Epub 2007 Aug 9.

Functional characterization of the promoter of human kinetochore protein HEC1:
novel link between regulation of the cell cycle protein and CREB family
transcription factors.

Cheng L(1), Li L, Qiao X, Liu J, Yao X.

Author information: 
(1)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, School of Life Science,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 230027, China.
charlson@ustc.edu.cn

HEC1 (highly expressed in cancer), which localizes to kinetochore in cell
mitosis, plays an essential role in chromosome segregation for M phase
progression. To clarify the mechanism of its transcriptional regulation, we
searched out and isolated its 5'-flanking region. Mapping of this region
identified that it is a TATA-less promoter and contains several putative binding 
sites for different transcription factors. The results from HeLa cells
transfected with pGL3 luciferase reporter vectors containing progressive deletion
of the HEC1 5'-flanking region demonstrated that two elements containing binding 
sites for cAMP responsive element binding (CREB) protein and activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4 or CREB2) are critical for transcriptional activity.
Mutation of the two elements, not downstream E2F box, resulted in a significant
reduction of the promoter activity. Gel shift and supershift assays also
demonstrated specific binding of transcription factors to their putative binding 
sites. Furthermore, overexpression of either CREB or ATF4 enhanced the activation
of the HEC1 promoter and overexpression of both of them had an additive effect on
the activation of the HEC1 transcription. Conversely, overexpression of dominant 
negative mutants of either CREB or ATF4 resulted in downregulation of HEC1 mRNA
significantly. Our study provided a new insight into a potential mechanism of how
transcription factors of CREB family are involved in the regulation of
kinetochore protein HEC1 in cancer-related cells.

PMID: 17822787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2007 Dec;9(12):2357-71.

Translational control and the unfolded protein response.

Wek RC(1), Cavener DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA. rwek@iupui.edu

Cellular stresses that disrupt the processing of proteins slated for the
secretory pathway induce the unfolded protein response (UPR), a regulatory
network involving both translational and transcriptional control mechanisms that 
is designed to expand the secretory pathway and alleviate cellular injury. PERK
(PEK/EIF2AK3) mediates the translational control arm of the UPR by enhancing
phosphorylation of eIF2. Phosphorylation of eIF2 reduces global protein
synthesis, preventing further overload of the secretory pathway and allowing the 
cell to direct a new pattern of mRNA synthesis that enhances the processing
capacity of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). PERK also directs preferential
translation of stress-related transcripts, including that encoding ATF4, a
transcriptional activator that contributes to the UPR. Reduced global translation
also leads to reduced levels of key regulatory proteins that are subject to rapid
turnover, facilitating activation of transcription factors such as NF-B during
cellular stress. This review highlights the mechanisms by which PERK monitors and
is activated by accumulated misfolded protein in the ER, the processes by which
PERK regulates both general and gene-specific translation that is central for the
UPR, and the role of PERK in the process of cellular adaptation to ER stress and 
its impact in disease.

PMID: 17760508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. BMC Cell Biol. 2007 Aug 29;8:38.

PERK eIF2 alpha kinase is required to regulate the viability of the exocrine
pancreas in mice.

Iida K(1), Li Y, McGrath BC, Frank A, Cavener DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of History of Science and Technology, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA. kiida1@jhu.edu

BACKGROUND: Deficiency of the PERK eIF2 alpha kinase in humans and mice results
in postnatal exocrine pancreatic atrophy as well as severe growth and metabolic
anomalies in other organs and tissues. To determine if the exocrine pancreatic
atrophy is due to a cell-autonomous defect, the Perk gene was specifically
ablated in acinar cells of the exocrine pancreas in mice.
RESULTS: We show that expression of PERK in the acinar cells is required to
maintain their viability but is not required for normal protein synthesis and
secretion. Exocrine pancreatic atrophy in PERK-deficient mice was previously
attributed to uncontrolled ER-stress followed by apoptotic cell death based on
studies in cultured fibroblasts. However, we have found no evidence for
perturbations in the endoplasmic reticulum or ER-stress and show that acinar
cells succumb to a non-apoptotic form of cell death, oncosis, which is associated
with a pronounced inflammatory response and induction of the pancreatitis stress 
response genes. We also show that mice carrying a knockout mutation of PERK's
downstream target, ATF4, exhibit pancreatic deficiency caused by developmental
defects and that mice ablated for ATF4's transcriptional target CHOP have a
normal exocrine pancreas.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that PERK modulates secretory capacity of the exocrine
pancreas by regulating cell viability of acinar cells.

PMCID: PMC2072952
PMID: 17727724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(17):5954-65. Epub 2007 Aug 28.

The p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF) is a cofactor of ATF4 for amino
acid-regulated transcription of CHOP.

Chérasse Y(1), Maurin AC, Chaveroux C, Jousse C, Carraro V, Parry L, Deval C,
Chambon C, Fafournoux P, Bruhat A.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 1019 of Human Nutrition and Proteomic core facility, INRA de Theix, 63122 
Saint Genès Champanelle, France.

When an essential amino acid is limited, a signaling cascade is triggered that
leads to increased translation of the 'master regulator', activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), and resulting in the induction of specific target 
genes. Binding of ATF4 to the amino acid response element (AARE) is an essential 
step in the transcriptional activation of CHOP (a CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein-related gene) by amino acid deprivation. We set out to identify proteins 
that interact with ATF4 and that play a role in the transcriptional activation of
CHOP. Using a tandem affinity purification (TAP) tag approach, we identified
p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF) as a novel interaction partner of ATF4 in
leucine-starved cells. We show that the N-terminal region of ATF4 is required for
a direct interaction with PCAF and demonstrate that PCAF is involved in the full 
transcriptional response of CHOP by amino acid starvation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that PCAF is engaged on the CHOP AARE in
response to amino acid starvation and that ATF4 is essential for its recruitment.
We also show that PCAF stimulates ATF4-driven transcription via its histone
acetyltransferase domain. Thus PCAF acts as a coactivator of ATF4 and is involved
in the enhancement of CHOP transcription following amino acid starvation.

PMCID: PMC2034469
PMID: 17726049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. FEBS Lett. 2007 Sep 4;581(22):4325-32. Epub 2007 Aug 14.

The double-strand RNA-dependent protein kinase PKR plays a significant role in a 
sustained ER stress-induced apoptosis.

Lee ES(1), Yoon CH, Kim YS, Bae YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Cheoncheon-dong
300, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do 440-746, South Korea.

Sustained ER stress leads to apoptosis. However, the exact mechanism still
remains to be elucidated. Here, we demonstrate that the double strand
RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) is involved in the ER stress-mediated
signaling pathway. ER stress rapidly activated PKR, inducing the phosphorylation 
of eIF2alpha, followed by the activation of the ATF4/CHOP pathway.
ER-stress-mediated eIF2alpha/ATF4/CHOP signaling and associated cell death was
markedly reduced by PKR knockdown. We also found that PKR activation was mediated
by PACT, the expression of which was elevated by ER-stress. These results
indicate that the ER-stress-mediated eIF2alpha/ATF4/CHOP/cell death pathway is,
to some degree, dependent on PACT-mediated PKR activation apart from the PERK
pathway.

PMID: 17716668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2007 Dec;9(12):2265-75.

Hippocampal cellular stress responses after global brain ischemia and
reperfusion.

Roberts GG(1), Di Loreto MJ, Marshall M, Wang J, DeGracia DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, 
Michigan, USA.

Brain ischemia and reperfusion (I/R) induce neuronal intracellular stress
responses, including the heat-shock response (HSR) and the unfolded protein
response (UPR), but the roles of each in neuronal survival or death are not well 
understood. We assessed the relative expression of UPR (ATF4, CHOP, GRP78, XBP-1)
and HSR-related (HSP70 and HSC70) mRNAs and proteins after brain I/R. We
evaluated these in hippocampal CA1 and CA3 after normothermic, transient global
forebrain ischemia and up to 42 h of reperfusion. In CA1, chop and xbp-1 mRNA
showed maximal 14- and 12-fold increases, and the only protein increase observed 
was for 30-kDa XBP-1. CA3 showed induction of only xbp-1. GRP78 protein declined 
in CA1, but increased twofold and then declined in CA3. Transcription of hsp70
was an order of magnitude greater than that of any UPR-induced transcript in
either CA1 or CA3. HSP70 translation in CA1 lagged CA3 by approximately 24 h. We 
conclude that (a) in terms of functional end products, the ER stress response
after brain ischemia and reperfusion more closely resembles the integrated stress
response than the UPR; and (b) the HSR leads to quantitatively greater mRNA
production in postischemic neurons, suggesting that cytoplasmic stress
predominates over ER stress in reperfused neurons.

PMID: 17715997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Exp Cell Res. 2007 Oct 1;313(16):3556-67. Epub 2007 Jul 25.

TRB3 protects cells against the growth inhibitory and cytotoxic effect of ATF4.

Ord D(1), Meerits K, Ord T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia;
Estonian Biocentre, 23 Riia St, Tartu, Estonia.

Tribbles homolog 3 (TRB3) is a pseudokinase the level of which is increased in
response to various stresses. We and other researchers have previously shown that
TRB3 interacts with activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and may function as 
a negative feedback regulator of ATF4. In the present study, we investigate the
effect of ATF4 and TRB3 on cell growth and viability, using both the enforced
expression and silencing of the genes. HEK293 cells overexpressing ATF4 show
retarded growth in the complete medium and decreased viability in the
glucose-free medium. The enforced expression of ATF4 increases the level of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the supplementation of the medium with ROS
scavenging and reducing compounds supports the growth and survival of cells
overexpressing ATF4. The deleterious effects of elevated ATF4 are suppressed by
the coexpression of TRB3, which downregulates ATF4 transcriptional activity and
results in the decrease of intracellular ROS. Also, the coexpression of TRB3
rescues postmitotic neuronally differentiated PC12 cells from the apoptosis
evoked by ATF4 overexpression. The silencing of ATF4 and TRB3 genes by RNA
interference reveals that endogenous ATF4 promotes and TRB3 suppresses the death 
of glucose-deprived SaOS2 cells. Together, the results indicate that TRB3
protects cells against the growth inhibitory and cytotoxic effect of ATF4.

PMID: 17707795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Brain Res. 2007 Sep 12;1169:24-33. Epub 2007 Jul 31.

Impact of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response in spinal cord after
transient ischemia.

Yamauchi T(1), Sakurai M, Abe K, Matsumiya G, Sawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
yamataka@surg1.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Delayed paraplegia after operation of the thoracic aorta is
considered to be related to vulnerability of motor neurons to ischemia. Recently,
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been reported to participate in neuronal
cell death. In the present study, we investigate the expression of ER
stress-related molecules and discuss the relationship between neuronal
vulnerability and ER stress after transient ischemia in the spinal cord.
METHODS: A rabbit spinal cord ischemia model was generated using a balloon
catheter. In this model, spinal motor neurons show selectively delayed neuronal
death whereas other spinal neuron, such as interneurons, survive.
Immunohistochemical analysis and Western blotting for ER stress-related
molecules, including phosphorylated eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha
(p-eIF2alpha), activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), glucose-regulated
protein 78 (GRP78) and inositol-requiring ER transmembrane RNAse alpha isoform
(IRE1alpha), were examined.
RESULTS: P-eIF2alpha, which inhibits protein synthesis and modulates ER stress,
was induced only in interneurons after 6 h of reperfusion. ATF4, which is
specifically activated by PERK-eIF2alpha, was induced only in interneurons
between 6 h and 1 day after reperfusion. GRP78 was induced strongly both in
interneurons and motor neurons at an early stage of reperfusion, but prolonged
expression was observed only in interneurons. IRE1alpha, which is supposed to
transduce an ER stress-related death signal, was expressed more strongly and over
a more prolonged period in motor neurons.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that the vulnerability of motor neurons in
the spinal cord might be partially attributed to an ER stress response to
transient ischemia.

PMID: 17707355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 12;282(41):29748-56. Epub 2007 Aug 14.

Activation of the integrated stress response regulates lovastatin-induced
apoptosis.

Niknejad N(1), Morley M, Dimitroulakos J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Ottawa Health Research Institute, Ontario K1H 
8L6, Canada.

Lovastatin, a potent inhibitor of mevalonate synthesis, can readily induce
apoptosis in a subset of human tumor types including head and neck squamous cell 
carcinomas (HNSCC). We recently identified activation of transcription factor
(ATF) 4 as a lovastatin induced gene in HNSCC cells. ATF4 plays a significant
role in regulating cellular responses to a wide variety of stress inducers known 
as the integrated stress response (ISR). These cell stresses lead to the
phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) 2alpha shutting down global
protein translation. However, the translation of ATF4 is enhanced. In this study,
lovastatin treatment induced eIF2alpha phosphorylation and inhibited global
protein translation. ATF4 expression was induced followed by increased ATF3 and
CHOP expression, targets of ATF4 activity, in SCC25 HNSCC cells. In CHOP(-/-)
murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), lovastatin-induced apoptosis was attenuated 
indicating a role for CHOP in this response. Furthermore, the eIF2alpha kinase
GCN2 mediates lovastatin induction of ATF4 and lovastatin-induced apoptosis was
also attenuated in GCN2(-/-) MEFs. The pro-drug version of lovastatin has
potential proteasome inhibitory activity and recently a variety of well
established proteasome inhibitors were shown to activate the ISR. In this study, 
neither the pro-drug nor the active forms of lovastatin had any significant
effect on proteasome activity. Therefore, lovastatin, by targeting mevalonate
synthesis, is a potent inducer of the ISR through a novel and as yet unrecognized
mechanism.

PMID: 17699156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Blood. 2007 Nov 15;110(10):3610-7. Epub 2007 Aug 7.

Oxygen-dependent ATF-4 stability is mediated by the PHD3 oxygen sensor.

Köditz J(1), Nesper J, Wottawa M, Stiehl DP, Camenisch G, Franke C, Myllyharju J,
Wenger RH, Katschinski DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Heart and Circulatory Physiology, Center of Physiology and
Pathophysiology, Georg-August University Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

The activating transcription factor-4 (ATF-4) is translationally induced under
anoxic conditions, mediates part of the unfolded protein response following
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and is a critical regulator of cell fate.
Here, we identified the zipper II domain of ATF-4 to interact with the oxygen
sensor prolyl-4-hydroxylase domain 3 (PHD3). The PHD inhibitors
dimethyloxalylglycine (DMOG) and hypoxia, or proteasomal inhibition, all induced 
ATF-4 protein levels. Hypoxic induction of ATF-4 was due to increased protein
stability, but was independent of the ubiquitin ligase von Hippel-Lindau protein 
(pVHL). A novel oxygen-dependent degradation (ODD) domain was identified adjacent
to the zipper II domain. Mutations of 5 prolyl residues within this ODD domain or
siRNA-mediated down-regulation of PHD3, but not of PHD2, was sufficient to
stabilize ATF-4 under normoxic conditions. These data demonstrate that
PHD-dependent oxygen-sensing recruits both the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) and
ATF-4 systems, and hence not only confers adaptive responses but also cell fate
decisions.

PMID: 17684156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Aug;48(8):3729-36.

Involvement of double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase in ER stress-induced 
retinal neuron damage.

Shimazawa M(1), Ito Y, Inokuchi Y, Hara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biofunctional Molecules, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, Gifu,
Japan.

PURPOSE: To clarify whether the activation of double-stranded RNA-dependent
protein kinase (PKR) participates in the cell death induced by endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, the authors used cultured retinal ganglion cells (RGC-5, a
rat ganglion cell line transformed with the E1A virus) in vitro and the effect of
a PKR inhibitor (an imidazolo-oxindole derivative) on N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA)-induced retinal damage in mice in vivo.
METHODS: In RGC-5 culture, cell damage was induced by tunicamycin (an ER stress
inducer), and cell viability was measured by Hoechst 33342, YO-PRO-1, or
propidium iodide (PI) double staining or by the resazurin-reduction test. Levels 
of glucose-regulated protein (GRP) 78/BiP, activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4), C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP) and the phosphorylated form of PKR were
analyzed by immunoblot. The PKR inhibitor and two siRNAs that recognize
nonoverlapping sequences of rat PKR were tested for their effects on
tunicamycin-induced cell death. In vivo, retinal cell damage was induced by
intravitreal injection of NMDA (20 nmol/eye) in mice. To examine its effect in
vivo, the PKR inhibitor (1 nmol/eye) was intravitreally injected with NMDA, and
ganglion cell layer cell loss and inner plexiform layer thinning were evaluated 7
days after NMDA injection.
RESULTS: Treatment with tunicamycin at 1, 2, and 4 microg/mL for 24 hours
increased the number of YO-PRO-1 and PI-positive (apoptosis or necrosis
indicator) cells in a concentration-dependent manner. Immunoblotting analysis
showed that tunicamycin at 2 microg/mL induced BiP, ATF4, and CHOP protein
production and PKR phosphorylation. Both the PKR inhibitor (0.03-1 microM) and
the PKR knockdown (using siRNA) inhibited tunicamycin-induced RGC-5 cell death.
The same inhibitor also reduced NMDA-induced retinal damage in vivo. The PKR
inhibitor reduced the tunicamycin-induced increase in CHOP but not that in BiP
protein production.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that inhibiting PKR activation is
neuroprotective against ER stress-induced retinal damage, suggesting that PKR
activation may be involved in the mechanisms underlying ER stress-induced cell
death.

PMID: 17652745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2007 Jul 18;2(7):e615.

Inhibition of proliferation by PERK regulates mammary acinar morphogenesis and
tumor formation.

Sequeira SJ(1), Ranganathan AC, Adam AP, Iglesias BV, Farias EF, Aguirre-Ghiso
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Public Health and Center for
Excellence in Cancer Genomics, University at Albany, State University of New
York, Rensselaer, New York, United States of America.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress signaling can be mediated by the ER kinase
PERK, which phosphorylates its substrate eIF2alpha. This in turn, results in
translational repression and the activation of downstream programs that can limit
cell growth through cell cycle arrest and/or apoptosis. These responses can also 
be initiated by perturbations in cell adhesion. Thus, we hypothesized that
adhesion-dependent regulation of PERK signaling might determine cell fate. We
tested this hypothesis in a model of mammary acini development, a morphogenetic
process regulated in part by adhesion signaling. Here we report a novel role for 
PERK in limiting MCF10A mammary epithelial cell proliferation during acinar
morphogenesis in 3D Matrigel culture as well as in preventing mammary tumor
formation in vivo. We show that loss of adhesion to a suitable substratum induces
PERK-dependent phosphorylation of eIF2alpha and selective upregulation of ATF4
and GADD153. Further, inhibition of endogenous PERK signaling during acinar
morphogenesis, using two dominant-negative PERK mutants (PERK-DeltaC or
PERK-K618A), does not affect apoptosis but results instead in hyper-proliferative
and enlarged lumen-filled acini, devoid of proper architecture. This phenotype
correlated with an adhesion-dependent increase in translation initiation, Ki67
staining and upregulation of Laminin-5, ErbB1 and ErbB2 expression. More
importantly, the MCF10A cells expressing PERKDeltaC, but not a vector control,
were tumorigenic in vivo upon orthotopic implantation in denuded mouse mammary
fat pads. Our results reveal that the PERK pathway is responsive to
adhesion-regulated signals and that it is essential for proper acinar
morphogenesis and in preventing mammary tumor formation. The possibility that
deficiencies in PERK signaling could lead to hyperproliferation of the mammary
epithelium and increase the likelihood of tumor formation, is of significance to 
the understanding of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC1910610
PMID: 17637831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Neuroscience. 2007 Jul 29;147(4):957-67. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Involvement of endoplasmic reticulum stress after middle cerebral artery
occlusion in mice.

Morimoto N(1), Oida Y, Shimazawa M, Miura M, Kudo T, Imaizumi K, Hara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biofunctional Molecules, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, 5-6-1
Mitahora-higashi, Gifu 502-8585, Japan.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) plays an important role in ischemic neuronal cell 
death. ER stress-related markers [immunoglobulin binding protein
(BiP)/glucose-regulated protein (GRP) 78, activating transcription factor-4
(ATF-4), and C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP)] in the striatum and the cortex were
investigated after permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) in mice.
Using endoplasmic reticulum stress-activated indicator (ERAI) transgenic mice,
which show splicing of X-box protein 1 (XBP-1) mRNA as green fluorescence, we
monitored the regional changes in fluorescence after MCAO. BiP mRNA (by
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction [RT-PCR] analysis) was increased 
in the cortex at 6 h. In immunohistochemical and/or Western blot analysis, the
expressions of ER stress-related markers (BiP, ATF-4, and CHOP) were increased in
the infarct region, more strongly in the cortex than in the striatum. ERAI
fluorescence was observed in the ischemic area starting from 6 and 12 h,
respectively, after MCAO, with the peaks at 1 day and the fluorescence
co-localized with the 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC)-visible extension
of brain infarction. These findings suggest that permanent MCAO induces
expression of ER-stress related genes mainly in the periphery of the MCA
territory.

PMID: 17590517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Diabetologia. 2007 Jul;50(7):1442-52. Epub 2007 May 12.

Acute nutrient regulation of the unfolded protein response and integrated stress 
response in cultured rat pancreatic islets.

Elouil H(1), Bensellam M, Guiot Y, Vander Mierde D, Pascal SM, Schuit FC, Jonas
JC.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, Université
Catholique de Louvain, Avenue Hippocrate, 55 (UCL 55.30), 1200, Brussels,
Belgium.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Inadequate chaperone function relative to client protein load in
the endoplasmic reticulum triggers an adaptive unfolded protein response (UPR),
including the integrated stress response (ISR), the latter being also activated
by other types of stresses. It is well established that pancreatic beta cells,
which synthesise and secrete insulin upon nutrient stimulation, are markedly
affected by pathological disruption or excessive activation of the UPR. However, 
whether and how physiological nutrient stimulation affects the beta cell UPR has 
been little investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We compared the effects of increasing glucose
concentrations and of endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) emptying with thapsigargin on 
the UPR (X-box binding protein [Xbp1] mRNA splicing and XBP1/activating
transcription factor [ATF] 6-target gene expression) and ISR (eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2A phosphorylation, ATF4 protein levels and target 
gene expression) in isolated rat islets.
RESULTS: Thapsigargin strongly increased both UPR and ISR. In comparison, glucose
moderately increased the UPR between 5 and 30 mmol/l, but exerted complex effects
on the ISR as follows: (1) marked reduction between 2 and 10 mmol/l; (2) moderate
increase parallel to the UPR between 10 and 30 mmol/l. These glucose effects
occurred within 2 h, were mimicked by other metabolic substrates, but were
independent of changes in Ca(2+) influx or insulin secretion. Remarkably,
attenuating the glucose stimulation of protein synthesis with a low concentration
of cycloheximide prevented UPR activation but not ISR reduction by high glucose.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Nutrient stimulation acutely activates rat islet UPR 
in a manner dependent on protein synthesis, while exerting complex effects on the
ISR. These effects may contribute to nutrient-induced maintenance of the beta
cell phenotype.

PMID: 17497122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Front Biosci. 2007 May 1;12:3068-92.

Signaling and transcriptional regulation in osteoblast commitment and
differentiation.

Huang W(1), Yang S, Shao J, Li YP.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

The major event that triggers osteogenesis is the transition of mesenchymal stem 
cells into bone forming, differentiating osteoblast cells. Osteoblast
differentiation is the primary component of bone formation, exemplified by the
synthesis, deposition and mineralization of extracellular matrix. Although not
well understood, osteoblast differentiation from mesenchymal stem cells is a
well-orchestrated process. Recent advances in molecular and genetic studies using
gene targeting in mouse enable a better understanding of the multiple factors and
signaling networks that control the differentiation process at a molecular level.
Osteoblast commitment and differentiation are controlled by complex activities
involving signal transduction and transcriptional regulation of gene expression. 
We review Wnt signaling pathway and Runx2 regulation network, which are critical 
for osteoblast differentiation. Many other factors and signaling pathways have
been implicated in regulation of osteoblast differentiation in a network manner, 
such as the factors Osterix, ATF4, and SATB2 and the TGF-beta, Hedgehog, FGF,
ephrin, and sympathetic signaling pathways. This review summarizes the recent
advances in the studies of signaling transduction pathways and transcriptional
regulation of osteoblast cell lineage commitment and differentiation. The
knowledge of osteoblast commitment and differentiation should be applied towards 
the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic alternatives for human bone
diseases.

PMCID: PMC3571113
PMID: 17485283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 May 1;13(9):2537-40.

The unfolded protein response and integrated stress response to anoxia.

Rzymski T(1), Harris AL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of 
Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom.

The lack of oxygen delivery to tumor cells has profound consequences for tumor
growth and correlates with poor prognosis. Some tumors contain regions of very
severe hypoxia called anoxia, which constitutes a functionally different state to
hypoxia. In response to anoxia, mammalian cells induce coordinated cytoprotective
programs that are critical for tumor survival: the unfolded protein response and 
integrated stress response. Therefore, targeting additional components of anoxic 
pathways, besides the hypoxia-inducible response, may be effective for future
anticancer therapies.

PMID: 17473181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2008;40(1):14-21. Epub 2007 Jan 28.

Activating transcription factor 4.

Ameri K(1), Harris AL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Stanford School of Medicine, Department of Radiation Oncology,
CCSR-South, 269 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. kameri@stanford.edu

Activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) belongs to the ATF/CREB (activating
transcription factor/cyclic AMP response element binding protein) family of basic
region-leucine zipper (bZip) transcription factors, which have the consensus
binding site cAMP responsive element (CRE). ATF4 has numerous dimerization
partners. ATF4 is induced by stress signals including anoxia/hypoxia, endoplasmic
reticulum stress, amino acid deprivation, and oxidative stress. ATF4 expression
is regulated transcriptionally, translationally via the PERK pathway of eIF2alpha
phosphorylation, and posttranslationally by phosphorylation, which targets ATF4
to proteasomal degradation. ATF4 regulates the expression of genes involved in
oxidative stress, amino acid synthesis, differentiation, metastasis and
angiogenesis. Transgenic studies have demonstrated ATF4 to be involved in
hematopoiesis, lens and skeletal development, fertility, proliferation,
differentiation, and long-term memory. ATF4 expression is upregulated in cancer. 
Since ATF4 is induced by tumour microenvironmental factors, and regulates
processes relevant to cancer progression, it might serve as a potential
therapeutic target in cancer.

PMID: 17466566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Neurosci Res. 2007 Jun;85(8):1674-84.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor suppresses tunicamycin-induced upregulation of 
CHOP in neurons.

Chen G(1), Fan Z, Wang X, Ma C, Bower KA, Shi X, Ke ZJ, Luo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, West Virginia
University School of Medicine, Robert C. Byrd Health Sciences Center, Morgantown,
West Virginia 26506, USA.

The accumulation of unfolded or misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) lumen triggers ER stress. ER stress initiates a number of specific
compensatory signaling pathways including unfolded protein response (UPR). UPR is
characterized by translational attenuation, synthesis of ER chaperone proteins
such as glucose-regulated protein of 78 kDa (GRP78, also known as Bip), and
transcriptional induction, which includes the activation of transcription factors
such as activating transcriptional factor 6 (ATF6) and C/EBP homologous protein
(CHOP, also known as growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible gene 153 [GADD153]). 
Sustained ER stress ultimately leads to cell death. ER functions are believed to 
be impaired in various neurodegenerative diseases, as well as in some acute
disorders of the brain. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a member of the
neurotrophin family, functions as a neuroprotective agent and rescues neurons
from various insults. The molecular mechanisms underlying BDNF neuroprotection,
however, remain to be elucidated. We showed that CHOP partially mediated ER
stress-induced neuronal death. BDNF suppressed ER stress-induced upregulation/
nuclear translocation of CHOP. The transcription of CHOP is regulated by ATF4,
ATF6, and XBP1; BDNF selectively blocked the ATF6/CHOP pathway. Furthermore, BDNF
inhibited the induction of death receptor 5 (DR5), a transcriptional target of
CHOP. Our study thus suggests that suppression of CHOP activation may contribute 
to BDNF-mediated neuroprotection during ER stress responses.

Copyright (c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3085896
PMID: 17455323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Neuron. 2007 Apr 19;54(2):186-9.

Switching gears: translational mastery of transcription during memory formation.

Hoeffer CA(1), Klann E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA.

A critical molecular requirement underlying many forms of long-lasting synaptic
plasticity and memory is the de novo synthesis of mRNAs and proteins. In a recent
paper in Cell, Costa-Mattioli et al. present data from a pharmacogenetic study
that places a key regulatory event in the "neural decision" to undergo these
persistent neuronal changes under translational control mediated by eIF2alpha.

PMID: 17442240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 8;282(23):16744-53. Epub 2007 Apr 12.

Role of the transcription factor ATF4 in the anabolic actions of insulin and the 
anti-anabolic actions of glucocorticoids.

Adams CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA. christopher-adams@uiowa.edu

In most mammalian cells, insulin and glucocorticoids promote anabolism and
catabolism, respectively. Whereas the opposing effects of insulin and
glucocorticoids on catabolic gene expression have been explained at the molecular
level, comparatively little is known about how these hormones alter anabolic gene
expression. These studies identify ATF4 as an anabolic transcription factor that 
is repressed by glucocorticoids and induced by insulin. Insulin-mediated
induction of ATF4 required the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1, was
required for the activation of a genetic program for the cellular uptake of
essential amino acids and the synthesis of nonessential amino acids and
aminoacyl-tRNAs, and was coupled to the repression of Foxo-dependent genes needed
for protein and lipid catabolism. These results suggest that ATF4 plays a central
role in hormonal regulation of amino acid and protein anabolism by coupling amino
acid uptake and synthesis, as well as the generation of charged tRNAs, to
mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1-mediated mRNA translation.

PMID: 17430894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Neurosci Res. 2007 Jul;58(3):234-44. Epub 2007 Mar 16.

PC12 cell model of inducible expression of mutant DISC1: new evidence for a
dominant-negative mechanism of abnormal neuronal differentiation.

Pletnikov MV(1), Xu Y, Ovanesov MV, Kamiya A, Sawa A, Ross CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurobiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. mpletnik@jhmi.edu

A balanced chromosomal translocation, segregating with mental illnesses in a
large Scottish family, interrupts the disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) gene, 
which would result in loss of DISC1 function via haploinsufficiency or
dominant-negative effects (or possibly could cause gain-of-function effects) if a
truncated protein is present. To evaluate the effects of a predicted protein,
mutant DISC1, we generated stable PC12 cell clones with inducible expression of
mutant or full-length human DISC1 (hDISC1). Our study presents new observations
that the inhibitory effects of mutant hDISC1 on NGF-induced neurite outgrowth are
dependent on the level and timing of expression of mutant DISC1 and the
concentrations of NGF, and are associated with altered sub-cellular distribution 
of endogenous DISC1 and ATF4, and decreased protein levels of LIS1. Thus,
inducible expression of DISC1 in PC12 cell clones is a valuable in vitro model
for further studying the molecular mechanisms likely due to loss of function of
DISC1 relevant to the pathogenesis of major mental illnesses.

PMID: 17418909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. FEBS Lett. 2007 May 1;581(9):1769-74. Epub 2007 Apr 2.

Stress to endoplasmic reticulum of mouse osteoblasts induces apoptosis and
transcriptional activation for bone remodeling.

Hamamura K(1), Yokota H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, and Anatomy and Cell Biology, Indiana
University Purdue University Indianapolis, Fesler Hall 115, 1120 South Drive,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

ATF4 is an essential regulator in osteogenesis as well as in stress responses to 
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). We addressed a question: Does ER stress to
osteoblasts upregulate ATF4 expression? If so, do they exhibit ATF4-mediated bone
remodeling or apoptosis? ER stress, induced by Thapsigargin and tunicamycin,
elevated a phosphorylated form of eIF2alpha and ATF4, but the cellular fate
depended on treatment duration. The treatment for 1h, for instance, activated
Runx2, and type I collagen, while the treatment for 24h induced apoptosis. Our
observations suggest that there is a threshold for ER stress and osteoblasts
present a bi-phasic pattern of their fate.

PMCID: PMC1920705
PMID: 17418825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Cell. 2007 Apr 6;129(1):195-206.

eIF2alpha phosphorylation bidirectionally regulates the switch from short- to
long-term synaptic plasticity and memory.

Costa-Mattioli M(1), Gobert D, Stern E, Gamache K, Colina R, Cuello C, Sossin W, 
Kaufman R, Pelletier J, Rosenblum K, Krnjevic K, Lacaille JC, Nader K, Sonenberg 
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and McGill Cancer Center, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. mauro.costa-mattioli@mail.mcgill.ca

Comment in
    Cell. 2007 Apr 6;129(1):23-4.

The late phase of long-term potentiation (LTP) and memory (LTM) requires new gene
expression, but the molecular mechanisms that underlie these processes are not
fully understood. Phosphorylation of eIF2alpha inhibits general translation but
selectively stimulates translation of ATF4, a repressor of CREB-mediated late-LTP
(L-LTP) and LTM. We used a pharmacogenetic bidirectional approach to examine the 
role of eIF2alpha phosphorylation in synaptic plasticity and behavioral learning.
We show that in eIF2alpha(+/S51A) mice, in which eIF2alpha phosphorylation is
reduced, the threshold for eliciting L-LTP in hippocampal slices is lowered, and 
memory is enhanced. In contrast, only early-LTP is evoked by repeated tetanic
stimulation and LTM is impaired, when eIF2alpha phosphorylation is increased by
injecting into the hippocampus a small molecule, Sal003, which prevents the
dephosphorylation of eIF2alpha. These findings highlight the importance of a
single phosphorylation site in eIF2alpha as a key regulator of L-LTP and LTM
formation.

PMCID: PMC4149214
PMID: 17418795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cell. 2007 Apr 6;129(1):23-4.

An atomic switch for memory.

Sweatt JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and McKnight Brain Institute, University of
Alabama-Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. dsweatt@nrc.uab.edu
<dsweatt@nrc.uab.edu>

Comment on
    Cell. 2007 Apr 6;129(1):195-206.

Molecular genetic techniques are beginning to bring about a detailed
understanding of the biochemical processes underlying complex cognitive phenomena
such as memory, with investigations approaching atomic-level resolution. An
excellent example of this is provided in this issue of Cell by Costa-Mattioli et 
al. (2007), whose results implicate a single protein dephosphorylation event in
the control of long-term memory formation in mice.

PMID: 17418779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Diabetes. 2007 Apr;56(4):1069-77.

Transcriptional regulation of the endoplasmic reticulum stress gene chop in
pancreatic insulin-producing cells.

Pirot P(1), Ortis F, Cnop M, Ma Y, Hendershot LM, Eizirik DL, Cardozo AK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Route de
Lennik, 808-CP-618, 1070 Brussels, Belgium.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated apoptosis may play an important role in the
destruction of pancreatic beta-cells, thus contributing to the development of
type 1 and type 2 diabetes. One of the regulators of endoplasmic reticulum
stress-mediated cell death is the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)
homologous protein (Chop). We presently studied the molecular regulation of Chop 
expression in insulin-producing cells (INS-1E) in response to three pro-apoptotic
and endoplasmic reticulum stress-inducing agents, namely the cytokines
interleukin-1beta + interferon-gamma, the free fatty acid palmitate, and the
sarcoendoplasmic reticulum pump Ca(2+) ATPase blocker cyclopiazonic acid (CPA).
Detailed mutagenesis studies of the Chop promoter showed differential regulation 
of Chop transcription by CPA, cytokines, and palmitate. Whereas palmitate- and
cytokine-induced Chop expression was mediated via a C/EBP-activating
transcription factor (ATF) composite and AP-1 binding sites, CPA induction
required the C/EBP-ATF site and the endoplasmic reticulum stress response
element. Cytokines, palmitate, and CPA induced eIF2alpha phosphorylation in
INS-1E cells leading to activation of the transcription factor ATF4. Chop
transcription in response to cytokines and palmitate depends on the binding of
ATF4 and AP-1 to the Chop promoter, but distinct AP-1 dimers were formed by
cytokines and palmitate. These results suggest a differential response of
beta-cells to diverse endoplasmic reticulum stress inducers, leading to a
differential regulation of Chop transcription.

PMID: 17395747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 25;282(21):15851-61. Epub 2007 Mar 16.

TRB3 inhibits the transcriptional activation of stress-regulated genes by a
negative feedback on the ATF4 pathway.

Jousse C(1), Deval C, Maurin AC, Parry L, Chérasse Y, Chaveroux C, Lefloch R,
Lenormand P, Bruhat A, Fafournoux P.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 1019, Unité Nutrition Humaine, INRA de Theix, 63122 St Genès Champanelle, 
France.

The integrated stress response (ISR) is defined as a highly conserved response to
several stresses that converge to the induction of the activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4). Because an uncontrolled response may have deleterious effects,
cells have elaborated several negative feedback loops that attenuate the ISR. In 
the present study, we describe how induction of the human homolog of Drosophila
tribbles (TRB3) attenuates the ISR by a negative feedback mechanism. To
investigate the role of TRB3 in the control of the ISR, we used the regulation of
gene expression by amino acid limitation as a model. The enhanced production of
ATF4 upon amino acid starvation results in the induction of a large number of
target genes like CHOP (CAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein),
asparagine synthetase (ASNS), or TRB3. We demonstrate that TRB3 overexpression
inhibits the transcriptional induction of CHOP and ASNS whereas TRB3 silencing
induces the expression of these genes both under normal and stressed conditions. 
In addition, transcriptional profiling experiments show that TRB3 affects the
expression of many ISR-regulated genes. Our results also suggest that TRB3 and
ATF4 belong to the same protein complex bound to the sequence involved in the
ATF4-dependent regulation of gene expression by amino acid limitation.
Collectively, our data identify TRB3 as a negative feedback regulator of the
ATF4-dependent transcription and participates to the fine regulation of the ISR.

PMID: 17369260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Virus Res. 2007 Jun;126(1-2):128-38. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

Activation of the ER stress gene gadd153 by hepatitis C virus sensitizes cells to
oxidant injury.

Ciccaglione AR(1), Marcantonio C, Tritarelli E, Equestre M, Vendittelli F,
Costantino A, Geraci A, Rapicetta M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious, Parasitic and Immune-Mediated Disease, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy.

HCV induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress which correlates with
transcriptional induction of ER stress genes. Previously, we reported that
expression of HCV structural proteins activates the ER stress and pro-apoptotic
gene gadd153 which plays a relevant role in cell death induced by oxidative
stress. In the present study, using human hepatic cell lines Huh7 carrying a
full-length HCV replicon, we demonstrated that replication and expression of the 
complete set of HCV proteins were associated with elevated expression of gadd153.
Analysis of gadd153 promoter activity revealed that both the ATF4 and the ATF6
pathways, which are typically induced during ER stress response, contribute to
the induction of gadd153 in HCV replicon cells. Activation of the ATF4 pathway
was confirmed by identification of increased levels of ATF4 protein in replicon
cells. Importantly, we showed that, following H2O2 treatment, gadd153 gene
reached higher levels of expression in replicon cells. Consistent with the marked
induction of the pro-apoptotic gene gadd153, HCV replicon cells showed an
increased vulnerability to oxidant injury. Treatment of replicon cells with a
specific small interfering RNA, targeted to gadd153 gene, reduced basal
expression of gadd153 and decreased cell death following H2O2. These findings
suggest that gadd153 may play a major role in sensitivity of HCV replicon cell to
oxidative stress.

PMID: 17368854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 May 11;356(3):711-7. Epub 2007 Mar 13.

Involvement of up-regulation of PUMA in non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drug-induced apoptosis.

Ishihara T(1), Hoshino T, Namba T, Tanaka K, Mizushima T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

NSAIDs such as celecoxib induce apoptosis in cancer cells. Although this
apoptotic effect is involved in the anti-tumor activity associated with such
drugs, the mechanism by which this occurs is not fully understood. We report here
that various NSAIDs, including celecoxib, up-regulate PUMA, a Bcl-2 family
protein with potent apoptosis-inducing activity, in human gastric carcinoma cell 
line, accompanying the induction of apoptosis. Experiments using siRNA and an
intracellular Ca(2+) chelator revealed that Ca(2+)-dependent up-regulation of
ATF4 and CHOP is involved in this up-regulation of PUMA. The siRNA for PUMA
inhibited the celecoxib-induced activation and translocation of Bax, release of
cytochrome c into the cytosol and induction of apoptosis, suggesting that PUMA
plays an important role in celecoxib-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and the
resulting apoptosis.

PMID: 17368424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Br J Cancer. 2007 Apr 10;96(7):1062-71. Epub 2007 Mar 13.

Targeting homeostatic mechanisms of endoplasmic reticulum stress to increase
susceptibility of cancer cells to fenretinide-induced apoptosis: the role of
stress proteins ERdj5 and ERp57.

Corazzari M(1), Lovat PE, Armstrong JL, Fimia GM, Hill DS, Birch-Machin M,
Redfern CP, Piacentini M.

Author information: 
(1)1INMI-IRCCS Lazzaro Spallanzani, Rome 00149, Italy.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) malfunction, leading to ER stress, can be a
consequence of genome instability and hypoxic tissue environments. Cancer cells
survive by acquiring or enhancing survival mechanisms to counter the effects of
ER stress and these homeostatic responses may be new therapeutic targets.
Understanding the links between ER stress and apoptosis may be approached using
drugs specifically to target ER stress responses in cancer cells. The retinoid
analogue fenretinide [N-(4-hydroxyphenyl) retinamide] is a new cancer preventive 
and chemotherapeutic drug, that induces apoptosis of some cancer cell types via
oxidative stress, accompanied by induction of an ER stress-related transcription 
factor, GADD153. The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that
fenretinide induces ER stress in neuroectodermal tumour cells, and to elucidate
the role of ER stress responses in fenretinide-induced apoptosis. The ER stress
genes ERdj5, ERp57, GRP78, calreticulin and calnexin were induced in
neuroectodermal tumour cells by fenretinide. In contrast to the
apoptosis-inducing chemotherapeutic drugs vincristine and temozolomide,
fenretinide induced the phosphorylation of eIF2alpha, expression of ATF4 and
splicing of XBP-1 mRNA, events that define ER stress. In these respects,
fenretinide displayed properties similar to the ER stress inducer thapsigargin.
ER stress responses were inhibited by antioxidant treatment. Knockdown of ERp57
or ERdj5 by RNA interference in these cells increased the apoptotic response to
fenretinide. These data suggest that downregulating homeostatic ER stress
responses may enhance apoptosis induced by oxidative stress-inducing drugs acting
through the ER stress pathway. Therefore, ER-resident proteins such as ERdj5 and 
ERp57 may represent novel chemotherapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC2360126
PMID: 17353921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Jun;81(6):1535-47. Epub 2007 Mar 8.

ATF4 differentially regulates transcriptional activation of myeloid-specific
genes by C/EBPepsilon and C/EBPalpha.

Gombart AF(1), Grewal J, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Davis Bldg.
5019, 8700 Beverly Blvd., Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. gombarta@csmc.edu

Dimerization between different basic region leucine zipper (ZIP) transcription
factors is regarded as an important mechanism for integrating various
extracellular signals to control specific patterns of gene expression in cells.
The activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) protein was identified as a
principal partner for the myeloid-specific transcriptional factor C/EBPepsilon.
Dimerization required the ZIP motif of each protein and redirected DNA binding of
C/EBPepsilon and ATF4 from their respective symmetric consensus sites to
asymmetric C/EBP and cAMP response element sites. The C/EBPepsilon:ATF4
heterodimer bound to the C/EBP sites in the promoters of the myeloid-specific
genes encoding neutrophil elastase (NE) and the G-CSF receptor (G-CSFR). Also,
the heterodimer bound a previously uncharacterized site in the promoter of the
mim-1 gene at nucleotide -174. Coexpression of ATF4 and C/EBPepsilon in the
presence of c-Myb synergistically activated the mim-1 and NE promoters compared
with C/EBPepsilon plus c-Myb alone. Synergistic activation was not observed for
the G-CSFR promoter and only occurred in the presence of c-myb with the NE or
mim-1 promoters. In contrast, ATF4:C/EBPalpha dimers bound to the C/EBP sites in 
the G-CSFR and NE promoters, but transcriptional activation was inhibited by
30-80% in the presence or absence of c-Myb. We propose that ATF4 may regulate
myeloid gene expression differentially by potentiating C/EBPepsilon but
inhibiting C/EBPalpha-mediated transcriptional activation.

PMID: 17347301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Neurosci Lett. 2007 May 7;417(3):316-21. Epub 2007 Feb 24.

Association analysis of ATF4 and ATF5, genes for interacting-proteins of DISC1,
in bipolar disorder.

Kakiuchi C(1), Ishiwata M, Nanko S, Kunugi H, Minabe Y, Nakamura K, Mori N, Fujii
K, Yamada K, Yoshikawa T, Kato T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Dynamics of Mental Disorders, Brain Science
Institute, RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Disrupted in schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) and its molecular cascade are implicated in 
the pathophysiology of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. As
interacting-proteins with DISC1, Nudel, ATF4, ATF5, LIS1, alpha-tubulin, PDE4B,
eIF3, FEZ1, Kendrin, MAP1A and MIPT3 were identified. We previously showed the
down-regulation of ATF5 in the lymphoblastoid cells derived from affected co-twin
of monozygotic twins discordant for bipolar disorder. We also suggested the
contribution of endoplasmic reticulum stress response pathway to the illness, and
ATF4 is one of major components in the pathway. Truncated mutant DISC1 reportedly
cannot interact with ATF4 and ATF5. These findings suggest the role of these
genes in the pathophysiology of bipolar disorder. In this study, we tested
genetic association of ATF4 and ATF5 genes with bipolar disorder by a
case-control study in Japanese population (438 patients and 532 controls) and
transmission disequilibrium test in 237 trio samples from NIMH Genetics
Initiative Pedigrees. We also performed gene expression analysis in
lymphoblastoid cells. We did not find any significant association in both genetic
study and expression analysis. By the exploratory haplotype analysis, nominal
association of ATF4 with bipolar II patients was observed, but it was not
significant after correction of multiple testing. Contribution of common
variations of ATF4 and ATF5 to the pathophysiology of bipolar disorder may be
minimal if any.

PMID: 17346882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 2007 Apr 27;282(17):12725-33. Epub 2007 Feb 28.

Perturbation of endoplasmic reticulum homeostasis facilitates prion replication.

Hetz C(1), Castilla J, Soto C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 
77555, USA. chetz@med.uchile.cl

Prion diseases are fatal and infectious neurodegenerative disorders characterized
by the accumulation of an abnormally folded form of the prion protein (PrP),
termed PrP(Sc). Prion replication triggers endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress,
neuronal dysfunction, and apoptosis. In this study we analyze the effect of
perturbations in ER homeostasis on PrP biochemical properties and prion
replication. ER stress led to the generation of a mis-folded PrP isoform, which
is detergent-insoluble and protease-sensitive. To understand the mechanism by
which ER stress generates PrP misfolding, we assessed the contribution of
different signaling pathways implicated in the unfolded protein response.
Expression of a dominant negative form of IRE1 alpha or XBP-1 significantly
increased PrP aggregation, whereas overexpression of ATF4 or an active mutant
form of XBP-1 and ATF6 had the opposite affect. Analysis of prion replication in 
vitro revealed that the PrP isoform generated after ER stress is more efficiently
converted into PrP(Sc) compared with the protein extracted from untreated cells. 
These findings indicate that ER-damaged cells might be more susceptible to prion 
replication. Because PrP(Sc) induces ER stress, our data point to a vicious cycle
accelerating prion replication, which may explain the rapid progression of the
disease.

PMCID: PMC2804266
PMID: 17329244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Apr 6;355(2):365-70. Epub 2007 Feb 6.

Reduced eIF2alpha phosphorylation and increased proapoptotic proteins in aging.

Hussain SG(1), Ramaiah KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad 500 046, AP,
India.

A decline in relative levels and phosphorylation of many of the eukaryotic
initiation factors (eIFs) including S6, the 40S ribosomal subunit protein in many
of the rat tissues during chronological aging is accompanied by elevated levels
of eIF2alpha kinases, such as PKR and PERK, but not their activity. Concomitant
with increased eIF2alpha phosphorylation, young tissues displayed a higher level 
of eIF2B to tolerate the toxic effect of eIF2alpha phosphorylation on
translation, ATF4, a b-zip transcriptional factor that is produced as part of the
gene expression programme in response to eIF2alpha phosphorylation, and BiP, an
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) molecular chaperone and regulator of ER stress
sensors. Decline in eIF2alpha phosphorylation in aged tissues is associated with 
a higher level of GADD34, a subunit of eIF2alpha phosphatase, and proapoptotic
proteins like CHOP/GADD153 and phospho JNK, suggesting that young tissues possess
an efficient ER stress adaptive mechanism that declines with aging.

PMID: 17300747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Oncogene. 2007 Jul 19;26(33):4749-60. Epub 2007 Feb 12.

Clock and ATF4 transcription system regulates drug resistance in human cancer
cell lines.

Igarashi T(1), Izumi H, Uchiumi T, Nishio K, Arao T, Tanabe M, Uramoto H, Sugio
K, Yasumoto K, Sasaguri Y, Wang KY, Otsuji Y, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan.

The mechanisms underlying cellular drug resistance have been extensively studied,
but little is known about its regulation. We have previously reported that
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is upregulated in cisplatin-resistant
cells and plays a role in cisplatin resistance. Here, we find out a novel
relationship between the circadian transcription factor Clock and drug
resistance. Clock drives the periodical expression of many genes that regulate
hormone release, cell division, sleep-awake cycle and tumor growth. We
demonstrate that ATF4 is a direct target of Clock, and that Clock is
overexpressed in cisplatin-resistant cells. Furthermore, Clock expression
significantly correlates with cisplatin sensitivity, and that the downregulation 
of either Clock or ATF4 confers sensitivity of A549 cells to cisplatin and
etoposide. Notably, ATF4-overexpressing cells show multidrug resistance and
marked elevation of intracellular glutathione. The microarray study reveals that 
genes for glutathione metabolism are generally downregulated by the knockdown of 
ATF4 expression. These results suggest that the Clock and ATF4 transcription
system might play an important role in multidrug resistance through
glutathione-dependent redox system, and also indicate that physiological
potentials of Clock-controlled redox system might be important to better
understand the oxidative stress-associated disorders including cancer and
systemic chronotherapy.

PMID: 17297441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cancer Res. 2007 Feb 1;67(3):1262-9.

Inhibition of fatty acid synthase induces endoplasmic reticulum stress in tumor
cells.

Little JL(1), Wheeler FB, Fels DR, Koumenis C, Kridel SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Fatty acid synthase (FAS), the cellular enzyme that synthesizes palmitate, is
expressed at high levels in tumor cells and is vital for their survival. Through 
the synthesis of palmitate, FAS primarily drives the synthesis of phospholipids
in tumor cells. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that the FAS inhibitors
induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in tumor cells. Treatment of tumor cells
with FAS inhibitors induces robust PERK-dependent phosphorylation of the
translation initiation factor eIF2alpha and concomitant inhibition of protein
synthesis. PERK-deficient transformed mouse embryonic fibroblasts and HT-29 colon
carcinoma cells that express a dominant negative PERK (DeltaC-PERK) are
hypersensitive to FAS inhibitor-induced cell death. Pharmacologic inhibition of
FAS also induces the processing of X-box binding protein-1, indicating that the
IRE1 arm of the ER stress response is activated when FAS is inhibited. Induction 
of ER stress is further confirmed by the increased expression of the ER
stress-regulated genes CHOP, ATF4, and GRP78. FAS inhibitor-induced ER stress is 
activated prior to the detection of caspase 3 and PARP cleavage, primary
indicators of cell death, whereas orlistat-induced cell death is rescued by
coincubation with the global translation inhibitor cycloheximide. Lastly, FAS
inhibitors cooperate with the ER stress inducer thapsigargin to enhance tumor
cell killing. These results provide the first evidence that FAS inhibitors induce
ER stress and establish an important mechanistic link between FAS activity and ER
function.

PMID: 17283163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mitochondrion. 2007 Feb-Apr;7(1-2):80-8. Epub 2006 Dec 3.

CHOP (C/EBP homologous protein) and ASNS (asparagine synthetase) induction in
cybrid cells harboring MELAS and NARP mitochondrial DNA mutations.

Fujita Y(1), Ito M, Nozawa Y, Yoneda M, Oshida Y, Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Longevity and Aging Research, Gifu International Institute of
Biotechnology, 1-1 Naka-Fudogaoka, Kakamigahara, Gifu 504-0838, Japan.

Mitochondrial dysfunction caused by mutations in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is
related to a variety of diseases including MELAS and NARP syndromes. However,
little is known about the intracellular responses induced by mtDNA mutations. In 
order to identify genes whose expression is altered as a result of the presence
of mtDNA mutations, DNA microarray analysis was performed using human 143B
osteosarcoma cells harboring 3243A>G [tRNA-Leu (UUR)] and 8993T>G [ATPase6
Leu156Arg] mtDNA mutations associated with MELAS and NARP syndromes (2SD and
NARP3-1 cybrid cells), respectively. We found that mRNA and protein levels of
ATF4, CHOP and ASNS were upregulated in 2SD and NARP3-1 cells as compared with
parental cells. Reporter assays demonstrated that transcription of CHOP and ASNS 
genes was upregulated through the AARE (amino acid regulatory element) and NSRE-1
(nutrient-sensing response element-1) enhancer elements to which ATF4 binds,
respectively. Furthermore, knockdown of ATF4 by RNA interference reduced CHOP and
ASNS transcription in 2SD and NARP3-1 cells. These results suggest that the
presence of mtDNA mutations elicits upregulation of CHOP and ASNS genes through
the elevation of ATF4 expression and its binding to the AARE and NSRE-1,
respectively.

PMID: 17276738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Diabetologia. 2007 Apr;50(4):752-63. Epub 2007 Feb 1.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress contributes to beta cell apoptosis in type 2
diabetes.

Laybutt DR(1), Preston AM, Akerfeldt MC, Kench JG, Busch AK, Biankin AV, Biden
TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research,
St Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Increased lipid supply causes beta cell death, which may
contribute to reduced beta cell mass in type 2 diabetes. We investigated whether 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is necessary for lipid-induced apoptosis in
beta cells and also whether ER stress is present in islets of an animal model of 
diabetes and of humans with type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: Expression of genes involved in ER stress was evaluated in
insulin-secreting MIN6 cells exposed to elevated lipids, in islets isolated from 
db/db mice and in pancreas sections of humans with type 2 diabetes.
Overproduction of the ER chaperone heat shock 70 kDa protein 5 (HSPA5, previously
known as immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein [BIP]) was performed to
assess whether attenuation of ER stress affected lipid-induced apoptosis.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that the pro-apoptotic fatty acid palmitate triggers a
comprehensive ER stress response in MIN6 cells, which was virtually absent using 
non-apoptotic fatty acid oleate. Time-dependent increases in mRNA levels for
activating transcription factor 4 (Atf4), DNA-damage inducible transcript 3
(Ddit3, previously known as C/EBP homologous protein [Chop]) and DnaJ homologue
(HSP40) C3 (Dnajc3, previously known as p58) correlated with increased apoptosis 
in palmitate- but not in oleate-treated MIN6 cells. Attenuation of ER stress by
overproduction of HSPA5 in MIN6 cells significantly protected against
lipid-induced apoptosis. In islets of db/db mice, a variety of marker genes of ER
stress were also upregulated. Increased processing (activation) of X-box binding 
protein 1 (Xbp1) mRNA was also observed, confirming the existence of ER stress.
Finally, we observed increased islet protein production of HSPA5, DDIT3, DNAJC3
and BCL2-associated X protein in human pancreas sections of type 2 diabetes
subjects.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our results provide evidence that ER stress occurs in
type 2 diabetes and is required for aspects of the underlying beta cell failure.

PMID: 17268797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(4):1312-21. Epub 2007 Jan 31.

ATF2 is required for amino acid-regulated transcription by orchestrating specific
histone acetylation.

Bruhat A(1), Chérasse Y, Maurin AC, Breitwieser W, Parry L, Deval C, Jones N,
Jousse C, Fafournoux P.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 1019, Unité de Nutrition Humaine, INRA de Theix, 63122 Saint Genès
Champanelle, France. bruhat@clermont.inra.fr

The transcriptional activation of CHOP (a CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-related 
gene) by amino acid deprivation involves the activating transcription factor 2
(ATF2) and the activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) binding the amino acid
response element (AARE) within the promoter. Using a chromatin
immunoprecipitation approach, we report that in vivo binding of phospho-ATF2 and 
ATF4 to CHOP AARE are associated with acetylation of histones H4 and H2B in
response to amino acid starvation. A time course analysis reveals that ATF2
phosphorylation precedes histone acetylation, ATF4 binding and the increase in
CHOP mRNA. We also show that ATF4 binding and histone acetylation are two
independent events that are required for the CHOP induction upon amino acid
starvation. Using ATF2-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts, we demonstrate that
ATF2 is essential in the acetylation of histone H4 and H2B in vivo. The role of
ATF2 on histone H4 acetylation is dependent on its binding to the AARE and can be
extended to other amino acid regulated genes. Thus, ATF2 is involved in promoting
the modification of the chromatin structure to enhance the transcription of a
number of amino acid-regulated genes.

PMCID: PMC1851658
PMID: 17267404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Blood. 2007 May 15;109(10):4209-19. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

Modulation of DNA binding properties of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein epsilon by
heterodimer formation and interactions with NFkappaB pathway.

Chumakov AM(1), Silla A, Williamson EA, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University of California 
at Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. chumakov@gmail.com

C/EBP epsilon is a transcription factor involved in myeloid cell differentiation.
Along with C/EBP-alpha, -beta, -gamma, -delta, and -zeta, C/EBP-epsilon belongs
to the family of CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins that are implicated in control
of growth and differentiation of several cell lineages in inflammation and stress
response. We have previously shown that C/EBP-epsilon preferentially binds DNA as
a heterodimer with other C/EBP family members such as C/EBP-delta, CHOP
(C/EBP-zeta), and the b-zip family protein ATF4. In this study, we define the
consensus binding sites for C/EBP-epsilon dimers and C/EBP-epsilon-ATF4
heterodimers. We show that the activated NFkappaB pathway promotes interaction of
the C/EBP-epsilon subunit with its cognate DNA binding site via interaction with 
RelA. RelA-C/EBP interaction is enhanced by phosphorylation of threonine at amino
acid 75 and results in increased DNA binding compared with the wild-type
nonphosphorylated C/EBP both in vitro and in vivo. We suggest that interaction of
the activated NFkappaB pathway and C/EBP-epsilon may be important in selective
activation of a subset of C/EBP-epsilon-responsive genes.

PMCID: PMC1885488
PMID: 17255362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Endocrinol. 2007 Jan;192(1):179-87.

Distinct glucose-dependent stress responses revealed by translational profiling
in pancreatic beta-cells.

Greenman IC(1), Gomez E, Moore CE, Herbert TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Leicester,
Maurice Shock Medical Sciences Building, University Road, Leicester, UK.

In pancreatic beta-cells, following an acute (within 1 h) increase in glucose
concentration, there are rapid changes in the expression of a large subset of
proteins. The change in the expression of many of these proteins is mediated by a
post-transcriptional mechanism through either increases or decreases in the rate 
of translation from pre-existing transcripts. These proteins, whose synthesis is 
rapidly up- or down-regulated in response to glucose, are likely important in
mounting the correct response to changes in plasma glucose concentrations.
However, the vast majority of these proteins remain unidentified. Therefore, in
order to identify these proteins, we analysed changes in the levels of mRNAs
associated with polysomes (i.e. actively translating mRNAs) isolated from mouse
insulinoma 6 cells incubated at either 0.5 or 20 mM glucose for 1 h. Changes in
the levels of polysomal mRNAs in response to glucose were analysed using
affymetrix oligonucleotide microarrays (translational profiling). This work
revealed that, in response to a change in glucose concentration, the abundance of
313 transcripts associated with polysomes changed by more than 1.5-fold, of which
the abundance of 37 changed by more than twofold. The majority of these
transcripts encoded proteins associated with metabolism or gene expression. More 
detailed analysis showed that a number of mRNAs encoding proteins associated with
the induction of oxidative stress, including thioredoxin-2 and
thioredoxin-interacting protein were rapidly redistributed onto heavier polysomes
at high glucose concentration, indicating an increase in their expression. At low
glucose concentration, when the general rate of protein synthesis is low, a
number of mRNAs encoding integrated stress response proteins, including ATF4 and 
CHOP10, associate with heavier polysomes, indicating that their expression is
up-regulated. In conclusion, translational profiling has revealed that, at either
low or at high glucose concentration, beta-cells rapidly increase the synthesis
of a specific subset of proteins that are likely important in maintaining
beta-cell integrity and survival during conditions of nutritional stress.

PMCID: PMC1831533
PMID: 17210755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Endocrine. 2006 Aug;30(1):81-91.

The murine p8 gene promoter is activated by activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4) in the gonadotrope-derived LbetaT2 cell line.

Passe CM(1), Cooper G, Quirk CC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Sciences Program, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 47405-4401,
USA.

The factor p8 is a high mobility group (HMG) A family member that is upregulated 
during the cellular stress response in numerous tissues. Because expression of
this protein encourages cellular transformation, our goal is to characterize the 
mechanism by which the p8 gene is regulated. Using LbetaT2 cells as a model of a 
transformed cell in which p8 plays a role in tumor formation, we dissected the p8
promoter into its minimal functional units and found that activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), a factor also upregulated during cellular stress
responses, enhances p8 promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner. In addition,
ATF4 binds in the highly conserved major activation domain of the p8 proximal
promoter between -130 and -100 bp. Furthermore, we show that six of the nine base
pairs that encompass the putative element are essential for ATF4 binding. These
findings increase our knowledge of the mechanisms regulating the p8 gene in a
genetically defined tumor model.

PMID: 17185796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Kidney Int. 2007 Feb;71(3):201-9. Epub 2006 Dec 20.

Chronic metabolic acidosis alters osteoblast differentiation from human
mesenchymal stem cells.

Disthabanchong S(1), Radinahamed P, Stitchantrakul W, Hongeng S, Rajatanavin R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand. sineemd@hotmail.com

Bone histology of distal renal tubular acidosis patients showed decreased bone
formation with impaired bone matrix mineralization that is not entirely explained
by an alteration in the mineral balance. Data from in vitro studies suggests a
direct inhibitory effect of metabolic acidosis on osteoblast function. We
investigated the effects of chronic metabolic acidosis on osteoblast
differentiation from mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). Human MSCs were allowed to
differentiate into osteoblasts in culture. Concentrated hydrochloric acid was
added to the medium to lower the bicarbonate concentration and pH. The expression
of various osteoblastic genes and proteins and bone matrix mineralization were
examined. Chronic metabolic acidosis enhanced the messenger RNA (mRNA) and
protein expression of early osteoblast transcription factor, runx-2, whereas
inhibiting osterix and having no effect on ATF-4. The expression of type I
collagen, the most abundant bone matrix protein, was increased following the same
pattern of runx-2. Likewise, metabolic acidosis slightly enhanced the expression 
of mature osteoblastic gene, osteocalcin. Study on mineralization revealed
suppressed alkaline phosphatase mRNA and enzyme activity. Despite the augmented
collagen deposit in acidic culture, bone matrix mineralization was impaired. In
conclusion, chronic metabolic acidosis alters osteoblast differentiation from
MSCs through its diverse effect on osteoblastic genes and proteins resulting in
an impairment of bone formation.

PMID: 17183249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biol Chem. 2007 Feb 9;282(6):3755-65. Epub 2006 Dec 14.

The eukaryotic initiation factor-2 kinase pathway facilitates differential
GADD45a expression in response to environmental stress.

Jiang HY(1), Jiang L, Wek RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor-2 (eIF2) regulates general and
gene-specific translation in response to diverse environmental stresses. Central 
to gene expression induced by eIF2 phosphorylation is the preferential
translation of ATF4, a basic zipper transcription activator. Phosphorylation of
eIF2 and its attendant induction of ATF4 can lead to different patterns of gene
expression depending on the environmental stress. This is of fundamental
importance because eIF2 kinases can induce the expression of genes involved in
survival as well as in apoptosis. In this report, we explore the molecular basis 
for why there can be differential expression of GADD45a, a stress-responsive
protein that regulates genome stability, apoptosis, and immune responses. We find
that whereas ATF4 is required for GADD45a transcription during many different
environmental stresses, GADD45a protein accumulates only during a limited number 
of stress arrangements. The basis for this difference between measurable GADD45a 
mRNA and protein lies in the observation that GADD45a protein is labile. Those
stress agents that enhance ATF4-directed GADD45a transcription and impede the
turnover of GADD45a protein by blocking ubiquitin/proteasome-mediated degradation
elevate GADD45a protein levels. By comparison, those stress arrangements that
trigger ATF4 levels and GADD45a transcription, but do not perturb the proteasome 
pathway, only elevate GADD45a mRNA levels. This study highlights the molecular
mechanisms by which environmental stresses can differentially control central
regulatory proteins targeted by the eIF2 kinase pathway.

PMID: 17170114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Mol Pharmacol. 2007 Mar;71(3):860-70. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

Up-regulation of 150-kDa oxygen-regulated protein by celecoxib in human gastric
carcinoma cells.

Namba T(1), Hoshino T, Tanaka K, Tsutsumi S, Ishihara T, Mima S, Suzuki K, Ogawa 
S, Mizushima T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University,
5-1 Oe-honmachi, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

Induction of apoptosis by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as
celecoxib, is involved in their antitumor activity. An endoplasmic reticulum
chaperone, 150-kDa oxygen-regulated protein (ORP150) is essential for the
maintenance of cellular viability under hypoxia and is reported to be
overexpressed in clinically isolated tumors. We here found that ORP150 was
up-regulated by celecoxib in human gastric carcinoma cells. In conjunction with
the suppression of tumor growth, orally administered celecoxib up-regulated
ORP150 in xenograft tumors. Both the ATF4 and ATF6 pathways were activated by
celecoxib, and suppression of ATF4 and ATF6 mRNA expression by small interfering 
RNA (siRNA) inhibited the celecoxib-dependent up-regulation of ORP150. Celecoxib 
administration led to an increase in the intracellular concentration of Ca2+,
whereas 1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic acid-acetoxymethyl
ester, an intracellular Ca2+ chelator, inhibited the up-regulation of ORP150 and 
the activation of the ATF4 and ATF6 pathways. These results suggest that these
Ca2+-activated pathways are involved in the celecoxib-mediated up-regulation of
ORP150. Clones overexpressing ORP150 were less susceptible to celecoxib-induced, 
but not staurosporine-induced, apoptosis and displayed less up-regulation of
C/EBP homologous transcription factor (CHOP), a transcription factor with
apoptosis-inducing activity. In contrast, siRNA for ORP150 stimulated apoptosis
and expression of CHOP in the presence of celecoxib but not staurosporine. These 
results suggest that up-regulation of ORP150 in cancer cells inhibits
celecoxib-induced apoptosis, thereby decreasing the potential antitumor activity 
of celecoxib.

PMID: 17167033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cell Metab. 2006 Dec;4(6):441-51.

ATF4 mediation of NF1 functions in osteoblast reveals a nutritional basis for
congenital skeletal dysplasiae.

Elefteriou F(1), Benson MD, Sowa H, Starbuck M, Liu X, Ron D, Parada LF, Karsenty
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Bone Disease program of Texas,
Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2006 Dec;4(6):419-20.

The transcription factor ATF4 enhances bone formation by favoring amino acid
import and collagen synthesis in osteoblasts, a function requiring its
phosphorylation by RSK2, the kinase inactivated in Coffin-Lowry Syndrome. Here,
we show that in contrast, RSK2 activity, ATF4-dependent collagen synthesis, and
bone formation are increased in mice lacking neurofibromin in osteoblasts
(Nf1(ob)(-/-) mice). Independently of RSK2, ATF4 phosphorylation by PKA is
enhanced in Nf1(ob)(-/-) mice, thereby increasing Rankl expression, osteoclast
differentiation, and bone resorption. In agreement with ATF4 function in amino
acid transport, a low-protein diet decreased bone protein synthesis and
normalized bone formation and bone mass in Nf1(ob)(-/-) mice without affecting
other organ weight, while a high-protein diet overcame Atf4(-/-) and Rsk2(-/-)
mice developmental defects, perinatal lethality, and low bone mass. By showing
that ATF4-dependent skeletal dysplasiae are treatable by dietary manipulations,
this study reveals a molecular connection between nutrition and skeletal
development.

PMCID: PMC2756713
PMID: 17141628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Cell Metab. 2006 Dec;4(6):419-20.

Protein nutrition as therapy for a genetic disorder of bone?

Martin TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)St. Vincent's Institute of Medical Research and Department of Medicine,
University of Melbourne, 41 Victoria Parade, Fitzroy, Victoria 3065, Australia.

Comment on
    Cell Metab. 2006 Dec;4(6):441-51.

Bone formation is controlled by a network of transcription factors and signaling 
molecules. In this issue, , studying the role of the transcription factor ATF4 in
a new mouse model of neurofibromatosis type I skeletal defects, demonstrate
striking effects of changing dietary protein on bone formation abnormalities.

PMID: 17141624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jan 19;352(3):722-7. Epub 2006 Nov 27.

ATF4 regulates gamma-secretase activity during amino acid imbalance.

Mitsuda T(1), Hayakawa Y, Itoh M, Ohta K, Nakagawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1
Yanagido, Gifu 501-1194, Japan.

Accumulation of amyloid-beta (Abeta), which is generated from amyloid precursor
protein by gamma-secretase, in cerebral cortex is common and critical incident in
Alzheimer disease. Specifically, presenilin is an essential for gamma-secretase
activity. However, the regulation of presenilin expression, affecting
gamma-secretase activity, remains obscure. We investigated mechanism controlling 
the expression of presenilin-1 (PS1) and gamma-secretase activity. We showed that
PS1 is induced by activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), regulated by GCN2
eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha (eIF2alpha) kinase. A chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis and an electrophoretic mobility shift assay
demonstrated that ATF4 binds to the regulatory region of human PS1 gene. Through 
knockdown analysis, we observed that the secretion of Abeta (1-42) and induction 
of gamma-secretase cofactors are controlled by ATF4. These data indicate that
ATF4 is critical for gamma-secretase activity, by which ATF4 mRNA is
preferentially translated in response to eIF2alpha phosphorylation.

PMID: 17141186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Curr Eye Res. 2006 Nov;31(11):947-53.

Induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress in retinal pericytes by glucose
deprivation.

Ikesugi K(1), Mulhern ML, Madson CJ, Hosoya K, Terasaki T, Kador PF, Shinohara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences, University of Nebraska Medical 
Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5840, USA.

Diabetic retinopathy is one of the major microvascular complications associated
with diabetes mellitus, and the selective degeneration of retinal capillary
pericytes is considered to be a hallmark of early retinopathy. Because glucose
fluctuations commonly occur in diabetes, we hypothesized that these fluctuations 
will increase the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and induce the unfolded
protein response (UPR) in retinal pericytes. To study whether ER stress and the
UPR can be induced in retinal pericytes, rat retinal capillary pericytes were
cultured in different concentrations of glucose. Hypoglycemia but not
hyperglycemia was found to activate UPR-specific enzymes in pericytes. Strong UPR
activation leading to apoptosis was also observed when pericytes were cultured in
glucose concentrations that were reduced from high to low or no glucose. These
results indicate that induction of UPR is related not only to absolute
concentrations but also to a shifting from higher to lower concentrations of
glucose.

PMID: 17114120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Cell Metab. 2006 Nov;4(5):391-406.

GLP-1 receptor activation improves beta cell function and survival following
induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Yusta B(1), Baggio LL, Estall JL, Koehler JA, Holland DP, Li H, Pipeleers D, Ling
Z, Drucker DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Banting and Best Diabetes Centre, Samuel Lunenfeld
Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2006 Nov;4(5):333-4.

Perturbation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis impairs insulin
biosynthesis, beta cell survival, and glucose homeostasis. We show that a murine 
model of diabetes is associated with the development of ER stress in beta cells
and that treatment with the GLP-1R agonist exendin-4 significantly reduced
biochemical markers of islet ER stress in vivo. Exendin-4 attenuated
translational downregulation of insulin and improved cell survival in purified
rat beta cells and in INS-1 cells following induction of ER stress in vitro.
GLP-1R agonists significantly potentiated the induction of ATF-4 by ER stress and
accelerated recovery from ER stress-mediated translational repression in INS-1
beta cells in a PKA-dependent manner. The effects of exendin-4 on the induction
of ATF-4 were mediated via enhancement of ER stress-stimulated ATF-4 translation.
Moreover, exendin-4 reduced ER stress-associated beta cell death in a
PKA-dependent manner. These findings demonstrate that GLP-1R signaling directly
modulates the ER stress response leading to promotion of beta cell adaptation and
survival.

PMID: 17084712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Cell Metab. 2006 Nov;4(5):333-4.

EXtENDINg beta cell survival by UPRegulating ATF4 translation.

Wek RC(1), Anthony TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Comment on
    Cell Metab. 2006 Nov;4(5):391-406.

In this issue of Cell Metabolism, Daniel Drucker and colleagues (Yusta et al.,
2006) explore how the incretin mimetic exendin-4 improves beta cell function and 
survival during ER stress. Their findings suggest that protein kinase A signaling
elicited by GLP-1 receptor activation differentially modulates one arm of the
unfolded protein response (UPR). Regulation of this UPR pathway leads to enhanced
translational expression of ATF4, a transcription factor central for stress
remedy and cell survival.

PMID: 17084705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Toxicology. 2006 Dec 7;228(2-3):299-309. Epub 2006 Sep 29.

Toxicoproteomic investigation of the molecular mechanisms of
cycloheximide-induced hepatocellular apoptosis in rat liver.

Kumagai K(1), Ando Y, Kiyosawa N, Ito K, Kawai R, Yamoto T, Manabe S, Teranishi
M.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Safety Research Labs., Sankyo Co., Ltd., 717 Horikoshi, Fukuroi,
Shizuoka 437-0065, Japan. kumawind@sankyo.co.jp <kumawind@sankyo.co.jp>

C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) is a transcriptional factor and is induced under 
conditions such as the unfolded protein response or amino acid starvation. A
previous study showed that the transcriptional level of CHOP was highly increased
in rat liver in which hepatocellular apoptosis was induced by cycloheximide (CHX)
treatment. Here, we investigated the relationship between hepatocellular
apoptosis and CHOP-mediated apoptotic pathway, and studied the mechanisms of
induction of CHOP gene in the liver of rats treated with CHX. Male F344 rats were
treated intravenously with 6mg/kg CHX, and sacrificed at 1, 2 and 6h after the
treatment. In the gene expression assay using quantitative RT-PCR, the genes
related to CHOP-mediated apoptosis such as the C/EBPbeta, ATF3 and ATF4 genes
were significantly increased corresponding to the induction of hepatocellular
apoptosis in rats treated with CHX. However the GRP78/Bip gene, which serves as a
representative marker for the unfolded protein response, did not change after the
treatment. Toxicoproteomics using two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis 
and mass spectrometry indicated that GRP78/Bip was inactivated by the CHX
treatment. Furthermore, the CHX-treated animals exhibited a significant decrease 
of phosphorylated Akt/PKB (protein kinase B). These results indicate that the
protein synthesis inhibition by CHX induces the CHOP gene through a pathway
similar to that of amino acid starvation, and that Akt/PKB inactivation enhances 
the CHOP-mediated hepatocellular apoptosis.

PMID: 17067731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Carcinogenesis. 2007 Mar;28(3):691-7. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

Cigarette smoke-induced differential gene expression in blood cells from
monozygotic twin pairs.

van Leeuwen DM(1), van Agen E, Gottschalk RW, Vlietinck R, Gielen M, van
Herwijnen MH, Maas LM, Kleinjans JC, van Delft JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Risk Analysis and Toxicology, Maastricht University, PO
Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Chemical carcinogenesis induced by lifestyle factors like cigarette smoking is a 
major research area in molecular epidemiology. Gene expression analysis of large 
numbers of genes simultaneously using microarrays holds the opportunity to study 
the effects of such an exposure at the genome level yielding more mechanism-based
information. Therefore, the aim of our study was to investigate multiple gene
expressions in blood, indicative for the effects caused by cigarette smoke.
Smoking-discordant monozygotic twin pairs (n=9) were studied to diminish
influences of genetic background. Using a dedicated microarray containing 600
toxicologically relevant genes, we investigated which genes are differentially
expressed in smokers compared to non-smokers. We also looked for genes of which
the expression changes correlated with DNA adducts, a biomarker of effective dose
for exposure to cigarette smoke carcinogens. The mean DNA adduct level in smokers
differed significantly from that in non-smokers (mean +/- standard error 1.96 +/-
0.24 versus 1.17 +/- 0.16 adducts per 10(8) nucleotides, respectively; P=0.04).
The genes of which the expression differed most significantly between smokers and
non-smokers are ATF4, MAPK14, SOD2, CYP1B1 and SERPINB2. CYP1B1 and SOD2 can
directly be linked to cigarette smoke exposure, whereas the other genes are
associated with stress or environmentally induced response. Main functions of the
genes influenced by cigarette smoking comprise carcinogen metabolism, oxidative
stress response and anti-apoptosis.

PMID: 17056606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Bone. 2007 Feb;40(2):305-15. Epub 2006 Oct 13.

Osteoclast inhibitory lectin (OCIL) inhibits osteoblast differentiation and
function in vitro.

Nakamura A(1), Ly C, Cipetic M, Sims NA, Vieusseux J, Kartsogiannis V, Bouralexis
S, Saleh H, Zhou H, Price JT, Martin TJ, Ng KW, Gillespie MT, Quinn JM.

Author information: 
(1)St. Vincent's Institute, 9, Princes Street, Fitzroy, Victoria, Australia.

Osteoclast inhibitory lectin (OCIL) is a type II C-type lectin and binds NK
cell-associated receptor Nkrp1d and sulfated glycosaminoglycans. OCIL is
expressed by several cell types found in bone and inhibits osteoclast
differentiation. To determine whether OCIL may have wider effects on bone
metabolism, we examined the effects of recombinant soluble OCIL on cultured
osteoblasts and pre-osteoblastic KUSA O cells. Although OCIL did not affect
osteoblast proliferation or apoptosis, or the formation of alkaline phosphatase
positive colonies in cultured bone marrow, OCIL profoundly inhibited
mineralization by primary osteoblasts and KUSA O cells in vitro. Analysis of
ascorbate-treated KUSA O cells showed that addition of OCIL reduced bone
sialoprotein (BSP), osterix and osteocalcin mRNA expression, as well as alkaline 
phosphatase activity while, in contrast, expression of markers associated with
the earlier stages of osteoblast maturation or the transcription factors Runx2,
ATF4 and c-fos were not affected by OCIL treatment. Indeed, osteocalcin
expression was strongly inhibited within 3 days in a dose-dependent manner,
although after subsequent removal of OCIL, osteocalcin mRNA levels recovered
within 4 days. OCIL treatment also reduced osteocalcin expression in BMP-2
stimulated C2C12 cells. In support of a role for OCIL in mineralization, OCIL
anti-sense oligonucleotide treatment of KUSA O cells increased mineralization and
osteocalcin expression. In addition, insulin-, dexamethasone- and IBMX-stimulated
KUSA O cells undergo adipocyte differentiation and OCIL treatment greatly
suppressed this process. Consistent with this, OCIL also reduced adiponectin and 
resistin mRNA expression in these cells. Our data indicate that OCIL reduces
osteoblastic function in vitro and this may be due to an inhibitory effect on
osteoblast maturation. In addition, the reduction of adipocyte formation in KUSA 
O cells by OCIL indicates that OCIL may have wider effects on the mesenchymal
lineage that may be important for both bone metabolism and other connective
tissue functions.

PMID: 17049328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Biochem J. 2007 Feb 15;402(1):163-73.

A feedback transcriptional mechanism controls the level of the arginine/lysine
transporter cat-1 during amino acid starvation.

Lopez AB(1), Wang C, Huang CC, Yaman I, Li Y, Chakravarty K, Johnson PF, Chiang
CM, Snider MD, Wek RC, Hatzoglou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH 44106-4906, USA.

The adaptive response to amino acid limitation in mammalian cells inhibits global
protein synthesis and promotes the expression of proteins that protect cells from
stress. The arginine/lysine transporter, cat-1, is induced during amino acid
starvation by transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms. It is shown in
the present study that the transient induction of cat-1 transcription is
regulated by the stress response pathway that involves phosphorylation of the
translation initiation factor, eIF2 (eukaryotic initiation factor-2). This
phosphorylation induces expression of the bZIP (basic leucine zipper protein)
transcription factors C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein)-beta and ATF
(activating transcription factor) 4, which in turn induces ATF3. Transfection
experiments in control and mutant cells, and chromatin immunoprecipitations
showed that ATF4 activates, whereas ATF3 represses cat-1 transcription, via an
AARE (amino acid response element), TGATGAAAC, in the first exon of the cat-1
gene, which functions both in the endogenous and in a heterologous promoter. ATF4
and C/EBPbeta activated transcription when expressed in transfected cells and
they bound as heterodimers to the AARE in vitro. The induction of transcription
by ATF4 was inhibited by ATF3, which also bound to the AARE as a heterodimer with
C/EBPbeta. These results suggest that the transient increase in cat-1
transcription is due to transcriptional activation caused by ATF4 followed by
transcriptional repression by ATF3 via a feedback mechanism.

PMCID: PMC1783987
PMID: 17042743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Biochem J. 2007 Jan 1;401(1):299-307.

Activation of the ATF3 gene through a co-ordinated amino acid-sensing response
programme that controls transcriptional regulation of responsive genes following 
amino acid limitation.

Pan YX(1), Chen H, Thiaville MM, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, Shands
Cancer Center and Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College 
of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

Expression of ATF3 (activating transcription factor 3) is induced by a variety of
environmental stress conditions, including nutrient limitation. In the present
study, we demonstrate that the increase in ATF3 mRNA content following amino acid
limitation of human HepG2 hepatoma cells is dependent on transcriptional
activation of the ATF3 gene, through a highly co-ordinated amino acid-responsive 
programme of transcription factor synthesis and action. Studies using transient
over-expression and knockout fibroblasts showed that several ATF and C/EBP
(CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein) family members contribute to ATF3 regulation.
Promoter analysis showed that a C/EBP-ATF composite site at -23 to -15 bp
relative to the transcription start site of the ATF3 gene functions as an AARE
(amino acid response element). Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated that
amino acid limitation increased ATF4, ATF3, and C/EBPbeta binding to the ATF3
promoter, but the kinetics of each was markedly different. Immediately following 
histidine removal, there was a rapid increase in histone H3 acetylation prior to 
an enhancement in ATF4 binding and in histone H4 acetylation. These latter
changes closely paralleled the initial increase in RNA pol II (RNA polymerase II)
binding to the promoter and in the transcription rate from the ATF3 gene. The
increase in ATF3 and C/EBPbeta binding was considerably slower and more closely
correlated with a decline in transcription rate. A comparison of the recruitment 
patterns between ATF and C/EBP transcription factors and RNA polymerase II at the
AARE of several amino acid-responsive genes revealed that a highly co-ordinated
response programme controls the transcriptional activation of these genes
following amino acid limitation.

PMCID: PMC1698690
PMID: 16989641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 Sep;47(9):3951-9.

The unfolded protein response in lens epithelial cells from galactosemic rat
lenses.

Mulhern ML(1), Madson CJ, Danford A, Ikesugi K, Kador PF, Shinohara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Nebraska,
Omaha, NE 68198-5840, USA.

PURPOSE: Diabetic complications are associated with hypoglycemia and
hyperglycemia. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of both
glucose deprivation and hyperglycemia on the induction of endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress and the subsequent activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) 
that results in apoptosis in in vitro cultured lens epithelial cells (LECs) and
in vivo cataract formation in galactose-fed rats.
METHODS: Lenses from rats fed a standard diet containing 50% galactose with or
without an aldose reductase inhibitor (ARI) were investigated. Transformed human 
LECs were cultured in standard 10% FCS-DMEM containing various concentrations of 
sugar. UPR-specific proteins from both the rat lenses and lens cultures were
quantified by protein blot analysis. Cell death was evaluated with TUNEL staining
and ethidium homodimer-1 (EthD) dyes. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) were
quantified with H2-DCF, and free glutathione (GSH) levels were measured with a
commercial GSH quantification kit.
RESULTS: Increased apoptosis of the LECs was observed in the lenses of rats fed
the galactose diet for 5 to 9 days, and nuclear cataracts subsequently developed 
in these lenses after 13 to 15 days. Protein blot analysis of the LECs from these
galactose-fed rats showed higher levels of the UPR-specific proteins Bip/GRP78,
ATF4, and CHOP. These LECs also demonstrated activation of the UPR-specific
procaspase-12 and the increased presence of ROS, whereas GSH was reduced. Because
these results indicate that the UPR is activated in LECs along with the
production of ROS and apoptosis during cataract formation in the galactose-fed
rats, subsequent studies were conducted to determine the role of nonenzymatic
glycation, osmotic stress, and oxidative stress on these biochemical processes.
In vitro cultures of human LECs showed that the UPR was induced by osmotic and
oxidative stress, but not by glycation. In addition, the UPR and apoptosis in
LECs was induced by glucose deprivation. The ARI blocked the induction of the
UPR, cell death, and cataract formation.
CONCLUSIONS: The UPR that is induced by abnormally high or low concentrations of 
sugar is linked to the production of ROS, increased apoptosis in LECs, and
cataract formation. The inhibition of the UPR induction by ARI suggests that
osmotic stress may be the primary inducer of the UPR. Modulation of the UPR
pathways may offer novel methods for the development of therapeutic tools to
delay cataracts.

PMID: 16936110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006 Nov;26(11):2490-6. Epub 2006 Aug 24.

The unfolded protein response is an important regulator of inflammatory genes in 
endothelial cells.

Gargalovic PS(1), Gharavi NM, Clark MJ, Pagnon J, Yang WP, He A, Truong A,
Baruch-Oren T, Berliner JA, Kirchgessner TG, Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)UCLA Department of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1679, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Oxidized 1-palmitoyl-2-arachidonyl-sn-3-glycero-phosphorylcholine
(oxPAPC) accumulates in atherosclerotic lesions and in vitro studies suggest that
it mediates chronic inflammatory response in endothelial cells (ECs). The goal of
our studies was to identify pathways mediating the induction of inflammatory
genes by oxPAPC.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using expression arrays, quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (PCR), and immunoblotting we demonstrate that oxPAPC leads to
endoplasmic reticulum stress and activation of the unfolded protein response
(UPR) in human aortic ECs. Immunohistochemistry analysis of human atherosclerotic
lesions indicated that UPR is induced in areas containing oxidized phospholipids.
Using the UPR inducing agent tunicamycin and selective siRNA targeting of the
ATF4 and XBP1 branches of the UPR, we demonstrate that these transcription
factors are essential mediators of IL8, IL6, and MCP1 expression in human aortic 
ECs required for maximal inflammatory gene expression in the basal state and
after oxPAPC treatment. We also identify a novel oxPAPC-induced chemokine, the
CXC motif ligand 3 (CXCL3), and show that its expression requires XBP1.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the UPR pathway is a general mediator of
vascular inflammation and EC dysfunction in atherosclerosis, and, likely, other
inflammatory disorders.

PMID: 16931790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Virol. 2006 Sep;80(17):8613-26.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress and neurodegeneration in rats neonatally infected
with borna disease virus.

Williams BL(1), Lipkin WI.

Author information: 
(1)Jerome L. and Dawn Greene Infectious Disease Laboratory, Mailman School of
Public Health, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA. wil2001@columbia.edu

Borna disease virus infection of neonatal rats results in a characteristic
behavioral syndrome and apoptosis of subsets of neurons in the hippocampus and
cerebellum (neonatal Borna disease [NBD]). The cellular mechanisms leading to
neurodevelopmental damage in NBD have not been fully elucidated. Insights into
this model may have general implications for understanding the pathogenesis of
virus-associated neurodevelopmental damage. Here we report the presence of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress markers and activation of the unfolded protein 
response in the NBD hippocampus and cerebellum. Specific findings included
enhanced PERK-mediated phosphorylation of eif2alpha and concomitant regulation of
ATF4 translation; IRE1-mediated splicing of XBP1 mRNA; and cleavage of the ATF6
protein in NBD rat brains. We found evidence for regional and cell type-specific 
divergence in the expression of ER stress-induced proapoptotic and quality
control signals. Our results demonstrate that ER stress induction in
death-susceptible Purkinje neurons in NBD is associated with the expression of
the proapoptotic molecule CHOP in the absence of compensatory expression of the
ER quality control molecules Bip and protein disulfide isomerase. In contrast, ER
stress in death-resistant astrocytes is associated with complementary expression 
of CHOP and ER quality control signals. These results implicate an imbalance
between ER stress-mediated apoptosis and survival signaling as a critical
determinant of neural cell fate in NBD.

PMCID: PMC1563873
PMID: 16912310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Aug 22;103(34):12741-6. Epub 2006 Aug 15.

Identification of inflammatory gene modules based on variations of human
endothelial cell responses to oxidized lipids.

Gargalovic PS(1), Imura M, Zhang B, Gharavi NM, Clark MJ, Pagnon J, Yang WP, He
A, Truong A, Patel S, Nelson SF, Horvath S, Berliner JA, Kirchgessner TG, Lusis
AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 
pgargalo@ucla.edu

Oxidized phospholipids are thought to promote atherogenesis by stimulating
endothelial cells (ECs) to produce inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-8. In
studies with mouse models, we previously demonstrated that genetic variation in
inflammatory responses of endothelial cells to oxidized lipids contributes
importantly to atherosclerosis susceptibility. We now show that similar
variations occur in cultured aortic ECs derived from multiple heart transplant
donors. These variations were stably maintained between passages and, thus,
reflect either genetic or epigenetic regulatory differences. Expression array
analysis of aortic EC cultures derived from 12 individuals revealed that >1,000
genes were regulated by oxidized phospholipids. We have used the observed
variations in the sampled population to construct a gene coexpression network
comprised of 15 modules of highly connected genes. We show that several
identified modules are significantly enriched in genes for known pathways and
confirm a module enriched for unfolded protein response (UPR) genes using siRNA
and the UPR inducer tunicamycin. On the basis of the constructed network, we
predicted that a gene of unknown function (MGC4504) present in the UPR module is 
a target for UPR transcriptional activator ATF4. Our data also indicate that IL-8
is present in the UPR module and is regulated, in part, by the UPR. We validate
these by using siRNA. In conclusion, we show that interindividual variability can
be used to group genes into pathways and predict gene-gene regulatory
relationships, thus identifying targets potentially involved in susceptibility to
common diseases such as atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC1568918
PMID: 16912112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2006 Jul-Aug;8(7-8):1263-72.

Radiation-induced changes in gene-expression profiles for the SCC VII tumor cells
grown in vitro and in vivo.

Cook JA(1), Chuang EY, Tsai MH, Coffin D, Degraff W, Sowers AL, Mitchell JB.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Biology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. cook@helix.nih.gov

SCCVII tumor cells that grow in vitro or in vivo as a solid tumor were used to
compare and contrast geneexpression profiles with or without exposure to two
doses of ionizing radiation. Exponentially growing SCCVII cell cultures and
tumors (1 cm diameter) were treated with 0, 2, or 10 Gy, and RNA was collected 1,
3, 6, 12, and 24 h after treatment. Growth under in vitro conditions increased
the expression of genes associated with the unfolded protein response (UPR)
including ATF4, Ero-1 like, and cystathionase. Growth in vivo indicated that the 
HIF-1a genes were not upregulated, whereas genes such as hemoglobin alpha and
crystallin alpha B were significantly upregulated. Ninety genes of 16K were found
to be significantly modulated under either growth condition by radiation
treatment. Gene expression was not dose dependent. Sixty percent of these genes
exhibited similar modulation under both in vitro and in vivo conditions; however,
29% of the genes were modulated by radiation under in vivo conditions only.
Gene-expression profiles for the same tumor cells can differ, dependent on growth
conditions, underscoring the influence that the tumor microenvironment exerts on 
gene expression for both growth of solid tumors and their response to radiation
treatment.

PMID: 16910774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Jul;5(7):723-8. Epub 2006 Jul 1.

The PERK/eIF2alpha/ATF4 module of the UPR in hypoxia resistance and tumor growth.

Fels DR(1), Koumenis C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Radiation Oncology, Cancer Biology and Neurosurgery,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, USA.

Hypoxia is a dynamic feature of the tumor microenvironment that contributes to
cancer progression. In order to adapt and overcome hypoxic stress, tumor cells
activate survival pathways that attempt to couple metabolic processes to reduced 
energy availability due to oxygen deprivation. While the hypoxia-inducible
factors HIF-1 and HIF-2 are critical to the cellular response to hypoxia,
HIF-independent processes are known to contribute to this adaptation. Recent
evidence demonstrates that hypoxia activates components of the Unfolded Protein
Response (UPR), a coordinated program that regulates cellular adaptation to
increased levels of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Here we 
review the evidence implicating the ER kinase PERK, its downstream target
translation initiation factor eIF2alpha, and the subsequent translational
upregulation of the transcription factor ATF4 in this response. Not only are
cells with compromised PERK-eIF2alpha-ATF4 signaling more sensitive to hypoxic
stress in vitro but they also form tumors that grow slower in vivo with smaller
hypoxic areas, indicating that the PERK-eIF2alpha-ATF4 pathway confers a survival
advantage for tumor cells under hypoxia. These results, together with evidence
for an involvement of other UPR pathways and ER stress proteins in hypoxia
tolerance and tumor maintenance, point to a central role for UPR activation in
tumor progression and suggest that this response may offer an attractive target
for new anti-tumor modalities.

PMID: 16861899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Virology. 2006 Sep 15;353(1):1-5. Epub 2006 Jul 24.

Adenovirus-induced alterations in host cell gene expression prior to the onset of
viral gene expression.

Granberg F(1), Svensson C, Pettersson U, Zhao H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

In this report, we have studied gene expression profiles in human primary lung
fibroblasts (IMR-90) during the very early phase of an adenovirus infection.
Eight out of twelve genes with known functions encoded transcription factors
linked to two major cellular processes; inhibition of cell growth (ATF3, ATF4,
KLF4, KLF6 and ELK3) and immune response (NR4A1 and CEBPB), indicating that the
earliest consequences of an adenovirus infection are growth arrest and induction 
of an immune response. A time course analysis showed that the induction of these 
immediate-early response genes was transient and suppressed after the onset of
the adenovirus early gene expression.

PMID: 16860366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Br J Haematol. 2006 Jul;134(2):145-56.

Gene expression analysis of B-lymphoma cells resistant and sensitive to
bortezomib.

Shringarpure R(1), Catley L, Bhole D, Burger R, Podar K, Tai YT, Kessler B,
Galardy P, Ploegh H, Tassone P, Hideshima T, Mitsiades C, Munshi NC, Chauhan D,
Anderson KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib has shown impressive clinical activity alone 
and in combination with conventional and other novel agents for the treatment of 
multiple myeloma (MM). Although bortezomib is known to be a selective proteasome 
inhibitor, the downstream mechanisms of cytotoxicity and drug resistance are
poorly understood. However, resistance to bortezomib as a single agent develops
in the majority of patients, and activity in other malignancies has been less
impressive. To elucidate mechanisms of bortezomib resistance, we compared
differential gene expression profiles of bortezomib-resistant SUDHL-4 and
bortezomib-sensitive SUDHL-6 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma lines in response to
bortezomib. At concentrations that effectively inhibited proteasome activity,
bortezomib induced apoptosis in SUDHL-6 cells, but not in SUDHL-4 cells. We
showed that overexpression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), ATF4,
ATF5, c-Jun, JunD and caspase-3 is associated with sensitivity to
bortezomib-induced apoptosis, whereas overexpression of heat shock protein
(HSP)27, HSP70, HSP90 and T-cell factor 4 is associated with bortezomib
resistance.

PMID: 16846475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 8;281(36):26633-44. Epub 2006 Jul 11.

Nck in a complex containing the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase 1
regulates eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha signaling and cell survival to
endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Latreille M(1), Larose L.

Author information: 
(1)Polypeptide Hormone Laboratory, Department of Medicine, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B2, Canada.

Stress imposed on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) induces the phosphorylation of
the alpha-subunit of the eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2) on Ser51. This
results in transient inhibition of general translation initiation while
concomitantly activating a signaling pathway that promotes the expression of
genes whose products improve ER function. Conversely, dephosphorylation of
eIF2alphaSer51 is accomplished by protein phosphatase 1 (PP1c) complexes
containing either the protein CReP or GADD34, which target PP1c to eIF2. Here, we
demonstrate that the Src homology (SH) domain-containing adaptor Nck is a key
component of a molecular complex that controls eIF2alpha phosphorylation and
signaling in response to ER stress. We show that overexpression of Nck decreases 
basal and ER stress-induced eIF2alpha phosphorylation and the attendant induction
of ATF4 and CHOP. In contrast, we demonstrate that the mouse embryonic
fibroblasts lacking both isoforms of Nck (Nck1-/-Nck2-/-) show higher levels of
eIF2alpha phosphorylation and premature induction of ATF4, CHOP, and GADD34 in
response to ER stress and finally, are more resistant to cell death induced by
prolonged ER stress conditions. We establish that a significant amount of Nck
protein localizes at the ER and is in a complex with eIF2 subunits. Further
analysis of this complex revealed that it also contains the Ser/Thr phosphatase
PP1c, its regulatory subunit CReP, and dephosphorylates eIF2alpha on Ser51 in
vitro. Overall, we demonstrate that Nck as a component of the CReP/PP1c
holophosphatase complex contributes to maintain eIF2alpha in a hypophosphorylated
state. In this manner, Nck modulates translation and eIF2alpha signaling in
response to ER stress.

PMID: 16835242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Apr;1068:131-42.

Inhibition of ATF4 transcriptional activity by FIAT/gamma-taxilin modulates bone 
mass accrual.

Yu VW(1), Gauthier C, St-Arnaud R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children, 1529 Cedar Avenue, Montreal
(Quebec), Canada H3G 1A6.

The basic domain-leucine zipper protein, activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4), was recently shown to control key aspects of osteoblast biology. ATF4
regulates the timely onset of osteoblast differentiation, the synthesis of type I
collagen, and the transcription of the osteocalcin and RANKL (receptor activator 
of NFkappa-B ligand) genes. Accordingly, the levels and activity of ATF4 are
under tight control through mechanisms that include protein stability and
phosphorylation. We have uncovered yet another mode of inhibition of ATF4 through
its interaction with the leucine zipper protein FIAT (Factor Inhibiting
ATF4-mediated Transcription, also described as gamma-taxilin). FIAT/gamma-taxilin
localizes to the nucleus in osteoblasts and dimerizes with ATF4 to form inactive 
dimers, because it does not contain a DNA-binding basic domain moiety. The
interaction of FIAT/gamma-taxilin with ATF4 thus inhibits ATF4-mediated
transcription. Transgenic mice overexpressing FIAT/gamma-taxilin show osteopenia 
and reduced expression of the ATF4 target gene, osteocalcin. Interestingly,
FIAT/gamma-taxilin also interacts with the transcriptional co-activator alphaNAC 
(Nascent polypeptide associated complex And Coactivator alpha), suggesting
alternative, non-mutually exclusive mechanisms contributing to the inhibition of 
ATF4-dependent osteocalcin gene transcription by FIAT/gamma-taxilin.

PMID: 16831913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Virol. 2006 Jul;80(14):7052-9.

TORC1 and TORC2 coactivators are required for tax activation of the human T-cell 
leukemia virus type 1 long terminal repeats.

Siu YT(1), Chin KT, Siu KL, Yee Wai Choy E, Jeang KT, Jin DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, 3/F Laboratory Block,
Faculty of Medicine Building, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) Tax protein activates viral
transcription from the long terminal repeats (LTR). Mechanisms through which Tax 
activates LTR have been established, but coactivators of this process remain to
be identified and characterized. Here we show that all three members of the TORC 
family of transcriptional regulators are coactivators of Tax for LTR-driven
expression. TORC coactivation requires CREB, but not ATF4 or other bZIP factors. 
Tax physically interacts with TORC1, TORC2, and TORC3 (TORC1/2/3), and the
depletion of TORC1/2/3 inhibited Tax activity. TORC coactivation can be further
enhanced by transcriptional coactivator p300. In addition, coactivators in the
p300 family are required for full activity of Tax independently of TORC1/2/3.
Thus, both TORC and p300 families of coactivators are essential for optimal
activation of HTLV-1 transcription by Tax.

PMCID: PMC1489057
PMID: 16809310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Dec 1;99(5):1233-9.

Regulation of osteoblast differentiation by transcription factors.

Komori T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Reconstructive Medicine, Division of Cell
Biology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-7-1
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8588, Japan. komorit@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Runx2, osterix, and beta-catenin are essential for osteoblast differentiation.
Runx2 directs multipotent mesenchymal cells to an osteoblastic lineage, and
inhibits them from differentiating into the adipocytic and chondrocytic lineages.
After differentiating to preosteoblasts, beta-catenin, osterix, and Runx2 direct 
them to immature osteoblasts, which produce bone matrix proteins, blocking their 
potential to differentiate into the chondrocytic lineage. Runx2 inhibits
osteoblast maturation and the transition into osteocytes, keeping osteoblasts in 
an immature stage. Other transcription factors including Msx1, Msx2, Dlx5, Dlx6, 
Twist, AP1(Fos/Jun), Knox-20, Sp3, and ATF4 are also involved in osteoblast
differentiation. To gain an understanding of bone development, it is important to
position these transcription factors to the right places in the processes of
osteoblast differentiation.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16795049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Cell Biochem. 2006 Nov;292(1-2):89-98. Epub 2006 Jun 20.

Up-regulation of the endoplasmic reticulum molecular chaperone GRP78 during
hibernation in thirteen-lined ground squirrels.

Mamady H(1), Storey KB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Department of Biology, College of Natural
Sciences, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1S
5B6.

Hibernating mammals endure conditions of low body temperature and oxidative
stress that would be highly injurious to humans and most other mammals. Stress
conditions frequently trigger the production of molecular chaperones; in the
endoplasmic reticulum the glucose-regulated protein-78 (GRP78) helps to minimize 
protein misfolding under stress. The present study evaluated the GRP78 response
in seven organs of hibernating thirteen-lined ground squirrels, Spermophilus
tridecemlineatus. Transcript levels of grp78, assessed by RT-PCR, were
significantly higher (3.5- to 4.1-fold) in brown adipose tissue and brain of
hibernating squirrels compared with euthermic control animals but remained low or
stable in all other tissues. GRP78 protein content, assessed by Western blotting,
was also elevated in brown adipose and brain during hibernation by 1.4-1.6 fold. 
A 2490 bp cDNA sequence was retrieved that contained the full length open reading
frame of ground squirrel grp78 and the translated protein sequence of 654 amino
acids shared 98-99% identity with GRP78 from other mammalian sources. Selected
specific amino acid substitutions were found in the ground squirrel sequence that
may aid GRP78 function under the near 0 degrees C body temperatures of the
hibernating state. Electrophoretic mobility shift and supershift assays showed
that the activating transcription factor, ATF4, binds to the promoter region of
the grp78 gene in ground squirrel brain and may be responsible for grp78
up-regulation during hibernation. Changes in grp78 gene and protein expression
appear to aid stress tolerance in two highly oxygen-dependent organs that are
critical to whole animal survival during hibernation.

PMID: 16788740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Biol Chem. 2006 Aug 25;281(34):24623-36. Epub 2006 Jun 20.

Transcription of human zinc finger ZNF268 gene requires an intragenic promoter
element.

Guo MX(1), Wang D, Shao HJ, Qiu HL, Xue L, Zhao ZZ, Zhu CG, Shi YB, Li WX.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan 430072, China.

Human ZNF268 gene is a typical Krüppel-associated box/C2H2 zinc finger gene whose
homolog has been found only in higher mammals and not in lower mammals such as
mouse. Its expression profiles have suggested that it plays a role in the
differentiation of blood cells during early human embryonic development and the
pathogenesis of leukemia. To gain additional insight into the molecular
mechanisms controlling the expression of the ZNF268 gene and to provide the
necessary tools for further genetic studies of leukemia, we have mapped the
5'-end of the human ZNF268 mRNA by reverse transcription-PCR and primer extension
assays. We then cloned the 5'-flanking genomic DNA containing the putative ZNF268
gene promoter and analyzed its function in several different human and mouse
tissue culture cell lines. Interestingly, our studies show that the ZNF268 gene
lacks a typical eukaryotic promoter that is present upstream of the transcription
start site and directs a basal level of transcription. Instead, the functional
promoter requires an essential element that is located within the first exon of
the gene. Deletion and mutational analysis reveals the requirement for a cAMP
response-element-binding protein (CREB)-binding site within this element for
promoter function. Gel mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
confirm that CREB-2 binds to the site in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore,
overexpression of CREB-2 enhances the promoter activity. These results
demonstrate that the human ZNF268 gene promoter is atypical and requires an
intragenic element located within the first exon that mediates the effect of CREB
for its activity.

PMID: 16787922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Environ Health Perspect. 2006 Jun;114(6):859-64.

Cadmium induces the expression of Grp78, an endoplasmic reticulum molecular
chaperone, in LLC-PK1 renal epithelial cells.

Liu F(1), Inageda K, Nishitai G, Matsuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene and Public Health I, School of Medicine, Tokyo Women's
Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

To reveal the effects of cadmium exposure on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress response, we examined the expression and function of 78-kDa
glucose-regulated protein (Grp78) , an ER-resident molecular chaperone, in
LLC-PK1 cells. In cells treated with 10 microM cadmium chloride, Grp78 protein
levels increased after 6 hr and remained elevated at 24 hr. When cells were
incubated with 1-20 microM CdCl2 for 6 hr, Grp78 increased in a dose-dependent
manner. In addition, Grp78 mRNA levels were elevated in response to CdCl2
exposure. After exposure to 10 microM CdCl2, the levels of activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) were increased at 2 hr, with a further enhancement 
after that ; this accumulation followed the transient but marked phosphorylation 
of the alpha subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2(alpha)) 
on serine 51. Although ATF4 mRNA levels increased mildly by CdCl2 exposure,
treatment with actinomycin D did not suppress CdCl2-induced accumulation of ATF4 
protein, suggesting the involvement of posttranscriptional and, in part,
transcriptional mechanisms. Compared with other heavy-metal compounds such as
manganese chloride, zinc chloride, mercuric chloride, and lead chloride, CdCl2
could increase the levels of Grp78, ATF4, and the phosphorylated form of
eIF2(alpha) more markedly without definite cellular damage. The silencing of
Grp78 expression using short-interference RNA enhanced CdCl2-induced cellular
damage. These results show that cadmium induces the expression of Grp78 probably 
via phosphorylation of eIF2(alpha) and resultant translation of ATF4, and this ER
stress response plays a role in protection against cadmium cytotoxicity in this
renal epithelial cell.

PMCID: PMC1480533
PMID: 16759985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cell. 2006 Jun 2;125(5):971-86.

SATB2 is a multifunctional determinant of craniofacial patterning and osteoblast 
differentiation.

Dobreva G(1), Chahrour M, Dautzenberg M, Chirivella L, Kanzler B, Fariñas I,
Karsenty G, Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Immunology, 79108 Freiburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Cell. 2006 Jun 2;125(5):840-2.

Vertebrate skeletogenesis involves two processes, skeletal patterning and
osteoblast differentiation. Here, we show that Satb2, encoding a nuclear matrix
protein, is expressed in branchial arches and in cells of the osteoblast lineage.
Satb2-/- mice exhibit both craniofacial abnormalities that resemble those
observed in humans carrying a translocation in SATB2 and defects in osteoblast
differentiation and function. Multiple osteoblast-specific genes were identified 
as targets positively regulated by SATB2. In addition, SATB2 was found to repress
the expression of several Hox genes including Hoxa2, an inhibitor of bone
formation and regulator of branchial arch patterning. Molecular analysis revealed
that SATB2 directly interacts with and enhances the activity of both Runx2 and
ATF4, transcription factors that regulate osteoblast differentiation. This
synergy was genetically confirmed by bone formation defects in Satb2/Runx2 and
Satb2/Atf4 double heterozygous mice. Thus, SATB2 acts as a molecular node in a
transcriptional network regulating skeletal development and osteoblast
differentiation.

PMID: 16751105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 14;281(28):19124-33. Epub 2006 May 10.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress induction of insulin-like growth factor-binding
protein-1 involves ATF4.

Marchand A(1), Tomkiewicz C, Magne L, Barouki R, Garlatti M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR-S 747, Université Paris-Descartes, 45 Rue des Saints-Pères, 75270
Paris, France.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is sensed by cells in different
physiopathological conditions in which there is an accumulation of unfolded
proteins in the ER. A coordinated adaptive program called the unfolded protein
response is triggered and includes translation inhibition, transcriptional
activation of a set of genes encoding mostly intracellular proteins, and
ultimately apoptosis. Here we show that insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-binding 
protein-1 (IGFBP-1), a secreted protein that modulates IGF bioavailability and
has other IGF-independent effects, is potently induced during ER stress in human 
hepatocytes. Various ER stress-inducing agents were able to increase IGFBP-1 mRNA
levels, as well as cellular and secreted IGFBP-1 protein up to 20-fold. A distal 
regulatory region of the human IGFBP-1 gene (-6682/-6384) containing an
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) composite site was required for promoter
activation upon ER stress. Mutation of the ATF4 composite site led to the loss of
IGFBP-1 regulation. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay revealed an ER
stress-inducible complex that was displaced by an ATF4 antibody. Knockdown of
ATF4 expression using two specific small interfering RNAs impaired up-regulation 
of IGFBP-1 mRNA, which highlights the relevance of ATF4 in endogenous IGFBP-1
gene induction. In addition to intracellular proteins involved in secretory and
metabolic pathways, we conclude that ER stress induces the synthesis of secreted 
proteins. Increased secretion of IGFBP-1 during hepatic ER stress may thus
constitute a signal to modulate cell growth and metabolism and induce a systemic 
adaptive response.

PMID: 16687408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Brain Res. 2006 May 4;1087(1):60-6. Epub 2006 May 8.

Prolonged bihemispheric alterations in unfolded protein response related gene
expression after experimental stroke.

Rissanen A(1), Sivenius J, Jolkkonen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, University of Kuopio, Kuopio,
Finland. rissanen@mun.ca

After ischemia, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress pathways are activated that
include unfolded protein response (UPR) and protein synthesis inhibition (PSI).
Both of these mechanisms aim to restore ER functioning mainly by inhibition of
translation and increased processing of excess proteins in ER. We were interested
in the role of these pathways during spontaneous recovery after transient middle 
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) in rats. The spontaneous recovery of rats was
assessed with a limb-placing test. The expression of ER-stress-related genes
(IRE1, ATF6, GRP78, eif2alpha, ATF4, PERK) was studied by using in situ
hybridization in different brain areas on post-operative days 2, 7, 14 and 28.
Elevated signals were detected in striatum contralateral to the lesion on days 2 
(PERK and IRE1) and 14 post-ischemia (IRE1). Gene expression was elevated on day 
7 in the striatum ipsilateral to the lesion (ATF6 and GRP78) and on day 14
(GRP78) post-ischemia. Furthermore, elevated levels of GRP78 were detected on day
14 after ischemia in the ipsilateral sensorimotor cortex. These results suggest
that altered gene expression related to unfolded protein response may be more
long lasting than expected following focal cerebral ischemia. In addition, these 
results show that the response to ER stress differs ipsi- and contralaterally
after MCAO in rats. Since these differences are detected in both hemispheres only
in areas adjacent to the lesion, UPR may contribute to spontaneous recovery after
MCAO in rats.

PMID: 16684512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Nat Genet. 2006 Jun;38(6):674-81. Epub 2006 May 7.

The centrosomal protein nephrocystin-6 is mutated in Joubert syndrome and
activates transcription factor ATF4.

Sayer JA(1), Otto EA, O'Toole JF, Nurnberg G, Kennedy MA, Becker C, Hennies HC,
Helou J, Attanasio M, Fausett BV, Utsch B, Khanna H, Liu Y, Drummond I, Kawakami 
I, Kusakabe T, Tsuda M, Ma L, Lee H, Larson RG, Allen SJ, Wilkinson CJ, Nigg EA, 
Shou C, Lillo C, Williams DS, Hoppe B, Kemper MJ, Neuhaus T, Parisi MA, Glass IA,
Petry M, Kispert A, Gloy J, Ganner A, Walz G, Zhu X, Goldman D, Nurnberg P,
Swaroop A, Leroux MR, Hildebrandt F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109,
USA.

The molecular basis of nephronophthisis, the most frequent genetic cause of renal
failure in children and young adults, and its association with retinal
degeneration and cerebellar vermis aplasia in Joubert syndrome are poorly
understood. Using positional cloning, we here identify mutations in the gene
CEP290 as causing nephronophthisis. It encodes a protein with several domains
also present in CENPF, a protein involved in chromosome segregation. CEP290 (also
known as NPHP6) interacts with and modulates the activity of ATF4, a
transcription factor implicated in cAMP-dependent renal cyst formation. NPHP6 is 
found at centrosomes and in the nucleus of renal epithelial cells in a cell
cycle-dependent manner and in connecting cilia of photoreceptors. Abrogation of
its function in zebrafish recapitulates the renal, retinal and cerebellar
phenotypes of Joubert syndrome. Our findings help establish the link between
centrosome function, tissue architecture and transcriptional control in the
pathogenesis of cystic kidney disease, retinal degeneration, and central nervous 
system development.

PMID: 16682973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Exp Eye Res. 2006 Sep;83(3):508-16. Epub 2006 Apr 27.

Role of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in cataract formation.

Ikesugi K(1), Yamamoto R, Mulhern ML, Shinohara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, 985840 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5840, USA.

Cataract is a multifactorial disease, and a large variety of stressors induce
cataracts. Many cataractogenic stressors and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stressors
induce the unfolded protein response (UPR) in various cell types. The UPR is
known to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) prior to the inducement of
apoptosis. We investigated whether ER stressors induce the UPR in lens epithelial
cells (LECs) or whole rat lenses. Our results showed that higher levels of ER
stressors activated Bip/GRP78, ATF4, and caspase-12. In addition, ROS were
produced, free glutathione was decreased, and apoptosis was induced. LECs in the 
mitotic zone were the most susceptible to the UPR while the central LECs were the
most resistant. The UPR induced the production of ROS in the ER and probably in
the mitochondria. The detectable ROS production in cultured lenses is limited to 
the epithelial cells. These findings indicate that ER stressors induce the UPR in
LECs with and without the induction of apoptosis, and we conclude that the UPR is
probably one of the initiating factors of many types of cataracts.

PMID: 16643900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cancer Cell. 2006 Apr;9(4):301-12.

The stress-regulated protein p8 mediates cannabinoid-induced apoptosis of tumor
cells.

Carracedo A(1), Lorente M, Egia A, Blázquez C, García S, Giroux V, Malicet C,
Villuendas R, Gironella M, González-Feria L, Piris MA, Iovanna JL, Guzmán M,
Velasco G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology I, School of Biology,
Complutense University, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

One of the most exciting areas of current research in the cannabinoid field is
the study of the potential application of these compounds as antitumoral drugs.
Here, we describe the signaling pathway that mediates cannabinoid-induced
apoptosis of tumor cells. By using a wide array of experimental approaches, we
identify the stress-regulated protein p8 (also designated as candidate of
metastasis 1) as an essential mediator of cannabinoid antitumoral action and show
that p8 upregulation is dependent on de novo-synthesized ceramide. We also
observe that p8 mediates its apoptotic effect via upregulation of the endoplasmic
reticulum stress-related genes ATF-4, CHOP, and TRB3. Activation of this pathway 
may constitute a potential therapeutic strategy for inhibiting tumor growth.

PMID: 16616335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Endocrinology. 2006 Jul;147(7):3398-407. Epub 2006 Apr 6.

Chronic palmitate but not oleate exposure induces endoplasmic reticulum stress,
which may contribute to INS-1 pancreatic beta-cell apoptosis.

Karaskov E(1), Scott C, Zhang L, Teodoro T, Ravazzola M, Volchuk A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Toronto General Research Institute,
University Health Network, 200 Elizabeth Street, MBRC 4R402 Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M5G 2C4.

Chronic free fatty acid (FFA) exposure induces pancreatic beta-cell death, which 
may contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes. The mechanisms involved in 
FFA-induced cell death are not completely understood. Here we have investigated
the effect of FFA on endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress pathways in INS-1
pancreatic beta-cells. INS-1 cells exposed to palmitate for 16-24 h under
serum-free conditions showed marked apoptosis and increased protein levels of
phosphorylated eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2alpha (eIF2alpha),
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), X box-binding protein 1 (XBP-1), and
C/EBP homologous transcription factor (CHOP) compared with control cells. The
CHOP transcription factor has been implicated in mediating ER stress-induced
apoptosis. Unexpectedly, the levels of the ER chaperone proteins Grp78/BiP and
PDI were not affected by palmitate treatment, suggesting that the cell protective
aspects of the unfolded protein response (UPR) are not up-regulated by palmitate.
Palmitate-treated cells had markedly altered distribution of ER chaperones and
altered ER morphology, suggesting that accumulation of misfolded proteins might
trigger the ER stress response. In contrast, oleate treatment did not
significantly induce the UPR pathways, nor was it as detrimental to INS-1
beta-cells. The results suggest that activation of the UPR may significantly
contribute to palmitate- but not oleate-induced pancreatic beta-cell death.

PMID: 16601139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 12;281(19):13694-707. Epub 2006 Mar 16.

Activation and cross-talk between Akt, NF-kappaB, and unfolded protein response
signaling in 1-LN prostate cancer cells consequent to ligation of cell
surface-associated GRP78.

Misra UK(1), Deedwania R, Pizzo SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University, Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

Binding of activated forms of the proteinase inhibitor alpha2-macroglobulin
(alpha2M*) to cell surface-associated GRP78 on 1-LN human prostate cancer cells
causes their proliferation. We have now examined the interplay between Akt
activation, regulation of apoptosis, the unfolded protein response, and
activation of NF-kappaB in alpha2M*-induced proliferation of 1-LN cells. Exposure
of cells to alpha2M* (50 pM) induced phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent
activation of Akt by phosphorylation at Thr-308 and Ser-473 with a concomitant
60-80% increase in Akt-associated kinase activity. ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK were also 
activated, but there was only a marginal effect on JNK activation. Treatment of
1-LN cells with alpha2M* down-regulated apoptosis and promoted NF-kappaB
activation as shown by increases of Bcl-2, p-Bad(Ser-136), p-FOXO1(Ser-253),
p-GSK3beta(Ser-9), XIAP, NF-kappaB, cyclin D1, GADD45beta, p-ASK1(Ser-83), and
TRAF2 in a time of incubation-dependent manner. alpha2M* treatment of 1-LN cells,
however, showed no increase in the activation of caspase -3, -9, or -12. Under
these conditions, we observed increased unfolded protein response signaling as
evidenced by elevated levels of GRP78, IRE1alpha, XBP-1, ATF4, ATF6, p-PERK,
p-eIF2alpha, and GADD34 and reduced levels of GADD153. Silencing of GRP78 gene
expression by RNAi suppressed activation of Akt(Thr-308), Akt(Ser-473), and
IkappaB kinase alpha kinase. The effects of alpha2M* on the NF-kappaB activation,
antiapoptotic signaling, unfolded protein response signaling, and proapoptotic
signaling were also reversed by this treatment. In conclusion, alpha2M* promotes 
cellular proliferation of 1-LN prostate cancer cells by activating MAPK and
Akt-dependent signaling, down-regulating apoptotic signaling, and activating
unfolded protein response signaling.

PMID: 16543232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Neurochem. 2006 Apr;97(1):92-104. Epub 2006 Mar 3.

Up-regulation of tyrosine hydroxylase gene transcription by tetradecanoylphorbol 
acetate is mediated by the transcription factors Ets-like protein-1 (Elk-1) and
Egr-1.

Stefano L(1), Al Sarraj J, Rössler OG, Vinson C, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, Homburg, Germany.

Tyrosine hydroxylase is the rate-limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of
catecholamines. Expression of the tyrosine hydroxylase gene is regulated at the
transcriptional level by extracellular signalling molecules, including epidermal 
growth factor (EGF), nerve growth factor (NGF) and glucocorticoids. We have
analysed the stimulation of tyrosine hydroxylase gene transcription by the
phorbol ester 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) in noradrenergic locus
coeruleus-like CATH.a cells and observed a striking enhancement of the
transcriptional activation potential of the ternary complex factor Ets-like
protein-1 (Elk-1), a key transcriptional regulator of serum response
element-driven gene transcription. Likewise, TPA strongly up-regulated the
biosynthesis of the transcription factor Egr-1 via distal serum response elements
within the Egr-1 5'-flanking region. Subsequently, enhancement of the
transcriptional activation potential of Egr-1 was observed. Overexpression of
Egr-1 was sufficient to activate transcription of a tyrosine hydroxylase
promoter/reporter gene, corroborating the view that the tyrosine hydroxylase gene
is a target gene of Egr-1. Expression of dominant-negative mutants of Elk-1 or
Egr-1 impaired TPA-induced stimulation of a tyrosine hydroxylase
promoter/reporter gene transcription. In contrast, dominant-negative mutants of
the transcription factors activating transcription factor (ATF)-2, ATF4, cAMP
response element-binding protein, c-Jun and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP) did not change TPA-induced tyrosine hydroxylase promoter activity,
indicating that these proteins are not part of the TPA-mediated signalling
cascade directed towards the tyrosine hydroxylase gene.

PMID: 16515541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Blood. 2006 Jun 15;107(12):4907-16. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

Proteasome inhibitors induce a terminal unfolded protein response in multiple
myeloma cells.

Obeng EA(1), Carlson LM, Gutman DM, Harrington WJ Jr, Lee KP, Boise LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami Miller School
of Medicine, Miami, FL 33101, USA.

Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable plasma cell malignancy. The 26S proteasome 
inhibitor, bortezomib, selectively induces apoptosis in MM cells; however, the
nature of its selectivity remains unknown. Here we demonstrate that 5 different
MM cell lines display similar patterns of sensitivity to 3 proteasome inhibitors 
(PIs) but respond differently to specific NF-kappaB inhibition. We further show
that PIs initiate the unfolded protein response (UPR), a signaling pathway
activated by the accumulation of misfolded proteins within the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). Consistent with reports that prosurvival/physiologic UPR
components are required for B-cell differentiation into antibody-secreting cells,
we found that MM cells inherently expressed the ER chaperones GRP78/Bip and
GRP94/gp96. However, bortezomib rapidly induced components of the
proapoptotic/terminal UPR, including PERK, the ER stress-specific eIF-2alpha
kinase; ATF4, an ER stress-induced transcription factor; and its proapoptotic
target, CHOP/GADD153. Consistent with our hypothesis that PIs induce the
accumulation of misfolded ER-processed proteins, we found that the amount of
immunoglobulin subunits retained within MM cells correlated with their
sensitivity to PIs. These findings suggest that MM cells have a lower threshold
for PI-induced UPR induction and ER stress-induced apoptosis because they
constitutively express ER stress survival factors to function as secretory cells.

PMCID: PMC1895817
PMID: 16507771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Mar 7;103(10):3604-9. Epub 2006 Feb 27.

Mechanism of arylating quinone toxicity involving Michael adduct formation and
induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Wang X(1), Thomas B, Sachdeva R, Arterburn L, Frye L, Hatcher PG, Cornwell DG, Ma
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Quinones permeate our biotic environment, contributing to both homeostasis and
cytotoxicity. All quinones generate reactive oxygen species through redox
cycling, while partially substituted quinones also undergo arylation (Michael
adduct formation) yielding covalent bonds with nucleophiles such as cysteinyl
thiols. In contrast to reactive oxygen species, the role of arylation in quinone 
cytotoxicity is not well understood. We found that the arylating quinones,
including unsubstituted 1,4-benzoquinone (1,4-BzQ) and partially substituted
vitamin E congener gamma-tocopherol quinone (gamma-TQ), were cytotoxic, with
gamma-TQ > 1,4-BzQ, whereas the fully substituted nonarylating vitamin E congener
alpha-tocopherol quinone was not. In vitro, both arylating quinones formed
Michael adducts with the thiol nucleophile N-acetylcysteine (NAC) at rates where 
1,4-BzQ > gamma-TQ. In cultured cells, concurrent addition of NAC eliminated
1,4-BzQ caused toxicity, but preincubation was required for the same NAC
detoxification effect on gamma-TQ. These data clearly established the role of
arylation in quinone toxicity and revealed that arylating quinone structure
affects cytotoxicity by governing detoxification through the rate of adduct
formation. Furthermore, arylating quinones induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress by activating the pancreatic ER kinase (PERK) signaling pathway including 
elF2alpha, ATF4, and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP). Detoxification by NAC
greatly attenuates CHOP induction in arylating quinone-treated cells, suggesting 
that ER stress is a cellular mechanism for arylating quinone cytotoxicity.

PMCID: PMC1450130
PMID: 16505371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Curr Mol Med. 2006 Feb;6(1):55-69.

ER stress, hypoxia tolerance and tumor progression.

Koumenis C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. ckoumeni@wfubmc.edu

The development of chronic and fluctuating hypoxic regions in tumors has profound
consequences for malignant progression, response to therapy and overall patient
survival. Understanding the events involved in hypoxia tolerance will offer new
opportunities for antitumor modalities. A universal response of tumor cells to
hypoxia is a rapid and substantial decrease in the rates of macromolecular
synthesis. Hypoxia induces phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor
eIF2alpha on Ser51 via activation of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) resident
kinase PERK and that this modification is required for the rapid downregulation
of global protein synthesis by this hypoxic stress. PERK-dependent
phosphorylation of eIF2alpha is one component of the Unfolded Protein Response
(UPR), a coordinated program that promotes cell survival under conditions of ER
stress. Inactivation of PERK or eIF2alpha phosphorylation impairs cell survival
under hypoxia, and transformed cells with inactivating PERK or eIF2alpha
mutations form tumors in nude mice that are slower growing, and have higher
levels of apoptosis in hypoxic areas compared to tumors with an intact UPR.
Expression of the transcription factor ATF4, a downstream effector of eIF2alpha
phosphorylation, is also upregulated by hypoxia in vitro and in human tumors and 
increases hypoxia tolerance. A second UPR pathway mediated by activation of IRE1 
and its downstream target XBP1 is also required for hypoxia tolerance in vitro
and for tumor growth. These results reveal a critical role for UPR activation for
tumor cell resistance to hypoxia and tumor growth promotion and suggest that the 
UPR may be an attractive target for anti-tumor modalities.

PMID: 16472113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biomed Sci. 2006 Mar;13(2):205-13. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Mitosin/CENP-F in mitosis, transcriptional control, and differentiation.

Ma L(1), Zhao X, Zhu X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, 200031, China.

Mitosin/CENP-F is a large nuclear/kinetochore protein containing multiple leucine
zipper motifs potentially for protein interactions. Its expression levels and
subcellular localization patterns are regulated in a cell cycle-dependent manner.
Recently, accumulating lines of evidence have suggested it a multifunctional
protein involved in mitotic control, microtubule dynamics, transcriptional
regulation, and muscle cell differentiation. Consistently, it is shown to
interact directly with a variety of proteins including CENP-E, NudE/Nudel, ATF4, 
and Rb. Here we review the current progress and discuss possible mechanisms
through which mitosin may function.

PMID: 16456711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Virol. 2006 Feb;80(4):2019-33.

Reovirus induces and benefits from an integrated cellular stress response.

Smith JA(1), Schmechel SC, Raghavan A, Abelson M, Reilly C, Katze MG, Kaufman RJ,
Bohjanen PR, Schiff LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware Street SE,
MMC 196, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Following infection with most reovirus strains, viral protein synthesis is
robust, even when cellular translation is inhibited. To gain further insight into
pathways that regulate translation in reovirus-infected cells, we performed a
comparative microarray analysis of cellular gene expression following infection
with two strains of reovirus that inhibit host translation (clone 8 and clone 87)
and one strain that does not (Dearing). Infection with clone 8 and clone 87
significantly increased the expression of cellular genes characteristic of stress
responses, including the integrated stress response. Infection with these same
strains decreased transcript and protein levels of P58(IPK), the cellular
inhibitor of the eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha (eIF2alpha) kinases PKR and 
PERK. Since infection with host shutoff-inducing strains of reovirus impacted
cellular pathways that control eIF2alpha phosphorylation and unphosphorylated
eIF2alpha is required for translation initiation, we examined reovirus
replication in a variety of cell lines with mutations that impact eIF2alpha
phosphorylation. Our results revealed that reovirus replication is more efficient
in the presence of eIF2alpha kinases and phosphorylatable eIF2alpha. When
eIF2alpha is phosphorylated, it promotes the synthesis of ATF4, a transcription
factor that controls cellular recovery from stress. We found that the presence of
this transcription factor increased reovirus yields 10- to 100-fold. eIF2alpha
phosphorylation also led to the formation of stress granules in reovirus-infected
cells. Based on these results, we hypothesize that eIF2alpha phosphorylation
facilitates reovirus replication in two ways-first, by inducing ATF4 synthesis,
and second, by creating an environment that places abundant reovirus transcripts 
at a competitive advantage for limited translational components.

PMCID: PMC1367166
PMID: 16439558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mol Genet Metab. 2006 May;88(1):7-15. Epub 2006 Jan 18.

Childhood ataxia with CNS hypomyelination/vanishing white matter disease--a
common leukodystrophy caused by abnormal control of protein synthesis.

Schiffmann R(1), Elroy-Stein O.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Metabolic Neurology Branch, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
USA. RS4e@nih.gov

Mutations in eukaryotic initiation factor 2B (eIF2B) cause one of the most common
leukodystrophies, childhood ataxia with CNS hypomyelination/vanishing white
matter disease or CACH/VWM. Patients may develop a wide spectrum of neurological 
abnormalities from prenatal-onset white matter disease to juvenile or adult-onset
ataxia and dementia, sometimes with ovarian insufficiency. The pattern of diffuse
white matter abnormalities on MRI of the head is often diagnostic.
Neuropathological abnormalities indicate a unique and selective disruption of
oligodendrocytes and astrocytes with sparing of neurons. Marked decrease of
asialo-transferrin in cerebrospinal fluid is the only biochemical abnormality
identified thus far. Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2B (eIF2B)
mutations cause a decrease in guanine nucleotide exchange activity on eIF2-GDP,
resulting in increased susceptibility to stress and enhanced ATF4 expression
during endoplasmic reticulum stress. eIF2B mutations are speculated to lead to
increased susceptibility to various physiological stress conditions. Future
research will be directed towards understanding why abnormal control of protein
translation predominantly affects brain glial cells.

PMID: 16378743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Apoptosis. 2006 Jan;11(1):5-13.

Role of the unfolded protein response in cell death.

Kim R(1), Emi M, Tanabe K, Murakami S.

Author information: 
(1)International Radiation Information Center, Research Institute for Radiation
Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.
rkim@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

Unfolded protein response (UPR) is an important genomic response to endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. The ER chaperones, GRP78 and Gadd153, play critical roles 
in cell survival or cell death as part of the UPR, which is regulated by three
signaling pathways: PERK/ATF4, IRE1/XBP1 and ATF6. During the UPR, accumulated
unfolded protein is either correctly refolded, or unsuccessfully refolded and
degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. When the unfolded protein exceeds a
threshold, damaged cells are committed to cell death, which is mediated by ATF4
and ATF6, as well as activation of the JNK/AP-1/Gadd153-signaling pathway.
Gadd153 suppresses activation of Bcl-2 and NF-kappaB. UPR-mediated cell survival 
or cell death is regulated by the balance of GRP78 and Gadd153 expression, which 
is coregulated by NF-kappaB in accordance with the magnitude of ER stress. Less
susceptibility to cell death upon activation of the UPR may contribute to tumor
progression and drug resistance of solid tumors.

PMID: 16374548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. FEBS Lett. 2006 Jan 9;580(1):58-62. Epub 2005 Dec 6.

Cooperative interaction of Zhangfei and ATF4 in transactivation of the cyclic AMP
response element.

Hogan MR(1), Cockram GP, Lu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Axelrod
Building, Room 334, 50 Stone Road East, Guelph, Ont., Canada N1G 2W1.

Zhangfei (ZF) is a basic region-leucine zipper protein that has been implicated
in herpesvirus infection cycle and related cellular processes. Here we show both 
in vivo and in vitro data demonstrating that ZF is a novel cellular binding
partner of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) (or CREB2). We found that ZF 
competed with ATF4 to form ATF4-ZF heterodimeric complexes through the bZIP
regions. ZF enhanced ATF4 binding to the cAMP response element (CRE), and
augmented activation of a CRE reporter by ATF4, in response to MEK1 activation.
These results suggest an important role of ZF in the MEK1-ATF4 signaling pathway.

PMID: 16343488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Biochem Pharmacol. 2006 Jan 12;71(3):239-47. Epub 2005 Dec 1.

Role of GADD34 in modulation of cisplatin cytotoxicity.

Fishel ML(1), Rabik CA, Bleibel WK, Li X, Moschel RC, Dolan ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Cisplatin and carboplatin are widely used clinical chemotherapeutic agents,
especially against testicular, ovarian, and head and neck cancers.
O(6)-Benzylguanine (BG) has been shown to result in enhanced cytotoxicity,
apoptosis, and DNA platination when used in conjunction with cisplatin and
carboplatin in head and neck cancer cell lines. Microarray expression data
indicated overexpression of 19 genes and underexpression of 22 genes specific to 
treatment with the combination of BG+/-cisplatin compared to cisplatin alone
treatment in SQ20b head and neck cancer cells (p<0.05) using the Affymetrix
HG-U133A GeneChip((R)). Among the overexpressed probe sets were genes involved in
DNA damage and apoptosis, including GADD34, DDIT4, ATF4, and PTHLH. A similarly
structured analog, 9-CH(3)-BG, does not enhance cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity or
apoptosis nor is there enhanced expression of GADD34 in cisplatin or
9-CH(3)-BG+/-cisplatin-treated cells compared to control cells. Analysis of cells
exposed to 9-CH(3)-BG+/-cisplatin allowed us to focus our array list on 32 probe 
sets specific to BG+cisplatin versus cisplatin, ruling out differentially
expressed probe sets common to 9-CH(3)-BG+cisplatin versus cisplatin. Similarly, 
14 probe sets were specific to BG+/-cisplatin versus BG, ruling out
differentially expressed probe sets common to 9-CH(3)-BG+/-cisplatin versus
9-CH(3)-BG. Quantitative real-time PCR demonstrated a dose dependent increase in 
GADD34 expression in cells exposed to BG+/-cisplatin with levels approximately
>2-fold for cells exposed to BG+cisplatin compared to cisplatin alone. Levels of 
GADD34 transcripts were determined with both cisplatin and BG+cisplatin at
several different time points concomitant with and following drug treatment. At
all timepoints, GADD34 transcript levels are approximately two-fold elevated in
cells treated with BG+cisplatin compared to cisplatin alone. Furthermore,
significant changes in GADD34 expression levels in SQ20b, SCC35, and SCC61 cells,
with approximately three-fold, two-fold, and 3.5-fold increases in expression,
respectively, upon treatment with BG+/-cisplatin compared with control.
Elucidation of these molecular pathways will aid in our goal of synthesizing more
powerful modulators to increase efficacy of platinum agents.

PMID: 16325149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jan 13;339(2):463-8. Epub 2005 Nov 15.

Doxorubicin prevents endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis.

Kim SJ(1), Park KM, Kim N, Yeom YI.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Genomics, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-333, Republic of Korea. crystal@kribb.re.kr

Several cellular stress signaling pathways initiate apoptosis in eukaryotic
cells, but the interactions and coordination between the pathways have not been
elucidated. In this study, apoptosis was triggered in MCF7 human breast carcinoma
cells using doxorubicin, a topoisomerase inhibitor, and an endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) stress inducer, thapsigargin, the latter causing the unfolded protein
response (UPR). Interestingly, compared to treatment with doxorubicin or
thapsigargin alone, cell death was reduced by treatment with both stress
inducers. In contrast to another topoisomerase inhibitor, etoposide, doxorubicin 
markedly decreased apoptosis induced by thapsigargin; this doxorubicin effect was
accompanied by reduced expression of the UPR-specific proapoptotic protein,
C/EBP-homologous protein, and its upstream transcription factor, ATF4. We further
found that doxorubicin downregulates the expression of ATF4 mRNA, indicating that
doxorubicin interferes with the UPR at the level of ATF4 transcription. Taken
together, the data suggest that ER stress-initiated cell death might be regulated
by doxorubicin.

PMID: 16298333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2006 Mar;38(3):317-32. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

Coordination of ER and oxidative stress signaling: the PERK/Nrf2 signaling
pathway.

Cullinan SB(1), Diehl JA.

Author information: 
(1)The Leonard and Madlyn Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute and Cancer
Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

In the broadest sense, cellular stress describes conditions wherein cells
encounter and react to a 'non-normal' state. Perturbations may originate through 
both extracellular and intracellular means. Whereas transient levels of stress
are expected to occur on a regular basis, a series of checks and balances ensures
that cells are well equipped to maintain a homeostatic state. In the case of
supra-physiological stress signaling, cellular challenges are more severe, and
programmed cell death may be the best option for the organism. The ability of a
cell, and by extension, an organism, to adequately manage cellular stress is
fundamental--a question of life or death. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is
exquisitely poised to sense and respond to cellular stresses including those that
result from metabolic and/or protein folding imbalances. In response to stress
originating from within the ER, the PERK and Ire1 protein kinases, along with
other proximal signaling molecules, initiate a program of transcriptional and
translational regulation termed the unfolded protein response. A consequence of
ER stress is the accumulation of reactive oxygen species that promotes a state of
oxidative stress. PERK signaling, via activation of the Nrf2 and ATF4
transcription factors, coordinates the convergence of ER stress with oxidative
stress signaling. Here we discuss progress regarding the signaling pathways
involved in these cellular stresses and the implications of the intersection
between the two signaling pathways.

PMID: 16290097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Biochem. 2005 Oct;138(4):501-7.

The ER stress pathway involving CHOP is activated in the lungs of LPS-treated
mice.

Endo M(1), Oyadomari S, Suga M, Mori M, Gotoh T.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Genetics and Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Honjo 1-1-1, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.

Comment in
    J Biochem. 2012 Mar;151(3):217-9.

CHOP is a C/EBP family transcription factor involved in endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress-mediated apoptosis. To determine if the ER stress pathway is involved
in the pathogenesis of LPS-treated mouse lung injury, mice were given
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) intraperitoneally. The mRNAs for activating
transcription factor (ATF) 4 and X-box binding protein (XBP) 1, transcriptional
activators of the CHOP gene, and that for CHOP were induced by or after the LPS
treatment. Apoptosis induced by LPS treatment was suppressed in the lungs of
Chop-knockout mice. Overexpression of CHOP induced apoptosis in a lung
cancer-derived cell line. These results suggest that the ER stress pathway,
involving CHOP, is activated and plays a role in the pathogenesis of septic shock
lung.

PMID: 16272146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Biochem Soc Trans. 2006 Feb;34(Pt 1):7-11.

Coping with stress: eIF2 kinases and translational control.

Wek RC(1), Jiang HY, Anthony TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. rwek@iupui.edu

In response to environmental stresses, a family of protein kinases phosphorylate 
eIF2 (eukaryotic initiation factor 2) to alleviate cellular injury or
alternatively induce apoptosis. Phosphorylation of eIF2 reduces global
translation, allowing cells to conserve resources and to initiate a
reconfiguration of gene expression to effectively manage stress conditions.
Accompanying this general protein synthesis control, eIF2 phosphorylation induces
translation of specific mRNAs, such as that encoding the bZIP (basic leucine
zipper) transcriptional regulator ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4). ATF4 
also enhances the expression of additional transcription factors, ATF3 and CHOP
(CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein)/GADD153 (growth arrest and
DNA-damage-inducible protein), that assist in the regulation of genes involved in
metabolism, the redox status of the cells and apoptosis. Reduced translation by
eIF2 phosphorylation can also lead to activation of stress-related transcription 
factors, such as NF-kappaB (nuclear factor kappaB), by lowering the steady-state 
levels of short-lived regulatory proteins such as IkappaB (inhibitor of
NF-kappaB). While many of the genes induced by eIF2 phosphorylation are shared
between different environmental stresses, eIF2 kinases function in conjunction
with other stress-response pathways, such as those regulated by mitogen-activated
protein kinases, to elicit gene expression programmes that are tailored for the
specific stress condition. Loss of eIF2 kinase pathways can have important health
consequences. Mice devoid of the eIF2 kinase GCN2 [general control
non-derepressible-2 or EIF2AK4 (eIF2alpha kinase 4)] show sensitivity to
nutritional deficiencies and aberrant eating behaviours, and deletion of PEK
[pancreatic eIF2alpha kinase or PERK (RNA-dependent protein kinase-like
endoplasmic reticulum kinase) or EIF2AK3] leads to neonatal insulin-dependent
diabetes, epiphyseal dysplasia and hepatic and renal complications.

PMID: 16246168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006 Jan;40(1):76-86. Epub 2005 Oct 17.

Transcriptomic profiling of the canine tachycardia-induced heart failure model:
global comparison to human and murine heart failure.

Gao Z(1), Xu H, DiSilvestre D, Halperin VL, Tunin R, Tian Y, Yu W, Winslow RL,
Tomaselli GF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Bioinformatics and Modeling, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine and Whiting School of Engineering, Baltimore, MD
21218, USA.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006 Jan;40(1):13-5.

Alterations of cardiac gene expression are central to ventricular dysfunction in 
human heart failure (HF). The canine tachycardia pacing-induced HF model is known
to reproduce the main hemodynamic, echocardiographic and electrophysiological
changes observed in human HF. In this study, we use this HF model to compare gene
expression profiles in the left and right ventricles (LV, RV) of normal and
end-stage failing canine hearts and compare the transcription profiles to those
in human and murine models of HF. In end-stage HF, the LV exhibits down
regulation of genes involved in energy production, cardiac contraction, and
modulation of excitation-contraction coupling as compared with normal LV. The
majority of transcriptomic changes between normal and end-stage canine HF were
shared by the RV and LV. Genes down regulated only in the LV included those
involved in aerobic energy production pathways, regulation of actin filament
length, and enzyme-linked receptor protein signaling pathways. In normal canine
hearts, genes encoding specific components of the contractile apparatus exhibit
LV-RV asymmetric expression patterns; in failing hearts, cardiac fetal
transcription factors MEF2 and MITF and the stress-responsive transcription
factor ATF4 showed interventricular differences in expression. The comparison
among the canine tachypacing, mouse transgenic, and human HF reveals that human
disease involves down regulation of genes in a broad range of biological
processes while experimentally induced HF is associated with down regulation of
energy pathways, and that human ischemic HF and canine HF share a similar over
representation of transcriptional pathways in the up regulated genes. This study 
provides insights into the molecular pathways leading to end-stage
tachycardia-induced HF, and into global transcriptomic differences between the
animal HF models and human HF.

PMCID: PMC1896268
PMID: 16236311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Nov;25(21):9340-9.

Global gene expression profiling reveals widespread yet distinctive translational
responses to different eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2B-targeting
stress pathways.

Smirnova JB(1), Selley JN, Sanchez-Cabo F, Carroll K, Eddy AA, McCarthy JE,
Hubbard SJ, Pavitt GD, Grant CM, Ashe MP.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, The Michael Smith
Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, United Kingdom.

Global inhibition of protein synthesis is a hallmark of many cellular stress
conditions. Even though specific mRNAs defy this (e.g., yeast GCN4 and mammalian 
ATF4), the extent and variation of such resistance remain uncertain. In this
study, we have identified yeast mRNAs that are translationally maintained
following either amino acid depletion or fusel alcohol addition. Both stresses
inhibit eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2B, but via different
mechanisms. Using microarray analysis of polysome and monosome mRNA pools, we
demonstrate that these stress conditions elicit widespread yet distinct
translational reprogramming, identifying a fundamental role for translational
control in the adaptation to environmental stress. These studies also highlight
the complex interplay that exists between different stages in the gene expression
pathway to allow specific preordained programs of proteome remodeling. For
example, many ribosome biogenesis genes are coregulated at the transcriptional
and translational levels following amino acid starvation. The transcriptional
regulation of these genes has recently been connected to the regulation of
cellular proliferation, and on the basis of our results, the translational
control of these mRNAs should be factored into this equation.

PMCID: PMC1265828
PMID: 16227585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 16;280(50):41537-45. Epub 2005 Oct 11.

p300 modulates ATF4 stability and transcriptional activity independently of its
acetyltransferase domain.

Lassot I(1), Estrabaud E, Emiliani S, Benkirane M, Benarous R, Margottin-Goguet
F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Department of Maladies Infectieuses, INSERM U567, CNRS
UMR8104, University Rene Descartes Paris V, Bat G. Roussy, 27 Rue du Faubourg
Saint Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.

ATF4 plays a crucial role in the cellular response to stress and multiple stress 
responses pathways converge to the translational up-regulation of ATF4. ATF4 is a
substrate of the SCF(betaTrCP) ubiquitin ligase that binds to betaTrCP through
phosphorylation on a DSGXXXS motif. We show here that ATF4 stability is also
modulated by the histone acetyltransferase p300, which induces ATF4 stabilization
by inhibiting its ubiquitination. Despite p300 acetylates ATF4, we found that
p300-mediated ATF4 stabilization is independent of p300 catalytic activity, using
either the inactive form of p300 or the acetylation mutant ATF4-K311R. ATF4
deleted of its p300 binding domain is no more stabilized by p300 nor recruited
into nuclear speckles. In consequence of ATF4 stabilization, both p300 and the
catalytically inactive enzyme increase ATF4 transcriptional activity.

PMID: 16219772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Oncogene. 2006 Feb 16;25(7):1018-29.

Celecoxib upregulates endoplasmic reticulum chaperones that inhibit
celecoxib-induced apoptosis in human gastric cells.

Tsutsumi S(1), Namba T, Tanaka KI, Arai Y, Ishihara T, Aburaya M, Mima S, Hoshino
T, Mizushima T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto, Japan.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) induce apoptosis in cancer cells
and this effect is involved in their antitumor activity. We recently demonstrated
that NSAIDs upregulate GRP78, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperone, in gastric
mucosal cells in primary culture. In the present study, induction of ER
chaperones by NSAIDs and the effect of those chaperones on NSAID-induced
apoptosis were examined in human gastric carcinoma cells. Celecoxib, an NSAID,
upregulated ER chaperones (GRP78 and its cochaperones ERdj3 and ERdj4) but also
C/EBP homologous transcription factor (CHOP), a transcription factor involved in 
apoptosis. Celecoxib also upregulated GRP78 in xenograft tumors, accompanying
with the suppression of tumor growth in nude mice. Celecoxib caused
phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 kinase (PERK) and
eukaryotic initiation factor-2alpha (eIF2alpha) and production of activating
transcription factor (ATF)4 mRNA. Suppression of ATF4 expression by small
interfering RNA (siRNA) partially inhibited the celecoxib-dependent upregulation 
of GRP78. Celecoxib increased the intracellular Ca2+ concentration, while
1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N'N'-tetraacetic acid, an intracellular Ca2+
chelator, inhibited the upregulation of GRP78 and ATF4. These results suggest
that the Ca2+-dependent activation of the PERK-eIF2alpha-ATF4 pathway is involved
in the upregulation of ER chaperones by celecoxib. Overexpression of GRP78
partially suppressed the apoptosis and induction of CHOP in the presence of
celecoxib and this suppression was stimulated by coexpression of either ERdj3 or 
ERdj4. On the other hand, suppression of GRP78 expression by siRNA drastically
stimulated cellular apoptosis and production of CHOP in the presence of
celecoxib. These results show that upregulation of ER chaperones by celecoxib
protects cancer cells from celecoxib-induced apoptosis, thus may decrease the
potential antitumor activity of celecoxib.

PMID: 16205636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Biol Chem. 2005 Sep;386(9):873-9.

Regulation of asparagine synthetase gene transcription by the basic region
leucine zipper transcription factors ATF5 and CHOP.

Al Sarraj J(1), Vinson C, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, D-66421 Homburg, Germany.

Asparagine synthetase catalyses the glutamine- and ATP-dependent conversion of
aspartic acid to asparagine. In human hepatoma cells cultured in medium
containing amino acids, the mRNA of asparagine synthetase is not detectable by
RNase protection mapping. However, maintaining the cells in amino acid-free
Krebs-Ringer bicarbonate buffer strongly upregulated asparagine synthetase
biosynthesis. The effect of amino acid deprivation on asparagine synthetase gene 
transcription is mediated by a genetic element termed the nutrient-sensing
response unit. Previous studies revealed that the basic region leucine zipper
(bZIP) transcription factor CREB2/ATF4 is involved in the nutrient
deprivation-induced upregulation of asparagine synthetase gene transcription.
Here we show that overexpression of the bZIP protein ATF5, a transcriptional
activator, stimulates asparagine synthetase promoter/reporter gene transcription 
via the nutrient-sensing response unit. In contrast, ATF5 does not transactivate 
cAMP response element (CRE)-containing reporter genes. Overexpression of the
C/EBP homologous transcription factor CHOP impaired transcriptional activation of
the asparagine synthetase promoter following amino acid deprivation or
over-expression of ATF5 or CREB2/ATF4. These data indicate that CHOP functions as
a shut-off-device for nutrient deprivation-induced gene transcription.

PMID: 16164412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. EMBO J. 2005 Oct 5;24(19):3470-81. Epub 2005 Sep 8.

ER stress-regulated translation increases tolerance to extreme hypoxia and
promotes tumor growth.

Bi M(1), Naczki C, Koritzinsky M, Fels D, Blais J, Hu N, Harding H, Novoa I,
Varia M, Raleigh J, Scheuner D, Kaufman RJ, Bell J, Ron D, Wouters BG, Koumenis
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Tumor cell adaptation to hypoxic stress is an important determinant of malignant 
progression. While much emphasis has been placed on the role of HIF-1 in this
context, the role of additional mechanisms has not been adequately explored. Here
we demonstrate that cells cultured under hypoxic/anoxic conditions and
transformed cells in hypoxic areas of tumors activate a translational control
program known as the integrated stress response (ISR), which adapts cells to
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Inactivation of ISR signaling by mutations in 
the ER kinase PERK and the translation initiation factor eIF2alpha or by a
dominant-negative PERK impairs cell survival under extreme hypoxia. Tumors
derived from these mutant cell lines are smaller and exhibit higher levels of
apoptosis in hypoxic areas compared to tumors with an intact ISR. Moreover,
expression of the ISR targets ATF4 and CHOP was noted in hypoxic areas of human
tumor biopsy samples. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that activation of
the ISR is required for tumor cell adaptation to hypoxia, and suggest that this
pathway is an attractive target for antitumor modalities.

PMCID: PMC1276162
PMID: 16148948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2005 Sep;64(9):770-5.

The unfolded protein response in vanishing white matter disease.

van der Voorn JP(1), van Kollenburg B, Bertrand G, Van Haren K, Scheper GC,
Powers JM, van der Knaap MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics/Child Neurology, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. jp.vandervoorn@vumc.nl

Leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter (VWM) is an autosomal-recessive
disorder in which febrile infections may provoke major neurologic deterioration. 
Characteristic pathologic findings include cystic white matter degeneration,
foamy oligodendrocytes, dysmorphic astrocytes and oligodendrocytes,
oligodendrocytosis, and apoptotic losses of oligodendrocytes. VWM is caused by
mutations in eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) 2B (eIF2B). eIF2B plays an
important role in the regulation of protein synthesis. Mutant eIF2B may impair
the ability of cells to regulate protein synthesis in response to stress and
perhaps even under normal conditions. An overload of misfolded proteins in the
endoplasmic reticulum activates the unfolded protein response (UPR), a
compensatory mechanism that inhibits synthesis of new proteins and induces both
prosurvival and proapoptotic signals. We have studied the activation of the UPR
in VWM through the immunohistochemical expression of its upstream components PERK
and phosphorylated eIF2alpha (eIF2alphaP) and combined immunohistochemical and
Western blot analysis of the downstream effector proteins activating
transcription factor-4 (ATF4) and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) in 4 VWM brains
and 3 age-matched controls. We demonstrate activation of the UPR in glia of
patients with VWM. Our findings may point to a possible explanation for the
dysmorphic glia, the increased numbers of oligodendrocytes, and the apoptotic
loss of oligodendrocytes in VWM.

PMID: 16141786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Cell Sci. 2005 Sep 15;118(Pt 18):4253-60. Epub 2005 Sep 1.

RNA polymerase II subunit 3 is retained in the cytoplasm by its interaction with 
HCR, the psoriasis vulgaris candidate gene product.

Corbi N(1), Bruno T, De Angelis R, Di Padova M, Libri V, Di Certo MG, Spinardi L,
Floridi A, Fanciulli M, Passananti C.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Biologia e Patologia Molecolari CNR, Universita' di Roma La
Sapienza, P. le A. Moro, 5, 00185 Roma, Italy.

Here, we show that the subcellular localization of alpha-like RNA polymerase II
core subunit 3 (RPB3) is regulated during muscle differentiation. We have
recently demonstrated that the expression of RPB3 is regulated during muscle
differentiation and that, inside RNA polymerase II (RNAP II), it is directly
involved in contacting regulatory proteins such as the myogenic transcription
factor Myogenin and activating transcription factor ATF4. We show for the first
time, that RPB3, in addition to its presence and role inside the RNAP II core
enzyme, accumulates in the cytoplasm of cycling myogenic cells and migrates to
the nucleus upon induction of the differentiation program. Furthermore, using
human RPB3 as bait in a yeast two-hybrid system, we have isolated a novel RPB3
cytoplasmic interacting protein, HCR. HCR, previously identified as alpha-helix
coiled-coil rod homologue, is one of the psoriasis vulgaris (PV) candidate genes.
In cycling myogenic C2C7 cells, we show that the RPB3 protein directly interacts 
with HCR within the cytoplasm. Finally, knocking down HCR expression by RNA
interference, we demonstrate that HCR acts as cytoplasmic docking site for RPB3.

PMID: 16141233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Nature. 2005 Aug 25;436(7054):1166-73.

Translational control of hippocampal synaptic plasticity and memory by the
eIF2alpha kinase GCN2.

Costa-Mattioli M(1), Gobert D, Harding H, Herdy B, Azzi M, Bruno M, Bidinosti M, 
Ben Mamou C, Marcinkiewicz E, Yoshida M, Imataka H, Cuello AC, Seidah N, Sossin
W, Lacaille JC, Ron D, Nader K, Sonenberg N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and McGill Cancer Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada

Studies on various forms of synaptic plasticity have shown a link between
messenger RNA translation, learning and memory. Like memory, synaptic plasticity 
includes an early phase that depends on modification of pre-existing proteins,
and a late phase that requires transcription and synthesis of new proteins.
Activation of postsynaptic targets seems to trigger the transcription of
plasticity-related genes. The new mRNAs are either translated in the soma or
transported to synapses before translation. GCN2, a key protein kinase, regulates
the initiation of translation. Here we report a unique feature of hippocampal
slices from GCN2(-/-) mice: in CA1, a single 100-Hz train induces a strong and
sustained long-term potentiation (late LTP or L-LTP), which is dependent on
transcription and translation. In contrast, stimulation that elicits L-LTP in
wild-type slices, such as four 100-Hz trains or forskolin, fails to evoke L-LTP
in GCN2(-/-) slices. This aberrant synaptic plasticity is mirrored in the
behaviour of GCN2(-/-) mice in the Morris water maze: after weak training, their 
spatial memory is enhanced, but it is impaired after more intense training.
Activated GCN2 stimulates mRNA translation of ATF4, an antagonist of
cyclic-AMP-response-element-binding protein (CREB). Thus, in the hippocampus of
GCN2(-/-) mice, the expression of ATF4 is reduced and CREB activity is increased.
Our study provides genetic, physiological, behavioural and molecular evidence
that GCN2 regulates synaptic plasticity, as well as learning and memory, through 
modulation of the ATF4/CREB pathway.

PMCID: PMC1464117
PMID: 16121183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Hum Genet. 2005 Oct;118(1):99-106. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

Heightened stress response in primary fibroblasts expressing mutant eIF2B genes
from CACH/VWM leukodystrophy patients.

Kantor L(1), Harding HP, Ron D, Schiffmann R, Kaneski CR, Kimball SR, Elroy-Stein
O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Research & Immunology, George S. Wise Faculty of Life
Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, 69978, Israel.

Childhood ataxia with central nervous system hypomyelination (CACH), also called 
vanishing white matter (VWM) leukoencephalopathy, is a fatal genetic disease
caused by mutations in eukaryotic initiation factor 2B (eIF2B) genes. The five
subunits eIF2B factor is critical for translation initiation under normal
conditions and regulates protein synthesis in response to cellular stresses.
Primary fibroblasts from CACH/VWM patients and normal individuals were used to
measure basal eIF2B activity as well as global protein synthesis and ATF4
induction in response to stress in the endoplasmic reticulum. We show that
although the cells expressing mutant eIF2B genes respond normally to stress
conditions by reduced global translation rates, they exhibit significantly
greater increase in ATF4 induction compared to normal controls despite equal
levels of stress and activity of the upstream eIF2alpha kinase. This heightened
stress response observed in primary fibroblasts that suffer from minor loss of
basal eIF2B activity may be employed as an initial screening tool for CACH/VWM
leukodystrophy.

PMID: 16041584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Biochem J. 2005 Nov 1;391(Pt 3):649-58.

Amino-acid limitation induces transcription from the human C/EBPbeta gene via an 
enhancer activity located downstream of the protein coding sequence.

Chen C(1), Dudenhausen E, Chen H, Pan YX, Gjymishka A, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, and
Shands Cancer Center, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 
32610, USA.

For animals, dietary protein is critical for the nutrition of the organism and,
at the cellular level, protein nutrition translates into amino acid availability.
Amino acid deprivation triggers the AAR (amino acid response) pathway, which
causes enhanced transcription from specific target genes. The present results
show that C/EBPbeta (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta) mRNA and protein
content were increased following the deprivation of HepG2 human hepatoma cells of
a single amino acid. Although there was a modest increase in mRNA half-life
following histidine limitation, the primary mechanism for the elevated
steady-state mRNA was increased transcription. Transient transfection documented 
that C/EBPbeta genomic fragments containing the 8451 bp 5' upstream of the
transcription start site did not contain amino-acid-responsive elements. However,
deletion analysis of the genomic region located 3' downstream of the protein
coding sequence revealed that a 93 bp fragment contained an amino-acid-responsive
activity that functioned as an enhancer. Exogenous expression of ATF4 (activating
transcription factor 4), known to activate other genes through amino acid
response elements, caused increased transcription from reporter constructs
containing the C/EBPbeta enhancer in cells maintained in complete amino acid
medium. Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated that RNA polymerase II is
bound at the C/EBPbeta promoter and at the 93 bp regulatory region in vivo,
whereas ATF4 binds to the enhancer region only. Immediately following amino acid 
removal, the kinetics of binding for ATF4, ATF3, and C/EBPbeta itself to the 93
bp regulatory region were similar to those observed for the amino-acid-responsive
asparagine synthetase gene. Collectively the findings show that expression of
C/EBPbeta, which contributes to the regulation of amino-acid-responsive genes, is
itself controlled by amino acid availability through transcription.

PMCID: PMC1276966
PMID: 16026328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Int J Radiat Biol. 2005 Mar;81(3):211-20.

Maintenance of differentiation capacity of HT-29 cells after radiation exposure.

Haton C(1), Lebrun F, Benderitter M, Griffiths NM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Radioprotection et de Sûreté Nucleaire/DRPH/SRBE, Cedex, France.

PURPOSE: Following ionizing radiation exposure, intestinal crypt regeneration is 
possible but it is still not known if regenerating crypts give rise to
differentiated functional epithelial cells on villi. The aim of this study was to
demonstrate that irradiated progeny of enterocytic precursor cells are capable of
proliferation and subsequent differentiation using the HT-29?cell line.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cells were cultured, irradiated (5 Gy or 10 Gy) and
incubated in the presence or absence of butyrate (5 mM). Cell numbers, cell cycle
parameters, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, occludin labelling and gene
expression were determined at different times post-exposure.
RESULTS: Butyrate-induced inhibition of cell growth and arrest in G0 phase was
comparable in both sham and irradiated cells in addition to similar development
of ALP activity and expression. Cells also formed a monolayer with tight
junctions post-irradiation. Butyrate-stimulated modulation of integrin expression
during differentiation was unchanged after radiation exposure. Genes known to be 
implicated in differentiation mechanisms, i.e., growth and transcription factors 
(vascular Epidermal Growth Factor, v-EGF ; Activating Transcription Factor 4,
ATF4), cell cycle genes (Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor 1A,
CDKN1A/p21(Cip1/waf1)), were studied. Most responded similarly to the
differentiation stimulus whether irradiated or not.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that irradiated HT-29 cells still respond
to butyrate to form a differentiated, functional epithelium.

PMID: 16019930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 2;280(35):30689-96. Epub 2005 Jul 5.

Cooperative interactions between activating transcription factor 4 and
Runx2/Cbfa1 stimulate osteoblast-specific osteocalcin gene expression.

Xiao G(1), Jiang D, Ge C, Zhao Z, Lai Y, Boules H, Phimphilai M, Yang X, Karsenty
G, Franceschi RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, Prevention, and Geriatrics, School of Dentistry,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1078, USA. xiaogz@umich.edu

The role of ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4) in osteoblast
differentiation and bone formation was recently described using ATF4-deficient
mice (Yang, X., Matsuda, K., Bialek, P., Jacquot, S., Masuoka, H. C., Schinke,
T., Li, L., Brancorsini, S., Sassone-Corsi, P., Townes, T. M., Hanauer, A., and
Karsenty, G. (2004) Cell 117, 387-398). However, the mechanisms of ATF4 in bone
cells are still not clear. In this study, we determined the molecular mechanisms 
through which ATF4 activates the mouse osteocalcin (Ocn) gene 2 (mOG2) expression
and mOG2 promoter activity. ATF4 increased the levels of Ocn mRNA and mOG2
promoter activity in Runx2-containing osteoblasts but not in non-osteoblastic
cells that lack detectable Runx2 protein. However, ATF4 increased Ocn mRNA and
mOG2 promoter activity in non-osteoblastic cells when Runx2 was co-expressed.
Mutational analysis of the OSE1 (ATF4-binding site) and the two OSE2s
(Runx2-binding sites) in the 657-bp mOG2 promoter demonstrated that ATF4 and
Runx2 activate Ocn via cooperative interactions with these sites. Pull-down
assays using nuclear extracts from osteoblasts or COS-7 cells overexpressing ATF4
and Runx2 showed that both factors are present in either anti-ATF4 and anti-Runx2
immunoprecipitates. In contrast, pull-down assays using purified glutathione
S-transferase fusion proteins were unable to demonstrate a direct physical
interaction between ATF4 and Runx2. Thus, accessory factors are likely involved
in stabilizing interactions between these two molecules. Regions within Runx2
required for ATF4 complex formation and activation were identified. Deletion
analysis showed that the leucine zipper domain of ATF4 is critical for Runx2
activation. This study is the first demonstration that cooperative interactions
between ATF4 and Runx2/Cbfa1 stimulate osteoblast-specific Ocn expression and
suggests that this regulation may represent a novel intramolecular mechanism
regulating Runx2 activity and, thereby, osteoblast differentiation and bone
formation.

PMID: 16000305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 19;280(33):29804-11. Epub 2005 Jun 21.

The homeobox protein MSX2 interacts with tax oncoproteins and represses their
transactivation activity.

Twizere JC(1), Lefèbvre L, Collete D, Debacq C, Urbain P, Heremans H, Jauniaux
JC, Burny A, Willems L, Kettmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agronomy, Gembloux, Belgium.

Bovine leukemia virus (BLV) tax is an essential gene involved in the
transcriptional activation of viral expression. Tax is also believed to be
implicated in leukemogenesis because of its ability to immortalize primary cells 
in vitro. To gain insight into the molecular pathways mediating the activities of
this important gene, we identified cellular proteins interacting with Tax. By
means of a two-hybrid approach, we show that Tax specifically interacts with
MSX2, a general repressor of gene expression. GST pull-down experiments and
co-immunoprecipitation assays further confirmed binding specificity. Furthermore,
the N-terminal residues 1-79 of MSX2 are required for binding, whereas the
C-terminal residues 201-267 of MSX2 do not play a critical role. Whereas the
oncogenic potential of Tax in primary cells was only slightly affected by
overexpression of MSX2, the other function of Tax, namely LTR-dependent
transcriptional activation, was inhibited by MSX2 in human HeLa and bovine
B-lymphoblastoid (BL3) cell lines. This MSX2 repression function can be
counteracted by overexpression of transcription factors CREB2 and RAP74. The
Tax/MSX2 interplay thus results in repression of viral transcriptional activation
possibly acting as a regulatory feedback loop. Importantly, this viral gene
silencing is not strictly associated with a concomitant loss of Tax oncogenicity 
as measured by its ability to immortalize primary cells. And interestingly, MSX2 
also interacts with and inhibits the transactivation function of the related Tax1
protein encoded by the Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1).

PMID: 15970589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 5;280(31):28316-23. Epub 2005 Jun 2.

IMPACT, a protein preferentially expressed in the mouse brain, binds GCN1 and
inhibits GCN2 activation.

Pereira CM(1), Sattlegger E, Jiang HY, Longo BM, Jaqueta CB, Hinnebusch AG, Wek
RC, Mello LE, Castilho BA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamentos de Microbiologia, Imunologia, e Parasitologia and Fisiologia,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo SP 04023-062, Brazil.

Translational control directed by the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 
alpha-subunit (eIF2alpha) kinase GCN2 is important for coordinating gene
expression programs in response to nutritional deprivation. The GCN2 stress
response, conserved from yeast to mammals, is critical for resistance to
nutritional deficiencies and for the control of feeding behaviors in rodents. The
mouse protein IMPACT has sequence similarities to the yeast YIH1 protein, an
inhibitor of GCN2. YIH1 competes with GCN2 for binding to a positive regulator,
GCN1. Here, we present evidence that IMPACT is the functional counterpart of
YIH1. Overexpression of IMPACT in yeast lowered both basal and amino acid
starvation-induced levels of phosphorylated eIF2alpha, as described for YIH1
(31). Overexpression of IMPACT in mouse embryonic fibroblasts inhibited
phosphorylation of eIF2alpha by GCN2 under leucine starvation conditions,
abolishing expression of its downstream target genes, ATF4 (CREB-2) and CHOP
(GADD153). IMPACT bound to the minimal yeast GCN1 segment required for
interaction with yeast GCN2 and YIH1 and to native mouse GCN1. At the protein
level, IMPACT was detected mainly in the brain. IMPACT was found to be abundant
in the majority of hypothalamic neurons. Scattered neurons expressing this
protein at higher levels were detected in other regions such as the hippocampus
and piriform cortex. The abundance of IMPACT correlated inversely with
phosphorylated eIF2alpha levels in different brain areas. These results suggest
that IMPACT ensures constant high levels of translation and low levels of ATF4
and CHOP in specific neuronal cells under amino acid starvation conditions.

PMID: 15937339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Brain Res. 2005 Jun 28;1048(1-2):59-68.

The protective effect of dantrolene on ischemic neuronal cell death is associated
with reduced expression of endoplasmic reticulum stress markers.

Li F(1), Hayashi T, Jin G, Deguchi K, Nagotani S, Nagano I, Shoji M, Chan PH, Abe
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine and
Dentistry, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) plays an important role in ischemic neuronal cell 
death. In order to determine the effect of dantrolene, a ryanodine receptor
antagonist, on ER stress response and ischemic brain injury, we investigated
changes in ER stress-related molecules, that is phosphorylated form of
double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase (PKR)-like ER kinase (p-PERK),
phosphorylated form of eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha (p-eIF2alpha),
activating transcription factor-4 (ATF-4), and C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP),
as well as terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling 
(TUNEL) in the peri-ischemic area and ischemic core region of rat brain after
transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). In contrast to the cases
treated with vehicle, the infarct volume and TUNEL-positive cells were
significantly reduced at 24 h of reperfusion by treatment with dantrolene. The
immunoreactivities for p-PERK, p-eIF2alpha, ATF-4, and CHOP were increased at the
ischemic peripheral region after MCAO, which were partially inhibited by
dantrolene treatment. The present results suggest that dantrolene significantly
decreased infarct volume and provided neuroprotective effect on rats after
transient MCAO by reducing ER stress-mediated apoptotic signal pathway activation
in the ischemic area.

PMID: 15921666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Cell Biol. 2005 May 23;169(4):591-601.

FIAT represses ATF4-mediated transcription to regulate bone mass in transgenic
mice.

Yu VW(1), Ambartsoumian G, Verlinden L, Moir JM, Prud'homme J, Gauthier C,
Roughley PJ, St-Arnaud R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G
1A6.

We report the characterization of factor inhibiting activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4)-mediated transcription (FIAT), a leucine zipper nuclear protein. 
FIAT interacted with ATF4 to inhibit binding of ATF4 to DNA and block
ATF4-mediated transcription of the osteocalcin gene in vitro. Transgenic mice
overexpressing FIAT in osteoblasts also had reduced osteocalcin gene expression
and decreased bone mineral density, bone volume, mineralized volume, trabecular
thickness, trabecular number, and decreased rigidity of long bones. Mineral
homeostasis, osteoclast number and activity, and osteoblast proliferation and
apoptosis were unchanged in transgenics. Expression of osteoblastic
differentiation markers was largely unaffected and type I collagen synthesis was 
unchanged. Mineral apposition rate was reduced in transgenic mice, suggesting
that the lowered bone mass was due to a decline in osteoblast activity. This
cell-autonomous decrease in osteoblast activity was confirmed by measuring
reduced alkaline phosphatase activity and mineralization in primary osteoblast
cultures. These results show that FIAT regulates bone mass accrual and establish 
FIAT as a novel transcriptional regulator of osteoblastic function.

PMCID: PMC2171686
PMID: 15911876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Virol. 2005 Jun;79(11):6890-9.

Human cytomegalovirus infection activates and regulates the unfolded protein
response.

Isler JA(1), Skalet AH, Alwine JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.

Viral infection causes stress to the endoplasmic reticulum. The response to
endoplasmic reticulum stress, known as the unfolded protein response (UPR), is
designed to eliminate misfolded proteins and allow the cell to recover by
attenuating translation and upregulating the expression of chaperones,
degradation factors, and factors that regulate the cell's metabolic and redox
environment. Some consequences of the UPR (e.g., expression of chaperones and
regulation of the metabolism and redox environment) may be advantageous to the
viral infection; however, translational attenuation would not. Thus, viruses may 
induce mechanisms which modulate the UPR, maintaining beneficial aspects and
suppressing deleterious aspects. We demonstrate that human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)
infection induces the UPR but specifically regulates the three branches of UPR
signaling, PKR-like ER kinase (PERK), activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6),
and inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE-1), to favor viral replication. HCMV
infection activated the eIF2alpha kinase PERK; however, the amount of
phosphorylated eIF2alpha was limited and translation attenuation did not occur.
Interestingly, translation of select mRNAs, which is dependent on eIF2alpha
phosphorylation, did occur, including the transcription factor ATF4, which
activates genes which may benefit the infection. The endoplasmic reticulum
stress-induced activation of the transcription factor ATF6 was suppressed in
HCMV-infected cells; however, specific chaperone genes, normally activated by
ATF6, were activated by a virus-induced, ATF6-independent mechanism. Lastly, HCMV
infection activated the IRE-1 pathway, as indicated by splicing of Xbp-1 mRNA.
However, transcriptional activation of the XBP-1 target gene EDEM (ER
degradation-enhancing alpha-mannosidase-like protein, a protein degradation
factor) was inhibited. These results suggest that, although HCMV infection
induces the unfolded protein response, it modifies the outcome to benefit viral
replication.

PMCID: PMC1112127
PMID: 15890928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2005 May-Jun;7(5-6):639-48.

Microarray expression profiling identifies early signaling transcripts associated
with 6-OHDA-induced dopaminergic cell death.

Holtz WA(1), Turetzky JM, O'Malley KL.

Author information: 
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, Anatomy and Neurobiology Department,
St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The parkinsonian mimetic 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) has been shown to cause
transcriptional changes associated with cellular stress and the unfolded protein 
response. As these cellular sequelae depend on upstream signaling events, the
present study used functional genomics and proteomic approaches to aid in
deciphering toxin-mediated regulatory pathways. Microarray analysis of RNA
collected from multiple time points following 6-OHDA treatment was combined with 
data mining and clustering techniques to identify distinct functional subgroups
of genes. Notably, stress-induced transcription factors such as ATF3, ATF4, CHOP,
and C/EBP beta were robustly up-regulated, yet exhibited unique kinetic patterns.
Genes involved in the synthesis and modification of proteins (various tRNA
synthetases), protein degradation (e.g., ubiquitin, Herpud1, Sqstm1), and
oxidative stress (Hmox1, Por) could be subgrouped into distinct kinetic profiles 
as well. Realtime PCR and/or two-dimensional electrophoresis combined with
western blotting validated data derived from microarray analyses. Taken together,
these data support the notion that oxidative stress and protein dysfunction play 
a role in Parkinson's disease, as well as provide a time course for many of the
molecular events associated with 6-OHDA neurotoxicity.

PMID: 15890008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Gut. 2005 Sep;54(9):1309-17. Epub 2005 May 4.

CREB/PKA sensitive signalling pathways activate and maintain expression levels of
the hepatitis B virus pre-S2/S promoter.

Tacke F(1), Liedtke C, Bocklage S, Manns MP, Trautwein C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover
Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: CREB (cAMP response element binding protein) transcription
factors are key regulators of homeostatic functions in the liver, and CRE binding
is increased in hepatic inflammation. During chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV)
infection, mutations or deletions in the pre-S region are frequently observed.
These mutations can affect the pre-S2/S promoter controlling HBV envelope protein
expression (hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)) and have been associated with
worsened clinical outcome. We aimed to test if CREB activation impacts on HBsAg
expression.
METHODS: The effect of the CREB inducer protein kinase A (PKA) was tested by
coexpression with HBV wild-type vector in vitro. Luciferase reporter gene
constructs were cloned to identify novel regulatory regions for the HBV pre-S2/S 
promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) gelshift and supershift
experiments were conducted to confirm DNA transcription factor binding.
RESULTS: Coexpression of HBV and PKA resulted in HBV-S mRNA induction and
enhanced small envelope protein expression. We identified a CREB binding motif in
the transcribed part of the pre-S2 region, contributing to basal S promoter
activity via binding of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2). A second CREB
motif closely linked to the S-ATG showed a similar binding pattern involving ATF2
and CREB1, without appearing essential for basal promoter activity. Moreover, a
sequence in the pre-S2 region is responsible for further transcriptional
induction via CREB activators such as PKA and forskolin. EMSA experiments
indicate that CREB1 and ATF4 are involved in complex formation conferring PKA
dependent promoter activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest a novel mechanism by which HBV may utilise CREB/PKA
signal transduction pathways of hepatocytes to enhance its HBsAg expression
during homeostasis and hepatic inflammation.

PMCID: PMC1774645
PMID: 15871998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. FEBS Lett. 2005 May 9;579(12):2609-14. Epub 2005 Apr 8.

Induction of IGFBP-1 expression by amino acid deprivation of HepG2 human hepatoma
cells involves both a transcriptional activation and an mRNA stabilization due to
its 3'UTR.

Averous J(1), Maurin AC, Bruhat A, Jousse C, Arliguie C, Fafournoux P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Nutrition et Métabolisme Protéique, INRA de Theix, Saint Genès
Champanelle, France.

A dramatic overexpression of IGFBP-1 is responsible for growth inhibition, in
response to a low-protein diet feeding. It has been demonstrated that a fall in
the amino acid concentration was directly responsible for IGFBP-1 induction. In
this report, we sought to determine the mechanism by which amino acid limitation 
upregulates IGFBP-1 expression. Our results show that both transcriptional
activation and mRNA stabilization are involved. We also demonstrate that (i) the 
mGCN2/ATF4 pathway is not involved in this regulation and (ii) the 3'UTR of
IGFBP-1 mRNA is responsible for its destabilization and regulates its stability
in response to amino acid starvation.

PMID: 15862298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Neuropharmacology. 2005 Jun;48(7):956-64.

GABAB receptor antagonist SGS742 improves spatial memory and reduces protein
binding to the cAMP response element (CRE) in the hippocampus.

Helm KA(1), Haberman RP, Dean SL, Hoyt EC, Melcher T, Lund PK, Gallagher M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, The Johns Hopkins University, 
3400 North Charles St., 102 Ames Hall, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

Memory storage in the brain requires protein synthesis initiated through
signaling pathways that control transcription. Such mechanisms are under active
investigation for therapies in disorders involving cognitive dysfunction.
Long-term memory can be improved by inhibiting activation or reducing expression 
of transcription factors such as ATF4/CREB2 and some C/EBP family members which
appear to serve as memory suppressors. Here, we provide evidence that GABAB
receptor antagonists may enhance cognition, at least in part, by this mechanism. 
We tested a GABAB receptor antagonist, SGS742 (CGP36742), on
hippocampal-dependent memory and hippocampal nuclear CRE-binding activity in
rats. As a result, acute in vivo administration of SGS742 both improved memory
and reduced total hippocampal CRE-binding activity of which a large proportion in
the basal state could be immunoneutralized with CREB2 antibodies. Consistent with
its activity on information storage mechanisms, acute SGS742 effectively improved
long-term memory in retrograde protocols, in which drug was given at times when
memory formation can be interrupted by blocking new protein production. In
conclusion, GABAB antagonists may provide a pharmacological therapy for cognitive
impairment, sharing mechanistic features with genetic approaches to reduce CREB2 
activity and to augment long-term memory.

PMID: 15857622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Dec;1038:60-74.

Study of translational control of eukaryotic gene expression using yeast.

Hinnebusch AG(1), Asano K, Olsen DS, Phan L, Nielsen KH, Valásek L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Development, Division of Intramural
Research, NICHD, NIH, Bldg. 18T, Rm. 106, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
ahinnebusch@nih.gov

Eukaryotic cells respond to starvation by decreasing the rate of general protein 
synthesis while inducing translation of specific mRNAs encoding transcription
factors GCN4 (yeast) or ATF4 (humans). Both responses are elicited by
phosphorylation of translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2) and the attendant
inhibition of its nucleotide exchange factor eIF2B-decreasing the binding to 40S 
ribosomes of methionyl initiator tRNA in the ternary complex (TC) with eIF2 and
GTP. The reduction in TC levels enables scanning ribosomes to bypass the start
codons of upstream open reading frames in the GCN4 mRNA leader and initiate
translation at the authentic GCN4 start codon. We exploited the fact that GCN4
translation is a sensitive reporter of defects in TC recruitment to identify the 
catalytic and regulatory subunits of eIF2B. More recently, we implicated the
C-terminal domain of eIF1A in 40S-binding of TC in vivo. Interestingly, we found 
that TC resides in a multifactor complex (MFC) with eIF3, eIF1, and the
GTPase-activating protein for eIF2, known as eIF5. Our biochemical and genetic
analyses indicate that physical interactions between MFC components enhance TC
binding to 40S subunits and are required for wild-type translational control of
GCN4. MFC integrity and eIF3 function also contribute to post-assembly steps in
the initiation pathway that impact GCN4 expression. Thus, apart from its critical
role in the starvation response, GCN4 regulation is a valuable tool for
dissecting the contributions of multiple translation factors in the eukaryotic
initiation pathway.

PMID: 15838098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Nature. 2005 Mar 24;434(7032):447-8.

Physiology: do neural signals remodel bone?

Elmquist JK, Strewler GJ.

Comment on
    Nature. 2005 Mar 24;434(7032):514-20.

PMID: 15791237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 27;280(21):20331-9. Epub 2005 Mar 23.

The oxidative stressor arsenite activates vascular endothelial growth factor mRNA
transcription by an ATF4-dependent mechanism.

Roybal CN(1), Hunsaker LA, Barbash O, Vander Jagt DL, Abcouwer SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of New Mexico
School of Medicine, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131-0001, USA.

Aberrant retinal expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) leading 
to neovascularization is a central feature of age-related macular degeneration
and diabetic retinopathy, two leading causes of vision loss. Oxidative stress is 
suggested to occur in retinal tissue during age-related macular degeneration and 
diabetic retinopathy and is suspected in the mechanism of VEGF expression in
these diseases. Arsenite, a thiol-reactive oxidative stressor, induces VEGF
expression by a HIF-1alpha-independent mechanism. Previously, we demonstrated
that homocysteine, an endoplasmic reticulum stressor, increases VEGF
transcription by a mechanism dependent upon activating transcription factor ATF4.
Because ATF4 is expressed in response to oxidative stress, we hypothesized that
ATF4 was also responsible for increased VEGF transcription in response to
arsenite. We now show that arsenite increased steady state levels of VEGF mRNA
and activated transcription from a VEGF promoter construct. Arsenite induced
eIF2alpha phosphorylation, resulting in increased ATF4 protein levels.
Inactivation or loss of ATF4 greatly diminished the VEGF response to arsenite
treatment. Overexpression of ATF4 was sufficient to activate the VEGF promoter,
and arsenite cooperated with exogenous ATF4 to further activate the promoter. A
complex containing ATF4 binds a DNA element at +1767 bp relative to the VEGF
transcription start site, and DNA binding activity is increased by arsenite
treatment. In addition, the ability of a thiol antioxidant, N-acetylcysteine, to 
inhibit the effect of arsenite on VEGF expression coincided with its ability to
inhibit phosphorylation of eIF2alpha and ATF4 protein expression. Thus,
arsenite-induced up-regulation of VEGF gene transcription occurs by an
ATF4-dependent mechanism.

PMID: 15788408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Apr 29;330(1):210-8.

Characterization of human NIPK (TRB3, SKIP3) gene activation in stressful
conditions.

Ord D(1), Ord T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia.

The neuronal cell death-inducible putative kinase (NIPK) gene is upregulated in
several cell types under stressful conditions. In order to understand the
molecular control of the human (h) NIPK gene (also known as TRB3 and SKIP3), we
mapped the transcriptional start sites of the gene in HepG2 cells treated with
thapsigargin, the inhibitor of endoplasmic reticular Ca(2+)-ATPase, and
determined the promoter region of the gene which is essential for endoplasmic
reticulum and arsenite stress responses. The analysis of cDNA clones revealed the
presence of several hNIPK mRNA isoforms, differing in their 5' regions upstream
of the hNIPK translation initiation codon as a result of alternative
transcription initiation and alternative splicing. The induction of hNIPK gene in
response to thapsigargin and arsenite treatments is mediated by a promoter
segment consisting of tandemly arranged 33-bp repeats that contain a regulatory
element similar to C/EBP-ATF composite site of the Chop gene promoter. ATF4,
whose level is upregulated in the cells exposed to thapsigargin or arsenite, is
able to bind to the 33-bp repeat and activate the hNIPK promoter. The
coexpression of hNIPK inhibits activation of hNIPK promoter in response to the
stress-inducing agents and to overexpressed ATF4, and thus NIPK may function as a
negative feedback regulator of ATF4.

PMID: 15781252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. EMBO J. 2005 Mar 23;24(6):1243-55. Epub 2005 Mar 10.

TRB3, a novel ER stress-inducible gene, is induced via ATF4-CHOP pathway and is
involved in cell death.

Ohoka N(1), Yoshii S, Hattori T, Onozaki K, Hayashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Health Sciences, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Nagoya City University, Mizuho, Nagoya, Japan.

C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) is a stress-inducible nuclear protein that is
crucial for the development of programmed cell death and regeneration; however,
the regulation of its function has not been well characterized. Slbo, a
Drosophila homolog of C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer binding protein), was shown to be
unstabilized by tribbles. Here, we identified TRB3 as a tribbles ortholog in
humans, which associated with CHOP to suppress the CHOP-dependent
transactivation. TRB3 is induced by various forms endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress later than CHOP. Tunicamycin treatment enhanced the TRB3 promoter
activity, while dominant-negative forms of CHOP suppressed the
tunicamycin-induced activation. In addition, the tunicamycin response region in
the TRB3 promoter contains amino-acid response elements overlapping the
CHOP-binding site, and CHOP and ATF4 cooperated to activate this promoter
activity. Knockdown of endogenous ATF4 or CHOP expression dramatically repressed 
tunicamycin-induced TRB3 induction. Furthermore, knockdown of TRB3 expression
decreased ER stress-dependent cell death. These results indicate that TRB3 is a
novel target of CHOP/ATF4 and downregulates its own induction by repression of
CHOP/ATF4 functions, and that it is involved in CHOP-dependent cell death during 
ER stress.

PMCID: PMC556400
PMID: 15775988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Jun;67(6):1909-19. Epub 2005 Mar 8.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress links dyslipidemia to inhibition of proteasome
activity and glucose transport by HIV protease inhibitors.

Parker RA(1), Flint OP, Mulvey R, Elosua C, Wang F, Fenderson W, Wang S, Yang WP,
Noor MA.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic and Cardiovascular Discovery Biology, Bristol-Myers Squibb
Pharmaceutical Research Institute, 311 Pennington-Rocky Hill Road, Pennington, NJ
08534, USA. rex.parker@bms.com

The lipid and metabolic disturbances associated with human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) protease inhibitor therapy in AIDS have stimulated interest in developing
new agents that minimize these side effects in the clinic. The underlying
explanation of mechanism remains enigmatic, but a recently described link between
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and dysregulation of lipid metabolism suggests 
a provocative integration of existing and emerging data. We provide new evidence 
from in vitro models indicating that proteasome inhibition and differential
glucose transport blockade by protease inhibitors are proximal events eliciting
an ER stress transcriptional response that can regulate lipogenic pathways in
hepatocytes or adipocytes. Proteasome activity was inhibited in vitro by several 
protease inhibitors at clinically relevant (micromolar) levels. In the intact
cells, protease inhibitors rapidly elicited a pattern of gene expression
diagnostic of intracellular proteasome inhibition and activation of an ER stress 
response. This included induction of transcription factors GADD153, ATF4, and
ATF3; amino acid metabolic enzymes; proteasome components; and certain ER
chaperones. In hepatocyte lines, the ER stress response was closely linked to
moderate increases in lipogenic and cholesterogenic gene expression. However, in 
adipocytes where GLUT4 was directly inhibited by some protease inhibitors,
time-dependent suppression of lipogenic genes and triglyceride synthesis was
observed in coordination with the ER stress response. These results further link 
ER stress to dyslipidemia and contribute to a unifying mechanism for the
pathophysiology of protease inhibitor-associated lipodystrophy, helping explain
differences in clinical metabolic profiles among protease inhibitors.

PMID: 15755908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Nature. 2005 Mar 24;434(7032):514-20. Epub 2005 Feb 20.

Leptin regulation of bone resorption by the sympathetic nervous system and CART.

Elefteriou F(1), Ahn JD, Takeda S, Starbuck M, Yang X, Liu X, Kondo H, Richards
WG, Bannon TW, Noda M, Clement K, Vaisse C, Karsenty G.

Collaborators: Karsenty G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2005 Mar 24;434(7032):447-8.
    Cell Metab. 2005 Apr;1(4):219-21.

Bone remodelling, the mechanism by which vertebrates regulate bone mass,
comprises two phases, namely resorption by osteoclasts and formation by
osteoblasts; osteoblasts are multifunctional cells also controlling osteoclast
differentiation. Sympathetic signalling via beta2-adrenergic receptors (Adrb2)
present on osteoblasts controls bone formation downstream of leptin. Here we
show, by analysing Adrb2-deficient mice, that the sympathetic nervous system
favours bone resorption by increasing expression in osteoblast progenitor cells
of the osteoclast differentiation factor Rankl. This sympathetic function
requires phosphorylation (by protein kinase A) of ATF4, a cell-specific
CREB-related transcription factor essential for osteoblast differentiation and
function. That bone resorption cannot increase in gonadectomized Adrb2-deficient 
mice highlights the biological importance of this regulation, but also contrasts 
sharply with the increase in bone resorption characterizing another hypogonadic
mouse with low sympathetic tone, the ob/ob mouse. This discrepancy is explained, 
in part, by the fact that CART ('cocaine amphetamine regulated transcript'), a
neuropeptide whose expression is controlled by leptin and nearly abolished in
ob/ob mice, inhibits bone resorption by modulating Rankl expression. Our study
establishes that leptin-regulated neural pathways control both aspects of bone
remodelling, and demonstrates that integrity of sympathetic signalling is
necessary for the increase in bone resorption caused by gonadal failure.

PMID: 15724149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Curr Med Chem Anticancer Agents. 2005 Jan;5(1):15-27.

Cisplatin resistance and transcription factors.

Torigoe T(1), Izumi H, Ishiguchi H, Yoshida Y, Tanabe M, Yoshida T, Igarashi T,
Niina I, Wakasugi T, Imaizumi T, Momii Y, Kuwano M, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, School of Medicine, 1-1 Iseigaoka, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka
807-8555, Japan.

Cisplatin is one of the most potent and widely used anti-cancer agents in the
treatment of various solid tumors. However, the development of resistance to
cisplatin is a major obstacle in clinical treatment. Several mechanisms are
thought to be involved in cisplatin resistance, including decreased intracellular
drug accumulation, increased levels of cellular thiols, increased nucleotide
excision-repair activity and decreased mismatch-repair activity. In general, the 
molecules responsible for each mechanism are upregulated in cisplatin-resistant
cells; this indicates that the transcription factors activated in response to
cisplatin might play crucial roles in drug resistance. It is known that the
tumor-suppressor proteins p53 and p73, and the oncoprotein c-Myc, which function 
as transcription factors, influence cellular sensitivity to cisplatin. So far, we
have identified several transcription factors involved in cisplatin resistance,
including Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1), CCAAT-binding transcription factor 2
(CTF2), activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), zinc-finger factor 143 (ZNF143)
and mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA). Two of these-YB-1 and
ZNF143-lack the high-mobility group (HMG) domain and can bind preferentially to
cisplatin-modified DNA in addition to HMG domain proteins or DNA repair proteins,
indicating that these transcription factors may also participate in DNA repair.
In this review, we summarize the mechanisms of cisplatin resistance and focus on 
transcription factors involved in the genomic response to cisplatin.

PMID: 15720258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 8;280(14):14189-202. Epub 2005 Jan 31.

Phosphorylation of the alpha-subunit of the eukaryotic initiation factor-2
(eIF2alpha) reduces protein synthesis and enhances apoptosis in response to
proteasome inhibition.

Jiang HY(1), Wek RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA. hijang@iupui.edu

Protein ubiquitination and subsequent degradation by the proteasome are important
mechanisms regulating cell cycle, growth and differentiation, and apoptosis.
Recent studies in cancer therapy suggest that drugs that disrupt the
ubiquitin/proteasome pathway induce apoptosis and sensitize malignant cells and
tumors to conventional chemotherapy. In this study we addressed the role of
phosphorylation of the alpha-subunit eukaryotic initiation factor-2 (eIF2), and
its attendant regulation of gene expression, in the cellular stress response to
proteasome inhibition. Phosphorylation of eIF2alpha in mouse embryo fibroblast
(MEF) cells subjected to proteasome inhibition leads to a significant reduction
in protein synthesis, concomitant with induced expression of the bZIP
transcription regulator, ATF4, and its target gene CHOP/GADD153. The primary
eIF2alpha kinase activated by exposure of these fibroblast cells to proteasome
inhibition is GCN2 (EIF2AK4), which has a central role in the recognition of
cytoplasmic stress signals. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is not effectively 
induced in MEF cells subjected to proteasome inhibition, with minimal activation 
of the ER stress sensory proteins, eIF2alpha kinase PEK (PERK/EIF2AK3), IRE1
protein kinase and the transcription regulator ATF6 following up to 6 h of
proteasome inhibitor treatment. Loss of eIF2alpha phosphorylation thwarts caspase
activation and delays apoptosis. Central to this pro-apoptotic function of
eIF2alpha kinases during proteasome inhibition is the transcriptional regulator
CHOP, as deletion of CHOP in MEF cells impedes apoptosis. We conclude that
eIF2alpha kinases are integral to cellular stress pathways induced by proteasome 
inhibitors, and may be central to the efficacy of anticancer drugs that target
the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway.

PMID: 15684420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2005 Jan;25(1):41-53.

Damage to the endoplasmic reticulum and activation of apoptotic machinery by
oxidative stress in ischemic neurons.

Hayashi T(1), Saito A, Okuno S, Ferrand-Drake M, Dodd RL, Chan PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California 94305-5487, USA.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which plays a role in apoptosis, is susceptible
to oxidative stress. Because superoxide is produced in the brain after
ischemia/reperfusion, oxidative injury to this organelle may be implicated in
ischemic neuronal cell death. Activating transcription factor-4 (ATF-4) and
C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP), both of which are involved in apoptosis, are
induced by severe ER stress. Using wild-type and human copper/zinc superoxide
dismutase transgenic rats, we observed induction of these molecules in the brain 
after global cerebral ischemia and compared them with neuronal degeneration. In
ischemic, wild-type brains, expression of ATF-4 and CHOP was increased in the
hippocampal CA1 neurons that would later undergo apoptosis. Transgenic rats had a
mild increase in ATF-4 and CHOP and minimal neuronal degeneration, indicating
that superoxide was involved in ER stress-induced cell death. We further
confirmed attenuation on induction of these molecules in transgenic mouse brains 
after focal ischemia. When superoxide was visualized with ethidium, signals for
ATF-4 and superoxide overlapped in the same cells. Moreover, lipids in the ER
were robustly peroxidized by ischemia but were attenuated in transgenic animals. 
This indicates that superoxide attacked and damaged the ER, and that oxidative ER
damage is implicated in ischemic neuronal cell death.

PMID: 15678111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Diabetes. 2005 Feb;54(2):452-61.

Cytokines downregulate the sarcoendoplasmic reticulum pump Ca2+ ATPase 2b and
deplete endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+, leading to induction of endoplasmic reticulum
stress in pancreatic beta-cells.

Cardozo AK(1), Ortis F, Storling J, Feng YM, Rasschaert J, Tonnesen M, Van Eylen 
F, Mandrup-Poulsen T, Herchuelz A, Eizirik DL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Route de
Lennik, 808 CP-618, 1070 Brussels, Belgium. akupperc@ulb.ac.be

Cytokines and free radicals are mediators of beta-cell death in type 1 diabetes. 
Under in vitro conditions, interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) + gamma-interferon
(IFN-gamma) induce nitric oxide (NO) production and apoptosis in rodent and human
pancreatic beta-cells. We have previously shown, by microarray analysis of
primary beta-cells, that IL-1beta + IFN-gamma decrease expression of the mRNA
encoding for the sarcoendoplasmic reticulum pump Ca(2+) ATPase 2b (SERCA2b) while
inducing expression of the endoplasmic reticulum stress-related and proapoptotic 
gene CHOP (C/EBP [CCAAT/enhancer binding protein] homologous protein). In the
present study we show that cytokine-induced apoptosis and necrosis in primary rat
beta-cells and INS-1E cells largely depends on NO production. IL-1beta +
IFN-gamma, via NO synthesis, markedly decreased SERCA2b protein expression and
depleted ER Ca(2+) stores. Of note, beta-cells showed marked sensitivity to
apoptosis induced by SERCA blockers, as compared with fibroblasts.
Cytokine-induced ER Ca(2+) depletion was paralleled by an NO-dependent induction 
of CHOP protein and activation of diverse components of the ER stress response,
including activation of inositol-requiring ER-to-nucleus signal kinase 1alpha
(IRE1alpha) and PRK (RNA-dependent protein kinase)-like ER kinase
(PERK)/activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), but not ATF6. In contrast, the
ER stress-inducing agent thapsigargin triggered these four pathways in parallel. 
In conclusion, our results suggest that the IL-1beta + IFN-gamma-induced decrease
in SERCA2b expression, with subsequent depletion of ER Ca(2+) and activation of
the ER stress pathway, is a potential contributory mechanism to beta-cell death.

PMID: 15677503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 8;280(14):13973-7. Epub 2005 Jan 26.

Mitosin/CENP-F as a negative regulator of activating transcription factor-4.

Zhou X(1), Wang R, Fan L, Li Y, Ma L, Yang Z, Yu W, Jing N, Zhu X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Mitosin/CENP-F is a human nuclear matrix protein with multiple leucine zipper
motifs. Its accumulation in S-G2 phases and transient kinetochore localization in
mitosis suggest a multifunctional protein for cell proliferation. Moreover, its
murine and avian orthologs are implicated in myocyte differentiation. Here we
report its interaction with activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4), a
ubiquitous basic leucine zipper transcription factor important for proliferation,
differentiation, and stress response. The C-terminal portion of mitosin between
residues 2488 and 3113 bound to ATF4 through two distinct domains, one of which
was a leucine zipper motif. Mitosin mutants containing these domains were able to
either supershift or disrupt the ATF4-DNA complex. On the other hand, ATF4, but
not ATF1-3 or ATF6, interacted with mitosin through a region containing the basic
leucine zipper motif. Moreover, overexpression of full-length mitosin repressed
the transactivation activity of ATF4 in dual luciferase-based reporter assays,
while knocking down mitosin expression manifested the opposite effects. These
findings suggest mitosin to be a negative regulator of ATF4 in interphase through
direct interaction.

PMID: 15677469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Neurochem. 2005 Jan;92(2):321-36.

Role of basic region leucine zipper transcription factors cyclic AMP response
element binding protein (CREB), CREB2, activating transcription factor 2 and
CAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha in cyclic AMP response element-mediated
transcription.

Thiel G(1), Al Sarraj J, Vinson C, Stefano L, Bach K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, Homburg, Germany. gerald.thiel@uniklinik-saarland.de

The transcription factor cAMP response element binding protein (CREB), a member
of the basic region leucine zipper (bZIP) family of proteins, is the major cAMP
response element (CRE) binding. Other bZIP proteins, including CREB2, activating 
transcription factor 2 (ATF2), or CAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) have been
reported to transactivate CRE-containing genes or to interfere with
transactivation by CREB. We have designed a simple transactivation assay using
expression of either a constitutively active CREB mutant or a nuclear targeted
mutant of the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase. In both cases, 
a striking stimulation of transcription of CRE-containing reporter genes was
observed in noradrenergic locus coeruleus-like CATH.a cells. In addition, a
constitutively active mutant of ATF2 specifically transactivated a secretogranin 
II promoter/luciferase reporter gene, but had no effect on the tyrosine
hydroxylase promoter. In contrast, CREB2 and C/EBPalpha did not transactivate
CRE-containing reporter genes, indicating that these bZIP proteins target
distinct genetic elements. Experiments involving dominant-negative bZIP mutants
revealed that CREB does not heterodimerize with CREB2, ATF2, c-Jun or C/EBP.
Rather, CREB and ATF2 compete for binding to the CRE, and are independently able 
to up-regulate transcription of genes containing CRE motifs in their regulatory
regions.

PMID: 15663480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Jul;204(1):45-50.

Divergent stress responses to IL-1beta, nitric oxide, and tunicamycin by
chondrocytes.

Oliver BL(1), Cronin CG, Zhang-Benoit Y, Goldring MB, Tanzer ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of BioStructure and Function, School of Dental Medicine, University
of Connecticut Heath Center, Farmington, Connecticut, USA. bolivar@up.uchc.edu

As the only cell in cartilage responsible for matrix synthesis, the chondrocyte's
viability is crucial to healthy tissue. It must tolerate stresses from both
mechanical and cellular sources. This study examines the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress response in chondrocytes after exposure to IL-1beta, nitric oxide, or
tunicamycin in order to determine whether this form of stress causes cell death. 
Cultures of the immortalized human juvenile costal chondrocyte cell line,
C-28/I2, were treated with IL-1beta, S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine (SNAP), and 
tunicamycin. Increasing intracellular nitric oxide levels by SNAP treatment or
inhibiting protein folding in the ER lumen by tunicamycin induced the ER stress
response as evidenced by increased protein and gene expression of GADD153 as well
as PERK and eIF2-alpha phosphorylation, and resulted in apoptosis. IL-1beta
treatment induced PERK and eIF2-alpha phosphorylation, but not GADD153 expression
or apoptosis. The ER stress signaling pathway of IL-1beta involved iNOS because
blocking its expression, inhibited ER stress gene expression. Therefore, inducing
the ER stress response in chondrocytes results in divergent responses depending
on the agent used. Even though IL-1beta, a common proinflammatory cytokine,
induces the ER stress response, it is not proapoptotic to chondrocytes. On the
other hand, exposure to high levels of intracellular nitric oxide induce
chondrocyte apoptosis as part of the ER stress response.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15605392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Dec 3;325(1):109-16.

Transcriptional control of cystine/glutamate transporter gene by amino acid
deprivation.

Sato H(1), Nomura S, Maebara K, Sato K, Tamba M, Bannai S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

Recent studies have demonstrated that depletion of amino acids results in the
induction of several genes and that a genomic cis-element termed amino acid
response element (AARE) is required for the induction. System x(c)(-) is an
anionic amino acid transport system highly specific for cystine and glutamate,
and its activity is known to be induced by cystine deprivation. This transporter 
is composed of two protein components, xCT and 4F2 heavy chain, and xCT is
thought to mediate the transport activity. In the present study, the molecular
mechanism for the induction of xCT by amino acid deprivation has been
investigated. In mouse NIH3T3 cells, the activity of system x(c)(-) and xCT mRNA 
is induced not only by deprivation of cystine but also by deprivation of other
amino acids. Two AAREs, each located in the opposite direction with an
intervening sequence, were found in the 5'-flanking region of the mouse xCT gene.
Promoter analysis revealed that both AAREs were necessary for the maximal
induction of xCT mRNA in response to the amino acid deprivation. Glucose
deprivation had no effect on the induction of the activity of system x(c)(-).
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that ATF4, but not ATF2, is involved 
in the amino acid control of xCT expression. These results demonstrate that xCT
is a new member of the proteins whose transcriptional control by the amino acid
deprivation is mediated by AARE.

PMID: 15522208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Cancer Lett. 2001 Dec 28;174(2):103-13.

Molecular basis for the contribution of the antioxidant responsive element to
cancer chemoprevention.

Hayes JD(1), McMahon M.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Centre, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, University 
of Dundee, Dundee DD1 9SY, Scotland, UK. hayes@icrf.icnet.uk

This article provides an overview of the mechanisms by which cancer
chemopreventive blocking agents increase the expression of detoxication and
antioxidant genes. These agents all appear capable of transcriptionally
activating a gene battery that includes NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase, aldo-keto
reductases, glutathione S-transferases, gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase,
glutathione synthetase and heme oxygenase. Gene induction occurs through the
antioxidant responsive element (ARE), a process that is dependent on the Nuclear 
Factor-Erythroid 2p45-related factors, Nrf1 and Nrf2. Under basal conditions,
these basic region leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors are located in the
cytoplasm of the cell bound to Keap1, and upon challenge with inducing agents,
they are released from Keap1 and translocate to the nucleus. Within the nucleus, 
Nrf1 and Nrf2 are recruited to the ARE as heterodimers with either small Maf
proteins, FosB, c-Jun, JunD, activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) or ATF4.
The role of protein kinases in transducing chemical stress signals to the bZIP
factors that affect gene induction through the ARE is discussed.

PMID: 11689285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Gene. 2001 Jul 25;273(1):1-11.

The molecular biology and nomenclature of the activating transcription
factor/cAMP responsive element binding family of transcription factors:
activating transcription factor proteins and homeostasis.

Hai T(1), Hartman MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Neurobiotechnology Center, 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. hai.2@osu.edu

The mammalian ATF/CREB family of transcription factors represents a large group
of basic region-leucine zipper (bZip) proteins which was originally defined in
the late 1980s by their ability to bind to the consensus ATF/CRE site 'TGACGTCA'.
Over the past decade, cDNA clones encoding identical or homologous proteins have 
been isolated by different laboratories and given different names. These proteins
can be grouped into subgroups according to their amino acid similarity. In this
review, we will briefly describe the classification of these proteins with a
historical perspective of their nomenclature. We will then review three members
of the ATF/CREB family of proteins: ATF3, ATF4 and ATF6. We will address four
issues for each protein: (a) homologous proteins and alternative names, (b) dimer
formation with other bZip proteins, (c) transcriptional activity, and (d)
potential physiological functions. Although the name Activating Transcription
Factor (ATF) implies that they are transcriptional activators, some of these
proteins are transcriptional repressors. ATF3 homodimer is a transcriptional
repressor and ATF4 has been reported to be either an activator or a repressor. We
will review the reports on the transcriptional activities of ATF4, and propose
potential explanations for the discrepancy. Although the physiological functions 
of these proteins are not well understood, some clues can be gained from studies 
with different approaches. When the data are available, we will address the
following questions. (a) How is the expression (at the mRNA level or protein
level) regulated? (b) How are the transcriptional activities regulated? (c) What 
are the interacting proteins (other than bZip partners)? (d) What are the
consequences of ectopically expressing the gene (gain-of-function) or deleting
the gene (loss-of-function)? Although answers to these questions are far from
being complete, together they provide clues to the functions of these ATF
proteins. Despite the diversity in the potential functions of these proteins, one
common theme is their involvement in cellular responses to extracellular signals,
indicating a role for these ATF proteins in homeostasis.

PMID: 11483355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. FEBS Lett. 2001 Jul 27;502(1-2):57-62.

The cAMP response element binding protein-2 (CREB-2) can interact with the
C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP).

Gachon F(1), Gaudray G, Thébault S, Basbous J, Koffi JA, Devaux C, Mesnard J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Infections Rétrovirales et Signalisation Cellulaire, CNRS EP
2104/Université Montpellier I, Institut de Biologie, 4 Bd Henri IV, 34060
Montpellier, France.

cAMP response element binding protein-2 (CREB-2) is a basic leucine zipper (bZIP)
factor that was originally described as a repressor of CRE-dependent
transcription but that can also act as a transcriptional activator. Moreover,
CREB-2 is able to function in association with the viral Tax protein as an
activator of the human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) promoter. Here we
show that CREB-2 is able to interact with C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP), a bZIP
transcription factor known to inhibit CAAT/enhancer-dependent transcription.
Cotransfection of CHOP with CREB-2 results in decreased activation driven by the 
cellular CRE motif or the HTLV-I proximal Tax-responsive element, confirming that
CREB-2 and CHOP can interact with each other in vivo.

PMID: 11478948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Cell Biol. 2001 May 28;153(5):1011-22.

Feedback inhibition of the unfolded protein response by GADD34-mediated
dephosphorylation of eIF2alpha.

Novoa I(1), Zeng H, Harding HP, Ron D.

Author information: 
(1)Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, New York 
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Phosphorylation of the alpha subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 
2 (eIF2alpha) on serine 51 integrates general translation repression with
activation of stress-inducible genes such as ATF4, CHOP, and BiP in the unfolded 
protein response. We sought to identify new genes active in this
phospho-eIF2alpha-dependent signaling pathway by screening a library of
recombinant retroviruses for clones that inhibit the expression of a CHOP::GFP
reporter. A retrovirus encoding the COOH terminus of growth arrest and DNA damage
gene (GADD)34, also known as MYD116 (Fornace, A.J., D.W. Neibert, M.C. Hollander,
J.D. Luethy, M. Papathanasiou, J. Fragoli, and N.J. Holbrook. 1989. Mol. Cell.
Biol. 9:4196-4203; Lord K.A., B. Hoffman-Lieberman, and D.A. Lieberman. 1990.
Nucleic Acid Res. 18:2823), was isolated and found to attenuate CHOP (also known 
as GADD153) activation by both protein malfolding in the endoplasmic reticulum,
and amino acid deprivation. Despite normal activity of the cognate
stress-inducible eIF2alpha kinases PERK (also known as PEK) and GCN2,
phospho-eIF2alpha levels were markedly diminished in GADD34-overexpressing cells.
GADD34 formed a complex with the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase 1
(PP1c) that specifically promoted the dephosphorylation of eIF2alpha in vitro.
Mutations that interfered with the interaction with PP1c prevented the
dephosphorylation of eIF2alpha and blocked attenuation of CHOP by GADD34.
Expression of GADD34 is stress dependent, and was absent in PERK(-)/- and
GCN2(-)/- cells. These findings implicate GADD34-mediated dephosphorylation of
eIF2alpha in a negative feedback loop that inhibits stress-induced gene
expression, and that might promote recovery from translational inhibition in the 
unfolded protein response.

PMCID: PMC2174339
PMID: 11381086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2001 Apr;17(4):637-45.

GABA(B) receptors couple directly to the transcription factor ATF4.

Vernon E(1), Meyer G, Pickard L, Dev K, Molnar E, Collingridge GL, Henley JM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Synaptic Plasticity, Department of Anatomy, School of Medical
Sciences, Bristol University, University Walk, Bristol, BS8 1TD.

The inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), acts at
ionotropic (GABA(A) and GABA(C)) and metabotropic (GABA(B)) receptors. Functional
GABA(B) receptors are heterodimers of GABA(B(1)) and GABA(B(2)) subunits. Here we
show a robust, direct, and specific interaction between the coiled-coil domain
present in the C-terminus of the GABA(B(1)) subunit and the transcription factor 
ATF4 (also known as CREB2). ATF4 and GABA(B(2)) binding to the GABA(B(1)) subunit
were mutually exclusive. In rat hippocampal neurons native GABA(B(1)) showed
surprisingly little similarity to GABA(B(2)) in its subcellular distribution.
GABA(B(1)) and ATF4, however, were highly colocalized throughout the cell and
displayed a punctate distribution within the dendrites. Activation of GABA(B)
receptors in hippocampal neurons caused a dramatic translocation of ATF4 out of
the nucleus into the cytoplasm. These data suggest a novel neuronal signaling
pathway that could regulate the functional expression of GABA(B) receptors and/or
modulate gene transcription.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11312600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Neurochem Int. 2001 Jun;38(7):601-8.

Modular structure of cAMP response element binding protein 2 (CREB2).

Schoch S(1), Cibelli G, Magin A, Steinmüller L, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, D-50674 Cologne, Germany.

The transcription factor cAMP-response element binding protein 2 (CREB2), a
member of the family of basic region leucine zipper proteins, has been suggested 
to function in the brain as a repressor of long-term memory. Using recombinant
proteins we show that CREB2 binds in vitro to the palindromic cAMP response
element derived from the secretogranin II gene. Recent studies of the
chromogranin B, secretogranin II and enkephalin genes showed that CREB2
functioned as a repressor of cAMP-induced transcription. We analyzed the ability 
of CREB2 to repress transcription using model promoters. A molecular dissection
of the CREB2 molecule revealed that CREB2 lacks a transferable repressor domain
suggesting that CREB2 may function solely as a "passive" transcriptional
repressor. In contrast, "active" repressor domains derived from the thyroid
hormone receptor alpha or the NK10 zinc finger protein containing a "Krüppel
associated box" could be transfered to a heterologous DNA-binding domain and
functioned as fusion proteins in repressing transcription of a reporter gene. In 
addition, a strong activation domain located at the N-terminus was identified in 
the CREB2 protein suggesting that CREB2 may act as an activator of transcription 
by binding to different genetic regulatory elements.

PMID: 11290385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 15;276(24):20858-65. Epub 2001 Mar 26.

Identification of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) as an Nrf2-interacting
protein. Implication for heme oxygenase-1 gene regulation.

He CH(1), Gong P, Hu B, Stewart D, Choi ME, Choi AM, Alam J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Nrf2 regulates expression of genes encoding enzymes with antioxidant (e.g. heme
oxygenase-1 (HO-1)) or xenobiotic detoxification (e.g. NAD(P)H:quinone
oxidoreductase, glutathione S-transferase) functions via the stress- or
antioxidant-response elements (StRE/ARE). Nrf2 heterodimerizes with small Maf
proteins, but the role of such dimers in gene induction is controversial, and
other partners may exist. By using the yeast two-hybrid assay, we identified
activating transcription factor (ATF) 4 as a potential Nrf2-interacting protein. 
Association between Nrf2 and ATF4 in mammalian cells was confirmed by
co-immunoprecipitation and mammalian two-hybrid assays. Furthermore, Nrf2.ATF4
dimers bound to an StRE sequence from the ho-1 gene. CdCl(2), a potent inducer of
HO-1, increased expression of ATF4 in mouse hepatoma cells, and detectable
induction of ATF4 protein preceded that of HO-1 (30 min versus 2 h). A
dominant-negative mutant of ATF4 inhibited basal and CdCl(2)-stimulated
expression of a StRE-dependent/luciferase fusion construct (pE1-luc) in hepatoma 
cells but only basal expression in mammary epithelial MCF-7 cells. A dominant
mutant of Nrf2 was equally inhibitory in both cell types in the presence or
absence of CdCl(2). These results indicate that ATF4 regulates basal and
CdCl(2)-induced expression of the ho-1 gene in a cell-specific manner and
possibly in a complex with Nrf2.

PMID: 11274184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Mar;21(6):2192-202.

ATF4 degradation relies on a phosphorylation-dependent interaction with the
SCF(betaTrCP) ubiquitin ligase.

Lassot I(1), Ségéral E, Berlioz-Torrent C, Durand H, Groussin L, Hai T, Benarous 
R, Margottin-Goguet F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unite 529, Interactions Moléculaires Hôte-pathogène, 75014 Paris,
France.

The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway regulates gene expression through protein
degradation. Here we show that the F-box protein betaTrCP, the receptor component
of the SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase responsible for IkappaBalpha and beta-catenin
degradation, is colocalized in the nucleus with ATF4, a member of the ATF-CREB
bZIP family of transcription factors, and controls its stability. Association
between the two proteins depends on ATF4 phosphorylation and on ATF4 serine
residue 219 present in the context of DSGXXXS, which is similar but not identical
to the motif found in other substrates of betaTrCP. ATF4 ubiquitination in HeLa
cells is enhanced in the presence of betaTrCP. The F-box-deleted betaTrCP protein
behaves as a negative transdominant mutant that inhibits ATF4 ubiquitination and 
degradation and, subsequently, enhances its activity in cyclic AMP-mediated
transcription. ATF4 represents a novel substrate for the SCF(betaTrCP) complex,
which is the first mammalian E3 ubiquitin ligase identified so far for the
control of the degradation of a bZIP transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC86853
PMID: 11238952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mol Cell. 2000 Nov;6(5):1099-108.

Regulated translation initiation controls stress-induced gene expression in
mammalian cells.

Harding HP(1), Novoa I, Zhang Y, Zeng H, Wek R, Schapira M, Ron D.

Author information: 
(1)Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine The Department of Medicine, Kaplan
Cancer Center New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Protein kinases that phosphorylate the alpha subunit of eukaryotic initiation
factor 2 (eIF2alpha) are activated in stressed cells and negatively regulate
protein synthesis. Phenotypic analysis of targeted mutations in murine cells
reveals a novel role for eIF2alpha kinases in regulating gene expression in the
unfolded protein response (UPR) and in amino acid starved cells. When activated
by their cognate upstream stress signals, the mammalian eIF2 kinases PERK and
GCN2 repress translation of most mRNAs but selectively increase translation of
Activating Transcription Factor 4 (ATF4), resulting in the induction of the
downstream gene CHOP (GADD153). This is the first example of a mammalian
signaling pathway homologous to the well studied yeast general control response
in which eIF2alpha phosphorylation activates genes involved in amino acid
biosynthesis. Mammalian cells thus utilize an ancient pathway to regulate gene
expression in response to diverse stress signals.

PMID: 11106749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Dec 5;97(25):13967-72.

The GABAB receptor interacts directly with the related transcription factors
CREB2 and ATFx.

White JH(1), McIllhinney RA, Wise A, Ciruela F, Chan WY, Emson PC, Billinton A,
Marshall FH.

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Systems, Molecular Pharmacology Department, Glaxo Wellcome Medicines 
Research Centre, Gunnels Wood Road, Stevenage, Hertfordshire, SG1 2NY, United
Kingdom. Jw6155@glaxowellcome.co.uk

gamma-Aminobutyric acid type B (GABA(B)) receptors mediate the metabotropic
actions of the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA. These seven-transmembrane
receptors are known to signal primarily through activation of G proteins to
modulate the action of ion channels or second messengers. The functional GABA(B) 
receptor is made up of a heterodimer consisting of two subunits, GABA(B)-R1 and
GABA(B)-R2, which interact via coiled-coil domains in their C-terminal tails. By 
using a yeast two-hybrid approach, we have identified direct interactions between
the C-terminal tails of GABA(B)-R1 and GABA(B)-R2 with two related transcription 
factors, CREB2 (ATF4) and ATFx. In primary neuronal cultures as well in
recombinant Chinese hamster ovary cells expressing GABA(B) receptors, CREB2 is
localized within the cytoplasm as well as the nucleus. Activation of the GABA(B) 
receptor by the specific agonist baclofen leads to a marked translocation and
accumulation of CREB2 from the cytoplasm into the nucleus. We demonstrate that
receptor stimulation results in activation of transcription from a CREB2
responsive reporter gene. Such a signaling mechanism is unique among Family C G
protein-coupled receptors and, in the case of the GABA(B) receptor and CREB2, may
play a role in long-term changes in the nervous system.

PMCID: PMC17684
PMID: 11087824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Physiol Res. 2000;49(3):363-8.

Effects of vitamin E and prostaglandin E2 on expression of CREB1 and CREB2
proteins by human T lymphocytes.

Valenti A(1), Venza I, Venza M, Fimiani V, Teti D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Pathology, Medical School, University of Messina, Italy.

Both prostaglandins (PGs) and vitamin E are known to deeply affect immune
responses. It is shown here that they both influence T cell-mediated immunity
through reciprocal interference on the expression of cyclic-AMP responsive
element binding (CREB) family proteins. CREB1 protein of human T lymphocytes was 
significantly modulated by a brief treatment of 5 to 10 min with PGE2. On the
contrary, vitamin E appeared to be ineffective on the CREB1 behavior, while it
abolished the PGE2-induced modulation of this protein. The CREB2 protein
expression was also affected by PGE2 treatment, but a longer period of incubation
(>20 min) was needed to observe these changes. Vitamin E showed a strong
enhancing effect on CREB2 that was partially reversed by the subsequent treatment
with PGE2. Our results support the idea that there is reciprocal interference
between PGE2 and vitamin E on PGE2-induced signals in T lymphocytes. These data
are in agreement with the reports concerning different cell systems and
experimental conditions.

PMID: 11043924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Gen Virol. 2000 Nov;81(Pt 11):2645-52.

Latency-associated nuclear antigen of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
(human herpesvirus-8) binds ATF4/CREB2 and inhibits its transcriptional
activation activity.

Lim C(1), Sohn H, Gwack Y, Choe J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Taejeon 305-701, Korea.

Latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA), encoded by ORF 73 of Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV; human herpesvirus-8), may play an important
role in the persistence of the viral episome by tethering it to host chromosomes 
during mitosis. It also has been suggested from its amino acid sequence features 
that LANA may have transcription-regulatory activity. Here, it is reported that
LANA interacts with activating transcription factor (ATF) 4/cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) 2, a member of the ATF/CREB family of
transcription factors, and represses the transcriptional activation activity of
ATF4/CREB2. Repression by LANA is independent of the DNA-binding ability of
ATF4/CREB2, since LANA also represses transactivation of ATF4/CREB2 fused to the 
GAL4 DNA-binding domain and does not affect the DNA-binding ability of ATF4/CREB2
in an electrophoretic mobility shift assay. The putative leucine zipper domain of
LANA is required for binding to the relatively conserved basic region/leucine
zipper domain (bZIP) of ATF4/CREB2, suggesting that the interaction may involve
leucine zipper dimerization.

PMID: 11038375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Mech Dev. 2000 Oct;97(1-2):141-8.

Expression of the bZIP transcription factor TCF11 and its potential dimerization 
partners during development.

Murphy P(1), Kolstø A.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Centre of Oslo, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1125, Blindern,
N-0316, Oslo, Norway. paula.murphy@biotek.uio.no

TCF11 (also known as Nrf1 and LCR-F1) is a basic-region leucine-zipper (b-ZIP)
transcription factor that is essential during embryonic development. We have
carried out expression analysis at a number of developmental stages and find that
while there is some localized elevated expression between 8 and 9 days post
coitum (dpc), the gene is widely expressed with a constant level of mRNA
transcripts detectable in all tissues and at all stages examined. However, this
does not reflect the specific nature of a TCF11 mutant phenotype (EMBO J. 17
(1998) 1779) which shows an essential role in foetal liver haematopoiesis. The
specificity of TCF11 function may be controlled at a post-transcriptional level
including availability of, and specific interaction with, a range of potential
heterodimerization partners. We therefore carried out expression analysis of four
candidate partner molecules; the three small Maf genes and another bZIP
transcription factor found to bind to TCF11 in a two-hybrid screen, ATF4. We show
different patterns of expression for the three Maf genes during development with 
MafG being widely expressed, MafK expressed only later in development and in
specific tissues, and no detection of MafF. ATF4 shows evidence of complex
regulation during development and shows elevated expression in many of the same
sites as TCF11.

PMID: 11025215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 5;276(1):505-13.

Crystal structure of the CCAAT box/enhancer-binding protein beta activating
transcription factor-4 basic leucine zipper heterodimer in the absence of DNA.

Podust LM(1), Krezel AM, Kim Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0146, USA.

The crystal structure of the heterodimer formed by the basic leucine zipper
(bZIP) domains of activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4) and CCAAT
box/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBP beta), from two different bZIP
transcription factor families, has been determined and refined to 2.6 A. The
structure shows that the heterodimer forms an asymmetric coiled-coil. Even in the
absence of DNA, the basic region of ATF4 forms a continuous alpha-helix, but the 
basic region of C/EBP beta is disordered. Proteolysis, electrophoretic mobility
shift assay, circular dichroism, and NMR analyses indicated that (i) the bZIP
domain of ATF4 is a disordered monomer and forms a homodimer upon binding to the 
DNA target; (ii) the bZIP domain of ATF4 forms a heterodimer with the bZIP domain
of C/EBP beta that binds the cAMP response element, but not CCAAT box DNA, with
high affinity; and (iii) the basic region of ATF4 has a higher alpha-helical
propensity than that of C/EBP beta. These results suggest that the degree of
ordering of the basic region and the fork and the dimerization properties of the 
leucine zipper combine to distinguish the structurally similar bZIP domains of
ATF4 and C/EBP beta with respect to DNA target sequence. This study provides
insight into the mechanism by which dimeric bZIP transcription factors
discriminate between closely related but distinct DNA targets.

PMID: 11018027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Cancer Res. 2000 Sep 15;60(18):5027-30.

Pleiotropic resistance to DNA-interactive drugs is associated with increased
expression of genes involved in DNA replication, repair, and stress response.

Levenson VV(1), Davidovich IA, Roninson IB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at Chicago,
60607-7170, USA. levenson@uic.edu

A combination of four genetic suppressor elements (GSEs), two of which are
derived from putative transcriptional regulators, was previously found to
increase resistance to drugs inhibiting DNA replication in HT1080 fibrosarcoma
cells. In the present study, two GSE-transduced cell lines, isolated with and
without cytotoxic selection, were found to be resistant to a diverse group of
DNA-interactive agents, including aphidicolin, hydroxyurea, cytarabine,
etoposide, doxorubicin, and mafosfamide. Changes in gene expression associated
with GSE-induced drug resistance were analyzed by cDNA array hybridization and
reverse transcription-PCR. Twenty genes were found to be up-regulated in both of 
the resistant cell lines. These include genes involved in DNA replication and
repair (e.g., PCNA, XRCC1, B-MYB, and GADD45), transcriptional regulators
associated with stress response, and cell cycle checkpoint control (e.g., YB-1,
DBPA, and ATF4), and genes for signal transduction proteins (e.g., protein
tyrosine phosphatase 1B and regulatory subunits alpha and beta of cAMP-dependent 
protein kinase). The observed changes in gene expression may play a role in
pleiotropic resistance to different classes of DNA-targeting drugs.

PMID: 11016623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 10;275(45):35185-91.

The metabotropic GABAB receptor directly interacts with the activating
transcription factor 4.

Nehring RB(1), Horikawa HP, El Far O, Kneussel M, Brandstätter JH, Stamm S,
Wischmeyer E, Betz H, Karschin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology of Signal Transduction, Max Planck
Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, 37070 Göttingen, Germany.

G protein-coupled receptors regulate gene expression by cellular signaling
cascades that target transcription factors and their recognition by specific DNA 
sequences. In the central nervous system, heteromeric metabotropic
gamma-aminobutyric acid type B (GABA(B)) receptors through adenylyl cyclase
regulate cAMP levels, which may control transcription factor binding to the cAMP 
response element. Using yeast-two hybrid screens of rat brain libraries, we now
demonstrate that GABA(B) receptors are engaged in a direct and specific
interaction with the activating transcription factor 4 (ATF-4), a member of the
cAMP response element-binding protein /ATF family. As confirmed by pull-down
assays, ATF-4 associates via its conserved basic leucine zipper domain with the C
termini of both GABA(B) receptor (GABA(B)R) 1 and GABA(B)R2 at a site which
serves to assemble these receptor subunits in heterodimeric complexes. Confocal
fluorescence microscopy shows that GABA(B)R and ATF-4 are strongly coclustered in
the soma and at the dendritic membrane surface of both cultured hippocampal
neurons as well as retinal amacrine cells in vivo. In oocyte coexpression assays 
short term signaling of GABA(B)Rs via G proteins was only marginally affected by 
the presence of the transcription factor, but ATF-4 was moderately stimulated in 
response to receptor activation in in vivo reporter assays. Thus, inhibitory
metabotropic GABA(B)Rs may regulate activity-dependent gene expression via a
direct interaction with ATF-4.

PMID: 10924501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Genetics. 2000 Aug;155(4):1711-23.

The cryptocephal gene (ATF4) encodes multiple basic-leucine zipper proteins
controlling molting and metamorphosis in Drosophila.

Hewes RS(1), Schaefer AM, Taghert PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. hewesr@thalamus.wustl.edu

The cryptocephal (crc) mutation causes pleiotropic defects in ecdysone-regulated 
events during Drosophila molting and metamorphosis. Here we report that crc
encodes a Drosophila homolog of vertebrate ATF4, a member of the CREB/ATF family 
of basic-leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors. We identified three
putative protein isoforms. CRC-A and CRC-B contain the bZIP domain, and CRC-D is 
a C-terminally truncated form. We have generated seven new crc alleles.
Consistent with the molecular diversity of crc, these alleles show that crc is a 
complex genetic locus with two overlapping lethal complementation groups. Alleles
representing both groups were rescued by a cDNA encoding CRC-B. One lethal group 
(crc(1), crc(R6), and crc(Rev8)) consists of strong hypomorphic or null alleles
that are associated with mutations of both CRC-A and CRC-B. These mutants display
defects associated with larval molting and pupariation. In addition, they fail to
evert the head and fail to elongate the imaginal discs during pupation, and they 
display variable defects in the subsequent differentiation of the adult abdomen. 
The other group (crc(R1), crc(R2), crc(E85), crc(E98), and crc(929)) is
associated with disruptions of CRC-A and CRC-D; except for a failure to properly 
elongate the leg discs, these mutants initiate metamorphosis normally.
Subsequently, they display a novel metamorphic phenotype, involving collapse of
the head and abdomen toward the thorax. The crc gene is expressed throughout
development and in many tissues. In third instar larvae, crc expression is high
in targets of ecdysone signaling, such as the leg and wing imaginal discs, and in
the ring gland, the source of ecdysone. Together, these findings implicate
CREB/ATF proteins in essential functions during molting and metamorphosis. In
addition, the similarities between the mutant phenotypes of crc and the
ecdysone-responsive genes indicate that these genes are likely to be involved in 
common signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC1461179
PMID: 10924469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Dev Biol. 2000 Jun 1;222(1):110-23.

Microphthalmia due to p53-mediated apoptosis of anterior lens epithelial cells in
mice lacking the CREB-2 transcription factor.

Hettmann T(1), Barton K, Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Cardiovascular Biology, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

CREB-2 (also called ATF4, TAXREB67, or C/ATF) is an evolutionarily conserved
member of the CREB/ATF family of basic-leucine zipper transcription factors.
CREB-2 is expressed ubiquitously in the adult mouse and can function as both a
transcriptional activator and a repressor. However, little was understood about
the normal function of CREB-2 in mammalian development or organ physiology. In
this report we have used gene targeting to produce CREB-2-deficient (CREB-2-/-)
mice. Adult CREB-2-/- mice displayed microphthalmia due to the complete absence
of a lens. Early embryonic lens development including formation of the optic
vesicle, primary lens fibers, and proliferating anterior epithelial cells
occurred normally in these mice. However, beginning at ED 14.5 the
CREB-2-deficient anterior epithelial lens cells underwent massive and synchronous
apoptosis. This was followed by the complete resorption of the developing lens.
Consistent with this defect in anterior epithelial cell survival, in situ
hybridization studies showed that CREB-2 is expressed at high levels in wild-type
anterior epithelial lens cells at ED 14.5. The defect in lens formation seen in
the CREB-2-/- mice was not associated with qualitative defects in the expression 
of Pax-6, alphaA-crystallin, c-maf, or PDGF-R alpha. However, apoptosis of the
anterior epithelial cells was mediated by a p53-dependent cell death pathway
because ablation of the p53 gene rescued anterior epithelial cell death and
allowed the formation of a lens in the absence of CREB-2. Taken together, these
results identify CREB-2 as an important regulator of mammalian lens development.

PMID: 10885750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Immunol. 2000 Jun 15;164(12):6372-9.

Functional analysis of the OCA-B promoter.

Stevens S(1), Wang L, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY 10021, USA.

OCA-B was identified as a B cell-specific coactivator that functions with either 
Oct-1 or Oct-2 to mediate efficient cell type-specific transcription via the
octamer site (ATGCAAAT) both in vivo and in vitro. Mice lacking OCA-B exhibit
normal Ag-independent B cell maturation. In contrast, Ag-dependent functions,
including production of secondary Ig isotypes and germinal center formation, are 
greatly affected. To better understand OCA-B expression and, ultimately, the
defects observed in the OCA-B knockout mice, we have cloned the OCA-B promoter
and examined its function in both transformed and primary B cells. We show here
that the OCA-B promoter is developmentally regulated, with activity increasing
throughout B cell differentiation. Through physical and functional assays, we
have found an activating transcription factor/cAMP response element binding
protein binding site (or cAMP response element) that is crucial for OCA-B
promoter activity. Furthermore, we demonstrate that IL-4 and anti-CD40 induce
both the OCA-B promoter and octamer-dependent promoters, thus implicating OCA-B
in B cell signaling events in the nucleus.

PMID: 10843692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 25;275(8):5947-57.

Identification and characterization of basal and cyclic AMP response elements in 
the promoter of the rat GTP cyclohydrolase I gene.

Kapatos G(1), Stegenga SL, Hirayama K.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Neurobiology Program, Department of Psychiatry, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.
gkapato@med.wayne.edu

5812 base pairs of rat GTP cyclohydrolase I (GTPCH) 5'-flanking region were
cloned and sequenced, and the transcription start site was determined for the
gene in rat liver. Progressive deletion analysis using transient transfection
assays of luciferase reporter constructs defined the core promoter as a highly
conserved 142-base pair GC-rich sequence upstream from the cap site. DNase I
footprint analysis of this region revealed (5' --> 3') a Sp1/GC box, a
noncanonical cAMP-response element (CRE), a CCAAT-box, and an E-box.
Transcription from the core promoter in PC12 but not C6 or Rat2 cells was
enhanced by incubation with 8-bromo-cyclic AMP. Mutagenesis showed that both the 
CRE and CCAAT-box independently contribute to basal and cAMP-dependent activity. 
The combined CRE and CCAAT-box cassette was also found to enhance basal
transcription and confer cAMP sensitivity on a heterologous minimal promoter. The
addition of the Sp1/GC box sequence to this minimal promoter construct inhibited 
basal transcription without affecting the cAMP response. EMSA showed that nuclear
proteins from PC12 but not C6 or Rat2 cells bind the CRE as a complex containing 
activating transcription factor (ATF)-4 and CCAAT enhancer-binding protein beta, 
while both PC12 and C6 cell nuclear extracts were recruited by the CCAAT-box as a
complex containing nuclear factor Y. Overexpression of ATF-4 in PC12 cells was
found to transactivate the GTPCH promoter response to cAMP. These studies suggest
that the elements required for cell type-specific cAMP-dependent enhancement of
gene transcription are located along the GTPCH core promoter and include the CRE 
and adjacent CCAAT-box and the proteins ATF-4, CCAAT enhancer-binding protein
beta, and nuclear factor Y.

PMID: 10681588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Cancer Res. 2000 Jan 15;60(2):276-81.

Heregulin induces expression, DNA binding activity, and transactivating functions
of basic leucine zipper activating transcription factor 4.

Talukder AH(1), Vadlamudi R, Mandal M, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Heregulin beta1 (HRG), a combinatorial ligand for human epidermal growth factor
receptor 3 and human epidermal growth factor receptor 4 receptors, is a
regulatory secretory polypeptide with distinct biological effects such as growth 
stimulation, differentiation, invasiveness, and migration in breast cancer cells.
The mechanism underlying the diverse functions of HRG is not well established,
but it is believed to be dependent on the induced changes in expression of
specific cellular gene products, their modification, or both. The binding of
basic leucine zipper transcription factors to the cAMP response element is known 
to activate a variety of gene products with a role or roles in growth regulation.
In the studies presented here, we identified basic leucine zipper activating
transcription factor (ATF) 4 as one of the HRG-inducible gene product. We
demonstrated that HRG stimulation of human cancer cells induces expression of
ATF4 mRNA and protein, ATF4 DNA binding activity, and ATF4 transactivating
function. Consistent with its role as a transcriptional activator, HRG-stimulated
ATF4 protein stimulated the transcription from an artificial promoter with three 
tandem ATF sites or from a naturally occurring promoter with ATF4 sites such as
E-selectin. We also demonstrated a preferential role of the HRG-stimulated
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, but not the phosphatidylinositol
3'-kinase pathway, in supporting the observed increase in ATF4 DNA binding
activity and transcription from E-selectin promoter in HRG-stimulated cells.
Because ATF4 binding sites are present in a variety of growth-regulating cellular
genes, these findings suggest that the stimulation of ATF4 expression and its
transactivating functions may constitute an important mechanism of HRG-mediated
regulation of putative genes with diversified functions. The present study is the
first demonstration of regulation of expression and transactivation ability of
ATF4 by any polypeptide growth factor.

PMID: 10667576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1999 Aug 20;154(1-2):151-9.

Presence of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) in the porcine anterior
pituitary.

Kato Y(1), Koike Y, Tomizawa K, Ogawa S, Hosaka K, Tanaka S, Kato T.

Author information: 
(1)Biosignal Research Center, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Regulation,
Maebashi, Gunma, Japan.

The two-hybrid system that identifies protein-protein interactions in a yeast
expression system was used to investigate porcine anterior pituitary
transcription factors. Four cDNA clones of a protein interacting with the leucine
zipper domain of porcine cJun were obtained. Their nucleotide sequences revealed 
that they encode activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). A full-length cDNA of 
porcine ATF4 was obtained by the polymerase chain reaction, and its deduced amino
acid sequence showed 88 and 83% identity to human and mouse ATF4, respectively.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis of mRNAs prepared from
11 porcine tissues demonstrated that ATF4 is ubiquitous. Immunohistochemistry
showed that ATF4 is present in the hormone producing cells of the anterior
pituitary, but absent in some cells of the anterior pituitary. Further binding
analysis revealed that ATF4 also interacts with itself and cFos. This evidence of
ATF4 homodimerization, as well as heterodimerization with cJun and cFos in the
anterior pituitary suggests a novel mechanism for the regulation of gene
expression in this tissue.

PMID: 10509809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Virol. 1999 Sep;73(9):7882-5.

Middle T antigen activation of signal transduction pathways does not overcome
p53-mediated growth arrest.

Doherty J(1), Freund R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology Program, University of Maryland, Baltimore,
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

Polyomavirus middle T antigen does not overcome p53-mediated G(1) arrest in mouse
embryo fibroblasts. Middle T antigen still associates with the signaling
molecules phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and SHC and activates the transcriptional
activity of c-Myc and AP1 in p53-arrested cells. Examination of cell cycle
regulatory proteins indicated that p53 does not interfere with these mitogenic
signals but acts later in the G(1) phase of the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC104322
PMID: 10438885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Blood. 1999 Aug 1;94(3):959-67.

Homocysteine-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress and growth arrest leads to
specific changes in gene expression in human vascular endothelial cells.

Outinen PA(1), Sood SK, Pfeifer SI, Pamidi S, Podor TJ, Li J, Weitz JI, Austin
RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University and the
Hamilton Civic Hospitals Research Centre, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Alterations in the cellular redox potential by homocysteine promote endothelial
cell (EC) dysfunction, an early event in the progression of atherothrombotic
disease. In this study, we demonstrate that homocysteine causes endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress and growth arrest in human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVEC). To determine if these effects reflect specific changes in gene
expression, cDNA microarrays were screened using radiolabeled cDNA probes
generated from mRNA derived from HUVEC, cultured in the absence or presence of
homocysteine. Good correlation was observed between expression profiles
determined by this method and by Northern blotting. Consistent with its adverse
effects on the ER, homocysteine alters the expression of genes sensitive to ER
stress (ie, GADD45, GADD153, ATF-4, YY1). Several other genes observed to be
differentially expressed by homocysteine are known to mediate cell growth and
differentiation (ie, GADD45, GADD153, Id-1, cyclin D1, FRA-2), a finding that
supports the observation that homocysteine causes a dose-dependent decrease in
DNA synthesis in HUVEC. Additional gene profiles also show that homocysteine
decreases cellular antioxidant potential (glutathione peroxidase, NKEF-B PAG,
superoxide dismutase, clusterin), which could potentially enhance the cytotoxic
effects of agents or conditions known to cause oxidative damage. These results
successfully demonstrate the use of cDNA microarrays in identifying
homocysteine-respondent genes and indicate that homocysteine-induced ER stress
and growth arrest reflect specific changes in gene expression in human vascular
EC.

PMID: 10419887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1999 May 21;69(1):124-34.

Regulation of transcription factor C/ATF by the cAMP signal activation in
hippocampal neurons, and molecular interaction of C/ATF with signal integrator
CBP/p300.

Yukawa K(1), Tanaka T, Tsuji S, Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology II, Wakayama Medical College, 811-1 kimiidera,
Wakayama 641-0012, Japan. kazu59@wakayama-med.ac.jp

The CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins related activating transcription factor,
C/ATF, is a mouse leucine-zipper transcription factor which is structurally
homologous to ApCREB2, a suppressor integral to long-term synaptic plasticity in 
Aplysia. To gain a clue to whether C/ATF is involved in long-term plasticities of
brain, we examined if the expression levels of C/ATF are modulated by cAMP, an
inducer crucial for memory formation in Aplysia, Drosophila and mice. Our in situ
hybridization analysis revealed the expression of C/ATF mRNA in hippocampal
neurons. C/ATF protein levels increased after the cAMP signal stimulation in
hippocampal neurons, while C/ATF mRNA levels remained constant. The human
activating transcription factor 4 (hATF4), another homolog of ApCREB2, interacts 
with multiple domains of the coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP), resulting in
the potentiation of its ability to activate transcription. As expected, C/ATF was
found to interact with three domains of CBP including CREB binding domain or
kinase-inducible interaction (KIX) domain, the third cysteine-histidine-rich
region (CH3 domain) and the nuclear receptor coactivator p160/SRC-1-interacting
domain. Interestingly, C/ATF was further found to interact strongly with CREB
binding protein/p300 (CBP/p300) CH1 domain. Mammalian two hybrid assays indicated
that the interaction between C/ATF and CBP/p300 can occur in mammalian cells, and
that the p300 CH1 domain is critical for the interaction. Thus, C/ATF may be
implicated in transcription-dependent phase of hippocampal long-term plasticities
through the modulation of its protein level under cAMP signal and the interaction
with signal integrator, CBP/p300.

Copyright 1999 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 10350644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Genes Cells. 1998 Dec;3(12):801-10.

Targeted disruption of ATF4 discloses its essential role in the formation of eye 
lens fibres.

Tanaka T(1), Tsujimura T, Takeda K, Sugihara A, Maekawa A, Terada N, Yoshida N,
Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hyogo College of Medicine, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4)--also termed CREB2, C/ATF,
and TAXREB67--is a basic-leucine zipper (bZip) transcription factor that belongs 
to the ATF/CREB family. In addition to its own family members, ATF4 can also form
heterodimers with other related but distinct bZIP proteins such as the C/EBP,
AP-1 and Maf families, which may give rise to a variety of combinatorial
diversity in gene regulation. In order to assess the in vivo essential role of
ATF4, we have generated mice lacking ATF4 by gene targeting.
RESULTS: ATF4-deficient mice exhibited severe microphthalmia. Although
ATF4-deficient eyes revealed a normal gross lens structure up to embryonic day
14.5, later on the ATF4-deficient lens, degenerated due to apoptosis without the 
formation of lens secondary fibre cells. Retinal development was normal in the
mutant mice. The lens-specific expression of ATF4 in the mutant mice led not only
to the recovery of lens secondary fibres but also to the induction of hyperplasia
of these fibres.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrated that ATF4 is essential for the later
stages of lens fibre cell differentiation.

PMID: 10096021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Biochem J. 1999 Apr 1;339 ( Pt 1):135-41.

Complexes containing activating transcription factor
(ATF)/cAMP-responsive-element-binding protein (CREB) interact with the
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)-ATF composite site to regulate Gadd153
expression during the stress response.

Fawcett TW(1), Martindale JL, Guyton KZ, Hai T, Holbrook NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression and Aging Section, Laboratory of Biological Chemistry, NIA,
National Institutes of Health, 5600 Nathan Shock Drive, Box 12, Baltimore, MD
21224-6825, USA.

Gadd153, also known as chop, encodes a member of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein (C/EBP) transcription factor family and is transcriptionally activated by
cellular stress signals. We recently demonstrated that arsenite treatment of rat 
pheochromocytoma PC12 cells results in the biphasic induction of Gadd153 mRNA
expression, controlled in part through binding of C/EBPbeta and two
uncharacterized protein complexes to the C/EBP-ATF (activating transcription
factor) composite site in the Gadd153 promoter. In this report, we identified
components of these additional complexes as two ATF/CREB
(cAMP-responsive-element-binding protein) transcription factors having
differential binding activities dependent upon the time of arsenite exposure.
During arsenite treatment of PC12 cells, we observed enhanced binding of ATF4 to 
the C/EBP-ATF site at 2 h as Gadd153 mRNA levels increased, and enhanced binding 
of ATF3 complexes at 6 h as Gadd153 expression declined. We further demonstrated 
that ATF4 activates, while ATF3 represses, Gadd153 promoter activity through the 
C/EBP-ATF site. ATF3 also repressed ATF4-mediated transactivation and
arsenite-induced activation of the Gadd153 promoter. Our results suggest that
numerous members of the ATF/CREB family are involved in the cellular stress
response, and that regulation of stress-induced biphasic Gadd153 expression in
PC12 cells involves the ordered, sequential binding of multiple transcription
factor complexes to the C/EBP-ATF composite site.

PMCID: PMC1220137
PMID: 10085237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 5;274(10):6698-703.

Interleukin-12 induces expression of interferon regulatory factor-1 via signal
transducer and activator of transcription-4 in human T helper type 1 cells.

Coccia EM(1), Passini N, Battistini A, Pini C, Sinigaglia F, Rogge L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, I-00161 Rome, Italy.

IRF-1-deficient mice show a striking defect in the development of T helper 1
(Th1) cells. In the present report, we investigate the expression of IRF-1 during
differentiation of human T helper cells. No significant differences of IRF-1 mRNA
expression were found in established Th1 and Th2 cells; however, interleukin 12
(IL-12) induced a strong up-regulation of IRF-1 transcripts in Th1 but not in Th2
cells. We demonstrate that IL-12-induced up-regulation of IRF-1 is mediated by
signal transducer and activator of transcription-4, which binds to the interferon
(IFN)-gamma-activated sequence present in the promoter of the IRF-1 gene. Strong 
IL-12-dependent activation of a reporter gene construct containing the IRF-1
IFN-gamma-activated sequence element provides further evidence for the key role
of signal transducer and activator of transcription-4 in the IL-12-induced
up-regulation of IRF-1 transcripts in T cells. IRF-1 expression was strongly
induced after stimulation of naive CD4(+) T cells via the T cell receptor,
irrespective of the cytokines present at priming, indicating that this
transcription factor does not play a major role in initiating a Th1-specific
transcriptional cascade in differentiating helper T cells. However, our finding
that IRF-1 is a target gene of IL-12 suggests that some of the IL-12-induced
effector functions of Th1 cells may be mediated by IRF-1.

PMID: 10037767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Exp Cell Res. 1998 Feb 25;239(1):93-103.

Activation of the rat cyclin A promoter by ATF2 and Jun family members and its
suppression by ATF4.

Shimizu M(1), Nomura Y, Suzuki H, Ichikawa E, Takeuchi A, Suzuki M, Nakamura T,
Nakajima T, Oda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
Japan.

Cyclin A plays an essential role in the G1 to S phase transition in the cell
cycle. The expression of cyclin A is restrained during G0 and G1, but steeply
induced at the G1/S boundary. Analysis of the rat cyclin A promoter elements with
the 5' sequential deletion derivatives of the promoter fused to the luciferase
cDNA indicated that the ATF/CRE motif primarily determines the inducibility at
G1/S. Gel shift analysis of the complex formed at the ATF/CRE site indicated that
the complex was not formed with the G0/G1 cell extract, but maximally formed with
the late-G1 cell extract. The complex was supershifted by anti-JunD antibody, and
Western blot analysis of the immune complexes prepared with anti-JunD antibody
revealed the presence of ATF2, suggesting heterodimerization of JunD with ATF2.
The cyclin A promoter in a reporter plasmid was activated by nearly 10-fold in
quiescent rat 3Y1 cells by cotransfection with the expression of plasmids
encoding ATF2 and Jun family members. In contrast, cotransfection with the ATF4
expression plasmid suppressed the promoter activation mediated by ATF2 and Jun
family members. The expression of Jun family members during G1 to S progression
was induced biphasically in early and late G1 and the level of JunD increased
markedly at the G1/S, while that of ATF family members was gradually increased
along with the G1 to S progression. These results indicate that the cyclin A
promoter activity is regulated, at least in part, by relative amounts of the ATF 
and Jun family members.

PMID: 9511728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Mar;18(3):1642-51.

ZIP kinase, a novel serine/threonine kinase which mediates apoptosis.

Kawai T(1), Matsumoto M, Takeda K, Sanjo H, Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan.

We have identified a novel serine/threonine kinase, designated ZIP kinase, which 
mediates apoptosis. ZIP kinase contains a leucine zipper structure at its C
terminus, in addition to a kinase domain at its N terminus. ZIP kinase physically
binds to ATF4, a member of the activating transcription factor/cyclic
AMP-responsive element-binding protein (ATF/CREB) family, through interaction
between their leucine zippers. The leucine zipper domain is necessary for the
homodimerization of ZIP kinase as well as for the activation of kinase.
Immunostaining study showed that ZIP kinase localizes in the nuclei.
Overexpression of intact ZIP kinase but not catalytically inactive kinase mutants
led to the morphological changes of apoptosis in NIH 3T3 cells, suggesting that
the cell death-inducing activity of ZIP kinase depends on its intrinsic kinase
activity. Interestingly, the catalytic domain of ZIP kinase is closely related to
that of death-associated protein kinase (DAP kinase), which is a mediator of
apoptosis induced by gamma interferon. Therefore, both ZIP and DAP kinases
represent a novel kinase family, which mediates apoptosis through their catalytic
activities.

PMCID: PMC108879
PMID: 9488481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Biochemistry. 1997 Nov 25;36(47):14447-55.

ATF1 and CREB trans-activate a cell cycle regulated histone H4 gene at a distal
nuclear matrix associated promoter element.

Guo B(1), Stein JL, van Wijnen AJ, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655, USA.

Proteins of the ATF/CREB class of transcription factors stimulate gene expression
of several cell growth-related genes through protein kinase A-related cAMP
response elements. The promoter activity of cell cycle regulated histone H4 genes
is regulated by at least four principal cis-acting elements which mediate G1/S
phase control and/or enhancement of transcription during the cell cycle. Using
protein-DNA interaction assays we show that the H4 promoter contains two ATF/CREB
recognition motifs which interact with CREB, ATF1, and ATF2 but not with
ATF4/CREB2. One ATF/CRE motif is located in the distal promoter at the nuclear
matrix-associated Site IV, and the second motif is present in the proximal
promoter at Site I. Both ATF/CRE motifs overlap binding sequences for the
multifunctional YY1 transcription factor, which has previously been shown to be
nuclear matrix associated. Subnuclear fractionation reveals that there are two
ATF1 isoforms which appear to differ with respect to DNA binding activity and
partition selectively between nuclear matrix and nonmatrix compartments,
consistent with the role of the nuclear matrix in regulating gene expression.
Site-directed mutational studies demonstrate that Site I and Site IV together
support ATF1- and CREB-induced trans-activation of the H4 promoter. Thus, our
data establish that ATF/CREB factors functionally modulate histone H4 gene
transcription at distal and proximal promoter elements.

PMID: 9398163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Biol Chem. 1997 Sep 19;272(38):24088-95.

Characterization of human activating transcription factor 4, a transcriptional
activator that interacts with multiple domains of cAMP-responsive element-binding
protein (CREB)-binding protein.

Liang G(1), Hai T.

Author information: 
(1)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, 
USA.

We demonstrate that human activating transcription factor 4 (hATF4), a member of 
the activating transcription factor/cAMP-responsive element-binding protein
(ATF/CREB) family of transcription factors, is a potent transcriptional activator
in both mammalian cells and yeast. The N-terminal 113 amino acids of hATF4
activate transcription efficiently, and unexpectedly, the C-terminal bZip DNA
binding domain of hATF4 also activates transcription, albeit weakly. Our results 
indicate that hATF4 interacts with several general transcription factors:
TATA-binding protein, TFIIB, and the RAP30 subunit of TFIIF. In addition, hATF4
interacts with the coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP) at four regions: 1) the
KIX domain, 2) a region that contains the third zinc finger and the
E1A-interacting domain, 3) a C-terminal region that contains the
p160/SRC-1-interacting domain, and 4) the recently identified histone
acetyltransferase domain. Interestingly, both the N-terminal and C-terminal
regions of hATF4 interact with the above general transcription factors and CBP,
providing a mechanistic explanation for their ability to activate transcription. 
Consistent with its role as a coactivator, CBP potentiates the ability of hATF4
to activate transcription. The potential significance of the interaction between 
hATF4 and multiple factors is discussed.

PMID: 9295363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Oncogene. 1997 Jun 12;14(23):2785-92.

Functional interaction of the HTLV-1 transactivator Tax with activating
transcription factor-4 (ATF4).

Reddy TR(1), Tang H, Li X, Wong-Staal F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0665, USA.

The Tax protein of the Human T-cell Leukemia Virus (HTLV) activates the
expression of viral mRNA through a three 21 bp repeat enhancer located within the
HTLV-1 LTR. Since Tax does not bind to the 21 bp DNA repeats directly, it has
been speculated that Tax interacts with cellular protein(s) which mediate binding
to the enhancer. We employed the yeast two hybrid system to identify host
proteins that are potentially relevant to Tax transactivation. We identified a
Tax binding protein encoded from a cDNA expression library derived from
peripheral blood lymphocytes. The corresponding cDNA has sequence identity with a
known transcription factor, activating factor-4 (ATF-4). ATF-4 also binds to
GST-Tax fusion protein in vitro. Tax mutants that did not transactivate the
HTLV-1 LTR also failed to bind ATF-4. The critical domain for Tax binding resides
in a 85 amino acid stretch in the C-terminus of ATF-4, which contains the basic
domain and leucine zipper. We further demonstrated that both full length and
N-terminal truncated ATF-4 were able to enhance Tax transactivation. Thus, ATF-4 
may act as an adapter between Tax and the TRE (Tax responsive element), and play 
an important role in Tax-mediated transactivation.

PMID: 9190894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Nov 12;228(2):586-95.

Mutated Atf4 suppresses c-Ha-ras oncogene transcript levels and cellular
transformation in NIH3T3 fibroblasts.

Mielnicki LM(1), Hughes RG, Chevray PM, Pruitt SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Center,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

A frameshift mutation is present in one allele of the Atf4 gene in genomic DNA
from F9 embryonal carcinoma stem cells. The mutation results in the fusion of a
short 5' open reading frame to the coding sequence of Atf4, replacing the first
18 N-terminal amino acids with 50 amino acids encoded by the upstream open
reading frame. The ability of both normal and mutated Atf4 gene products to
influence cell growth was tested using an NIH3T3 cell transformation assay.
Overexpression of mutant Atf4 suppresses ras-induced transformation in this
assay. In G418r cell lines derived from parallel co-transfections, expression of 
transfected mutant Atf4 mRNA correlates with a loss of transformed morphology and
a reduction in ras mRNA levels. Transient cotransfection assays in NIH3T3 cells
demonstrate that wild type Atf4 is able to inhibit transcription directed by the 
human c-Ha-ras1 promoter and that this effect is increased by the mutation.

PMID: 8920955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Cell. 1995 Dec 15;83(6):979-92.

Aplysia CREB2 represses long-term facilitation: relief of repression converts
transient facilitation into long-term functional and structural change.

Bartsch D(1), Ghirardi M, Skehel PA, Karl KA, Herder SP, Chen M, Bailey CH,
Kandel ER.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

The switch from short- to long-term facilitation induced by behavioral
sensitization in Aplysia involves CREB-like proteins, as well as the
immediate-early gene ApC/EBP. Using the bZIP domain of ApC/EBP in a two-hybrid
system, we have cloned ApCREB2, a transcription factor constitutively expressed
in sensory neurons that resembles human CREB2 and mouse ATF4. ApCREB2 represses
ApCREB1-mediated transcription in F9 cells. Injection of anti-ApCREB2 antibodies 
into Aplysia sensory neurons causes a single pulse of serotonin (5-HT), which
induces only short-term facilitation lasting minutes, to evoke facilitation
lasting more than 1 day. This facilitation has the properties of long-term
facilitation: it requires transcription and translation, induces the growth of
new synaptic connections, and occludes further facilitation by five pulses of
5-HT.

PMID: 8521521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Exp Cell Res. 1995 Sep;220(1):47-54.

Normal fibroblasts induce the C/EBP beta and ATF-4 bZIP transcription factors in 
response to anoxia.

Estes SD(1), Stoler DL, Anderson GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

Fibroblasts exhibit a complex response to temporary anoxia; this response, which 
is associated with no loss of viability, includes enhanced secretion of proteases
and endonucleases along with an increase in glycolytic metabolism.
Physiologically, this response is activated during the early stages of wound
healing. We have been investigating the mechanisms by which gene expression is
regulated in fibroblasts during conditions of oxygen deprivation. We show that
normal fibroblasts in response to anoxia induce several members of the C/EBP and 
ATF subfamilies of the bZIP (basic/leucine zipper domain) transcription factor
class. Although anoxia substantially elevated the levels of the corresponding
proteins, we detected only slight changes in the activity of reporters containing
consensus bZIP binding sites. In the case of C/EBP beta this was apparently
related to the failure to detect an increase in the DNA binding of the induced
factor to its consensus binding site. In contrast, we show that anoxia strongly
increases ATF-4 or an immunologically related protein's DNA binding activity on a
variant site, although this variant sequence by itself is insufficient for
anoxia-inducible transactivation. This suggests that anoxic exposure of
fibroblasts may promote the formation of variant bZIP proteins in nonpermissive
conformations or they require the interaction with additional transcription
factors at adjacent promoter elements for functional activity.

PMID: 7664842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jan;15(1):415-24.

Impaired cyclic AMP-dependent phosphorylation renders CREB a repressor of
C/EBP-induced transcription of the somatostatin gene in an insulinoma cell line.

Vallejo M(1), Gosse ME, Beckman W, Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Boston 02114.

Transcription factor CREB regulates cyclic AMP (cAMP)-dependent gene expression
by binding to and activating transcription from cAMP response elements (CREs) in 
the promoters of target genes. The transcriptional transactivation functions of
CREB are activated by its phosphorylation by cAMP-dependent protein kinase A
(PKA). In studies of many different phenotypically distinct cells, the CRE of the
somatostatin gene promoter is a prototype of a highly cAMP-responsive element
regulated by CREB. We now report on a somatostatin-producing rat insulinoma cell 
line, RIN-1027-B2, in which transcription from the somatostatin gene promoter is 
paradoxically repressed by CREB. We find that CREB fails to transactivate a
CRE-containing somatostatin-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter even when 
coexpressed with the catalytic subunit of PKA. CAAT box/enhancer-binding protein 
beta (C/EBP beta) and C/EBP-related activating transcription factor bind to the
CRE in the promoter of the somatostatin gene and transactivate transcription.
CREB binds competitively with C/EBP beta to the somatostatin CRE in vitro and
represses C/EBP beta-induced transcription of the CRE-containing
somatostatin-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter. The lack of
CREB-mediated transcriptional stimulation is due to the presence of a heat-stable
inhibitor of PKA that prevents activation of PKA and subsequent CREB
phosphorylation in the nucleus. These findings indicate that dephosphorylated
CREB is a negative regulator of C/EBP-activated transcription of the somatostatin
gene promoter in RIN-1027-B2 cells.

PMCID: PMC231983
PMID: 7799950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 23;269(38):23553-62.

The C/EBP family of proteins distorts DNA upon binding but does not introduce a
large directed bend.

Avitahl N(1), Calame K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, New York 10032.

The DNA-bending properties of several C/EBP family proteins, bound to two
different sites, have been determined using circular permutation and phasing
analyses. All the proteins examined by circular permutation analysis induced a
significant distortion in the DNA (40-66 degrees), and this distortion was of the
same magnitude at both C/EBP sites. However, phasing analysis revealed that the
size of the directed bend induced in the DNA by C/EBP proteins was only 1-4
degrees. Both the magnitude and orientation of the directed bend were affected by
the specific sequence of the DNA-binding site. All proteins induced a directed
bend of similar magnitude and orientation (toward the minor groove) when bound to
the C/EBP site derived from the IgH enhancer, but the induced bend was smaller
when the protein was bound to the C/EBP site derived from the VH1 promoter. The
study also included a heterodimer between Ig/EBP and ATF4. Similar to C/EBP
protein homodimers, this heterodimer induces a small directed bend of 4 degrees
oriented toward the minor groove when bound to the enhancer-derived C/EBP site.

PMID: 8089123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Genes Dev. 1993 Jun;7(6):1047-58.

Dimerization specificity of the leucine zipper-containing bZIP motif on DNA
binding: prediction and rational design.

Vinson CR(1), Hai T, Boyd SM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

We propose an interhelical salt bridge rule to explain the dimerization
specificity between the two amphipathic alpha-helices in the leucine zipper
structure. Using the bZIP class of DNA-binding proteins as a model system, we
predicted and designed novel dimerization partners. We predicted that ATF4, a
member of the ATF/CREB family of transcription factors, would preferentially form
heterodimers with IGEBP1, a member of the C/EBP superfamily. These predictions
were verified using a gel mobility-shift assay. To further test the value of this
interhelical salt bridge rule, we modified the bZIP protein C/EBP attempting to
design molecules that would form preferentially heterodimers with C/EBP or
molecules that would not interact with C/EBP. These designed molecules behaved as
predicted. Therefore, we conclude that this interhelical salt bridge rule is
useful in understanding the dimerization specificity of bZIP proteins. In
addition, we suggest that this rule could be used to design novel
"dominant-negative" molecules to specifically inhibit the function of target
leucine zipper proteins in vivo.

PMID: 8504929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 May 15;90(10):4679-83.

C/ATF, a member of the activating transcription factor family of DNA-binding
proteins, dimerizes with CAAT/enhancer-binding proteins and directs their binding
to cAMP response elements.

Vallejo M(1), Ron D, Miller CP, Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston 02114.

Members of the C/EBP family of basic-leucine zipper (bZip) transcription factors 
form heterodimers and bind to the CAAT box and other sequence-related enhancer
motifs. Using a 32P-labeled protein probe consisting of the bZip domain of C/EBP 
beta, we isolated a clone encoding C/EBP-related ATF (C/ATF), a bZip protein that
heterodimerizes with C/EBP-like proteins but belongs to the CREB/ATF family.
C/ATF homodimers do not bind to typical C/EBP DNA sites. Instead they bind to
palindromic cAMP response elements such as that of the somatostatin gene. In
addition, C/ATF-C/EBP beta heterodimers bind to a subclass of asymmetric cAMP
response elements exemplified by those in the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
and proenkephalin genes. Transient transfection studies indicate that
interactions between C/ATF and C/EBP beta are the basis for a functional cross
talk between these two families of transcription factors that may be important
for the integration of hormonal and developmental stimuli that determine the
expression of subsets of genes in specific cellular phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC46576
PMID: 8506317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. FEBS Lett. 1992 Mar 24;299(1):36-8.

cDNA clones encoding leucine-zipper proteins which interact with G-CSF gene
promoter element 1-binding protein.

Nishizawa M(1), Nagata S.

Author information: 
(1)Osaka Bioscience Institute, Japan.

The gene expression of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is induced
by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). GPE1, a cis-controlling element of the G-CSF gene,
functions as an LPS-responsive element. GPE1-binding protein (GPE1-BP), a
leucine-zipper protein, did not independently activate G-CSF gene expression.
Protein blot analysis with biotinylated GPE1-BP revealed that there were nuclear 
proteins that interact specifically with GPE1-BP. Three leucine-zipper proteins
were isolated from mouse cDNA expression libraries by this method: NF-IL6, ATF4, 
and a novel ATF4-related ATFx. The interactions of these proteins with GPE1-BP
may play key roles in G-CSF gene expression.

PMID: 1371974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Nov 25;19(22):6332.

Isolation and nucleotide sequence of a murine cDNA homologous to human activating
transcription factor 4.

Mielnicki LM(1), Pruitt SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY 14263.

PMCID: PMC329152
PMID: 1956797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


