
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 1. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7801. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification and characterization of lncRNA mediated transcriptional
dysregulation dictates lncRNA roles in glioblastoma.

Li Y(1), Wang Z(1), Wang Y(1), Zhao Z(1), Zhang J(1), Lu J(1), Xu J(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology and Bio-Pharmaceutical Key
Laboratory of Heilongjiang Province, Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150081,
China.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) modulate gene expression, and lncRNA misregulation
is associated with cancer. However, precise functional roles in biological and
disease processes have been described for only a few lncRNAs. Identification of
genome-wide lncRNA-mediated transcriptional dysregulations may improve cancer
treatments. In the present study, we used a computational framework that combined
lncRNA and gene expression profiles with transcription factor (TF)-target
relationships to comprehensively identify dysregulatory lncRNA-TF-gene triplets. 
In glioblastoma (GBM), we found that most lncRNAs affect multiple targets and
primarily affect TF activity in trans. Six different classes of lncRNA-mediated
transcriptional dysregulations were identified, with most lncRNAs either
enhancing or attenuating target gene expression. Functional analysis of lncRNAs
via their dysregulated targets implicated lncRNA modulators in some hallmarks of 
cancer, providing a new way to predict lncRNA function. Finally, we identified
several lncRNA-TF-gene triplets (including HOTAIR-MXI1-CD58/PRKCE and
HOTAIR-ATF5-NCAM1) that are associated with glioblastoma prognosis. The
integration of lncRNA modulators into transcriptional regulatory networks will
further enhance our understanding of lncRNA functions in cancer.

PMID: 26943771  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 5. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7212. [Epub ahead of print]

Regression/Eradication of gliomas in mice by a systemically-deliverable ATF5
dominant-negative peptide.

Cates CC(1,)(2), Arias AD(1,)(3), Nakayama Wong LS(1), Lamé MW(1), Sidorov M(1), 
Cayanan G(1), Rowland DJ(4), Fung J(4), Karpel-Massler G(5), Siegelin MD(5),
Greene LA(5), Angelastro JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of California, Davis School of
Veterinary Medicine, Davis, CA, USA. (2)Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
CA, USA. (3)Moores-UCSD Cancer Center, La Jolla, CA, USA. (4)Center for Molecular
Genomic Imaging, Davis, CA, USA. (5)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology,
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

Malignant gliomas have poor prognosis and urgently require new therapies.
Activating Transcription Factor 5 (ATF5) is highly expressed in gliomas, and
interference with its expression/function precipitates targeted glioma cell
apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. We designed a novel deliverable
truncated-dominant-negative (d/n) form of ATF5 fused to a cell-penetrating domain
(Pen-d/n-ATF5-RP) that can be intraperitoneally/subcutaneously administered to
mice harboring malignant gliomas generated; (1) by PDGF-B/sh-p53 retroviral
transformation of endogenous neural progenitor cells; and (2) by human U87-MG
xenografts. In vitro Pen-d/n-ATF5-RP entered into glioma cells and triggered
massive apoptosis. In vivo, subcutaneously-administered Pen-d/n-ATF5-RP passed
the blood brain barrier, entered normal brain and tumor cells, and then caused
rapid selective tumor cell death. MRI verified elimination of retrovirus-induced 
gliomas within 8-21 days. Histopathology revealed growth-suppression of
intracerebral human U87-MG cells xenografts. For endogenous PDGF-B gliomas, there
was no recurrence or mortality at 6-12 months versus 66% mortality in controls at
6 months. Necropsy and liver-kidney blood enzyme analysis revealed no adverse
effects on brain or other tissues. Our findings thus identify Pen-d/n-ATF5-RP as 
a potential therapy for malignant gliomas.

PMID: 26863637  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Oncol Lett. 2015 Nov;10(5):2812-2820. Epub 2015 Aug 25.

Association between human cytomegalovirus infection and histone acetylation level
in various histological types of glioma.

Huang R(1), Qian D(1), Hu M(1), Zhang X(1), Song J(1), Li L(1), Chen H(1), Wang
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Qingdao University Medical College, Qingdao,
Shandong 266071, P.R. China.

At present, glioma is the most common intracranial tumor and accounts for 40-60% 
of intracranial tumors. Glioma is highly anaplastic and demonstrates invasive
growth. Although considerable progression has been achieved in the treatment of
malignant glioma, the prognosis of this disease remains poor. Over the previous
decade, several studies have confirmed that human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) enhances
the growth or survival of tumors. This is likely to occur through mechanisms
distinct from those of classic tumor viruses, which express transforming viral
oncoproteins in the majority of tumor cells. The immediate-early 2 protein (IE86;
86 kDa) of HCMV is a key regulator for viral replication and host cell
proliferation. The present study aimed to identify the association between the
acetylation level and HCMV IE86 expression in various histological types of
glioma. Tissue samples were obtained from 60 patients with glioma, consisting of 
25 patients with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), 16 patients with anaplastic
glioma and 19 patients with low-grade glioma, in addition to 9 tissue samples
obtained from the normal cortex, which were used as the control. The in situ
protein expression of IE86, which is encoded by the IE2 gene, activating
transcription factor 5 (ATF5), P300, acetyl-histone H3K9 and acetyl-histone H3K14
was detected by immunohistochemistry. The mRNA levels of ATF5, IE2 and P300 were 
measured by reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction in GBM, 
anaplastic glioma, low-grade glioma and normal cortex tissue specimens. The
protein levels of ATF5, IE86, P300, acetyl-histone H3K9 and acetyl-histone H3K14 
were assessed by western blot analysis in high-grade glioma, low-grade glioma and
normal cortex tissues. Analysis of the expression of the proteins revealed that
the excessive expression of the HCMV IE86 protein is associated with the
malignancy degree and acetylation level in glioma. IE86 expression is also
associated with ATF5, which is an anti-apoptotic protein that is highly expressed
in malignant glioma, but not in normal brain tissues. The expression level of
IE86 may demonstrate considerable importance for the evaluation of the malignancy
degree of human gliomas and extensive application in diagnostic and therapeutic
medicine.

PMCID: PMC4665835
PMID: 26722247  [PubMed]


4. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Jan 15;469(3):424-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.12.007. Epub 2015 Dec 9.

Hepatic maturation of human iPS cell-derived hepatocyte-like cells by ATF5,
c/EBPa, and PROX1 transduction.

Nakamori D(1), Takayama K(2), Nagamoto Y(3), Mitani S(1), Sakurai F(4), Tachibana
M(1), Mizuguchi H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (2)Laboratory
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; The Keihanshin Consortium for 
Fostering the Next Generation of Global Leaders in Research (K-CONNEX), Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8302, Japan; Laboratory of Hepatocyte Regulation, National 
Institute of Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition, Osaka 567-0085, Japan. 
(3)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; Laboratory of
Hepatocyte Regulation, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, Health and
Nutrition, Osaka 567-0085, Japan. (4)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka
565-0871, Japan; Laboratory of Regulatory Sciences for Oligonucleotide
Therapeutics, Clinical Drug Development Project, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (5)Laboratory
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; Laboratory of Hepatocyte
Regulation, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition,
Osaka 567-0085, Japan; iPS Cell-based Research Project on Hepatic Toxicity and
Metabolism, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka
565-0871, Japan; Global Center for Medical Engineering and Informatics, Osaka
University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. Electronic address:
mizuguch@phs.osaka-u.ac.jp.

Hepatocyte-like cells differentiated from human iPS cells (human iPS-HLCs) are
expected to be utilized in drug development and research. However, recent hepatic
characterization of human iPS-HLCs showed that these cells resemble fetal
hepatocytes rather than adult hepatocytes. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to 
develop a method to enhance the hepatic function of human iPS-HLCs. Because the
gene expression levels of the hepatic transcription factors (activating
transcription factor 5 (ATF5), CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (c/EBPa), and
prospero homeobox protein 1 (PROX1)) in adult liver were significantly higher
than those in human iPS-HLCs and fetal liver, we expected that the hepatic
functions of human iPS-HLCs could be enhanced by adenovirus (Ad) vector-mediated 
ATF5, c/EBPa, and PROX1 transduction. The gene expression levels of cytochrome
P450 (CYP) 2C9, 2E1, alpha-1 antitrypsin, transthyretin, Na+/taurocholate
cotransporting polypeptide, and uridine diphosphate glucuronosyl transferase 1A1 
and protein expression levels of CYP2C9 and CYP2E1 were upregulated by ATF5,
c/EBPa, and PROX1 transduction. These results suggest that the hepatic functions 
of the human iPS-HLCs could be enhanced by ATF5, c/EBPa, and PROX1 transduction. 
Our findings would be useful for the hepatic maturation of human iPS-HLCs.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26679606  [PubMed - in process]


5. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Nov 30;16(12):28320-33. doi: 10.3390/ijms161226107.

Gene Expression Profiles of Main Olfactory Epithelium in Adenylyl Cyclase 3
Knockout Mice.

Wang Z(1), Zhou Y(2), Luo Y(3), Zhang J(4), Zhai Y(5), Yang D(6), Zhang Z(7), Li 
Y(8), Storm DR(9), Ma RZ(10).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Hebei University, Baoding 071002, China.
zswang@hbu.edu.cn. (2)College of Life Science, Hebei University, Baoding 071002, 
China. zhou66913@163.com. (3)College of Life Science, Hebei University, Baoding
071002, China. luoyingtao1987@sina.com. (4)College of Life Science, Hebei
University, Baoding 071002, China. zhangjing_0521@sohu.com. (5)College of Life
Science, Hebei University, Baoding 071002, China. zypkid1412@sina.com. (6)College
of Life Science, Hebei University, Baoding 071002, China. yangdong87@yahoo.com.
(7)College of Life Science, Hebei University, Baoding 071002, China.
zhangzhe_2005@126.com. (8)Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. liyongchao@genetics.ac.cn.
(9)Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. 
dstorm@u.washington.edu. (10)Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. rlma@genetics.ac.cn.

Adenylyl Cyclase 3 (AC3) plays an important role in the olfactory
sensation-signaling pathway in mice. AC3 deficiency leads to defects in
olfaction. However, it is still unknown whether AC3 deficiency affects gene
expression or olfactory signal transduction pathways within the main olfactory
epithelium (MOE). In this study, gene microarrays were used to screen
differentially expressed genes in MOE from AC3 knockout (AC3(-/-)) and wild-type 
(AC3(+/+)) mice. The differentially expressed genes identified were subjected to 
bioinformatic analysis and verified by qRT-PCR. Gene expression in the MOE from
AC3(-/-) mice was significantly altered, compared to AC3(+/+) mice. Of the 41266 
gene probes, 3379 had greater than 2-fold fold change in expression levels
between AC3(-/-) and AC3(+/+) mice, accounting for 8% of the total gene probes.
Of these genes, 1391 were up regulated, and 1988 were down regulated, including
425 olfactory receptor genes, 99 genes that are specifically expressed in the
immature olfactory neurons, 305 genes that are specifically expressed in the
mature olfactory neurons, and 155 genes that are involved in epigenetic
regulation. Quantitative RT-PCR verification of the differentially expressed
epigenetic regulation related genes, olfactory receptors, ion transporter related
genes, neuron development and differentiation related genes, lipid metabolism and
membrane protein transport etc. related genes showed that P75NTR, Hinfp, Gadd45b,
and Tet3 were significantly up-regulated, while Olfr370, Olfr1414, Olfr1208,
Golf, Faim2, Tsg101, Mapk10, Actl6b, H2BE, ATF5, Kirrrel2, OMP, Drd2 etc. were
significantly down-regulated. In summary, AC3 may play a role in proximal
olfactory signaling and play a role in the regulation of differentially expressed
genes in mouse MOE.

PMCID: PMC4691054
PMID: 26633363  [PubMed - in process]


6. Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 1;76(3):664-74. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0828. Epub
2015 Nov 20.

Elucidation and Pharmacological Targeting of Novel Molecular Drivers of
Follicular Lymphoma Progression.

Bisikirska B(1), Bansal M(1), Shen Y(1), Teruya-Feldstein J(2), Chaganti R(3),
Califano A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York. Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York. (3)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, New York. (4)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University, New York, 
New York. ac2248@cumc.columbia.edu.

Follicular lymphoma, the most common indolent subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, is
associated with a relatively long overall survival rate ranging from 6 to 10
years from the time of diagnosis. However, in 20% to 60% of follicular lymphoma
patients, transformation to aggressive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
reduces median survival to only 1.2 years. The specific functional and genetic
determinants of follicular lymphoma transformation remain elusive, and genomic
alterations underlying disease advancement have only been identified for a subset
of cases. Therefore, to identify candidate drivers of follicular lymphoma
transformation, we performed systematic analysis of a B-cell-specific regulatory 
model exhibiting follicular lymphoma transformation signatures using the Master
Regulator Inference algorithm (MARINa). This analysis revealed FOXM1, TFDP1,
ATF5, HMGA1, and NFYB to be candidate master regulators (MR) contributing to
disease progression. Accordingly, validation was achieved through synthetic
lethality assays in which RNAi-mediated silencing of MRs individually or in
combination reduced the viability of (14;18)-positive DLBCL (t-DLBCL) cells.
Furthermore, specific combinations of small-molecule compounds targeting
synergistic MR pairs induced loss of viability in t-DLBCL cells. Collectively,
our findings indicate that MR analysis is a valuable method for identifying bona 
fide contributors to follicular lymphoma transformation and may therefore guide
the selection of compounds to be used in combinatorial treatment strategies.
Cancer Res; 76(3); 664-74. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4738055 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26589882  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Neurosci. 2015 Oct 7;35(40):13807-18. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2247-15.2015.

The Stimulus-Dependent Gradient of Cyp26B1+ Olfactory Sensory Neurons Is
Necessary for the Functional Integrity of the Olfactory Sensory Map.

Login H(1), Håglin S(1), Berghard A(1), Bohm S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, Umeå SE90187, Sweden.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, Umeå SE90187, Sweden
Staffan.Bohm@umu.se.

Stimulus-dependent expression of the retinoic acid-inactivating enzyme Cyp26B1 in
olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) forms a dorsomedial (DM)-ventrolateral (VL)
gradient in the mouse olfactory epithelium. The gradient correlates spatially
with different rates of OSN turnover, as well as the functional organization of
the olfactory sensory map, into overlapping zones of OSNs that express different 
odorant receptors (ORs). Here, we analyze transgenic mice that, instead of a
stimulus-dependent Cyp26B1 gradient, have constitutive Cyp26B1 levels in all
OSNs. Starting postnatally, OSN differentiation is decreased and progenitor
proliferation is increased. Initially, these effects are selective to the VL-most
zone and correlate with reduced ATF5 expression and accumulation of OSNs that do 
not express ORs. Transcription factor ATF5 is known to stabilize OR gene choice
via onset of the stimulus-transducing enzyme adenylyl cyclase type 3. During
further postnatal development of Cyp26B1 mice, an anomalous DM(high)-VL(low)
expression gradient of adenylyl cyclase type 3 appears, which coincides with
altered OR frequencies and OR zones. All OR zones expand ventrolaterally except
for the VL-most zone, which contracts. The expansion results in an increased
zonal overlap that is also evident in the innervation pattern of OSN axon
terminals in olfactory bulbs. These findings together identify a mechanism by
which postnatal sensory-stimulated vitamin A metabolism modifies the generation
of spatially specified neurons and their precise topographic connectivity. The
distributed patterns of vitamin A-metabolizing enzymes in the nervous system
suggest the possibility that the mechanism may also regulate neuroplasticity in
circuits other than the olfactory sensory map.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: The mouse
olfactory sensory map is functionally wired according to precise axonal
projections of spatially organized classes of olfactory sensory neurons in the
nose. The genetically controlled mechanisms that regulate the development of the 
olfactory sensory map are beginning to be elucidated. Little is known about
mechanisms by which sensory stimuli shape the organization of the map after
birth. We show that a stimulus-dependent gradient of a retinoic acid-inactivating
enzyme Cyp26B1 modifies the composition, localization, and axonal projections of 
olfactory sensory neuron classes. The mechanism is novel and suggests the
interesting possibility that local vitamin A metabolism could also be a mediator 
of stimulus-dependent modifications of precise spatial connectivity in other
parts of the nervous system.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3513807-12$15.00/0.

PMID: 26446231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cell Tissue Res. 2016 Mar;363(3):621-33. doi: 10.1007/s00441-015-2283-8. Epub
2015 Sep 22.

Activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) is essential for the maturation and
survival of mouse basal vomeronasal sensory neurons.

Nakano H(1), Iida Y(1), Suzuki M(1), Aoki M(1), Umemura M(1), Takahashi S(1),
Takahashi Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology, School of Life Sciences,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, 1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji,
Tokyo, 192-0392, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology,
School of Life Sciences, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, 1432-1
Horinouchi, Hachioji, Tokyo, 192-0392, Japan. yuji@toyaku.ac.jp.

Activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) is a member of the CREB/ATF family of
transcription factors, which is highly expressed in olfactory chemosensory
tissues, the main olfactory epithelium and vomeronasal epithelium (VNE) in mice. 
The vomeronasal sensory neurons in the VNE detect pheromones in order to regulate
social behaviors such as mating and aggression; however, the physiological role
of ATF5 in the vomeronasal sensory system remains unknown. In this study, we
found that the differentiation of mature vomeronasal sensory neurons, assessed by
olfactory marker protein expression, was inhibited in ATF5-deficient VNE. In
addition, many apoptotic vomeronasal sensory neurons were evident in
ATF5-deficient VNE. The vomeronasal sensory neurons consist of two major types of
neuron expressing either vomeronasal 1 receptor (V1r)/Gai2 or vomeronasal 2
receptor (V2r)/Gao. We demonstrated that the differentiation, survival and axonal
projection of V2r/Gao-type rather than V1r/Gai2-type vomeronasal sensory neurons 
were severely inhibited in ATF5-deficient VNE. These results suggest that ATF5 is
one of the transcription factors crucial for the vomeronasal sensory formation.

PMID: 26395637  [PubMed - in process]


9. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2015 Sep;16(9):757-62. doi: 10.1631/jzus.B1500067.

DNA methylation level of promoter region of activating transcription factor 5 in 
glioma.

Hua XM(1), Wang J(2), Qian DM(1), Song JY(1), Chen H(1), Zhu XL(1), Zhou R(1),
Zhao YD(1), Zhou XZ(1), Li L(1), Zhang L(1), Song XX(1), Wang B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Qingdao University Medical College, Qingdao
266071, China. (2)Department of Biotechnology, Binzhou Medical College, Yantai
264003, China.

Transcription factors, which represent an important class of proteins that play
key roles in controlling cellular proliferation and cell cycle modulation, are
attractive targets for cancer therapy. Previous researches have shown that the
expression level of activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) was frequently
increased in glioma and its acetylation level was related to glioma. The purposes
of this study were to explore the methylation level of ATF5 in clinical glioma
tissues and to explore the effect of ATF5 methylation on the expression of ATF5
in glioma. Methylation of the promoter region of ATF5 was assayed by
bisulfite-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) sequencing analysis in 35
cases of glioma and 5 normal tissues. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) was
also performed to detect ATF5 mRNA expression in 35 cases of glioma and 5 normal 
tissues. Clinical data were collected from the patients and analyzed. The
percentages of methylation of the ATF5 gene in the promoter region in healthy
control, patients with well-differentiated glioma, and those with poorly
differentiated glioma were 87.78%, 73.89%, and 47.70%, respectively. Analysis of 
the methylation status of the promoter region of the ATF5 gene showed a gradually
decreased methylation level in poorly differentiated glioma, well-differentiated 
glioma, and normal tissues (P<0.05). There was also a significant difference
between well-differentiated glioma and poorly differentiated glioma (P<0.05).
ATF5 mRNA expression in glioma was significantly higher than that in the normal
tissues (P<0.05). This study provides the first evidence that the methylation
level of ATF5 decreased, and its mRNA expression was evidently up-regulated in
glioma.

PMCID: PMC4569683
PMID: 26365117  [PubMed - in process]


10. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(20):3215-6. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1086202.

ATF5 is an essential protein in the centrosome.

Lengel K(1), Kim E(1), Liu DX(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences ; Washington State University College 
of Pharmacy ; Spokane , WA USA.

Comment on
    Cell. 2015 Jul 30;162(3):580-92.

PMID: 26312370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cell. 2015 Jul 30;162(3):580-92. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.06.055. Epub 2015 Jul
23.

ATF5 Connects the Pericentriolar Materials to the Proximal End of the Mother
Centriole.

Madarampalli B(1), Yuan Y(1), Liu D(1), Lengel K(1), Xu Y(1), Li G(1), Yang J(2),
Liu X(3), Lu Z(4), Liu DX(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Washington State University College of 
Pharmacy, Spokane, WA 99202, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Penn State
College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. (3)State Key Laboratory of Cell
Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institute for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; Xinyuan
Institute of Medicine and Biotechnology, College of Life Science, Zhejiang
Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou 310018, China. (4)Brain Tumor Center and Department
of Neuro-Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
77030, USA. (5)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Washington State University
College of Pharmacy, Spokane, WA 99202, USA. Electronic address: d.liu@wsu.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2015;14(20):3215-6.

Although it is known that the centrioles play instructive roles in pericentriolar
material (PCM) assembly and that the PCM is essential for proper centriole
formation, the mechanism that governs centriole-PCM interaction is poorly
understood. Here, we show that ATF5 forms a characteristic 9-fold symmetrical
ring structure in the inner layer of the PCM outfitting the proximal end of the
mother centriole. ATF5 controls the centriole-PCM interaction in a cell-cycle-
and centriole-age-dependent manner. Interaction of ATF5 with polyglutamylated
tubulin (PGT) on the mother centriole and with PCNT in the PCM renders ATF5 as a 
required molecule in mother centriole-directed PCM accumulation and in
PCM-dependent centriole formation. ATF5 depletion blocks PCM accumulation at the 
centrosome and causes fragmentation of centrioles, leading to the formation of
multi-polar mitotic spindles and genomic instability. These data show that ATF5
is an essential structural protein that is required for the interaction between
the mother centriole and the PCM.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26213385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Aging (Albany NY). 2015 Jul;7(7):453-4.

ATF5: development of oncogenic resistance to radiotherapy.

Ishihara S(1), Haga H(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI 53705, USA. (2)Faculty of Advanced Life Science, Hokkaido University,
Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0810, Japan. (3)Research Center for Cooperative Projects,
Graduate School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638,
Japan.

PMCID: PMC4543028
PMID: 26187904  [PubMed - in process]


13. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 26;10(6):e0131918. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131918.
eCollection 2015.

Validation of Genotyping-By-Sequencing Analysis in Populations of Tetraploid
Alfalfa by 454 Sequencing.

Rocher S(1), Jean M(2), Castonguay Y(1), Belzile F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche et de Développement sur les Sols et les Grandes Cultures, 
Agriculture et agroalimentaire Canada, Quebec City (QC), Canada. (2)Département
de Phytologie and Institut de Biologie Intégrative et des Systèmes, Université
Laval, Quebec City (QC), Canada.

Genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS) is a relatively low-cost high throughput
genotyping technology based on next generation sequencing and is applicable to
orphan species with no reference genome. A combination of genome complexity
reduction and multiplexing with DNA barcoding provides a simple and affordable
way to resolve allelic variation between plant samples or populations. GBS was
performed on ApeKI libraries using DNA from 48 genotypes each of two
heterogeneous populations of tetraploid alfalfa (Medicago sativa spp. sativa):
the synthetic cultivar Apica (ATF0) and a derived population (ATF5) obtained
after five cycles of recurrent selection for superior tolerance to freezing (TF).
Nearly 400 million reads were obtained from two lanes of an Illumina HiSeq 2000
sequencer and analyzed with the Universal Network-Enabled Analysis Kit (UNEAK)
pipeline designed for species with no reference genome. Following the application
of whole dataset-level filters, 11,694 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) loci 
were obtained. About 60% had a significant match on the Medicago truncatula
syntenic genome. The accuracy of allelic ratios and genotype calls based on GBS
data was directly assessed using 454 sequencing on a subset of SNP loci scored in
eight plant samples. Sequencing depth in this study was not sufficient for
accurate tetraploid allelic dosage, but reliable genotype calls based on diploid 
allelic dosage were obtained when using additional quality filtering. Principal
Component Analysis of SNP loci in plant samples revealed that a small proportion 
(<5%) of the genetic variability assessed by GBS is able to differentiate ATF0
and ATF5. Our results confirm that analysis of GBS data using UNEAK is a reliable
approach for genome-wide discovery of SNP loci in outcrossed polyploids.

PMCID: PMC4482585
PMID: 26115486  [PubMed - in process]


14. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Aug;12(2):2707-14. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3709. Epub 2015 Apr
30.

A comprehensive analysis of differentially expressed genes and pathways in
abdominal aortic aneurysm.

Yuan K(1), Liang W(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, Renji Hospital of Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200127, P.R. China.

The current study aimed to investigate the molecular mechanism underlying
abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) via various bioinformatics techniques. Gene
expression profiling analysis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between
AAA samples and normal controls was conducted. The Database for Annotation,
Visualization and Integrated Discovery tool was utilized to perform Gene ontology
(GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analyses for DEGs and clusters
from the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, which was constructed using
the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes. In addition, important
transcription factors (TFs) that regulated DEGs were investigated. A total of 346
DEGs were identified between AAA samples and healthy controls. Additionally, four
clusters were identified from the PPI network. Cluster 1 was associated with
sensory perception of smell and the olfactory transduction subpathway. The most
significant GO function terms for cluster 2 and 3 were response to virus and
defense response, respectively. Cluster 4 was associated with
mitochondria-associated functions and the oxidative phosphorylation subpathway.
Early growth response-1 (EGR-1), Myc, activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5)
and specificity protein (SP) 1:SP3 were identified to be critical TFs in this
disease. The present study suggested that the olfactory transduction subpathway, 
mitochondria and oxidative phosphorylation pathways were involved in AAA, and
TFs, such as EGR-1, Myc, ATF5 and SP1:SP3, may be potential candidate molecular
targets for this disease.

PMID: 25936411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2015;79(7):1082-9. doi: 10.1080/09168451.2015.1012042.
Epub 2015 Feb 23.

Activating transcription factor 5 is required for mouse olfactory bulb
development via interneuron.

Umemura M(1), Tsunematsu K, Shimizu YI, Nakano H, Takahashi S, Higashiura Y,
Okabe M, Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)a School of Life Sciences , Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences ,
Hachioji , Japan.

Activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) is a stress response transcription
factor of the cAMP-responsive element-binding/ATF family. Earlier, we reported
that ATF5 expression is up-regulated in response to stress, such as amino acid
limitation or arsenite exposure. Although ATF5 is widely expressed in the brain
and the olfactory epithelium, the role of ATF5 is not fully understood. Here, the
olfactory bulbs (OBs) of ATF5-deficient mice are smaller than those of wild-type 
mice. Histological analysis reveals the disturbed laminar structure of the OB,
showing the thinner olfactory nerve layer, and a reduced number of interneurons. 
This is mainly due to the reduced number of bromodeoxyuridine-positive
proliferating cells in the subventricular zone, where the interneuron progenitors
are formed and migrate to the OBs. Moreover, the olfaction-related aggressive
behavior of ATF5-deficient mice is reduced compared to wild-type mice. Our data
suggest that ATF5 plays a crucial role in mouse OB development via interneuron.

PMID: 25704077  [PubMed - in process]


16. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Feb 19;11(2):e1004046. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004046. 
eCollection 2015.

Data-driven prediction and design of bZIP coiled-coil interactions.

Potapov V(1), Kaplan JB(1), Keating AE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America;
Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Apr;11(4):e1004243.

Selective dimerization of the basic-region leucine-zipper (bZIP) transcription
factors presents a vivid example of how a high degree of interaction specificity 
can be achieved within a family of structurally similar proteins. The coiled-coil
motif that mediates homo- or hetero-dimerization of the bZIP proteins has been
intensively studied, and a variety of methods have been proposed to predict these
interactions from sequence data. In this work, we used a large quantitative set
of 4,549 bZIP coiled-coil interactions to develop a predictive model that
exploits knowledge of structurally conserved residue-residue interactions in the 
coiled-coil motif. Our model, which expresses interaction energies as a sum of
interpretable residue-pair and triplet terms, achieves a correlation with
experimental binding free energies of R = 0.68 and significantly out-performs
other scoring functions. To use our model in protein design applications, we
devised a strategy in which synthetic peptides are built by assembling 7-residue 
native-protein heptad modules into new combinations. An integer linear program
was used to find the optimal combination of heptads to bind selectively to a
target human bZIP coiled coil, but not to target paralogs. Using this approach,
we designed peptides to interact with the bZIP domains from human JUN, XBP1, ATF4
and ATF5. Testing more than 132 candidate protein complexes using a fluorescence 
resonance energy transfer assay confirmed the formation of tight and selective
heterodimers between the designed peptides and their targets. This approach can
be used to make inhibitors of native proteins, or to develop novel peptides for
applications in synthetic biology or nanotechnology.

PMCID: PMC4335062
PMID: 25695764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 10;6(7):4602-14.

Activating transcription factor 5 enhances radioresistance and malignancy in
cancer cells.

Ishihara S(1,)(2), Yasuda M(3), Ishizu A(4), Ishikawa M(5), Shirato H(6), Haga
H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Advanced Life Science, Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo
060-0810, Japan. (2)Research Center for Cooperative Projects, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. (3)Department of
Oral Pathobiological Science, Graduate School of Dental Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8586, Japan. (4)Division of Medical Laboratory
Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo
060-0812, Japan. (5)Department of Medical Physics, Graduate School of Medicine,
Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. (6)Department of
Radiology, Graduate School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo
060-8638, Japan.

Radiotherapy is effective for treating various types of tumors. However, some
cancer cells survive after irradiation and repopulate tumors with highly
malignant phenotypes that correlate with poor prognosis. It is not known how
cancer cells survive and generate malignant tumors after irradiation. Here, we
show that activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) promotes radioresistance and
malignancy in cancer cells after irradiation. In the G1-S phase of the cell
cycle, cancer cells express high levels of ATF5, which promotes cell cycle
progression and thereby increases radioresistance. Furthermore, ATF5 increases
malignant phenotypes, such as cell growth and invasiveness, in cancer cells in
vitro and in vivo. We have identified a new mechanism for the regeneration of
highly malignant tumors after irradiation and shown that ATF5 plays a key role in
the process.

PMCID: PMC4467102
PMID: 25682872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Genome Biol. 2014 Dec 3;15(12):533. doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0533-9.

Integrated analyses of DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation reveal tumor
suppressive roles of ECM1, ATF5, and EOMES in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Gao F, Xia Y, Wang J, Lin Z, Ou Y, Liu X, Liu W, Zhou B, Luo H, Zhou B, Wen B,
Zhang X, Huang J.

BACKGROUND: Differences in 5-hydroxymethylcytosine, 5hmC, distributions may
complicate previous observations of abnormal cytosine methylation statuses that
are used for the identification of new tumor suppressor gene candidates that are 
relevant to human hepatocarcinogenesis. The simultaneous detection of
5-methylcytosine and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine is likely to stimulate the discovery
of aberrantly methylated genes with increased accuracy in human hepatocellular
carcinoma.
RESULTS: Here, we performed ultra-performance liquid chromatography/tandem mass
spectrometry and single-base high-throughput sequencing, Hydroxymethylation and
Methylation Sensitive Tag sequencing, HMST-seq, to synchronously measure these
two modifications in human hepatocellular carcinoma samples. After identification
of differentially methylated and hydroxymethylated genes in human hepatocellular 
carcinoma, we integrate DNA copy-number alterations, as determined using
array-based comparative genomic hybridization data, with gene expression to
identify genes that are potentially silenced by promoter hypermethylation.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a high enrichment of genes with epigenetic aberrations in 
cancer signaling pathways. Six genes were selected as tumor suppressor gene
candidates, among which, ECM1, ATF5 and EOMES are confirmed via siRNA experiments
to have potential anti-cancer functions.

PMCID: PMC4253612
PMID: 25517360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Mar;35(5):778-88. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01228-14. Epub 2014 Dec
15.

Stabilization of ATF5 by TAK1-Nemo-like kinase critically regulates the
interleukin-1ß-stimulated C/EBP signaling pathway.

Zhang ZY(1), Li SZ(1), Zhang HH(1), Wu QR(1), Gong J(1), Liang T(1), Gao L(2),
Xing NN(1), Liu WB(3), Du RL(4), Zhang XD(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. (2)Department of
Cardiology, Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Hua Zhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (3)College
of Health Sciences and Nursing, Wuhan Polytechnic University, Wuhan, China.
(4)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China runleidu@whu.edu.cn
zhangxd@whu.edu.cn.

Interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) is a key proinflammatory cytokine that initiates several
signaling cascades, including those involving CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins
(C/EBPs). The mechanism by which IL-1ß propagates a signal that activates C/EBP
has remained elusive. Nemo-like kinase (NLK) is a mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK)-like kinase associated with many pathways and phenotypes that are
not yet well understood. Using a luciferase reporter screen, we found that
IL-1ß-induced C/EBP activation was positively regulated by NLK. Overexpression of
NLK activated C/EBP and potentiated IL-1ß-triggered C/EBP activation, whereas
knockdown or knockout of NLK had the opposite effect. NLK interacted with
activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) and inhibited the proteasome-dependent
degradation of ATF5 in a kinase-independent manner. Consistently, NLK deficiency 
resulted in decreased levels of ATF5. NLK cooperated with ATF5 to activate C/EBP,
whereas NLK could not activate C/EBP upon knockdown of ATF5. Moreover, TAK1, a
downstream effector of IL-1ß that acts upstream of NLK, mimicked the ability of
NLK to stabilize ATF5 and activate C/EBP. Thus, our findings reveal the TAK1-NLK 
pathway as a novel regulator of basal or IL-1ß-triggered C/EBP activation though 
stabilization of ATF5.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4323494
PMID: 25512613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Med Oncol. 2014 Nov;31(11):269. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0269-0. Epub 2014 Oct 8.

High ATF5 expression is a favorable prognostic indicator in patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma after hepatectomy.

Wu Y(1), Wu B, Chen R, Zheng Y, Huang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gerontology, The DingLi Clinical Institute Affiliated to Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou Central Hospital, Wenzhou, China.

Activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) is a member of the ATF/CREB family
involved in diverse physiological functions, ranging from metabolite homeostasis 
to cellular differentiations and regulation of the cell cycle. However, the
clinical significance of ATF5 expression in patients with hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) is unknown. We investigated ATF5 mRNA expression in tumors and
adjacent non-tumor hepatic tissues from 119 HCC patients using quantitative
real-time PCR. Association between the ATF5 mRNA expression level and clinical
and pathological parameters, including recurrence-free survival (RFS) and overall
survival, were also evaluated using appropriate statistical methods. ATF5 was
downregulated significantly (P < 0.001) in the tumor versus matched HCC non-tumor
hepatic tissue, with average mRNA expression levels of 0.25 ± 0.92 and 0.41 ±
1.19, respectively. Low ATF5 expression was correlated significantly with liver
cirrhosis, intrahepatic metastasis, and TNM stage (P < 0.05). Additionally, both 
Kaplan-Meier survival curve and multivariate analyses showed a relationship
between ATF5 and RFS. In conclusion, a low expression level of ATF5 in HCC
indicated aggressive tumor behavior and predicted a worse clinical outcome. ATF5 
may be useful as a novel prognostic indicator in hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMID: 25294425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Pharmacol. 2014 Dec;86(6):727-35. doi: 10.1124/mol.114.093666. Epub 2014 Sep 
12.

Krüppel-like factor 9 promotes hepatic cytochrome P450 2D6 expression during
pregnancy in CYP2D6-humanized mice.

Koh KH(1), Pan X(1), Zhang W(1), McLachlan A(1), Urrutia R(1), Jeong H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice (K.H.K., H.J.), Department of
Biopharmaceutical Sciences (X.P., H.J.), College of Pharmacy, and Department of
Pediatrics (W.Z.) and Department of Microbiology and Immunology (A.M.), College
of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois; and Laboratory
of Epigenetics and Chromatin Dynamics, and Departments of Biology and Molecular
Biology, Epigenomics Translational Program, Mayo Clinic Center for Individualized
Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota (R.U.). (2)Department of Pharmacy
Practice (K.H.K., H.J.), Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences (X.P., H.J.),
College of Pharmacy, and Department of Pediatrics (W.Z.) and Department of
Microbiology and Immunology (A.M.), College of Medicine, University of Illinois
at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois; and Laboratory of Epigenetics and Chromatin
Dynamics, and Departments of Biology and Molecular Biology, Epigenomics
Translational Program, Mayo Clinic Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota (R.U.) yjeong@uic.edu.

Cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6), a major drug-metabolizing enzyme, is responsible
for metabolism of approximately 25% of marketed drugs. Clinical evidence
indicates that metabolism of CYP2D6 substrates is increased during pregnancy, but
the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. To identify transcription factors
potentially responsible for CYP2D6 induction during pregnancy, a panel of genes
differentially expressed in the livers of pregnant versus nonpregnant
CYP2D6-humanized (tg-CYP2D6) mice was compiled via microarray experiments
followed by real-time quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction(qRT-PCR) verification. As a result, seven transcription
factors-activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5), early growth response 1 (EGR1),
forkhead box protein A3 (FOXA3), JUNB, Krüppel-like factor 9 (KLF9), KLF10, and
REV-ERBa-were found to be up-regulated in liver during pregnancy. Results from
transient transfection and promoter reporter gene assays indicate that KLF9
itself is a weak transactivator of CYP2D6 promoter but significantly enhances
CYP2D6 promoter transactivation by hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4a), a known
transcriptional activator of CYP2D6 expression. The results from deletion and
mutation analysis of CYP2D6 promoter activity identified a KLF9 putative binding 
motif at -22/-14 region to be critical in the potentiation of HNF4a-induced
transactivation of CYP2D6. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed a
direct binding of KLF9 to the putative KLF binding motif. Results from chromatin 
immunoprecipitation assay showed increased recruitment of KLF9 to CYP2D6 promoter
in the livers of tg-CYP2D6 mice during pregnancy. Taken together, our data
suggest that increased KLF9 expression is in part responsible for CYP2D6
induction during pregnancy via the potentiation of HNF4a transactivation of
CYP2D6.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4244597
PMID: 25217496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Oncol Lett. 2014 Sep;8(3):1051-1057. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Human cytomegalovirus inhibits apoptosis by regulating the activating
transcription factor 5 signaling pathway in human malignant glioma cells.

Wang T(1), Qian D(1), Hu M(1), Li L(1), Zhang L(1), Chen H(1), Yang R(1), Wang
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Qingdao University Medical College, Qingdao,
Shandong 266071, P.R. China.

The activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5), also termed ATFx, is a member of
the ATF/cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) family of basic zipper
proteins. ATF5 is an anti-apoptotic protein that is highly expressed in malignant
glioma and is essential for glioma cell survival. Accumulating evidence indicates
that human malignant gliomas are universally infected with human cytomegalovirus 
(HCMV). Recent studies have shown that HCMV may be resistant to the induction of 
apoptosis by disrupting cellular pathways in glioblastoma. To investigate the
potential anti-apoptotic function of HCMV in glioma, malignant U87 glioma cells
were infected with HCMV. The present study showed that HCMV infection suppressed 
apoptosis in glioblastoma U87 cells by regulating the expression of ATF5.
Furthermore, in glioblastoma U87 cells, HCMV infection induced cellular
proliferation in parallel with an increase in the expression level of ATF5 and
B-cell lymphoma/leukemia-2 to Bcl-2-associated X protein ratio. Loss of ATF5
function was achieved using a dominant-negative form of ATF5 in U87 cells,
whereby cells appeared to grow marginally following HCMV infection when compared 
with the control. However, the anti-apoptotic ability was appeared to decline in 
the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling assay. 
These results indicate that ATF5 signaling pathways may be important in the
anti-apoptotic activity of HCMV-infected glioblastoma cells; therefore, the
anti-apoptotic molecular mechanisms of HCMV in human glioblastoma cells were
investigated in the current study. Prevention of HCMV infection may present a
potential and promising approach for the treatment of malignant gliomas.

PMCID: PMC4114579
PMID: 25120656  [PubMed]


23. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1176:59-72. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-0992-6_6.

A diphtheria toxin negative selection in RNA interference screening.

Sheng Z(1), Murphy SF, Guo S, Green MR.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute, 2 Riverside Circle, Roanoke, VA,
24016, USA, zhisheng@vtc.vt.edu.

RNA interference (RNAi) screening is a powerful technique for understanding the
molecular biology of cancer and searching drug targets. Genes and their upstream 
activators that are essential for the survival of cancer cells often dictate
cancer formation/progression. Hence, they are preferable therapeutic targets.
Identifying these genes using RNAi is, however, problematic because knocking them
down leads to cell death. Here we describe a diphtheria toxin (DT) negative
selection method to circumvent the problem of cell death in RNAi screening. DT
fails to kill mouse cells due to the lack of functional DT receptor (DTR). Thus, 
we first prepare a construct encoding a human functional DTR driven by the
promoter of mouse Atf5, a gene essential for the survival of malignant glioma.
Then a DT-sensitive mouse malignant glioma cell line is established by
over-expressing this DTR. Finally, an RNAi screen is performed in this cell line 
and genes that activate Atf5 expression are identified. The negative selection
approach described here allows RNAi screening to be used for identifying genes
controlling cell survival in cancers or perhaps other human diseases with
potential in therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 25030919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 27;9(3):e93258. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093258. eCollection
2014.

RNA sequence reveals mouse retinal transcriptome changes early after axonal
injury.

Yasuda M(1), Tanaka Y(1), Ryu M(1), Tsuda S(1), Nakazawa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan.

Glaucoma is an ocular disease characterized by progressive retinal ganglion cell 
(RGC) death caused by axonal injury. However, the underlying mechanisms involved 
in RGC death remain unclear. In this study, we investigated changes in the
transcriptome profile following axonal injury in mice (C57BL/6) with RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) technology. The experiment group underwent an optic nerve
crush (ONC) procedure to induce axonal injury in the right eye, and the control
group underwent a sham procedure. Two days later, we extracted the retinas and
performed RNA-seq and a pathway analysis. We identified 177 differentially
expressed genes with RNA-seq, notably the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-related genes Atf3, Atf4, Atf5, Chac1, Chop, Egr1 and Trb3, which were
significantly upregulated. The pathway analysis revealed that ATF4 was the most
significant upstream regulator. The antioxidative response-related genes Hmox1
and Srxn1, as well as the immune response-related genes C1qa, C1qb and C1qc, were
also significantly upregulated. To our knowledge, this is the first reported
RNA-seq investigation of the retinal transcriptome and molecular pathways in the 
early stages after axonal injury. Our results indicated that ER stress plays a
key role under these conditions. Furthermore, the antioxidative defense and
immune responses occurred concurrently in the early stages after axonal injury.
We believe that our study will lead to a better understanding of and insight into
the molecular mechanisms underlying RGC death after axonal injury.

PMCID: PMC3968129
PMID: 24676137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Mar 6;14(3):394-403. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.01.008. Epub
2014 Feb 27.

Human hepatocytes with drug metabolic function induced from fibroblasts by
lineage reprogramming.

Du Y(1), Wang J(2), Jia J(3), Song N(3), Xiang C(1), Xu J(1), Hou Z(4), Su X(1), 
Liu B(2), Jiang T(5), Zhao D(1), Sun Y(6), Shu J(1), Guo Q(5), Yin M(1), Sun
D(2), Lu S(7), Shi Y(8), Deng H(9).

Author information: 
(1)The MOE Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation, College of
Life Sciences, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University,
Beijing 100871, China. (2)Shenzhen Stem Cell Engineering Laboratory, Key
Laboratory of Chemical Genomics, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School,
Shenzhen 518055, China. (3)The MOE Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and
Differentiation, College of Life Sciences, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China; Shenzhen Stem Cell
Engineering Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Chemical Genomics, Peking University
Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China. (4)Beijing Vitalstar
Biotechnology, Beijing 100012, China. (5)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery,
Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. (6)Laboratory of Genome
Variations and Precision Bio-Medicine, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (7)Department of Hepatobiliary
Surgery, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. Electronic address:
lsc620213@aliyun.com. (8)Shenzhen Stem Cell Engineering Laboratory, Key
Laboratory of Chemical Genomics, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School,
Shenzhen 518055, China. Electronic address: shiyan@pkusz.edu.cn. (9)The MOE Key
Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation, College of Life Sciences,
Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871,
China; Shenzhen Stem Cell Engineering Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Chemical
Genomics, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China;
Peking University Stem Cell Research Center, Department of Cell Biology, School
of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing
100191, China. Electronic address: hongkui_deng@pku.edu.cn.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Mar 6;14(3):267-9.

Obtaining fully functional cell types is a major challenge for drug discovery and
regenerative medicine. Currently, a fundamental solution to this key problem is
still lacking. Here, we show that functional human induced hepatocytes (hiHeps)
can be generated from fibroblasts by overexpressing the hepatic fate conversion
factors HNF1A, HNF4A, and HNF6 along with the maturation factors ATF5, PROX1, and
CEBPA. hiHeps express a spectrum of phase I and II drug-metabolizing enzymes and 
phase III drug transporters. Importantly, the metabolic activities of CYP3A4,
CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 are comparable between hiHeps and freshly
isolated primary human hepatocytes. Transplanted hiHeps repopulate up to 30% of
the livers of Tet-uPA/Rag2(-/-)/<U+03B3>c(-/-) mice and secrete more than 300 µg/ml
human ALBUMIN in vivo. Our data demonstrate that human hepatocytes with drug
metabolic function can be generated by lineage reprogramming, thus providing a
cell resource for pharmaceutical applications.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24582926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 14;289(7):3888-900. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.491217. Epub 2013
Dec 30.

N-terminal hydrophobic amino acids of activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5)
protein confer interleukin 1ß (IL-1ß)-induced stabilization.

Abe T(1), Kojima M, Akanuma S, Iwashita H, Yamazaki T, Okuyama R, Ichikawa K,
Umemura M, Nakano H, Takahashi S, Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology.

Activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) is a stress-response transcription
factor that responds to amino acid limitation and exposure to cadmium chloride
(CdCl2) and sodium arsenite (NaAsO2). The N-terminal amino acids contribute to
the destabilization of the ATF5 protein in steady-state conditions and serve as a
stabilization domain in the stress response after CdCl2 or NaAsO2 exposure. In
this study, we show that interleukin 1ß (IL-1ß), a proinflammatory cytokine,
increases the expression of ATF5 protein in HepG2 hepatoma cells in part by
stabilizing the ATF5 protein. The N-terminal domain rich in hydrophobic amino
acids that is predicted to form a hydrophobic network was responsible for
destabilization in steady-state conditions and served as an IL-1ß response
domain. Furthermore, IL-1ß increased the translational efficiency of ATF5 mRNA
via the 5' UTRa and phosphorylation of the eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 2a (eIF2a). ATF5 knockdown in HepG2 cells up-regulated the IL-1ß-induced
expression of the serum amyloid A 1 (SAA1) and SAA2 genes. Our results show that 
the N-terminal hydrophobic amino acids play an important role in the regulation
of ATF5 protein expression in IL-1ß-mediated immune response and that ATF5 is a
negative regulator for IL-1ß-induced expression of SAA1 and SAA2 in HepG2 cells.

PMCID: PMC3924258
PMID: 24379400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Retrovirology. 2013 Dec 21;10:160. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-10-160.

Transcriptional profiling reveals molecular signatures associated with HIV
permissiveness in Th1Th17 cells and identifies peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor gamma as an intrinsic negative regulator of viral replication.

Bernier A, Cleret-Buhot A, Zhang Y, Goulet JP, Monteiro P, Gosselin A, DaFonseca 
S, Wacleche VS, Jenabian MA, Routy JP, Tremblay C, Ancuta P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Infectiology, and Immunology, Université de
Montréal, Faculty of Medicine, Montreal Quebec, Canada.
petronela.ancuta@umontreal.ca.

BACKGROUND: We previously demonstrated that primary Th1Th17 cells are highly
permissive to HIV-1, whereas Th1 cells are relatively resistant. Molecular
mechanisms underlying these differences remain unknown.
RESULTS: Exposure to replication competent and single-round VSV-G pseudotyped HIV
strains provide evidence that superior HIV replication in Th1Th17 vs. Th1 cells
was regulated by mechanisms located at entry and post-entry levels. Genome-wide
transcriptional profiling identified transcripts upregulated (n = 264) and
downregulated (n = 235) in Th1Th17 vs. Th1 cells (p-value < 0.05; fold change
cut-off 1.3). Gene Set Enrichment Analysis revealed pathways enriched in Th1Th17 
(nuclear receptors, trafficking, p38/MAPK, NF-<U+03BA>B, p53/Ras, IL-23) vs. Th1 cells
(proteasome, interferon a/ß). Differentially expressed genes were classified into
biological categories using Gene Ontology. Th1Th17 cells expressed typical Th17
markers (IL-17A/F, IL-22, CCL20, RORC, IL-26, IL-23R, CCR6) and transcripts
functionally linked to regulating cell trafficking (CEACAM1, MCAM), activation
(CD28, CD40LG, TNFSF13B, TNFSF25, PTPN13, MAP3K4, LTB, CTSH), transcription
(PPAR<U+03B3>, RUNX1, ATF5, ARNTL), apoptosis (FASLG), and HIV infection (CXCR6, FURIN).
Differential expression of CXCR6, PPAR<U+03B3>, ARNTL, PTPN13, MAP3K4, CTSH, SERPINB6,
PTK2, and ISG20 was validated by RT-PCR, flow cytometry and/or confocal
microscopy. The nuclear receptor PPAR<U+03B3> was preferentially expressed by Th1Th17
cells. PPAR<U+03B3> RNA interference significantly increased HIV replication at levels
post-entry and prior HIV-DNA integration. Finally, the activation of PPAR<U+03B3>
pathway via the agonist Rosiglitazone induced the nuclear translocation of PPAR<U+03B3> 
and a robust inhibition of viral replication.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, transcriptional profiling in Th1Th17 vs. Th1 cells
demonstrated that HIV permissiveness is associated with a superior state of
cellular activation and limited antiviral properties and identified PPAR<U+03B3> as an
intrinsic negative regulator of viral replication. Therefore, triggering PPAR<U+03B3>
pathway via non-toxic agonists may contribute to limiting covert HIV replication 
and disease progression during antiretroviral treatment.

PMCID: PMC3898812
PMID: 24359430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Sci China Life Sci. 2013 Dec;56(12):1124-33. doi: 10.1007/s11427-013-4569-y. Epub
2013 Dec 5.

A cellular response protein induced during HSV-1 infection inhibits viral
replication by interacting with ATF5.

Wu L(1), Zhang X, Che Y, Zhang Y, Tang S, Liao Y, Na R, Xiong X, Liu L, Li Q.

Author information: 
(1)Yunnan Key Laboratory of Vaccine Research & Development on Severe Infectious
Diseases, Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences &
Peking Union Medical College, Kunming, 650118, China.

Studies of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection have shown that many
known and unknown cellular molecules involved in viral proliferation are
up-regulated following HSV-1 infection. In this study, using two-dimensional
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, we found that the expression of the HSV-1
infection response repressive protein (HIRRP, GI 16552881) was up-regulated in
human L02 cells infected with HSV-1. HIRRP, an unknown protein, was initially
localized in the cytoplasm and then translocated into the nucleus of
HSV-1-infected cells. Further analysis showed that HIRRP represses HSV-1
proliferation by inhibiting transcription of the viral genome by interacting with
the cellular transcription factor, ATF5, via its N-terminal domain. ATF5
represses the transcription of many host genes but can also act as an activator
of genes containing a specific motif. We found that ATF5 promotes the
proliferation of HSV-1 via a potential mechanism by which ATF5 enhances the
transcription of viral genes during the course of an HSV-1 infection; HIRRP then 
induces feedback repression of this transcription by interacting with ATF5.

PMID: 24302293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;34(3):315-24. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00956-13. Epub 2013 Nov
11.

p300-dependent acetylation of activating transcription factor 5 enhances C/EBPß
transactivation of C/EBPa during 3T3-L1 differentiation.

Zhao Y(1), Zhang YD, Zhang YY, Qian SW, Zhang ZC, Li SF, Guo L, Liu Y, Wen B, Lei
QY, Tang QQ, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University Shanghai Medical College,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Adipogenesis is a multistep process by which 3T3-L1 preadipocytes differentiate
into mature adipocytes through mitotic clonal expansion (MCE) and terminal
differentiation. The CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) is an important
transcription factor that takes part in both of these processes. C/EBPß not only 
transactivates C/EBPa and the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>
(PPAR<U+03B3>), which cause 3T3-L1 preadipocytes to enter terminal adipocyte
differentiation, but also is required to activate cell cycle genes necessary for 
MCE. The identification of potential cofactors of C/EBPß will help to explain how
C/EBPß undertakes these specialized roles during the different stages of
adipogenesis. In this study, we found that activating transcription factor 5
(ATF5) can bind to the promoter of C/EBPa via its direct interaction with C/EBPß 
(which is mediated via the p300-dependent acetylation of ATF5), leading to
enhanced C/EBPß transactivation of C/EBPa. We also show that p300 is important
for the interaction of ATF5 with C/EBPß as well as for the binding activity of
this complex on the C/EBPa promoter. Consistent with these findings,
overexpression of ATF5 and an acetylated ATF5 mimic both promoted 3T3-L1
adipocyte differentiation, whereas short interfering RNA-mediated ATF5
downregulation inhibited this process. Furthermore, we show that the elevated
expression of ATF5 is correlated with an obese phenotype in both mice and humans.
In summary, we have identified ATF5 as a new cofactor of C/EBPß and examined how 
C/EBPß and ATF5 (acetylated by a p300-dependent mechanism) regulate the
transcription of C/EBPa.

PMCID: PMC3911509
PMID: 24216764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cell. 2013 Oct 10;155(2):321-32. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.09.033.

Co-opting the unfolded protein response to elicit olfactory receptor feedback.

Dalton RP(1), Lyons DB, Lomvardas S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA 94158, USA; Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Olfactory receptor (OR) expression requires the transcriptional activation of 1
out of 1,000s of OR alleles and a feedback signal that preserves this
transcriptional choice. The mechanism by which olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs)
detect ORs to signal to the nucleus remains elusive. Here, we show that OR
proteins generate this feedback by activating the unfolded protein response
(UPR). OR expression induces Perk-mediated phosphorylation of the translation
initiation factor eif2a causing selective translation of activating transcription
factor 5 (ATF5). ATF5 induces the transcription of adenylyl cyclase 3 (Adcy3),
which relieves the UPR. Our data provide a role for the UPR in defining neuronal 
identity and cell fate commitment and support a two-step model for the feedback
signal: (1) OR protein, as a stress stimulus, alters the translational landscape 
of the OSN and induces Adcy3 expression; (2), Adcy3 relieves that stress,
restores global translation, and makes OR choice permanent.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3843319
PMID: 24120133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. FEBS J. 2013 Sep;280(18):4693-707. doi: 10.1111/febs.12440. Epub 2013 Aug 19.

The 5'-untranslated region regulates ATF5 mRNA stability via nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay in response to environmental stress.

Hatano M(1), Umemura M, Kimura N, Yamazaki T, Takeda H, Nakano H, Takahashi S,
Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology, School of Life Sciences,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Hachioji, Japan.

We previously reported that activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) mRNA
increases in response to amino acid limitation, and that this increase is
dependent on mRNA stabilization. The ATF5 gene allows transcription of mRNAs with
two alternative 5'-UTRs, 5'-UTRa and 5'-UTRß, derived from exon 1a and exon 1ß.
5'-UTRa contains the upstream open reading frames uORF1 and uORF2.
Phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2a during the integrated stress
response had been previously shown to lead to bypassing of uORF2 translation and 
production of ATF5 protein. Translation of uORF2 is expected to result in
translational termination at a position 125 nucleotides upstream of the exon
junction, and this fits the criterion of a nonsense-mediated decay target mRNA.
We investigated the potential role of 5'-UTRa in the control of mRNA
stabilization, and found that 5'-UTRa reduced the stability of ATF5 mRNA.
5'-UTRa-regulated destabilization of mRNA was suppressed by knockdown of the
nonsense-mediated decay factors Upf1 and Upf2. Mutation of the downstream AUG
(uAUG2) rendered mRNA refractory to Upf1 and Upf2 knockdown. Moreover,
5'-UTRa-regulated down-regulation was hindered by amino acid limitation and
tunicamycin treatment, and stress-induced phosphorylation of eukaryotic
initiation factor 2a was involved in stabilization of ATF5 mRNA. These studies
show that ATF5 mRNA is a naturally occurring normal mRNA target of
nonsense-mediated decay, and provide evidence for linkage between
stress-regulated translational regulation and the mRNA decay pathway. This
linkage constitutes a mechanism that regulates expression of stress response
genes.

© 2013 FEBS.

PMID: 23876217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Aug;24(15):2477-90. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-01-0067. Epub 2013
Jun 12.

CHOP induces activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) to trigger apoptosis in
response to perturbations in protein homeostasis.

Teske BF(1), Fusakio ME, Zhou D, Shan J, McClintick JN, Kilberg MS, Wek RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Indiana 
University, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Environmental stresses that disrupt protein homeostasis induce phosphorylation of
eIF2, triggering repression of global protein synthesis coincident with
preferential translation of ATF4, a transcriptional activator of the integrated
stress response (ISR). Depending on the extent of protein disruption, ATF4 may
not be able to restore proteostatic control and instead switches to a terminal
outcome that features elevated expression of the transcription factor CHOP
(GADD153/DDIT3). The focus of this study is to define the mechanisms by which
CHOP directs gene regulatory networks that determine cell fate. We find that in
response to proteasome inhibition, CHOP enhances the expression of a collection
of genes encoding transcription regulators, including ATF5, which is
preferentially translated during eIF2 phosphorylation. Transcriptional expression
of ATF5 is directly induced by both CHOP and ATF4. Knockdown of ATF5 increases
cell survival in response to proteasome inhibition, supporting the idea that both
ATF5 and CHOP have proapoptotic functions. Transcriptome analysis of
ATF5-dependent genes reveals targets involved in apoptosis, including NOXA, which
is important for inducing cell death during proteasome inhibition. This study
suggests that the ISR features a feedforward loop of stress-induced
transcriptional regulators, each subject to transcriptional and translational
control, which can switch cell fate toward apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3727939
PMID: 23761072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Brain. 2013 Apr;136(Pt 4):1161-76. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt044. Epub 2013 Mar 20.

Protective neuronal induction of ATF5 in endoplasmic reticulum stress induced by 
status epilepticus.

Torres-Peraza JF(1), Engel T, Martín-Ibáñez R, Sanz-Rodríguez A,
Fernández-Fernández MR, Esgleas M, Canals JM, Henshall DC, Lucas JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular 'Severo Ochoa' (CSIC/UAM), C/ Nicolás Cabrera, 1,
Campus UAM de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

Activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) is a basic-leucine-zipper transcription 
factor of the ATF/CREB family. The Atf5 gene generates two transcripts, Atf5a and
Atf5ß, of which Atf5a is known to be selectively translated upon endoplasmic
reticulum stress response in non-neuronal cells. ATF5 is highly expressed in the 
developing brain where it modulates proliferation of neural progenitor cells.
These cells show a high level of ATF5 that has to decrease to allow them to
differentiate into mature neurons or glial cells. This has led to the extended
notion that differentiated neural cells do not express ATF5 unless they undergo
tumourigenic transformation. However, no systematic analysis of the distribution 
of ATF5 in adult brain or of its potential role in neuronal endoplasmic reticulum
stress response has been reported. By immunostaining here we confirm highest ATF5
levels in neuroprogenitor cells of the embryonic and adult subventricular zone
but also found ATF5 in a large variety of neurons in adult mouse brain. By
combining Atf5 in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry for the neuronal
marker NeuN we further confirmed Atf5 messenger RNA in adult mouse neurons.
Quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction demonstrated that
Atf5a is the most abundant transcript in adult mouse encephalon and injection of 
the endoplasmic reticulum stress inducer tunicamycin into adult mouse brain
increased neuronal ATF5 levels. Accordingly, ATF5 levels increased in hippocampal
neurons of a mouse model of status epilepticus triggered by intra-amygdala
injection of kainic acid, which leads to abnormal hippocampal neuronal activity
and endoplasmic reticulum stress. Interestingly, ATF5 upregulation occurred
mainly in hippocampal neuronal fields that do not undergo apoptosis in this
status epilepticus model such as CA1 and dentate gyrus, thus suggesting a
neuroprotective role. This was confirmed in a primary neuronal culture model in
which ATF5 overexpression resulted in decreased endoplasmic reticulum
stress-induced apoptosis and the opposite result was achieved by Atf5 RNA
interference. Furthermore, in vivo administration of the eIF2a phosphatase
inhibitor salubrinal resulted in increased ATF5 hippocampal levels and attenuated
status epilepticus-induced neuronal death in the vulnerable CA3 subfield. In good
agreement with the neuroprotective effect of increased ATF5, we found that
apoptosis-resistant epileptogenic foci from patients with temporal lobe epilepsy 
also showed increased levels of ATF5. Thus, our results demonstrate that adult
neurons express ATF5 and that they increase its levels upon endoplasmic reticulum
stress as a pro-survival mechanism, thus opening a new field for neuroprotective 
strategies focused on ATF5 modulation.

PMID: 23518711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Clin Invest. 2013 Feb;123(2):630-45. doi: 10.1172/JCI64265. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

Hepatitis B virus X protein represses miRNA-148a to enhance tumorigenesis.

Xu X(1), Fan Z, Kang L, Han J, Jiang C, Zheng X, Zhu Z, Jiao H, Lin J, Jiang K,
Ding L, Zhang H, Cheng L, Fu H, Song Y, Jiang Y, Liu J, Wang R, Du N, Ye Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Molecular Biology, Beijing Institute of Biotechnology,
Beijing, Peoples Republic of China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been shown to be dysregulated in virus-related cancers;
however, miRNA regulation of virus-related cancer development and progression
remains poorly understood. Here, we report that miR-148a is repressed by
hepatitis B virus (HBV) X protein (HBx) to promote cancer growth and metastasis
in a mouse model of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Hematopoietic pre-B cell
leukemia transcription factor-interacting protein (HPIP) is an important
regulator of cancer cell growth. We used miRNA target prediction programs to
identify miR-148a as a regulator of HPIP. Expression of miR-148a in hepatoma
cells reduced HPIP expression, leading to repression of AKT and ERK and
subsequent inhibition of mTOR through the AKT/ERK/FOXO4/ATF5 pathway. HBx has
been shown to play a critical role in the molecular pathogenesis of HBV-related
HCC. We found that HBx suppressed p53-mediated activation of miR-148a. Moreover, 
expression of miR-148a was downregulated in patients with HBV-related liver
cancer and negatively correlated with HPIP, which was upregulated in patients
with liver cancer. In cultured cells and a mouse xenograft model, miR-148a
reduced the growth, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, invasion, and
metastasis of HBx-expressing hepatocarcinoma cells through inhibition of
HPIP-mediated mTOR signaling. Thus, miR-148a activation or HPIP inhibition may be
a useful strategy for cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC3561812
PMID: 23321675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 6;109(45):18589-94. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1210479109. Epub 2012 Oct 22.

Transcription factor ATF5 is required for terminal differentiation and survival
of olfactory sensory neurons.

Wang SZ(1), Ou J, Zhu LJ, Green MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) is a member of the ATF/cAMP response
element-binding family of transcription factors, which compose a large group of
basic region leucine zipper proteins whose members mediate diverse
transcriptional regulatory functions. ATF5 has a well-established prosurvival
activity and has been found to be overexpressed in several human cancers, in
particular glioblastoma. However, the role(s) of ATF5 in development and normal
physiology are unknown. Here we address this issue by deriving and characterizing
homozygous Atf5 knockout mice. We find that Atf5(-/-) pups die neonatally, which,
as explained below, is consistent with an olfactory defect resulting in a
competitive suckling deficit. We show that Atf5 is highly expressed in olfactory 
sensory neurons (OSNs) in the main olfactory epithelium starting from embryonic
stage 11.5 through adulthood. Immunostaining experiments with OSN-specific
markers reveal that ATF5 is expressed in some immature OSNs and in all mature
OSNs. Expression profiling and immunostaining experiments indicate that loss of
Atf5 leads to a massive reduction in mature OSNs resulting from a differentiation
defect and the induction of apoptosis. Ectopic expression of Atf5 in neural
progenitor cells induces expression of multiple OSN-specific genes. Collectively,
our results suggest a model in which Atf5 is first expressed in immature OSNs and
the resultant ATF5 functions to promote differentiation into mature OSNs. Thus,
ATF5 is required for terminal differentiation and survival of OSNs.

PMCID: PMC3494896
PMID: 23090999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Mol Pharm. 2012 Nov 5;9(11):3190-9. doi: 10.1021/mp300288n. Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Influence of the valine zipper region on the structure and aggregation of the
basic leucine zipper (bZIP) domain of activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5).

Ciaccio NA(1), Reynolds TS, Middaugh CR, Laurence JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas
66047, United States.

Protein aggregation is a major problem for biopharmaceuticals. While the control 
of aggregation is critically important for the future of protein pharmaceuticals,
mechanisms of aggregate assembly, particularly the role that structure plays, are
still poorly understood. Increasing evidence indicates that partially folded
intermediates critically influence the aggregation pathway. We have previously
reported the use of the basic leucine zipper (bZIP) domain of activating
transcription factor 5 (ATF5) as a partially folded model system to investigate
protein aggregation. This domain contains three regions with differing structural
propensity: a N-terminal polybasic region, a central helical leucine zipper
region, and a C-terminal extended valine zipper region. Additionally, a centrally
positioned cysteine residue readily forms an intermolecular disulfide bond that
reduces aggregation. Computational analysis of ATF5 predicts that the valine
zipper region facilitates self-association. Here we test this hypothesis using a 
truncated mutant lacking the C-terminal valine zipper region. We compare the
structure and aggregation of this mutant to the wild-type (WT) form under both
reducing and nonreducing conditions. Our data indicate that removal of this
region results in a loss of a-helical structure in the leucine zipper and a
change in the mechanism of self-association. The mutant form displays increased
association at low temperature but improved resistance to thermally induced
aggregation.

PMCID: PMC3535187
PMID: 23067245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Anticancer Res. 2012 Oct;32(10):4385-94.

Interference with ATF5 function enhances the sensitivity of human pancreatic
cancer cells to paclitaxel-induced apoptosis.

Hu M(1), Wang B, Qian D, Li L, Zhang L, Song X, Liu DX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, Penn State University College of
Medicine, 500 University Drive, Hershey, PA 17033, USA.

BACKGROUND: Past work has established that human glioblastomas and breast cancer 
cells invariably express the activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) and that
loss of function of ATF5 caused massive apoptotic death of all cancer cell lines 
tested. ATF5 expression and function in pancreatic cancer cells have not been
investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Quantitative real-time/reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (QRT/RT-PCR), western blotting (WB), immunohistochemistry (IHC)
and promoter reporter assay were used for gene expression analysis. MTT
[3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] assay and FACS
(fluorescence-activated cell sorting) analysis were used to monitor cell
viability/apoptosis.
RESULTS: ATF5 is highly expressed in pancreatic cancer cells as compared with
non-tumor tissues. Both paclitaxel treatment and loss of function of ATF5
elicited apoptosis of SW1990 cells. Interference with ATF5 function in SW1990
cells resulted in down-regulation of BCL-2 and up-regulation of BAX, resulting in
enhanced sensitivity to apoptosis induced by paclitaxel treatment.
CONCLUSION: ATF5 is highly expressed in pancreatic cancer cells. Targeting ATF5
significantly enhances paclitaxel-induced apoptosis in human pancreatic cancer
cells. ATF5 could be an important therapeutic target for pancreatic cancer
treatment.

PMID: 23060563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2012 Nov;31(6):532-7. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e31824df26b.

ATF5 is overexpressed in epithelial ovarian carcinomas and interference with its 
function increases apoptosis through the downregulation of Bcl-2 in SKOV-3 cells.

Chen A(1), Qian D, Wang B, Hu M, Lu J, Qi Y, Liu DX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University
Medical College, Qingdao, Shandong, China.

The activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) is highly expressed in many kinds of
tumors including glioblastoma and breast cancers, but its expression in
epithelial ovarian neoplasms has not been investigated. Here, we show that ATF5
is highly expressed in the majority of epithelial ovarian cancer samples (43/60) 
as compared with benign ovarian tumor tissues (4/13) and normal ovarian tissues
(1/10). Furthermore, we found that ATF5 expression significantly correlated with 
advanced clinical stage (P<0.05) and poor differentiation of epithelial ovarian
carcinomas (P<0.05). Previous studies suggested that ATF5 is required for the
survival of cancer cells, but the mechanisms by which ATF5 regulates genes and
promotes cell survival are not clear. Our data additionally demonstrated that
interference with the function of ATF5 could markedly increase the apoptosis of
ovarian cancer cells and identified B-cell leukemia lymphoma-2 as an
ATF5-targeted apoptosis-related gene. These findings may provide potential
therapeutic application in epithelial ovarian cancer.

PMID: 23018213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Med Hypotheses. 2012 Dec;79(6):709-12. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2012.07.025. Epub 2012
Sep 13.

Possible link between the synthesis of GR alpha isoforms and eIF2 alpha
phosphorylation state.

Kochetov AV(1), Merkulova TI, Merkulov VM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology & Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russia.

Glucocorticoid hormones regulate numerous physiological processes and are widely 
used in the treatment of inflammation, autoimmune disease and cancer.
Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) - a transcription factor, derived from a single
gene, is responsible for the diverse actions of glucocorticoids. It was shown
that GR gene gives rise a variety of mRNA species that produces several protein
isoforms, among them GRa is the most abundant. In addition, GRa N-end-truncated
protein isoforms (A, B, C, D) are generated by translational mechanisms. As it
was found that the ratio between the translational isoforms amounts varied in
different tissues and cell lines and distinct isoforms could control
transcription of different sets of genes, molecular mechanisms underlining the
synthesis of translational GRa isoforms are of great interest. It was considered 
that GRa isoform A is translated by a conventional linear scanning, isoform B is 
translated by leaky scanning, isoform C is translated by leaky scanning and
ribosomal shunt whereas translation of isoform D occurs through ribosomal shunt
only. Since the sequence organization of GRa mRNA strongly resembles the cases of
ATF4 or ATF5, the well-known examples of reinitiation-dependent synthesis of
functional isoforms, we hypothesize that translation of isoform C could be
controlled by reinitiation mechanism also. If this assumption is correct, the
ratio between GRa N-end isoforms could depend on the eIF2a phosphorylation state 
that could provide an additional connection between the GR and cellular stresses.
We believe that this hypothesis could be of interest to plan more robust
experiments or for better interpretation of available data.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 22981593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Exp Ther Med. 2011 Sep;2(5):827-831. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Overexpression of activating transcription factor 5 in human rectal cancer.

Kong X(1), Meng W, Zhou Z, Li Y, Zhou B, Wang R, Zhan L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Digestive Surgery;

The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between the expression 
of activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) and clinicopathological features in
human rectal cancer. Relative quantitative real-time RT-PCR and
immunohistochemical staining were used to detect ATF5 mRNA and protein expression
in 92 paired samples of rectal cancer and distant normal tissues.
Immunohistochemical staining of the matched rectal tissue samples revealed that
the positive expression rate of the ATF5 protein in rectal cancer was
significantly higher compared to that in the normal tissue. Furthermore, the
expression of ATF5 in poorly differentiated cancers was higher compared to that
in well to moderately differentiated cancers (P=0.013). However, there was no
significant association between ATF5 protein expression and patient age, gender, 
histological tumor type, cell differentiation, invasive depth, lymph node
metastasis or distant metastasis (P>0.05). However, to our surprise, there was no
difference in the relative mRNA expression levels of ATF5 between normal tissues 
and rectal cancers. Our findings indicate that overexpression of ATF5 protein may
be an important biomarker of the degree of malignancy, and increased expression
may be related to the post-transcriptional regulation of ATF5 in rectal cancer
tissues.

PMCID: PMC3440731
PMID: 22977583  [PubMed]


41. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Dec;1823(12):2149-56. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.08.020. Epub 2012 Sep 6.

ATF4 interacts with Abro1/KIAA0157 scaffold protein and participates in a
cytoprotective pathway.

Ambivero CT(1), Cilenti L, Zervos AS.

Author information: 
(1)Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of
Central Florida, 12722 Research Parkway, Orlando, FL 32826, USA.

Abro1 (Abraxas brother 1), also known as KIAA0157, is a scaffold protein that
recruits various polypeptides to assemble the BRISC (BRCC36 isopeptide)
deubiquitinating enzyme (DUB) complex. The BRISC enzyme has a Lys63-linked
deubiquitinating activity and is comprised of four known subunits: MERIT40
(mediator of Rap80 interactions and targeting 40kDa), BRE (brain and reproductive
organ-expressed), BRCC36 (BRCA1/BRCA2-containing complex, subunit 3) and Abro1.
We have previously shown that Abro1 has a cytoprotective role that involves the
BRISC DUB complex acting on specific Lys63-linked polyubiquitinated substrates.
In this report we identify three members of the AP-1 (activating protein-1)
family, the ATF4, ATF5 (activating transcription factor) and JunD proteins, as
specific interactors of Abro1. The function of ATF4-Abro1 interaction was
investigated under normal conditions as well as under cellular stress. Abro1 is
predominantly cytoplasmic, but during cellular stress it enters the nucleus and
co-localizes with ATF4. Furthermore, this interaction with ATF4 is necessary and 
essential for the cytoprotective function of Abro1 following oxidative stress.
The ability of Abro1 to specifically interact with a number of transcription
factors suggests a new mechanism of regulation of the BRISC DUB complex. This
regulation involves the participation of at least three known members of the AP-1
family of transcription factors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22974638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 19;287(43):36190-200. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.373746. Epub
2012 Aug 30.

The endoplasmic reticulum stress transducer BBF2H7 suppresses apoptosis by
activating the ATF5-MCL1 pathway in growth plate cartilage.

Izumi S(1), Saito A, Kanemoto S, Kawasaki N, Asada R, Iwamoto H, Oki M, Miyagi H,
Ochi M, Imaizumi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Biomedical and Health Sciences,
University of Hiroshima, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan and.

BBF2H7 (box B-binding factor 2 human homolog on chromosome 7) is a basic leucine 
zipper transmembrane transcription factor that belongs to the cyclic
AMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB)/activating transcription factor
(ATF) family. This novel endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress transducer is
localized in the ER and is cleaved in its transmembrane region in response to ER 
stress. BBF2H7 has been shown to be expressed in proliferating chondrocytes in
cartilage during the development of long bones. The target of BBF2H7 is Sec23a,
one of the coat protein complex II components. Bbf2h7-deficient (Bbf2h7(-/-))
mice exhibit severe chondrodysplasia, with expansion of the rough ER in
proliferating chondrocytes caused by impaired secretion of extracellular matrix
(ECM) proteins. We observed a decrease in the number of proliferating
chondrocytes in the cartilage of Bbf2h7(-/-) mice. TUNEL staining of the
cartilage showed that apoptosis was promoted in Bbf2h7(-/-) chondrocytes. Atf5
(activating transcription factor 5), another member of the CREB/ATF family and an
antiapoptotic factor, was also found to be a target of BBF2H7 in chondrocytes.
ATF5 activated the transcription of Mcl1 (myeloid cell leukemia sequence 1),
which belongs to the antiapoptotic B-cell leukemia/lymphoma 2 family, to suppress
apoptosis. Finally, we found that the BBF2H7-ATF5-MCL1 pathway specifically
suppressed ER stress-induced apoptosis in chondrocytes. Taken together, our
findings indicate that BBF2H7 is activated in response to ER stress caused by
synthesis of abundant ECM proteins and plays crucial roles as a bifunctional
regulator to accelerate ECM protein secretion and suppress ER stress-induced
apoptosis by activating the ATF5-MCL1 pathway during chondrogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3476286
PMID: 22936798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Gene Ther. 2013 Apr;20(4):444-9. doi: 10.1038/gt.2012.62. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Oncolytic measles virus strains have significant antitumor activity against
glioma stem cells.

Allen C(1), Opyrchal M, Aderca I, Schroeder MA, Sarkaria JN, Domingo E,
Federspiel MJ, Galanis E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common primary brain tumor in adults and has a
dismal prognosis despite multimodality treatment. Given the resistance of glioma 
stem cells (GSC) to chemotherapy and radiation therapy, their eradication could
prevent tumor recurrence. We sought to evaluate the antitumor activity of measles
virus (MV) derivatives against GSC. We generated neurosphere cultures from
patient-derived primary tumor GBM xenografts, and we characterized them for the
GSC markers CD133, SOX2, Nestin, ATF5 and OLIG2. Using the MV-strains MV-GFP,
MV-CEA and MV-NIS we demonstrated infection, viral replication and significant
cytopathic effect in vitro against GSC lines. In tumorigenicity experiments,
GBM44 GSC were infected with MV in vitro and subsequently implanted into the
right caudate nucleus of nude mice: significant prolongation of survival in mice 
implanted with infected GSC was observed, compared with mock-infected controls
(P=0.0483). In therapy experiments in GBM6 and GBM12 GSC xenograft models, there 
was significant prolongation of survival in MV-GFP-treated animals compared with 
inactivated virus-treated controls (GBM6 P=0.0021, GBM12 P=0.0416). Abundant
syncytia and viral replication was demonstrated in tumors of MV-treated mice.
Measles virus derivatives have significant antitumor activity against
glioma-derived stem cells in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3509233
PMID: 22914495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 1;287(23):19599-609. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.363622. Epub
2012 Apr 23.

Nucleophosmin (NPM1/B23) interacts with activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) 
protein and promotes proteasome- and caspase-dependent ATF5 degradation in
hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Liu X(1), Liu D, Qian D, Dai J, An Y, Jiang S, Stanley B, Yang J, Wang B, Liu X, 
Liu DX.

Author information: 
(1)Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA.

Nucleophosmin (NPM1/B23) and the activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) are
both known to subject to cell type-dependent regulation. NPM1 is expressed weakly
in hepatocytes and highly expressed in hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) with a
clear correlation between enhanced NPM1 expression and increased tumor grading
and poor prognosis, whereas in contrast, ATF5 is expressed abundantly in
hepatocytes and down-regulated in HCC. Re-expression of ATF5 in HCC inhibits cell
proliferation. We report here that using an unbiased approach, tandem affinity
purification (TAP) followed with mass spectrometry (MS), we identified NPM1 as a 
novel ATF5-interacting protein. Unlike many other NPM1-interacting proteins that 
interact with the N-terminal oligomerization domain of NPM1, ATF5 binds via its
basic leucine zipper to the C-terminal region of NPM1 where its nucleolar
localization signal is located. NPM1 association with ATF5, whose staining
patterns partially overlap in the nucleoli, promotes ATF5 protein degradation
through proteasome-dependent and caspase-dependent pathways. NPM1-c, a mutant
NPM1 that is defective in nucleolar localization, failed to stimulate ATF5
polyubiquitination and was unable to down-regulate ATF5. NPM1 interaction with
ATF5 displaces HSP70, a known ATF5-interacting protein, from ATF5 protein
complexes and antagonizes its role in stabilization of ATF5 protein.
NPM1-promoted ATF5 down-regulation diminished ATF5-mediated repression of
cAMP-responsive element-dependent gene transcription and abrogates ATF5-induced
G(2)/M cell cycle blockade and inhibition of cell proliferation in HCC cells. Our
study establishes a mechanistic link between elevated NPM1 expression and
depressed ATF5 in HCC and suggests that regulation of ATF5 by NPM1 plays an
important role in the proliferation and survival of HCC.

PMCID: PMC3365995
PMID: 22528486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Aug;113(8):2744-53. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24150.

ATF5, a possible regulator of osteogenic differentiation in human adipose-derived
stem cells.

Leong DT(1), Abraham MC, Gupta A, Lim TC, Chew FT, Hutmacher DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National University of
Singapore, Singapore 117456, Singapore. cheltwd@nus.edu.sg

The regulatory pathways involved in maintaining the pluripotency of embryonic
stem cells are partially known, whereas the regulatory pathways governing adult
stem cells and their "stem-ness" are characterized to an even lesser extent. We, 
therefore, screened the transcriptome profiles of 20 osteogenically induced adult
human adipose-derived stem cell (ADSC) populations and investigated for putative 
transcription factors that could regulate the osteogenic differentiation of these
ADSC. We studied a subgroup of donors' samples that had a disparate osteogenic
response transcriptome from that of induced human fetal osteoblasts and the rest 
of the induced human ADSC samples. From our statistical analysis, we found
activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) to be significantly and consistently
down-regulated in a randomized time-course study of osteogenically differentiated
adipose-derived stem cells from human donor samples. Knockdown of ATF5 with siRNA
showed an increased sensitivity to osteogenic induction. This evidence suggests a
role for ATF5 in the regulation of osteogenic differentiation in adipose-derived 
stem cells. To our knowledge, this is the first report that indicates a novel
role of transcription factors in regulating osteogenic differentiation in adult
or tissue specific stem cells.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22442021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Blood. 2012 Mar 8;119(10):2335-45. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-361261. Epub 2012
Jan 18.

Targeting of GSK3ß promotes imatinib-mediated apoptosis in quiescent CD34+
chronic myeloid leukemia progenitors, preserving normal stem cells.

Reddiconto G(1), Toto C, Palamà I, De Leo S, de Luca E, De Matteis S, Dini L,
Passerini CG, Di Renzo N, Maffia M, Coluccia AM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Unit, Vito Fazzi Hospital Azienda Sanitaria Locale Leece, Italy.

The targeting of BCR-ABL, a hybrid oncogenic tyrosine (Y) kinase, does not
eradicate chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)-initiating cells. Activation of
ß-catenin was linked to CML leukemogenesis and drug resistance through its
BCR-ABL-dependent Y phosphorylation and impaired binding to GSK3ß (glycogen
synthase kinase 3ß). Herein, we show that GSK3ß is constitutively Y(216)
phospho-activated and predominantly relocated to the cytoplasm in primary CML
stem/progenitor cells compared with its balanced active/inactive levels and
cytosolic/nuclear distribution in normal cells. Under cytokine support,
persistent GSK3ß activity and its altered subcellular localization were
correlated with BCR-ABL-dependent and -independent activation of MAPK and
p60-SRC/GSK3ß complex formation. Specifically, GSK3ß activity and nuclear import 
were increased by imatinib mesylate (IM), a selective ABL inhibitor, but
prevented by dasatinib that targets both BCR-ABL- and cytokine-dependent
MAPK/p60-SRC activity. SB216763, a specific GSK3 inhibitor, promoted an almost
complete suppression of primary CML stem/progenitor cells when combined with IM, 
but not dasatinib, while sparing bcr-abl-negative cells. Our data indicate that
GSK3 inhibition acts to prime a pro-differentiative/apoptotic transcription
program in the nucleus of IM-treated CML cells by affecting the ß-catenin,
cyclinD1, C-EBPa, ATF5, mTOR, and p27 levels. In conclusion, our data gain new
insight in CML biology, indicating that GSK3 inhibitors may be of therapeutic
value in selectively targeting leukemia-initiating cells in combination with IM
but not dasatinib.

PMID: 22262776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Dev Neurobiol. 2012 Jun;72(6):789-804. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20979.

Reciprocal actions of ATF5 and Shh in proliferation of cerebellar granule neuron 
progenitor cells.

Lee HY(1), Angelastro JM, Kenney AM, Mason CA, Greene LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York, USA.

Precise regulation of neuroprogenitor cell proliferation and differentiation is
required for successful brain development, but the factors that contribute to
this are only incompletely understood. The transcription factor ATF5 promotes
proliferation of cerebral cortical neuroprogenitor cells and its down regulation 
permits their differentiation. Here, we examine the expression and regulation of 
ATF5 in cerebellar granule neuron progenitor cells (CGNPs) as well as the role of
ATF5 in the transition of CGNPs to postmitotic cerebellar granule neurons (GCNs).
We find that ATF5 is expressed by proliferating CGNPs in both the embryonic and
postnatal cerebellar external granule layer (EGL) and in the rhombic lip, the
embryonic structure from which the EGL arises. In contrast, ATF5 is undetectable 
in postmitotic GCNs. In highly enriched dissociated cultures of CGNPs and CGNs,
ATF5 is expressed only in CGNPs. Constitutive ATF5 expression in CGNPs does not
affect their proliferation or exit from the cell cycle. In contrast, in presence 
of sonic hedgehog (Shh), a mitogen for CGNPs, constitutively expressed ATF5
promotes CGNP proliferation and delays their cell cycle exit and differentiation.
Conversely, ATF5 loss-of-function conferred by a dominant-negative form of ATF5
significantly diminishes Shh-stimulated CGNP proliferation and promotes
differentiation. In parallel with its stimulation of CGNP proliferation, Shh
enhances ATF5 expression by what appeared to be a posttranscriptional mechanism
involving protein stabilization. These findings indicate a reciprocal interaction
between ATF5 and Shh in which Shh stimulates ATF5 expression and in which ATF5
contributes to Shh-stimulated CGNP expansion.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3857133
PMID: 22095825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Theor Appl Genet. 2012 Mar;124(5):809-19. doi: 10.1007/s00122-011-1735-0. Epub
2011 Nov 9.

Intron-length polymorphism identifies a Y2K4 dehydrin variant linked to superior 
freezing tolerance in alfalfa.

Castonguay Y(1), Dubé MP, Cloutier J, Michaud R, Bertrand A, Laberge S.

Author information: 
(1)Crops and Soils Research and Development Center, Agriculture and Agri-Food
Canada, 2560 Hochelaga Blvd., Quebec, QC, Canada. yves.castonguay@agr.gc.ca

Erratum in
    Theor Appl Genet. 2012 Mar;124(5):821-4.

Breeding alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.) with superior freezing tolerance could be
accelerated by the identification of molecular markers associated to that trait. 
Dehydrins are a group of highly hydrophilic proteins that have been related to
low temperature tolerance. We previously identified a dehydrin restriction
fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) among populations recurrently selected for
superior tolerance to freezing (TF). Analysis of crosses between genotypes with
(D+) or without (D-) that RFLP revealed a significant impact on freezing
tolerance. In this study, we sought to develop a PCR marker for freezing
tolerance based on prior evidence of a relationship between size variation in
Y(2)K(4) dehydrins and the RFLP. Results confirm the enrichment of Y(2)K(4)
sequences of intermediate size (G2 group) in response to recurrent selection and 
in the D+ progeny. Analysis of genomic sequences revealed significant
intron-length polymorphism (ILP) within the G2 group. G2 sequences with a
characteristic short intron were more frequently found in D+ genotypes.
Amplification using sequence-characterized amplified region (SCAR) primers
bordering the intron confirmed an increase in the number of fragments with small 
introns in the D+ progeny and in the ATF5 population obtained after five cycles
of recurrent selection for superior TF within the cultivar Apica (ATF0).
Conversely, there was a reduction in the number of fragments with long introns in
the D+ progeny and in ATF5 as compared to ATF0. Recurrent selection for superior 
tolerance to freezing in combination with ILP identified a sequence variant of
Y(2)K(4) dehydrins associated to the phenotypic response to selection.

PMID: 22083355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Blood. 2011 Nov 24;118(22):5883-90. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-355560. Epub 2011 
Oct 4.

ATF5 polymorphisms influence ATF function and response to treatment in children
with childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Rousseau J(1), Gagné V, Labuda M, Beaubois C, Sinnett D, Laverdière C, Moghrabi
A, Sallan SE, Silverman LB, Neuberg D, Kutok JL, Krajinovic M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte-Justine, Montreal,
QC.

Asparaginase is a standard and critical component in the therapy of childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Asparagine synthetase (ASNS) and the basic region
leucine zipper activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) and arginosuccinate
synthase 1 (ASS1) have been shown to mediate the antileukemic effect of
asparaginase and to display variable expression between leukemia cells that are
resistant and sensitive to treatment. Fourteen polymorphisms in the regulatory
and coding regions of these genes were investigated for an association with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia outcome. Lower event-free survival (EFS) was associated
with ATF5 T1562C, tandem-repeat ASNS polymorphism, derived haplotype, and ASS1
G1343T and G34T substitutions (P = .03). Associations were limited to patients
who received Escherichia coli asparaginase. Variations that sustained correction 
for multiple testing (ATF5 T1562C, P = .005; ASNS tandem-repeat and related
haplotype, P = .01) were subsequently analyzed in the replication cohort. The E
coli-dependent association of the ATF5 T1562 allele with reduced EFS was
confirmed (P = .01). A gene-reporter assay showed that the haplotype tagged by
T1562 had higher promoter activity (P = .01). The remaining regulatory
polymorphisms also appeared to affect ATF5 function; 2 additional high-activity
haplotypes were identified (P = .02) and were further corroborated by
quantitative mRNA analysis in lymphoblastoid cell lines. The ATF5-regulated
increase in ASNS expression in response to more efficacious E coli-induced
asparagine depletion may explain our observed results.

PMCID: PMC3342855
PMID: 21972289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2646-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-366153.

Bcr-Abl adds another twist to cell fate.

Donato NJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Michigan, USA.

Comment on
    Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2840-8.

PMID: 21903901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23450. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023450. Epub 2011 Aug 11.

Sequencing of DISC1 pathway genes reveals increased burden of rare missense
variants in schizophrenia patients from a northern Swedish population.

Moens LN(1), De Rijk P, Reumers J, Van den Bossche MJ, Glassee W, De Zutter S,
Lenaerts AS, Nordin A, Nilsson LG, Medina Castello I, Norrback KF, Goossens D,
Van Steen K, Adolfsson R, Del-Favero J.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Molecular Genomics Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, Flanders
Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), Flanders, Belgium.

In recent years, DISC1 has emerged as one of the most credible and best supported
candidate genes for schizophrenia and related neuropsychiatric disorders.
Furthermore, increasing evidence--both genetic and functional--indicates that
many of its protein interaction partners are also involved in the development of 
these diseases. In this study, we applied a pooled sample 454 sequencing
strategy, to explore the contribution of genetic variation in DISC1 and 10 of its
interaction partners (ATF5, Grb2, FEZ1, LIS-1, PDE4B, NDE1, NDEL1, TRAF3IP1,
YWHAE, and ZNF365) to schizophrenia susceptibility in an isolated northern
Swedish population. Mutation burden analysis of the identified variants in a
population of 486 SZ patients and 514 control individuals, revealed that
non-synonymous rare variants with a MAF<0.01 were significantly more present in
patients compared to controls (8.64% versus 4.7%, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.018), providing further
evidence for the involvement of DISC1 and some of its interaction partners in
psychiatric disorders. This increased burden of rare missense variants was even
more striking in a subgroup of early onset patients (12.9% versus 4.7%,
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0004), highlighting the importance of studying subgroups of patients and
identifying endophenotypes. Upon investigation of the potential functional
effects associated with the identified missense variants, we found that ~90% of
these variants reside in intrinsically disordered protein regions. The observed
increase in mutation burden in patients provides further support for the role of 
the DISC1 pathway in schizophrenia. Furthermore, this study presents the first
evidence supporting the involvement of mutations within intrinsically disordered 
protein regions in the pathogenesis of psychiatric disorders. As many important
biological functions depend directly on the disordered state, alteration of this 
disorder in key pathways may represent an intriguing new disease mechanism for
schizophrenia and related neuropsychiatric diseases. Further research into this
unexplored domain will be required to elucidate the role of the identified
variants in schizophrenia etiology.

PMCID: PMC3154939
PMID: 21853134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Sep;31(18):3906-16. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05887-11. Epub 2011 Jul 
26.

p300-Dependent ATF5 acetylation is essential for Egr-1 gene activation and cell
proliferation and survival.

Liu DX(1), Qian D, Wang B, Yang JM, Lu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neural and Behavioural Sciences, Penn State University College 
of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. dliu@psu.edu

ATF5 has been shown to be a critical regulator of cell proliferation and
survival; however, the underlying mechanism remains largely unknown. We
demonstrate here that ATF5 interacts with the transcriptional coactivator p300,
which acetylates ATF5 at lysine-29 (K29), which in turn enhances the interaction 
between ATF5 and p300 and binding of the ATF5/p300 complex to the ATF5 response
element (ARE) region of the Egr-1 promoter. ARE-bound ATF5/p300 acetylates
lysine-14 (K14) of nucleosomal histone H3 at both the ARE and serum response
element (SRE) of the Egr-1 promoter, which facilitates binding of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-phosphorylated Elk-1 to the SRE, activating the
Egr-1 promoter. Interference of p300-dependent acetylation of ATF5 or nucleosomal
histone H3 or blockade of ERK-dependent Elk-1 phosphorylation abrogates
ATF5-dependent Egr-1 activation and cell proliferation and survival. These
findings assign a central role for the ATF5/p300 complex in ATF5 function and
suggest that coordinated actions by ATF5, p300, Elk-1, and ERK/mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (MAPK) are essential for ATF5-dependent Egr-1 activation and cell 
proliferation and survival.

PMCID: PMC3165717
PMID: 21791614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Oncogene. 2012 Feb 9;31(6):739-51. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.276. Epub 2011 Jul 4.

Regulated ATF5 loss-of-function in adult mice blocks formation and causes
regression/eradication of gliomas.

Arias A(1), Lamé MW, Santarelli L, Hen R, Greene LA, Angelastro JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of California, Davis School of
Veterinary Medicine, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Glioblastomas are among the most incurable cancers. Our past findings indicated
that glioblastoma cells, but not neurons or glia, require the transcription
factor ATF5 (activating transcription factor 5) for survival. However, it was
unknown whether interference with ATF5 function can prevent or promote
regression/eradication of malignant gliomas in vivo. To address this issue, we
created a mouse model by crossing a human glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) 
promoter-tetracycline transactivator mouse line with tetracycline operon-dominant
negative-ATF5 (d/n-ATF5) mice to establish bi-transgenic mice. In this model,
d/n-ATF5 expression is controlled by doxycycline and the promoter for GFAP, a
marker for stem/progenitor cells as well as gliomas. Endogenous gliomas were
produced with high efficiency by retroviral delivery of platelet-derived growth
factor (PDGF)-B and p53-short hairpin RNA (shRNA) in adult bi-transgenic mice in 
which expression of d/n-ATF5 was spatially and temporally regulated. Induction of
d/n-ATF5 before delivery of PDGF-B/p53-shRNA virus greatly reduced the proportion
of mice that formed tumors. Moreover, d/n-ATF5 induction after tumor formation
led to regression/eradication of detectable gliomas without evident damage to
normal brain cells in all 24 mice assessed.

PMCID: PMC3277917
PMID: 21725368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2840-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-322537. Epub 2011
Jun 29.

BCR-ABL suppresses autophagy through ATF5-mediated regulation of mTOR
transcription.

Sheng Z(1), Ma L, Sun JE, Zhu LJ, Green MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Program in Gene Function and Expression,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2646-7.

The oncoprotein BCR-ABL transforms myeloid progenitor cells and is responsible
for the development of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). In transformed cells,
BCR-ABL suppresses apoptosis as well as autophagy, a catabolic process in which
cellular components are degraded by the lysosomal machinery. The mechanism by
which BCR-ABL suppresses autophagy is not known. Here we report that in both
mouse and human BCR-ABL-transformed cells, activating transcription factor 5
(ATF5), a prosurvival factor, suppresses autophagy but does not affect apoptosis.
We find that BCR-ABL, through PI3K/AKT/FOXO4 signaling, transcriptionally
up-regulates ATF5 expression and that ATF5, in turn, stimulates transcription of 
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR; also called mechanistic target of
rapamycin), a well-established master negative-regulator of autophagy. Previous
studies have shown that the BCR-ABL inhibitor imatinib mesylate induces both
apoptosis and autophagy, and that the resultant autophagy modulates the
efficiency by which imatinib kills BCR-ABL-transformed cells. We demonstrate that
imatinib-induced autophagy is because of inhibition of the
BCR-ABL/PI3K/AKT/FOXO4/ATF5/mTOR pathway that we have identified in this study.

PMCID: PMC3172800
PMID: 21715304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 10;286(23):20251-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.211771. Epub 2011
Apr 25.

HSP70 protein promotes survival of C6 and U87 glioma cells by inhibition of ATF5 
degradation.

Li G(1), Xu Y, Guan D, Liu Z, Liu DX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, Penn State University College of
Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA.

Although both the heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) and the activating transcription 
factor 5 (ATF5) have been shown to promote cell survival of transformed cells but
not survival of non-transformed cells, the relationship of the two molecules is
unknown. Here we show that HSP70 and ATF5 are concomitantly up-regulated upon
transient but down-regulated over prolonged cellular stress and apoptotic
stimulation in the rat C6 glioma and human U87 glioma cells. HSP70 interacts
strongly with the N-terminal activation domain of ATF5, which is expected to be
rigid and uniquely structured under physiological conditions because of
extraordinary high concentration (over 25%) of proline residues. Binding of HSP70
to ATF5 is an ATP-driven process and requires functional ATPase on the nucleotide
binding domain of the HSP70 molecule. Overexpression of HSP70 dramatically
stabilizes the ATF5 protein, which is otherwise subject to rapid degradation,
facilitated by both proteasome-dependent and caspase-dependent processes, whereas
HSP70 depletion leads to acceleration of ATF5 degradation and transcription
repression of Bcl-2 and Egr-1, which are downstream targets of ATF5 in C6 and U87
glioma cells. Our data reveal an essential role for HSP70 in maintaining high
levels of ATF5 expression in glioma cells and support the conclusion that ATF5 is
an important substrate protein of HSP70 that mediates HSP70-promoted cell
survival in glioma cells.

PMCID: PMC3121475
PMID: 21521685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Oncotarget. 2010 Oct;1(6):457-60.

An activating transcription factor 5-mediated survival pathway as a target for
cancer therapy?

Sheng Z(1), Evans SK, Green MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Program in Gene Function, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Genes that are highly expressed in cancer cells and are essential for their
viability are attractive targets for the development of novel cancer
therapeutics. Activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) is an anti-apoptotic
protein that is highly expressed in malignant glioma but not normal brain
tissues, and is essential for glioma cell survival. Recent work has revealed an
essential survival pathway mediated by ATF5 in malignant glioma; pharmacological 
inhibition of this pathway leads to tumor regression in mice. ATF5 is also highly
expressed in a variety of other cancers, and preliminary studies have shown that 
the ATF5-mediated survival pathway is active in diverse human cancer cell lines. 
Targeting this pathway may therefore have therapeutic implications for the
treatment of a wide range of cancers. In this perspective, we summarize recent
advances in ATF5 research, focusing on its role in promoting cancer and its
potential as a target for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3069685
PMID: 21311102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 4;286(9):7705-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.207639. Epub 2011
Jan 6.

BCL-2 is a downstream target of ATF5 that mediates the prosurvival function of
ATF5 in a cell type-dependent manner.

Dluzen D(1), Li G, Tacelosky D, Moreau M, Liu DX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, Penn State University College of
Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA.

ATF5 loss of function has been shown previously to cause apoptotic cell death in 
glioblastoma and breast cancer cells but not in non-transformed astrocytes and
human breast epithelial cells. The mechanism for the cell type-dependent survival
function of ATF5 is unknown. We report here that the anti-apoptotic factor BCL-2 
is a downstream target of ATF5 that mediates the prosurvival function of ATF5 in 
C6 glioma cells and MCF-7 breast cancer cells. ATF5 binds to an ATF5-specific
regulatory element that is downstream of and adjacent to the negative regulatory 
element in the BCL-2 P2 promoter, stimulating BCL-2 expression. Highlighting the 
critical role of BCL-2 in ATF5-dependent cancer cell survival, expression of
BCL-2 blocks death of C6 and MCF-7 cells induced by dominant-negative ATF5, and
depletion of BCL-2 impairs ATF5-promoted cell survival. Moreover, we found that
BCL-2 expression is not regulated by ATF5 in non-transformed rat astrocytes,
mouse embryonic fibroblasts, and human breast epithelial cells, where expression 
of BCL-2 but not ATF5 is required for cell survival. These findings identify
BCL-2 as an essential mediator for the cancer-specific cell survival function of 
ATF5 in glioblastoma and breast cancer cells and provide direct evidence that the
cell type-specific function of ATF5 derives from differential regulation of
downstream targets by ATF5 in different types of cells.

PMCID: PMC3045024
PMID: 21212266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Life Sci. 2010 Aug 28;87(9-10):294-301. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2010.07.006. Epub 2010
Jul 21.

Regulation of the human CHOP gene promoter by the stress response transcription
factor ATF5 via the AARE1 site in human hepatoma HepG2 cells.

Yamazaki T(1), Ohmi A, Kurumaya H, Kato K, Abe T, Yamamoto H, Nakanishi N,
Okuyama R, Umemura M, Kaise T, Watanabe R, Okawa Y, Takahashi S, Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology, School of Life Sciences,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Hachioji, Tokyo, Japan.

AIMS: Activating transcription factor (ATF) 5 is a member of the cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB)/ATF family of transcription factors. We have shown
that ATF5 is a stress response transcription factor that responds to amino acid
limitation, arsenite exposure, or cadmium exposure. In this study we investigated
whether ATF5 is involved in the regulation of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
(C/EBP) homologous protein (CHOP) gene expression.
MAIN METHODS: We used a transient transfection system to express ATF5 and
analyzed the regulation of CHOP gene promoter in human hepatoma, HepG2 cells. We 
also studied the effect of ATF5 knockdown on arsenite-induced CHOP protein
expression and arsenite-induced cell death of HepG2 cells.
KEY FINDINGS: We showed that ATF5 activates the CHOP gene promoter in HepG2
cells. Both deletion analysis and point mutations of the promoter revealed that
amino acid response element (AARE) 1 is responsible for ATF5-dependent promoter
activation. Furthermore, the existence of either AARE1 or activating protein-1
(AP-1) site is sufficient for transcriptional activation of the CHOP gene
promoter by arsenite exposure, although complete induction requires the existence
of both elements. We also demonstrated that knockdown of ATF5 reduced
arsenite-induced CHOP protein expression and arsenite-induced cell death of HepG2
cells.
SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggested that the CHOP gene is a potential target
for ATF5, and that ATF5 raises the arsenite-induced CHOP gene expression level
via the AARE1 site in HepG2 cells.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20654631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nat Med. 2010 Jun;16(6):671-7. doi: 10.1038/nm.2158. Epub 2010 May 23.

A genome-wide RNA interference screen reveals an essential CREB3L2-ATF5-MCL1
survival pathway in malignant glioma with therapeutic implications.

Sheng Z(1), Li L, Zhu LJ, Smith TW, Demers A, Ross AH, Moser RP, Green MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Programs in Gene Function and Expression and 
Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts, USA.

Activating transcription factor-5 (ATF5) is highly expressed in malignant glioma 
and has a key role in promoting cell survival. Here we perform a genome-wide RNAi
screen to identify transcriptional regulators of ATF5. Our results reveal an
essential survival pathway in malignant glioma, whereby activation of a
RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase or phosphoinositide-3-kinase signaling
cascade leads to induction of the transcription factor cAMP response
element-binding protein-3-like-2 (CREB3L2), which directly activates ATF5
expression. ATF5, in turn, promotes survival by stimulating transcription of
myeloid cell leukemia sequence-1 (MCL1), an antiapoptotic B cell leukemia-2
family member. Analysis of human malignant glioma samples indicates that ATF5
expression inversely correlates with disease prognosis. The RAF kinase inhibitor 
sorafenib suppresses ATF5 expression in glioma stem cells and inhibits malignant 
glioma growth in cell culture and mouse models. Our results demonstrate that ATF5
is essential in malignant glioma genesis and reveal that the ATF5-mediated
survival pathway described here provides potential therapeutic targets for
treatment of malignant glioma.

PMCID: PMC2882506
PMID: 20495567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Chem Biodivers. 2010 May;7(5):1051-64. doi: 10.1002/cbdv.200900320.

Gene network analysis during early infection of human coronary artery smooth
muscle cells by Trypanosoma cruzi and Its gp83 ligand.

Nde PN(1), Johnson CA, Pratap S, Cardenas TC, Kleshchenko YY, Furtak VA, Simmons 
KJ, Lima MF, Villalta F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Meharry Medical
College, 1005 Dr. D. B. Todd Jr. Blvd., Nashville, TN 37208-3599, USA.

Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas' disease, infects heart and
muscle cells leading to cardiac arrest, followed by death. The genetic
architectures in the early T. cruzi infection process of human cells are unknown.
To understand the genetic architectures of the early invasion process of T.
cruzi, we conducted gene transcription microarray analysis, followed by gene
network construction of the host cell response in primary human coronary artery
smooth muscle (HCASM) cells infected with T. cruzi or exposed to T. cruzi gp83, a
ligand used by the trypanosome to bind host cells. Using seven RT-PCR verified
up-regulated genes (FOSB, ATF5, INPP1, CCND2, THBS1, LAMC1, and APLP2) as the
seed for network construction, we built an interaction network of the early T.
cruzi infection process containing 165 genes, connected by 598 biological
interactions. This interactome network is centered on the BCL6 gene as a hub.
Silencing the expression of two seed genes (THBS1 and LAMC1) by RNAi reduced T.
cruzi infection. Overall, our results elucidate the significant and complex
process involved in T. cruzi infection of HCASM cells at the transcriptome level.
This is the first elucidation into the interactome network in human cells caused 
by T. cruzi and its gp83 ligand.

PMCID: PMC2910116
PMID: 20491065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Biochem. 2010 Aug;148(2):171-8. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvq047. Epub 2010 Apr 27.

Identification and characterization of the promoter of human ATF5 gene.

Wei Y(1), Ge Y, Zhou F, Chen H, Cui C, Liu D, Yang Z, Wu G, Gu J, Jiang J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Glycoconjuates Research, Ministry of Public Health & Gene
Research Center, Shanghai Medical College of Fudan University, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China.

ATF5, a member of ATF/CREB family of b-ZIP transcription factors, is highly
expressed in a wide variety of neoplasms and regulates cell differentiation, cell
survival and apoptosis. However, the mechanism of human ATF5 transcriptional
regulation has not been clarified. Here, we identified the transcription start
site of the ATF5 gene, cloned its 5'-flanking region and identified the region
-105 to +3 relative to the transcription start site as that having promoter
activity. This region contained potential binding sites for several transcription
factors, including EBF1, Sp1 and E2F1. EBF1 transcription factor binds to the
ATF5 promoter and regulates the ATF5 transcription in an EBF-binding site
independent manner. Thus, our studies not only provided molecular basis of ATF5
transcriptional regulation, but also identified ATF5 as a target gene of EBF1
transcription factor.

PMID: 20423929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Theor Appl Genet. 2010 May;120(8):1611-9. doi: 10.1007/s00122-010-1280-2. Epub
2010 Feb 9.

SRAP polymorphisms associated with superior freezing tolerance in alfalfa
(Medicago sativa spp. sativa).

Castonguay Y(1), Cloutier J, Bertrand A, Michaud R, Laberge S.

Author information: 
(1)Crops and Soils Research and Development Center, Agriculture and Agri-Food
Canada, 2560 Hochelaga Blvd, Quebec, QC, G1V 2J3, Canada.
yves.castonguay@agr.gc.ca

Sequence-related amplified polymorphism (SRAP) analysis was used to uncover
genetic polymorphisms among alfalfa populations recurrently selected for superior
tolerance to freezing (TF populations). Bulk DNA samples (45 plants/bulk) from
each of the cultivar Apica (ATF0), and populations ATF2, ATF4, ATF5, and ATF6
were evaluated with 42 different SRAP primer pairs. Several polymorphisms that
progressively intensified or decreased with the number of recurrent cycles were
identified. Four positive polymorphisms (F10-R14, Me4-R8, F10-R8 and F11-R9)
that, respectively, yielded 540-, 359-, 213-, and 180-bp fragments were selected 
for further analysis. SRAP amplifications with genotypes within ATF populations
confirmed that the polymorphisms identified with bulk DNA samples were reflecting
changes in the frequency of their occurrence in response to selection. In
addition, the number of genotypes cumulating multiple polymorphisms markedly
increased in response to recurrent selection. Independent segregation of the four
SRAP polymorphisms suggests location at unlinked loci. Homology search gave
matches with BAC clones from syntenic Medicago truncatula for the four SRAP
fragments. Analysis of the relationship with low temperature tolerance showed
that multiple SRAP polymorphisms are more frequent in genotypes that maintain
superior regrowth after freezing. These results show that SRAP analysis of bulk
DNA samples from recurrent selections is an effective approach for the
identification of genetic polymorphisms associated with quantitative traits in
allogamous species. These polymorphisms could be useful tools for indirect
selection of freezing tolerance in alfalfa.

PMID: 20143042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Dev Growth Differ. 2009 Sep;51(7):669-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2009.01126.x.

Spatio-temporal expression of activating transcription factor 5 in the skeletal
development of mouse limb.

Satake H(1), Ito K, Takahara M, Furukawa T, Takagi M, Ogino T, Shinomura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Yamagata University School of Medicine,
Yamagata, Yamagata 990-9585, Japan.

There are no data about the expression pattern of activating transcription factor
5 (Atf5) during limb development. The aim of the present study was to describe
the expression of Atf5 throughout mouse limb development. Some specimens were
examined for the expression of type II collagen alpha1 (Col2a1), sex-determining 
region Y-related high-mobility-group-box 9 (Sox9), and activating transcription
factor 2 (Atf2) by in situ hybridization. ATDC5 cells, mouse limb buds, and
epiphyseal cartilage were examined for the expression of Atf5alpha and Atf5beta
by quantitative real-time PCR. Atf5 transcripts were detected in condensed
mesenchymal cells, cartilage primordia, proliferative, prehypertrophic, and
articular chondrocytes, but not in hypertrophic chondrocytes. Atf5 was
predominantly expressed by osteoblasts in the primary spongiosa. At the postnatal
stage, Atf5 was expressed in epiphyseal chondrocytes and osteoblasts lining the
bone trabeculae. Spatial distribution of Col2a1, Sox9, and Atf2 transcripts
closely corresponded to that of Atf5 within developing limbs, except for bony
tissues. In cartilage, Atf5alpha is the dominant form in the embryonic stage as
well as in the postnatal stage.

PMID: 19712269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Jun;7(6):933-43. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0365. Epub
2009 Jun 16.

Identification of a novel DNA binding site and a transcriptional target for
activating transcription factor 5 in c6 glioma and mcf-7 breast cancer cells.

Li G(1), Li W, Angelastro JM, Greene LA, Liu DX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, Penn State University College of
Medicine, Hershey, 17033, USA.

Recent reports indicate that the activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) is
required for the survival of cancer cells but not for noncancer cells. However,
the mechanisms by which ATF5 regulates genes and promotes cell survival are not
clear. Using a cyclic amplification and selection of targets (CASTing) approach, 
we identified a novel ATF5 consensus DNA binding sequence. We show in C6 glioma
and MCF-7 breast cancer cells that ATF5 occupies this sequence and that ATF5
activates reporter gene expression driven by this site. Conversely, reporter
activity is diminished when ATF5 activity is blocked or when ATF5 expression is
down-regulated by serum withdrawal. We further show that early growth response
factor 1 (Egr-1), whose promoter contains two adjacent ATF5 consensus binding
sites at a conserved promoter position in rat, mouse, and human, is targeted and 
regulated by ATF5 in C6 and MCF-7 cells. These data provide new insight on the
mechanisms by which ATF5 promotes gene regulation and cancer-specific cell
survival.

PMCID: PMC2880174
PMID: 19531563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Mol Pharm. 2009 Jul-Aug;6(4):1205-15. doi: 10.1021/mp900058t.

Effects of disulfide bond formation and protein helicity on the aggregation of
activating transcription factor 5.

Ciaccio NA(1), Laurence JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas
66047, USA.

Amorphous aggregation is a major problem for protein biopharmaceuticals, and
aggregate formation in a drug formulation can have serious health implications
for the patient. In many cases, an immunogenic response is generated from the
administration of a drug product containing aggregated protein. This becomes
especially significant when the patient requires long-term or repeated
administration of the drug, because the likelihood of a severe immune response
increases. While the prevention of protein aggregation is critically important
for the future of protein pharmaceuticals, the mechanism of amorphous aggregation
is still poorly understood. The lack of understanding regarding nonfibrillar
aggregation is largely due to the fact that assembly is difficult to study. In
particular the role that various structural features (i.e., alpha-helix,
beta-structure, disulfide bonds) play in the aggregation process varies with the 
amino acid sequence and is dependent upon tertiary structure and solution
conditions. Well-structured proteins do not readily aggregate in solution,
whereas partially unfolded proteins tend to aggregate rapidly and often become
insoluble. Here, we present a unique and simple system for studying amorphous
protein aggregation. We have previously reported the isolation of the basic
leucine zipper (bZIP) domain of activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5), a
protein notable for its potential as a pharmaceutical target for treatment of
glioblastoma multiforme. This domain consists of a single alpha-helix and
possesses a single cysteine residue. It is only partially structured and displays
marginal stability in solution under physiological conditions. We have modulated 
solution conditions that affect backbone solubility and the oxidation state of
the thiol to successfully investigate the role that alpha-helical structure and
disulfide bond formation play in protein stability. Our data indicate that
covalent cross-linking helps to retain ATF5's helicity, which inhibits the
formation of large aggregates. These studies have led to the identification of
stabilizing conditions for ATF5, which will enable further study of the protein
as a pharmaceutical target. Moreover, this work has general implications for
analyzing stability of helical proteins in vitro as well as the specific
atomic-level interactions in ATF5 that contribute to instability and
self-association.

PMCID: PMC3414431
PMID: 19435374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Life Sci. 2009 Jun 19;84(25-26):894-902. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2009.04.002. Epub
2009 Apr 17.

Fasting induced up-regulation of activating transcription factor 5 in mouse
liver.

Shimizu YI(1), Morita M, Ohmi A, Aoyagi S, Ebihara H, Tonaki D, Horino Y, Iijima 
M, Hirose H, Takahashi S, Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology, School of Life Sciences,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0392, Japan.

AIMS: Food deprivation (fasting) is commonly encountered in the lives of animals 
and humans. In mammals, adaptive responses predominantly include the induction of
hepatic gluconeogenesis, but the regulatory mechanisms remain unclear. Atf5
(activating transcription factor 5) is a transcription factor of the ATF/cAMP
response element-binding protein family and is expressed abundantly in human
liver. Atf5 has been associated with stress responses, cell differentiation,
proliferation, and survival. However, its role in the liver response to in vivo
food deprivation has not yet been investigated.
MAIN METHODS: Adult mice were food-deprived for 48 h and the expression of two
Atf5 mRNA subtypes (Atf5-R1 and Atf-R2) and gluconeogenic factors was
investigated. Using in vitro cell culture, Pgc-1alpha (peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1alpha) promoter activities
after ectopic expression of Atf5 and Cebpg (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein gamma)
proteins were measured.
KEY FINDINGS: The Atf5-R1 transcript was found to be abundant in liver and other 
energy metabolism-related organs; Atf5-R2 was prominent in the testis. Fasting
resulted in elevation of the expression of both Atf5-R1 and R2 in the liver.
Interestingly, up-regulation of Atf5 was accompanied by increased expression of
Cebpg and Pgc-1alpha. In human hepatoma cells (HepG2), but not in human cervical 
carcinoma cells (HeLa), forced expression of Atf5 and Cebpg cooperatively
stimulated Pgc-1alpha promoter activity, suggesting that hepatic Pgc-1alpha could
be induced by Atf5 and Cebpg in cooperation with other hepatic factors.
SIGNIFICANCE: Hepatic Atf5 might be potentially involved in the induction of
gluconeogenetic factors during in vivo fasting stress.

PMID: 19376136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cell Struct Funct. 2009;34(1):17-22. Epub 2009 Mar 17.

Novel function of transcription factor ATF5: blockade of p53-dependent apoptosis 
induced by ionizing irradiation.

Nishioka T(1), Miyai Y, Haga H, Kawabata K, Shirato H, Homma A, Shibata K, Yasuda
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Engineering, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Graduate School of Health Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
trout@hs.hokudai.ac.jp

PURPOSE: To find a new molecule that affects p53-dependent radiosensitivity.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: A mouse sarcoma cell line, QRsP(p53+/+), was used. From
this cell line, we established a radiosensitive clone and a radioresistant one.
Colony assay, p53 gene transfer, a luciferase assay for p53 and p21, animal
transplantation experiment, and DNA array analyses were performed.
RESULTS: Microarray showed marked reduction of a transcription factor, ATF5, both
in vitro and in vivo for the radiosensitive clone. Interestingly, flow cytometric
analysis demonstrated marked apoptosis for the radiosensitive clone by p53 cloned
adenovirus infection. Luciferase reporter assay revealed that ATF5 suppressed the
transactivational activity of p53 and p63. By ATF5 gene transfer, the
radiosensitive clone regained resistance to both ionizing-radiation and Ad-p53
infection-induced cell death. Surprisingly, time-lapse cell migration observation
revealed greater cell motility for ATF5-transfected radiosensitive clone.
CONCLUSIONS: It seems likely that ATF5 is a potent repressor of p53 and elevated 
expression of ATF5 in a tumor may relate to enhanced malignant phenotypes, such
as radioresistance or greater cell motility.

PMID: 19293535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Mar 13;380(3):673-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.01.158. Epub 2009 Jan 29.

Cadmium interferes with the degradation of ATF5 via a post-ubiquitination step of
the proteasome degradation pathway.

Uekusa H(1), Namimatsu M, Hiwatashi Y, Akimoto T, Nishida T, Takahashi S,
Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology, School of Life Science,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, 1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji,
Tokyo 192-0392, Japan.

ATF5 is a member of the CREB/ATF family of transcription factors. In the current 
study, using a transient transfection system to express FLAG epitope fusion
proteins of ATF5, we have shown that CdCl(2) or NaAsO(3) increases the protein
levels of ATF5 in cells, and that cadmium stabilizes the ATF5 protein. Proteasome
inhibitors had a similar effect to cadmium on the cellular accumulation of ATF5. 
Proteasome inhibition led to an increase in ubiquitinated ATF5, while cadmium did
not appear to reduce the extent of ATF5 ubiquitination. ATF5 contains a putative 
nuclear export signal within its N-terminus. We demonstrated that whereas
deletion of N-terminal region resulted in a increase of ATF5 levels, this region 
does not appear to be involved in the ubiquitination of ATF5. These results
indicate that ATF5 is targeted for degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome
pathway, and that cadmium slows the rate of ATF5 degradation via a
post-ubiquitination mechanism.

PMID: 19285020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Neurochem. 2009 Jan;108(1):11-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05749.x. Epub
2008 Nov 15.

The transcription factor ATF5: role in neurodevelopment and neural tumors.

Greene LA(1), Lee HY, Angelastro JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA. lag3@columbia.edu

We review recent findings regarding the properties of ATF5 and the major roles
that this transcription factor plays in development of the nervous system and in 
survival of neural tumors. ATF5 is a widely expressed basic leucine zipper
protein that has been subject to limited characterization. It is highly expressed
in zones of neuroprogenitor cell proliferation. In vitro and in vivo studies
indicate that it functions there to promote neuroprogenitor cell expansion and to
suppress their differentiation into neurons or glia. ATF5 expression is
down-regulated by trophic factors and this is required for their capacity to
promote neuroprogenitor cell cycle exit and differentiation into either neurons, 
oligodendroglia or astrocytes. ATF5 is also highly expressed in a number of tumor
types, including neural tumors such as neuroblastomas, medulloblastomas and
glioblastomas. Examination of the role of ATF5 in glioblastoma cells indicates
that interference with its expression or activity causes them to undergo
apoptotic death. In contrast, normal astrocytes and neurons do not appear to
require ATF5 for survival, indicating that it may be a selective target for
treatment of glioblastomas and other neural neoplasias. Further studies are
needed to identify the transcriptional targets of ATF5 and the mechanisms by
which its expression is regulated in neuroprogenitors and tumors.

PMCID: PMC2680418
PMID: 19046351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Am J Pathol. 2008 Nov;173(5):1397-405. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.080440. Epub 2008
Oct 2.

Up-regulation of activating transcription factor-5 suppresses SAP expression to
activate T cells in hemophagocytic syndrome associated with Epstein-Barr virus
infection and immune disorders.

Chuang HC(1), Wang JM, Hsieh WC, Chang Y, Su IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Research, National Health Research Institutes, Tainan,
Taiwan.

Hemophagocytic syndrome (HPS) is a fatal, pro-inflammatory cytokine disorder that
is associated with viral infections and immune disorders. Previously, we
demonstrated that Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein-1 (LMP-1) could
down-regulate the SAP gene, enhancing Th1 cytokine secretion in T cells and
leading to HPS. The exact mechanism of SAP gene regulation by LMP-1 remains to be
clarified. In this study, using cDNA microarray analysis, we identified ATF5 as
the candidate transcriptional repressor for SAP expression in LMP-1-expressing T 
cells. LMP-1 up-regulated ATF5 via TRAF2,5/NF-kappaB signals to suppress SAP gene
expression. Reporter assays and electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed
that ATF5 bound differentially to two sites of the SAP promoter. In resting T
cells, ATF5 bound predominantly to the high-affinity site in the -81 to -74
region while additionally binding to the low-affinity site at -305 to -296 in
LMP-1-expressing T cells. Such binding subsequently disrupted the transcription
of the SAP gene. At the same time, Th1 cytokine secretion was enhanced. This
phenomenon was also observed in conditions such as ATF5 overexpression,
phytohemagglutinin stimulation of primary T cells, and ligand engagement of
T-cell lines. Therefore, the down-regulation of the SAP gene by ATF5 may
represent a common mechanism for the pathogenesis of HPS that is associated with 
either Epstein-Barr virus infection or immune disorders with dysregulated T-cell 
activation.

PMCID: PMC2570130
PMID: 18832568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Protein Expr Purif. 2008 Dec;62(2):235-43. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2008.07.011. Epub
2008 Aug 3.

High-yield expression in E. coli and refolding of the bZIP domain of activating
transcription factor 5.

Ciaccio NA(1), Moreno ML, Bauer RL, Laurence JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, The University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS
66047, USA.

Activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) recently has been demonstrated to play a
critical role in promoting the survival of human glioblastoma cells. Interference
with the function of ATF5 in an in vivo rat model caused glioma cell death in
primary tumors but did not affect the status of normal cells surrounding the
tumor, suggesting ATF5 may prove an ideal target for anti-cancer therapy. In
order to examine ATF5 as a pharmaceutical target, the protein must be produced
and purified to sufficient quantity to begin analyses. Here, a procedure for
expressing and refolding the bZIP domain of ATF5 in sufficient yield and final
concentration to permit assay development and structural characterization of this
target using solution NMR is reported. Two-dimensional NMR and circular dichroism
analyses indicate the protein exists in the partially alpha-helical, monomeric
x-form conformation with only a small fraction of ATF5 participating in formation
of higher-order structure, presumably coiled-coil homodimerization. Despite the
persistence of monomers in solution even at high concentration, an
electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that ATF5 is able to bind to the cAMP
response element (CRE) DNA motif. Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and mass
spectrometry were used to confirm that ATF5 can participate in homodimer
formation and that this dimerization is mediated by disulfide bond formation.

PMCID: PMC2599749
PMID: 18718539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cancer Res. 2008 Aug 15;68(16):6743-51. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6469.

Re-expression of transcription factor ATF5 in hepatocellular carcinoma induces
G2-M arrest.

Gho JW(1), Ip WK, Chan KY, Law PT, Lai PB, Wong N.

Author information: 
(1)Li Ka-Shing Institute of Health Sciences, Department of Anatomical and
Cellular Pathology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong,
China.

Transcription factors represent an important class of genes that play key roles
in controlling cellular proliferation, cell cycle modulation, and attractive
targets for cancer therapy. Here, we report on the novel finding of common ATF5
down-regulations in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), a highly malignant tumor with
a dismal clinical course. Array-based mapping in HCC highlighted a high and
consistent incidence of transcription factor ATF5 repressions on regional
chr.19q13. By quantitative reverse transcription-PCR, profound down-regulations
of ATF5 were further suggested in 78% of HCC tumors (60 of 77 cases) compared to 
their adjacent nontumoral liver (P = 0.0004). Restoration of ATF5 expression in 3
nonexpressing HCC cell lines demonstrated a consistent growth inhibitory effect
(P < 0.029) but minimal induction on cellular apoptosis. Subsequent flow
cytometric investigations revealed a G(2)-M cell cycle arrest in HCC cells that
were ectopically transfected with ATF5 (P < 0.002). The differential expressed
genes from the functional effects of ATF5 were examined by array profiling. Over 
a hundred genes were identified, among which ID1 contains the ATF/CREB target
binding sequences within its promoter region. An inverse relationship between
ATF5 expressions with ID1 transcriptions was verified in HCC (P = 0.019), and a
direct interaction of ATF5 on the promoter of ID1 was further demonstrated from
electromobility shift assay. Examination of causal events underlying the
silencing of ATF5 in HCC suggested copy number losses, promoter hypermethylation,
histone deacetylation, and DNA mutations to be the likely inactivating
mechanisms. In conclusion, our finding supports a tumor suppressive role for ATF5
in HCC, and highlighted ID1 as a potential downstream target.

PMID: 18701499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 May 8;2(5):448-60. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.03.013.

A hierarchical network controls protein translation during murine embryonic stem 
cell self-renewal and differentiation.

Sampath P(1), Pritchard DK, Pabon L, Reinecke H, Schwartz SM, Morris DR, Murry
CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Center for Cardiovascular Biology, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2008 May 8;2(5):410-2.

Stem cell differentiation involves changes in transcription, but little is known 
about translational control during differentiation. We comprehensively profiled
gene expression during differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells (ESCs) into
embryoid bodies by integrating transcriptome analysis with global assessment of
ribosome loading. While protein synthesis was parsimonious during self-renewal,
differentiation induced an anabolic switch, with global increases in transcript
abundance, polysome content, protein synthesis, and protein content. Furthermore,
78% of transcripts showed increased ribosome loading, thereby enhancing
translational efficiency. Transcripts under exclusive translational control
included the transcription factor ATF5, the tumor suppressor DCC, and the
beta-catenin agonist Wnt1. We show that a hierarchy of translational regulators, 
including mTOR, 4EBP1, and the RNA-binding proteins DAZL and GRSF1, control
global and selective protein synthesis during ESC differentiation. Parsimonious
translation in pluripotent state and hierarchical translational regulation during
differentiation may be important quality controls for self-renewal and choice of 
fate in ESCs.

PMID: 18462695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 4;283(27):18773-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M707879200. Epub 2008 
May 5.

Cdc34-mediated degradation of ATF5 is blocked by cisplatin.

Wei Y(1), Jiang J, Liu D, Zhou J, Chen X, Zhang S, Zong H, Yun X, Gu J.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Research Center, Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology Ministry of
Education and Health, Ministry of Public Health, Shanghai Medical College and
Institutes of Biomedical Sciences of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

ATF5, a member of activating transcription factor (ATF)/cAMP-response
element-binding protein (CREB) family of b-ZIP transcription factors, contributes
to neural cell differentiation and is involved in cell apoptosis in response to
cisplatin and a number of environment factors. However, the mechanisms governing 
the regulation of ATF5 protein during apoptosis are largely unknown. In this
study we reported that ATF5 protein was a substrate of the ubiquitin-proteasome
pathway. Interestingly, the ubiquitin-dependent degradation of exogenous ATF5
protein was independent of lysine residues. Instead, the addition of a large
N-terminal enhanced green fluorescence protein tag increased the stability of
ATF5 protein, and the free amino acid group of the N-terminal methionine of ATF5 
protein was a site for ubiquitinylation, indicating that exogenous ATF5 was
degraded via the ubiquitin-proteasome system through N-terminal ubiquitinylation.
Furthermore, cisplatin increased ATF5 protein expression via preventing its
ubiquitin-dependent degradation, which might be associated with its promoting the
nucleus-to-cytoplasm translocation of E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Cdc34 and
reducing the interaction between ATF5 and Cdc34. In summary, a down-regulation of
proteasome-mediated degradation of ATF5 might contribute to cisplatin-induced
apoptosis, providing a new mechanism of cisplatin-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 18458088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Urol Oncol. 2008 Jul-Aug;26(4):378-85. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2007.02.013. Epub
2007 Dec 21.

(Z)-1,1-Dichloro-2-(4-methoxyphenyl)-3-phenylcyclopropane induces
concentration-dependent growth inhibition, apoptosis, and coordinates regulation 
of apoptotic genes in TRAMP cells.

Thomas CA(1), Grant SG, Pflug BR, Getzenberg RH, Day BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.

(Z)-1-1-Dichloro-2,3-diphenylcyclopropane (A(II)) and
(Z)-1,1-dichloro-2-(4-methoxyphenyl)-3-phenylcyclopropane
[2-(4-methoxyphenyl)-A(II)] inhibit tubulin polymerization, PSA production, and
the proliferation of human prostate cancer cells. The actions of the agents were 
studied in three transgenic adenocarcinomas of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) cell
lines. Antiproliferative potencies were determined and cells treated with the
more potent 2-(4-methoxyphenyl)-A(II) were examined for induction of apoptosis.
Microarray analyses were conducted to determine the apoptosis-related genes up-
and down-regulated by the agent. 2-(4-Methoxyphenyl)-A(II)
concentration-dependently inhibited growth of all three cell lines. Fifty percent
and 100% growth inhibitory and 50% lethal concentrations were determined to be
0.3, 1.5, and 5 muM, respectively. Minimum detectable apoptosis-inducing
concentrations by ELISA were 0.10 to 0.14 muM. PARP cleavage and two-color flow
cytometry assays verified apoptosis induction. Microarray analyses showed Bok and
Siva-pending to be up-regulated and that Birc, Dad1, and Atf5 were
down-regulated. 2-(4-methoxyphenyl)-A(II) inhibits proliferation and induces
apoptosis in the in vivo-adaptable TRAMP cells, suggesting the compound should be
further examined in preclinical models.

PMID: 18367102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Drug Metab Dispos. 2008 Jun;36(6):1063-72. doi: 10.1124/dmd.107.019380. Epub 2008
Mar 10.

ATF5 is a highly abundant liver-enriched transcription factor that cooperates
with constitutive androstane receptor in the transactivation of CYP2B6:
implications in hepatic stress responses.

Pascual M(1), Gómez-Lechón MJ, Castell JV, Jover R.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Hepatología Experimental, Centro de Investigación, Hospital
Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain.

Activating transcription factor (ATF) 5 is a member of the ATF/cAMP response
element-binding protein family, which has been associated with differentiation,
proliferation, and survival in several tissues and cell types. However, its role 
in the liver has not yet been investigated. We show herein that ATF5 is a highly 
abundant liver-enriched transcription factor (LETF) whose expression declines in 
correlation with the level of dedifferentiation in cultured human hepatocytes and
cell lines. Re-expression of ATF5 in human HepG2 cells by adenoviral transduction
resulted in a marked selective up-regulation of CYP2B6. Moreover, adenoviral
cotransfection of ATF5 and constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) caused an
additive increase in CYP2B6 mRNA. These results were confirmed in cultured human 
hepatocytes, where the cooperation of ATF5 and CAR not only increased CYP2B6
basal expression but also enhanced the induced levels after phenobarbital or
6-(4-chloropheny-l)-imidazo[2,1-b][1,3]thiazole-5-carbaldehyde
O-(3,4-dichlorobenzyl)oxime (CITCO). Comparative sequence analysis of ATF5 and
ATF4, its closest homolog, showed a large conservation of the mRNA
5'-untranslated region organization, suggesting that ATF5 might be up-regulated
by stress responses through a very similar translational mechanism. To
investigate this possibility, we induced endoplasmic reticulum stress by means of
amino acid limitation or selective chemicals, and assessed the time course
response of ATF5 and CYP2B6. We found a post-transcriptional up-regulation of
ATF5 and a parallel induction of CYP2B6 mRNA. Our findings uncover a new LETF
coupled to the differentiated hepatic phenotype that cooperates with CAR in the
regulation of drug-metabolizing CYP2B6 in the liver. Moreover, ATF5 and its
target gene CYP2B6 are induced under different stress conditions, suggesting a
new potential mechanism to adapt hepatic cytochrome P450 expression to diverse
endobiotic/xenobiotic harmful stress.

PMID: 18332083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 14;283(11):7064-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708530200. Epub 2008 
Jan 14.

Phosphorylation of eIF2 directs ATF5 translational control in response to diverse
stress conditions.

Zhou D(1), Palam LR, Jiang L, Narasimhan J, Staschke KA, Wek RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2) is an important
mechanism regulating global and gene-specific translation in response to
different environmental stresses. Central to the eIF2 kinase response is the
preferential translation of ATF4 mRNA, encoding a transcriptional activator of
genes involved in stress remediation. In this report, we addressed whether there 
are additional transcription factors whose translational expression is regulated 
by eIF2 kinases. We show that the expression of the basic zipper transcriptional 
regulator ATF5 is induced in response to many different stresses, including
endoplasmic reticulum stress, arsenite exposure, and proteasome inhibition, by a 
mechanism requiring eIF2 phosphorylation. ATF5 is subject to translational
control as illustrated by the preferential association of ATF5 mRNA with large
polyribosomes in response to stress. ATF5 translational control involves two
upstream open reading frames (uORFs) located in the 5'-leader of the ATF5 mRNA, a
feature shared with ATF4. Mutational analyses of the 5'-leader of ATF5 mRNA fused
to a luciferase reporter suggest that the 5'-proximal uORF1 is positive-acting,
allowing scanning ribosomes to reinitiate translation of a downstream ORF. During
non-stressed conditions, when eIF2 phosphorylation is low, ribosomes reinitiate
translation at the next ORF, the inhibitory uORF2. Phosphorylation of eIF2 during
stress delays translation reinitiation, allowing scanning ribosomes to bypass
uORF2, and instead translate the ATF5 coding region. In addition to translational
control, ATF5 mRNA levels are significantly reduced in ATF4-/- mouse embryo
fibroblasts, suggesting that ATF4 contributes to basal ATF5 transcription. These 
results demonstrate that eIF2 kinases direct the translational expression of
multiple transcription regulators by a mechanism involving delayed translation
reinitiation.

PMID: 18195013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 1;283(5):2543-53. Epub 2007 Nov 30.

Stress-induced translation of ATF5 mRNA is regulated by the 5'-untranslated
region.

Watatani Y(1), Ichikawa K, Nakanishi N, Fujimoto M, Takeda H, Kimura N, Hirose H,
Takahashi S, Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology, School of Life Science,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, 1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji,
Tokyo, Japan.

Activating transcription factor (ATF) 5 is a transcription factor belonging to
the ATF/cAMP-response element-binding protein gene family. We previously reported
that ATF5 mRNA expression increased in response to amino acid limitation. The
ATF5 gene allows transcription of mRNAs with at least two alternative
5'-untranslated regions (5'-UTRs), 5'-UTRalpha and 5'-UTRbeta, derived from
exon1alpha and exon1beta. 5'-UTRalpha contains highly conserved sequences, in
which the upstream open reading frames (uORFs) uORF1 and uORF2 are found in many 
species. This study was designed to investigate the potential role of 5'-UTRs in 
translational control. These 5'-UTRs differentially determined translation
efficiency from mRNA. The presence of 5'-UTRalpha or 5'-UTRbeta represses
translation from the downstream ATF5 ORF. Moreover, 5'-UTRalpha-regulated
translational repression is released by amino acid limitation or NaAsO(2)
exposure. This release was not seen for 5'-UTRbeta. Mutation of uAUG2 in the
uORF2 of 5'-UTRalpha restored the basal expression and abolished the positive
regulation by amino acid limitation or arsenite exposure. We demonstrated that
phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha was required for amino
acid limitation-induced translational regulation of ATF5. Furthermore, arsenite
exposure activated the exogenously expressed heme-regulated inhibitor kinase and 
induced the phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha in
nonerythroid cells. These results suggest that translation of ATF5 is regulated
by the alternative 5'-UTR region of its mRNA, and ATF5 may play a role in
protecting cells from amino acid limitation or arsenite-induced oxidative stress.

PMID: 18055463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Endocrinology. 2007 Dec;148(12):5811-21. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Evidence for circadian regulation of activating transcription factor 5 but not
tyrosine hydroxylase by the chromaffin cell clock.

Lemos DR(1), Goodspeed L, Tonelli L, Antoch MP, Ojeda SR, Urbanski HF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, 505
Northwest 185th Avenue, Beaverton, OR 97006, USA.

In mammals, adrenal medulla chromaffin cells constitute a fundamental component
of the sympathetic nervous system outflow, producing most of the circulating
adrenaline. We recently found that the rhesus monkey adrenal gland expresses
several genes in a 24-h rhythmic pattern, including TH (the rate-limiting enzyme 
in catecholamine synthesis) and Atf5 (a transcription factor involved in
apoptosis and neural cell differentiation) together with the core-clock genes. To
examine whether these core-clock genes play a role in adrenal circadian function,
we exposed rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells to a serum shock and found that it
triggered rhythmic oscillation of the clock genes rBmal1, rPer1, rRev-erbalpha,
and rCry1 and induced the circadian expression of Atf5 but not TH. Furthermore,
we found that the CLOCK/brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1) heterodimer 
could regulate Atf5 expression by binding to an E-box motif and repressing
activity of its promoter. The physiological relevance of this interaction was
evident in Bmal1 -/- mice, in which blunted circadian rhythm of Atf5 mRNA was
observed in the liver, together with significantly higher expression levels in
both liver and adrenal glands. Although we found no compelling evidence for
rhythmic expression of TH in chromaffin cells being regulated by an intrinsic
molecular clock mechanism, the Atf5 results raise the possibility that other
aspects of chromaffin cell physiology, such as cell survival and cell
differentiation, may well be intrinsically regulated.

PMID: 17823250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Int J Mol Med. 2007 Oct;20(4):461-9.

Molecular basis of aggressive disease in chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients
with 11q deletion and trisomy 12 chromosomal abnormalities.

Mittal AK(1), Hegde GV, Aoun P, Bociek RG, Dave BJ, Joshi AD, Sanger WG,
Weisenburger DD, Joshi SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
68198-6395, USA.

In B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), Rai stage, immunoglobulin gene
mutational status, chromosomal abnormalities, CD38 and ZAP-70 expression were
used as prognostic markers. In this study, to understand the molecular basis of
chromosomal abnormalities leading to tumor progression, 90 CLL patients were
grouped into poor prognosis (with 11q deletion and trisomy 12) and good prognosis
(with normal karyotype and 13q deletion) and their clinical outcome was assessed.
Gene expression profiles of 35 CLL samples with poor outcome (11q deletion, n=9; 
trisomy 12, n=5) and good outcome (13q deletion, n=13; normal karyotype, n=8)
were analyzed using oligonucleotide microarray. Significance analysis of
microarray (SAM) identified 27 differentially expressed genes between these two
subgroups with significant overexpression of ATF5 and underexpression of CDC16,
PCDH8, SLAM, MNDA and ATF2 in CLL patients with poor outcome. ATF5 gene
expression in CLL was further studied because of its role in the regulation of
cell cycle progression/differentiation and apoptosis. The overexpression of ATF5 
was confirmed by real-time PCR using 39 CLL samples from the poor and good
outcome groups. ATF5 was significantly (p<0.001) overexpressed in the poor
outcome group. Furthermore, ATF5 expression was significantly higher in the 11q
deletion as well as trisomy 12 group alone compared to the 13q deletion and
normal karyotype groups. ATF5 overexpression was also associated with
significantly (p=0.04) shorter time to treatment. Similarly, expression of five
underexpressed genes also correlated with longer time to treatment. Thus, this
report demonstrates that ATF5 may be one of the key genes involved in increased
proliferation and survival in 11q deletion or trisomy 12, whereas CD16, CD86,
SLAM, MNDA and ATF2 may be involved in the decreased proliferation of CLL cells
with 13q deletion or normal karyotype.

PMID: 17786276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cell Biol Int. 2007 Nov;31(11):1309-15. Epub 2007 May 21.

ATF5 promotes cell survival through transcriptional activation of Hsp27 in H9c2
cells.

Wang H(1), Lin G, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Peking University School of
Basic Medical Science, Beijing 100083, China. whj@bjmu.edu.cn

The activating transcription factor (ATF) family comprises a group of basic
region-leucine zipper (bZIP) proteins, which have roles in development,
differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis. Here we described that ATF5 could
promote cell survival in heat shock stress and identified that heat shock protein
27 (Hsp27) as one of its target gene related to cell survival. The ectopic
expression of ATF5 could significantly increase cell tolerance to elevated
temperature and the CRE motif played an important role in upregulating Hsp27 gene
promoter activity by ATF5. Also, inhibition of Hsp27 expression by RNAi could
increase cell death in ATF5 ectopic expressing cells, indicating that Hsp27
involved in ATF5 mediated cell survival. Taken together, our results indicated
that ATF5 promoted H9c2 cell survival in heat shock stress at least through
activation of Hsp27.

PMID: 17606386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Neurooncol. 2007 Nov;85(2):149-57. Epub 2007 May 22.

Organotypic distribution of stem cell markers in formalin-fixed brain harboring
glioblastoma multiforme.

Schrot RJ(1), Ma JH, Greco CM, Arias AD, Angelastro JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, UC Davis Medical Center, 4860 Y Street,
Suite 3740, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA. rjschrot@ucdavis.edu

Comment in
    J Neurooncol. 2008 Sep;89(2):247-8; author reply 249.

The role of stem cells in the origin, growth patterns, and infiltration of
glioblastoma multiforme is a subject of intense investigation. One possibility is
that glioblastoma may arise from transformed stem cells in the ventricular zone. 
To explore this hypothesis, we examined the distribution of two stem cell
markers, activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) and CD133, in an autopsy brain 
specimen from an individual with glioblastoma multiforme. A 41-year-old male with
a right posterior temporal glioblastoma had undergone surgery, radiation, and
chemotherapy. The brain was harvested within several hours after death. After
formalin fixation, sectioning, and mapping of tumor location in the gross
specimen, histologic specimens were prepared from tumor-bearing and grossly
normal hemispheres. Fluorescence immunohistochemistry and colorimetric staining
were performed for ATF5 and CD133. Both markers co-localized to the ependymal and
subependymal zones on the side of the tumor, but not in the normal hemisphere or 
more rostrally in the affected hemisphere. ATF5 staining was especially robust
within the diseased hemisphere in histologically normal ependyma. To our
knowledge, this is the first in situ demonstration of stem cell markers in whole 
human brain. These preliminary results support the hypothesis that some
glioblastomas may arise from the neurogenic zone of the lateral ventricle. The
robust staining for ATF5 and CD133 in histologically normal ventricular zone
suggests that an increase in periventricular stem cell activity occurred in this 
patient on the side of the tumor, either as a localized response to brain injury 
or as an integral component of oncogenesis and tumor recurrence.

PMID: 17516028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Neurosci Lett. 2007 May 7;417(3):316-21. Epub 2007 Feb 24.

Association analysis of ATF4 and ATF5, genes for interacting-proteins of DISC1,
in bipolar disorder.

Kakiuchi C(1), Ishiwata M, Nanko S, Kunugi H, Minabe Y, Nakamura K, Mori N, Fujii
K, Yamada K, Yoshikawa T, Kato T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Dynamics of Mental Disorders, Brain Science
Institute, RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Disrupted in schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) and its molecular cascade are implicated in 
the pathophysiology of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. As
interacting-proteins with DISC1, Nudel, ATF4, ATF5, LIS1, alpha-tubulin, PDE4B,
eIF3, FEZ1, Kendrin, MAP1A and MIPT3 were identified. We previously showed the
down-regulation of ATF5 in the lymphoblastoid cells derived from affected co-twin
of monozygotic twins discordant for bipolar disorder. We also suggested the
contribution of endoplasmic reticulum stress response pathway to the illness, and
ATF4 is one of major components in the pathway. Truncated mutant DISC1 reportedly
cannot interact with ATF4 and ATF5. These findings suggest the role of these
genes in the pathophysiology of bipolar disorder. In this study, we tested
genetic association of ATF4 and ATF5 genes with bipolar disorder by a
case-control study in Japanese population (438 patients and 532 controls) and
transmission disequilibrium test in 237 trio samples from NIMH Genetics
Initiative Pedigrees. We also performed gene expression analysis in
lymphoblastoid cells. We did not find any significant association in both genetic
study and expression analysis. By the exploratory haplotype analysis, nominal
association of ATF4 with bipolar II patients was observed, but it was not
significant after correction of multiple testing. Contribution of common
variations of ATF4 and ATF5 to the pathophysiology of bipolar disorder may be
minimal if any.

PMID: 17346882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Int J Cancer. 2007 May 1;120(9):1883-90.

The transcription factor ATF5 is widely expressed in carcinomas, and interference
with its function selectively kills neoplastic, but not nontransformed, breast
cell lines.

Monaco SE(1), Angelastro JM, Szabolcs M, Greene LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, NY, USA.

ATF5, a transcription factor important in differentiation, proliferation and
survival, has been found to be highly expressed in neural progenitor cells and in
certain tumors including glioblastomas (GBMs), but its expression in other normal
and neoplastic tissues has not been extensively investigated. A tissue microarray
immunostained for ATF5 showed diffuse nuclear expression (as defined by the
presence in greater than 25% of cells) in 63% (117/186) of neoplastic samples,
when compared to only 32% (20/62) in nonneoplastic tissues. When analyzed by
histologic subtype, a significantly greater proportion of adenocarcinomas,
transitional cell carcinomas, squamous cell carcinomas and metastatic carcinomas 
of various tissue origins had nuclear staining when compared to nonneoplastic
tissues. There was no significant difference in ATF5 expression in renal cell
carcinomas, lymphomas and seminomas, when compared to nonneoplastic tissues. An
expanded series of nonarray breast resection specimens revealed a significantly
greater proportion of ATF5 positivity in ductal and lobular carcinomas, when
compared to normal breast tissue. Past work found that loss of ATF5 function
triggers death of GBM cells, but not of normal activated astrocytes. Here, we
observed that loss of ATF5 function caused significant apoptotic death of
neoplastic breast cell lines, but not of nonneoplastic breast cell lines. Our
data demonstrate elevated ATF5 expression in a wide variety of neoplasms and that
interference with ATF5 function selectively triggers death of breast carcinoma
cells. Such findings may have potential therapeutic application.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17266024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Stem Cells Regen Med. 2007 May 16;2(1):110-2. eCollection 2007.

ATF5, a possible regulator of osteogenic differentiation in adult mesenchymal
stem cells.

Leong D(1), Abraham M(1), Chew F(1), Lim T(1), Hutmacher D(1).

Author information: 
(1)QUT Chair in Regenerative Medicine, Institute of Health and Biomedical
Innovation, Queensland University of Technology . 60 Musk Avenue, Kelvin Grove
QLD 4059. Dietmar.hutmacher@qut.edu.au.

PMID: 24692936  [PubMed]


86. Life Sci. 2007 Feb 6;80(9):879-85. Epub 2006 Nov 11.

Amino acid limitation induces expression of ATF5 mRNA at the post-transcriptional
level.

Watatani Y(1), Kimura N, Shimizu YI, Akiyama I, Tonaki D, Hirose H, Takahashi S, 
Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology, School of Life Science,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, 1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji,
Tokyo 192-0392, Japan.

ATF5 is a transcription factor in the cAMP response element (CRE)-binding
protein/activating transcription factor (CREB/ATF) family. We studied the effect 
of amino acid limitation on ATF5 mRNA levels in a mammalian cell line.
Northern-blot analysis demonstrated that limitation of a single amino acid,
glutamine, methionine, or leucine, resulted in increased ATF5 mRNA levels in
HeLaS3 cells. This resulted, at least in part, from increased half-life of the
ATF5 mRNA transcript. Cycloheximide inhibited the increase in ATF5 mRNA
expression induced by glutamine limitation, indicating that it was dependent on
de novo protein synthesis. Moreover, rapamycin had no effect on basal ATF5 mRNA
expression or on increased expression induced by glutamine limitation. These
results indicate that amino acid limitation regulates ATF5 mRNA expression during
post-transcription in a rapamycin-independent manner. The potential role for ATF5
in protecting cells from amino acid-limitation is of considerable interest.

PMID: 17140605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Br J Haematol. 2006 Jul;134(2):145-56.

Gene expression analysis of B-lymphoma cells resistant and sensitive to
bortezomib.

Shringarpure R(1), Catley L, Bhole D, Burger R, Podar K, Tai YT, Kessler B,
Galardy P, Ploegh H, Tassone P, Hideshima T, Mitsiades C, Munshi NC, Chauhan D,
Anderson KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib has shown impressive clinical activity alone 
and in combination with conventional and other novel agents for the treatment of 
multiple myeloma (MM). Although bortezomib is known to be a selective proteasome 
inhibitor, the downstream mechanisms of cytotoxicity and drug resistance are
poorly understood. However, resistance to bortezomib as a single agent develops
in the majority of patients, and activity in other malignancies has been less
impressive. To elucidate mechanisms of bortezomib resistance, we compared
differential gene expression profiles of bortezomib-resistant SUDHL-4 and
bortezomib-sensitive SUDHL-6 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma lines in response to
bortezomib. At concentrations that effectively inhibited proteasome activity,
bortezomib induced apoptosis in SUDHL-6 cells, but not in SUDHL-4 cells. We
showed that overexpression of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), ATF4,
ATF5, c-Jun, JunD and caspase-3 is associated with sensitivity to
bortezomib-induced apoptosis, whereas overexpression of heat shock protein
(HSP)27, HSP70, HSP90 and T-cell factor 4 is associated with bortezomib
resistance.

PMID: 16846475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Feb 14;86(6):394-8.

[Regulation of heat shock protein 27/activating transcription factor-5 complex
and its implication in podocyte apoptosis induced by high glucose].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang LZ(1), Huang Q, Huang HC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, First Hospital & Institute of Nephrology, Peking
University, Beijing 100034, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the regulation of heat shock protein (HSP)27/activating
transcription factor (ATF)-5 complex in podocytes induced by high glucose and
relevant mechanisms.
METHODS: Mice kidney podocytes were cultured in culture fluid with D-glucose at
normal concentration (5.5 mol/L) (Group NG) or with D-glucose at high
concentration (30 mmol/L) (Group HG) cells of these 2 groups were collected at
different time points after glucose stimulation to detect the cell apoptosis by
Hoechst 33342 staining and fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry. Western
blotting was used to analyze the activation of extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK = MAPK) and p38 signaling pathway. The HSP27/ATF5 complex was
assessed by co-immunoprecipitation. ERK pathway blocker PD98059 and p38 signal
pathway blocker SB203580 were added into the culture fluid of Group HG and Group 
NG respectively, and then the podocytes were collected at different time points
to detect the high glucose-induced HSP27/ATF5 complex and cell apoptosis.
RESULTS: The apoptotic rate of the podocytes of Group HG 24 hours after high
glucose incubation was 14.3% +/- 6.2%, and that 48 h after was 27.2% +/- 8.9%,
significantly higher than that of Group NG (10.6% +/- 2.7%, P < 0.05). HSP27/ATF5
complex could detected in the cells of Group NG too, however, the level of
HSP27/ATF5 complex in Group HG 12 hours after incubation was 195% +/- 36% that of
Group NG (P < 0.05). Both the ERK signal pathway and p38 signal pathway of Group 
HG began to be activated 10 min after incubation, peaked 30 min after, remained
at the highest level till 1 hour after, and returned almost to the baseline level
2 hours after. No activation of these 2 pathways was observed in Group NG. The
HSP27/ATF5 complex level of the PD98059 + high glucose group was 109% +/- 19%
that of Group NG, significantly lower than that of Group HG (211% +/- 46% that of
Group NG, P < 0.05). The apoptotic rate of the PD98059 + high glucose group was
51% +/- 4%, significantly higher than that of PD98059 + normal glucose group (16%
+/- 3%, P < 0.05) and that of Group HG (27% +/- 9%, P < 0.05). The apoptotic rate
of the SB203580 + HG group was 16% +/- 6%, significantly lower than that of Group
HG (27% +/- 9%, P < 0.05). The HSP27/ATF5 complex level of the SB230580 + HG
group was 290% +/- 43% that of Group NG, not significantly different from that of
Group HG (231% +/- 20% that of Group NG, P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: High glucose stimulates the formation of HSP27/ATF5 complex in
podocytes through ERK signaling pathway but not P38 signaling pathway, and the
HSP27/ATF5 complex may have a regulatory effect in podocyte apoptosis induced by 
high glucose.

PMID: 16677549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Mar 3;341(1):167-74. Epub 2006 Jan 6.

Screening for genes preferentially expressed in the early phase of
chondrogenesis.

Shinomura T(1), Ito K, Kimura JH, Höök M.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Regeneration, Department of Hard Tissue Engineering, Tokyo Medical and 
Dental University, Japan. t.shinomura.trg@tmd.ac.jp

This study reports a new system that is very effective in identifying genes
closely related to the early phase of chondrogenic differentiation. While
studying chondrogenesis in a progenitor cell line, ATDC5, we found that the
amount of culture media overlying an ATDC5 monolayer affected the extent to which
differentiation occurred. Therefore, to gain insight into the molecular
mechanisms of chondrogenic differentiation, differential gene expression between 
differentiating and non-differentiating ATDC5 cultures was examined by
suppression subtractive hybridization analysis. In this study, we focused on
transcription factors that were identified in differentiating cultures, and found
that activating transcription factor 5, ATF5, exhibited a conspicuous activation 
pattern using two methods to induce chondrogenesis of ATDC5 cells. Furthermore,
ATF5 was found to be elevated in the developing limb bud by in situ hybridization
in a pattern that was highly restricted to the cartilaginous anlagen, suggesting 
a positive association with ATF5 expression and chondrogenesis.

PMID: 16412979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jan 13;339(2):591-6. Epub 2005 Nov 17.

ATF5 increases cisplatin-induced apoptosis through up-regulation of cyclin D3
transcription in HeLa cells.

Wei Y(1), Jiang J, Sun M, Chen X, Wang H, Gu J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and Gene Research Center, Shanghai
Medical College of Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, People's Republic of China.

ATF5 transcription factor plays an essential role in hematopoietic and glioma
cell survival and neuronal cell differentiation. Here, we report for the first
time the pro-apoptosis role of ATF5 and identify Cyclin D3 as an ATF5-targeted
apoptosis-related gene. The ectopic expression of ATF5 in HeLa cells could
markedly increase cisplatin-induced apoptosis and the cleavage of Caspase-3, and 
induce Cyclin D3 mRNA expression via cooperation with E2F1 transcription factor. 
Moreover, the interference of Cyclin D3 expression by transfection with Cyclin D3
RNAi could protect cells from ATF5-mediated apoptosis induced by cisplatin,
indicating the contribution of Cyclin D3 in ATF5-mediated apoptosis. Taken
together, these results suggest that ATF5 increases cisplatin-induced apoptosis
through up-regulation of Cyclin D3 transcription, which elicits survival signals 
in HeLa cells.

PMID: 16300731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2005 Nov;64(11):948-55.

Histology-based expression profiling yields novel prognostic markers in human
glioblastoma.

Dong S(1), Nutt CL, Betensky RA, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Denko NC, Ligon KL,
Rowitch DH, Louis DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Center and Neurosurgical Service,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, 02129, USA.

Although the prognosis for patients with glioblastoma is poor, survival is
variable, with some patients surviving longer than others. For this reason, there
has been longstanding interest in the identification of prognostic markers for
glioblastoma. We hypothesized that specific histologic features known to
correlate with malignancy most likely express molecules that are directly related
to the aggressive behavior of these tumors. We further hypothesized that such
molecules could be used as biomarkers to predict behavior in a manner that might 
add prognostic power to sole histologic observation of the feature. We reasoned
that perinecrotic tumor cell palisading, which denotes the most aggressive forms 
of malignant gliomas, would be a striking histologic feature on which to test
this hypothesis. We therefore used laser capture microdissection and
oligonucleotide arrays to detect molecules differentially expressed in
perinecrotic palisades. A set of RNAs (including POFUT2, PTDSR, PLOD2, ATF5, and 
HK2) that were differentially expressed in 3 initially studied, microdissected
glioblastomas also provided prognostic information in an independent set of 28
glioblastomas that did not all have perinecrotic palisades. On validation in a
second, larger independent series, this approach could be applied to other human 
glioma types to derive tissue biomarkers that could offer ancillary prognostic
and predictive information alongside standard histopathologic examination.

PMCID: PMC1557632
PMID: 16254489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Oncogene. 2006 Feb 9;25(6):907-16.

Selective destruction of glioblastoma cells by interference with the activity or 
expression of ATF5.

Angelastro JM(1), Canoll PD, Kuo J, Weicker M, Costa A, Bruce JN, Greene LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Columbia
University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, USA.
jmangelastro@ucdavis.edu

Glioblastoma multifome is the most common and most aggressive primary brain tumor
with no current curative therapy. We found expression of the bZip transcription
factor ATF5 in all 29 human glioblastomas and eight human and rat glioma cell
lines assessed. ATF5 is not detectably expressed by mature brain neurons and
astrocytes, but is expressed by reactive astrocytes. Interference with ATF5
function or expression in all glioma cell lines tested causes marked apoptotic
cell death. In contrast, such manipulations do not affect survival of
ATF5-expressing cultured astrocytes or of several other cell types that express
this protein. In a proof-of-principle experiment, retroviral delivery of a
function-blocking mutant form of ATF5 into a rat glioma model evokes death of the
infected tumor cells, but not of infected brain cells outside the tumors. The
widespread expression of ATF5 in glioblastomas and the selective effect of
interference with ATF5 function/expression on their survival suggest that ATF5
may be an attractive target for therapeutic intervention in such tumors.

PMID: 16170340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Biol Chem. 2005 Sep;386(9):873-9.

Regulation of asparagine synthetase gene transcription by the basic region
leucine zipper transcription factors ATF5 and CHOP.

Al Sarraj J(1), Vinson C, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, D-66421 Homburg, Germany.

Asparagine synthetase catalyses the glutamine- and ATP-dependent conversion of
aspartic acid to asparagine. In human hepatoma cells cultured in medium
containing amino acids, the mRNA of asparagine synthetase is not detectable by
RNase protection mapping. However, maintaining the cells in amino acid-free
Krebs-Ringer bicarbonate buffer strongly upregulated asparagine synthetase
biosynthesis. The effect of amino acid deprivation on asparagine synthetase gene 
transcription is mediated by a genetic element termed the nutrient-sensing
response unit. Previous studies revealed that the basic region leucine zipper
(bZIP) transcription factor CREB2/ATF4 is involved in the nutrient
deprivation-induced upregulation of asparagine synthetase gene transcription.
Here we show that overexpression of the bZIP protein ATF5, a transcriptional
activator, stimulates asparagine synthetase promoter/reporter gene transcription 
via the nutrient-sensing response unit. In contrast, ATF5 does not transactivate 
cAMP response element (CRE)-containing reporter genes. Overexpression of the
C/EBP homologous transcription factor CHOP impaired transcriptional activation of
the asparagine synthetase promoter following amino acid deprivation or
over-expression of ATF5 or CREB2/ATF4. These data indicate that CHOP functions as
a shut-off-device for nutrient deprivation-induced gene transcription.

PMID: 16164412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Clin Virol. 2005 Oct;34(2):133-9.

The interaction of the SARS coronavirus non-structural protein 10 with the
cellular oxido-reductase system causes an extensive cytopathic effect.

Li Q(1), Wang L, Dong C, Che Y, Jiang L, Liu L, Zhao H, Liao Y, Sheng Y, Dong S, 
Ma S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking
Union Medical College, Kunming 650118, PR China. qihanli@public.km.yn.cn

The pathological mechanism of SARS-CoV infection was investigated. The gene for
the SARS-CoV non-structural protein 10, which is located in the open reading
frame of pp1a/pp1ab gene, was synthesized and used to screen for the specific
cellular gene coding for the protein interacting with this nsp10 protein in a
human embryo lung cDNA library using a yeast trap method. The results indicated
that apart from the two subunits of cellular RNA polymerase complex, BTF3 and
ATF5, this nsp10 protein was also able to interact specifically with the NADH 4L 
subunit and cytochrome oxidase II. Further study revealed that the activity of
the NADH-cytochrome was altered and the inner mitochondrial membrane was
depolarized in the transfected human embryo lung fibroblast by the nsp10 protein 
gene. The cytopathic effect of the Coronavirus 229E strain appeared more
extensive in these cells than in the control cells.

PMID: 16157265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Oncogene. 2006 Jan 12;25(2):310-6.

Identification of RASSF1A modulated genes in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Chow LS(1), Lam CW, Chan SY, Tsao SW, To KF, Tong SF, Hung WK, Dammann R, Huang
DP, Lo KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, Prince of Wales Hospital, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong SAR.

RASSF1A is a tumor suppressor gene on 3p21.3 frequently inactivated by promoter
hypermethylation in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). To identify RASSF1A target
genes in NPC, we have investigated the expression profile of the stable RASSF1A
transfectants and controls by high-density oligonucleotide array. A total of 57
genes showed differential expression in the RASSF1A-expressing cells. These
RASSF1A target genes were involved in multiple cellular regulatory processes such
as transcription, signal transduction, cell adhesion and RNA processing. The
RASSF1A-modulated expression of eight selected genes with the highest fold
changes (ATF5, TCRB, RGS1, activin betaE, HNRPH1, HNRPD, Id2 and CKS2) by RASSF1A
was confirmed in both stable and transient transfectants. Compared with the
RASSF1A transfectants, an inverse expression pattern of activin betaE, Id2 and
ATF5 was shown in the immortalized nasopharyngeal epithelial cells treated with
siRNA against RASSF1A. The findings imply that the expression of activin betaE,
Id2 and ATF5 was tightly regulated by RASSF1A and may associate with its tumor
suppressor function. Strikingly, overexpression of Id2 is common in NPC and
RASSF1A-induced repression of Id2 was mediated by the overexpression of activin
betaE. The results suggest a novel RASSF1A pathway in which both activin betaE
and Id2 are involved.

PMID: 16116475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Jul;29(3):372-80.

ATF5 regulates the proliferation and differentiation of oligodendrocytes.

Mason JL(1), Angelastro JM, Ignatova TN, Kukekov VG, Lin G, Greene LA, Goldman
JE.

Author information: 
(1)Farber Institute for Neurosciences, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
PA 19107, USA. jeffrey.mason@jefferson.edu

The transcription factor ATF5 is expressed in cells of the embryonic and neonatal
ventricular zone/subventricular zone (VZ/SVZ), and must be down-regulated for
their differentiation into neurons and astrocytes. Here, we show that ATF5 plays 
a major role in directing oligodendrocyte development. ATF5 is expressed by
oligodendrocyte precursors but is absent from mature oligodendroglia.
Constitutively expressed ATF5 maintains SVZ cells and O4(+) oligodendrocyte
precursors in cycle and inhibits their differentiation into oligodendrocytes in
vitro and in vivo. In contrast, ATF5 loss-of-function (LOF; produced by a
dominant-negative form of the protein) accelerates oligodendrocyte
differentiation of O4(+) cells in vitro and of SVZ cells in vivo. Significantly, 
the accelerated oligodendrocyte differentiation promoted by ATF5 LOF in vivo
results in aberrant migration. Thus, appropriately regulated expression of ATF5
is required for proper expansion of oligodendroglial progenitors as well as for
their timely differentiation. Regulation of oligodendrocyte, astrocyte, and
neuronal differentiation indicates that ATF5 operates as a general regulator of
the timing of differentiation, independent of cell lineage.

PMID: 15950153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Neurosci. 2005 Apr 13;25(15):3889-99.

Downregulation of activating transcription factor 5 is required for
differentiation of neural progenitor cells into astrocytes.

Angelastro JM(1), Mason JL, Ignatova TN, Kukekov VG, Stengren GB, Goldman JE,
Greene LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Columbia
University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.
jmangelastro@ucdavis.edu

The mechanisms that regulate neural progenitor cell differentiation are primarily
unknown. The transcription factor activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5) is
expressed in neural progenitors of developing brain but is absent from mature
astrocytes and neurons. Here, we demonstrate that ATF5 regulates the conversion
of ventricular zone (VZ) and subventricular zone (SVZ) neural progenitors into
astrocytes. Constitutive ATF5 expression maintains neural progenitor cell
proliferation and blocks their in vitro and in vivo differentiation into
astrocytes. Conversely, loss of ATF5 function promotes cell-cycle exit and allows
astrocytic differentiation in vitro and in vivo. CNTF, a promoter of astrocytic
differentiation, downregulates endogenous ATF5, whereas constitutively expressed 
ATF5 suppresses CNTF-promoted astrocyte genesis. Unexpectedly, constitutive ATF5 
expression in neonatal SVZ cells both in vitro and in vivo causes them to acquire
properties and anatomic distributions of VZ cells. These findings identify ATF5
as a key regulator of astrocyte formation and potentially of the VZ to SVZ
transition.

PMID: 15829641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Oncogene. 2004 Jun 24;23(29):5084-91.

Distinctive gene expression of human lung adenocarcinomas carrying LKB1
mutations.

Fernandez P(1), Carretero J, Medina PP, Jimenez AI, Rodriguez-Perales S, Paz MF, 
Cigudosa JC, Esteller M, Lombardia L, Morente M, Sanchez-Verde L, Sotelo T,
Sanchez-Cespedes M.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphomas and Lung Cancer Laboratory, Spanish National Cancer Centre (CNIO),
Madrid, Spain.

LKB1, a tumor-suppressor gene that codifies for a serine/threonine kinase, is
mutated in the germ-line of patients affected with the Peutz-Jeghers syndrome
(PJS), which have an increased incidence of several cancers including
gastrointestinal, pancreatic and lung carcinomas. Regarding tumors arising in
non-PJS patients, we recently observed that at least one-third of lung
adenocarcinomas (LADs) harbor somatic LKB1 gene mutations, supporting a role for 
LKB1 in the origin of some sporadic tumors. To characterize the pattern of LKB1
mutations in LADs further, we first screened for LKB1 gene alterations (gene
mutations, promoter hypermethylation and homozygous deletions) in 19 LADs and, in
agreement with our previous data, five of them (26%) were shown to harbor
mutations, all of which gave rise to a truncated protein. Recent reports
demonstrate that LKB1 is able to suppress cell growth, but little is known about 
the specific mechanism by which it functions. To further our understanding of
LKB1 function, we analysed global expression in lung primary tumors using cDNA
microarrays to identify LKB1-specific variations in gene expression. In all, 34
transcripts, 24 of which corresponded to known genes, differed significantly
between tumors with and without LKB1 gene alterations. Among the most remarkable 
findings was deregulation of transcripts involved in signal transduction (e.g.
FRAP1/mTOR, ARAF1 and ROCK2), cytoskeleton (e.g. MPP1), transcription factors
(e.g. MEIS2, ATF5), metabolism of AMP (AMPD3 and APRT) and ubiquitinization (e.g.
USP16 and UBE2L3). Real-time quantitative RT-PCR on 15 tumors confirmed the
upregulation of the homeobox MEIS2 and of the AMP-metabolism AMPD3 transcripts in
LKB1-mutant tumors. In addition, immunohistochemistry in 10 of the lung tumors
showed the absence of phosphorylated FRAP1/mTOR protein in LKB1-mutant tumors,
indicating that LKB1 mutations do not lead to FRAP1/mTOR protein kinase
activation. In conclusion, our results reveal that several important factors
contribute to LKB1-mediated carcinogenesis in LADs, confirming previous
observations and identifying new putative pathways that should help to elucidate 
the biological role of LKB1.

PMID: 15077168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Jul 1;12(13):1591-608.

DISC1 (Disrupted-In-Schizophrenia 1) is a centrosome-associated protein that
interacts with MAP1A, MIPT3, ATF4/5 and NUDEL: regulation and loss of interaction
with mutation.

Morris JA(1), Kandpal G, Ma L, Austin CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Merck Research Laboratories, West Point, PA 19486,
USA.

Disrupted-In-Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) is a novel gene associated with
schizophrenia by multiple genetic studies. In order to determine how mutations in
DISC1 might cause susceptibility to schizophrenia, we undertook a comprehensive
study of the cellular biology of DISC1 in its full-length and disease-associated 
mutant forms. DISC1 interacts by yeast two-hybrid, mammalian two-hybrid, and
co-immunoprecipitation assays with multiple proteins of the centrosome and
cytoskeletal system, including MIPT3, MAP1A and NUDEL; proteins which localize
receptors to membranes, including alpha-actinin2 and beta4-spectrin; and proteins
which transduce signals from membrane receptors, including ATF4 and ATF5.
Truncated mutant DISC1 fails to interact with ATF4, ATF5 or NUDEL. Deletion
mapping demonstrated that DISC1 has distinct interaction domains: MAP1A interacts
via its LC2 domain with the N-terminus of DISC1, whereas MIPT3 and NUDEL bind via
their C-terminal domains to the central coiled-coil domain of DISC1, and ATF4/5
bind via their C-terminal domains to the C-terminus of DISC1. In its full-length 
form, DISC1 protein localizes to predominantly perinuclear punctate structures
which extend into neurites in some cells; mutant truncated DISC1, by contrast, is
seen in a diffuse pattern throughout the cytoplasm and abundantly in neurites.
Both forms co-localize with the centrosomal complex, although truncated less
abundantly than full-length DISC1. Although both full-length and mutant DISC1 are
found in microtubule fractions, neither form of DISC1 appears to bind directly to
microtubules, but rather do so in a MIPT3-dependent fashion that is stabilized by
taxol. Based on these data, we propose that DISC1 is a multifunctional protein
whose truncation contributes to schizophrenia susceptibility by disrupting
intracellular transport, neurite architecture and/or neuronal migration, all of
which have been hypothesized to be pathogenic in the schizophrenic brain.

PMID: 12812986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Neurosci. 2003 Jun 1;23(11):4590-600.

Regulated expression of ATF5 is required for the progression of neural progenitor
cells to neurons.

Angelastro JM(1), Ignatova TN, Kukekov VG, Steindler DA, Stengren GB, Mendelsohn 
C, Greene LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA. jma14@columbia.edu

An important milestone in brain development is the transition of neuroprogenitor 
cells to postmitotic neurons. We report that the bZIP transcription factor ATF5
plays a major regulatory role in this process. In developing brain ATF5
expression is high within ventricular zones containing neural stem and progenitor
cells and is undetectable in postmitotic neurons. In attached clonal neurosphere 
cultures ATF5 is expressed by neural stem/progenitor cells and is undetectable in
tau-positive neurons. In PC12 cell cultures nerve growth factor (NGF)
dramatically downregulates endogenous ATF5 protein and transcripts, whereas
exogenous ATF5 suppresses NGF-promoted neurite outgrowth. Such inhibition
requires the repression of CRE sites. In contrast, loss of function conferred by 
dominant-negative ATF5 accelerates NGF-promoted neuritogenesis. Exogenous ATF5
also suppresses, and dominant-negative ATF5 and a small-interfering RNA targeted 
to ATF5 promote, neurogenesis by cultured nestin-positive telencephalic cells.
These findings indicate that ATF5 blocks the differentiation of neuroprogenitor
cells into neurons and must be downregulated to permit this process to occur.

PMID: 12805299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Genomics. 2002 Sep;80(3):344-50.

Mouse Atf5: molecular cloning of two novel mRNAs, genomic organization, and
odorant sensory neuron localization.

Hansen MB(1), Mitchelmore C, Kjaerulff KM, Rasmussen TE, Pedersen KM, Jensen NA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Molecular Genetics, The Panum Institute 6.5,
University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

The activating transcription factor (ATF) family comprises a group of basic
region-leucine zipper (bZIP) proteins, which have roles in the development of
species as diverse as insects and mammals. Here we describe two novel mRNAs
encoding a single, 30-kDa mouse polypeptide, designated mouse ATF5, which is 58% 
identical to mouse ATF4 in the carboxy-terminal bZIP region. Both transcripts
harbor highly complex 5' untranslated regions that impede translation of the ATF5
open reading frame. The mouse and human ATF5 loci consist of at least four exons 
contained within 5 kb of genomic sequence. During mouse embryonic development,
expression of Atf5 is pronounced at the late gestational period and appears to be
confined to cells of the neuronal layers of the olfactory epithelium and
vomeronasal organ. This suggests a role for ATF5 in odorant sensory neuron
differentiation.

PMID: 12213205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jul;19(7):5001-13.

Human Cdc34 and Rad6B ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes target repressors of cyclic
AMP-induced transcription for proteolysis.

Pati D(1), Meistrich ML, Plon SE.

Author information: 
(1)Texas Children's Cancer Center, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis controls diverse physiological processes in
eukaryotes. However, few in vivo targets of the mammalian Cdc34 and Rad6
ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes are known. A yeast-based genetic assay to identify 
proteins that interact with human Cdc34 resulted in three cDNAs encoding bZIP DNA
binding motifs. Two of these interactants are repressors of cyclic AMP
(cAMP)-induced transcription: hICERIIgamma, a product of the CREM gene, and
hATF5, a novel ATF homolog. Transfection assays with mammalian cells demonstrate 
both hCdc34- and hRad6B-dependent ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis of hICERIIgamma 
and hATF5. This degradation requires an active ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme and
results in abrogation of ICERIIgamma- and ATF5-mediated repression of
cAMP-induced transcription. Consistent with these results, the endogenous ICER
protein is elevated in cells which are null for murine Rad6B (mHR6B-/-) or
transfected with dominant negative and antisense constructs of human CDC34. Based
on the requirement for CREM/ICER and Rad6B proteins in spermatogenesis, we
determined expression of Cdc34, Rad6B, CREM/ICER isoforms, and the
Skp1-Cullin-F-box ubiquitin protein ligase subunits Cul-1 and Cul-2, which are
associated with Cdc34 activity during murine testicular development. Cdc34,
Rad6B, and the Cullin proteins are expressed in a developmentally regulated
manner, with distinctly different patterns for Cdc34 and the Cullin proteins in
germ cells. The Cdc34 and Rad6B proteins are significantly elevated in meiotic
and postmeiotic haploid germ cells when chromatin modifications occur. Thus, the 
stability of specific mammalian transcription factors is the result of complex
targeting by multiple ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes and may have an impact on
cAMP-inducible gene regulation during both meiotic and mitotic cell cycles.

PMCID: PMC84326
PMID: 10373550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


