
1. Genom Data. 2015 Dec 1;7:90-1. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2015.11.028. eCollection
2016.

Microarray expression analysis of genes involved in innate immune memory in
peritoneal macrophages.

Yoshida K(1), Renard-Guillet C(2), Inoue K(3), Shirahige K(2), Okada-Hatakeyama
M(3), Ishii S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, CREST Research Project of JST (Japan Science
and Technology Agency), RIKEN Tsukuba institute, Tsukuba 305-0074, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Genome Structure and Function, Research Center for Epigenetic
Disease, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo 153-8904, Japan. (3)Laboratory for Integrated Cellular Systems, RIKEN
Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

Immunological memory has been believed to be a feature of the adaptive immune
system for long period, but recent reports suggest that the innate immune system 
also exhibits memory-like reaction. Although evidence of innate immune memory is 
accumulating, no in vivo experimental data has clearly implicated a molecular
mechanism, or even a cell-type, for this phenomenon. In this study of data
deposited into Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under GSE71111, we analyzed the
expression profile of peritoneal macrophages isolated from mice pre-administrated
with toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands, mimicking pathogen infection. In these
macrophages, increased expression of a group of innate immunity-related genes was
sustained over a long period of time, and these genes overlapped with
ATF7-regulated genes. We conclude that ATF7 plays an important role in innate
immune memory in macrophages.

PMCID: PMC4778626
PMID: 26981372  [PubMed]


2. Blood. 2016 Jan 8. pii: blood-2015-07-655647. [Epub ahead of print]

CARMA1- and MyD88-dependent activation of Jun/ATF-type AP-1 complexes is a
hallmark of ABC diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

Juilland M(1), Gonzalez M(1), Erdmann T(2), Banz Y(3), Jevnikar Z(1), Hailfinger 
S(1), Tzankov A(4), Grau M(5), Lenz G(6), Novak U(7), Thome M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland;
(2)Translational Oncology, Department of Medicine A, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, 
University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany; (3)Institute of Pathology,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; (4)Institute of Pathology, University
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland; (5)Department of Physics, Philipps-University
Marburg, Marburg, Germany; (6)Cluster of Excellence EXC 1003, Cells in Motion,
Muenster, Germany; (7)Department of Medical Oncology, Inselspital, Bern
University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland. (8)Department of Biochemistry, University
of Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland; margot.thomemiazza@unil.ch.

A hallmark of the diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) of the activated B-cell
(ABC) type, a molecular subtype characterized by adverse outcome, is constitutive
activation of the transcription factor NF-<U+03BA>B, which controls expression of genes 
promoting cellular survival and proliferation. Much less, however, is known about
the role of the transcription factor AP-1 in ABC DLBCL. Here we show that AP-1,
like NF-<U+03BA>B, was controlled by constitutive activation of the B-cell receptor
and/or toll-like receptor signaling pathways in ABC DLBCL cell lines. In contrast
to germinal center B-cell (GCB) DLBCL, ABC DLBCL cell lines expressed high levels
of the AP-1 family members c-Jun, JunB and JunD, which formed heterodimeric
complexes with the AP-1 family members ATF2, ATF3 and ATF7. Inhibition of these
complexes by a dominant negative approach led to impaired growth of a majority of
ABC DLBCL cell lines. Individual silencing of c-Jun, ATF2 or ATF3 decreased
cellular survival, and revealed a c-Jun/ATF2-dependent control of ATF3
expression. As a consequence, ATF3 expression was much higher in ABC versus GCB
DLBCL cell lines. Samples derived from DLBCL patients showed a clear trend
towards high and nuclear ATF3 expression in nodal DLBCL of the non-GC, or ABC
subtype. These findings identify the activation of AP-1 complexes of the
Jun/ATF-type as an important element controlling the growth of ABC DLBCL.

Copyright © 2016 American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26747248  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Cell Cycle. 2016 Jan 2;15(1):3-4. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1112687.

Innate immune memory via ATF7-dependent epigenetic changes.

Yoshida K(1), Ishii S(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, CREST Research Project of JST (Japan
Science and Technology Agency), RIKEN Tsukuba Institute , Tsukuba , Ibaraki,
Japan.

PMID: 26556024  [PubMed - in process]


4. Nat Immunol. 2015 Oct;16(10):1034-43. doi: 10.1038/ni.3257. Epub 2015 Aug 31.

The transcription factor ATF7 mediates lipopolysaccharide-induced epigenetic
changes in macrophages involved in innate immunological memory.

Yoshida K(1), Maekawa T(1), Zhu Y(1,)(2), Renard-Guillet C(3), Chatton B(4),
Inoue K(5), Uchiyama T(6), Ishibashi K(7), Yamada T(6), Ohno N(7), Shirahige
K(3), Okada-Hatakeyama M(5), Ishii S(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, CREST Research Project of the Japan Science 
and Technology Agency, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, Tsukuba, Japan. (2)Department of 
Functional Genomics, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University 
of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Genome Structure and Function,
Research Center for Epigenetic Disease, Institute of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Université de Strasbourg,
UMR7242 Biotechnologie et Signalisation Cellulaire, Illkirch, France.
(5)Laboratory for Integrated Cellular Systems, RIKEN Center for Integrative
Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan. (6)Department of Biological Information, Tokyo
Institute of Technology, Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Yokohama, Japan. (7)Laboratory for Immunopharmacology of Microbial Products,
School of Pharmacy, Tokyo University of Pharmacy &Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2015 Oct;15(10):596.

Immunological memory is thought to be mediated exclusively by lymphocytes.
However, enhanced innate immune responses caused by a previous infection increase
protection against reinfection, which suggests the presence of innate
immunological memory. Here we identified an important role for the
stress-response transcription factor ATF7 in innate immunological memory. ATF7
suppressed a group of genes encoding factors involved in innate immunity in
macrophages by recruiting the histone H3K9 dimethyltransferase G9a. Treatment
with lipopolysaccharide, which mimics bacterial infection, induced
phosphorylation of ATF7 via the kinase p38, which led to the release of ATF7 from
chromatin and a decrease in repressive histone H3K9me2 marks. A partially
disrupted chromatin structure and increased basal expression of target genes were
maintained for long periods, which enhanced resistance to pathogens. ATF7 might
therefore be important in controlling memory in cells of the innate immune
system.

PMID: 26322480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Cancer Res Ther. 2015 Apr-Jun;11(2):319-23. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.148688.

Expression of activating transcription factor 7 is correlated with prognosis of
colorectal cancer.

Guo HQ(1), Ye S, Huang GL, Liu L, Liu OF, Yang SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University; Department of Medical Oncology, Henan Province Cancer Hospital of
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450 008, China.

BACKGROUND: It is important to identify some tumor-related factors for early
detection, treatment, and evaluation of prognosis in colorectal cancer (CRC). In 
our study, we investigated the clinical and prognostic role of activating
transcription factor 7 (ATF7) in CRC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of ATF7 was detected with immunohistochemistry 
in 72 cases with complete follow-up data and post-operation tissue specimens.
Correlation between ATF7 and other clinicopathological factors was calculated
with Chi-square test and the impact of ATF7 on survival were analyzed with
Log-rank test and Cox regression models.
RESULTS: Among 72 cases, ATF7 expression was detected in 43 cases (59.7%) and 29 
cases (40.3%) without ATF7 expression. The correlation between ATF7 expression
and pathological stage was investigated (P = 0.041). The 5-year overall survival 
(OS) of with or without ATF7 expression was 79% versus 51% respectively (P <
0.001) and the 5-year progression free survival (PFS) was 74% versus 41% (P <
0.001). The media OS was 69 months versus 52 months (P = 0.002) and the media PFS
was 65 months versus 42 months (P = 0.002). ATF7 expression and numbers of lymph 
nodes involvement were prognostic factors for OS according to univariated and
multivariated analysis and for PFS it was ATF7 expression and lymph nodes
involvement.
CONCLUSION: It is negatively related between ATF7 expression and pathological
stage and positive correlation with OS and PFS in CRC. ATF7 expression is a
favorable factor for survival of patients with CRC.

PMID: 26148593  [PubMed - in process]


6. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(16):2655-66. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1064568.

ATF7 is stabilized during mitosis in a CDK1-dependent manner and contributes to
cyclin D1 expression.

Schaeffer E(1), Vigneron M, Sibler AP, Oulad-Abdelghani M, Chatton B, Donzeau M.

Author information: 
(1)a Université de Strasbourg; UMR7242 Biotechnologie et Signalisation
Cellulaire; Ecole Supérieure de Biotechnologie de Strasbourg ; Illkirch Cedex ,
France.

The transcription factor ATF7 undergoes multiple post-translational
modifications, each of which has distinct effects upon ATF7 function. Here, we
show that ATF7 phosphorylation on residue Thr112 exclusively occurs during
mitosis, and that ATF7 is excluded from the condensed chromatin. Both processes
are CDK1/cyclin B dependent. Using a transduced neutralizing monoclonal antibody 
directed against the Thr112 epitope in living cells, we could demonstrate that
Thr112 phosphorylation protects endogenous ATF7 protein from degradation, while
it has no effect on the displacement of ATF7 from the condensed chromatin. The
crucial role of Thr112 phosphorylation in stabilizing ATF7 protein during mitosis
was confirmed using phospho-mimetic and phospho-deficient mutants. Finally,
silencing ATF7 by CRISPR/Cas9 technology leads to a decrease of cyclin D1 protein
expression levels. We propose that mitotic stabilized ATF7 protein re-localizes
onto chromatin at the end of telophase and contributes to induce the cyclin D1
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4615120 [Available on 2016-06-23]
PMID: 26101806  [PubMed - in process]


7. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 7;10(4):e0122980. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122980.
eCollection 2015.

A humanized leucine zipper-TRAIL hybrid induces apoptosis of tumors both in vitro
and in vivo.

Rozanov D(1), Spellman P(1), Savinov A(2), Strongin AY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, Oregon, United States of America. (2)Sanford Research,
Sioux Falls, South Dakota, United States of America. (3)Sanford-Burnham Medical
Research Institute, La Jolla, California, United States of America.

Evidence suggests that stimulating apoptosis in malignant cells without
inflicting collateral damage to the host's normal tissues is a promising cancer
therapy. Chemo- and radiation therapies that, especially if combined, induce
apoptosis in tumor cells have been used for treating cancer patients for decades.
These treatments, however, are limited in their ability to discriminate between
malignant and non-malignant cells and, therefore, produce substantial healthy
tissue damage and subsequent toxic side-effects. In addition, as a result of
these therapies, many tumor types acquire an apoptosis-resistant phenotype and
become more aggressive and metastatic. Tumor necrosis factor-Related
Apoptosis-Inducing Ligand (TRAIL) has been considered a promising and reliable
selective inducer of apoptosis in cancerous cells. TRAIL, however, is not
uniformly effective in cancer and multiple cancer cell types are considered
resistant to natural TRAIL. To overcome this deficiency of TRAIL, we have earlier
constructed a yeast-human hybrid leucine zipper-TRAIL in which the yeast GCN4-pII
leucine zipper was fused to human TRAIL (GCN4-TRAIL). This construct exhibited a 
significantly improved anti-tumor apoptotic activity and safety, but is
potentially immunogenic in humans. Here, we report a novel, potent, and fully
human ATF7 leucine zipper-TRAIL (ATF7-TRAIL) fusion construct that is expected to
have substantially lower immunogenicity. In solution, ATF7-TRAIL exists solely as
a trimer with a Tm of 80°C and is active against cancer cells both in vitro and
in vivo, in a mouse tumor xenograft model. Our data suggest that our
re-engineered TRAIL is a promising candidate for further evaluation as an
antitumor agent.

PMCID: PMC4388654
PMID: 25849628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 29;9(12):e116048. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116048.
eCollection 2014.

Cdk1-mediated phosphorylation of human ATF7 at Thr-51 and Thr-53 promotes
cell-cycle progression into M phase.

Hasegawa H(1), Ishibashi K(1), Kubota S(1), Yamaguchi C(1), Yuki R(1), Nakajo
H(1), Eckner R(2), Yamaguchi N(1), Yokoyama KK(3), Yamaguchi N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey, United States of America.
(3)Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) and its homolog ATF7 are phosphorylated 
at Thr-69/Thr-71 and at Thr-51/Thr-53, respectively, by stress-activated MAPKs
regulating their transcriptional functions in G1 and S phases. However, little is
known about the role of ATF2 and ATF7 in G2/M phase. Here, we show that
Cdk1-cyclin B1 phosphorylates ATF2 at Thr-69/Thr-71 and ATF7 at Thr-51/Thr-53
from early prophase to anaphase in the absence of any stress stimulation.
Knockdown of ATF2 or ATF7 decreases the rate of cell proliferation and the number
of cells in M-phase. In particular, the knockdown of ATF7 severely inhibits cell 
proliferation and G2/M progression. The inducible expression of a mitotically
nonphosphorylatable version of ATF7 inhibits G2/M progression despite the
presence of endogenous ATF7. We also show that mitotic phosphorylation of ATF7
promotes the activation of Aurora kinases, which are key enzymes for early
mitotic events. These results suggest that the Cdk1-mediated phosphorylation of
ATF7 facilitates G2/M progression, at least in part, by enabling Aurora
signaling.

PMCID: PMC4278844
PMID: 25545367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Oct 24;453(3):576-81. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.09.122. Epub 2014 Oct 6.

The JNK1/JNK3 interactome--contributions by the JNK3 unique N-terminus and JNK
common docking site residues.

Chen WK(1), Yeap YY(1), Bogoyevitch MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia.
Electronic address: marieb@unimelb.edu.au.

The c-Jun N-terminal Kinases (JNKs) play important roles in cell responses to
stress or growth factor stimulation. The JNK1a1 isoform shares >90% identity with
a predominantly neuronal JNK3a1 isoform, but JNK3a1 also includes a distinctive
38 amino acid N-terminal sequence. To address the outstanding question of the
potential for these JNK isoforms to have different binding partners that mediate 
different biological actions, the work presented here refined the yeast
two-hybrid approach to identify and categorize binding partners for JNK1a1 and
JNK3a1. Specifically, site-directed mutagenesis of the JNK1a1 common docking (CD)
domain that mediates typical JNK-binding domain (JBD)-dependent interactions,
truncation of the distinctive JNK3 N-terminal domain (i.e. <U+0394>N JNK3a1), and
interaction evaluation in the yeast two-hybrid system defined the interacting
partners as either JNK1-specific interactors (ATF7, FUS, KCNE4, PIAS1, SHANK1,
TKT), typical JBD-dependent interactors shared by JNK1a1 and JNK3a1 (AKAP6,
BMPR2, EEF1A1, GFAP, GRIP2, GTF2F1, HDAC2, MAP1B, MYO9B, PTPN2, RABGAP1, RUSC2,
SUMO1, SYPL1, TOPBP1, ZNF668), or JNK3-specific partners (ATXN1, NNAT, PTGDS)
dependent on interaction with the JNK3 N-terminal extension. The interacting
partners ATF7, AKAP6, and ATXN1 were explored further as representatives of these
different classes. Two potential JBDs were identified in ATF7 as important for
its interaction with JNK1a1, but additionally an interaction between ATF7 and <U+0394>N 
JNK3a1 was shown to be JBD-dependent, suggesting that the JNK3a1 N-terminus
prevents interaction with some proteins. For the shared partner AKAP6, one of the
multiple potential JBDs predicted by sequence analysis was important for the
AKAP6-JNK interaction in the yeast screening system as well as in mammalian
cells. Finally, the ATXN1-JNK3a1 interaction was dependent on the JNK3a1
N-terminus in a mammalian cell context. These studies therefore highlight a
diversity of potential JNK-interacting partners with both JBD-dependent as well
as JBD-independent modes of interaction.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25301550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Bone Miner Res. 2014 Jan;29(1):90-102. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2026.

TBK1 mediates critical effects of measles virus nucleocapsid protein (MVNP) on
pagetic osteoclast formation.

Sun Q(1), Sammut B, Wang FM, Kurihara N, Windle JJ, Roodman GD, Galson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Hematology-Oncology, University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Paget's disease of bone (PDB) is characterized by abnormal osteoclasts with
unique characteristics that include increased sensitivity of osteoclast
progenitors to 1,25(OH)2 D3 , receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL), and
TNF-a; increased osteoclast numbers; and increased expression of IL-6 and several
transcription factors. We recently reported that measles virus nucleocapsid
protein (MVNP) plays a key role in the development of these abnormal osteoclasts.
MVNP can induce the pagetic osteoclast phenotype in vitro and in vivo in
TRAP-MVNP transgenic mice. However, the molecular mechanisms by which MVNP
generates pagetic osteoclasts have not been determined. TANK-binding kinase 1
(TBK1) and I<U+03BA>B kinase-<U+03F5> (IKK<U+03F5>) are IKK family members that complex with MVNP and 
activate both IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways. MVNP increases the amount of TBK1 protein 
in bone marrow monocytes (BMM). Interestingly, we found that RANKL increased TBK1
and IKK<U+03F5> early in osteoclast differentiation, suggesting a possible role in
normal osteoclastogenesis. However, only TBK1 is further increased in osteoclasts
formed by TRAP-MVNP BMM owing to increased TBK1 protein stability. TBK1
overexpression induced IL6 promoter reporter activity, and elevated endogenous
IL6 mRNA and p65 NF-<U+03BA>B, TAF12, and ATF7 proteins in several cell lines.
Overexpression of TBK1 was insufficient to induce pagetic osteoclasts from WT BMM
but synergized with MVNP to increase pagetic osteoclast formation from TRAP-MVNP 
BMM. BX795 inhibition of TBK1 impaired MVNP-induced IL-6 expression in both
NIH3T3 cells and BMM, and shRNA knockdown of Tbk1 in NIH3T3 cells impaired IL-6
secretion induced by MVNP and decreased TAF12 and ATF7, factors involved in
1,25(OH)2 D3 hypersensitivity of pagetic osteoclasts. Similarly, Tbk1 knockdown
in BMM from TRAP-MVNP and WT mice specifically impaired development of the
MVNP-induced osteoclast pagetic phenotype. These results demonstrate that TBK1
plays a critical role in mediating the effects of MVNP on osteoclast
differentiation and on the expression of IL-6, a key contributor to the pagetic
osteoclast phenotype.

© 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMCID: PMC3870038
PMID: 23794264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Jun;28(6):1489-500. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1884.

Role of ATF7-TAF12 interactions in the vitamin D response hypersensitivity of
osteoclast precursors in Paget's disease.

Teramachi J(1), Hiruma Y, Ishizuka S, Ishizuka H, Brown JP, Michou L, Cao H,
Galson DL, Subler MA, Zhou H, Dempster DW, Windle JJ, Roodman GD, Kurihara N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology Oncology, Indiana University, Indianapolis,
IN, USA.

Osteoclast (OCL) precursors from many Paget's disease (PD) patients express
measles virus nucleocapsid protein (MVNP) and are hypersensitive to
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D2 (1,25-(OH)2D3; also know as calcitriol). The increased
1,25-(OH)2D3 sensitivity is mediated by transcription initiation factor TFIID
subunit 12 (TAF12), a coactivator of the vitamin D receptor (VDR), which is
present at much higher levels in MVNP-expressing OCL precursors than normals.
These results suggest that TAF12 plays an important role in the abnormal OCL
activity in PD. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying both 1,25-(OH)2D3's 
effects on OCL formation and the contribution of TAF12 to these effects in both
normals and PD patients are unclear. Inhibition of TAF12 with a specific TAF12
antisense construct decreased OCL formation and OCL precursors' sensitivity to
1,25-(OH)2D3 in PD patient bone marrow samples. Further, OCL precursors from
transgenic mice in which TAF12 expression was targeted to the OCL lineage
(tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase [TRAP]-TAF12 mice), formed OCLs at very low 
levels of 1,25-(OH)2D3, although the OCLs failed to exhibit other hallmarks of PD
OCLs, including receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL) hypersensitivity and
hypermultinucleation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis of OCL
precursors using an anti-TAF12 antibody demonstrated that TAF12 binds the
24-hydroxylase (CYP24A1) promoter, which contains two functional vitamin D
response elements (VDREs), in the presence of 1,25-(OH)2D3. Because TAF12
directly interacts with the cyclic adenosine monophosphate-dependent activating
transcription factor 7 (ATF7) and potentiates ATF7-induced transcriptional
activation of ATF7-driven genes in other cell types, we determined whether TAF12 
is a functional partner of ATF7 in OCL precursors. Immunoprecipitation of lysates
from either wild-type (WT) or MVNP-expressing OCL with an anti-TAF12 antibody,
followed by blotting with an anti-ATF7 antibody, or vice versa, showed that TAF12
and ATF7 physically interact in OCLs. Knockdown of ATF7 in MVNP-expressing cells 
decreased cytochrome P450, family 24, subfamily A, polypeptide 1 (CYP24A1)
induction by1,25-(OH)2D3, as well as TAF12 binding to the CYP24A1 promoter. These
results show that ATF7 interacts with TAF12 and contributes to the
hypersensitivity of OCL precursors to 1,25-(OH)2D3 in PD.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMCID: PMC3663902
PMID: 23426901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Oncogene. 2014 Feb 20;33(8):1027-36. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.28. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Sensitisation of c-MYC-induced B-lymphoma cells to apoptosis by ATF2.

Walczynski J(1), Lyons S(1), Jones N(1), Breitwieser W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Regulation, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Transcription factors ATF2 (activating transcription factor 2) and ATF7
(activating transcription factor 7) are highly homologous members of the
activator protein 1 (AP-1) family. Their activities are growth factor and stress 
stimulated and they strictly require phosphorylation by mitogen-activated protein
(MAP) kinases for their transcriptional functions. In samples of human B-cell
lymphomas as well as Eµ-Myc-driven mouse B-cell lymphomas, we find that ATF2 as
well as MAP kinase c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) are significantly up-regulated
compared with normal human B-cell lines and mouse B cells, respectively. The B
cell-specific deletion of ATF2 and ATF7 in mice results in significantly
accelerated onset of Eµ-Myc-induced lymphoma. In addition, loss of ATF2/7
desensitises Eµ-Myc lymphoma cells to spontaneous as well as stress-induced
apoptosis. Our results therefore suggest that c-MYC induces stress-mediated
activation of ATF2 and ATF7 and that these transcription factors regulate
apoptosis in response to oncogenic transformation of B cells.

PMID: 23416976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Biochem Soc Trans. 2012 Feb;40(1):230-4. doi: 10.1042/BST20110630.

The roles of ATF2 (activating transcription factor 2) in tumorigenesis.

Gozdecka M(1), Breitwieser W.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Regulation Department, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, University
of Manchester, Wilmslow Road, Withington, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.

MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) pathways are among the most frequently
deregulated signalling events in cancer. Among the critical targets of MAPK
activities are members of the AP-1 (activator protein 1) transcription factor, a 
dimeric complex consisting of Jun, Fos, Maf and ATF (activating transcription
factor) family DNA-binding proteins. Depending on the cellular context, the
composition of the dimeric complexes determines the regulation of growth,
survival or apoptosis. JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase), p38 and a number of Jun and
Fos family proteins have been analysed for their involvement in oncogenic
transformation and tumour formation. These data are also emerging for the ATF
components of the AP-1 factor. The aim of the present review is to provide an
overview of the functions of two ATF family proteins, ATF2 and ATF7, in mammalian
development and their potential functions in tumour formation.

PMID: 22260696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23351. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023351. Epub 2011 Aug 16.

A cytoplasmic negative regulator isoform of ATF7 impairs ATF7 and ATF2
phosphorylation and transcriptional activity.

Diring J(1), Camuzeaux B, Donzeau M, Vigneron M, Rosa-Calatrava M, Kedinger C,
Chatton B.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Strasbourg, UMR7242 Biotechnologie et Signalisation Cellulaire, 
Ecole Supérieure de Biotechnologie de Strasbourg, BP10413, Illkirch, France.

Alternative splicing and post-translational modifications are processes that give
rise to the complexity of the proteome. The nuclear ATF7 and ATF2 (activating
transcription factor) are structurally homologous leucine zipper transcription
factors encoded by distinct genes. Stress and growth factors activate ATF2 and
ATF7 mainly via sequential phosphorylation of two conserved threonine residues in
their activation domain. Distinct protein kinases, among which mitogen-activated 
protein kinases (MAPK), phosphorylate ATF2 and ATF7 first on Thr71/Thr53 and next
on Thr69/Thr51 residues respectively, resulting in transcriptional activation.
Here, we identify and characterize a cytoplasmic alternatively spliced isoform of
ATF7. This variant, named ATF7-4, inhibits both ATF2 and ATF7 transcriptional
activities by impairing the first phosphorylation event on Thr71/Thr53 residues. 
ATF7-4 indeed sequesters the Thr53-phosphorylating kinase in the cytoplasm. Upon 
stimulus-induced phosphorylation, ATF7-4 is poly-ubiquitinated and degraded,
enabling the release of the kinase and ATF7/ATF2 activation. Our data therefore
conclusively establish that ATF7-4 is an important cytoplasmic negative regulator
of ATF7 and ATF2 transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3156760
PMID: 21858082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS Genet. 2010 Apr 1;6(4):e1000892. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000892.

Phosphorylation of the conserved transcription factor ATF-7 by PMK-1 p38 MAPK
regulates innate immunity in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Shivers RP(1), Pagano DJ, Kooistra T, Richardson CE, Reddy KC, Whitney JK,
Kamanzi O, Matsumoto K, Hisamoto N, Kim DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Innate immunity in Caenorhabditis elegans requires a conserved PMK-1 p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway that regulates the basal and
pathogen-induced expression of immune effectors. The mechanisms by which PMK-1
p38 MAPK regulates the transcriptional activation of the C. elegans immune
response have not been identified. Furthermore, in mammalian systems the genetic 
analysis of physiological targets of p38 MAPK in immunity has been limited. Here,
we show that C. elegans ATF-7, a member of the conserved cyclic AMP-responsive
element binding (CREB)/activating transcription factor (ATF) family of
basic-region leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors and an ortholog of
mammalian ATF2/ATF7, has a pivotal role in the regulation of PMK-1-mediated
innate immunity. Genetic analysis of loss-of-function alleles and a
gain-of-function allele of atf-7, combined with expression analysis of
PMK-1-regulated genes and biochemical characterization of the interaction between
ATF-7 and PMK-1, suggest that ATF-7 functions as a repressor of PMK-1-regulated
genes that undergoes a switch to an activator upon phosphorylation by PMK-1.
Whereas loss-of-function mutations in atf-7 can restore basal expression of
PMK-1-regulated genes observed in the pmk-1 null mutant, the induction of
PMK-1-regulated genes by pathogenic Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14 is abrogated. The
switching modes of ATF-7 activity, from repressor to activator in response to
activated PMK-1 p38 MAPK, are reminiscent of the mechanism of regulation mediated
by the corresponding ancestral Sko1p and Hog1p proteins in the yeast response to 
osmotic stress. Our data point to the regulation of the ATF2/ATF7/CREB5 family of
transcriptional regulators by p38 MAPK as an ancient conserved mechanism for the 
control of innate immunity in metazoans, and suggest that ATF2/ATF7 may function 
in a similar manner in the regulation of mammalian innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC2848548
PMID: 20369020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Environ Pollut. 2010 Feb;158(2):401-8. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2009.09.005. Epub
2009 Oct 7.

Environmental monitoring of Domingo Rubio stream (Huelva Estuary, SW Spain) by
combining conventional biomarkers and proteomic analysis in Carcinus maenas.

Montes Nieto R(1), García-Barrera T, Gómez-Ariza JL, López-Barea J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Córdoba,
Severo Ochoa Building, Rabanales Campus, Highway A4 Km 396a, 14071 Córdoba,
Spain.

Element load, conventional biomarkers and altered protein expression profiles
were studied in Carcinus maenas crabs, to assess contamination of "Domingo Rubio"
stream, an aquatic ecosystem that receives pyritic metals, industrial
contaminants, and pesticides. Lower antioxidative activities -
glucose-6-phosphate and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenases, catalase - were found 
in parallel to higher levels of damaged biomolecules - malondialdehyde, oxidized 
glutathione -, due to oxidative lesions promoted by contaminants, as the
increased levels of essential - Zn, Cu, Co - and nonessential - Cr, Ni, Cd -
elements. Utility of Proteomics to assess environmental quality was confirmed,
especially after considering the six proteins identified by de novo sequencing
through capLC-muESI-ITMS/MS and homology search on databases. They include
tripartite motif-containing protein 11 and ATF7 transcription factor
(upregulated), plus CBR-NHR-218 nuclear hormone receptor, two components of the
ABC transporters and aldehyde dehydrogenase (downregulated). These proteins could
be used as novel potential biomarkers of the deleterious effects of pollutants
present in the area.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19815320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Mol Biol. 2008 Dec 26;384(4):980-91. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.10.008. Epub 2008 
Oct 11.

p38beta2-mediated phosphorylation and sumoylation of ATF7 are mutually exclusive.

Camuzeaux B(1), Diring J, Hamard PJ, Oulad-Abdelghani M, Donzeau M, Vigneron M,
Kedinger C, Chatton B.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Strasbourg I, Institut Gilbert Laustriat, CNRS-UMR7175, Ecole
Supérieure de Biotechnologie de Strasbourg, BP10413, Strasbourg Illkirch Cedex,
France.

The ubiquitous activating transcription factor (ATF) 7 binds as a homodimer to
the cAMP response element/TPA response element motifs present in the promoters of
its target genes. ATF7 is homologous to ATF2 and heterodimerizes with Jun or Fos 
proteins, modulating their DNA-binding specificities. We previously demonstrated 
that TAF12, a component of the TFIID general transcription factor, mediates ATF7 
transcriptional activity through direct interactions between the two proteins. By
contrast, ATF7, but not ATF2, is modified in vivo by sumoylation, which restricts
its subcellular localization, thereby inhibiting its transcriptional activity. In
the present study, we dissect the mechanism of this functional switch. We
characterized the multisite phosphorylation of the ATF7 activation domain and
identified one of the involved kinase, p38beta2 mitogen-activated protein kinase.
In addition, we show that epidermal growth factor treatment results in a two-step
modification mechanism of ATF7 activation domain. The Thr53 residue is
phosphorylated first by a presently unknown kinase, allowing p38beta2
mitogen-activated protein kinase to modify the Thr51 residue, excluding the
sumoylation of ATF7 protein. The resulting activation of transcription is related
to an increased association of TAF12 with this phosphorylated form of ATF7. Our
data therefore conclusively establish that sumoylation and phosphorylation of
ATF7 are two antagonistic posttranslational modifications.

PMID: 18950637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Genes Dev. 2007 Aug 15;21(16):2069-82.

Feedback regulation of p38 activity via ATF2 is essential for survival of
embryonic liver cells.

Breitwieser W(1), Lyons S, Flenniken AM, Ashton G, Bruder G, Willington M, Lacaud
G, Kouskoff V, Jones N.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Regulation Department, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, University
of Manchester, Manchester M20 4BX, United Kingdom.

The ATF2 transcription factor is phosphorylated by the stress-activated
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) JNK and p38. We show that this
phosphorylation is essential for ATF2 function in vivo, since a mouse carrying
mutations in the critical phosphorylation sites has a strong phenotype identical 
to that seen upon deletion of the DNA-binding domain. In addition, combining this
mutant with a knockout of the ATF2 homolog, ATF7, results in embryonic lethality 
with severe abnormalities in the developing liver and heart. The mutant fetal
liver is characterized by high levels of apoptosis in developing hepatocytes and 
haematopoietic cells. Furthermore, we observe a significant increase in active
p38 due to loss of a negative feedback loop involving the ATF2-dependent
transcriptional activation of MAPK phosphatases. In embryonic liver cells, this
increase drives apoptosis, since it can be suppressed by chemical inhibition of
p38. Our findings demonstrate the importance of finely regulating the activities 
of MAPKs during development.

PMCID: PMC1948861
PMID: 17699753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2007 Mar-Apr;17(2):484-91. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

Differentially expressed genes between high-risk human papillomavirus types in
human cervical cancer cells.

Vazquez-Ortiz G(1), García JA, Ciudad CJ, Noé V, Peñuelas S, López-Romero R,
Mendoza-Lorenzo P, Piña-Sánchez P, Salcedo M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oncogenomics, Oncology Research Unit, Oncology Hospital,
National Medical Center SXXI-IMSS, México, DF, Mexico.

Cervical carcinoma (CC) is one of the most common cancers among women worldwide
and the first cause of death among the Mexican female population. Human
papillomavirus (HPV) infection is the most important etiologic factor for CC. Of 
the oncogenic types, HPV16 and HPV18 are found in 60-70% of invasive CCs
worldwide. HPV18 appears to be associated with a more aggressive form of cervical
neoplasia than HPV16 infection. At present, there are no studies on
differentially expressed cellular genes between transformed cells harboring HPV16
and HPV18 sequences. Based on previous complementary DNA microarray data from our
group, 13 genes were found to be differentially overexpressed between HPV16- and 
HPV18-transformed cells. These genes were as follows: E6BP, UBE4A, C20orf14,
ATF7, ABCC8, SLC6A12, WASF3, SUV39H1, SPAG8, CCNC, E2FFE, BIRC5, and DEDD.
Differential expression of six selected genes was confirmed by real-time reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). All real-time RT-PCRs confirmed
differential expression between HPV18 and HPV(-) samples. The present work
identifies genes from signaling pathways triggered by HPV transformation that
could be differentially deregulated between HPV16(+) and HPV18(+) samples.

PMID: 17309674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(4):1134-44. Epub 2007 Jan 30.

Sumoylation delays the ATF7 transcription factor subcellular localization and
inhibits its transcriptional activity.

Hamard PJ(1), Boyer-Guittaut M, Camuzeaux B, Dujardin D, Hauss C, Oelgeschläger
T, Vigneron M, Kedinger C, Chatton B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Gilbert Laustriat, Ecole Supérieure de Biotechnologie de Strasbourg, 
UMR7175 CNRS-ULP, BP10413, 67412 Strasbourg Illkirch Cedex, France.

Over the past few years, small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) modification has
emerged as an important regulator of diverse pathways and activities including
protein localization and transcriptional regulation. We identified a consensus
sumoylation motif (IKEE), located within the N-terminal activation domain of the 
ATF7 transcription factor and thus investigated the role of this modification.
ATF7 is a ubiquitously expressed transcription factor, homologous to ATF2, that
binds to CRE elements within specific promoters. This protein is able to
heterodimerize with Jun or Fos proteins and its transcriptional activity is
mediated by interaction with TAF12, a subunit of the general transcription factor
TFIID. In the present article, we demonstrate that ATF7 is sumoylated in vitro
(using RanBP2 as a E3-specific ligase) and in vivo. Moreover, we show that ATF7
sumoylation affects its intranuclear localization by delaying its entry into the 
nucleus. Furthermore, SUMO conjugation inhibits ATF7 transactivation activity by 
(i) impairing its association with TAF12 and (ii) blocking its
binding-to-specific sequences within target promoters.

PMCID: PMC1851647
PMID: 17264123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Neurogenetics. 2006 Jul;7(3):157-65. Epub 2006 Jun 13.

Parsing the genetic heterogeneity of chromosome 12q susceptibility genes for
Alzheimer disease by family-based association analysis.

Lin PI(1), Martin ER, Browning-Large CA, Schmechel DE, Welsh-Bohmer KA,
Doraiswamy PM, Gilbert JR, Haines JL, Pericak-Vance MA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Previous linkage studies have suggested that chromosome 12 may harbor
susceptibility genes for late-onset Alzheimer disease (LOAD). No risk genes on
chromosome 12 have been conclusively identified yet. We have reported that the
linkage evidence for LOAD in a 12q region was significantly increased in
autopsy-confirmed families particularly for those showing no linkage to alpha-T
catenin gene, a LOAD candidate gene on chromosome 10 [LOD score increased from
0.1 in the autopsy-confirmed subset to 4.19 in the unlinked subset (optimal
subset); p<0.0001 for the increase in LOD score], indicating a one-LOD support
interval spanning 6 Mb. To further investigate this finding and to identify
potential candidate LOAD risk genes for follow-up analysis, we analyzed 99 single
nucleotide polymorphisms in this region, for the overall sample, the
autopsy-confirmed subset, and the optimal subset, respectively, for comparison.
We saw no significant association (p<0.01) in the overall sample. In the
autopsy-confirmed subset, the best finding was obtained in the activation
transcription factor 7 (ATF7) gene (single-locus association, p=0.002; haplotype 
association global, p=0.007). In the optimal subset, the best finding was
obtained in the hypothetical protein FLJ20436 (FLJ20436) gene (single-locus
association, p=0.0026). These results suggest that subset and covariate analyses 
may be one approach to help identify novel susceptibility genes on chromosome 12q
for LOAD.

PMID: 16770605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cell Cycle. 2005 Nov;4(11):1486-90. Epub 2005 Nov 23.

New insights into TAFs as regulators of cell cycle and signaling pathways.

Davidson I(1), Kobi D, Fadloun A, Mengus G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, llkirch Cédex, France. irwin@titus.u-strasbg.fr

RNA polymerase II general transcription factor TFIID is a macromolecular complex 
comprising the TATA-binding protein, TBP and 13-14 evolutionary conserved
TBP-associated factors, TAFs. Although genetic experiments have shown that TAFs
are essential for cell cycle progression in yeast and in rapidly proliferating
vertebrate cells in vitro, new experiments indicate they may be dispensible in
specific developmental and physiological processes. Moreover, the TAF4 subunit of
TFIID negatively regulates proliferation by inhibiting activation of the TGFbeta 
signalling pathway by its paralogue TAF4b. TAF4 is however essential in the
retinoic acid and cAMP signalling pathways acting as a cofactor for CREB and the 
retinoic acid receptor, but is a negative regulator of the ATF7 transcription
factor.

PMID: 16205117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jul;233(3):1157-62.

Characterization and expression pattern of two zebrafish atf7 genes.

Zhao C(1), Qi J, Meng A.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Department of 
Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

Members of the ATF/CREB (activating transcription factor/cAMP-responsive element 
binding protein) transcription factor family play diverse roles in controlling
cell proliferation, apoptosis, and oncogenesis, as well as in embryonic
development of vertebrates. We identified two zebrafish orthologs of human ATF7
gene: atf7a and atf7b. Whole-mount in situ hybridization shows that zebrafish
atf7a is first expressed in the notochord precursors at 80% epiboly stage and
then in the developing notochord during segmentation. The expression of atf7a is 
positively regulated by ntl, flh, and spr2, which are involved in development of 
the notochord. In contrast, atf7b is maternally expressed and during
embryogenesis its mRNA is ubiquitously distributed, showing an expression pattern
similar to that of mammalian Atf7.

PMID: 15906372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Oncogene. 2005 May 12;24(21):3472-83.

A functional interaction between ATF7 and TAF12 that is modulated by TAF4.

Hamard PJ(1), Dalbies-Tran R, Hauss C, Davidson I, Kedinger C, Chatton B.

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Supérieure de Biotechnologie de Strasbourg, Université Louis Pasteur,
Parc d'innovation, UMR7100 CNRS-ULP, Bd. Sebastien Brant-BP10413, 67412
Strasbourg, Illkirch Cedex, France.

The ATF7 proteins, which are members of the cyclic AMP responsive binding protein
(CREB)/activating transcription factor (ATF) family of transcription factors,
display quite versatile properties: they can interact with the adenovirus E1a
oncoprotein, mediating part of its transcriptional activity; they heterodimerize 
with the Jun, Fos or related transcription factors, likely modulating their
DNA-binding specificity; they also recruit to the promoter a stress-induced
protein kinase (JNK2). In the present study, we investigate the functional
relationships of ATF7 with hsTAF12 (formerly hsTAF(II)20/15), which has
originally been identified as a component of the general transcription factor
TFIID. We show that overexpression of hsTAF12 potentiates ATF7-induced
transcriptional activation through direct interaction with ATF7, suggesting that 
TAF12 is a functional partner of ATF7. In support of this conclusion, chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments confirm the interaction of ATF7 with TAF12 on an 
ATF7-responsive promoter, in the absence of any artificial overexpression of both
proteins. We also show that the TAF12-dependent transcriptional activation is
competitively inhibited by TAF4. Although both TAF12 isoforms (TAF12-1 and -2,
formerly TAF(II)20 and TAF(II)15) interact with the ATF7 activation region
through their histone-fold domain, only the largest, hsTAF12-1, mediates
transcriptional activation through its N-terminal region.

PMID: 15735663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Apoptosis. 2003 Jun;8(3):225-8.

The role of ATF/CREB family members in cell growth, survival and apoptosis.

Persengiev SP(1), Green MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Programmed cell death is an integral part of the mechanisms regulating tissue
homeostasis. Defects in the apoptotic signaling pathway are often associated with
uncontrolled cell proliferation, high mutation rate and malignant transformation.
Transcription factors, such as the mammalian ATF/CREB family of transcriptional
regulators, have diverse functions in controlling cell proliferation and
apoptosis. One particular ATF/CREB family member, ATFx, is an anti-apoptotic
factor that plays an essential role in cell survival. Current observations
indicate that one mechanism by which ATFx inhibits cell death and promotes cell
survival is by disrupting signal transmission from activated "death receptors" to
initiator caspases. A better understanding of ATFx function should provide new
insight into the processes that control apoptotic cascades.

PMID: 12766482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Genes Dev. 2002 Jul 15;16(14):1806-14.

Inhibition of apoptosis by ATFx: a novel role for a member of the ATF/CREB family
of mammalian bZIP transcription factors.

Persengiev SP(1), Devireddy LR, Green MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Programs in Molecular Medicine and Gene
Function and Expression, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts 01605, USA.

The mammalian ATF/CREB family of transcription factors comprises a large group of
basic-region leucine zipper (bZIP) proteins whose members mediate diverse
transcriptional regulatory functions. Here we report that expression of a
specific mouse ATF gene, ATFx, is down-regulated in a variety of cells undergoing
apoptosis following growth factor deprivation. When stably expressed in an
interleukin 3 (IL-3)-dependent cell line, ATFx suppresses apoptosis resulting
from cytokine deprivation. Conversely, a dominant-negative ATFx mutant induces
apoptosis of cells cultured in the presence of growth factors. We also show that 
24p3, a secreted lipocalin that induces apoptosis when added to hematopoietic
cells, represses ATFx expression. However, constitutive expression of ATFx
renders cells resistant to 24p3-mediated apoptosis. Collectively, our results
indicate that ATFx is an anti-apoptotic factor, a novel role for an ATF protein.

PMCID: PMC186387
PMID: 12130540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 27;276(17):13718-26. Epub 2001 Jan 22.

ATF-7, a novel bZIP protein, interacts with the PRL-1 protein-tyrosine
phosphatase.

Peters CS(1), Liang X, Li S, Kannan S, Peng Y, Taub R, Diamond RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia 19104-6145, USA.

We have identified a novel basic leucine zipper (bZIP) protein, designated ATF-7,
that physically interacts with the PRL-1 protein-tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase).
PRL-1 is a predominantly nuclear, farnesylated PTPase that has been linked to the
control of cellular growth and differentiation. This interaction was initially
found using the yeast two-hybrid system. ATF-7 is most closely related to members
of the ATF/CREB family of bZIP proteins, with highest homology to ATF-4. ATF-7
homodimers can bind specifically to CRE elements. ATF-7 is expressed in a number 
of different tissues and is expressed in association with differentiation in the 
Caco-2 cell model of intestinal differentiation. We have confirmed the
PRL-1.ATF-7 interaction and mapped the regions of ATF-7 and PRL-1 important for
interaction to ATF-7's bZIP region and PRL-1's phosphatase domain. Finally, we
have determined that PRL-1 is able to dephosphorylate ATF-7 in vitro. Further
insight into ATF-7's precise cellular roles, transcriptional function, and
downstream targets are likely be of importance in understanding the mechanisms
underlying the complex processes of maintenance, differentiation, and turnover of
epithelial tissues.

PMID: 11278933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


