
1. Genes Cells. 2016 Mar 30. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12365. [Epub ahead of print]

Genomewide approaches for BACH1 target genes in mouse embryonic fibroblasts
showed BACH1-Pparg pathway in adipogenesis.

Matsumoto M(1,)(2), Kondo K(3), Shiraki T(1,)(4), Brydun A(1), Funayama R(5),
Nakayama K(5), Yaegashi N(2), Katagiri H(3), Igarashi K(1,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
2-1, Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan. (2)Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1, Seiryo-machi,
Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan. (3)Division of Metabolism and Diabetes, Tohoku 
University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1, Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai,
980-8575, Japan. (4)Faculty of Biology-Oriented Science and Technology, Kinki
University, Nishimitani, Kinokawashi, Wakayama, 649-6493, Japan. (5)Division of
Cell Proliferation, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1,
Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan. (6)AMED-CREST, Japan Agency for
Medical Research and Development, Tokyo, 100-0004, Japan. (7)Center for
Regulatory Epigenome and Diseases, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
2-1, Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan.

The transcription repressor BTB and CNC homology 1 (BACH1) represses genes
involved in heme metabolism and oxidative stress response. BACH1 also suppresses 
the p53-dependent cellar senescence in primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs). To investigate the role of BACH1 in MEF other than its known functions,
we carried out a genomewide mapping of binding site for BACH1 and its heterodimer
partner MAFK in immortalized MEFs (iMEFs) using chromatin immunoprecipitation and
next-generation sequencing technology (ChIP-sequence). The comparative analysis
of the ChIP-sequence data and DNA microarray data from Bach1-deficient and
wild-type (WT) iMEF showed 35 novel candidate target genes of BACH1. Among these 
genes, five genes (Pparg, Nfia, Ptplad2, Adcy1 and Ror1) were related with lipid 
metabolism. Bach1-deficient iMEFs showed increased expression of mRNA and protein
of PPAR<U+03B3>, which is the key factor of adipogenesis. These cells also showed a
concomitant increase in ligand-dependent activation of PPAR<U+03B3> target genes
compared with wild-type iMEFs. Moreover, Bach1-deficient iMEFs efficiently
differentiated to adipocyte compared with wild-type cells in the presence of
PPAR<U+03B3> ligands. Our results suggest that BACH1 regulates expression of
adipocyte-related genes including Pparg and potentiates adipocyte differentiation
capacity.

© 2016 Molecular Biology Society of Japan and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

PMID: 27030212  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Prostate. 2016 Mar 28. doi: 10.1002/pros.23183. [Epub ahead of print]

MicroRNA alteration and putative target genes in high-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia and prostate cancer: STAT3 and ZEB1 are upregulated
during prostate carcinogenesis.

Cha YJ(1), Lee JH(2), Han HH(2), Kim BG(2), Kang S(3), Choi YD(4), Cho
NH(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. 
(2)Brain Korea 21 Plus Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Severance Biomedical Science Institute (SBSI), Yonsei 
University, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Urology, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: We aimed to identify alteration of cancer-related miRNAs in HGPIN and
PCa, and to investigate the clinical implications of HGPIN as a precancerous
lesion of PCa.
METHODS: Clinicopathologic analysis based on the status of HGPIN was performed in
388 patients who received radical prostatectomy between January 2005 and December
2008 in Severance Hospital. Among them, 10 paired HGPIN and PCa were prepared to 
perform miRNA microarray and quantitative real-time PCR. Fifty-two prostatectomy 
specimens were used to further validation of protein expression that was assessed
by immunohistochemical staining (IHC) in matched non-neoplastic prostatic tissue 
(NPT), HGPIN, and PCa. Functional analysis was performed using a prostate normal 
cell line (RWPE-1) and two prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP, PC-3) for
comparison of expression of miR-155 and STAT3 mRNA before and after treatment of 
miR-155 mimetics/antagomir into each cell line.
RESULTS: Patients with HGPIN had significantly less lymphovascular invasion, less
lymph node metastasis, lower tumor volume, lower Gleason score, lower incidence
of death, and longer overall survival compared to patients without HGPIN.
MiR-155, miR-210, miR-153, and miR-200c were downregulated in HGPIN and PCa in
common, compared to NPT. As putative target mRNAs, mRNA expression level of
STAT3, ZEB1, and BACH1 was increased in PCa and HGPIN compared to NPT. mRNA
expression level of ephrin-A3 was increased in PCa compared to NPT, and FGFRL1
was decreased in PCa compared to HGPIN and NPT. Protein expression assessed by
IHC showed correlated results in STAT3, ZEB1, and ephrin-A3. Moreover, STAT3 and 
ZEB1 increased in a stepwise manner, from NPT to PCa. Treatment of miR-155
antagomir increased STAT3 mRNA expression in RWPE-1 cells, whereas treatment of
miR-155 mimetics into PC-3 cells significantly decreased STAT3 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: STAT3 and ZEB1 could be the key molecules altered at the early
stages of carcinogenesis, especially in HGPIN. Prostate © 2016 Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 27017949  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Fish Biol. 2016 Mar 16. doi: 10.1111/jfb.12931. [Epub ahead of print]

The spatial-temporal expression and functional divergence of bach homologs in
zebrafish Danio rerio.

Luo Q(1), Wu C(1), Sun S(1), Lu F(1), Xie L(1), Zhao H(1), Zhong X(1), Zhou Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, School of 
Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, 430079, P.R. China.

The spatial-temporal expressions of bach1a, bach1b, bach2a and bach2b in early
development of zebrafish Danio rerio embryos were examined in the present study
by whole mount in situ hybridization. Transcripts of all genes were found at the 
one cell stage, suggesting that these four genes are maternally inherited. From
the phylogenetic analyses, Bach1a and Bach1b from fishes form a well-supported
group with two sub-groups. Bach2a and Bach2b, however, did not fall into one
clade, suggesting that Bach2 proteins diverged faster or earlier than Bach1
proteins in fishes. The differentially regulated expression of the exocrine
zymogen (such as the trypsin-like gene, tryl) of both paralogs of bach1 and
bach2, respectively, showed that their functions are still active and already
divergent, coinciding with subfunction partitioning.

© 2016 The Fisheries Society of the British Isles.

PMID: 26992035  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Curr Opin Immunol. 2016 Apr;39:136-42. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2016.01.012. Epub 2016 
Feb 16.

Orchestration of B lymphoid cells and their inner myeloid by Bach.

Igarashi K(1), Itoh-Nakadai A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Center for Regulatory Epigenome and Diseases,
Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575,
Japan. Electronic address: igarashi@med.tohoku.ac.jp. (2)Department of
Experimental Immunology, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku
University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

The transcription repressor Bach2 is required for class switch recombination and 
somatic hypermutation of antibody genes in B cells, and proper development of
effector and regulatory T cells. In addition, Bach2 and its related factor Bach1 
promote B cell commitment of progenitor cells by repressing myeloid-related
genes. Bach2 and the myeloid regulators C/EBPß and C/EBPa mutually repress their 
expression, forming a gene regulatory network (GRN) that dictates the process of 
lineage commitment. Bach2 forms another GRN with the plasma cell regulator
Blimp-1, in which Bach2 and Blimp-1 mutually repress their expression. Since
Bach2 expression is reduced in plasma cells, the repression of myeloid-related
genes in B cells may be dissolved upon terminal differentiation of B cells to
plasma cells. The Bach2 GRNs support the myeloid-based model of hematopoiesis.
Myeloid-like characteristics suppressed or manifested in B cells by modifying
differentiation trajectories of B and myeloid cells may be termed as 'inner
myeloid' after the concept of 'inner fish'.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26894991  [PubMed - in process]


5. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Feb 9;113(6):E725-34. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1508779113. Epub 2016 Jan 25.

Transketolase counteracts oxidative stress to drive cancer development.

Xu IM(1), Lai RK(1), Lin SH(2), Tse AP(1), Chiu DK(1), Koh HY(1), Law CT(1), Wong
CM(3), Cai Z(2), Wong CC(4), Ng IO(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, China;
(2)Department of Chemistry,Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, SAR, China;
State Key Laboratory of Environmental and Biological Analysis, Hong Kong Baptist 
University, Hong Kong, SAR, China; (3)Department of Pathology, The University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, China; State Key Laboratory for Liver Research, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, China. (4)Department of Pathology, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, China; State Key Laboratory for Liver
Research, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, China iolng@hku.hk
carmencl@pathology.hku.hk.

Cancer cells experience an increase in oxidative stress. The pentose phosphate
pathway (PPP) is a major biochemical pathway that generates antioxidant NADPH.
Here, we show that transketolase (TKT), an enzyme in the PPP, is required for
cancer growth because of its ability to affect the production of NAPDH to
counteract oxidative stress. We show that TKT expression is tightly regulated by 
the Nuclear Factor, Erythroid 2-Like 2 (NRF2)/Kelch-Like ECH-Associated Protein 1
(KEAP1)/BTB and CNC Homolog 1 (BACH1) oxidative stress sensor pathway in cancers.
Disturbing the redox homeostasis of cancer cells by genetic knockdown or
pharmacologic inhibition of TKT sensitizes cancer cells to existing targeted
therapy (Sorafenib). Our study strengthens the notion that antioxidants are
beneficial to cancer growth and highlights the therapeutic benefits of targeting 
pathways that generate antioxidants.

PMCID: PMC4760787
PMID: 26811478  [PubMed - in process]


6. Free Radic Biol Med. 2016 Mar;92:163-4. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.01.013.
Epub 2016 Jan 21.

Commentary on "Bach1 differentially regulates distinct Nrf2-dependent genes in
human venous and coronary artery endothelial cells adapted to physiological
oxygen levels" by Chapple et al.

Forman HJ(1), Davies KJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Leonard Davis School of Gerontology, The University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0191, USA. (2)Leonard Davis School of Gerontology, The
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-0191, USA; Division of
Molecular & Computational Biology, Department of Biological Sciences, Dornsife
College of Letters, Arts, and Sciences, The University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0191, USA.

PMID: 26802904  [PubMed - in process]


7. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Feb 2;113(5):1250-5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1525619113.
Epub 2016 Jan 19.

Common BRAF(V600E)-directed pathway mediates widespread epigenetic silencing in
colorectal cancer and melanoma.

Fang M(1), Hutchinson L(2), Deng A(2), Green MR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605; Department of Molecular, Cell and Cancer Biology, University
of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605; (2)Department of Pathology,
UMass Memorial Medical Center and University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605; Department of Molecular, Cell 
and Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA
01605; michael.green@umassmed.edu.

During cancer development, it is well established that many genes, including
tumor suppressor genes, are hypermethylated and transcriptionally repressed, a
phenomenon referred to as epigenetic silencing. In general, the factors involved 
in, and the mechanistic basis of, epigenetic silencing during cancer development 
are not well understood. We have recently described an epigenetic silencing
pathway, directed by the oncogenic B-Raf proto-oncogene (BRAF) variant
BRAF(V600E), that mediates widespread epigenetic silencing in colorectal cancer
(CRC). Notably, the BRAF(V600E) mutation is also present in 50-70% of melanomas. 
Here, we show that the same pathway we identified in CRC also directs epigenetic 
silencing of a similar set of genes in BRAF-positive melanoma. In both CRC and
melanoma, BRAF(V600E) promotes epigenetic silencing through up-regulation of
v-maf avian musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homolog G (MAFG), a
transcriptional repressor with sequence-specific DNA-binding activity. The
elevated concentration of MAFG drives DNA binding on the promoter. Promoter-bound
MAFG recruits a set of corepressors that includes its heterodimeric partner BTB
and CNC homology 1, basic leucine zipper transcription factor 1 (BACH1), the
chromatin remodeling factor chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 8 (CHD8),
and the DNA methyltransferase DNMT3B, resulting in hypermethylation and
transcriptional silencing. Our results reveal a common BRAF(V600E)-directed
transcriptional regulatory pathway that mediates epigenetic silencing in
unrelated solid tumors and provide strong support for an instructive model of
oncoprotein-directed epigenetic silencing.

PMCID: PMC4747705 [Available on 2016-08-02]
PMID: 26787892  [PubMed - in process]


8. Mol Cell. 2016 Feb 4;61(3):434-48. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.12.017. Epub 2016
Jan 14.

Structure of BRCA1-BRCT/Abraxas Complex Reveals Phosphorylation-Dependent BRCT
Dimerization at DNA Damage Sites.

Wu Q(1), Paul A(2), Su D(3), Mehmood S(4), Foo TK(5), Ochi T(1), Bunting EL(1),
Xia B(5), Robinson CV(4), Wang B(6), Blundell TL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, CB2
1GA Cambridge, UK. (2)Department of Genetics, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Genes and
Development Program, The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences at Houston, 6767 Bertner Avenue, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Department
of Genetics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Department of Chemistry, Physical and
Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, OX1 3QZ
Oxford, UK. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, 195 Little Albany Street, New
Brunswick, NJ 08903, USA. (6)Department of Genetics, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Genes
and Development Program, The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences at Houston, 6767 Bertner Avenue, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic
address: bwang3@mdanderson.org. (7)Department of Biochemistry, University of
Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, CB2 1GA Cambridge, UK. Electronic address:
tom@cryst.bioc.cam.ac.uk.

BRCA1 accumulation at DNA damage sites is an important step for its function in
the DNA damage response and in DNA repair. BRCA1-BRCT domains bind to proteins
containing the phosphorylated serine-proline-x-phenylalanine (pSPxF) motif
including Abraxas, Bach1/FancJ, and CtIP. In this study, we demonstrate that
ionizing radiation (IR)-induces ATM-dependent phosphorylation of serine 404
(S404) next to the pSPxF motif. Crystal structures of BRCT/Abraxas show that
phosphorylation of S404 is important for extensive interactions through the
N-terminal sequence outside the pSPxF motif and leads to formation of a stable
dimer. Mutation of S404 leads to deficiency in BRCA1 accumulation at DNA damage
sites and cellular sensitivity to IR. In addition, two germline mutations of
BRCA1 are found to disrupt the dimer interface and dimer formation. Thus, we
demonstrate a mechanism involving IR-induced phosphorylation and dimerization of 
the BRCT/Abraxas complex for regulating Abraxas-mediated recruitment of BRCA1 in 
response to IR.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4747905
PMID: 26778126  [PubMed - in process]


9. Free Radic Biol Med. 2016 Mar;92:152-62. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2015.12.013. Epub 2015 Dec 15.

Bach1 differentially regulates distinct Nrf2-dependent genes in human venous and 
coronary artery endothelial cells adapted to physiological oxygen levels.

Chapple SJ(1), Keeley TP(1), Mastronicola D(1), Arno M(2), Vizcay-Barrena G(3),
Fleck R(3), Siow RC(1), Mann GE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, British Heart Foundation Centre of Research
Excellence, Faculty of Life Sciences & Medicine, King's College London, 150
Stamford Street, London SE1 9NH, UK. (2)Genomics Centre, King's College London,
150 Stamford Street, London SE1 9NH, UK. (3)Centre for Ultrastructural Imaging,
King's College London, London SE1 9NH, UK. (4)Cardiovascular Division, British
Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, Faculty of Life Sciences &
Medicine, King's College London, 150 Stamford Street, London SE1 9NH, UK.
Electronic address: giovanni.mann@kcl.ac.uk.

The effects of physiological oxygen tension on Nuclear Factor-E2-Related Factor 2
(Nrf2)-regulated redox signaling remain poorly understood. We report the first
study of Nrf2-regulated signaling in human primary endothelial cells (EC) adapted
long-term to physiological O2 (5%). Adaptation of EC to 5% O2 had minimal effects
on cell ultrastructure, viability, basal redox status or HIF1-a expression.
Affymetrix array profiling and subsequent qPCR/protein validation revealed that
induction of select Nrf2 target genes, HO-1 and NQO1, was significantly
attenuated in cells adapted to 5% O2, despite nuclear accumulation and DNA
binding of Nrf2. Diminished HO-1 induction under 5% O2 was stimulus independent
and reversible upon re-adaptation to air or silencing of the Nrf2 repressor
Bach1, notably elevated under 5% O2. Induction of GSH-related genes xCT and GCLM 
were oxygen and Bach1-insensitive during long-term culture under 5% O2, providing
the first evidence that genes related to GSH synthesis mediate protection
afforded by Nrf2-Keap1 defense pathway in cells adapted to physiological O2
levels encountered in vivo.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26698668  [PubMed - in process]


10. EMBO Rep. 2016 Feb;17(2):249-65. doi: 10.15252/embr.201541465. Epub 2015 Dec 23.

Mechanism governing heme synthesis reveals a GATA factor/heme circuit that
controls differentiation.

Tanimura N(1), Miller E(2), Igarashi K(3), Yang D(4), Burstyn JN(2), Dewey CN(5),
Bresnick EH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, UW-Madison Blood Research
Program, Carbone Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, WI, USA. (2)Department of Chemistry, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku
University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (4)Department of Pathology,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA ehbresni@wisc.edu
colin.dewey@wisc.edu. (6)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, UW-Madison 
Blood Research Program, Carbone Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of 
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA ehbresni@wisc.edu
colin.dewey@wisc.edu.

Metal ion-containing macromolecules have fundamental roles in essentially all
biological processes throughout the evolutionary tree. For example,
iron-containing heme is a cofactor in enzyme catalysis and electron transfer and 
an essential hemoglobin constituent. To meet the intense demand for hemoglobin
assembly in red blood cells, the cell type-specific factor GATA-1 activates
transcription of Alas2, encoding the rate-limiting enzyme in heme biosynthesis,
5-aminolevulinic acid synthase-2 (ALAS-2). Using genetic editing to unravel
mechanisms governing heme biosynthesis, we discovered a GATA factor- and
heme-dependent circuit that establishes the erythroid cell transcriptome.
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated ablation of two Alas2 intronic cis elements strongly reduces
GATA-1-induced Alas2 transcription, heme biosynthesis, and surprisingly, GATA-1
regulation of other vital constituents of the erythroid cell transcriptome.
Bypassing ALAS-2 function in Alas2 cis element-mutant cells by providing its
catalytic product 5-aminolevulinic acid rescues heme biosynthesis and the
GATA-1-dependent genetic network. Heme amplifies GATA-1 function by
downregulating the heme-sensing transcriptional repressor Bach1 and via a
Bach1-insensitive mechanism. Through this dual mechanism, heme and a master
regulator collaborate to orchestrate a cell type-specific transcriptional program
that promotes cellular differentiation.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMID: 26698166  [PubMed - in process]


11. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2015 Jul;5(4):285-99. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2015.05.008. Epub
2015 Jul 2.

Discovery of direct inhibitors of Keap1-Nrf2 protein-protein interaction as
potential therapeutic and preventive agents.

Abed DA(1), Goldstein M(1), Albanyan H(1), Jin H(1), Hu L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers,
The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway 08854, USA. (2)Department of
Medicinal Chemistry, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey, Piscataway 08854, USA ; School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan 030001, China.

The Keap1-Nrf2-ARE pathway is an important antioxidant defense mechanism that
protects cells from oxidative stress and the Keap1-Nrf2 protein-protein
interaction (PPI) has become an important drug target to upregulate the
expression of ARE-controlled cytoprotective oxidative stress response enzymes in 
the development of therapeutic and preventive agents for a number of diseases and
conditions. However, most known Nrf2 activators/ARE inducers are indirect
inhibitors of Keap1-Nrf2 PPI and they are electrophilic species that act by
modifying the sulfhydryl groups of Keap1<U+05F3>s cysteine residues. The
electrophilicity of these indirect inhibitors may cause "off-target" side effects
by reacting with cysteine residues of other important cellular proteins. Efforts 
have recently been focused on the development of direct inhibitors of Keap1-Nrf2 
PPI. This article reviews these recent research efforts including the development
of high throughput screening assays, the discovery of peptide and small molecule 
direct inhibitors, and the biophysical characterization of the binding of these
inhibitors to the target Keap1 Kelch domain protein. These non-covalent direct
inhibitors of Keap1-Nrf2 PPI could potentially be developed into effective
therapeutic or preventive agents for a variety of diseases and conditions.

PMCID: PMC4629420
PMID: 26579458  [PubMed]


12. Hypertension. 2015 Dec;66(6):1240-50. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.115.06163.
Epub 2015 Oct 26.

Downregulation of Nuclear Factor Erythroid 2-Related Factor and Associated
Antioxidant Genes Contributes to Redox-Sensitive Vascular Dysfunction in
Hypertension.

Lopes RA(1), Neves KB(1), Tostes RC(1), Montezano AC(1), Touyz RM(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, BHF Glasgow
Cardiovascular Research Centre, College of Medicine, Veterinary and Life
Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK (R.A.L., K.B.N., A.C.M., R.M.T.);
and Department of Pharmacology, Ribeirao Preto Medical School, University of Sao 
Paulo, Brazil (R.A.L., K.B.N., R.C.T.). (2)From the Institute of Cardiovascular
and Medical Sciences, BHF Glasgow Cardiovascular Research Centre, College of
Medicine, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
(R.A.L., K.B.N., A.C.M., R.M.T.); and Department of Pharmacology, Ribeirao Preto 
Medical School, University of Sao Paulo, Brazil (R.A.L., K.B.N., R.C.T.).
rhian.touyz@glasgow.ac.uk.

Oxidative stress is implicated in vascular dysfunction in hypertension. Although 
mechanisms regulating vascular pro-oxidants are emerging, there is a paucity of
information on antioxidant systems, particularly nuclear factor erythroid
2-related factor (Nrf2), a master regulator of antioxidants enzymes. We evaluated
the vascular regulatory role of Nrf2 in hypertension and examined molecular
mechanisms, whereby Nrf2 influences redox signaling in small arteries and
vascular smooth muscle cells from Wistar Kyoto (WKY) and stroke-prone
spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRSP). Cells were stimulated with angiotensin
II in the absence/presence of Nrf2 activators (bardoxolone/L-sulforaphane).
Increased vascular reactive oxygen species production (chemiluminescence and
amplex red) was associated with reduced Nrf2 activity in arteries (18%) and
vascular smooth muscle cells (48%) in SHRSP (P<0.05 versus WKY). Expression of
antioxidant enzymes, including superoxide dismutase-1 (64%), catalase (60%),
peroxiredoxin 1 (75%), and glutathione peroxidase (54%), was reduced in SHRSP.
L-sulforaphane reversed these effects. Angiotensin II increased nuclear
accumulation of Nrf2 in vascular smooth muscle cells from WKY (197% versus
vehicle), with blunted effects in SHRSP (44% versus vehicle). These responses
were associated with increased antioxidant expression (superoxide dismutase-1,
32%; catalase, 42%; thioredoxin, 71%; peroxiredoxin, 1%-90%; quinone
oxidoreductase, 84%; P<0.05 versus vehicle) and increased activity of superoxide 
dismutase-1, catalase, and thioredoxin in WKY but not in SHRSP, which exhibited
increased Bach1 expression. Nrf2 activators blocked angiotensin II-induced
reactive oxygen species generation. Vascular function demonstrated increased
contractility (Emax WKY 113.4±5.6 versus SHRSP 159.0±8.3) and decreased
endothelial-dependent relaxation (Emax WKY 88.6±3.1 versus SHRSP 74.6±3.2,
P<0.05) in SHRSP, effects corrected by L-sulforaphane. Our findings suggest that 
Nrf2 downregulation contributes to redox-sensitive vascular dysfunction in
hypertension.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 26503970  [PubMed - in process]


13. Chromosoma. 2015 Oct 21. [Epub ahead of print]

FancJ (Brip1) loss-of-function allele results in spermatogonial cell depletion
during embryogenesis and altered processing of crossover sites during meiotic
prophase I in mice.

Sun X(1), Brieño-Enríquez MA(1), Cornelius A(1), Modzelewski AJ(2), Maley TT(1), 
Campbell-Peterson KM(1), Holloway JK(1), Cohen PE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Center for Reproductive Genomics,
Cornell University, Tower Road, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA. (2)Department of
Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA,
USA. (3)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Center for Reproductive Genomics,
Cornell University, Tower Road, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA. paula.cohen@cornell.edu.

Fancj, the gene associated with Fanconi anemia (FA) Complementation Group J,
encodes a DNA helicase involved in homologous recombination repair and the
cellular response to replication stress. FANCJ functions in part through its
interaction with key DNA repair proteins, including MutL homolog-1 (MLH1), Breast
Cancer Associated gene-1 (BRCA1), and Bloom syndrome helicase (BLM). All three of
these proteins are involved in a variety of events that ensure genome stability, 
including the events of DNA double strand break (DSB) repair during prophase I of
meiosis. Meiotic DSBs are repaired through homologous recombination resulting in 
non-crossovers (NCO) or crossovers (CO). The frequency and placement of COs are
stringently regulated to ensure that each chromosome receives at least one CO
event, and that longer chromosomes receive at least one additional CO, thus
facilitating the accurate segregation of homologous chromosomes at the first
meiotic division. In the present study, we investigated the role of Fancj during 
prophase I using a gene trap mutant allele. Fancj (GT/GT) mutants are fertile,
but their testes are very much smaller than wild-type littermates, predominantly 
as a result of impeded spermatogonial proliferation and mildly increased
apoptosis during testis development in the fetus. This defect in spermatogonial
proliferation is consistent with mutations in other FA genes. During prophase I, 
early events of synapsis and DSB induction/repair appear mostly normal in Fancj
(GT/GT) males, and the FANCJ-interacting protein BRCA1 assembles normally on
meiotic chromosome cores. However, MLH1 focus frequency is increased in Fancj
(GT/GT) males, indicative of increased DSB repair via CO, and is concomitant with
increased chiasmata at diakinesis. This increase in COs in the absence of FANCJ
is associated with increased localization of BLM helicase protein, indicating
that BLM may facilitate the increased rate of crossing over in Fancj (GT/GT)
males. Taken together, these results demonstrate a critical role for FANCJ in
spermatogenesis at two stages: firstly in the proliferative activity that gives
rise to the full complement of testicular spermatogonia and secondly in the
establishment of appropriate CO numbers during prophase I.

PMID: 26490168  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Oct;75 Suppl 1:S31. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.10.761. Epub 2014 Dec 10.

Relationships between level of lipid peroxidation products and expression of Nrf2
and its activators/ inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer tissue.

Gegotek A(1), Niklinski J(2), Charkiewicz R(2), Bielawska K(3), Kozlowski M(4),
Skrzydlewska E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical University of Bialystok, Department of Analytical Chemistry, Poland.
Electronic address: agnieszkagegotek@o2.pl. (2)Medical University of Bialystok,
Department of Clinical Molecular Biology, Poland. (3)Medical University of
Bialystok, Department of Analytical Chemistry, Poland. (4)Medical University of
Bialystok, Department of Thoracic Surgery, Poland.

Lung cancer development is characterized by oxidative stress that leads to the
oxidative modifications of cellular components, including phospholipid and
protein. Lipid peroxidation products may be involved in intracellular signaling
pathways or in the activity of transcription factors (Nrf2). Therefore, the aim
of this study has been to evaluate the relationship between the level of reactive
aldehydes and the activity of the transcription factor and a comparison of these 
parameters in different histological types and stages of non-small cell lung
cancer. Lung cancer tissues and tissues without morphological changes were
received during operation from patients with squamous cell lung carcinoma (SqCC),
lung adenocarcinoma (AC) and large cell lung carcinoma (LCC). In the tissue
homogenates the level of reactive aldehydes [4-HNE, MDA, 4-ONE] was determined by
GCMS, while Nrf2 and its activators/inhibitors were evaluated by Western
immunobloting. Tumor tissues showed several times higher reactive aldehydes level
and those changes were accompanied by overexpression of Nrf2. The highest
increase of 4-HNE and MDA level was observed in the SqCC and it was correlated
with the highest increase in Nrf2 expression. Moreover, the aldehydes level and
Nrf2 phosphorylation were significantly higher in the stage I than in the stage
II. The level of Nrf2 inhibitor - Bach1 was lower in all histological types of
tumor, but in AC was the most reduced, what is correlated with the lowest level
of reactive aldehydes. The highest expression of p62 and p21 - Nrf2 activators
was observed also in adenocarcinoma of the lung. However, the level of another
Nrf2 activator - KAP1 was decreased in all histological types of tumor.
Additionally, the cJun amount in the tumor tissue was increased, whereas
reduction of its phosphorylated form in AC and LCC was observed. Understanding
the relation between reactive aldehydes level and the Nrf2 activity may be
applied in anticancer therapies.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26461337  [PubMed]


15. Arthritis Res Ther. 2015 Oct 13;17:285. doi: 10.1186/s13075-015-0792-1.

Bach1 deficiency reduces severity of osteoarthritis through upregulation of heme 
oxygenase-1.

Takada T(1), Miyaki S(2,)(3), Ishitobi H(4), Hirai Y(5), Nakasa T(6), Igarashi
K(7), Lotz MK(8), Ochi M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Hiroshima, 734-8551, Japan.
ttakada65@gmail.com. (2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Hiroshima, 734-8551,
Japan. miyaki@hiroshima-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Regenerative Medicine,
Hiroshima University Hospital, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Hiroshima, 734-8551, Japan.
miyaki@hiroshima-u.ac.jp. (4)Department of Regenerative Medicine, Hiroshima
University Hospital, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Hiroshima, 734-8551, Japan.
tobikowa@gmail.com. (5)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Hiroshima, 734-8551,
Japan. b091644@hiroshima-u.ac.jp. (6)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Hiroshima,
734-8551, Japan. tnakasa0@gmail.com. (7)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo, Aoba, Sendai, Miyagi,
980-8575, Japan. igarak@m.tains.tohoku.ac.jp. (8)Department of Molecular and
Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 N Torrey Pines Road,
La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA. mlotz@scripps.edu. (9)Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi,
Hiroshima, 734-8551, Japan. ochim@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

INTRODUCTION: BTB and CNC homology 1 (Bach1) is a transcriptional repressor of
Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), which is cytoprotective through its antioxidant effects.
The objective of this study was to define the role of Bach1 in cartilage
homeostasis and osteoarthritis (OA) development using in vitro models and Bach1
(-/-) mice.
METHODS: HO-1 expression in Bach1 (-/-) mice was analyzed by real-time PCR,
immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting. Knee joints from Bach1 (-/-) and
wild-type mice with age-related OA and surgically-induced OA were evaluated by OA
scoring systems. Levels of autophagy proteins and superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2)
were determined by immunohistochemistry. The relationship between HO-1 and the
protective effects for OA was determined in chondrocytes treated with small
interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting HO-1 gene.
RESULTS: HO-1 expression decreased with aging in articular cartilages and menisci
of mouse knees. Bach1 (-/-) mice showed reduced severity of age-related OA and
surgically-induced OA compared with wild-type mice. Microtubule-associated
protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3), autophagy marker, and SOD2 were increased in
articular cartilage of Bach1 (-/-) mice compared with wild-type mice.
Interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) induced a significant increase in Adamts-5 in wild-type
chondrocytes but not in Bach1(-/-) chondrocytes. The expression of SOD2 and the
suppression of apoptosis in Bach1 (-/-) chondrocytes were mediated by HO-1.
CONCLUSIONS: Bach1 deficiency reduces the severity of OA-like changes. This may
be due to maintenance of cartilage homeostasis and joint health by antioxidant
effects through HO-1 and downregulation of extracellular matrix degrading
enzymes. These results suggest that inactivation of Bach1 is a novel target and
signaling pathway in OA prevention.

PMCID: PMC4603301
PMID: 26458773  [PubMed - in process]


16. Circ Res. 2015 Oct 9;117(9):e77-8. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.307486.

Response to Letter by Loboda et al Regarding Article, "Bach1 Represses
Wnt/ß-Catenin Signaling and Angiogenesis".

Meng D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R.
China.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2015 Oct 9;117(9):e75-6.

PMID: 26450897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Circ Res. 2015 Oct 9;117(9):e75-6. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.307450.

Letter by Loboda et al Regarding Article, "Bach1 Represses Wnt/ß-Catenin
Signaling and Angiogenesis": IL-8 Is Not Present in Murine Genome Hence it Cannot
Be Responsible for the Bach1 Effect on Angiogenesis in Mice.

Loboda A(1), Florczyk U(1), Jazwa A(1), Grochot-Przeczek A(1), Nowak W(1),
Jozkowicz A(1), Dulak J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2015 Oct 9;117(9):e77-8.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2015 Jul 31;117(4):364-75.

PMID: 26450896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int J Nanomedicine. 2015 Sep 21;10:5925-39. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S88514. eCollection 
2015.

Gold nanoparticles induce heme oxygenase-1 expression through Nrf2 activation and
Bach1 export in human vascular endothelial cells.

Lai TH(1), Shieh JM(2), Tsou CJ(3), Wu WB(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Fu-Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City, Taiwan ;
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan 
; Institute of Systems Biology and Bioinformatics, National Central University,
Jhongli City, Taiwan. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Chi-Mei Medical Center,
Tainan, Taiwan ; Department of Recreation and Healthcare Management, Chia Nan
University of Pharmacy and Science, Tainan, Taiwan. (3)School of Medicine, Fu-Jen
Catholic University, New Taipei City, Taiwan.

It has been reported that increased levels and activity of the heme oxygenase-1
(HO-1) protein ameliorate tissue injuries. In the present study, we investigated 
the effects and mechanisms of action of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) on HO-1
protein expression in human vascular endothelial cells (ECs). The AuNPs induced
HO-1 protein and mRNA expression in a concentration- and time-dependent manner.
The induction was reduced by the thiol-containing antioxidants, including
N-acetylcysteine and glutathione, but not by the non-thiol-containing
antioxidants and inhibitors that block the enzymes for intracellular reactive
oxygen species generation. The AuNPs enhanced Nrf2 protein levels but did not
affect Nrf2 mRNA expression. In response to the AuNP treatment, the cytosolic
Nrf2 translocated to the nucleus, and, concomitantly, Bach1 exited the nucleus
and its tyrosine phosphorylation increased. The chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay revealed that the translocated Nrf2 bound to the antioxidant-response
element located in the E2 enhancer region of the HO-1 gene promoter and acted as 
a transcription factor. Although N-acetylcysteine inhibited the AuNP-induced Nrf2
nuclear translocation, the AuNPs did not promote intracellular reactive oxygen
species production or endoplasmic reticulum stress in the ECs. Knockdown of Nrf2 
expression by RNA interference significantly inhibited AuNP-induced HO-1
expression at the protein and mRNA levels. In summary, AuNPs enhance the levels
and nuclear translocation of the Nrf2 protein and Bach1 export/tyrosine
phosphorylation, leading to Nrf2 binding to the HO-1 E2 enhancer promoter region 
to drive HO-1 expression in ECs. This study, together with our parallel findings,
demonstrates that AuNPs can act as an HO-1 inducer, which may partially
contribute to their anti-inflammatory bioactivity in human vascular ECs.

PMCID: PMC4590552
PMID: 26445536  [PubMed - in process]


19. Toxicol Lett. 2015 Dec 15;239(3):152-60. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2015.09.020. Epub 
2015 Sep 28.

Palmitate-induced endothelial dysfunction is attenuated by cyanidin-3-O-glucoside
through modulation of Nrf2/Bach1 and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways.

Fratantonio D(1), Speciale A(2), Ferrari D(1), Cristani M(1), Saija A(1), Cimino 
F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Sciences and Health Products, University of Messina, Viale 
Annunziata, 98168 Messina, Italy. (2)Department of Drug Sciences and Health
Products, University of Messina, Viale Annunziata, 98168 Messina, Italy.
Electronic address: specialea@unime.it.

Free fatty acids (FFA), commonly elevated in diabetes and obesity, have been
shown to impair endothelial functions and cause oxidative stress, inflammation,
and insulin resistance. Anthocyanins represent one of the most important and
interesting classes of flavonoids and seem to play a role in preventing
cardiovascular diseases. Herein, we investigated the in vitro protective effects 
of cyanidin-3-O-glucoside (C3G) on cell signaling pathways in human umbilical
vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) exposed to palmitic acid (PA), the most prevalent
saturated FFA in circulation. Our data reported a significant augmentation of
free radicals and oxidative stress in HUVECs exposed to PA for 3h, while C3G
pretreatment improved intracellular redox status altered by FFA. Moreover, C3G
significantly inhibited NF-<U+03BA>B proinflammatory pathway and adhesion molecules
induced by PA, and these effects were attributed to the activation of Nrf2/EpRE
pathway. In fact, C3G induced Nrf2 nuclear localization and activation of
cellular antioxidant and cytoprotective genes at baseline and after PA exposure
in endothelial cells. Our data confirm the hypothesis that natural Nrf2 inducers,
such as C3G, might be a potential therapeutic strategy to protect vascular system
against various stressors preventing several pathological conditions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26422990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Turk J Haematol. 2016 Mar 5;33(1):15-20. doi: 10.4274/tjh.2014.0197. Epub 2015
Aug 6.

Correlation of BACH1 and Hemoglobin E/Beta-Thalassemia Globin Expression.

Lee TY, Muniandy L, Teh LK, Abdullah M, George E, Sathar J, Lai MI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universiti Putra Malaysia Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Department 
of Pathology, Serdang, Malaysia. E-mail: lmi@upm.edu.my.

OBJECTIVE: The diverse clinical phenotype of hemoglobin E (HbE)/ß-thalassemia has
not only confounded clinicians in matters of patient management but has also led 
scientists to investigate the complex mechanisms involved in maintaining the
delicate red cell environment where, even with apparent similarities of a- and
ß-globin genotypes, the phenotype tells a different story. The BTB and CNC
homology 1 (BACH1) protein is known to regulate a- and ß-globin gene
transcriptions during the terminal differentiation of erythroid cells. With the
mutations involved in HbE/ß-thalassemia disorder, we studied the role of BACH1 in
compensating for the globin chain imbalance, albeit for fine-tuning purposes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 47 HbE/ß-thalassemia samples were analyzed
using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction and correlated with age,
sex, red blood cell parameters, globin gene expressions, and some clinical data.
RESULTS: The BACH1 expression among the ß-thalassemia intermedia patients varied 
by up to 2-log differences and was positively correlated to age; a-, ß-, and
<U+03B3>-globin gene expression level; and heme oxygenase 1 protein. BACH1 was also
negatively correlated to reticulocyte level and had a significant correlation
with splenectomy.
CONCLUSION: This study indicates that the expression of BACH1 could be elevated
as a compensatory mechanism to decrease the globin chain imbalance as well as to 
reduce the oxidative stress found in HbE/ß-thalassemia.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 26377036  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2015 Oct;26(5):384-7. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0000000000000208.

Role of hemoglobin/heme scavenger protein hemopexin in atherosclerosis and
inflammatory diseases.

Mehta NU(1), Reddy ST.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA bDepartments of 
Medicine/Cardiology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California,
Los Angeles, California, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Hemoglobin and its scavenger proteins haptoglobin and
hemopexin (Hx) associate with HDL and influence the inflammatory properties of
HDL. Moreover, HDL from Hx-null mice is proinflammatory. In addition, Hx
deficiency is implicated in a number of other inflammatory diseases such as
septic shock and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. This article
highlights studies that demonstrate novel insights into the physiological
protective role of Hx in inflammatory diseases.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent studies demonstrate that Hx-dependent uptake of
extracellular heme leads to the deactivation of Bach1 repression leading to the
transcriptional activation of antioxidant heme oxygenase-1 gene. Levels of
circulating Hx have been implicated in the prognosis for patients with septic
shock. In addition, Hx therapy has been shown to be beneficial in cardiovascular 
disease, cerebral ischemic injury, and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
SUMMARY: These studies suggest that heme scavenging is a major mechanism by which
Hx defends against oxidative stress and related inflammatory disorders. Hx
therapy may provide a novel protective role against heme and oxidative
stress-mediated inflammatory conditions including atherosclerosis.

PMID: 26339767  [PubMed - in process]


22. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Oct 15;43(18):8638-50. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv857. Epub 2015
Sep 3.

In silico and in vitro evaluation of exonic and intronic off-target effects form 
a critical element of therapeutic ASO gapmer optimization.

Kamola PJ(1), Kitson JD(2), Turner G(2), Maratou K(2), Eriksson S(2), Panjwani
A(2), Warnock LC(2), Douillard Guilloux GA(3), Moores K(2), Koppe EL(2), Wixted
WE(4), Wilson PA(2), Gooderham NJ(5), Gant TW(6), Clark KL(2), Hughes SA(2),
Edbrooke MR(2), Parry JD(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK 
GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Ware SG12 0DP, UK GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Stevenage SG1 2NY, UK
Centre for Radiation, Chemical and Environmental Hazards, Public Health England, 
Harwell Science and Innovation Campus OX11 0RQ, UK piotr.j.kamola@gsk.com.
(2)GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Stevenage SG1 2NY, UK. (3)GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Les Ulis
91951, France. (4)GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Upper Merion 19406, US. (5)Department of
Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. (6)Centre for
Radiation, Chemical and Environmental Hazards, Public Health England, Harwell
Science and Innovation Campus OX11 0RQ, UK. (7)GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Ware SG12
0DP, UK.

With many safety and technical limitations partly mitigated through chemical
modifications, antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) are gaining recognition as
therapeutic entities. The increase in potency realized by 'third generation
chemistries' may, however, simultaneously increase affinity to unintended targets
with partial sequence complementarity. However, putative hybridization-dependent 
off-target effects (OTEs), a risk historically regarded as low, are not being
adequately investigated. Here we show an unexpectedly high OTEs confirmation rate
during screening of fully phosphorothioated (PS)-LNA gapmer ASOs designed against
the BACH1 transcript. We demonstrate in vitro mRNA and protein knockdown of
off-targets with a wide range of mismatch (MM) and gap patterns. Furthermore,
with RNase H1 activity residing within the nucleus, hybridization predicted
against intronic regions of pre-mRNAs was tested and confirmed. This dramatically
increased ASO-binding landscape together with relatively high potency of such
interactions translates into a considerable safety concern. We show here that
with base pairing-driven target recognition it is possible to predict the
putative off-targets and address the liability during lead design and
optimization phases. Moreover, in silico analysis performed against both primary 
as well as spliced transcripts will be invaluable in elucidating the mechanism
behind the hepatoxicity observed with some LNA-modified gapmers.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4605310
PMID: 26338776  [PubMed - in process]


23. J Biol Chem. 2015 Oct 2;290(40):24278-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.677419. Epub 2015
Aug 12.

Conserved overlapping gene arrangement, restricted expression, and biochemical
activities of DNA polymerase <U+03BD> (POLN).

Takata K(1), Tomida J(2), Reh S(2), Swanhart LM(3), Takata M(4), Hukriede NA(3), 
Wood RD(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis, University of
Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas 78957, the University of
Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at Houston, Houston, Texas 77030,
ktakata@mdanderson.org. (2)From the Department of Epigenetics and Molecular
Carcinogenesis, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville,
Texas 78957, the University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at
Houston, Houston, Texas 77030. (3)the Department of Developmental Biology,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, and.
(4)the Laboratory of DNA Damage Signaling, Department of Late Effects Studies,
Radiation Biology Center, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

DNA polymerase <U+03BD> (POLN) is one of 16 DNA polymerases encoded in vertebrate
genomes. It is important to determine its gene expression patterns, biological
roles, and biochemical activities. By quantitative analysis of mRNA expression,
we found that POLN from the zebrafish Danio rerio is expressed predominantly in
testis. POLN is not detectably expressed in zebrafish embryos or in mouse
embryonic stem cells. Consistent with this, injection of POLN-specific morpholino
antisense oligonucleotides did not interfere with zebrafish embryonic
development. Analysis of transcripts revealed that vertebrate POLN has an unusual
gene expression arrangement, sharing a first exon with HAUS3, the gene encoding
augmin-like complex subunit 3. HAUS3 is broadly expressed in embryonic and adult 
tissues, in contrast to POLN. Differential expression of POLN and HAUS3 appears
to arise by alternate splicing of transcripts in mammalian cells and zebrafish.
When POLN was ectopically overexpressed in human cells, it specifically
coimmunoprecipitated with the homologous recombination factors BRCA1 and FANCJ,
but not with previously suggested interaction partners (HELQ and members of the
Fanconi anemia core complex). Purified zebrafish POLN protein is capable of
thymine glycol bypass and strand displacement, with activity dependent on a basic
amino acid residue known to stabilize the primer-template. These properties are
conserved with the human enzyme. Although the physiological function of pol <U+03BD>
remains to be clarified, this study uncovers distinctive aspects of its
expression control and evolutionarily conserved properties of this DNA
polymerase.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4591814
PMID: 26269593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 Nov 1;288(3):281-8. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2015.07.027.
Epub 2015 Aug 2.

Dual regulation of skin sensitizer-induced HMOX1 expression by Bach1 and Nrf2:
Comparison to regulation of the AKR1C2-ARE element in the KeratinoSens cell line.

Emter R(1), Natsch A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences, Givaudan Schweiz AG, Ueberlandstrasse 138, CH-8600 Duebendorf,
Switzerland. (2)Biosciences, Givaudan Schweiz AG, Ueberlandstrasse 138, CH-8600
Duebendorf, Switzerland. Electronic address: andreas.natsch@givaudan.com.

Heme oxygenase (decycling) 1 (HMOX1) is the most consistently found genetic
marker induced by skin sensitizers. HMOX1 is often referred to as typical gene
regulated by nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), however, it is
also regulated by other DNA-binding factors, including BTB and CNC homolog 1
(Bach1). The KeratinoSens assay is the first validated in vitro assay for
sensitizers that measures gene induction. It is based on luciferase expression
regulated by the antioxidant response element (ARE) of the aldoketoreductase 1C2 
(AKR1C2) gene. Luciferase upregulation is dependent on Nrf2, while HMOX1
upregulation is only partially Nrf2-dependent. Thus, sensitizer-dependent
activation of HMOX1 may integrate multiple signals thereby providing additional
information. We constructed reporter cell lines containing the full HMOX1
regulatory region or the HMOX1-ARE sequence and compared them with the construct 
containing the AKR1C2-ARE sequence. Induction of the AKR1C2-ARE depends on Nrf2, 
but not on the repressor Bach1. Results obtained with HMOX1-ARE and the full
HMOX1 promoter indicate that, within the HMOX1 promoter, the HMOX1-ARE is
sufficient to explain the induction by sensitizers and that (i) inhibiting Bach1 
leads to strong basal expression, (ii) fold-induction by sensitizers above this
level is reduced in the absence of Bach1 and (iii) these constructs are less
dependent on Nrf2 as compared to the AKR1C2-ARE. Nevertheless, congruent dose
response curves for luciferase activity were obtained with all constructs. Thus, 
while sensitizer-induced HMOX1 activation is dependent on Nrf2 and Bach1, all
constructs give identical information for the in vitro prediction of the
sensitization potential.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26244607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2015 Jul 6;69:729-43. doi:
10.5604/17322693.1160360.

[CNC proteins in physiology and pathology].

[Article in Polish]

Gegotek A(1), Skrzydlewska E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zaklad Chemii Nieorganicznej i Analitycznej, Uniwersytet Medyczny w
Bialymstoku.

CNC proteins consist of Bach1, Bach2 and 4 homologous transcription factors:
Nrf1, Nrf2, Nrf3 and p45NF-E2. Transcription factors belonging to this group of
proteins play a crucial role in protection of cells against oxidative stress.
Under physiological conditions, they remain in the cytoplasm in the inactive form
or are degraded. However, in oxidative stress conditions, they are translocated
to the nucleus, and bind to DNA in the ARE sequence. Consequently, there is
transcription of genes encoding cytoprotective proteins, such as phase II
enzymes, or low molecular weight antioxidant proteins (i.e., thioredoxin,
ferritin, metallothionein) responsible for protecting cells from reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) action. The activity of transcriptional proteins depends directly
on the redox state of the cell. ROS as second messenger signals, control
inhibitors of cytoplasmic CNC proteins or potentiate the activity of kinases
(MAPK, PKC, PI3K, PERK), leading to phosphorylation of transcription factors.
This is conducive to translocation of these molecules into the nucleus and to
formation of complexes that initiate the gene expression. Disorders of regulation
of the activity of transcription factors belonging to the CNC proteins caused by 
gene mutations, epigenetic modifications or increased activity of p62, p21, or
k-Ras, B-Raf and c-Myc oncogenes, induce changes in the level of ARE-dependent
gene expression, which can lead even to the development of carcinogenesis. On the
other hand, Nrf transcription factors, inducing the expression of antioxidants
and enzymes responsible for the detoxification of xenobiotics, can be considered 
as a potential target of the action of chemopreventive factors in anticancer
therapy.

PMID: 26206989  [PubMed - in process]


26. Circ Res. 2015 Jul 31;117(4):364-75. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.306829. Epub
2015 Jun 29.

Bach1 Represses Wnt/ß-Catenin Signaling and Angiogenesis.

Jiang L(1), Yin M(1), Wei X(1), Liu J(1), Wang X(1), Niu C(1), Kang X(1), Xu
J(1), Zhou Z(1), Sun S(1), Wang X(1), Zheng X(1), Duan S(1), Yao K(1), Qian R(1),
Sun N(1), Chen A(1), Wang R(1), Zhang J(1), Chen S(1), Meng D(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology (L.J., Xiangxiang Wei,
J.L., Xinhong Wang, C.N., X.K., J.X., Z.Z., R.Q., N.S., A.C., R.W., S.C., D.M.)
and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (S.S., Xu Wang), School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; Department of
Cardiothoracic Surgery, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China (M.Y.); Key Laboratory of
Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes
for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China (X.Z.,
S.D.); Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Institute of Cardiovascular Disease,
ZhongShan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China (K.Y.); Center for Vascular
Disease and Translational Medicine, Xiangya Third Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, China (A.C.); Department of Biology, Laurentian University,
Sudbury, Ontario, Canada (R.W.); and Division of Cardiology, Department of
Medicine, Stem Cell Institute, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis (J.Z.). (2)From the Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology
(L.J., Xiangxiang Wei, J.L., Xinhong Wang, C.N., X.K., J.X., Z.Z., R.Q., N.S.,
A.C., R.W., S.C., D.M.) and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
(S.S., Xu Wang), School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China; Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China (M.Y.); Key
Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai, China (X.Z., S.D.); Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Institute of
Cardiovascular Disease, ZhongShan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
(K.Y.); Center for Vascular Disease and Translational Medicine, Xiangya Third
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China (A.C.); Department of
Biology, Laurentian University, Sudbury, Ontario, Canada (R.W.); and Division of 
Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Stem Cell Institute, University of Minnesota 
Medical School, Minneapolis (J.Z.). dmeng@fudan.edu.cn chen1216@fudan.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    Circ Res. 2015 Oct 9;117(9):e79.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2015 Oct 9;117(9):e75-6.

RATIONALE: Wnt/ß-catenin signaling has an important role in the angiogenic
activity of endothelial cells (ECs). Bach1 is a transcription factor and is
expressed in ECs, but whether Bach1 regulates angiogenesis is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: This study evaluated the role of Bach1 in angiogenesis and
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Hind-limb ischemia was surgically induced in Bach1(-/-) mice
and their wild-type littermates and in C57BL/6J mice treated with adenoviruses
coding for Bach1 or GFP. Lack of Bach1 expression was associated with significant
increases in perfusion and vascular density and in the expression of
proangiogenic cytokines in the ischemic hindlimb of mice, with enhancement of the
angiogenic activity of ECs (eg, tube formation, migration, and proliferation).
Bach1 overexpression impaired angiogenesis in mice with hind-limb ischemia and
inhibited Wnt3a-stimulated angiogenic response and the expression of
Wnt/ß-catenin target genes, such as interleukin-8 and vascular endothelial growth
factor, in human umbilical vein ECs. Interleukin-8 and vascular endothelial
growth factor were responsible for the antiangiogenic response of Bach1.
Immunoprecipitation and GST pull-down assessments indicated that Bach1 binds
directly to TCF4 and reduces the interaction of ß-catenin with TCF4. Bach1
overexpression reduces the interaction between p300/CBP and ß-catenin, as well as
ß-catenin acetylation, and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed
that Bach1 occupies the TCF4-binding site of the interleukin-8 promoter and
recruits histone deacetylase 1 to the interleukin-8 promoter in human umbilical
vein ECs.
CONCLUSIONS: Bach1 suppresses angiogenesis after ischemic injury and impairs
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by disrupting the interaction between ß-catenin and TCF4 
and by recruiting histone deacetylase 1 to the promoter of TCF4-targeted genes.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4676728
PMID: 26123998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 24;290(30):18545-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.642884. Epub
2015 Jun 8.

hMSH5 Facilitates the Repair of Camptothecin-induced Double-strand Breaks through
an Interaction with FANCJ.

Xu Y(1), Wu X(1), Her C(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Molecular Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Washington State University, Pullman, Washington 99164-7520. (2)From the School
of Molecular Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Washington State
University, Pullman, Washington 99164-7520 cher@wsu.edu.

Replication stress from stalled or collapsed replication forks is a major
challenge to genomic integrity. The anticancer agent camptothecin (CPT) is a DNA 
topoisomerase I inhibitor that causes fork collapse and double-strand breaks amid
DNA replication. Here we report that hMSH5 promotes cell survival in response to 
CPT-induced DNA damage. Cells deficient in hMSH5 show elevated CPT-induced <U+03B3>-H2AX
and RPA2 foci with concomitant reduction of Rad51 foci, indicative of impaired
homologous recombination. In addition, CPT-treated hMSH5-deficient cells exhibit 
aberrant activation of Chk1 and Chk2 kinases and therefore abnormal cell cycle
progression. Furthermore, the hMSH5-FANCJ chromatin recruitment underlies the
effects of hMSH5 on homologous recombination and Chk1 activation. Intriguingly,
FANCJ depletion desensitizes hMSH5-deficient cells to CPT-elicited cell killing. 
Collectively, our data point to the existence of a functional interplay between
hMSH5 and FANCJ in double-strand break repair induced by replication stress.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4513114 [Available on 2016-07-24]
PMID: 26055704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. MBio. 2015 Jun 4;6(3):e00668. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00668-15.

Kaposi Sarcoma Herpesvirus Induces HO-1 during De Novo Infection of Endothelial
Cells via Viral miRNA-Dependent and -Independent Mechanisms.

Botto S(1), Totonchy JE(2), Gustin JK(1), Moses AV(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute, Oregon Health and Science University,
Beaverton, Oregon, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA. (3)Vaccine and Gene Therapy
Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, Beaverton, Oregon, USA
mosesa@ohsu.edu.

Kaposi sarcoma (KS) herpesvirus (KSHV) infection of endothelial cells (EC) is
associated with strong induction of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), a stress-inducible
host gene that encodes the rate-limiting enzyme responsible for heme catabolism. 
KS is an angioproliferative tumor characterized by the proliferation of
KSHV-infected spindle cells, and HO-1 is highly expressed in such cells. HO-1
converts the pro-oxidant, proinflammatory heme molecule into metabolites with
antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and proliferative activities. Previously
published work has shown that KSHV-infected EC in vitro proliferate in response
to free heme in a HO-1-dependent manner, thus implicating virus-enhanced HO-1
activity in KS tumorigenesis. The present study investigated the molecular
mechanisms underlying KSHV induction of HO-1 in lymphatic EC (LEC), which are the
likely spindle cell precursors. In a time course analysis of KSHV-infected cells,
HO-1 expression displays biphasic kinetics characterized by an early transient
induction that is followed by a more sustained upregulation coincident with the
establishment of viral latency. A viral microRNA miR-K12-11 deletion mutant of
KSHV was found to be defective for induction of HO-1 during latency. A potential 
mechanism for this phenotype was provided by BACH1, a cellular HO-1
transcriptional repressor targeted by miR-K12-11. In fact, in KSHV-infected LEC, 
the BACH1 message level is reduced, BACH1 subcellular localization is altered,
and miR-K12-11 mediates the inverse regulation of HO-1 and BACH1 during viral
latency. Interestingly, the data indicate that neither miR-K12-11 nor de novo
KSHV gene expression is required for the burst of HO-1 expression observed at
early times postinfection, which suggests that additional virion components
promote this phenotype.IMPORTANCE: While the mechanisms underlying KSHV induction
of HO-1 remain unknown, the cellular mechanisms that regulate HO-1 expression
have been extensively investigated in the context of basal and pathophysiological
states. The detoxifying action of HO-1 is critical for the protection of cells
exposed to high heme levels. KS spindle cells are erythrophagocytic and contain
erythrocyte ghosts. Erythrocyte degeneration leads to the localized release of
heme, creating oxidative stress that may be further exacerbated by environmental 
or other cofactors. Our previous work showed that KSHV-infected cells proliferate
in response to heme and that this occurs in a HO-1-dependent manner. We therefore
hypothesize that KSHV induction of HO-1 contributes to KS tumor development via
heme metabolism and propose that HO-1 be evaluated as a therapeutic target for
KS. Our present work, which aimed to understand the mechanisms whereby KSHV
induces HO-1, will be important for the design and implementation of such a
strategy.

Copyright © 2015 Botto et al.

PMCID: PMC4462627
PMID: 26045540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Genes Cells. 2015 Jul;20(7):590-600. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12249. Epub 2015 May 18.

Heme-mediated inhibition of Bach1 regulates the liver specificity and transience 
of the Nrf2-dependent induction of zebrafish heme oxygenase 1.

Fuse Y(1), Nakajima H(1), Nakajima-Takagi Y(1), Nakajima O(2), Kobayashi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, 305-8575, Japan. (2)Research Laboratory for
Molecular Genetics, Yamagata University, Yamagata, 990-9585, Japan.

The induction of the gene encoding heme oxygenase 1 (Hmox1, HO-1) by Nrf2 is
unique compared with other Nrf2 targets. We previously showed that the
Nrf2a-mediated induction of zebrafish hmox1a was liver specific and transient. We
screened transcription factors that could repress the induction of hmox1a but not
other Nrf2a targets and concluded that Bach1b was a prime candidate. In
bach1b-knocked-down larvae, the induction of hmox1a was observed ectopically in
nonliver tissues and persisted longer than normal fish, suggesting that Bach1 is 
the only regulator for both the liver-specific and transient induction of hmox1a.
Co-knockdown of bach1b with its co-ortholog bach1a enhanced these effects. To
determine why Bach1 could not repress the hmox1a induction in the liver, we
analyzed the effects of a heme biosynthesis inhibitor, succinylacetone, and a
heme precursor, hemin. Succinylacetone decreased the Nrf2a-mediated hmox1a
induction, whereas pre-treatment with hemin caused ectopic induction of hmox1a in
nonliver tissues, implying that the high heme levels in the liver may release the
repressive activity of Bach1. Our results suggested that Bach1 regulates the
liver specificity and transience of the Nrf2a-dependent induction of hmox1a and
that heme mediates this regulation through Bach1 inhibition based on its level in
each tissue.

© 2015 The Molecular Biology Society of Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25982796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Free Radic Biol Med. 2015 Aug;85:183-96. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2015.04.024. Epub 2015 Apr 28.

Cis-regulatory elements involved in species-specific transcriptional regulation
of the SVCT1 gene in rat and human hepatoma cells.

Muñoz A(1), Villagrán M(1), Guzmán P(1), Solíz C(1), Gatica M(1), Aylwin C(1),
Sweet K(1), Maldonado M(1), Escobar E(1), Reyes AM(2), Toledo JR(1), Sánchez
O(3), Oñate SA(4), Carlos Vera J(5), Rivas CI(6).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiopatología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de
Concepción, Concepción, Bio-Bio 4070386, Chile. (2)Instituto de Bioquímica y
Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Austral de Chile, Campus Isla
Teja, Valdivia, Chile. (3)Departamento de Farmacología, Facultad de Ciencias
Biológicas, Universidad de Concepción, Concepción, Bio-Bio 4070386, Chile.
(4)Departamento de Especialidades Médicas, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de
Concepción, Concepción, Bio-Bio 4070386, Chile. (5)Departamento de
Fisiopatología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Concepción, Concepción,
Bio-Bio 4070386, Chile. Electronic address: juvera@udec.cl. (6)Departamento de
Fisiopatología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Concepción, Concepción,
Bio-Bio 4070386, Chile. Electronic address: corivas@udec.cl.

Ascorbic acid is transported into cells by the sodium-coupled vitamin C
transporters (SVCTs). Recently, we obtained evidence of differential regulation
of SVCT expression in response to acute oxidative stress in cells from species
that differ in their capacity to synthesize vitamin C, with a marked decrease in 
SVCT1 mRNA and protein levels in rat hepatoma cells that was not observed in
human hepatoma cells. To better understand the regulatory aspects involved, we
performed a structural and functional analysis of the proximal promoter of the
SVCT1 rat gene. We cloned a 1476-bp segment containing the proximal promoter of
the rat SVCT1 gene and generated deletion-derived truncated promoters of
decreasing sizes and mutant promoters by modification of consensus binding sites 
for transcription factors by site-directed mutagenesis. We next analyzed their
capacity to direct the transcription of a reporter gene after transfection into
rat H4IIE and human HepG2 hepatoma cells, in experiments involving the
coexpression of transcription factors whose consensus binding sequences are
present in the SVCT1 promoter. This analysis revealed the presence of two
critical cis-regulatory elements of the transcriptional activity of the rat SVCT1
gene promoter, sites containing consensus sequences for the binding of the
transcription factors Bach1 and HNF4 that are not present in equivalent locations
in the human SVCT1 gene promoter. Moreover, a consensus site for HNF1 that is
crucial for the regulation of the human SVCT1 promoter is present in the SVCT1
rat promoter but has no effect on its transcriptional activity. These findings
imply that regulation of vitamin C metabolism in the rat, a species with the
capacity to synthesize large amounts of ascorbic acid, may differ from that of
humans, a species that must obtain ascorbic acid from the diet through a
transport mechanism that depends on proper SVCT1 expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25933589  [PubMed - in process]


31. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Apr;150(3):467-71. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3343-1. 
Epub 2015 Mar 18.

Note of clarification of data in the paper entitled association between BRIP1
(BACH1) polymorphisms and breast cancer risk.

Wang Y(1), Yang H, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Henan Center for Disease Control and Prevention,
No.105 of South Nongye Road, Zhengzhou, 450016, China, wangyd76@163.com.

Comment on
    Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Jan;137(2):553-8.

With great interest, we read the recent article entitled "Association between
BRIP1 (BACH1) polymorphisms and breast cancer risk: a meta-analysis" published
online in Pabalan et al. (Breast Cancer Res Treat 137:553-558, 2013). This
article suggests that overall summary estimates imply no associations but suggest
susceptibility among carriers of the C47G polymorphism and Pro-Ser genotype in
premenopausal women. The result is encouraging. Nevertheless, several key issues 
in this meta-analysis are worth noticing.

PMID: 25783186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Arch Dermatol Res. 2015 Jul;307(5):385-96. doi: 10.1007/s00403-015-1554-2. Epub
2015 Feb 24.

The role of transcription factor Nrf2 in skin cells metabolism.

Gegotek A(1), Skrzydlewska E.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Analytical Chemistry, Medical University of Bialystok,
Mickiewicza 2D, 15-222, Bialystok, Poland, agnieszkagegotek@o2.pl.

Skin, which is a protective layer of the body, is in constant contact with
physical and chemical environmental factors. Exposure of the skin to highly
adverse conditions often leads to oxidative stress. Moreover, it has been
observed that skin cells are also exposed to reactive oxygen species generated
during cell metabolism particularly in relation to the synthesis of melanin or
the metabolism in immune system cells. However, skin cells have special features 
that protect them against oxidative modifications including transcription factor 
Nrf2, which is responsible for the transcription of the antioxidant protein genes
such as antioxidant enzymes, small molecular antioxidant proteins or
interleukins, and multidrug response protein. In the present study, the
mechanisms of Nrf2 activation have been compared in the cells forming the various
layers of the skin: keratinocytes, melanocytes, and fibroblasts. The primary
mechanism of control of Nrf2 activity is its binding by cytoplasmic inhibitor
Keap1, while cells have also other controlling mechanisms, such as
phosphorylation of Nrf2 and modifications of its activators (e.g., Maf, IKKß) or 
inhibitors (e.g., Bach1, caveolae, TGF-ß). Moreover, there are a number of drugs 
(e.g., ketoconazole) used in the pharmacotherapy of skin diseases based on the
activation of Nrf2, but they may also induce oxidative stress. Therefore, it is
important to look for compounds that cause a selective activation of Nrf2
particularly natural substances such as curcumin, sulforaphane, or extracts from 
the broccoli leaves without side effects. These findings could be helpful in the 
searching for new drugs for people with vitiligo or even melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4469773
PMID: 25708189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Cell Mol Med. 2015 May;19(5):924-33. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12401. Epub 2015 Feb 16.

Protective effect of heme oxygenase induction in ethinylestradiol-induced
cholestasis.

Muchova L(1), Vanova K, Suk J, Micuda S, Dolezelova E, Fuksa L, Cerny D, Farghali
H, Zelenkova M, Lenicek M, Wong RJ, Vreman HJ, Vitek L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, 1st Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.

Estrogen-induced cholestasis is characterized by impaired hepatic uptake and
biliary bile acids secretion because of changes in hepatocyte transporter
expression. The induction of heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX1), the inducible isozyme in
heme catabolism, is mediated via the Bach1/Nrf2 pathway, and protects livers from
toxic, oxidative and inflammatory insults. However, its role in cholestasis
remains unknown. Here, we investigated the effects of HMOX1 induction by heme on 
ethinylestradiol-induced cholestasis and possible underlying mechanisms. Wistar
rats were given ethinylestradiol (5 mg/kg s.c.) for 5 days. HMOX1 was induced by 
heme (15 µmol/kg i.p.) 24 hrs prior to ethinylestradiol. Serum cholestatic
markers, hepatocyte and renal membrane transporter expression, and biliary and
urinary bile acids excretion were quantified. Ethinylestradiol significantly
increased cholestatic markers (P = 0.01), decreased biliary bile acid excretion
(39%, P = 0.01), down-regulated hepatocyte transporters
(Ntcp/Oatp1b2/Oatp1a4/Mrp2, P = 0.05), and up-regulated Mrp3 (348%, P = 0.05).
Heme pre-treatment normalized cholestatic markers, increased biliary bile acid
excretion (167%, P = 0.05) and up-regulated hepatocyte transporter expression.
Moreover, heme induced Mrp3 expression in control (319%, P = 0.05) and
ethinylestradiol-treated rats (512%, P = 0.05). In primary rat hepatocytes, Nrf2 
silencing completely abolished heme-induced Mrp3 expression. Additionally, heme
significantly increased urinary bile acid clearance via up-regulation (Mrp2/Mrp4)
or down-regulation (Mrp3) of renal transporters (P = 0.05). We conclude that
HMOX1 induction by heme increases hepatocyte transporter expression, subsequently
stimulating bile flow in cholestasis. Also, heme stimulates hepatic Mrp3
expression via a Nrf2-dependent mechanism. Bile acids transported by Mrp3 to the 
plasma are highly cleared into the urine, resulting in normal plasma bile acid
levels. Thus, HMOX1 induction may be a potential therapeutic strategy for the
treatment of ethinylestradiol-induced cholestasis.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4420596
PMID: 25683492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(3):342-53. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.987614.

FANCD2, FANCJ and BRCA2 cooperate to promote replication fork recovery
independently of the Fanconi Anemia core complex.

Raghunandan M(1), Chaudhury I, Kelich SL, Hanenberg H, Sobeck A.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biochemistry; Molecular Biology and Biophysics ; University of
Minnesota ; Minneapolis , MN USA.

Fanconi Anemia (FA) is an inherited multi-gene cancer predisposition syndrome
that is characterized on the cellular level by a hypersensitivity to DNA
interstrand crosslinks (ICLs). To repair these lesions, the FA pathway proteins
are thought to act in a linear hierarchy: Following ICL detection, an upstream FA
core complex monoubiquitinates the central FA pathway members FANCD2 and FANCI,
followed by their recruitment to chromatin. Chromatin-bound monoubiquitinated
FANCD2 and FANCI subsequently coordinate DNA repair factors including the
downstream FA pathway members FANCJ and FANCD1/BRCA2 to repair the DNA ICL.
Importantly, we recently showed that FANCD2 has additional independent roles: it 
binds chromatin and acts in concert with the BLM helicase complex to promote the 
restart of aphidicolin (APH)-stalled replication forks, while suppressing the
firing of new replication origins. Here, we show that FANCD2 fulfills these roles
independently of the FA core complex-mediated monoubiquitination step. Following 
APH treatment, nonubiquitinated FANCD2 accumulates on chromatin, recruits the BLM
complex, and promotes robust replication fork recovery regardless of the absence 
or presence of a functional FA core complex. In contrast, the downstream FA
pathway members FANCJ and BRCA2 share FANCD2's role in replication fork restart
and the suppression of new origin firing. Our results support a non-linear FA
pathway model at stalled replication forks, where the nonubiquitinated FANCD2
isoform - in concert with FANCJ and BRCA2 - fulfills a specific function in
promoting efficient replication fork recovery independently of the FA core
complex.

PMCID: PMC4614542
PMID: 25659033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Crit Rev Oncog. 2014;19(6):417-30.

Genetic and epigenetic control of RKIP transcription.

Datar I(1), Tegegne H(1), Qin K(1), Al-Mulla F(2), Bitar MS(3), Trumbly RJ(1),
Yeung KC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cancer Biology, University of Toledo, College
of Medicine, Health Science Campus, Toledo, Ohio. (2)Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Pathology, Kuwait University Health Sciences Centre, Safat, Kuwait.
(3)Kuwait University, Faculty of Medicine, Safat, Kuwait.

Raf kinase inhibitory protein (RKIP) is known to modulate key signaling cascades 
and regulate normal physiological processes such as cellular proliferation,
differentiation, and apoptosis. The expression of RKIP is found to be
downregulated in several cancer metastases and the repressed RKIP expression can 
be reactivated on treatment with chemotherapeutic agents. RKIP is a proven tumor 
metastasis suppressor gene and investigating the mechanisms of transcriptional
regulation of RKIP is therefore of immense clinical importance. In this review,
we discuss the basal expression of RKIP in various tissues and the genetic
aspects of the RKIP chromosomal locus including the structure of the RKIP
promoter as well as gene regulatory elements such as enhancers. We also review
the genetic and epigenetic modulation of RKIP transcription through EZH2, a
component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and sequence specific
transcription factors (TFs) BACH1 and Snail. Emerging experimental evidence
supports a unifying model in which both these TFs repress RKIP transcription in
cancers by recruiting the EZH2 containing repressive complex to the proximal RKIP
promoter. Finally, we review the known mechanisms employed by different types of 
chemotherapeutic agents to activate RKIP expression in cancer cells.

PMID: 25597352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 20;290(8):5174-89. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.634923. Epub 2015 
Jan 5.

A distinct triplex DNA unwinding activity of ChlR1 helicase.

Guo M(1), Hundseth K(1), Ding H(1), Vidhyasagar V(1), Inoue A(2), Nguyen CH(3),
Zain R(4), Lee JS(1), Wu Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
Saskatchewan S7N 5E5, Canada. (2)the Department of Chemical Biology and
Therapeutics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105.
(3)UMR176 CNRS-Institut Curie, Laboratoire de Pharmacochimie, Centre
Universitaire, 91405 Orsay, France, and. (4)the Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Clinical Research Center, Karolinska Institutet, 141 86 Huddinge,
Stockholm, Sweden. (5)From the Department of Biochemistry, University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5E5, Canada, yuliang.wu@usask.ca.

Mutations in the human ChlR1 (DDX11) gene are associated with a unique genetic
disorder known as Warsaw breakage syndrome characterized by cellular defects in
genome maintenance. The DNA triplex helix structures that form by Hoogsteen or
reverse Hoogsteen hydrogen bonding are examples of alternate DNA structures that 
can be a source of genomic instability. In this study, we have examined the
ability of human ChlR1 helicase to destabilize DNA triplexes. Biochemical studies
demonstrated that ChlR1 efficiently melted both intermolecular and intramolecular
DNA triplex substrates in an ATP-dependent manner. Compared with other substrates
such as replication fork and G-quadruplex DNA, triplex DNA was a preferred
substrate for ChlR1. Also, compared with FANCJ, a helicase of the same family,
the triplex resolving activity of ChlR1 is unique. On the other hand, the mutant 
protein from a Warsaw breakage syndrome patient failed to unwind these triplexes.
A previously characterized triplex DNA-specific antibody (Jel 466) bound triplex 
DNA structures and inhibited ChlR1 unwinding activity. Moreover, cellular assays 
demonstrated that there were increased triplex DNA content and double-stranded
breaks in ChlR1-depleted cells, but not in FANCJ(-/-) cells, when cells were
treated with a triplex stabilizing compound benzoquinoquinoxaline, suggesting
that ChlR1 melting of triple-helix structures is distinctive and physiologically 
important to defend genome integrity. On the basis of our results, we conclude
that the abundance of ChlR1 known to exist in vivo is likely to be a strong
deterrent to the stability of triplexes that can potentially form in the human
genome.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4335251
PMID: 25561740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Genes (Basel). 2014 Dec 24;6(1):1-21. doi: 10.3390/genes6010001.

Down-Regulation of miR-129-5p and the let-7 Family in Neuroendocrine Tumors and
Metastases Leads to Up-Regulation of Their Targets Egr1, G3bp1, Hmga2 and Bach1.

Døssing KB(1), Binderup T(2), Kaczkowski B(3), Jacobsen A(4), Rossing M(5),
Winther O(6), Federspiel B(7), Knigge U(8), Kjær A(2), Friis-Hansen L(9).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine, Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen,
Denmark. kristina@doessing.dk. (2)Department of Clinical Physiology, Nuclear
Medicine and PET, Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.
ulrich.knigge@rh.regionh.dk. (3)The Bioinformatics Center, Department of Biology 
and Biotech and Research Innovation Centre, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen,
Denmark. b.kaczkowski@gmail.com. (4)The Bioinformatics Center, Department of
Biology and Biotech and Research Innovation Centre, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200
Copenhagen, Denmark. andersmbj@gmail.com. (5)Center for Genomic Medicine,
Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.
maria.rossing@rh.regionh.dk. (6)DTU Informatics, Technical University of Denmark,
Anker Engelunds Vej 1, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. ole.winther@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Pathology, Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen,
Denmark. birgitte.federspiel@rh.regionh.dk. (8)Cluster for Molecular Imaging,
Faculty of Health Sciences, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.
ulrich.knigge@rh.regionh.dk. (9)Center for Genomic Medicine, Rigshospitalet,
Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. lejf@regionsjaelland.dk.

Expression of miRNAs in Neuroendocrine Neoplasms (NEN) is poorly characterized.
We therefore wanted to examine the miRNA expression in Neuroendocrine Tumors
(NETs), and identify their targets and importance in NET carcinogenesis. miRNA
expression in six NEN primary tumors, six NEN metastases and four normal
intestinal tissues was characterized using miRNA arrays, and validated by in-situ
hybridization and qPCR. Among the down-regulated miRNAs miR-129-5p and the
let-7f/let-7 family, were selected for further characterization. Transfection of 
miR-129-5p inhibited growth of a pulmonary and an intestinal carcinoid cell line.
Analysis of mRNA expression changes identified EGR1 and G3BP1 as miR-129-5p
targets. They were validated by luciferase assay and western blotting, and found 
robustly expressed in NETs by immunohistochemistry. Knockdown of EGR1 and G3BP1
mimicked the growth inhibition induced by miR-129-5p. let-7 overexpression
inhibited growth of carcinoid cell lines, and let-7 inhibition increased protein 
content of the transcription factor BACH1 and its targets MMP1 and HMGA2, all
known to promote bone metastases. Immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that
let-7 targets are highly expressed in NETs and metastases. We found
down-regulation of miR-129-5p and the let-7 family, and identified new
neuroendocrine specific targets for these miRNAs, which contributes to the growth
and metastatic potential of these tumors.

PMCID: PMC4377830
PMID: 25546138  [PubMed]


38. Metallomics. 2015 Feb;7(2):309-21. doi: 10.1039/c4mt00246f.

ApoHRP-based assay to measure intracellular regulatory heme.

Atamna H(1), Brahmbhatt M, Atamna W, Shanower GA, Dhahbi JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, TCMC, Scranton, PA, USA.

The majority of the heme-binding proteins possess a "heme-pocket" that stably
binds to heme. Usually known as housekeeping heme-proteins, they participate in a
variety of metabolic reactions (e.g., catalase). Heme also binds with lower
affinity to the "Heme-Regulatory Motifs" (HRM) in specific regulatory proteins.
This type of heme binding is known as exchangeable or regulatory heme (RH). Heme 
binding to HRM proteins regulates their function (e.g., Bach1). Although there
are well-established methods for assaying total cellular heme (e.g.,
heme-proteins plus RH), currently there is no method available for measuring RH
independent of the total heme (TH). The current study describes and validates a
new method to measure intracellular RH. This method is based on the
reconstitution of apo-horseradish peroxidase (apoHRP) with heme to form holoHRP. 
The resulting holoHRP activity is then measured with a colorimetric substrate.
The results show that apoHRP specifically binds RH but not with heme from
housekeeping heme-proteins. The RH assay detects intracellular RH. Furthermore,
using conditions that create positive (hemin) or negative (N-methyl
protoporphyrin IX) controls for heme in normal human fibroblasts (IMR90), the RH 
assay shows that RH is dynamic and independent of TH. We also demonstrated that
short-term exposure to subcytotoxic concentrations of lead (Pb), mercury (Hg), or
amyloid-ß (Aß) significantly alters intracellular RH with little effect on TH. In
conclusion the RH assay is an effective assay to investigate intracellular RH
concentration and demonstrates that RH represents ~6% of total heme in IMR90
cells.

PMCID: PMC4326600
PMID: 25525887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Nutr Metab (Lond). 2014 Dec 8;11(1):55. doi: 10.1186/1743-7075-11-55. eCollection
2014.

Homocysteine downregulates gene expression of heme oxygenase-1 in hepatocytes.

Luo X(1), Xiao L(2), Yang H(1), Zhang R(3), Jiang M(2), Ni J(2), Lei T(2), Wang
N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, School of Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University,
Xi'an, 710061 China ; Department of Public Health, School of Medicine, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061 China ; Nutrition and Food Safety Engineering 
Research Center of Shaanxi Province, School of Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, 710061 China. (2)Cardiovascular Research Center, School of
Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061 China. (3)Department of Public
Health, School of Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061 China ;
Nutrition and Food Safety Engineering Research Center of Shaanxi Province, School
of Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061 China. (4)Cardiovascular
Research Center, School of Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061
China ; Institute of Cardiovascular Science, Peking University, Beijing, 100191
China.

BACKGROUND: Hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) is an independent risk factor for liver
diseases, such as fatty liver and hepatic fibrosis. However, the mechanisms
underlying this pro-oxidative effect of homocysteine (Hcy) in hepatocytes remain 
largely unknown. Thus, we investigated the effect of Hcy on the gene expression
of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), the primary rate-limiting enzyme in heme catabolism
and a key anti-oxidant detoxification enzyme in maintaining cellular redox
homeostasis.
METHODS: In vivo, twenty male C57BL/6 mice at 8 weeks of age were randomly
divided into two groups. One group was fed a chow diet (chow group; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10), the 
other group of mice was fed a methionine-supplemented diet (Met group,
1 mg kg(-1) day(-1) L-methionine in drinking water; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10) for 4 weeks. In
vitro, HepG2 cells were stimulated with different doses of homocysteine (Hcy).
RESULTS: Four weeks' methionine supplementation caused a significant increase of 
plasma Hcy concentration and a decrease of HO-1 expression in the liver of
C57BL/6 mice than mice received chow diet. Besides, SOD enzyme activities were
impaired and the level of oxidative stress markers, such as malondialdehyde (MDA)
were elevated in the liver from mice supplemented with methionine compared with
control mice. In cultured hepatocytes, Hcy treatment reduced both the mRNA and
protein levels of HO-1 dose-dependently. However, Hcy had no effect on the gene
expression of Nrf2, the major transcriptional regulator of HO-1. Instead, Hcy
induced the expression of Bach1, a transcriptional repressor of HO-1. In
addition, Hcy stimulated the nuclear localization of Bach1 but prevented that of 
Nrf2. Furthermore, we found that knockdown of Bach1 attenuated the suppression of
the HO-1 expression by Hcy.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our results demonstrated that Bach1 plays an important
role in Hcy-triggered ROS generations through inhibiting HO-1 expression, likely,
resulting from the disturbed interplay between Bach1 and Nrf2.

PMCID: PMC4268895
PMID: 25520741  [PubMed]


40. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(18):2913-30. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.946858.

A knockdown with smoke model reveals FHIT as a repressor of Heme oxygenase 1.

Boylston JA(1), Brenner C.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biochemistry and Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology;
Carver College of Medicine ; University of Iowa ; Iowa City , IA USA.

Fragile histidine triad (FHIT) gene deletions are among the earliest and most
frequent events in carcinogenesis, particularly in carcinogen-exposed tissues.
Though FHIT has been established as an authentic tumor suppressor, the mechanism 
underlying tumor suppression remains opaque. Most experiments designed to clarify
FHIT function have analyzed the consequence of re-expressing FHIT in
FHIT-negative cells. However, carcinogenesis occurs in cells that transition from
FHIT-positive to FHIT-negative. To better understand cancer development, we
induced FHIT loss in human bronchial epithelial cells with RNA interference.
Because FHIT is a demonstrated target of carcinogens in cigarette smoke, we
combined FHIT silencing with cigarette smoke extract (CSE) exposure and measured 
gene expression consequences by RNA microarray. The data indicate that FHIT loss 
enhances the expression of a set of oxidative stress response genes after
exposure to CSE, including the cytoprotective enzyme heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1) at 
the RNA and protein levels. Data are consistent with a mechanism in which Fhit
protein is required for accumulation of the transcriptional repressor of HMOX1,
Bach1 protein. We posit that by allowing superinduction of oxidative stress
response genes, loss of FHIT creates a survival advantage that promotes
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4614990
PMID: 25486479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(23):3685-97. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.964973.

BRCA1 and FancJ cooperatively promote interstrand crosslinker induced centrosome 
amplification through the activation of polo-like kinase 1.

Zou J(1), Zhang D, Qin G, Chen X, Wang H, Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)a Basic Biomedical Science Division; Sanford School of Medicine ; University
of South Dakota ; Vermillion , SD USA.

DNA damage response (DDR) and the centrosome cycle are 2 of the most critical
cellular processes affecting the genome stability in animal cells. Yet the
cross-talks between DDR and the centrosome are poorly understood. Here we showed 
that deficiency of the breast cancer 1, early onset gene (BRCA1) induces
centrosome amplification in non-stressed cells as previously reported while
attenuating DNA damage-induced centrosome amplification (DDICA) in cells
experiencing prolonged genotoxic stress. Mechanistically, the function of BRCA1
in promoting DDICA is through binding and recruiting polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) to
the centrosome. In a recent study, we showed that FancJ also suppresses
centrosome amplification in non-stressed cells while promoting DDICA in both
hydroxyurea and mitomycin C treated cells. FancJ is a key component of the BRCA1 
B-complex. Here, we further demonstrated that, in coordination with BRCA1, FancJ 
promotes DDICA by recruiting both BRCA1 and PLK1 to the centrosome in the DNA
damaged cells. Thus, we have uncovered a novel role of BRCA1 and FancJ in the
regulation of DDICA. Dysregulation of DDR or centrosome cycle leads to
aneuploidy, which is frequently seen in both solid and hematological cancers.
BRCA1 and FancJ are known tumor suppressors and have well-recognized functions in
DNA damage checkpoint and DNA repair. Together with our recent findings, we
demonstrated here that BRCA1 and FancJ also play an important role in centrosome 
cycle especially in DDICA. DDICA is thought to be an alternative fail-safe
mechanism to prevent cells experiencing severe DNA damage from becoming
carcinogenic. Therefore, BRCA1 and FancJ are potential liaisons linking early DDR
with the DDICA. We propose that together with their functions in DDR, the role of
BRCA1 and FancJ in the activation of DDICA is also crucial for their tumor
suppression functions in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4612125
PMID: 25483079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Free Radic Biol Med. 2015 Jan;78:224-32. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.10.579. Epub 2014 Nov 5.

Cell-type-specific downregulation of heme oxygenase-1 by lipopolysaccharide via
Bach1 in primary human mononuclear cells.

Dorresteijn MJ(1), Paine A(2), Zilian E(2), Fenten MG(1), Frenzel E(3),
Janciauskiene S(3), Figueiredo C(2), Eiz-Vesper B(2), Blasczyk R(2), Dekker D(4),
Pennings B(5), Scharstuhl A(4), Smits P(4), Larmann J(6), Theilmeier G(6), van
der Hoeven JG(7), Wagener FA(8), Pickkers P(7), Immenschuh S(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, 6500
HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Radboud 
University Medical Center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Radboud Institute
for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, 6500 HB Nijmegen,
The Netherlands. (2)Institute for Transfusion Medicine, Hannover Medical School, 
30625 Hannover, Germany. (3)Department of Internal Medicine-Respiratory Medicine,
Hannover Medical School, 30635 Hannover, Germany. (4)Department of Pharmacology
and Toxicology, Radboud University Medical Center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The
Netherlands; Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University
Medical Center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Pharmacology 
and Toxicology, Radboud University Medical Center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The
Netherlands; Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University
Medical Center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Department of Orthodontics and
Craniofacial Biology, Radboud University Medical Center, 6500 Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. (6)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine,
Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany. (7)Department of Intensive Care
Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands;
Nijmegen Center for Infectious Diseases, Radboud University Medical Center, 6500 
HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (8)Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud University Medical Center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Department 
of Orthodontics and Craniofacial Biology, Radboud University Medical Center, 6500
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (9)Institute for Transfusion Medicine, Hannover
Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany. Electronic address:
Immenschuh.Stephan@mh-hannover.de.

Heme oxygenase (HO)-1 is the inducible isoform of the heme-degrading enzyme HO,
which is upregulated by multiple stress stimuli. HO-1 has major immunomodulatory 
and anti-inflammatory effects via its cell-type-specific functions in mononuclear
cells. Contradictory findings have been reported on HO-1 regulation by the
Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 ligand lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in these cells.
Therefore, we reinvestigated the effects of LPS on HO-1 gene expression in human 
and murine mononuclear cells in vitro and in vivo. Remarkably, LPS downregulated 
HO-1 in primary human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), CD14(+)
monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, and granulocytes, but upregulated this
enzyme in primary murine macrophages and human monocytic leukemia cell lines.
Furthermore, experiments with human CD14(+) monocytes revealed that activation of
other TLRs including TLR1, -2, -5, -6, -8, and -9 decreased HO-1 mRNA expression.
LPS-dependent downregulation of HO-1 was specific, because expression of
cyclooxygenase-2, NADP(H)-quinone oxidoreductase-1, and peroxiredoxin-1 was
increased under the same experimental conditions. Notably, LPS upregulated
expression of Bach1, a critical transcriptional repressor of HO-1. Moreover,
knockdown of this nuclear factor enhanced basal and LPS-dependent HO-1 expression
in mononuclear cells. Finally, downregulation of HO-1 in response to LPS was
confirmed in PBMCs from human individuals subjected to experimental endotoxemia. 
In conclusion, LPS downregulates HO-1 expression in primary human mononuclear
cells via a Bach1-mediated pathway. As LPS-dependent HO-1 regulation is
cell-type- and species-specific, experimental findings in cell lines and animal
models need careful interpretation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Virus Res. 2015 Jan 22;196:105-12. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2014.11.010. Epub 2014
Nov 20.

Let-7c overexpression inhibits dengue virus replication in human hepatoma Huh-7
cells.

Escalera-Cueto M(1), Medina-Martínez I(2), del Angel RM(3), Berumen-Campos J(2), 
Gutiérrez-Escolano AL(3), Yocupicio-Monroy M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Posgrado en Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Autónoma de la Ciudad de México,
Distrito Federal, Plantel del Valle, San Lorenzo 290, Col. Del Valle, México DF, 
CP 03100, Mexico. (2)Laboratorio de Medicina Genómica, Hospital General de
México, Distrito Federal, Mexico. (3)Departamento de Infectómica y Patogénesis
Molecular, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del IPN, Distrito
Federal, Mexico. (4)Posgrado en Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Autónoma de la
Ciudad de México, Distrito Federal, Plantel del Valle, San Lorenzo 290, Col. Del 
Valle, México DF, CP 03100, Mexico. Electronic address: martha.ym1@gmail.com.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) constitute an important class of non-coding RNA implicated in 
gene expression regulation. More than 1900 miRNA molecules have been identified
in humans and their modulation during viral infection and it is recognized to
play a role in latency regulation or in establishing an antiviral state. The
liver cells are targets during DENV infection, and alteration of liver functions 
contributes to severe disease. In this work the miRNAs expression profile of the 
human hepatoma cell line, Huh-7, infected with DENV-2 was determined using
microarray and real-time PCR. Let-7c is one of the miRNAs up-regulated during
DENV infection in the hepatic Huh-7 as well as in the macrophage-monocytic cell
line U937-DC-SIGN. Let-7c overexpression down-regulates both DENV-2 and DENV-4
infection. Additionally, we found that the transcription factor BACH1, a let-7c
target, is also down-regulated during DENV infection. In accordance with this
finding, HO-1, the main responsive factor of BACH1 was found up-regulated. The
up-regulation of HO-1 may contribute to the stress oxidative response in infected
cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Dec 16;42(22):13599-614. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1169. Epub
2014 Nov 17.

Non-coding RNA derived from the region adjacent to the human HO-1 E2 enhancer
selectively regulates HO-1 gene induction by modulating Pol II binding.

Maruyama A(1), Mimura J(1), Itoh K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stress Response Science, Hirosaki University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 5 Zaifu-cho, Hirosaki 036-8562, Japan. (2)Department of Stress Response
Science, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine, 5 Zaifu-cho, Hirosaki
036-8562, Japan itohk@cc.hirosaki-u.ac.jp.

Recent studies have disclosed the function of enhancer RNAs (eRNAs), which are
long non-coding RNAs transcribed from gene enhancer regions, in transcriptional
regulation. However, it remains unclear whether eRNAs are involved in the
regulation of human heme oxygenase-1 gene (HO-1) induction. Here, we report that 
multiple nuclear-enriched eRNAs are transcribed from the regions adjacent to two 
human HO-1 enhancers (i.e. the distal E2 and proximal E1 enhancers), and some of 
these eRNAs are induced by the oxidative stress-causing reagent diethyl maleate
(DEM). We demonstrated that the expression of one forward direction (5' to 3')
eRNA transcribed from the human HO-1 E2 enhancer region (named human HO-1enhancer
RNA E2-3; hereafter called eRNA E2-3) was induced by DEM in an NRF2-dependent
manner in HeLa cells. Conversely, knockdown of BACH1, a repressor of HO-1
transcription, further increased DEM-inducible eRNA E2-3 transcription as well as
HO-1 expression. In addition, we showed that knockdown of eRNA E2-3 selectively
down-regulated DEM-induced HO-1 expression. Furthermore, eRNA E2-3 knockdown
attenuated DEM-induced Pol II binding to the promoter and E2 enhancer regions of 
HO-1 without affecting NRF2 recruitment to the E2 enhancer. These findings
indicate that eRNAE2-3 is functional and is required for HO-1 induction.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4267629
PMID: 25404134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;44(4):1107-20. doi: 10.3233/JAD-141254.

Bach1 overexpression in Down syndrome correlates with the alteration of the
HO-1/BVR-a system: insights for transition to Alzheimer's disease.

Di Domenico F(1), Pupo G(1), Mancuso C(2), Barone E(1), Paolini F(3), Arena A(1),
Blarzino C(1), Schmitt FA(4), Head E(5), Butterfield DA(6), Perluigi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy.
(2)Institute of Pharmacology, Catholic University School of Medicine, Rome,
Italy. (3)Laboratory of Virology, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome,
Italy. (4)Sanders-Brown Centre of Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY,
USA Department of Neurology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.
(5)Sanders-Brown Centre of Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA
Department of Pharmacology & Nutritional Sciences, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY, USA. (6)Sanders-Brown Centre of Aging, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY, USA Department of Chemistry, University of Kentucky, Lexington,
KY, USA.

Bach1, among the genes encoded on chromosome 21, is a transcription repressor,
which binds to antioxidant response elements of DNA thus inhibiting the
transcription of specific genes involved in the cell stress response including
heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). HO-1 and its partner, biliverdin reductase-A (BVR-A),
are upregulated in response to oxidative stress in order to protect cells against
further damage. Since oxidative stress is an early event in Down syndrome (DS)
and might contribute to the development of multiple deleterious DS phenotypes,
including Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology, we investigated the status of the
Bach1/HO-1/BVR-A axis in DS and its possible implications for the development of 
AD. In the present study, we showed increased total Bach1 protein levels in the
brain of all DS cases coupled with reduced induction of brain HO-1. Furthermore, 
increased oxidative stress could, on one hand, overcome the inhibitory effects of
Bach1 and, on the other hand, promote BVR-A impairment. Our data show that the
development of AD in DS subjects is characterized by (i) increased Bach1 total
and poly-ubiquitination; (ii) increased HO-1 protein levels; and (iii) increased 
nitration of BVR-A followed by reduced activity. To corroborate our findings, we 
analyzed Bach1, HO-1, and BVR-A status in the Ts65Dn mouse model at 3 (young) and
15 (old) months of age. The above data support the hypothesis that the
dysregulation of HO-1/BVR-A system contributes to the early increase of oxidative
stress in DS and provide potential mechanistic paths involved in the
neurodegenerative process and AD development.

PMCID: PMC4677575
PMID: 25391381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Nat Immunol. 2014 Dec;15(12):1171-80. doi: 10.1038/ni.3024. Epub 2014 Oct 26.

The transcription repressors Bach2 and Bach1 promote B cell development by
repressing the myeloid program.

Itoh-Nakadai A(1), Hikota R(2), Muto A(1), Kometani K(3), Watanabe-Matsui M(2),
Sato Y(2), Kobayashi M(2), Nakamura A(2), Miura Y(2), Yano Y(4), Tashiro S(4),
Sun J(4), Ikawa T(5), Ochiai K(6), Kurosaki T(7), Igarashi K(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sendai, Japan. [2] CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Sendai, Japan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan. (3)RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(4)Department of Cellular Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, Graduate School of Biomedical Science, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima,
Japan. (5)Laboratory for Immune Regeneration RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan. (6)1] Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. [2] CREST, Japan Science and
Technology Agency, Sendai, Japan. [3] Center for Regulatory Epigenome and
Diseases, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (7)1]
RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan. [2] WPI
Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

Mature lymphoid cells express the transcription repressor Bach2, which imposes
regulation on humoral and cellular immunity. Here we found critical roles for
Bach2 in the development of cells of the B lineage, commencing from the common
lymphoid progenitor (CLP) stage, with Bach1 as an auxiliary. Overexpression of
Bach2 in pre-pro-B cells deficient in the transcription factor EBF1 and
single-cell analysis of CLPs revealed that Bach2 and Bach1 repressed the
expression of genes important for myeloid cells ('myeloid genes'). Bach2 and
Bach1 bound to presumptive regulatory regions of the myeloid genes. Bach2(hi)
CLPs showed resistance to myeloid differentiation even when cultured under
myeloid conditions. Our results suggest that Bach2 functions with Bach1 and EBF1 
to promote B cell development by repressing myeloid genes in CLPs.

PMID: 25344725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2015 Mar;52(3):387-96. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2014-0263OC.

Oxidative stress regulates CFTR gene expression in human airway epithelial cells 
through a distal antioxidant response element.

Zhang Z(1), Leir SH, Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center, and
Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois.

Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene (CFTR) expression in
human airway epithelial cells involves the recruitment of distal cis-regulatory
elements, which are associated with airway-selective DNase hypersensitive sites
at -44 kb and -35 kb from the gene. The -35-kb site encompasses an enhancer that 
is regulated by the immune mediators interferon regulatory factor 1 and 2 and by 
nuclear factor Y. Here we investigate the -44-kb element, which also has enhancer
activity in vitro in airway epithelial cells but is inactive in intestinal
epithelial cells. This site contains an antioxidant response element (ARE) that
plays a critical role in its function in airway cell lines and primary human
bronchial epithelial cells. The natural antioxidant sulforaphane (SFN) induces
nuclear translocation of nuclear factor, erythroid 2-like 2 (Nrf2), a
transcription factor that regulates genes with AREs in their promoters, many of
which are involved in response to injury. Under normal conditions, the -44-kb ARE
is occupied by the repressor BTB and CNC homology 1, basic leucine zipper
transcription factor (Bach1), and v-Maf avian musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma
oncogene homolog K (MafK) heterodimers. After 2 hours of SFN treatment, Nrf2
displaces these repressive factors and activates CFTR expression. Site-directed
mutagenesis shows that both the ARE and an adjacent NF-<U+03BA>B binding site are
required for activation of the -44-kb element in airway epithelial cells.
Moreover, this element is functionally linked to the -35-kb enhancer in
modulating CFTR expression in response to environmental stresses in the airway.

PMCID: PMC4370264
PMID: 25259561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2014 Dec 15;564:83-8. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2014.09.005. Epub 
2014 Sep 18.

Heme oxygenase-1 and anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages.

Naito Y(1), Takagi T(2), Higashimura Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of Medical Science,
Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.
Electronic address: ynaito@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp. (2)Molecular Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kyoto, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan. (3)Molecular Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kyoto, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan; Department of Food Factor Science, Kyoto 
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) catalyzes the first and rate-limiting enzymatic step of
heme degradation and produces carbon monoxide, free iron, and biliverdin. HO-1, a
stress-inducible protein, is induced by various oxidative and inflammatory
signals. Consequently, HO-1 expression has been regarded as an adaptive cellular 
response against inflammatory response and oxidative injury. Although several
transcriptional factors and signaling cascades are involved in HO-1 regulation,
the two main pathways of Nrf2/Bach1 system and IL-10/HO-1 axis exist in
monocyte/macrophage. Macrophages are broadly divisible into two groups:
pro-inflammatory M1 macrophages and anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages. More
recently, several novel macrophage subsets have been identified including Mhem,
Mox, and M4 macrophages. Of these, M2 macrophages, Mhem, and Mox are HO-1 highly 
expressing macrophages. HO-1 has been recognized as having major immunomodulatory
and anti-inflammatory properties, which have been demonstrated in HO-1 deficient 
mice and human cases of genetic HO-1 deficiency. However, the mechanism
underlying the immunomodulatory actions of HO-1 remains poorly defined. This
review specifically addresses macrophage polarization. The present current
evidence indicates that HO-1 induction mediated by multiple pathways can drive
the phenotypic shift to M2 macrophages and suggests that HO-1 induction in
macrophages is a potential therapeutic approach to immunomodulation in widely
diverse human diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25241054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell. 2014 Sep 18;55(6):904-15. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.08.010. Epub 2014 
Sep 11.

The BRAF oncoprotein functions through the transcriptional repressor MAFG to
mediate the CpG Island Methylator phenotype.

Fang M(1), Ou J(2), Hutchinson L(3), Green MR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA; Programs in Gene Function and Expression and Molecular 
Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(2)Programs in Gene Function and Expression and Molecular Medicine, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (3)Department of
Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. 
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA; Programs in Gene Function and Expression and Molecular 
Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
Electronic address: michael.green@umassmed.edu.

Most colorectal cancers (CRCs) containing activated BRAF (BRAF[V600E]) have a CpG
island methylator phenotype (CIMP) characterized by aberrant hypermethylation of 
many genes, including the mismatch repair gene MLH1. MLH1 silencing results in
microsatellite instability and a hypermutable phenotype. Through an RNAi screen, 
here we identify the transcriptional repressor MAFG as the pivotal factor
required for MLH1 silencing and CIMP in CRCs containing BRAF(V600E). In
BRAF-positive human CRC cell lines and tumors, MAFG is bound at the promoters of 
MLH1 and other CIMP genes, and recruits a corepressor complex that includes its
heterodimeric partner BACH1, the chromatin remodeling factor CHD8, and the DNA
methyltransferase DNMT3B, resulting in hypermethylation and transcriptional
silencing. BRAF(V600E) increases BRAF/MEK/ERK signaling resulting in
phosphorylation and elevated levels of MAFG, which drives DNA binding. Analysis
of transcriptionally silenced CIMP genes in KRAS-positive CRCs indicates that
different oncoproteins direct the assembly of distinct repressor complexes on
common promoters.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4170521
PMID: 25219500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Photochem Photobiol. 2014 Nov-Dec;90(6):1340-8. doi: 10.1111/php.12343. Epub 2014
Oct 27.

Development of refractoriness of HO-1 induction to a second treatment with UVA
radiation and the involvement of Nrf2 in human skin fibroblasts.

Zhong JL(1), Raval CM, Nisar MF, Bian C, Zhang J, Yang L, Tyrrell RM.

Author information: 
(1)The Base of "111 Project" for Biomechanics and Tissue Repair Engineering, Key 
Laboratory of Biorheological Science and Technology, Ministry of Education,
Bioengineering College, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400044, China;
Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Bath, Bath, UK;
Dermatology Institute, Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan,
China.

UVA treatment of cultured human skin fibroblasts (FEK4) has been shown previously
to reduce transcriptional activation of heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) following a
second dose of UVA radiation, a phenomenon known as refractoriness. This study
demonstrates that the levels of HO-1 protein are also reduced after a second dose
of UVA radiation as are Nrf2 levels, and there is less accumulation of Nrf2 in
the nucleus where as Bach1 does accumulate in the nucleus. Cell viability is
further reduced and cell membrane damage increased as compared with a single UVA 
treatment when an initial UVA treatment was followed by a second dose. Knockdown 
of Nrf2 by siRNA (siNrf2) targeting caused additional refractoriness of HO-1
protein induction to a second UVA or heme treatment and this treatment also
further enhanced cell damage by a second dose of UVA radiation. However,
transfection with Nrf2 caused less refractoriness of HO-1 to a second dose of UVA
and reduced cell damage by a second dose of UVA radiation. These findings are
consistent with the proposal that Nrf2 is involved in HO-1 refractoriness and
could serve as a cytoprotective factor against cell damage caused by repeated
exposure to moderate doses of UVA radiation. We propose that protection by the
Nrf2-HO-1 pathway protection may have clinical relevance since human skin is
exposed repeatedly to UVA radiation.

© 2014 The American Society of Photobiology.

PMID: 25213834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Hum Pathol. 2014 Oct;45(10):1995-2005. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.06.012. Epub
2014 Jun 30.

Identification of putative pathogenic microRNA and its downstream targets in
anaplastic lymphoma kinase-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma.

Mehrotra M(1), Medeiros LJ(1), Luthra R(1), Sargent RL(1), Yao H(1), Barkoh
BA(1), Singh R(1), Patel KP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030. (2)Department of Hematopathology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030. Electronic address:
kppatel@mdanderson.org.

Anaplastic large cell lymphomas (ALCL) are tumors of T/null-cell lineage
characterized by uniform CD30 expression. The 2008 World Health Organization
classification subdivided ALCLs into 2 groups: anaplastic lymphoma kinase
(ALK)-positive (established entity) and ALK-negative (proposed new entity) ALCL. 
The genetic basis for the pathogenesis of newly categorized ALK- ALCL is poorly
understood. In this study, we used microRNA microarray analysis to identify
differentially expressed microRNAs in ALK+ and ALK- ALCL. ALK- ALCL showed
significantly higher expression of miR-155 (0.888 ± 0.228) compared with ALK+
ALCL (0.0565 ± 0.009) on microarray and by quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction in ALK- ALCL compared with ALK+ ALCL (P < .05) with a strong
correlation between the 2 platforms (R = 0.9, P < .0003). A novel in situ
hybridization method allows direct visualization of expression patterns and
relative quantitation of miR-155 (mean score, 2.3 versus 1.3; P = .01) for the
first time in tissue sections of ALCL. Among computationally predicted targets of
miR-155, we identified ZNF652 (r = -0.57, P = .05), BACH1 (r = 0.88, P = .02),
RBAK (r = 0.81, P = .05), TRIM32 (r = 0.92, P = .01), E2F2 (r = 0.81, P = .05),
and TP53INP1 (r = -0.31, P = .03) as genes whose expression by quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction correlated significantly with the level of
miR-155 in ALCL tumor tissue.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25128227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 12;289(37):25774-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.552570. Epub
2014 Jul 28.

The Fanconi anemia proteins FANCD2 and FANCJ interact and regulate each other's
chromatin localization.

Chen X(1), Wilson JB(2), McChesney P(1), Williams SA(1), Kwon Y(3), Longerich
S(3), Marriott AS(4), Sung P(3), Jones NJ(4), Kupfer GM(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Pediatrics. (2)the Department of Molecular and
Clinical Cancer Medicine, Institute of Translational Medicine, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool L3 9TA, United Kingdom. (3)Molecular Biophysics and
Biochemistry, Yale University School of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520. (4)the Department of Biochemistry, Institute of
Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, United Kingdom, 
and. (5)From the Departments of Pediatrics, Pathology, and gary.kupfer@yale.edu.

Fanconi anemia is a genetic disease resulting in bone marrow failure, birth
defects, and cancer that is thought to encompass a defect in maintenance of
genomic stability. Mutations in 16 genes (FANCA, B, C, D1, D2, E, F, G, I, J, L, 
M, N, O, P, and Q) have been identified in patients, with the Fanconi anemia
subtype J (FA-J) resulting from homozygous mutations in the FANCJ gene. Here, we 
describe the direct interaction of FANCD2 with FANCJ. We demonstrate the
interaction of FANCD2 and FANCJ in vivo and in vitro by immunoprecipitation in
crude cell lysates and from fractions after gel filtration and with baculovirally
expressed proteins. Mutation of the monoubiquitination site of FANCD2 (K561R)
preserves interaction with FANCJ constitutively in a manner that impedes proper
chromatin localization of FANCJ. FANCJ is necessary for FANCD2 chromatin loading 
and focus formation in response to mitomycin C treatment. Our results suggest not
only that FANCD2 regulates FANCJ chromatin localization but also that FANCJ is
necessary for efficient loading of FANCD2 onto chromatin following DNA damage
caused by mitomycin C treatment.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4162179
PMID: 25070891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2014;2014:757901. doi: 10.1155/2014/757901. Epub 2014 Jun
23.

Bach1 deficiency and accompanying overexpression of heme oxygenase-1 do not
influence aging or tumorigenesis in mice.

Ota K(1), Brydun A(2), Itoh-Nakadai A(2), Sun J(3), Igarashi K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1
Seiryo-machi, Sendai 980-0872, Japan ; Division of Nephrology, Endocrinology, and
Vascular Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1
Seiryo-machi, Sendai 980-0872, Japan. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-machi, Sendai 980-0872, Japan.
(3)Department of Cellular Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan. (4)Department of
Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-machi,
Sendai 980-0872, Japan ; Center for Regulatory Epigenome and Diseases, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-machi, Sendai 980-0872, Japan.

Oxidative stress contributes to both aging and tumorigenesis. The transcription
factor Bach1, a regulator of oxidative stress response, augments oxidative stress
by repressing the expression of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) gene (Hmox1) and
suppresses oxidative stress-induced cellular senescence by restricting the p53
transcriptional activity. Here we investigated the lifelong effects of Bach1
deficiency on mice. Bach1-deficient mice showed longevity similar to wild-type
mice. Although HO-1 was upregulated in the cells of Bach1-deficient animals, the 
levels of ROS in Bach1-deficient HSCs were comparable to those in wild-type
cells. Bach1(-/-); p53(-/-) mice succumbed to spontaneous cancers as frequently
as p53-deficient mice. Bach1 deficiency significantly altered transcriptome in
the liver of the young mice, which surprisingly became similar to that of
wild-type mice during the course of aging. The transcriptome adaptation to Bach1 
deficiency may reflect how oxidative stress response is tuned upon genetic and
environmental perturbations. We concluded that Bach1 deficiency and accompanying 
overexpression of HO-1 did not influence aging or p53 deficiency-driven
tumorigenesis. Our results suggest that it is useful to target Bach1 for acute
injury responses without inducing any apparent deteriorative effect.

PMCID: PMC4094857
PMID: 25050144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2014 Sep;100(9):670-8. doi:
10.1002/bdra.23275. Epub 2014 Jul 21.

Genetic variants in BRIP1 (BACH1) contribute to risk of nonsyndromic cleft lip
with or without cleft palate.

Mostowska A(1), Hozyasz KK, Wójcicki P, Galas-Filipowicz D, Lasota A,
Dunin-Wilczynska I, Lianeri M, Jagodzinski PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

BACKGROUND: The etiology of nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate
(NSCL/P) is very complex and still not well elucidated. Given the critical role
of DNA damage repair in the embryonic development, we decided to test the
hypothesis that polymorphisms of selected DNA repair genes might contribute to
the risk of NSCL/P in the Polish population.
METHODS: Analysis of 36 polymorphisms in 12 DNA damage repair genes (ATM, BLM,
BRCA1, BRIP1, E2F1, MLH1, MRE11A, MSH2, MSH6, NBN, RAD50, and RAD51) was
conducted using TaqMan assays in a group of 263 NSCL/P patients and matched
control group (n = 526).
RESULTS: Statistical analysis of genotyping results revealed that nucleotide
variants in the BRIP1 (BACH1) gene were associated with the risk of NSCL/P. Under
assumption of a dominant model, the calculated odds ratios (ORs) for BRIP1
rs8075370 and rs9897121 were 1.689 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.249-2.282; p 
= 0.0006) and 1.621 (95% CI, 1.200-2.191; p = 0.0016), respectively. These
results were statistically significant even after applying multiple testing
correction. Additional evidence for a causative role of BRIP1 in NSCL/P etiology 
was provided by haplotype analysis. Borderline association with a decreased risk 
of this anomaly was also observed for BLM rs401549 (ORrecessive = 0.406; 95% CI, 
0.223-1.739; p = 0.002) and E2F1 rs2071054 (ORdominant = 0.632; 95% CI,
0.469-0.852; p = 0.003).
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that polymorphic variants of DNA damage repair
genes play a role in the susceptibility to NSCL/P. BRIP1 might be novel candidate
gene for this common developmental anomaly.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25045080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 14;9(7):e101044. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101044.
eCollection 2014.

Induction of heme oxygenase I (HMOX1) by HPP-4382: a novel modulator of Bach1
activity.

Attucks OC(1), Jasmer KJ(2), Hannink M(3), Kassis J(1), Zhong Z(1), Gupta S(1),
Victory SF(1), Guzel M(1), Polisetti DR(1), Andrews R(1), Mjalli AM(1), Kostura
MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)TransTech Pharma LLC, High Point, North Carolina, United States of America.
(2)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri,
United States of America. (3)Biochemistry Department and Life Sciences Center,
University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, United States of America.

Oxidative stress is generated by reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced in
response to metabolic activity and environmental factors. Increased oxidative
stress is associated with the pathophysiology of a broad spectrum of inflammatory
diseases. Cellular response to excess ROS involves the induction of antioxidant
response element (ARE) genes under control of the transcriptional activator Nrf2 
and the transcriptional repressor Bach1. The development of synthetic small
molecules that activate the protective anti-oxidant response network is of major 
therapeutic interest. Traditional small molecules targeting ARE-regulated gene
activation (e.g., bardoxolone, dimethyl fumarate) function by alkylating numerous
proteins including Keap1, the controlling protein of Nrf2. An alternative is to
target the repressor Bach1. Bach1 has an endogenous ligand, heme, that inhibits
Bach1 binding to ARE, thus allowing Nrf2-mediated gene expression including that 
of heme-oxygenase-1 (HMOX1), a well described target of Bach1 repression. In this
report, normal human lung fibroblasts were used to screen a collection of
synthetic small molecules for their ability to induce HMOX1. A class of
HMOX1-inducing compounds, represented by HPP-4382, was discovered. These
compounds are not reactive electrophiles, are not suppressed by N-acetyl
cysteine, and do not perturb either ROS or cellular glutathione. Using RNAi, we
further demonstrate that HPP-4382 induces HMOX1 in an Nrf2-dependent manner.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation verified that HPP-4382 treatment of NHLF cells
reciprocally coordinated a decrease in binding of Bach1 and an increase of Nrf2
binding to the HMOX1 E2 enhancer. Finally we show that HPP-4382 can inhibit Bach1
activity in a reporter assay that measures transcription driven by the human
HMOX1 E2 enhancer. Our results suggest that HPP-4382 is a novel activator of the 
antioxidant response through the modulation of Bach1 binding to the ARE binding
site of target genes.

PMCID: PMC4096395
PMID: 25019514  [PubMed - in process]


56. EMBO J. 2014 Aug 1;33(15):1698-712. doi: 10.15252/embj.201387530. Epub 2014 Jun
25.

Crosstalk between BRCA-Fanconi anemia and mismatch repair pathways prevents
MSH2-dependent aberrant DNA damage responses.

Peng M(1), Xie J(1), Ucher A(2), Stavnezer J(2), Cantor SB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Women's Cancers Program, UMASS Memorial Cancer Center, Worcester, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Women's Cancers Program, UMASS Memorial Cancer
Center, Worcester, MA, USA. (3)Department of Cancer Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Women's Cancers Program, UMASS Memorial Cancer
Center, Worcester, MA, USA Sharon.Cantor@umassmed.edu.

Several proteins in the BRCA-Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway, such as FANCJ, BRCA1,
and FANCD2, interact with mismatch repair (MMR) pathway factors, but the
significance of this link remains unknown. Unlike the BRCA-FA pathway, the MMR
pathway is not essential for cells to survive toxic DNA interstrand crosslinks
(ICLs), although MMR proteins bind ICLs and other DNA structures that form at
stalled replication forks. We hypothesized that MMR proteins corrupt ICL repair
in cells that lack crosstalk between BRCA-FA and MMR pathways. Here, we show that
ICL sensitivity of cells lacking the interaction between FANCJ and the MMR
protein MLH1 is suppressed by depletion of the upstream mismatch recognition
factor MSH2. MSH2 depletion suppresses an aberrant DNA damage response, restores 
cell cycle progression, and promotes ICL resistance through a Rad18-dependent
mechanism. MSH2 depletion also suppresses ICL sensitivity in cells deficient for 
BRCA1 or FANCD2, but not FANCA. Rescue by Msh2 loss was confirmed in Fancd2-null 
primary mouse cells. Thus, we propose that regulation of MSH2-dependent DNA
damage response underlies the importance of interactions between BRCA-FA and MMR 
pathways.

© 2014 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4194102
PMID: 24966277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mitochondrial DNA. 2016 Mar;27(2):896-903. doi: 10.3109/19401736.2014.926477.
Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Analysis of mtDNA, miR-155 and BACH1 expression in hearts from donors with and
without Down syndrome.

Hefti E(1), Quiñones-Lombraña A(1), Redzematovic A(1), Hui J(1), Blanco JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo , The State
University of New York , Buffalo , NY , USA.

Cancer patients with Down syndrome (DS) are at increased risk for
anthracycline-related cardiotoxicity. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) alterations in
hearts with-DS may contribute to anthracycline-related cardiotoxicity. Cardiac
mtDNA and the mtDNA(4977) deletion were quantitated in samples with- (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>11) and
without-DS (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>31). Samples with-DS showed 30% lower mtDNA (DSMT-ND1/18Sratio:
1.48<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.72 versus non-DSMT-ND1/18Sratio: 2.10<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.59; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.647) and 30% higher 
frequency of the mtDNA(4977) deletion (DS% frequency mtDNA(4977) deletion:
0.0086<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.0166 versus non-DS% frequency mtDNA(4977) deletion: 0.0066<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.0124,
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.514) than samples without-DS. The BACH1 and microRNA-155 (miR-155) genes
are located in chromosome 21, and their products have demonstrated roles during
oxidative stress. BACH1 and miR-155 expression did not differ in hearts with- and
without-DS. An association between BACH1 and miR-155 expression was detected in
hearts without-DS, suggesting alterations between BACH1-miR-155 interactions in
the DS settings.

PMCID: PMC4315749 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 24938108  [PubMed - in process]


58. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 18;289(29):19928-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.542456. Epub
2014 Jun 3.

Novel function of the Fanconi anemia group J or RECQ1 helicase to disrupt
protein-DNA complexes in a replication protein A-stimulated manner.

Sommers JA(1), Banerjee T(1), Hinds T(1), Wan B(2), Wold MS(3), Lei M(2), Brosh
RM Jr(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, Biomedical Research Center, NIA,
National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21224. (2)the Department of
Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 
48109, and. (3)the Department of Biochemistry, Carver College of Medicine,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242. (4)From the Laboratory of Molecular
Gerontology, Biomedical Research Center, NIA, National Institutes of Health,
Baltimore, Maryland 21224, broshr@mail.nih.gov.

Understanding how cellular machinery deals with chromosomal genome complexity is 
an important question because protein bound to DNA may affect various cellular
processes of nucleic acid metabolism. DNA helicases are at the forefront of such 
processes, yet there is only limited knowledge how they remodel protein-DNA
complexes and how these mechanisms are regulated. We have determined that
representative human RecQ and Fe-S cluster DNA helicases are potently blocked by 
a protein-DNA interaction. The Fanconi anemia group J (FANCJ) helicase partners
with the single-stranded DNA-binding protein replication protein A (RPA) to
displace BamHI-E111A bound to duplex DNA in a specific manner. Protein
displacement was dependent on the ATPase-driven function of the helicase and
unique properties of RPA. Further biochemical studies demonstrated that the
shelterin proteins TRF1 and TRF2, which preferentially bind the telomeric repeat 
found at chromosome ends, effectively block FANCJ from unwinding the forked
duplex telomeric substrate. RPA, but not the Escherichia coli single-stranded
DNA-binding protein or shelterin factor Pot1, stimulated FANCJ ejection of TRF1
from the telomeric DNA substrate. FANCJ was also able to displace TRF2 from the
telomeric substrate in an RPA-dependent manner. The stimulation of
helicase-catalyzed protein displacement is also observed with the DNA helicase
RECQ1, suggesting a conserved functional interaction of RPA-interacting
helicases. These findings suggest that partnerships between RPA and interacting
human DNA helicases may greatly enhance their ability to dislodge proteins bound 
to duplex DNA, an activity that is likely to be highly relevant to their
biological roles in DNA metabolism.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4106313
PMID: 24895130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2014 May 6;9(5):e96533. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096533. eCollection 
2014.

Matrix conditions and KLF2-dependent induction of heme oxygenase-1 modulate
inhibition of HCV replication by fluvastatin.

Wuestenberg A(1), Kah J(1), Singethan K(2), Sirma H(3), Keller AD(1), Rosal
SR(1), Schrader J(4), Loscher C(1), Volz T(4), Bartenschlager R(5), Lohmann V(5),
Protzer U(2), Dandri M(4), Lohse AW(4), Tiegs G(1), Sass G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Immunology and Hepatology, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (2)Institute of Virology, Technische
Universität München/Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, Munich, Germany. (3)Institute of
Pathology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Medicine I, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany. (5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology,
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: HMG-CoA-reductase-inhibitors (statins) have been shown to
interfere with HCV replication in vitro. We investigated the mechanism,
requirements and contribution of heme oxygenase-1(HO-1)-induction by statins to
interference with HCV replication.
METHODS: HO-1-induction by fluva-, simva-, rosuva-, atorva- or pravastatin was
correlated to HCV replication, using non-infectious replicon systems as well as
the infectious cell culture system. The mechanism of HO-1-induction by statins as
well as its relevance for interference with HCV replication was investigated
using transient or permanent knockdown cell lines. Polyacrylamide(PAA) gels of
different density degrees or the Rho-kinase-inhibitor Hydroxyfasudil were used in
order to mimic matrix conditions corresponding to normal versus fibrotic liver
tissue.
RESULTS: All statins used, except pravastatin, decreased HCV replication and
induced HO-1 expression, as well as interferon response in vitro. HO-1-induction 
was mediated by reduction of Bach1 expression and induction of the Nuclear factor
(erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (NRF2) cofactor Krueppel-like factor 2 (KLF2).
Knockdown of KLF2 or HO-1 abrogated effects of statins on HCV replication.
HO-1-induction and anti-viral effects of statins were more pronounced under cell 
culture conditions mimicking advanced stages of liver disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Statin-mediated effects on HCV replication seem to require
HO-1-induction, which is more pronounced in a microenvironment resembling
fibrotic liver tissue. This implicates that certain statins might be especially
useful to support HCV therapy of patients at advanced stages of liver disease.

PMCID: PMC4011762
PMID: 24801208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 21;9(4):e95564. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095564. eCollection
2014.

Hepatic HMOX1 expression positively correlates with Bach-1 and miR-122 in
patients with HCV mono and HIV/HCV coinfection.

Jablonowska E(1), Wójcik K(1), Szymanska B(2), Omulecka A(3), Cwiklinska H(4),
Piekarska A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Hepatology, Medical University of Lodz, 
Lódz, Poland. (2)Central Laboratory, Medical University of Lodz, Lódz, Poland.
(3)Department of Pathology, Bieganski Provincial Specialistic Hospital, Lódz,
Poland. (4)Laboratory of Neuroimmunology, Department of Neurology, Medical
University of Lódz, Poland.

AIM: To analyze the expression of HMOX1 and miR-122 in liver biopsy samples
obtained from HCV mono-and HIV/HCV co-infected patients in relation to selected
clinical parameters, histological examination and IL-28B polymorphism as well as 
to determine whether HMOX1 expression is dependent on Bach-1.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study group consisted of 90 patients with CHC: 69 with
HCV mono and 21 with HIV/HCV co-infection. RT-PCR was used in the analysis of
HMOX1, Bach-1 and miR-122 expression in liver biopsy samples and in the
assessment of IL-28B single-nucleotide polymorphism C/T (rs12979860) in the
blood. Moreover in liver biopsy samples an analysis of HO-1 and Bach-1 protein
level by Western Blot was performed.
RESULTS: HCV mono-infected patients, with lower grading score (G<2) and higher
HCV viral load (>600000 IU/mL) demonstrated higher expression of HMOX1. In
patients with HIV/HCV co-infection, the expression of HMOX1 was lower in patients
with lower lymphocyte CD4 count and higher HIV viral load. IL28B polymorphism did
not affect the expression of either HMOX1 or miR-122. Higher HMOX1 expression
correlated with higher expression of Bach-1 (Spearman's <U+03C1><U+200A>=<U+200A>0.586, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.000001) 
and miR-122 (Spearman's <U+03C1><U+200A>=<U+200A>0.270, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.014059).
CONCLUSIONS: HMOX1 and miR-122 play an important role in the pathogenesis of CHC 
in HCV mono-and HIV/HCV co-infected patients. Reduced expression of HMOX1 in
patients with HIV/HCV co-infection may indicate a worse prognosis in this group. 
Our results do not support the importance of Bach-1 in repression of HMOX1 in
patients with chronic hepatitis C.

PMCID: PMC3994072
PMID: 24752012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Biomed Rep. 2014 May;2(3):359-363. Epub 2014 Feb 7.

Induction of hepatic Bach1 mRNA expression by carbon tetrachloride-induced acute 
liver injury in rats.

Tanioka N(1), Shimizu H(1), Takahashi T(2), Omori E(1), Kuroda K(1), Shibata
M(1), Yamaoka M(1), Toda Y(1), Matsusaki T(1), Morimatsu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Resuscitology, Okayama University Medical
School, Okayama 700-8558, Japan. (2)Department of Anesthesiology and
Resuscitology, Okayama University Medical School, Okayama 700-8558, Japan ;
Department of Health and Welfare Science, Okayama Prefectural University, Okayama
719-1197, Japan.

Hepatic oxidative stress is a major contributor to the pathogenesis of several
acute liver diseases. Diagnostic markers of hepatic oxidative stress may
facilitate early detection and intervention. Bach1 is an oxidative
stress-responsive transcription factor that represses heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1),
the rate-limiting enzyme in the catabolism of heme, a potent pro-oxidant. We
previously demonstrated that carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) causes oxidative hepatic
injury in rats, exacerbated by free heme, suggesting that CCl4 may affect Bach1
gene expression. In the present study, we used northern blot analysis to measure 
Bach1, HO-1 and d-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS1; a heme biosynthesis enzyme)
mRNA expression levels during acute hepatic injury induced by CCl4 (at doses of
0.1, 1.0 and 2.0 ml/kg body weight). Oxidative injury was assessed by measuring
serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT), hepatic malondialdehyde (MDA) and
glutathione (GSH) content. Treatment with CCl4 induced a significant
dose-dependent increase in Bach1 mRNA 1-3 h after administration. Bach1 mRNA
peaked at 6 h after CCl4 treatment (1 ml/kg), followed by a rapid decrease and
gradual return to baseline by 12 h after treatment. The timecourse of transient
Bach1 mRNA induction roughly mirrored that of HO-1 mRNA, while ALAS1 mRNA was
inversely downregulated. Serum ALT levels and hepatic MDA concentration were
significantly increased at 24 h after CCl4 treatment, while the hepatic GSH
content was significantly reduced within 3 h of treatment. Serum ALT levels were 
positively correlated with Bach1 mRNA levels. These findings indicate that Bach1 
mRNA is transiently induced in rat liver by CCl4, possibly as a regulatory
mechanism to restore HO-1 to baseline following free heme catabolism. Our
findings also suggest that Bach1 mRNA expression may be a novel indicator of the 
extent of oxidative hepatic injury caused by free heme.

PMCID: PMC3990211
PMID: 24748974  [PubMed]


62. Mol Cell. 2014 May 8;54(3):445-59. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.03.021. Epub 2014
Apr 17.

Identification of a BRCA1-mRNA splicing complex required for efficient DNA repair
and maintenance of genomic stability.

Savage KI(1), Gorski JJ(2), Barros EM(2), Irwin GW(2), Manti L(3), Powell AJ(2), 
Pellagatti A(4), Lukashchuk N(5), McCance DJ(2), McCluggage WG(6), Schettino
G(7), Salto-Tellez M(2), Boultwood J(4), Richard DJ(8), McDade SS(2), Harkin
DP(9).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast, 97
Lisburn Road, Belfast BT9 7BL, UK. Electronic address: k.savage@qub.ac.uk.
(2)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast, 97
Lisburn Road, Belfast BT9 7BL, UK. (3)Dipartimento di Fisiche, Università
Federico II di Napoli, Complesso Universitario di Monte S. Angelo, Naples 80126, 
Italy. (4)Leukaemia and Lymphoma Research Molecular Haematology Unit, Nuffield
Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3
9DU, UK. (5)The Gurdon Institute and Department of Biochemistry, University of
Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK. (6)Centre for Cancer
Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast
BT9 7BL, UK; Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, 274
Grosvenor Road, Belfast BT12 6BA, UK. (7)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell
Biology, Queen's University Belfast, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast BT9 7BL, UK;
Radiation Dosimetry Group, National Physical Laboratory, Hampton Road, Teddington
TW11 0LW, UK. (8)Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation, Queensland
University of Technology, 60 Musk Avenue, Kelvin Grove, 4059 Brisbane, Australia.
(9)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast, 97
Lisburn Road, Belfast BT9 7BL, UK. Electronic address: d.harkin@qub.ac.uk.

Mutations within BRCA1 predispose carriers to a high risk of breast and ovarian
cancers. BRCA1 functions to maintain genomic stability through the assembly of
multiple protein complexes involved in DNA repair, cell-cycle arrest, and
transcriptional regulation. Here, we report the identification of a DNA
damage-induced BRCA1 protein complex containing BCLAF1 and other key components
of the mRNA-splicing machinery. In response to DNA damage, this complex regulates
pre-mRNA splicing of a number of genes involved in DNA damage signaling and
repair, thereby promoting the stability of these transcripts/proteins. Further,
we show that abrogation of this complex results in sensitivity to DNA damage,
defective DNA repair, and genomic instability. Interestingly, mutations in a
number of proteins found within this complex have been identified in numerous
cancer types. These data suggest that regulation of splicing by the BRCA1-mRNA
splicing complex plays an important role in the cellular response to DNA damage.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4017265
PMID: 24746700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2014;232(4):229-53.

Wearing red for signaling: the heme-bach axis in heme metabolism, oxidative
stress response and iron immunology.

Igarashi K(1), Watanabe-Matsui M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine.

The connection between gene regulation and metabolism is an old issue that
warrants revisiting in order to understand both normal as well as pathogenic
processes in higher eukaryotes. Metabolites affect the gene expression by either 
binding to transcription factors or serving as donors for post-translational
modification, such as that involving acetylation and methylation. The focus of
this review is heme, a prosthetic group of proteins that includes hemoglobin and 
cytochromes. Heme has been shown to bind to several transcription factors,
including Bach1 and Bach2, in higher eukaryotes. Heme inhibits the
transcriptional repressor activity of Bach1, resulting in the derepression of its
target genes, such as globin in erythroid cells and heme oxygenase-1 in diverse
cell types. Since Bach2 is important for class switch recombination and somatic
hypermutation of immunoglobulin genes as well as regulatory and effector T cell
differentiation and the macrophage function, the heme-Bach2 axis may regulate the
immune response as a signaling cascade. We discuss future issues regarding the
topic of the iron/heme-gene regulation network based on current understanding of 
the heme-Bach axis, including the concept of "iron immunology" as the synthesis
of the iron metabolism and the immune response.

PMID: 24681888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cell. 2014 Mar 13;156(6):1223-34. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.01.069.

Heme-mediated SPI-C induction promotes monocyte differentiation into
iron-recycling macrophages.

Haldar M(1), Kohyama M(2), So AY(3), Kc W(1), Wu X(1), Briseño CG(1), Satpathy
AT(1), Kretzer NM(1), Arase H(2), Rajasekaran NS(4), Wang L(5), Egawa T(1),
Igarashi K(6), Baltimore D(3), Murphy TL(1), Murphy KM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St. Louis,
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Laboratory of Immunochemistry,
WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871,
Japan. (3)Department of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA. (4)Division of Cardiology and Pulmonary, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, UT 84132,
USA. (5)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. (6)Department of
Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8575,
Japan. (7)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St.
Louis, School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University in St. Louis, School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 
63110, USA. Electronic address: kmurphy@wustl.edu.

Splenic red pulp macrophages (RPM) degrade senescent erythrocytes and recycle
heme-associated iron. The transcription factor SPI-C is selectively expressed by 
RPM and is required for their development, but the physiologic stimulus inducing 
Spic is unknown. Here, we report that Spic also regulated the development of
F4/80(+)VCAM1(+) bone marrow macrophages (BMM) and that Spic expression in BMM
and RPM development was induced by heme, a metabolite of erythrocyte degradation.
Pathologic hemolysis induced loss of RPM and BMM due to excess heme but induced
Spic in monocytes to generate new RPM and BMM. Spic expression in monocytes was
constitutively inhibited by the transcriptional repressor BACH1. Heme induced
proteasome-dependent BACH1 degradation and rapid Spic derepression. Furthermore, 
cysteine-proline dipeptide motifs in BACH1 that mediate heme-dependent
degradation were necessary for Spic induction by heme. These findings are the
first example of metabolite-driven differentiation of a tissue-resident
macrophage subset and provide new insights into iron homeostasis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4010949
PMID: 24630724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jul;1840(7):2351-60. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2014.02.029. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Hemopexin-dependent heme uptake via endocytosis regulates the Bach1 transcription
repressor and heme oxygenase gene activation.

Hada H(1), Shiraki T(2), Watanabe-Matsui M(3), Igarashi K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, and Center for Regulatory Epigenome and Disease,
Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan; CREST,
Japan Science and Technology Agency, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. (2)Faculty of
Biology-Oriented Science and Technology, Kinki University, Nishimitani,
Kinokawashi, Wakayama 649-6493, Japan. (3)Department of Biochemistry, and Center 
for Regulatory Epigenome and Disease, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. (4)Department of Biochemistry, and Center for
Regulatory Epigenome and Disease, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sendai 980-8575, Japan; CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Sendai
980-8575, Japan. Electronic address: igarashi@med.tohoku.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Intracellular heme plays versatile roles in a variety of
physiological processes including mitochondrial respiration. Heme also induces
the expression of genes such as heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) by inactivating the
transcription repressor Bach1 through direct binding. However, the source of heme
for the regulation of the Bach1-HO-1 axis has been unclear. Considering that
extracellular heme exists as a complex with hemopexin (Hx) in serum under the
physiological conditions, heme-Hx complex may deliver heme for the gene
regulation.
METHODS: Using a mammalian expression system, high secretory recombinant Hx (rHx)
was developed. We examined the effects of rHx-bound heme on HO-1 expression and
Bach1 in Hepa-1c1c7 liver cells and THP-1 macrophage cells. We investigated the
uptake pathway of rHx-bound heme by treating cells with chlorpromazine (CPZ).
RESULTS: rHx-bound heme induced the expression of HO-1 and decreased the level of
Bach1 protein. CPZ inhibited the induction of the HO-1 expression by rHx-bound
heme.
CONCLUSION: rHx-bound heme was internalized into the cells via endocytosis,
resulting in HO-1 expression and inactivation of Bach1.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: The Bach1-dependent repression of the HO-1 expression is
under the control of the Hx-dependent uptake of extracellular heme. Heme may
regulate Bach1 as an extracellular signaling molecule.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24613679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Nutr Biochem. 2014 May;25(5):515-25. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2013.12.011. Epub
2014 Feb 4.

Characterization of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)-induced heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1)
expression in human cancer cells: the importance of enhanced BTB and CNC homology
1 (Bach1) degradation.

Wang S(1), Hannafon BN(1), Wolf RF(1), Zhou J(2), Avery JE(1), Wu J(2), Lind
SE(3), Ding WQ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 975 NE
10th Street, BRC 411A, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. (2)Department of
Radio-Oncology, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Suzhou Hospital, Suzhou, P.
R. China. (3)Departments of Pathology and Medicine, University of Colorado School
of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, University of Oklahoma 
Health Sciences Center, 975 NE 10th Street, BRC 411A, Oklahoma City, OK 73104,
USA. Electronic address: weiqun-ding@ouhsc.edu.

The effect of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) on heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) expression in
cancer cells has never been characterized. This study examines DHA-induced HO-1
expression in human cancer cell model systems. DHA enhanced HO-1 gene expression 
in a time- and concentration-dependent manner, with maximal induction at 21 h of 
treatment. This induction of HO-1 expression was confirmed in vivo using a
xenograft nude mouse model fed a fish-oil-enriched diet. The increase in HO-1
gene transcription induced by DHA was significantly attenuated by the antioxidant
N-acetyl cysteine, suggesting the involvement of oxidative stress. This was
supported by direct measurement of lipid peroxide levels after DHA treatment.
Using a human HO-1 gene promoter reporter construct, we identified two
antioxidant response elements (AREs) that mediate the DHA-induced increase in
HO-1 gene transcription. Knockdown of nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2
(Nrf2) expression compromised the DHA-induced increase in HO-1 gene
transcription, indicating the importance of the Nrf2 pathway in this event.
However, the nuclear protein levels of Nrf2 remained unchanged upon DHA
treatment. Further studies demonstrated that DHA reduces nuclear Bach1 protein
expression by promoting its degradation and attenuates Bach1 binding to the AREs 
in the HO-1 gene promoter. In contrast, DHA enhanced Nrf2 binding to the AREs
without affecting nuclear Nrf2 expression levels, indicating a new cellular
mechanism that mediates DHA's induction of HO-1 gene transcription. To our
knowledge, this is the first characterization of DHA-induced HO-1 expression in
human malignant cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3988241
PMID: 24613086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 11;289(15):10551-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.538892. Epub
2014 Feb 25.

Insight into the roles of helicase motif Ia by characterizing Fanconi anemia
group J protein (FANCJ) patient mutations.

Guo M(1), Vidhyasagar V, Ding H, Wu Y.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry, University of Saskatchewan, Health
Sciences Building, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, S7N 5E5, Canada.

Helicases are molecular motors that couple the energy of ATP hydrolysis to the
unwinding and remodeling of structured DNA or RNA, which is coordinated by
conserved helicase motifs. FANCJ is a DNA helicase that is genetically linked to 
Fanconi anemia, breast cancer, and ovarian cancer. Here, we characterized two
Fanconi anemia patient mutations, R251C and Q255H, that are localized in helicase
motif Ia. Our genetic complementation analysis revealed that both the R251C and
Q255H alleles failed to rescue cisplatin sensitivity of a FANCJ null cell line as
detected by cell survival or <U+03B3>-H2AX foci formation. Furthermore, our biochemical 
assays demonstrated that both purified recombinant proteins abolished DNA
helicase activity and failed to disrupt the DNA-protein complex. Intriguingly,
R251C impaired DNA binding ability to single-strand DNA and double-strand DNA,
whereas Q255H retained higher binding activity to these DNA substrates compared
with wild-type FANCJ protein. Consequently, R251C abolished its DNA-dependent ATP
hydrolysis activity, whereas Q255H retained normal ATPase activity. Physically,
R251C had reduced ATP binding ability, whereas Q255H had normal ATP binding
ability and could translocate on single-strand DNA. Although both proteins were
recruited to damage sites in our laser-activated confocal assays, they lost their
DNA repair function, which explains why they exerted a domain negative effect
when expressed in a wild-type background. Taken together, our work not only
reveals the structural function of helicase motif Ia but also provides the
molecular pathology of FANCJ in related diseases.

PMCID: PMC4036176
PMID: 24573678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. DNA Repair (Amst). 2014 Aug;20:58-70. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2014.01.013. Epub
2014 Feb 21.

Two steps forward, one step back: determining XPD helicase mechanism by
single-molecule fluorescence and high-resolution optical tweezers.

Spies M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, IA 
52242, United States. Electronic address: maria-spies@uiowa.edu.

XPD-like helicases constitute a prominent DNA helicase family critical for many
aspects of genome maintenance. These enzymes share a unique structural feature,
an auxiliary domain stabilized by an iron-sulphur (FeS) cluster, and a 5'-3'
polarity of DNA translocation and duplex unwinding. Biochemical analyses
alongside two single-molecule approaches, total internal reflection fluorescence 
microscopy and high-resolution optical tweezers, have shown how the unique
structural features of XPD helicase and its specific patterns of substrate
interactions tune the helicase for its specific cellular function and shape its
molecular mechanism. The FeS domain forms a duplex separation wedge and
contributes to an extended DNA binding site. Interactions within this site
position the helicase in an orientation to unwind the duplex, control the
helicase rate, and verify the integrity of the translocating strand. Consistent
with its cellular role, processivity of XPD is limited and is defined by an
idiosyncratic stepping kinetics. DNA duplex separation occurs in single base pair
steps punctuated by frequent backward steps and conformational rearrangements of 
the protein-DNA complex. As such, the helicase in isolation mainly stabilizes
spontaneous base pair opening and exhibits a limited ability to unwind stable DNA
duplexes. The presence of a cognate ssDNA binding protein converts XPD into a
vigorous helicase by destabilizing the upstream dsDNA as well as by trapping the 
unwound strands. Remarkably, the two proteins can co-exist on the same DNA strand
without competing for binding. The current model of the XPD unwinding mechanism
will be discussed along with possible modifications to this mechanism by the
helicase interacting partners and unique features of such bio-medically important
XPD-like helicases as FANCJ (BACH1), RTEL1 and CHLR1 (DDX11).

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4295835
PMID: 24560558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Apr;19(2):300-7. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.02.003.
Epub 2014 Feb 13.

5-Aminolevulinic acid combined with ferrous iron enhances the expression of heme 
oxygenase-1.

Nishio Y(1), Fujino M(2), Zhao M(3), Ishii T(4), Ishizuka M(4), Ito H(4),
Takahashi K(4), Abe F(4), Nakajima M(4), Tanaka T(4), Taketani S(5), Nagahara
Y(6), Li XK(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Transplantation Immunology, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Biomedical Sciences, Tokyo
Denki University, Saitama, Japan. (2)Division of Transplantation Immunology,
National Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan; AIDS 
Research Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Division of Transplantation Immunology, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. (4)SBI Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd., Tokyo,
Japan. (5)Department of Biotechnology, Kyoto Institute of Technology, Kyoto,
Japan. (6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Tokyo Denki University, Saitama,
Japan. Electronic address: yuki@mail.dendai.ac.jp. (7)Division of Transplantation
Immunology, National Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, 
Japan. Electronic address: ri-k@ncchd.go.jp.

5-Aminolevulinic acid (5-ALA) is the naturally occurring metabolic precursor of
heme. Heme negatively regulates the Maf recognition element (MARE) binding- and
repressing-activity of the Bach1 transcription factor through its direct binding 
to Bach1. Heme oxygenase (HO)-1 is an inducible enzyme that catalyzes the
rate-limiting step in the oxidative degradation of heme to free iron, biliverdin 
and carbon monoxide. These metabolites of heme protect against apoptosis,
inflammation and oxidative stress. Monocytes and macrophages play a critical role
in the initiation, maintenance and resolution of inflammation. Therefore, the
regulation of inflammation in macrophages is an important target under various
pathophysiological conditions. In order to address the question of what is
responsible for the anti-inflammatory effects of 5-ALA, the induction of HO-1
expression by 5-ALA and sodium ferrous citrate (SFC) was examined in macrophage
cell line (RAW264 cells). HO-1 expression induced by 5-ALA combined with SFC
(5-ALA/SFC) was partially inhibited by MEK/ERK and p38 MAPK inhibitor. The
NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) was activated and translocated from the cytosol to 
the nucleus in response to 5-ALA/SFC. Nrf2-specific siRNA reduced the HO-1
expression. In addition, 5-ALA/SFC increased the intracellular levels of heme in 
cells. The increased heme indicated that the inactivation of Bach1 by heme
supports the upregulation of HO-1 expression. Taken together, our data suggest
that the exposure of 5-ALA/SFC to RAW264 cells enhances the HO-1 expression via
MAPK activation along with the negative regulation of Bach1.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24530569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 21;111(3):E364-73. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1304840111. Epub 2014 Jan 6.

Network of mutually repressive metastasis regulators can promote cell
heterogeneity and metastatic transitions.

Lee J(1), Lee J, Farquhar KS, Yun J, Frankenberger CA, Bevilacqua E, Yeung K, Kim
EJ, Balázsi G, Rosner MR.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637.

The sources and consequences of nongenetic variability in metastatic progression 
are largely unknown. To address these questions, we characterized a
transcriptional regulatory network for the metastasis suppressor Raf kinase
inhibitory protein (RKIP). We previously showed that the transcription factor
BACH1 is negatively regulated by RKIP and promotes breast cancer metastasis. Here
we demonstrate that BACH1 acts in a double-negative (overall positive) feedback
loop to inhibit RKIP transcription in breast cancer cells. BACH1 also negatively 
regulates its own transcription. Analysis of the BACH1 network reveals the
existence of an inverse relationship between BACH1 and RKIP involving both
monostable and bistable transitions that can potentially give rise to nongenetic 
variability. Single-cell analysis confirmed monostable and bistable-like
behavior. Treatment with histone deacetylase inhibitors or depletion of the
polycomb repressor enhancer of zeste homolog 2 altered relative RKIP and BACH1
levels in a manner consistent with a prometastatic state. Together, our results
suggest that the mutually repressive relationship between metastatic regulators
such as RKIP and BACH1 can play a key role in determining metastatic progression 
in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3903259
PMID: 24395801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 7;289(6):3126-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.508044. Epub 2013
Dec 23.

A novel CXCR3-B chemokine receptor-induced growth-inhibitory signal in cancer
cells is mediated through the regulation of Bach-1 protein and Nrf2 protein
nuclear translocation.

Balan M(1), Pal S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Nephrology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115 and.

Chemokines and their receptors play diverse roles in regulating cancer growth and
progression. The receptor CXCR3 can have two splice variants with opposite
functions. CXCR3-A promotes cell growth, whereas CXCR3-B mediates
growth-inhibitory signals. However, the negative signals through CXCR3-B in
cancer cells are not well characterized. In this study, we found that
CXCR3-B-mediated signaling in MCF-7 and T47D breast cancer cells induced
apoptotic cell death. Signals through CXCR3-B decreased the levels of the
antiapoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL and increased the expression of apoptotic
cleaved poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Along with up-regulation in apoptosis,
CXCR3-B signals were associated with a decrease in cellular autophagy with
reduced levels of the autophagic markers Beclin-1 and LC3B. Notably, CXCR3-B
down-regulated the expression of the cytoprotective and antiapoptotic molecule
heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) at the transcriptional level. There was an increased
nuclear localization of Bach-1 and nuclear export of Nrf2, which are important
negative and positive transcription factors, respectively, for HO-1 expression.
We also observed that CXCR3-B promoted the activation of p38 MAPK and the
inhibition of ERK-1/2. CXCR3-B could not induce cancer cell apoptosis at the
optimal level when we either inhibited p38 activity or knocked down Bach-1.
Further, CXCR3-B-induced apoptosis was down-regulated when we overexpressed HO-1.
Together, our data suggest that CXCR3-B mediates a growth-inhibitory signal in
breast cancer cells through the modulations of nuclear translocation of Bach-1
and Nrf2 and down-regulation of HO-1. We suggest that the induction of
CXCR3-B-mediated signaling can serve as a novel therapeutic approach where the
goal is to promote tumor cell apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3916518
PMID: 24366869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cancer Res. 2014 Feb 1;74(3):932-44. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2474. Epub
2013 Dec 18.

FANCJ localization by mismatch repair is vital to maintain genomic integrity
after UV irradiation.

Guillemette S(1), Branagan A, Peng M, Dhruva A, Schärer OD, Cantor SB.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Cancer Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Women's Cancers Program, UMASS Memorial Cancer
Center, Worcester, Massachusetts; and Department of Pharmacological Sciences &
Department of Chemistry, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York.

Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is critical for the repair of DNA lesions
induced by UV radiation, but its contribution in replicating cells is less clear.
Here, we show that dual incision by NER endonucleases, including XPF and XPG,
promotes the S-phase accumulation of the BRCA1 and Fanconi anemia-associated DNA 
helicase FANCJ to sites of UV-induced damage. FANCJ promotes replication protein 
A phosphorylation and the arrest of DNA synthesis following UV irradiation.
Interaction defective mutants of FANCJ reveal that BRCA1 binding is not required 
for FANCJ localization, whereas interaction with the mismatch repair (MMR)
protein MLH1 is essential. Correspondingly, we find that FANCJ, its direct
interaction with MLH1, and the MMR protein MSH2 function in a common pathway in
response to UV irradiation. FANCJ-deficient cells are not sensitive to killing by
UV irradiation, yet we find that DNA mutations are significantly enhanced. Thus, 
we considered that FANCJ deficiency could be associated with skin cancer. Along
these lines, in melanoma we found several somatic mutations in FANCJ, some of
which were previously identified in hereditary breast cancer and Fanconi anemia. 
Given that, mutations in XPF can also lead to Fanconi anemia, we propose
collaborations between Fanconi anemia, NER, and MMR are necessary to initiate
checkpoint activation in replicating human cells to limit genomic instability.

PMID: 24351291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 11;8(12):e82125. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082125.
eCollection 2013.

A prognostic gene signature for metastasis-free survival of triple negative
breast cancer patients.

Lee U(1), Frankenberger C(1), Yun J(1), Bevilacqua E(1), Caldas C(2), Chin SF(2),
Rueda OM(2), Reinitz J(3), Rosner MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois, United States of America. (2)Department of Oncology, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (3)Departments of Statistics, Ecology and
Evolution, Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois, United States of America.

Although triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) are the most aggressive subtype of
breast cancer, they currently lack targeted therapies. Because this
classification still includes a heterogeneous collection of tumors, new tools to 
classify TNBCs are urgently required in order to improve our prognostic
capability for high risk patients and predict response to therapy. We previously 
defined a gene expression signature, RKIP Pathway Metastasis Signature (RPMS),
based upon a metastasis-suppressive signaling pathway initiated by Raf Kinase
Inhibitory Protein (RKIP). We have now generated a new BACH1 Pathway Metastasis
gene signature (BPMS) that utilizes targets of the metastasis regulator BACH1.
Specifically, we substituted experimentally validated target genes to generate a 
new BACH1 metagene, developed an approach to optimize patient tumor
stratification, and reduced the number of signature genes to 30. The BPMS
significantly and selectively stratified metastasis-free survival in basal-like
and, in particular, TNBC patients. In addition, the BPMS further stratified
patients identified as having a good or poor prognosis by other signatures
including the Mammaprint® and Oncotype® clinical tests. The BPMS is thus
complementary to existing signatures and is a prognostic tool for high risk
ER-HER2- patients. We also demonstrate the potential clinical applicability of
the BPMS as a single sample predictor. Together, these results reveal the
potential of this pathway-based BPMS gene signature to identify high risk TNBC
patients that can respond effectively to targeted therapy, and highlight BPMS
genes as novel drug targets for therapeutic development.

PMCID: PMC3859562
PMID: 24349199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Sci Total Environ. 2014 Feb 15;472:672-80. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.11.092. 
Epub 2013 Dec 7.

Arsenic exposure triggers a shift in microRNA expression.

Sturchio E(1), Colombo T(2), Boccia P(3), Carucci N(2), Meconi C(3), Minoia C(4),
Macino G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Italian Workers' Compensation Authority (INAIL), Department of Production
Plants and Anthropic Settlements (DIPIA) Via Alessandria, 220/E, 00198 Rome,
Italy. Electronic address: e.sturchio@inail.it. (2)University of Rome "La
Sapienza"-BCE, Viale del Policlinico 155, 00161, Rome, Italy. (3)Italian Workers'
Compensation Authority (INAIL), Department of Production Plants and Anthropic
Settlements (DIPIA) Via Alessandria, 220/E, 00198 Rome, Italy. (4)Laboratory for 
Environmental and Toxicological Measurements, IRCCS Pavia, S. Maugeri Foundation,
Via S. Maugeri, 8, 27100, Pavia, Italy.

Exposure to inorganic Arsenic (iAs) through drinking water is a major public
health problem affecting most countries. iAs has been classified by the
International Agency for Research on Cancer as Group 1: "Carcinogenic to humans".
Although numerous studies have shown the related adverse effects of iAs,
sensitive appropriate biomarkers for studies of environmental epidemiology are
still required. The present work aims at investigate the role of microRNAs
(miRNAs), powerful negative regulators of gene expression, playing a key role in 
many physiological and pathological cellular processes, in iAs exposure. To this 
end, we analyzed miRNA changes in expression profile triggered by iAs exposure in
Jurkat cell line. We used microarray technology to profile the expression of
miRNAs following 2 µmol/L sodium arsenite treatment at different time points.
Moreover, we performed phenotypic analysis of iAs treated cells. Real Time
Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) was used to validate miRNA microarray data and
to assay expression modulation of selected relevant mRNAs. Finally,
bioinformatics techniques were applied to reconstruct iAs-relevant molecular
pathways and miRNA regulatory networks from the expression data. We report miRNAs
modulated after iAs treatment in Jurkat cells. In particular, we highlight 36
miRNAs exhibiting consistent dysregulation and particularly a panel of 8 miRNAs
which we also validated by RT-PCR analysis. Computational analysis of lists of
putative target genes for these 8 miRNAs points to an involvement in
arsenic-response pathways, for a subset of them, that were analyzed by RT-PCR.
Furthermore, iAs exposure reveals induction of cell cycle progression and the
failure of apoptosis, supporting the idea of iAs carcinogenic activity. Our study
provides a list of miRNAs whose expression levels are affected by iAs treatment, 
corroborating the importance of proceeding with the hunt for specific subset of
miRNAs, which can serve as potential biomarkers of iAs effects with useful
diagnostic value.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24317173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2013 Dec;18(4):631-8. doi: 10.2478/s11658-013-0110-3. Epub
2013 Dec 2.

Detection of a novel mutation in exon 20 of the BRCA1 gene.

Chakraborty A(1), Katarkar A, Chaudhuri K, Mukhopadhyay A, Basak J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose Cancer Research
Institute (NCRI), Kolkata, India.

Erratum in
    Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2014 Mar;19(1):180.

Hereditary breast cancer constitutes 5-10% of all breast cancer cases. Inherited 
mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 tumor-suppressor genes account for the majority 
of hereditary breast cancer cases. The BRCA1 C-terminal region (BRCT) has a
functional duplicated globular domain, which helps with DNA damage repair and
cell cycle checkpoint protein control. More than 100 distinct BRCA1 missense
variants with structural and functional effects have been documented within the
BRCT domain. Interpreting the results of mutation screening of tumor-suppressor
genes that can have high-risk susceptibility mutations is increasingly important 
in clinical practice. This study includes a novel mutation, p.His1746 Pro
(c.5237A>C), which was found in BRCA1 exon 20 of a breast cancer patient. In
silico analysis suggests that this mutation could alter the stability and
orientation of the BRCT domain and the differential binding of the BACH1
substrate.

PMID: 24297685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Exp Ther Med. 2013 Aug;6(2):435-444. Epub 2013 Jun 7.

Correlation of the BACH1 Pro919Ser polymorphism with breast cancer risk: A
literature-based meta-analysis and meta-regression analysis.

Shi J(1), Tong J, Cai S, Qu X, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical Oncology, The First Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, P.R. China.

Recent investigations have suggested that common genetic polymorphisms in
BRCA1-associated C-terminal helicase 1 (BACH1) are important in the development
of breast cancer. However, individually published studies and previous
meta-analyses have demonstrated inconclusive results. The aim of this
meta-analysis was to derive a more precise estimation of the correlation between 
a common polymorphism [proline (Pro) 919 serine (Ser); rs4986764 C>T] in the
BACH1 gene and susceptibility to breast cancer. A literature search of PubMed,
Embase, Web of Science and Chinese BioMedicine (CBM) databases was conducted on
articles published prior to March 1, 2013. Crude odds ratios (ORs) with 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated. Eleven case-control studies were
included with a total of 6,903 breast cancer cases and 8,154 healthy controls.
The meta-analysis results revealed that the BACH1 919Ser polymorphism may be
correlated with a decreased risk of breast cancer among Caucasian populations
(Ser allele versus Pro allele: OR=0.90, 95% CI=0.86-0.95; Pro/Ser + Ser/Ser
versus Pro/Pro: OR=0.90, 95% CI=0.84-0.98; Ser/Ser versus Pro/Pro + Pro/Ser:
OR=0.84, 95% CI=0.76-0.92; Ser/Ser versus Pro/Pro: OR=0.81, 95% CI=0.73-0.91;
Ser/Ser versus Pro/Ser: OR=0.86, 95% CI=0.78-0.95), although not among Asian
populations. Further subgroup analyses indicated that there were significant
correlations between the BACH1 919Ser polymorphism and a decreased risk of breast
cancer in postmenopausal females, females with a family history of breast cancer 
and females without BRCA1/2 mutations. Univariate and multivariate
meta-regression analyses revealed that none of the factors explained the
heterogeneity (all P>0.05). The present meta-analysis suggested that the BACH1
919Ser polymorphism may decrease the risk of breast cancer among Caucasian
populations, particularly in postmenopausal females with a family history of
breast cancer and without BRCA1/2 mutations.

PMCID: PMC3786943
PMID: 24137204  [PubMed]


77. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 26;8(9):e75435. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075435. eCollection
2013.

Chl1 DNA helicase regulates Scc2 deposition specifically during DNA-replication
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Rudra S(1), Skibbens RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania,
United States of America.

The conserved family of cohesin proteins that mediate sister chromatid cohesion
requires Scc2, Scc4 for chromatin-association and Eco1/Ctf7 for conversion to a
tethering competent state. A popular model, based on the notion that cohesins
form huge ring-like structures, is that Scc2, Scc4 function is essential only
during G1 such that sister chromatid cohesion results simply from DNA replisome
passage through pre-loaded cohesin rings. In such a scenario, cohesin deposition 
during G1 is temporally uncoupled from Eco1-dependent establishment reactions
that occur during S-phase. Chl1 DNA helicase (homolog of human ChlR1/DDX11 and
BACH1/BRIP1/FANCJ helicases implicated in Fanconi anemia, breast and ovarian
cancer and Warsaw Breakage Syndrome) plays a critical role in sister chromatid
cohesion, however, the mechanism through which Chl1 promotes cohesion remains
poorly understood. Here, we report that Chl1 promotes Scc2 loading unto DNA such 
that both Scc2 and cohesin enrichment to chromatin are defective in chl1 mutant
cells. The results further show that both Chl1 expression and
chromatin-recruitment are tightly regulated through the cell cycle, peaking
during S-phase. Importantly, kinetic ChIP studies reveals that Chl1 is required
for Scc2 chromatin-association specifically during S-phase, but not during G1.
Despite normal chromatin enrichment of both Scc2 and cohesin during G1, chl1
mutant cells exhibit severe chromosome segregation and cohesion
defects--revealing that G1-loaded cohesins is insufficient to promote cohesion.
Based on these findings, we propose a new model wherein S-phase cohesin loading
occurs during DNA replication and in concert with both cohesion establishment and
chromatin assembly reactions--challenging the notion that DNA replication fork
navigates through or around pre-loaded cohesin rings.

PMCID: PMC3784445
PMID: 24086532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jan;1840(1):262-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.09.014.
Epub 2013 Sep 17.

PDT-induced epigenetic changes in the mouse cerebral cortex: a protein microarray
study.

Demyanenko SV(1), Uzdensky AB, Sharifulina SA, Lapteva TO, Polyakova LP.

Author information: 
(1)Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don 344090, Russia. Electronic address:
demyanenkosvetlana@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is used for cancer treatment including
brain tumors. But the role of epigenetic processes in photodynamic injury of
normal brain tissue is unknown.
METHODS: 5-Aminolevulinic acid (ALA), a precursor of protoporphyrin IX (PpIX),
was used to photosensitize mouse cerebral cortex. PpIX accumulation in cortical
tissue was measured spectrofluorometrically. Hematoxylin/eosin,
gallocyanin-chromalum and immunohistochemical staining were used to study
morphological changes in PDT-treated cerebral cortex. Proteomic antibody
microarrays were used to evaluate expression of 112 proteins involved in
epigenetic regulation.
RESULTS: ALA administration induced 2.5-fold increase in the PpIX accumulation in
the mouse brain cortex compared to untreated mice. Histological study
demonstrated PDT-induced injury of some neurons and cortical vessels. ALA-PDT
induced dimethylation of histone H3, upregulation of histone deacetylases HDAC-1 
and HDAC-11, and DNA methylation-dependent protein Kaiso that suppressed
transcriptional activity. Upregulation of HDAC-1 and H3K9me2 was confirmed
immunohistochemically. Down-regulation of transcription factor FOXC2, PABP, and
hBrm/hsnf2a negatively regulated transcription. Overexpression of phosphorylated 
histone H2AX indicated activation of DNA repair, but down-regulation of
MTA1/MTA1L1 and PML - impairment of DNA repair. Overexpression of arginine
methyltransferase PRMT5 correlated with up-regulation of transcription factor
E2F4 and importin a5/7.
CONCLUSION: ALA-PDT injures and kills some but not all neurons and caused limited
microvascular alterations in the mouse cerebral cortex. It alters expression of
some proteins involved in epigenetic regulation of transcription, histone
modification, DNA repair, nuclear protein import, and proliferation.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: These data indicate epigenetic markers of photo-oxidative
injury of normal brain tissue.

© 2013.

PMID: 24055374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cell. 2013 Oct 10;52(1):9-24. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.08.018. Epub 2013
Sep 12.

Parallel SCF adaptor capture proteomics reveals a role for SCFFBXL17 in NRF2
activation via BACH1 repressor turnover.

Tan MK(1), Lim HJ, Bennett EJ, Shi Y, Harper JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Modular cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases (CRLs) use substrate binding adaptor
proteins to specify target ubiquitylation. Many of the ~200 human CRL adaptor
proteins remain poorly studied due to a shortage of efficient methods to identify
biologically relevant substrates. Here, we report the development of parallel
adaptor capture (PAC) proteomics and its use to systematically identify candidate
targets for the leucine-rich repeat family of F-box proteins (FBXLs) that
function with SKP1-CUL1-F-box protein (SCF) E3s. In validation experiments, we
identify the unstudied F-box protein FBXL17 as a regulator of the NFR2 oxidative 
stress pathway. We demonstrate that FBXL17 controls the transcription of the NRF2
target HMOX1 via turnover of the transcriptional repressor BACH1 in the absence
or presence of extrinsic oxidative stress. This work identifies a role for
SCF(FBXL17) in controlling the threshold for NRF2-dependent gene activation and
provides a framework for elucidating the functions of CRL adaptor proteins.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3981468
PMID: 24035498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Diabetes. 2013 Dec;62(12):4088-97. doi: 10.2337/db13-0169. Epub 2013 Aug 23.

Gestational diabetes mellitus impairs Nrf2-mediated adaptive antioxidant defenses
and redox signaling in fetal endothelial cells in utero.

Cheng X(1), Chapple SJ, Patel B, Puszyk W, Sugden D, Yin X, Mayr M, Siow RC, Mann
GE.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, British Heart Foundation Centre of Research
Excellence, King's College London, London, U.K.

In utero exposure to gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is associated with an
increased risk of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease in later life, yet
the underlying mechanisms remain to be elucidated. We examined the effects of GDM
on the proteome, redox status, and nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2
(Nrf2)-mediated antioxidant gene expression in human fetal endothelial cells.
Proteomic analysis revealed that proteins involved in redox homeostasis were
significantly altered in GDM and associated with increased mitochondrial
superoxide generation, protein oxidation, DNA damage, and diminished glutathione 
(GSH) synthesis. In GDM cells, the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal
(HNE) failed to induce nuclear Nrf2 accumulation and mRNA and/or protein
expression of Nrf2 and its target genes NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1), 
Bach1, cystine/glutamate transporter, and glutamate cysteine ligase. Although
methylation of CpG islands in Nrf2 or NQO1 promoters was unaltered by GDM,
decreased DJ-1 and increased phosphorylated glycogen synthase kinase 3ß levels
may account for impaired Nrf2 signaling. HNE-induced increases in GSH and NQO1
levels were abrogated by Nrf2 small interfering RNA in normal cells, and
overexpression of Nrf2 in GDM cells partially restored NQO1 induction.
Dysregulation of Nrf2 in fetal endothelium may contribute to the increased risk
of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease in offspring.

PMCID: PMC3837032
PMID: 23974919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 2013 Sep 27;288(39):28217-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.496463. Epub
2013 Aug 9.

Specialization among iron-sulfur cluster helicases to resolve G-quadruplex DNA
structures that threaten genomic stability.

Bharti SK(1), Sommers JA, George F, Kuper J, Hamon F, Shin-ya K, Teulade-Fichou
MP, Kisker C, Brosh RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, NIA, National Institutes of
Health, National Institutes of Health Biomedical Research Center, Baltimore,
Maryland 21224.

G-quadruplex (G4) DNA, an alternate structure formed by Hoogsteen hydrogen bonds 
between guanines in G-rich sequences, threatens genomic stability by perturbing
normal DNA transactions including replication, repair, and transcription. A
variety of G4 topologies (intra- and intermolecular) can form in vitro, but the
molecular architecture and cellular factors influencing G4 landscape in vivo are 
not clear. Helicases that unwind structured DNA molecules are emerging as an
important class of G4-resolving enzymes. The BRCA1-associated FANCJ helicase is
among those helicases able to unwind G4 DNA in vitro, and FANCJ mutations are
associated with breast cancer and linked to Fanconi anemia. FANCJ belongs to a
conserved iron-sulfur (Fe S) cluster family of helicases important for genomic
stability including XPD (nucleotide excision repair), DDX11 (sister chromatid
cohesion), and RTEL (telomere metabolism), genetically linked to xeroderma
pigmentosum/Cockayne syndrome, Warsaw breakage syndrome, and dyskeratosis
congenita, respectively. To elucidate the role of FANCJ in genomic stability, its
molecular functions in G4 metabolism were examined. FANCJ efficiently unwound in 
a kinetic and ATPase-dependent manner entropically favored unimolecular G4 DNA,
whereas other Fe-S helicases tested did not. The G4-specific ligands Phen-DC3 or 
Phen-DC6 inhibited FANCJ helicase on unimolecular G4 ~1000-fold better than bi-
or tetramolecular G4 DNA. The G4 ligand telomestatin induced DNA damage in human 
cells deficient in FANCJ but not DDX11 or XPD. These findings suggest FANCJ is a 
specialized Fe-S cluster helicase that preserves chromosomal stability by
unwinding unimolecular G4 DNA likely to form in transiently unwound
single-stranded genomic regions.

PMCID: PMC3784731
PMID: 23935105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Hum Genet. 2013 Dec;132(12):1395-404. doi: 10.1007/s00439-013-1346-8. Epub 2013
Aug 9.

A functional variant of pre-miRNA-196a2 confers risk for Behcet's disease but not
for Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome or AAU in ankylosing spondylitis.

Qi J(1), Hou S, Zhang Q, Liao D, Wei L, Fang J, Zhou Y, Kijlstra A, Yang P.

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing Key
Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Chongqing Eye Institute, Chongqing, 400016, People's
Republic of China.

This study aimed to investigate the predisposition of common pre-miRNA SNPs with 
Behcet's disease (BD), Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome and acute anterior
uveitis (AAU) associated with ankylosing spondylitis (AS). A two-stage
association study was carried out in 859 BD, 400 VKH syndrome, 209 AAU(+)AS(+)
patients and 1,685 controls all belonging to a Chinese Han population.
Genotyping, the expression of miR-196a and Bach1 (the target gene of miR-196a),
cell proliferation, cytokine production were examined by PCR-RFLP, real-time PCR,
CCK8 and ELISA. In the first stage study, the results showed significantly
increased frequencies of the miR-196a2/rs11614913 TT genotype and T allele in BD 
patients (adjusted P(c) = 0.024, OR = 1.63; adjusted P(c) = 5.4 × 10(-3), OR =
1.45, respectively). However, no significant association of the tested SNPs with 
VKH and AAU(+)AS(+) patients was observed. The second stage and combined studies 
confirmed the association of rs11614913 with BD (TT genotype: adjusted P(c) =
6×10(-5), OR = 1.53; T allele: adjusted P(c) = 8×10(-6), OR = 1.35; CC genotype: 
adjusted P(c) = 0.024, OR = 0.68). A stratified analysis showed an association of
the rs11614913 TT genotype and T allele with the arthritis subgroup of BD (P(c) =
5.3 × 10(-3), OR = 1.89; P(c) = 0.015, OR = 1.56, respectively). Functional
experiments showed a decreased miR-196a expression, an increased Bach1 expression
and an increased production of IL-1ß and MCP-1 in TT cases compared to CC cases
(P = 0.023, P = 0.0073, P = 0.012, P = 0.002, respectively). This study shows
that a functional variant of miR-196a2 confers risk for BD but not for VKH
syndrome or AAU(+)AS(+) by modulating the miR-196a gene expression and by
regulating pro-inflammatory IL-1ß and MCP-1 production.

PMID: 23928854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Sep 1;305(5):E641-8. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00120.2013. Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Bach1 deficiency protects pancreatic ß-cells from oxidative stress injury.

Kondo K(1), Ishigaki Y, Gao J, Yamada T, Imai J, Sawada S, Muto A, Oka Y,
Igarashi K, Katagiri H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism and Diabetes, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan;

BTB and CNC homology 1 (Bach1) is a transcriptional repressor of antioxidative
enzymes, such as heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). Oxidative stress is reportedly involved
in insulin secretion impairment and obesity-associated insulin resistance.
However, the role of Bach1 in the development of diabetes is unclear. HO-1
expression in the liver, white adipose tissue, and pancreatic islets was markedly
upregulated in Bach1-deficient mice. Unexpectedly, glucose and insulin tolerance 
tests showed no differences in obese wild-type (WT) and obese Bach1-deficient
mice after high-fat diet loading for 6 wk, suggesting minimal roles of Bach1 in
the development of insulin resistance. In contrast, Bach1 deficiency
significantly suppressed alloxan-induced pancreatic insulin content reduction and
the resultant glucose elevation. Furthermore, TUNEL-positive cells in pancreatic 
islets of Bach1-deficient mice were markedly decreased, by 60%, compared with
those in WT mice. HO-1 expression in islets was significantly upregulated in
alloxan-injected Bach1-deficient mice, whereas expression of other antioxidative 
enzymes, e.g., catalase, superoxide dismutase, and glutathione peroxidase, was
not changed by either alloxan administration or Bach1 deficiency. Our results
suggest that Bach1 deficiency protects pancreatic ß-cells from oxidative
stress-induced apoptosis and that the enhancement of HO-1 expression plays an
important role in this protection.

PMID: 23880309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Free Radic Biol Med. 2013 Sep;64:4-11. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.07.025. 
Epub 2013 Jul 21.

Regulation of the Nrf2 antioxidant pathway by microRNAs: New players in
micromanaging redox homeostasis.

Cheng X(1), Ku CH, Siow RC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, British Heart Foundation Centre for Research
Excellence, School of Medicine, King's College London, London, UK.

MicroRNAs are now thought to play a central role in the regulation of many
diverse aspects of cell biology; however, it remains to be fully elucidated how
microRNAs can orchestrate cellular redox homeostasis, which plays a central role 
in a multitude of physiological and pathophysiological processes. The
redox-sensitive transcription factor nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 
(Nrf2) serves as a "master regulator" of cell survival through the coordinated
induction of phase II and antioxidant defense enzymes to counteract oxidative
stress and modulate redox signaling events. MicroRNAs are able to "fine-tune" the
regulation of processes including those directly interacting with the Nrf2
pathway and the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). This review
highlights that cellular redox homeostasis can be regulated by microRNAs through 
their modulation of Nrf2-driven antioxidant gene expression as well as key
enzymes that generate ROS, which in turn can alter the biogenesis and processing 
of microRNAs. Therefore redox sensitive microRNAs or "redoximiRs" add an
important regulatory mechanism for redox signaling beyond the well-characterized 
actions of Nrf2. The potential exists for microRNA-based therapies where
diminished antioxidant defenses and dysregulated redox signaling can lead to
cardiovascular diseases, cancers, neurodegeneration, and accelerated aging.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23880293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Redox Rep. 2013;18(4):150-4. doi: 10.1179/1351000213Y.0000000051.

Genoprotection and genotoxicity of green tea (Camellia sinensis): Are they two
sides of the same redox coin?

Ho CK(1), Siu-wai C, Siu PM, Benzie IF.

Author information: 
(1)The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong.

OBJECTIVES: Regular intake of green tea associates with lower DNA damage and
increased resistance of DNA to oxidant challenge. However, in vitro pro-oxidant
effects of green tea have been reported. Both effects could be mediated by
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) which is generated by autoxidation of tea catechins. In 
large amounts, H2O2 is genotoxic, but low concentrations could activate the
redox-sensitive antioxidant response element (ARE) via the Keap-1/Nrf2 redox
switch, inducing genoprotective adaptations. Our objective was to test this
hypothesis.
METHODS: Peripheral lymphocytes from healthy volunteers were incubated for 30
minutes at 37°C in freshly prepared tea solutions (0.005, 0.01, 0.05%w/v (7, 14, 
71 µmol/l total catechins) in phosphate buffered saline (PBS), with PBS as
control) in the presence and absence of catalase (CAT). H2O2 in tea was measured 
colorimetrically. Oxidation-induced DNA lesions were measured by the Fpg-assisted
comet assay.
RESULTS: H2O2 concentrations in 0.005, 0.01, and 0.05% green tea after 30 minutes
at 37°C were, respectively, ~3, ~7, and ~52 µmol/l. Cells incubated in 0.005 and 
0.01% tea showed less (P < 0.001) DNA damage compared to control cells. Cells
treated with 0.05% green tea showed ~50% (P < 0.001) more DNA damage. The
presence of CAT prevented this damage, but did not remove the genoprotective
effects of low-dose tea. No significant changes in expression of ARE-associated
genes (HMOX1, NRF2, KEAP1, BACH1, and hOGG1) were seen in cells treated with tea 
or tea + CAT.
CONCLUSION: Genoprotection by low-dose green tea could be due to direct
antioxidant protection by green tea polyphenols, or to H2O2-independent
signalling pathways.

PMID: 23849339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2013;2013:984546. doi: 10.1155/2013/984546. Epub 2013 May
7.

Activation of the Nrf2 pathway by inorganic arsenic in human hepatocytes and the 
role of transcriptional repressor Bach1.

Liu D(1), Duan X, Dong D, Bai C, Li X, Sun G, Li B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, Liaoning Provincial Key
Laboratory of Arsenic Biological Effect and Poisoning, School of Public Health,
China Medical University, 92 North 2nd Road, Heping District, Shenyang 110001,
China.

Previous studies have proved that the environmental toxicant, inorganic arsenic, 
activates nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) pathway in many
different cell types. This study tried to explore the hepatic Nrf2 pathway upon
arsenic treatment comprehensively, since liver is one of the major target organs 
of arsenical toxicity. Our results showed that inorganic arsenic significantly
induced Nrf2 protein and mRNA expression in Chang human hepatocytes. We also
observed a dose-dependent increase of antioxidant response element- (ARE-)
luciferase activity. Both the mRNA and protein levels of NAD(P)H:quinone
oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) and heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) were all upregulated
dramatically. On the other hand, entry and accumulation of Nrf2 protein in the
nucleus, while exportting the transcriptional repressor BTB and CNC homology 1
(Bach1) from nucleus to cytoplasm, were also confirmed by western blot and
immunofluorescence assay. Our results therefore confirmed the arsenic-induced
Nrf2 pathway activation in hepatocytes and also suggested that the translocation 
of Bach1 was associated with the regulation of Nrf2 pathway by arsenic. Hepatic
Nrf2 pathway plays indispensable roles for cellular defenses against arsenic
hepatotoxicity, and the interplay of Bach1 and Nrf2 may be helpful to understand 
the self-defensive responses and the diverse biological effects of arsenicals.

PMCID: PMC3664501
PMID: 23738048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 12;288(28):20658-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.450478. Epub
2013 Jun 4.

Transforming growth factor-ß induces transcription factors MafK and Bach1 to
suppress expression of the heme oxygenase-1 gene.

Okita Y(1), Kamoshida A, Suzuki H, Itoh K, Motohashi H, Igarashi K, Yamamoto M,
Ogami T, Koinuma D, Kato M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences and Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba 
305-8575, Japan.

Transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) has multiple functions in embryogenesis,
adult homeostasis, tissue repair, and development of cancer. Here, we report that
TGF-ß suppresses the transcriptional activation of the heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1)
gene, which is implicated in protection against oxidative injury and lung
carcinogenesis. HO-1 is a target of the oxidative stress-responsive transcription
factor Nrf2. TGF-ß did not affect the stabilization or nuclear accumulation of
Nrf2 after stimulation with electrophiles. Instead, TGF-ß induced expression of
transcription factors MafK and Bach1. Enhanced expression of either MafK or Bach1
was enough to suppress the electrophile-inducible expression of HO-1 even in the 
presence of accumulated Nrf2 in the nucleus. Knockdown of MafK and Bach1 by siRNA
abolished TGF-ß-dependent suppression of HO-1. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Nrf2 substitutes for Bach1 at the
antioxidant response elements (E1 and E2), which are responsible for the
induction of HO-1 in response to oxidative stress. On the other hand,
pretreatment with TGF-ß suppressed binding of Nrf2 to both E1 and E2 but
marginally increased the binding of MafK to E2 together with Smads. As TGF-ß is
activated after tissue injury and in the process of cancer development, these
findings suggest a novel mechanism by which damaged tissue becomes vulnerable to 
oxidative stress and xenobiotics.

PMCID: PMC3711329
PMID: 23737527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Blood. 2013 May 30;121(22):e138-48. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-474585. Epub 2013 
Apr 23.

Massively parallel sequencing, aCGH, and RNA-Seq technologies provide a
comprehensive molecular diagnosis of Fanconi anemia.

Chandrasekharappa SC(1), Lach FP, Kimble DC, Kamat A, Teer JK, Donovan FX, Flynn 
E, Sen SK, Thongthip S, Sanborn E, Smogorzewska A, Auerbach AD, Ostrander EA;
NISC Comparative Sequencing Program.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. chandra@mail.nih.gov.

Current methods for detecting mutations in Fanconi anemia (FA)-suspected patients
are inefficient and often miss mutations. We have applied recent advances in DNA 
sequencing and genomic capture to the diagnosis of FA. Specifically, we used
custom molecular inversion probes or TruSeq-enrichment oligos to capture and
sequence FA and related genes, including introns, from 27 samples from the
International Fanconi Anemia Registry at The Rockefeller University. DNA
sequencing was complemented with custom array comparative genomic hybridization
(aCGH) and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis. aCGH identified
deletions/duplications in 4 different FA genes. RNA-seq analysis revealed lack of
allele specific expression associated with a deletion and splicing defects caused
by missense, synonymous, and deep-in-intron variants. The combination of
TruSeq-targeted capture, aCGH, and RNA-seq enabled us to identify the
complementation group and biallelic germline mutations in all 27 families: FANCA 
(7), FANCB (3), FANCC (3), FANCD1 (1), FANCD2 (3), FANCF (2), FANCG (2), FANCI
(1), FANCJ (2), and FANCL (3). FANCC mutations are often the cause of FA in
patients of Ashkenazi Jewish (AJ) ancestry, and we identified 2 novel FANCC
mutations in 2 patients of AJ ancestry. We describe here a strategy for efficient
molecular diagnosis of FA.

PMCID: PMC3668494
PMID: 23613520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Neuroscience. 2013 Jul 23;243:22-32. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.03.046.
Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Induction of hemeoxygenase-1 expression after inhibition of hemeoxygenase
activity promotes inflammation and worsens ischemic brain damage in mice.

Pérez-de-Puig I(1), Martín A, Gorina R, de la Rosa X, Martinez E, Planas AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Brain Ischemia and Neurodegeneration, Institut d'Investigacions 
Biomèdiques de Barcelona (IIBB)-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas
(CSIC), Spain.

Hemeoxygenase (HO) is an enzymatic system that degrades heme. HO-1 is an
inducible isoform whereas HO-2 is constitutive. Stroke strongly induces HO-1
expression but the underlying mechanisms are not fully elucidated. Cytokines that
are up-regulated after ischemia, like interleukin (IL)-10, can induce HO-1 gene
expression, which is positively regulated by the transcriptional activator
nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) and negatively regulated by
the transcriptional repressor breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein (BRCA1)
associated C-terminal helicase 1 (Bach-1). While Nrf2 is activated after ischemia
and drugs promoting Nrf2 activation increase HO-1 and are beneficial, the
involvement of Bach-1 is unknown. Here we investigated mechanisms involved in
HO-1 induction and evaluated the effects of HO activity inhibition in mouse
permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO). HO-1 was induced after
ischemia in IL-10-deficient mice suggesting that post-ischemic HO-1 induction was
IL-10-independent. Attenuation of Bach-1 gene repression after ischemia was
associated to enhanced HO-1 induction. Administration of the HO activity
inhibitor zinc proto-porphyrin IX (ZnPP) i.p. 24h before pMCAO exacerbated
ischemia-induced tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and IL-1ß, nitro-oxidative
stress, and the presence of neutrophils at 8h, and increased infarct volume at
day 4. However, ZnPP did not worsen ischemic damage when given 30min before
pMCAO. ZnPP induced HO-1 expression in the cerebral vasculature at 24h, when it
was still detected by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) in plasma.
While ZnPP was not found in brain tissue extracts of controls, it could be
detected after ischemia, supporting that a small fraction of the injected drug
can reach the tissue following blood-brain barrier breakdown. The deleterious
effect of inhibiting HO activity in ischemia became apparent in the presence of
ZnPP-induced HO-1, which is known to exert effects independent of its enzymatic
activity. In conclusion, HO-1 induction after ischemia was associated to
down-regulation of transcriptional repressor Bach-1, and induction of HO-1 when
HO enzymatic activity was inhibited was related to worst outcome after brain
ischemia.

Copyright © 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23562577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;33(11):2212-27. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01256-12. Epub 2013 Mar 
25.

Fanconi anemia group J helicase and MRE11 nuclease interact to facilitate the DNA
damage response.

Suhasini AN(1), Sommers JA, Muniandy PA, Coulombe Y, Cantor SB, Masson JY,
Seidman MM, Brosh RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Aging, NIH, NIH Biomedical Research Center, Baltimore,
MD, USA.

FANCJ mutations are linked to Fanconi anemia (FA) and increase breast cancer
risk. FANCJ encodes a DNA helicase implicated in homologous recombination (HR)
repair of double-strand breaks (DSBs) and interstrand cross-links (ICLs), but its
mechanism of action is not well understood. Here we show with live-cell imaging
that FANCJ recruitment to laser-induced DSBs but not psoralen-induced ICLs is
dependent on nuclease-active MRE11. FANCJ interacts directly with MRE11 and
inhibits its exonuclease activity in a specific manner, suggesting that FANCJ
regulates the MRE11 nuclease to facilitate DSB processing and appropriate end
resection. Cells deficient in FANCJ and MRE11 show increased ionizing radiation
(IR) resistance, reduced numbers of <U+03B3>H2AX and RAD51 foci, and elevated numbers of
DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit foci, suggesting that HR is
compromised and the nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) pathway is elicited to help 
cells cope with IR-induced strand breaks. Interplay between FANCJ and MRE11
ensures a normal response to IR-induced DSBs, whereas FANCJ involvement in ICL
repair is regulated by MLH1 and the FA pathway. Our findings are discussed in
light of the current model for HR repair.

PMCID: PMC3648079
PMID: 23530059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2013 May;304(9):H1215-24. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00796.2012. Epub 2013 Mar 11.

Hydrogen sulfide preconditions the db/db diabetic mouse heart against
ischemia-reperfusion injury by activating Nrf2 signaling in an Erk-dependent
manner.

Peake BF(1), Nicholson CK, Lambert JP, Hood RL, Amin H, Amin S, Calvert JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Carlyle Fraser
Heart Center, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30308, USA.

Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) therapy protects nondiabetic animals in various models of 
myocardial injury, including acute myocardial infarction and heart failure. Here,
we sought to examine whether H2S therapy provides cardioprotection in the setting
of type 2 diabetes. H2S therapy in the form of sodium sulfide (Na2S) beginning 24
h or 7 days before myocardial ischemia significantly decreased myocardial injury 
in db/db diabetic mice (12 wk of age). In an effort to evaluate the signaling
mechanism responsible for the observed cardioprotection, we focused on the role
of nuclear factor E2-related factor (Nrf2) signaling. Our results indicate that
diabetes does not alter the ability of H2S to increase the nuclear localization
of Nrf2, but does impair aspects of Nrf2 signaling. Specifically, the expression 
of NADPH quinine oxidoreductase 1 was increased after the acute treatment,
whereas the expression of heme-oxygenase-1 (HO-1) was only increased after 7 days
of treatment. This discrepancy was found to be the result of an increased nuclear
expression of Bach1, a known repressor of HO-1 transcription, which blocked the
binding of Nrf2 to the HO-1 promoter. Further analysis revealed that 7 days of
Na2S treatment overcame this impairment by removing Bach1 from the nucleus in an 
Erk1/2-dependent manner. Our findings demonstrate for the first time that
exogenous administration of Na2S attenuates myocardial ischemia-reperfusion
injury in db/db mice, suggesting the potential therapeutic effects of H2S in
treating a heart attack in the setting of type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3652093
PMID: 23479260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 May;40(5):3731-7. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2449-3. Epub 2013
Mar 1.

Microarray gene expression profiling analysis combined with bioinformatics in
multiple sclerosis.

Liu M(1), Hou X, Zhang P, Hao Y, Yang Y, Wu X, Zhu D, Guan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Changhai Hospital, 168 Changhai Road, Shanghai
200433, China.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most prevalent demyelinating disease and the
principal cause of neurological disability in young adults. Recent microarray
gene expression profiling studies have identified several genetic variants
contributing to the complex pathogenesis of MS, however, expressional and
functional studies are still required to further understand its molecular
mechanism. The present study aimed to analyze the molecular mechanism of MS using
microarray analysis combined with bioinformatics techniques. We downloaded the
gene expression profile of MS from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) and analysed the
microarray data using the differentially coexpressed genes (DCGs) and links
package in R and Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery.
The regulatory impact factor (RIF) algorithm was used to measure the impact
factor of transcription factor. A total of 1,297 DCGs between MS patients and
healthy controls were identified. Functional annotation indicated that these DCGs
were associated with immune and neurological functions. Furthermore, the RIF
result suggested that IKZF1, BACH1, CEBPB, EGR1, FOS may play central regulatory 
roles in controlling gene expression in the pathogenesis of MS. Our findings
confirm the presence of multiple molecular alterations in MS and indicate the
possibility for identifying prognostic factors associated with MS pathogenesis.

PMID: 23456643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2013 Dec;21(6):511-7. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e318282ac20.

Immunohistochemical study of the Nrf2 pathway in colorectal cancer: Nrf2
expression is closely correlated to Keap1 in the tumor and Bach1 in the normal
tissue.

Chang LC(1), Fan CW, Tseng WK, Chen JR, Chein HP, Hwang CC, Hua CC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology Internal Medicine Division of Colon and Rectal
Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Keelung & Chang Gung University, Taiwan,
Republic of China.

Oxidative stress is a contributing factor in the carcinogenesis of colorectal
cancer. The Nrf2 [nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2; NFE2L2] pathway is
one of the major cellular defense mechanisms against oxidative stress. This study
investigated the expression of the Nrf2 pathway in colorectal cancer.
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue arrays consisting of the tumor, adjacent 
normal, and distant normal tissues from the resected specimens of 83 colorectal
cancer patients were subjected to immunohistochemical (IHC) staining with
antibodies against Nrf2, kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1), p21, P62,
Parkinson protein 7 (Park7), prohibitin, BTB and CNC homology 1 (Bach1), CD34 and
8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG). The mean IHC density of each IHC staining
was digitally analyzed. The results showed that molecules of the Nrf2 pathway
were actively expressed, with different expression profiles among the tumor and
normal tissues. The oxidative stress, represented by the mean IHC staining
density of 8-OHdG, did not differ but was correlated with the expressions of
different Nrf2 pathway molecules to a varied extent in tumor and normal tissues
of colorectal cancer. Keap1 [estimate, 0.49; 95% confidence interval (CI),
0.19-0.79] and Bach1 (estimate, 0.24; 95% CI, 0.11-0.38) were significant
predictors for the expression of 8-OHdG and had the closest proximity to Nrf2 in 
the cluster dendrogram of the tumor and distant normal tissues, respectively.
Advanced stage (estimate, 14.9; 95% CI, 2.99-26.8) and current smoker (estimate, 
15.6; 95% CI, 1.92-29.3) were significant predictors with high estimates for
Bach1 in the adjacent and distant normal tissues, respectively. In colorectal
cancer, the molecules of the Nrf2 pathway have different expression profiles and 
a difference in their importance, especially Keap1 and Bach1, related to Nrf2 and
oxidative stress among tumor and normal tissues.

PMID: 23455180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2013 Mar-Apr;19(4):740-53. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0b013e3182802968.

BTB and CNC homolog 1 (Bach1) deficiency ameliorates TNBS colitis in mice: role
of M2 macrophages and heme oxygenase-1.

Harusato A(1), Naito Y, Takagi T, Uchiyama K, Mizushima K, Hirai Y, Higashimura
Y, Katada K, Handa O, Ishikawa T, Yagi N, Kokura S, Ichikawa H, Muto A, Igarashi 
K, Yoshikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of Medical Science,
Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: BTB and CNC homolog 1 (Bach1) is a transcriptional repressor of heme 
oxygenase-1 (HO-1), which plays an important role in the protection of cells and 
tissues against acute and chronic inflammation. However, the role of Bach1 in the
gastrointestinal mucosal defense system remains little understood. HO-1 supports 
the suppression of experimental colitis and localizes mainly in macrophages in
colonic mucosa. This study was undertaken to elucidate the Bach1/HO-1 system's
effects on the pathogenesis of experimental colitis.
METHODS: This study used C57BL/6 (wild-type) and homozygous Bach1-deficient
C57BL/6 mice in which colonic damage was induced by the administration of an
enema of 2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS). Subsequently, they were
evaluated macroscopically, histologically, and biochemically. Peritoneal
macrophages from the respective mice were isolated and analyzed. Then, wild-type 
mice were injected with peritoneal macrophages from the respective mice. Acute
colitis was induced similarly.
RESULTS: TNBS-induced colitis was inhibited in Bach1-deficient mice. TNBS
administration increased the expression of HO-1 messenger RNA and protein in
colonic mucosa in Bach1-deficient mice. The expression of HO-1 mainly localized
in F4/80-immunopositive and CD11b-immunopositive macrophages. Isolated peritoneal
macrophages from Bach1-deficient mice highly expressed HO-1 and also manifested
M2 macrophage markers, such as Arginase-1, Fizz-1, Ym1, and MRC1. Furthermore,
TNBS-induced colitis was inhibited by the transfer of Bach1-deficient macrophages
into wild-type mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Deficiency of Bach1 ameliorated TNBS-induced colitis.
Bach1-deficient macrophages played a key role in protection against colitis.
Targeting of this mechanism is applicable to cell therapy for human inflammatory 
bowel disease.

PMID: 23446334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Jan;66:36-44. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.02.008.
Epub 2013 Feb 19.

Regulation of Nrf2-an update.

Niture SK(1), Khatri R(1), Jaiswal AK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. Electronic address:
ajaiswal@som.umaryland.edu.

Nrf2:INrf2 (Keap1) are cellular sensors of oxidative and electrophilic stress.
Nrf2 is a nuclear factor that controls the expression and coordinated induction
of a battery of genes that encode detoxifying enzymes, drug transporters,
antiapoptotic proteins, and proteasomes. In the basal state, Nrf2 is constantly
degraded in the cytoplasm by its inhibitor, INrf2. INrf2 functions as an adapter 
for Cul3/Rbx1 E3 ubiquitin ligase-mediated degradation of Nrf2. Chemicals,
including antioxidants, tocopherols including a-tocopherol (vitamin E), and
phytochemicals, and radiation antagonize the Nrf2:INrf2 interaction and lead to
the stabilization and activation of Nrf2. The signaling events involve
preinduction, induction, and postinduction responses that tightly control Nrf2
activation and repression back to the basal state. Oxidative/electrophilic
signals activate unknown tyrosine kinases in a preinduction response that
phosphorylates specific residues on Nrf2 negative regulators, INrf2, Fyn, and
Bach1, leading to their nuclear export, ubiquitination, and degradation. This
prepares nuclei for unhindered import of Nrf2. Oxidative/electrophilic
modification of INrf2 cysteine 151 followed by PKC phosphorylation of Nrf2 serine
40 in the induction response results in the escape or release of Nrf2 from INrf2.
Nrf2 is thus stabilized and translocates to the nucleus, resulting in a
coordinated activation of gene expression. This is followed by a postinduction
response that controls the "switching off" of Nrf2-activated gene expression.
GSK3ß, under the control of AKT and PI3K, phosphorylates Fyn, leading to Fyn
nuclear localization. Fyn phosphorylates Nrf2 Y568, resulting in nuclear export
and degradation of Nrf2. The activation and repression of Nrf2 provide protection
against oxidative/electrophilic stress and associated diseases, including cancer.
However, deregulation of INrf2 and Nrf2 due to mutations may lead to nuclear
accumulation of Nrf2 that reduces apoptosis and promotes oncogenesis and drug
resistance.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3773280
PMID: 23434765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Biology (Basel). 2013 Jan 2;2(1):40-63. doi: 10.3390/biology2010040.

BRCA1 and Its Network of Interacting Partners.

Christou CM(1), Kyriacou K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electron Microscopy/Molecular Pathology, Cyprus School of
Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, 6
International Airport Avenue, P.O. Box 23462, 1683 Nicosia, Cyprus.
charitac@cing.ac.cy. (2)Department of Electron Microscopy/Molecular Pathology,
Cyprus School of Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and
Genetics, 6 International Airport Avenue, P.O. Box 23462, 1683 Nicosia, Cyprus.
kyriacos@cing.ac.cy.

BRCA1 is a large multi-domain protein with a pivotal role in maintaining genome
stability and cell cycle progression. Germline mutations in the BRCA1 gene confer
an estimated lifetime risk of 60%-80% for breast cancer and 15%-60% for ovarian
cancer. Many of the germline mutations associated with cancer development are
concentrated in the amino terminal RING domain and the carboxyl terminal BRCT
motifs of BRCA1, which are the most well-characterized regions of the protein.
The function of BRCA1 in DNA repair, transcription and cell cycle control through
the DNA damage response is orchestrated through its association with an
impressive repertoire of protein complexes. The association of BRCA1 with
ATM/ATR, CHK2 and Aurora A protein kinases regulates cell cycle progression,
whilst its association with RAD51 has a direct impact on the repair of double
strand DNA breaks (DSBs) by homologous recombination (HR). BRCA1 interactions
with the MRN complex of proteins, with the BRCC complex of proteins that exhibit 
E3 ligase activity and with the phosphor proteins CtIP, BACH1 (BRIP1) and Abraxas
(CCDC98) are also implicated in DNA repair mechanisms and cell cycle checkpoint
control. BRCA1 through its association with specific proteins and multi-protein
complexes is a sentinel of the normal cell cycle control and DNA repair.

PMCID: PMC4009870
PMID: 24832651  [PubMed]


97. Gene. 2013 Dec 10;532(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.12.009. Epub 2012 Dec 14.

Regulation of the MIR155 host gene in physiological and pathological processes.

Elton TS(1), Selemon H, Elton SM, Parinandi NL.

Author information: 
(1)Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
OH, USA; College of Pharmacy, Division of Pharmacology, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. Electronic address:
terry.elton@osumc.edu.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a family of small nonprotein-coding RNAs, play a critical
role in posttranscriptional gene regulation by acting as adaptors for the
miRNA-induced silencing complex to inhibit gene expression by targeting mRNAs for
translational repression and/or cleavage. miR-155-5p and miR-155-3p are processed
from the B-cell Integration Cluster (BIC) gene (now designated, MIR155 host gene 
or MIR155HG). MiR-155-5p is highly expressed in both activated B- and T-cells and
in monocytes/macrophages. MiR-155-5p is one of the best characterized miRNAs and 
recent data indicate that miR-155-5p plays a critical role in various
physiological and pathological processes such as hematopoietic lineage
differentiation, immunity, inflammation, viral infections, cancer, cardiovascular
disease, and Down syndrome. In this review we summarize the mechanisms by which
MIR155HG expression can be regulated. Given that the pathologies mediated by
miR-155-5p result from the over-expression of this miRNA it may be possible to
therapeutically attenuate miR-155-5p levels in the treatment of several
pathological processes.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23246696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2013 Jul;66(3):431-41. doi: 10.1007/s12013-012-9491-6.

Intermittent hypoxia-induced NF-<U+03BA>B and HO-1 regulation in human endothelial
EA.hy926 cells.

Han Q(1), Yeung SC, Ip MS, Mak JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Intermittent hypoxia (IH) is a hallmark feature in obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) 
which is increasingly recognized as an independent risk factor for
atherosclerosis. Oxidative stress, inflammation, and cell apoptosis are major
pathological events initiating or accelerating atherogenesis. This study
addressed whether IH would affect these proatherogenic factors in endothelial
cells and the mechanistic pathways involved. EA.hy926 cells were exposed to
intermittent normoxia or IH for different numbers of cycles (32, 64, or 96). IH
exposure time-dependently raised cellular GSSG/GSH ratio, increased production of
IL-6 and IL-8, and accelerated cell apoptosis and death, concurrent with
activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and inhibition of Nrf2/HO-1 pathways. At 64 cycles,
inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B attenuated IH-induced cellular oxidative stress and
accumulation of inflammatory cytokines in cell culture medium but aggravated
IH-induced cell apoptosis, while stimulation of HO-1 suppressed IH-induced
cellular oxidative stress and cell apoptosis without affecting accumulation of
inflammatory cytokines in cell culture medium. We demonstrated that early stage
of exposure to IH-induced oxidative and inflammatory stresses leading to
acceleration of cell apoptosis via NF-<U+03BA>B and Nrf2/HO-1 pathways in endothelial
cells, suggesting the potential mechanisms for IH-induced vascular pathogenesis, 
in resemblance to OSA.

PMID: 23238643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Jan;137(2):553-8. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2364-2.
Epub 2012 Dec 6.

Association between BRIP1 (BACH1) polymorphisms and breast cancer risk: a
meta-analysis.

Pabalan N(1), Jarjanazi H, Ozcelik H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Natural Sciences, Saint Louis University, 2600, Baguio, Philippines.

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Apr;150(3):467-71.

Inconsistency of reported associations between the Pro919Ser polymorphism in the 
BRCA1 interacting protein 1 (BRIP1) gene and breast cancer prompted us to
undertake a meta-analysis. Although investigated by fewer studies, we have also
studied the risk associated with the two additional BRIP1 polymorphisms, C47G and
G64A, and breast cancer riskWe conducted searches of the published literature in 
MEDLINE through PubMed up to October 2012. Individual data on 5,122 cases and
5,735 controls from eight published case-control studies were evaluated for the
Pro919Ser polymorphism. Accordingly, C47G and G64A polymorphisms were studied in 
1,539 cases and 1,183 controls, and 667 and 782, respectively.In the overall
analysis, association was lacking between the Pro919Ser polymorphism and breast
cancer risk (odds ratio [OR] 0.98-1.02), materially unchanged when confined to
subjects of European ancestry (OR 0.96-1.03) or even in the high-powered studies 
(OR 0.97-1.03). In the menopausal subgroups, premenopausal women followed the
null pattern (OR 0.94-0.98) for the Pro and Ser allele contrasts, but not for the
Pro-Ser genotype comparison where significant increased risk was observed (OR
1.39, P = 0.002). The postmenopausal women (>50 years) exhibited a range of
pooled effects from protection (OR 0.83, P = 0.11) in the Pro-Ser genotype to
slightly increased risk (OR 1.12-1.16, P = 0.28-0.42) in the Pro and Ser allele
comparisons. The G64A polymorphism effects were essentially null (OR 0.90-0.98), 
but C47G was found to confer non-significantly increased risk under all genetic
models (OR 1.27-1.40).Upon conclusion, overall summary estimates imply no
associations but suggest susceptibility among carriers of the C47G polymorphism
and Pro-Ser genotype in premenopausal women. The premenopausal findings and
variable outcomes in postmenopausal women require more studies for confirmation.

PMID: 23225146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Commun Integr Biol. 2012 Sep 1;5(5):477-9. doi: 10.4161/cib.21149.

Bach1 as a regulator of mitosis, beyond its transcriptional function.

Li J(1), Shiraki T, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Center for Regulatory Epigenome and Diseases;
Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine; Sendai, Japan.

Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor which modulates several critical
transcriptional responses, such as the expression of the heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) 
gene in response to oxidative stress. In our recent study, we found that Bach1
possesses a novel role in mitotic chromosome alignment during metaphase. Upon
BACH1 depletion in HeLa cells, mitotic chromosomes become unstable. This defect
was efficiently rescued by expressing Bach1 fragments that lack the DNA binding
domain, indicating that its function in mitosis involves a
transcription-independent mechanism. The nuclear export signal (NES/CLS) of Bach1
is required for the mitotic function. Bach1 is excluded from the mitotic
chromosomes depending on its NES/CLS and the nuclear exporter Crm1. Our findings 
suggest that Bach1 might mediate the regulation of mitotic chromosomes under
conditions of cellular stress.

PMCID: PMC3502211
PMID: 23181164  [PubMed]


101. Genes Cells. 2012 Dec;17(12):962-70. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12011. Epub 2012 Nov 15.

CtIP- and ATR-dependent FANCJ phosphorylation in response to DNA strand breaks
mediated by DNA replication.

Sakasai R(1), Sakai A, Iimori M, Kiyonari S, Matsuoka K, Kakeji Y, Kitao H,
Maehara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Innovative Anticancer Strategy for Therapeutics and Diagnosis Group,
Innovation Center for Medical Redox Navigation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1
Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

FANCJ, also called BACH1/BRIP1, is a 5'-3' DEAH helicase, whose mutations are
known as a risk factor for Fanconi anemia and also breast and ovarian cancer.
FANCJ is thought to contribute to DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair and
S-phase checkpoint through binding to multiple partner proteins, such as BRCA1
and TopBP1, but its molecular regulation remains unclear. We focused on DNA
damage-induced phosphorylation of FANCJ and found that reagents that cause DSB or
replication fork stalling induce FANCJ hyperphosphorylation. In particular,
camptothecin (CPT) induced rapid and efficient FANCJ hyperphosphorylation that
was largely dependent on TopBP1 and ATM-Rad3 related (ATR) kinase. Furthermore,
DNA end resection that exposes single-strand DNA at the DSB site was required for
hyperphosphorylation. Interestingly, upon CPT treatment, a dramatic increase in
the FANCJ-TopBP1 complex was observed, and this increase was not alleviated even 
when ATR-dependent hyperphosphorylation was suppressed. These results suggest
that FANCJ function may be modulated by hyperphosphorylation in a DNA end
resection- and ATR-dependent manner and by FANCJ-TopBP1 complex formation in
response to replication-coupled DSBs.

© 2012 The Authors Genes to Cells © 2012 by the Molecular Biology Society of
Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23157317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Subcell Biochem. 2013;61:105-18. doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-4525-4_5.

Metabolic aspects of epigenome: coupling of S-adenosylmethionine synthesis and
gene regulation on chromatin by SAMIT module.

Igarashi K(1), Katoh Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Center for Regulatory Epigenome and Diseases,
Tohoku University School of Medicine, Seiryo 2-1, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan,
igarashi@med.tohoku.ac.jp.

Histone and DNA methyltransferases utilize S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM), a key
intermediate of sulfur amino acid metabolism, as a donor of methyl group. SAM is 
biosynthesized by methionine adenosyltransferase (MAT) using two substrates,
methionine and ATP. Three distinct forms of MAT (MATI, MATII and MATIII), encoded
by two distinct genes (MAT1A and MAT2A), have been identified in mammals. MATII
consists of a2 catalytic subunit encoded by MAT2A and ß regulatory subunit
encoded by MAT2B, but the physiological function of the ß subunit is not clear.
MafK is a member of Maf oncoproteins and functions as both transcription
activator and repressor by forming diverse heterodimers to bind to DNA elements
termed Maf recognition elements. Proteomics analysis of MafK-interactome revealed
its interaction with both MATIIa and MATIIß. They are recruited specifically to
MafK target genes and are required for their repression by MafK and its partner
Bach1. Because the catalytic activity of MATIIa is required for the MafK target
gene repression, MATIIa is suggested to provide SAM locally on chromatin where it
is recruited. One of the unexpected features of MATII is that MATIIa interacts
with many chromatin-related proteins of diverse functions such as histone
modification, chromatin remodeling, transcription regulation, and
nucleo-cytoplasmic transport. MATIIa appears to generate multiple, heterogenous
regulatory complexes where it provides SAM. Considering their function, the
heterooligomer of MATIIa and ß is named SAMIT (SAM-integrating transcription)
module within their interactome where it serves SAM for nuclear
methyltransferases.

PMID: 23150248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Nat Immunol. 2012 Nov;13(11):1118-28. doi: 10.1038/ni.2419. Epub 2012 Sep 30.

Gene-expression profiles and transcriptional regulatory pathways that underlie
the identity and diversity of mouse tissue macrophages.

Gautier EL(1), Shay T, Miller J, Greter M, Jakubzick C, Ivanov S, Helft J, Chow
A, Elpek KG, Gordonov S, Mazloom AR, Ma'ayan A, Chua WJ, Hansen TH, Turley SJ,
Merad M, Randolph GJ; Immunological Genome Consortium.

Collaborators: Gautier EL, Jakubzick C, Randolph GJ, Best AJ, Knell J, Goldrath
A, Miller J, Brown B, Merad M, Jojic V, Koller D, Cohen N, Brennan P, Brenner M, 
Shay T, Regev A, Fletcher A, Elpek K, Bellemare-Pelletier A, Malhotra D, Turley
S, Jianu R, Laidlaw D, Collins J, Narayan K, Sylvia K, Kang J, Gazit R, Garrison 
BS, Rossi DJ, Kim F, Rao TN, Wagers A, Shinton SA, Hardy RR, Monach P, Bezman NA,
Sun JC, Kim CC, Lanier LL, Heng T, Kreslavsky T, Painter M, Ericson J, Davis S,
Mathis D, Benoist C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

We assessed gene expression in tissue macrophages from various mouse organs. The 
diversity in gene expression among different populations of macrophages was
considerable. Only a few hundred mRNA transcripts were selectively expressed by
macrophages rather than dendritic cells, and many of these were not present in
all macrophages. Nonetheless, well-characterized surface markers, including MerTK
and Fc<U+03B3>R1 (CD64), along with a cluster of previously unidentified transcripts,
were distinctly and universally associated with mature tissue macrophages. TCEF3,
C/EBP-a, Bach1 and CREG-1 were among the transcriptional regulators predicted to 
regulate these core macrophage-associated genes. The mRNA encoding other
transcription factors, such as Gata6, was associated with single macrophage
populations. We further identified how these transcripts and the proteins they
encode facilitated distinguishing macrophages from dendritic cells.

PMCID: PMC3558276
PMID: 23023392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Oncol. 2013 Feb;7(1):85-100. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2012.08.002. Epub 2012 Sep
11.

Polymorphic variations in the FANCA gene in high-risk non-BRCA1/2 breast cancer
individuals from the French Canadian population.

Litim N(1), Labrie Y, Desjardins S, Ouellette G, Plourde K, Belleau P; INHERIT
BRCAs, Durocher F.

Collaborators: Bessette P, Chiquette J, Laframboise R, Lepine J, Lesperance B,
Plante M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genomics Laboratory, Division of Endocrinology and Genomics of CHUQ
Research Centre and Laval University, Québec G1V 4G2, Canada.

The majority of genes associated with breast cancer susceptibility, including
BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, are involved in DNA repair mechanisms. Moreover, among the
genes recently associated with an increased susceptibility to breast cancer, four
are Fanconi Anemia (FA) genes: FANCD1/BRCA2, FANCJ/BACH1/BRIP1, FANCN/PALB2 and
FANCO/RAD51C. FANCA is implicated in DNA repair and has been shown to interact
directly with BRCA1. It has been proposed that the formation of FANCA/G
(dependent upon the phosphorylation of FANCA) and FANCB/L sub-complexes
altogether with FANCM, represent the initial step for DNA repair activation and
subsequent formation of other sub-complexes leading to ubiquitination of FANCD2
and FANCI. As only approximately 25% of inherited breast cancers are attributable
to BRCA1/2 mutations, FANCA therefore becomes an attractive candidate for breast 
cancer susceptibility. We thus analyzed FANCA gene in 97 high-risk French
Canadian non-BRCA1/2 breast cancer individuals by direct sequencing as well as in
95 healthy control individuals from the same population. Among a total of 85
sequence variants found in either or both series, 28 are coding variants and 19
of them are missense variations leading to amino acid change. Three of the amino 
acid changes, namely Thr561Met, Cys625Ser and particularly Ser1088Phe, which has 
been previously reported to be associated with FA, are predicted to be damaging
by the SIFT and PolyPhen softwares. cDNA amplification revealed significant
expression of 4 alternative splicing events (insertion of an intronic portion of 
intron 10, and the skipping of exons 11, 30 and 31). In silico analyzes of
relevant genomic variants have been performed in order to identify potential
variations involved in the expression of these spliced transcripts. Sequence
variants in FANCA could therefore be potential spoilers of the Fanconi-BRCA
pathway and as a result, they could in turn have an impact in non-BRCA1/2 breast 
cancer families.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23021409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Gastric Cancer. 2013 Jul;16(3):345-54. doi: 10.1007/s10120-012-0191-0. Epub 2012 
Sep 12.

Decreased FANCJ caused by 5FU contributes to the increased sensitivity to
oxaliplatin in gastric cancer cells.

Mori R(1), Yoshida K, Tanahashi T, Yawata K, Kato J, Okumura N, Tsutani Y, Okada 
M, Oue N, Yasui W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Gifu University, Graduate School of Medicine,
1-1 Yanagido, Gifu, Gifu, 501-1194, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Oxaliplatin is effective against many types of cancer, and the
combination of 5-fluorouracil (5FU) and oxaliplatin is synergistically effective 
against gastric cancer, as well as colon cancer. The FANCJ protein is one of the 
Fanconi anemia (FA) gene products, and its interaction with the tumor suppressor 
BRCA1 is required for DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair. FANCJ also functions 
in interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) repair by linking to mismatch repair protein
complex MLH1-PMS2 (MutLa). While oxaliplatin causes ICLs, 5FU is considered to
cause DSBs. Therefore, we investigated the importance of FANCJ in the synergistic
effects of oxaliplatin and 5FU in MKN45 gastric cancer cells and the derived
5FU-resistant cell line, MKN45/F2R.
METHODS: MKN1, TMK1, MKN45, and MKN45/F2R (5FU-resistant) gastric cancer cells
were treated with 5FU and/or oxaliplatin. The signaling pathway was evaluated by 
a western blotting analysis and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). Drug resistance was evaluated by the
3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-tetrazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay.
RESULTS: In MKN45 cells, the combination of 5FU and oxaliplatin had synergistic
effects. DSBs appeared when the cells were treated with 5FU. FANCJ was
down-regulated, and BRCA1 was induced in a dose- and time-dependent manner. MKN45
cells showed increased sensitivity to oxaliplatin when FANCJ was knocked down by 
short interfering (si) RNA. However, these findings were not observed in
MKN45/F2R 5FU-resistant cells.
CONCLUSION: These results strongly suggest that the decrease in FANCJ caused by
5FU treatment leads to an increase in sensitivity to oxaliplatin, thus indicating
that the FANCJ protein plays an important role in the synergism of the
combination of 5FU and oxaliplatin.

PMCID: PMC3713262
PMID: 22968820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(8):e1002884. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002884. Epub 2012 Aug
23.

Ago HITS-CLIP expands understanding of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
miRNA function in primary effusion lymphomas.

Haecker I(1), Gay LA, Yang Y, Hu J, Morse AM, McIntyre LM, Renne R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2013 Mar;9(3). doi:
10.1371/annotation/bb6f7450-8506-41c3-8519-020df8b382b9.

KSHV is the etiological agent of Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), primary effusion lymphoma
(PEL), and a subset of multicentricCastleman's disease (MCD). The fact that
KSHV-encoded miRNAs are readily detectable in all KSHV-associated tumors suggests
a potential role in viral pathogenesis and tumorigenesis. MiRNA-mediated
regulation of gene expression is a complex network with each miRNA having many
potential targets, and to date only few KSHV miRNA targets have been
experimentally determined. A detailed understanding of KSHV miRNA functions
requires high-through putribonomics to globally analyze putative miRNA targets in
a cell type-specific manner. We performed Ago HITS-CLIP to identify viral and
cellular miRNAs and their cognate targets in two latently KSHV-infected PEL cell 
lines. Ago HITS-CLIP recovered 1170 and 950 cellular KSHV miRNA targets from
BCBL-1 and BC-3, respectively. Importantly, enriched clusters contained KSHV
miRNA seed matches in the 3'UTRs of numerous well characterized targets, among
them THBS1, BACH1, and C/EBPß. KSHV miRNA targets were strongly enriched for
genes involved in multiple pathways central for KSHV biology, such as apoptosis, 
cell cycle regulation, lymphocyte proliferation, and immune evasion, thus further
supporting a role in KSHV pathogenesis and potentially tumorigenesis. A limited
number of viral transcripts were also enriched by HITS-CLIP including vIL-6
expressed only in a subset of PEL cells during latency. Interestingly, Ago
HITS-CLIP revealed extremely high levels of Ago-associated KSHV miRNAs especially
in BC-3 cells where more than 70% of all miRNAs are of viral origin. This
suggests that in addition to seed match-specific targeting of cellular genes,
KSHV miRNAs may also function by hijacking RISCs, thereby contributing to a
global de-repression of cellular gene expression due to the loss of regulation by
human miRNAs. In summary, we provide an extensive list of cellular and viral
miRNA targets representing an important resource to decipher KSHV miRNA function.

PMCID: PMC3426530
PMID: 22927820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 28;287(40):33533-44. Epub 2012 Aug 8.

Transcriptional network analysis identifies BACH1 as a master regulator of breast
cancer bone metastasis.

Liang Y(1), Wu H, Lei R, Chong RA, Wei Y, Lu X, Tagkopoulos I, Kung SY, Yang Q,
Hu G, Kang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences/Shanghai JiaoTong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

The application of functional genomic analysis of breast cancer metastasis has
led to the identification of a growing number of organ-specific metastasis genes,
which often function in concert to facilitate different steps of the metastatic
cascade. However, the gene regulatory network that controls the expression of
these metastasis genes remains largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate a
computational approach for the deconvolution of transcriptional networks to
discover master regulators of breast cancer bone metastasis. Several known
regulators of breast cancer bone metastasis such as Smad4 and HIF1 were
identified in our analysis. Experimental validation of the networks revealed
BACH1, a basic leucine zipper transcription factor, as the common regulator of
several functional metastasis genes, including MMP1 and CXCR4. Ectopic expression
of BACH1 enhanced the malignance of breast cancer cells, and conversely, BACH1
knockdown significantly reduced bone metastasis. The expression of BACH1 and its 
target genes was linked to the higher risk of breast cancer recurrence in
patients. This study established BACH1 as the master regulator of breast cancer
bone metastasis and provided a paradigm to identify molecular determinants in
complex pathological processes.

PMCID: PMC3460454
PMID: 22875853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Oncogene. 2013 Jul 4;32(27):3231-45. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.336. Epub 2012 Jul 30.

Bach1 is critical for the transformation of mouse embryonic fibroblasts by
Ras(V12) and maintains ERK signaling.

Nakanome A(1), Brydun A, Matsumoto M, Ota K, Funayama R, Nakayama K, Ono M, Shiga
K, Kobayashi T, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS), by-products of aerobic respiration, promote
genetic instability and contribute to the malignant transformation of cells.
Among the genes related to ROS metabolism, Bach1 is a repressor of the oxidative 
stress response, and a negative regulator of ROS-induced cellular senescence
directed by p53 in higher eukaryotes. While ROS are intimately involved in
carcinogenesis, it is not clear whether Bach1 is involved in this process. We
found that senescent Bach1-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) underwent
spontaneous immortalization the same as did the wild-type cells. When transduced 
with constitutively active Ras (H-Ras(V12)), the proliferation and colony
formation of these cells in vitro were markedly reduced. When transplanted into
athymic nude mice, the growth and vascularization of tumors derived from
Bach1-deficient cells were also decreased. Gene expression profiling of the MEFs 
revealed a new H-Ras(V12) signature, which was distinct from the previously
reported signatures in epithelial tumors, and was partly dependent on Bach1. The 
Bach1-deficient cells showed diminished phosphorylation of MEK and ERK1/2 in
response to H-Ras(V12), which was consistent with the alterations in the gene
expression profile, including phosphatase genes. Finally, Bach1-deficient mice
were less susceptible to 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxidide (4-NQO)-induced tongue
carcinoma than wild-type mice. Our data provide evidence for a critical role of
Bach1 in cell transformation and tumor growth induced by activated H-Ras(V12).

PMID: 22847612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Eur Spine J. 2012 Sep;21(9):1748-57. Epub 2012 Jul 26.

Heme oxygenase-1 modulates degeneration of the intervertebral disc after puncture
in Bach 1 deficient mice.

Ohta R(1), Tanaka N, Nakanishi K, Kamei N, Nakamae T, Izumi B, Fujioka Y, Ochi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Hiroshima University, Kasumi, Hiroshima, 734-8551, Japan, xxxhr307@ybb.ne.jp

PURPOSE: Intervertebral disc degeneration is considered to be a major feature of 
low back pain. Furthermore, oxidative stress has been shown to be an important
factor in degenerative diseases such as osteoarthritis and is considered a cause 
of intervertebral disc degeneration. The purpose of this study was to clarify the
correlation between oxidative stress and intervertebral disc degeneration using
Broad complex-Tramtrack-Bric-a-brac and cap'n'collar homology 1 deficient (Bach
1-/-) mice which highly express heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). HO-1 protects cells from
oxidative stress.
METHODS: Caudal discs of 12-week-old and 1-year-old mice were evaluated as
age-related models. Each group and period, 5 mice (a total of 20 mice, a total of
20 discs) were evaluated as age-related model. C9-C10 caudal discs in 12-week-old
Bach 1-/- and wild-type mice were punctured using a 29-gauge needle as annulus
puncture model. Each group and period, 5 mice (a total of 60 mice, a total of 60 
discs) were evaluated. The progress of disc degeneration was evaluated at
pre-puncture, 1, 2, 4, 8 and 12 weeks post-puncture. Radiographic, histologic and
immunohistologic analysis were performed to compare between Bach 1-/- and
wild-type mice.
RESULTS: In the age-related model, there were no significant differences between 
Bach 1-/- and wild-type mice radiologically and histologically. However, in the
annulus puncture model, histological scoring revealed significant difference at 8
and 12 weeks post-puncture. The number of HO-1 positive cells was significantly
greater in Bach 1-/- mice at every period. The apoptosis rate was significantly
lower at 1 and 2 weeks post-puncture in Bach 1-/- mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Oxidative stress prevention may avoid the degenerative process of
the intervertebral disc after puncture, reducing the number of apoptosis cells.
High HO-1 expression may also inhibit oxidative stress and delay the process of
intervertebral disc degeneration.

PMCID: PMC3459108
PMID: 22832873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. PLoS Genet. 2012 Jul;8(7):e1002786. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002786. Epub 2012 
Jul 5.

FANCJ/BACH1 acetylation at lysine 1249 regulates the DNA damage response.

Xie J(1), Peng M, Guillemette S, Quan S, Maniatis S, Wu Y, Venkatesh A, Shaffer
SA, Brosh RM Jr, Cantor SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of America.

BRCA1 promotes DNA repair through interactions with multiple proteins, including 
CtIP and FANCJ (also known as BRIP1/BACH1). While CtIP facilitates DNA end
resection when de-acetylated, the function of FANCJ in repair processing is less 
well defined. Here, we report that FANCJ is also acetylated. Preventing FANCJ
acetylation at lysine 1249 does not interfere with the ability of cells to
survive DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs). However, resistance is achieved with
reduced reliance on recombination. Mechanistically, FANCJ acetylation facilitates
DNA end processing required for repair and checkpoint signaling. This conclusion 
was based on the finding that FANCJ and its acetylation were required for robust 
RPA foci formation, RPA phosphorylation, and Rad51 foci formation in response to 
camptothecin (CPT). Furthermore, both preventing and mimicking FANCJ acetylation 
at lysine 1249 disrupts FANCJ function in checkpoint maintenance. Thus, we
propose that the dynamic regulation of FANCJ acetylation is critical for robust
DNA damage response, recombination-based processing, and ultimately checkpoint
maintenance.

PMCID: PMC3390368
PMID: 22792074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Blood. 2012 Sep 20;120(12):2428-37. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Regulation of APC development, immune response, and autoimmunity by Bach1/HO-1
pathway in mice.

So AY(1), Garcia-Flores Y, Minisandram A, Martin A, Taganov K, Boldin M,
Baltimore D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 90227,
USA.

APCs are essential for innate and adaptive immunity as well as self-immune
tolerance. Here, we show that the Cap'n'collar member Bach1 regulates the
generation of APCs, specifically macrophages and dendritic cells, in mice. The
impaired APC development in Bach1(-/-) mice was accompanied by defects in
downstream T-cell responses and partial protection from experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis. Genomewide analyses identified a panel of Bach1 target genes
and ablation of the direct Bach1 target gene HO-1 exacerbated the impaired APC
development observed in Bach1(-/-) mice. This was attributed to the impaired
ability of HO-1(-/-)Bach1(-/-) double mutants to produce upstream APC progenitor 
cells, including common myeloid progenitor (CMP)-Flk2(+). By contrast, we
observed an increase in hematopoietic stem-progenitor cells (HSPCs) in these
mice, suggesting a developmental block in the progression of HSPCs to CMP-Flk2(+)
and subsequently APCs.

PMCID: PMC3448256
PMID: 22791292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Chem Biol Interact. 2012 Aug 30;199(2):87-95. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2012.06.006.
Epub 2012 Jun 23.

Phenylpropanoid glycosides from plant cell cultures induce heme oxygenase 1 gene 
expression in a human keratinocyte cell line by affecting the balance of NRF2 and
BACH1 transcription factors.

Sgarbossa A(1), Dal Bosco M, Pressi G, Cuzzocrea S, Dal Toso R, Menegazzi M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita e della Riproduzione, Sezione di Chimica
Biologica, Università di Verona, Strada Le Grazie 8, 37124 Verona, Italy.

Phenylpropanoids have several highly significant biological properties in both
plants and animals. Four phenylpropanoid glycosides (PPGs), verbascoside (VB),
forsythoside B (FB), echinacoside (EC) and campneoside I (CP), were purified and 
tested for their capability to activate NRF2 and induce phase II cytoprotective
enzymes in a human keratinocyte cell line (HaCaT). All four substances showed
similar strong antioxidant and radical-scavenging activities as determined by
diphenylpicrylhydrazyl assay. Furthermore, in HaCaT cells, FB and EC are strong
activators of NRF2, the nuclear transcription factor regulating many phase II
detoxifying and cytoprotective enzymes, such as heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1). In
HaCaT cells, FB and EC (200 µM) induced nuclear translocation of NRF2 protein
after 24 h and reduced nuclear protein levels of BACH1, a repressor of the
antioxidant response element. FB and EC greatly HMOX1 mRNA levels by more than
40-fold in 72 h. Cytoplasmic HMOX1 protein levels were also increased at 48 h
after treatment. VB was less active compared to FB and EC, and CP was slightly
active only at later times of treatment. We suggest that hydroxytyrosol (HYD)
could be a potential bioactive metabolite of PPGs since HYD, in equimolar amounts
to PGGs, is able to both activate HO-1 transcription and modify Nrf2/Bach1
nuclear protein levels. This is in agreement with the poor activity of CP, which 
contains a HYD moiety modified by an O-methyl group. In conclusion, FB and EC
from plant cell cultures may provide long-lasting skin protection by induction of
phase II cytoprotective capabilities.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22735309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cell Microbiol. 2012 Oct;14(10):1620-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2012.01827.x.
Epub 2012 Jul 11.

Identification of a novel role of ESAT-6-dependent miR-155 induction during
infection of macrophages with Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Kumar R(1), Halder P, Sahu SK, Kumar M, Kumari M, Jana K, Ghosh Z, Sharma P,
Kundu M, Basu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Bose Institute, Kolkata, India.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M.tb.) replicates in host macrophages to cause
tuberculosis. We have investigated the role of miRNAs in M.tb.-infected murine
RAW264.7 cells and bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs), focusing on miR-155, 
the most highly upregulated miRNA. We observed that miR-155 upregulation is
directly linked to the attenuation of expression of BTB and CNC homology 1
(Bach1) and SH2-containing inositol 5'-phosphatase (SHIP1). Bach1 is a
transcriptional repressor of haem oxygenase-1 (HO-1), whereas SHIP1 inhibits the 
activation of the serine/threonine kinase AKT. We hypothesize that M.tb.-induced 
miR-155 induction leads to repression of Bach1, which augments the expression of 
HO-1, a documented activator of the M.tb. dormancy regulon. SHIP1 repression
facilitates AKT activation, which is required for M.tb. survival. In addition,
M.tb.-induced miR-155 inhibits expression of cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) and
interleukin-6 (Il-6), two modulators of the innate immune response. Importantly, 
we observed that the virulence-associated secreted protein ESAT-6 plays a key
role in miR-155 induction and its subsequent effects on Bach1 and SHIP1
repression. Inhibition of miR-155 hindered survival of M.tb. in RAW264.7 and in
murine BMDMs. Thus, our results offer new insights into the role of miRNAs in
modulation of the host innate immune response by M.tb. for its own benefit.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22712528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Nov-Dec;1819(11-12):1113-22. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.06.001. Epub 2012 Jun 12.

The let-7 microRNA enhances heme oxygenase-1 by suppressing Bach1 and attenuates 
oxidant injury in human hepatocytes.

Hou W(1), Tian Q, Steuerwald NM, Schrum LW, Bonkovsky HL.

Author information: 
(1)The Liver-Biliary-Pancreatic Center, Carolinas Medical Center, Charlotte, NC, 
USA. weihong.hou@carolinashealthcare.org

The let-7 microRNA (miRNA) plays important roles in human liver development and
diseases such as hepatocellular carcinoma, liver fibrosis and hepatitis wherein
oxidative stress accelerates the progression of these diseases. To date, the role
of the let-7 miRNA family in modulation of heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1), a key
cytoprotective enzyme, remains unknown. Our aims were to determine whether let-7 
miRNA directly regulates Bach1, a transcriptional repressor of the HMOX1 gene,
and whether indirect up-regulation of HMOX1 by let-7 miRNA attenuates oxidant
injury in human hepatocytes. The effects of let-7 miRNA on Bach1 and HMOX1 gene
expression in Huh-7 and HepG2 cells were determined by real-time qRT-PCR, Western
blot, and luciferase reporter assays. Dual luciferase reporter assays revealed
that let-7b, let-7c, or miR-98 significantly decreased Bach1 3'-untranslated
region (3'-UTR)-dependent luciferase activity but not mutant Bach1
3'-UTR-dependent luciferase activity, whereas mutant let-7 miRNA containing base 
complementarity with mutant Bach1 3'-UTR restored its effect on mutant reporter
activity. let-7b, let-7c, or miR-98 down-regulated Bach1 protein levels by
50-70%, and subsequently up-regulated HMOX1 gene expression by 3-4 fold, compared
with non-specific controls. Furthermore, Huh-7 cells transfected with let-7b,
let-7c or miR-98 mimic showed increased resistance against oxidant injury induced
by tert-butyl-hydroperoxide (tBuOOH), whereas the protection was abrogated by
over-expression of Bach1. In conclusion, let-7 miRNA directly acts on the 3'-UTR 
of Bach1 and negatively regulates expression of this protein, and thereby
up-regulates HMOX1 gene expression. Over-expression of the let-7 miRNA family
members may represent a novel approach to protecting human hepatocytes from
oxidant injury.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3480558
PMID: 22698995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Biol Chem. 2012 Jan;393(1-2):11-21. doi: 10.1515/BC-2011-227.

Oxidative stress in Fanconi anaemia: from cells and molecules towards prospects
in clinical management.

Pagano G(1), Talamanca AA, Castello G, Pallardó FV, Zatterale A, Degan P.

Author information: 
(1)Italian Association for Fanconi Anaemia Research, I-80133 Naples, Italy.

Fanconi anaemia (FA) is a genetic disease featuring bone marrow failure,
proneness to malignancies, and chromosomal instability. A line of studies has
related FA to oxidative stress (OS). This review attempts to evaluate the
evidence for FA-associated redox abnormalities in the literature from 1981 to
2010. Among 2170 journal articles on FA evaluated, 162 related FA with OS. Early 
studies reported excess oxygen toxicity in FA cells that accumulated oxidative
DNA damage. Prooxidant states were found in white blood cells and body fluids
from FA patients as excess luminol-dependent chemiluminescence,
8-hydroxy-deoxyguanosine, reduced glutathione/oxidized glutathione imbalance, and
tumour necrosis factor-a. Some FA gene products involved in redox homeostasis can
be summarized as follows: (a) FANCA, FANCC, and FANCG interact with cytochrome
P450-related activities and/or respond to oxidative damage; (b) FANCD2 in OS
response interacts with forkhead box O3 and ataxia telangiectasia mutated
protein; (c) FANCG is found in mitochondria and interacts with PRDX3, and FA-G
cells display distorted mitochondria and decreased peroxidase activity; (d) FANCJ
(BACH1/BRIP1) is a repressor of haeme oxygenase-1 gene and senses oxidative base 
damage; (e) antioxidants, such as tempol and resveratrol decrease cancer
incidence and haematopoietic defects in Fancd2(-/-) mice. The overall evidence
for FA-associated OS may suggest designing chemoprevention studies aimed at
delaying the onset of OS-related clinical complications.

PMID: 22628295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 22;287(26):21699-716. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.351338. Epub
2012 May 10.

The Q motif of Fanconi anemia group J protein (FANCJ) DNA helicase regulates its 
dimerization, DNA binding, and DNA repair function.

Wu Y(1), Sommers JA, Loiland JA, Kitao H, Kuper J, Kisker C, Brosh RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institutes of Health Biomedical 
Research Center, NIA, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

The Q motif, conserved in a number of RNA and DNA helicases, is proposed to be
important for ATP binding based on structural data, but its precise biochemical
functions are less certain. FANCJ encodes a Q motif DEAH box DNA helicase
implicated in Fanconi anemia and breast cancer. A Q25A mutation of the invariant 
glutamine in the Q motif abolished its ability to complement cisplatin or
telomestatin sensitivity of a fancj null cell line and exerted a dominant
negative effect. Biochemical characterization of the purified recombinant
FANCJ-Q25A protein showed that the mutation disabled FANCJ helicase activity and 
the ability to disrupt protein-DNA interactions. FANCJ-Q25A showed impaired DNA
binding and ATPase activity but displayed ATP binding and temperature-induced
unfolding transition similar to FANCJ-WT. Size exclusion chromatography and
sedimentation velocity analyses revealed that FANCJ-WT existed as molecular
weight species corresponding to a monomer and a dimer, and the dimeric form
displayed a higher specific activity for ATPase and helicase, as well as greater 
DNA binding. In contrast, FANCJ-Q25A existed only as a monomer, devoid of
helicase activity. Thus, the Q motif is essential for FANCJ enzymatic activity in
vitro and DNA repair function in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3381133
PMID: 22582397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Jul 15;53(2):366-74. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.03.007. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

Sustained expression of heme oxygenase-1 alters iron homeostasis in nonerythroid 
cells.

Li C(1), Lönn ME, Xu X, Maghzal GJ, Frazer DM, Thomas SR, Halliwell B, Richardson
DR, Anderson GJ, Stocker R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, School of Medical Sciences (Pathology) and Bosch
Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.

Heme oxygenases initiate the catabolism of heme, releasing carbon monoxide, iron,
and biliverdin. Sustained induction of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) in nonerythroid
cells plays a key role in many pathological processes, yet the effect of
long-term HO-1 expression on cellular iron metabolism in the absence of exogenous
heme is poorly understood. Here we report that in a model nonerythroid cell, both
transient and stable HO-1 expression increased heme oxygenase activity, but total
cellular heme content was decreased only with transient enzyme expression.
Sustained HO-1 activity increased the expression of both the mitochondrial iron
importer mitoferrin-2 and the rate-limiting enzyme in heme synthesis,
aminolevulinate synthase-1, and it augmented the mitochondrial content of heme.
Also, the expression of transferrin receptor-1 and the activities of
iron-regulatory proteins 1 and 2 decreased, whereas total labile iron and the
regulatory activity of the heme-binding transcription factor Bach1 were
unaltered. In addition, stable, but not transient, HO-1 expression decreased the 
activities of aconitase, as well as increasing proteasomal degradation of
ferritin. Together, our results reveal a novel and coordinated adaptive response 
of nonerythroid cells to sustained HO-1 induction that has an impact on cellular 
iron homeostasis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22579918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012 Oct;19(11):3627-35. doi: 10.1245/s10434-012-2349-8. Epub
2012 Apr 12.

FANCJ expression predicts the response to 5-fluorouracil-based chemotherapy in
MLH1-proficient colorectal cancer.

Nakanishi R(1), Kitao H, Fujinaka Y, Yamashita N, Iimori M, Tokunaga E, Yamashita
N, Morita M, Kakeji Y, Maehara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

PURPOSE: Fanconi anemia protein, FANCJ, directly interacts with MLH1, a key
protein involved in DNA mismatch repair. Deficient mismatch repair, or
microsatellite instability, is a potent marker for the ineffectiveness of
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in colorectal cancer (CRC). We investigated the
significance of FANCJ expression in CRC, focusing on the effects of 5-FU-based
adjuvant chemotherapy.
METHODS: Clinicopathologic features and immunohistochemical expression of FANCJ
and MLH1 were studied in 219 patients with CRC. We also analyzed 5-FU sensitivity
in CRC cell lines with varying levels of FANCJ expression.
RESULTS: FANCJ expression was elevated in tumor tissues compared with normal
epithelial tissue. High expression of FANCJ was significantly associated with
5-FU resistance measured by the SDI test (P < 0.05) and poor recurrence-free
survival (RFS) (P < 0.05). Among patients with stage II/III tumors who received
5-FU, patients with tumors exhibiting high FANCJ expression had significantly
worse RFS than did patients with tumors exhibiting low FANCJ expression (P <
0.01). Among patients who did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy, FANCJ expression
was not correlated with RFS (P = 0.76). High FANCJ expression was correlated with
5-FU resistance in tumors with normal MLH1 expression (P < 0.05) but not in
tumors not expressing MLH1 (P = 0.9). In vitro, FANCJ overexpression was
correlated with 5-FU resistance in MLH1-proficient HCT116 3-6 cells but not in
MLH1-deficient HCT116 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: FANCJ could be a useful biomarker to predict the response to 5-FU
and prognosis of CRC, particularly in tumors with normal MLH1 expression.

PMID: 22526901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2012 Apr;39(4):498-501.

[Cellular functions of BRCA genes - from basic science to therapeutics].

[Article in Japanese]

Miki Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University.

BRCA1 and BRCA2 function for the maintenance of genome stability as "Caretakers
of the genome." BRCA1 is multi- functional and interacts with ATM/ATR and their
substrates to regulate various cellular functions. BRCA1 is important because of 
its checkpoint function at S and G2/M phages in the DNA damage response, and
controls the transcription of genes such as GADD45 or RNA poly II. BRCA1 also
interacts with SWI/SNF and BACH1 to regulate chromatin re-modeling. BRCA2 is also
multi-functional, and regulates the repair of DNA double-strand breaks in
cooperation with the MRN complex and RPA. BRCA2 interacts with Rad51 to directly 
repair DNA damage. In addition, BRCA2 regulates cytokinesis and centrosome
duplication. New treatment is developed with inhibitors of
poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase(PARP)for BRCA-deficient cells. PARPs repair
single-strand DNA breaks, and inhibition of PARPs is considered to break the
replication fork and increase the effect of anti-cancer drugs. Inhibition of
PARPs leads to the conversion of single-strand breaks(SSB)to double-strand
breaks(DSB). Because BRCA1- or BRCA2-deficient cells are unable to efficiently
complete homologous recombination, PARP inhibition in these cells causes a high
degree of genomic instability and eventual cell death termed "synthetic
lethality. "This synthetic lethal approach has been validated in studies that
show striking single-agent activity of PARP inhibitors in preclinical models of
BRCA1 and BRCA2 inactivation.

PMID: 22504671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 May 1;52(9):2038-46. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.02.042. Epub 2012 Mar 6.

Nrf2-regulated phase II enzymes are induced by chronic ambient nanoparticle
exposure in young mice with age-related impairments.

Zhang H(1), Liu H, Davies KJ, Sioutas C, Finch CE, Morgan TE, Forman HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Davis School of Gerontology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
CA 90089, USA.

Erratum in
    Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Dec;77:388.

Many xenobiotic detoxifying (phase II) enzymes are induced by sublethal doses of 
environmental toxicants. However, these adaptive mechanisms have not been studied
in response to vehicular-derived airborne nano-sized particulate matter (nPM).
Because aging is associated with increased susceptibility to environmental
toxicants, we also examined the expression of Nrf2-regulated phase II genes in
middle-aged mice and their inducibility by chronic nPM. The nPM from vehicular
traffic was collected in urban Los Angeles and reaerosolized for exposure of
C57BL/6J male mice (3 and 18 months old) for 150 h over 10 weeks. Brain
(cerebellum), liver, and lung were assayed by RT-PCR and/or Western blots for the
expression of phase II enzymes, glutamate cysteine ligase (catalytic GCLC, and
modifier GCLM subunits), NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1), heme oxygenase 
1 (HO-1), and relevant transcription factors, NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2),
c-Myc, Bach1. Chronic nPM exposure induced GCLC, GCLM, HO-1, NQO1 mRNA, and
protein similarly in cerebellum, liver, and lung of young mice. Middle-aged mice 
had elevated basal levels, but showed impaired further induction by nPM.
Similarly, Nrf2 increased with age and was induced by nPM in young but not old.
c-Myc showed the same age and induction profile while the age increase in Bach1
was further induced by nPM. Chronic exposure to nanoparticles induced
Nrf2-regulated detoxifying enzymes in brain (cerebellum), liver, and lung of
young adult mice, indicating a systemic impact of nPM. In contrast, middle-aged
mice did not respond above their elevated basal levels except for Bach1. The lack
of induction of phase II enzymes in aging mice may be a model for the
vulnerability of elderly to air pollution.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3342863
PMID: 22401859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Cell Biosci. 2012 Feb 27;2(1):6. doi: 10.1186/2045-3701-2-6.

BRCA1 tumor suppressor network: focusing on its tail.

Wang B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The University of Texas M,D, Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Blvd, Unit 1010, Houston, TX 77030, USA. bwang3@mdanderson.org.

Germline mutations of the BRCA1 tumor suppressor gene are a major cause of
familial breast and ovarian cancer. BRCA1 plays critical roles in the DNA damage 
response that regulates activities of multiple repair and checkpoint pathways for
maintaining genome stability. The BRCT domains of BRCA1 constitute a
phospho-peptide binding domain recognizing a phospho-SPxF motif (S, serine; P,
proline; × varies; F, phenylalanine). The BRCT domains are frequently targeted by
clinically important mutations and most of these mutations disrupt the binding
surface of the BRCT domains to phosphorylated peptides. The BRCT domain and its
capability to bind phosphorylated protein is required for the tumor suppressor
function of BRCA1. Through its BRCT phospho-binding ability BRCA1 forms at least 
three mutually exclusive complexes by binding to phosphorylated proteins Abraxas,
Bach1 and CTIP. The A, B and C complexes, at lease partially undertake BRCA1's
role in mechanisms of cell cycle checkpoint and DNA repair that maintain genome
stability, thus may play important roles in BRCA1's tumor suppressor function.

PMCID: PMC3315748
PMID: 22369660  [PubMed]


122. Cancer Sci. 2012 May;103(5):897-903. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2012.02244.x. Epub 
2012 Apr 11.

Bach1-mediated suppression of p53 is inhibited by p19(ARF) independently of MDM2.

Nishizawa H(1), Ota K, Dohi Y, Ikura T, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan.

Cellular senescence prevents the aberrant proliferation of damaged cells. The
transcription factor Bach1 binds to p53 to repress cellular senescence, but it is
still unclear how the Bach1-p53 interaction is regulated. We found that the
Bach1-p53 interaction was inhibited by oncogenic Ras, bleomycin, and hydrogen
peroxide. Proteomics analysis of Bach1 complex revealed its interaction with
p19(ARF), a tumor suppressor that competitively inhibited the Bach1-p53
interaction when overexpressed within cells. Reduction of MDM2 expression in
wild-type murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) did not result in slower
proliferation, showing that Bach1 plays a role in keeping the proliferation of
MEFs independent of MDM2. Consistent with this interpretation, expression of p21 
was highly induced in MEFs when both Bach1 and MDM2 were abrogated. The level of 
Bach1 protein was reduced on knockdown of p53. These results suggest that p53
activation involves its dissociation from Bach1, achieved in part by the
competitive binding of p19(ARF) to Bach1. The p19(ARF)-Bach1 interaction
constitutes a regulatory pathway of p53 in parallel with the p19(ARF)-MDM2
pathway.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 22348305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2012 May;92(3):253-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2011.12.004. Epub
2012 Feb 15.

Genetic variants in antioxidant pathway: risk factors for hepatotoxicity in
tuberculosis patients.

Nanashima K(1), Mawatari T, Tahara N, Higuchi N, Nakaura A, Inamine T, Kondo S,
Yanagihara K, Fukushima K, Suyama N, Kohno S, Tsukamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapeutics, Nagasaki University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, 1-14 Bunkyo-machi, Nagasaki 852-8521, Japan.

Tuberculosis (TB) treatment can cause serious sequelae including adverse effects 
such as anti-TB drug-induced hepatotoxicity (ATDH). We performed a candidate
gene-based association study between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 10
genes in the antioxidant pathway and ATDH susceptibility. The subjects comprised 
100 Japanese patients with pulmonary TB who received a treatment regimen
including isoniazid and rifampicin. Out of them, 18 patients had ATDH.
Thirty-four tag SNPs in 10 genes were analyzed by PCR-restriction fragment length
polymorphism or PCR-direct DNA sequencing. The frequencies of alleles and
genotypes between patients with and without ATDH were compared in three different
genetic models. Statistical analyses revealed that a C/C genotype at rs11080344
in NOS2A, a C/C genotype at rs2070401 in BACH1, and a G/A or A/A genotype at
rs4720833 in MAFK independently conferred ATDH susceptibility. Remarkably, the
association of the latter two tag SNPs with ATDH susceptibility was highly
statistically significant (P = 0.0006) with an odds ratio of 9.730. This study is
the first report to demonstrate that NOS2A, BACH1, and MAFK appear to be genetic 
determinants of ATDH in Japanese patients with TB. Furthermore, a combination of 
BACH1 and MAFK polymorphisms may be useful as new biomarkers to identify
high-risk Japanese TB patients for ATDH.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22341855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Apr;5(4):949-54. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.779. Epub 2012 Feb 3.

microRNA-155 silencing inhibits proliferation and migration and induces apoptosis
by upregulating BACH1 in renal cancer cells.

Li S(1), Chen T, Zhong Z, Wang Y, Li Y, Zhao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, PR China.

The purpose of this study was to explore the functional role and mechanism of
miR-155 in the development of renal cell carcinoma (RCC). miR-155 expression was 
quantified in renal cancers, matched adjacent non-tumor tissues and renal cell
lines using quantitative real-time PCR (RT-PCR). Cell proliferation, apoptosis
and migratory activity were measured following suppression of miR-155 expression 
by antisense oligonucleotides. miR-155 targets were scanned using target
prediction programs. Following the inhibition of miR-155, target gene expression 
was detected by western blotting. The expression of miR-155 was upregulated in
clear cell RCC (ccRCC) tissue and renal cancer cell lines. The suppression of
miR-155 inhibited cell proliferation and migratory activity and induced apoptosis
in renal cancer cells. The suppressor gene suppressor of cytokine signaling
(SOCS-1) and BACH1 were predicted as potential target genes by bioinformatics
analysis. The suppression of miR-155 inhibited BACH1 protein expression. miR-155 
may function as an oncogene by targeting BACH1. Thus, the inhibition of miR-155
may be an effective way to treat RCC.

PMCID: PMC3493052
PMID: 22307849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. FEBS Lett. 2012 Feb 17;586(4):448-54. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.01.028. Epub
2012 Jan 28.

Transcription-independent role of Bach1 in mitosis through a nuclear exporter
Crm1-dependent mechanism.

Li J(1), Shiraki T, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan.

Erratum in
    FEBS Lett. 2012 Sep 21;586(19):3537.

The transcriptional repressor Bach1 mediates various stress responses. Despite
its role in transcription, Bach1 is predominantly exported to the cytoplasm in a 
Crm1-dependent manner, but the functional role of its cytoplasmic retention is
still unclear. We found that Bach1 was also excluded from mitotic chromatin by a 
C-terminal cytoplasmic localization sequence dependent and leptomycin B sensitive
process. Bach1 depletion resulted in disordered mitotic chromosome alignment,
which was rescued by Bach1 mutants lacking the BTB or DNA binding domains,
suggesting its transcription-independent mechanism. We thus revealed a novel role
of Bach1 in the regulation of mitotic chromosome dynamics.

Copyright Â© 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22289179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Aging Cell. 2012 Apr;11(2):297-304. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2011.00788.x. Epub
2012 Feb 1.

Identification of age-specific Nrf2 binding to a novel antioxidant response
element locus in the Gclc promoter: a compensatory means for the loss of
glutathione synthetic capacity in the aging rat liver?

Shenvi SV(1), Smith E, Hagen TM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR
97331, USA.

NFE2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) transcriptionally governs the cellular response to
harmful electrophiles, xenobiotics, and reactive oxygen species. Its nuclear
levels decline with age (Suh et al., 2004a), which in part explains the
age-related loss of phase II detoxification. However, little work has yet
characterized how age affects Nrf2 DNA binding or the role that alterations to
the Nrf2 transcriptional apparatus plays in modulating Nrf2-mediated gene
expression. In this study, we used immunoprecipitation assays to show that Nrf2
bound to the active antioxidant response element (ARE) of the catalytic subunit
of glutamate cysteine ligase (GCLC) is significantly lower in hepatic chromatin
from aged vs. young rats. Moreover, the activity at this ARE locus is diminished 
during aging because of the presence of Bach1 and the absence of CREB-binding
protein (CBP), a transcriptional repressor and co-activator, respectively.
Further analysis reveals that Nrf2 occupies an alternate ARE site located -2.2 kb
downstream from the normally active ARE binding site in livers of old rats,
indicating an age-specific adaptation to maintain gene expression. Our results,
thus, show that the conversion of Nrf2 binding from an active ARE to an
alternative ARE element is not adequate to maintain basal expression of hepatic
Gclc in old rats, which provides a potential mechanism for the age-related loss
of glutathione synthetic and other phase II enzymes.

© 2011 The Authors. Aging Cell © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC3988790
PMID: 22212472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Bonekey Rep. 2012 Sep 5;1:189. doi: 10.1038/bonekey.2012.189. eCollection 2012.

BACH1, a novel master regulator of metastasis from breast to bone.

[No authors listed]

PMCID: PMC3727815
PMID: 24009979  [PubMed]


128. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2012 Jan;68(Pt 1):26-34. doi:
10.1107/S0907444911048335. Epub 2011 Dec 9.

The structure of the Bach2 POZ-domain dimer reveals an intersubunit disulfide
bond.

Rosbrook GO(1), Stead MA, Carr SB, Wright SC.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, England.

Bach2 is a transcriptional repressor that is expressed during specific stages of 
B-cell development and in neuronal cells. It plays a critical role in modulating 
class-switch recombination during the differentiation of mature B cells to
antibody-secreting plasma cells and it is also an important regulator of
apoptotic responses to oxidative stress. Bach2 has been implicated both as an
oncogene and as a tumour suppressor in human malignancy. The interaction of Bach2
with its target genes is mediated via its basic leucine-zipper region, whereas
the N-terminal POZ domain recruits transcriptional co-repressors and class II
histone deacetylases. Here, the crystal structure of the human Bach2 POZ domain
is reported at 2.1 Å resolution. The Bach2 POZ-domain dimer resembles the
POZ-domain dimers of the POZ zinc finger transcription factors and dimerization
is independent of an N-terminal region that has previously been implicated in the
dimerization of the POZ basic leucine-zipper protein Bach1. The Bach2 POZ domain 
crystallized in two forms which differed by the presence of an intersubunit
disulfide bond. The intersubunit disulfide bond is present both in bacterially
expressed Bach2 POZ domain in solution and in protein expressed in transfected
eukaryotic cells. These crystal structures will be relevant for understanding the
regulation of Bach2 in response to oxidative stress and for the design of
therapeutics that target the Bach2 POZ domain in human malignancy.

PMID: 22194330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 May;64(5):1518-28. doi: 10.1002/art.33497.

Bach1 regulates osteoclastogenesis in a mouse model via both heme oxygenase
1-dependent and heme oxygenase 1-independent pathways.

Hama M(1), Kirino Y, Takeno M, Takase K, Miyazaki T, Yoshimi R, Ueda A,
Itoh-Nakadai A, Muto A, Igarashi K, Ishigatsubo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Reducing inflammation and osteoclastogenesis by heme oxygenase 1
(HO-1) induction could be beneficial in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis
(RA). However, the function of HO-1 in bone metabolism remains unclear. This
study was undertaken to clarify the effects of HO-1 and its repressor Bach1 in
osteoclastogenesis.
METHODS: In vitro osteoclastogenesis was compared in Bach1-deficient and
wild-type mice. Osteoclasts (OCs) were generated from bone marrow-derived
macrophages by stimulation with macrophage colony-stimulating factor and RANKL.
Osteoclastogenesis was assessed by tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase staining
and expression of OC-related genes. Intracellular signal pathways in OC
precursors were also assessed. HO-1 short hairpin RNA (shRNA) was transduced into
Bach1(-/-) mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages to examine the role of HO-1 in
osteoclastogenesis. In vivo inflammatory bone loss was evaluated by local
injection of tumor necrosis factor a (TNFa) into calvaria.
RESULTS: Transcription of HO-1 was down-regulated by stimulation with RANKL in
the early stage of OC differentiation. Bach1(-/-) mouse bone marrow-derived
macrophages were partially resistant to the RANKL-dependent HO-1 reduction and
showed impaired osteoclastogenesis, which was associated with reduced expression 
of RANK and components of the downstream TNF receptor-associated factor
6/c-Fos/NF-ATc1 pathway as well as reduced expression of Blimp1. Treatment with
HO-1 shRNA increased the number of OCs and expression of OC-related genes except 
for the Blimp1 gene during in vitro osteoclastogenesis from Bach1(-/-) mouse bone
marrow-derived macrophages. TNFa-induced bone destruction was reduced in
Bach1(-/-) mice in vivo.
CONCLUSION: The present findings demonstrate that Bach1 regulates
osteoclastogenesis under inflammatory conditions, via both HO-1-dependent and
HO-1-independent mechanisms. Bach1 may be worthy of consideration as a target for
treatment of inflammatory bone loss in diseases including RA.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 22127667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Jan 1;52(1):227-36. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.10.494. Epub 2011 Nov 6.

The role of Bach1 in ultraviolet A-mediated human heme oxygenase 1 regulation in 
human skin fibroblasts.

Raval CM(1), Zhong JL, Mitchell SA, Tyrrell RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Bath, Bath, UK.

Up-regulation of heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) by ultraviolet A (UVA; 320-380 nm)
irradiation of human skin cells protects them against oxidative stress. The role 
of Nrf2 in up-regulation of HO-1 and other phase II genes is well established.
The mechanism underlying Bach1-mediated HO-1 repression is less well understood
although cellular localization seems to be crucial. Because prolonged HO-1
overexpression is likely to be detrimental, it is crucial that activation of the 
gene is transient. We now show that UVA irradiation of cultured human skin
fibroblasts enhances accumulation of Bach1 mRNA and protein severalfold.
Endogenous Bach1 protein accumulates in the nucleus after 8h and may occupy MARE 
sites after HO-1 activation thus providing a compensatory mechanism to control
HO-1 overexpression. Overexpression of Bach1, together with MafK, represses basal
and UVA-mediated HO-1 protein expression, whereas silencing of the Bach1 gene by 
Bach1-specific siRNAs causes robust enhancement of constitutive HO-1 levels. UVA 
treatment of cells in which Bach1 has been silenced leads to higher levels of
induction of the HO-1 protein. Although Bach1 protein is exported from the
nucleus 12h after UVA irradiation, the release of free cellular heme from
microsomal heme-containing proteins is immediate rather than delayed. Although
heme does promote the export of Bach1 via the Crm1/exportin 1 pathway and is
involved in the delayed UVA-mediated export of the protein, it is not clear how
this occurs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22107958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 6;287(2):1007-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.276022. Epub 2011
Nov 18.

Biochemical characterization of Warsaw breakage syndrome helicase.

Wu Y(1), Sommers JA, Khan I, de Winter JP, Brosh RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

Mutations in the human ChlR1 gene are associated with a unique genetic disorder
known as Warsaw breakage syndrome characterized by cellular defects in sister
chromatid cohesion and hypersensitivity to agents that induce replication stress.
A role of ChlR1 helicase in sister chromatid cohesion was first evidenced by
studies of the yeast homolog Chl1p; however, its cellular functions in DNA
metabolism are not well understood. We carefully examined the DNA substrate
specificity of purified recombinant human ChlR1 protein and the biochemical
effect of a patient-derived mutation, a deletion of a single lysine (K897del) in 
the extreme C terminus of ChlR1. The K897del clinical mutation abrogated ChlR1
helicase activity on forked duplex or D-loop DNA substrates by perturbing its DNA
binding and DNA-dependent ATPase activity. Wild-type ChlR1 required a minimal 5' 
single-stranded DNA tail of 15 nucleotides to efficiently unwind a simple duplex 
DNA substrate. The additional presence of a 3' single-stranded DNA tail as short 
as five nucleotides dramatically increased ChlR1 helicase activity, demonstrating
the preference of the enzyme for forked duplex structures. ChlR1 unwound
G-quadruplex (G4) DNA with a strong preference for a two-stranded antiparallel G4
(G2') substrate and was only marginally active on a four-stranded parallel G4
structure. The marked difference in ChlR1 helicase activity on the G4 substrates,
reflected by increased binding to the G2' substrate, distinguishes ChlR1 from the
sequence-related FANCJ helicase mutated in Fanconi anemia. The biochemical
results are discussed in light of the known cellular defects associated with
ChlR1 deficiency.

PMCID: PMC3256869
PMID: 22102414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Science. 2011 Oct 28;334(6055):525-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1209909.

BRCA1 tumor suppression depends on BRCT phosphoprotein binding, but not its E3
ligase activity.

Shakya R(1), Reid LJ, Reczek CR, Cole F, Egli D, Lin CS, deRooij DG, Hirsch S,
Ravi K, Hicks JB, Szabolcs M, Jasin M, Baer R, Ludwig T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2011 Oct 28;334(6055):459-60.

Germline mutations of the breast cancer 1 (BRCA1) gene are a major cause of
familial breast and ovarian cancer. The BRCA1 protein displays E3 ubiquitin
ligase activity, and this enzymatic function is thought to be required for tumor 
suppression. To test this hypothesis, we generated mice that express an
enzymatically defective Brca1. We found that this mutant Brca1 prevents tumor
formation to the same degree as does wild-type Brca1 in three different
genetically engineered mouse (GEM) models of cancer. In contrast, a mutation that
ablates phosphoprotein recognition by the BRCA C terminus (BRCT) domains of BRCA1
elicits tumors in each of the three GEM models. Thus, BRCT phosphoprotein
recognition, but not the E3 ligase activity, is required for BRCA1 tumor
suppression.

PMCID: PMC3904783
PMID: 22034435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Biochem J. 2012 Feb 1;441(3):919-26. doi: 10.1042/BJ20110314.

BRCA1-mediated repression of mutagenic end-joining of DNA double-strand breaks
requires complex formation with BACH1.

Dohrn L(1), Salles D, Siehler SY, Kaufmann J, Wiesmüller L.

Author information: 
(1)Gynaecological Oncology Division, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
University of Ulm, Prittwitzstrasse 43, D-89075 Ulm, Germany.

BACH1 (BRCA1-associated C-terminal helicase 1), the product of the BRIP1 {BRCA1
[breast cancer 1, early onset]-interacting protein C-terminal helicase 1; also
known as FANCJ [FA-J (Fanconi anaemia group J) protein]} gene mutated in Fanconi 
anaemia patients from complementation group J, has been implicated in DNA repair 
and damage signalling. BACH1 exerts DNA helicase activities and physically
interacts with BRCA1 and MLH1 (mutL homologue 1), which differentially control
DNA DSB (double-strand break) repair processes. The present study shows that
BACH1 plays a role in both HR (homologous recombination) and MMEJ
(microhomology-mediated non-homologous end-joining) and reveals discrete
mechanisms underlying modulation of these pathways. Our results indicate that
BACH1 stimulates HR, which depends on the integrity of the helicase domain.
Disruption of the BRCA1-BACH1 complex through mutation of BACH1 compromised
errorfree NHEJ (non-homologous end-joining) and accelerated error-prone MMEJ.
Conversely, molecular changes in BACH1 abrogating MLH1 binding interfered neither
with HR nor with MMEJ. Importantly, MMEJ is a mutagenic DSB repair pathway, which
is derepressed in hereditary breast and ovarian carcinomas. Since BRCA1 and BACH1
mutations targeting the BRCA1-BACH1 interaction have been associated with breast 
cancer susceptibility, the results of the present study thus provide evidence for
a novel role of BACH1 in tumour suppression.

PMID: 22032289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Trends Genet. 2012 Jan;28(1):7-13. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2011.09.003. Epub 2011 Oct 
23.

Fanconi anemia and Bloom's syndrome crosstalk through FANCJ-BLM helicase
interaction.

Suhasini AN(1), Brosh RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health (NIH) Biomedical Research Center, 251 Bayview Boulevard,
Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Fanconi anemia (FA) and Bloom's syndrome (BS) are rare hereditary chromosomal
instability disorders. FA displays bone marrow failure, acute myeloid leukemia,
and head and neck cancers, whereas BS is characterized by growth retardation,
immunodeficiency, and a wide spectrum of cancers. The BLM gene mutated in BS
encodes a DNA helicase that functions in a protein complex to suppress
sister-chromatid exchange. Of the 15 FA genetic complementation groups implicated
in interstrand crosslink repair, FANCJ encodes a DNA helicase involved in
recombinational repair and replication stress response. Based on evidence that
BLM and FANCJ interact we suggest that crosstalk between BLM and FA pathways is
more complex than previously thought. We propose testable models for how FANCJ
and BLM coordinate to help cells deal with stalled replication forks or
double-strand breaks (DSB). Understanding how BLM and FANCJ cooperate will help
to elucidate an important pathway for maintaining genomic stability.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3249464
PMID: 22024395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Free Radic Biol Med. 2011 Dec 1;51(11):2124-31. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.09.014. Epub 2011 Sep 17.

Heme oxygenase 1 is induced by miR-155 via reduced BACH1 translation in
endothelial cells.

Pulkkinen KH(1), Ylä-Herttuala S, Levonen AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Molecular Medicine, A.I. Virtanen Institute
for Molecular Sciences, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.

Heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) is a stress-inducible enzyme that degrades redox-active
heme-producing biliverdin, carbon monoxide, and Fe(2+). It protects cells under
various stress conditions and mediates anti-inflammatory and vasodilatory effects
in the endothelium. The expression of HMOX1, the HO-1 gene, is highly inducible
and its transcriptional regulation is complex. HMOX1 is induced by various
proinflammatory stimuli via NF-<U+03BA>B in human endothelial cells, but functional
NF-<U+03BA>B-binding elements have not been identified from the human gene. However, the
regulation of HMOX1 by the antioxidant-response element is firmly established,
with the transcription factor BACH1 serving as a repressor and Nrf2 as an
enhancer. miR-155 is one of the TNFa-inducible endothelial microRNAs predicted to
bind to the BACH1 mRNA. Oligonucleotides mimicking miR-155 efficiently inhibited 
BACH1 protein translation, resulting in a concentration-dependent increase in
HMOX1 mRNA and protein expression in human umbilical vein endothelial cells.
Moreover, endogenous miR-155 was upregulated by TNFa via an NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
mechanism with a subsequent increase in HMOX1 expression. We propose that
increased HMOX1 expression in endothelial cells by TNFa results from
miR-155-induced repression of BACH1 rather than direct induction of HMOX1 via
NF-<U+03BA>B, and that miR-155 is cytoprotective during inflammation by elevating HO-1
expression in endothelial cells.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21982894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. EMBO J. 2011 Aug 26;30(21):4500-14. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.312.

Signalling pathway for RKIP and Let-7 regulates and predicts metastatic breast
cancer.

Yun J(1), Frankenberger CA, Kuo WL, Boelens MC, Eves EM, Cheng N, Liang H, Li WH,
Ishwaran H, Minn AJ, Rosner MR.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, IL, USA.

Tumour metastasis suppressors are inhibitors of metastasis but their mechanisms
of action are generally not understood. We previously showed that the suppressor 
Raf kinase inhibitory protein (RKIP) inhibits breast tumour metastasis in part
via let-7. Here, we demonstrate an integrated approach combining statistical
analysis of breast tumour gene expression data and experimental validation to
extend the signalling pathway for RKIP. We show that RKIP inhibits let-7 targets 
(HMGA2, BACH1) that in turn upregulate bone metastasis genes (MMP1, OPN, CXCR4). 
Our results reveal BACH1 as a novel let-7-regulated transcription factor that
induces matrix metalloproteinase1 (MMP1) expression and promotes metastasis. An
RKIP pathway metastasis signature (designated RPMS) derived from the complete
signalling cascade predicts high metastatic risk better than the individual
genes. These results highlight a powerful approach for identifying signalling
pathways downstream of a key metastasis suppressor and indicate that analysis of 
genes in the context of their signalling environment is critical for
understanding their predictive and therapeutic potential.

PMCID: PMC3230370
PMID: 21873975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat. 2011 Nov;96(1-4):54-62. doi:
10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2011.07.005. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

Crosstalk between EET and HO-1 downregulates Bach1 and adipogenic marker
expression in mesenchymal stem cell derived adipocytes.

Vanella L(1), Kim DH, Sodhi K, Barbagallo I, Burgess AP, Falck JR, Schwartzman
ML, Abraham NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Toledo College of
Medicine, Toledo, OH 43614, USA. luca.vanella@utoledo.edu

Epoxygenase activity and synthesis of epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) have
emerged as important modulators of obesity and diabetes. We examined the effect
of the EET-agonist 12-(3-hexylureido)dodec-8(2) enoic acid on mesenchymal stem
cell (MSC) derived adipocytes proliferation and differentiation. MSCs expressed
substantial levels of EETs and inhibition of soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH)
increased the level of EETs and decreased adipogenesis. EET agonist treatment
increased HO-1 expression by inhibiting a negative regulator of HO-1 expression, 
Bach-1. EET treatment also increased ßcatenin and pACC levels while decreasing
PPAR<U+03B3> C/EBPa and fatty acid synthase levels. These changes were manifested by a
decrease in the number of large inflammatory adipocytes, TNFa, IFN<U+03B3> and IL-1a,
but an increase in small adipocytes and in adiponectin levels. In summary, EET
agonist treatment inhibits adipogenesis and decreases the levels of inflammatory 
cytokines suggesting the potential action of EETs as intracellular lipid
signaling modulators of adipogenesis and adiponectin.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3645487
PMID: 21821145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Biochem J. 2011 Dec 1;440(2):167-74. doi: 10.1042/BJ20110526.

Novel insights into the regulation of antioxidant-response-element-mediated gene 
expression by electrophiles: induction of the transcriptional repressor BACH1 by 
Nrf2.

Jyrkkänen HK(1), Kuosmanen S, Heinäniemi M, Laitinen H, Kansanen E, Mella-Aho E, 
Leinonen H, Ylä-Herttuala S, Levonen AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Molecular Medicine, AI Virtanen Institute for 
Molecular Sciences, University of Eastern Finland, FIN-70211, Kuopio, Finland.

A central mechanism in cellular defence against oxidative or electrophilic stress
is mediated by transcriptional induction of genes via the ARE
(antioxidant-response element), a cis-acting sequence present in the regulatory
regions of genes involved in the detoxification and elimination of reactive
oxidants and electrophiles. The ARE binds different bZIP (basic-region leucine
zipper) transcription factors, most notably Nrf2 (nuclear factor-erythroid
2-related factor 2) that functions as a transcriptional activator via
heterodimerization with small Maf proteins. Although ARE activation by Nrf2 is
relatively well understood, the mechanisms by which ARE-mediated signalling is
down-regulated are poorly known. Transcription factor BACH1 [BTB (broad-complex, 
tramtrack and bric-a-brac) and CNC (cap'n'collar protein) homology 1] binds to
ARE-like sequences, functioning as a transcriptional repressor in a subset of
ARE-regulated genes, thus antagonizing the activator function of Nrf2. In the
present study, we have demonstrated that BACH1 itself is regulated by Nrf2 as it 
is induced by Nrf2 overexpression and by Nrf2-activating agents in an
Nrf2-dependent manner. Furthermore, a functional ARE site was identified at +1411
from the transcription start site of transcript variant 2 of BACH1. We conclude
that BACH1 is a bona fide Nrf2 target gene and that induction of BACH1 by Nrf2
may serve as a feedback-inhibitory mechanism for ARE-mediated gene regulation.

PMID: 21812759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Cancer Res. 2011 Sep 1;71(17):5792-805. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0773. Epub 
2011 Jul 28.

Modification of BRCA1-Associated Breast and Ovarian Cancer Risk by
BRCA1-Interacting Genes.

Rebbeck TR(1), Mitra N, Domchek SM, Wan F, Friebel TM, Tran TV, Singer CF, Tea
MK, Blum JL, Tung N, Olopade OI, Weitzel JN, Lynch HT, Snyder CL, Garber JE,
Antoniou AC, Peock S, Evans DG, Paterson J, Kennedy MJ, Donaldson A, Dorkins H,
Easton DF; Epidemiological Study of BRCA1 and BRCA2 Mutation Carriers (EMBRACE), 
Rubinstein WS, Daly MB, Isaacs C, Nevanlinna H, Couch FJ, Andrulis IL, Freidman
E, Laitman Y, Ganz PA, Tomlinson GE, Neuhausen SL, Narod SA, Phelan CM, Greenberg
R, Nathanson KL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Cancer Center, Center for Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
and Department of Medicine, The University of Pennsylvania Perleman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. rebbeck@upenn.edu

Inherited BRCA1 mutations confer elevated cancer risk. Recent studies have
identified genes that encode proteins that interact with BRCA1 as modifiers of
BRCA1-associated breast cancer. We evaluated a comprehensive set of genes that
encode most known BRCA1 interactors to evaluate the role of these genes as
modifiers of cancer risk. A cohort of 2,825 BRCA1 mutation carriers was used to
evaluate the association of haplotypes at ATM, BRCC36, BRCC45 (BRE), BRIP1
(BACH1/FANCJ), CTIP, ABRA1 (FAM175A), MERIT40, MRE11A, NBS1, PALB2 (FANCN),
RAD50, RAD51, RAP80, and TOPBP1, and was associated with time to breast and
ovarian cancer diagnosis. Statistically significant false discovery rate (FDR)
adjusted P values for overall association of haplotypes (P(FDR)) with breast
cancer were identified at ATM (P(FDR) = 0.029), BRCC45 (P(FDR) = 0.019), BRIP1
(P(FDR) = 0.008), CTIP (P(FDR) = 0.017), MERIT40 (P(FDR) = 0.019), NBS1 (P(FDR) =
0.003), RAD50 (P(FDR) = 0.014), and TOPBP1 (P(FDR) = 0.011). Haplotypes at ABRA1 
(P(FDR) = 0.007), BRCC45 (P(FDR) = 0.016 and P(FDR) = 0.005 in two haplotype
blocks), and RAP80 (P(FDR) < 0.001) were associated with ovarian cancer risk.
Overall, the data suggest that genomic variation at multiple loci that encode
proteins that interact biologically with BRCA1 are associated with modified
breast cancer and ovarian cancer risk in women who carry BRCA1 mutations.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3170727
PMID: 21799032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Jun 17;12:243. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-243.

RegNetB: predicting relevant regulator-gene relationships in localized prostate
tumor samples.

Alvarez A(1), Woolf PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109, USA.

BACKGROUND: A central question in cancer biology is what changes cause a healthy 
cell to form a tumor. Gene expression data could provide insight into this
question, but it is difficult to distinguish between a gene that causes a change 
in gene expression from a gene that is affected by this change. Furthermore, the 
proteins that regulate gene expression are often themselves not regulated at the 
transcriptional level. Here we propose a Bayesian modeling framework we term
RegNetB that uses mechanistic information about the gene regulatory network to
distinguish between factors that cause a change in expression and genes that are 
affected by the change. We test this framework using human gene expression data
describing localized prostate cancer progression.
RESULTS: The top regulatory relationships identified by RegNetB include the
regulation of RLN1, RLN2, by PAX4, the regulation of ACPP (PAP) by JUN, BACH1 and
BACH2, and the co-regulation of PGC and GDF15 by MAZ and TAF8. These target genes
are known to participate in tumor progression, but the suggested regulatory roles
of PAX4, BACH1, BACH2, MAZ and TAF8 in the process is new.
CONCLUSION: Integrating gene expression data and regulatory topologies can aid in
identifying potentially causal mechanisms for observed changes in gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC3128037
PMID: 21682879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Arch Pharm Res. 2011 May;34(5):829-36. doi: 10.1007/s12272-011-0517-1. Epub 2011 
Jun 9.

Suppression of Nrf2 signaling by angiotensin II in murine renal epithelial cells.

Kang SJ(1), You A, Kwak MK.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan-si, Gyeongsangbuk-do
712-749, Korea.

Comment in
    Arch Pharm Res. 2011 May;34(5):695-7.

Angiotensin II (ATII), a physiologically active mediator of the renin-angiotensin
system, has been shown to be associated with renal fibrosis pathophysiology. In
our current study with murine renal epithelial TCMK-1 cells, ATII inhibited the
expression of NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)-target antioxidant genes such as
NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase-1 and <U+03B3>-glutamate cysteine ligase (GCL). In
accord to the reduced expression of GCL, a GSH biosynthesis enzyme, ATII
treatment reduced intracellular GSH content and increased the levels of reactive 
oxygen species (ROS). While, there was no significant changes in nuclear protein 
levels of Nrf2 following ATII treatment, implying the potential alterations in
the expression of partner proteins of Nrf2. Our measurement of Nrf2 partner bZIP 
transcription factors, including Bach1, small Maf proteins, and activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) showed that the expression level for ATF3 was
enhanced in ATII-treated TCMK cells. Presumably through ATII-induced oxidative
stress, ATII treatment was found to enhance the inducible level of TGFß-mediated 
a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) expression, which is one of molecular markers of
renal fibrosis. In conclusion, our results indicate that ATII suppresses Nrf2-GSH
signaling in murine renal epithelial cells. Elevated ROS levels in ATII exposed
epithelial cells might be a causing factor contributing to renal fibrosis
pathology.

PMID: 21656369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 1;286(26):23521-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.220178. Epub 2011
May 9.

The BTB and CNC homology 1 (BACH1) target genes are involved in the oxidative
stress response and in control of the cell cycle.

Warnatz HJ(1), Schmidt D, Manke T, Piccini I, Sultan M, Borodina T, Balzereit D, 
Wruck W, Soldatov A, Vingron M, Lehrach H, Yaspo ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

The regulation of gene expression in response to environmental signals and
metabolic imbalances is a key step in maintaining cellular homeostasis. BTB and
CNC homology 1 (BACH1) is a heme-binding transcription factor repressing the
transcription from a subset of MAF recognition elements at low intracellular heme
levels. Upon heme binding, BACH1 is released from the MAF recognition elements,
resulting in increased expression of antioxidant response genes. To
systematically address the gene regulatory networks involving BACH1, we combined 
chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing analysis of BACH1 target genes in HEK
293 cells with knockdown of BACH1 using three independent types of small
interfering RNAs followed by transcriptome profiling using microarrays. The 59
BACH1 target genes identified by chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing were
found highly enriched in genes showing expression changes after BACH1 knockdown, 
demonstrating the impact of BACH1 repression on transcription. In addition to
known and new BACH1 targets involved in heme degradation (HMOX1, FTL, FTH1, ME1, 
and SLC48A1) and redox regulation (GCLC, GCLM, and SLC7A11), we also discovered
BACH1 target genes affecting cell cycle and apoptosis pathways (ITPR2, CALM1,
SQSTM1, TFE3, EWSR1, CDK6, BCL2L11, and MAFG) as well as subcellular transport
processes (CLSTN1, PSAP, MAPT, and vault RNA). The newly identified impact of
BACH1 on genes involved in neurodegenerative processes and proliferation provides
an interesting basis for future dissection of BACH1-mediated gene repression in
neurodegeneration and virus-induced cancerogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3123115
PMID: 21555518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 26;6(4):e19137. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019137.

Upregulation of MiR-155 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma is partly driven by LMP1 and 
LMP2A and downregulates a negative prognostic marker JMJD1A.

Du ZM(1), Hu LF, Wang HY, Yan LX, Zeng YX, Shao JY, Ernberg I.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, and Department of Pathology, 
Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, PR China.

The role of microRNA-155 (miR-155) has been associated with oncogenesis of
several human tumors. However the expression pattern of miR-155 has not been
investigated in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). The present study was to assess
miR-155 expression pattern and its possible function in NPC, to identify its
targets and evaluate their clinical applications in NPC. MiR-155 was found to be 
upregulated in two Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) negative NPC derived cell lines CNE1 
and TW03, as well as in NPC clinical samples by quantitative Real-time PCR and in
situ hybridization detection. EBV encoded LMP1 and LMP2A could further enhance
the expression of miR-155 in NPC CNE1 and TW03 cells. JMJD1A and BACH1 were
identified as putative targets of miR-155 in a bioinformatics screen.
Overexpression of miR-155 downregulated a luciferase transcript fused to the
3'UTR of JMJD1A and BACH1. MiR-155 mimic could downregulate the expression of
JMJD1A and BACH1, while miR-155 inhibitor could upregulate JMJD1A expression in
NPC cell lines. Moreover, downregulation of JMJD1A was significantly correlated
with N stage in TNM classification (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.023), a lower five-year survival rate
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.021), and a lower five-year disease-free survival rate (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.049) of NPC 
patients. Taken together, up-regulation of miR-155 in NPC is partly driven by
LMP1 and LMP2A, and results in downregulation of JMJD1A, which is associated with
N stage and poor prognosis of NPC patients. The potential of miR-155 and JMJD1A
as therapeutic targets in NPC should be further investigated.

PMCID: PMC3082546
PMID: 21541331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. World J Gastroenterol. 2011 Apr 7;17(13):1694-700. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v17.i13.1694.

Legalon-SIL downregulates HCV core and NS5A in human hepatocytes expressing
full-length HCV.

Mehrab-Mohseni M(1), Sendi H, Steuerwald N, Ghosh S, Schrum LW, Bonkovsky HL.

Author information: 
(1)The Liver-Biliary-Pancreatic Center, Cannon Research Center, Carolinas Medical
Center, Charlotte, NC 28203, United States.

AIM: To determine the effect of Legalon-SIL (LS) on hepatitis C virus (HCV) core 
and NS5A expression and on heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX-1) and its transcriptional
regulators in human hepatoma cells expressing full length HCV genotype 1b.
METHODS: CON1 cells were treated with 50 µmol/L or 200 µmol/L LS. Cells were
harvested after 2, 6 and 24 h. HCV RNA and protein levels were determined by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting,
respectively.
RESULTS: HCV RNA (core and NS5A regions) was decreased after 6 h with LS 200
µmol/L (P < 0.05). Both 50 and 200 µmol/L LS decreased HCV RNA levels [core
region (by 55% and 88%, respectively) and NS5A region (by 62% and 87%,
respectively) after 24 h compared with vehicle (dimethyl sulphoxide) control (P <
0.01). Similarly HCV core and NS5A protein were decreased (by 85%, P < 0.01 and
by 65%, P < 0.05, respectively) by LS 200 µmol/L. Bach1 and HMOX-1 RNA were also 
downregulated by LS treatment (P < 0.01), while Nrf2 protein was increased (P <
0.05).
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that treatment with LS downregulates HCV core
and NS5A expression in CON1 cells which express full length HCV genotype 1b, and 
suggests that LS may prove to be a valuable alternative or adjunctive therapy for
the treatment of HCV infection.

PMCID: PMC3072633
PMID: 21483629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Free Radic Res. 2011 Jun;45(6):717-27. doi: 10.3109/10715762.2011.574287. Epub
2011 Apr 8.

Suppression of indomethacin-induced apoptosis in the small intestine due to Bach1
deficiency.

Harusato A(1), Naito Y, Takagi T, Uchiyama K, Mizushima K, Hirai Y, Yamada S,
Tuji T, Yoriki H, Horie R, Inoue K, Fukumoto K, Handa O, Ishikawa T, Kokura S,
Minamiyama Y, Ichikawa H, Muto A, Igarashi K, Yoshikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of Medical Science,
Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kawaramachi-hirokoji, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto
602-8566, Japan.

Erratum in
    Free Radic Res. 2013 Dec;47(12):1088.
    Free Radic Res. 2012 Nov;46(11):1420-1.

BTB and CNC homologue 1 (Bach1) is a transcriptional repressor of heme
oxygenase-1 (HO-1). This study hypothesized that Bach1 plays an important role in
the indomethacin-induced apoptosis in the case of small-intestinal mucosal
injury. Eight-week-old male C57BL/6 (wild-type) and homozygous Bach1-deficient
C57BL/6 mice were included in this study. Mucosal injuries induced by
subcutaneously administering indomethacin were evaluated macroscopically,
histologically and biochemically. Indomethacin-induced injuries were improved in 
Bach1-deficient mice. Immunohistochemistry showed an increase in the number of
HO-1-positive cells, which were mainly F4/80 positive macrophages, in
Bach1-deficient mice. Indomethacin administration increased the expression of
HO-1 mRNA and protein in the small intestine in Bach1-deficient mice. Terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labelling (TUNEL) staining
showed that the extent of apoptosis was suppressed in Bach1-deficent mice. In
conclusion, deficiency of the Bach1 gene inhibited apoptosis and thus suppressed 
mucosal injury, indicating that Bach1 is a novel therapeutic target for
indomethacin-induced intestinal injury.

PMID: 21473739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Blood. 2011 May 19;117(20):5438-48. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-07-296483. Epub 2011 
Mar 28.

Heme regulates B-cell differentiation, antibody class switch, and heme
oxygenase-1 expression in B cells as a ligand of Bach2.

Watanabe-Matsui M(1), Muto A, Matsui T, Itoh-Nakadai A, Nakajima O, Murayama K,
Yamamoto M, Ikeda-Saito M, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai, Japan.

Heme binds to proteins to modulate their function, thereby functioning as a
signaling molecule in a variety of biologic events. We found that heme bound to
Bach2, a transcription factor essential for humoral immunity, including antibody 
class switch. Heme inhibited the DNA binding activity of Bach2 in vitro and
reduced its half-life in B cells. When added to B-cell primary cultures, heme
enhanced the transcription of Blimp-1, the master regulator of plasma cells, and 
skewed plasma cell differentiation toward the IgM isotype, decreasing the IgG
levels in vitro. Intraperitoneal injection of heme in mice inhibited the
production of antigen-specific IgM when heme was administered simultaneously with
the antigen but not when it was administered after antigen exposure, suggesting
that heme also modulates the early phase of B-cell responses to antigen. Heme
oxygenase-1, which is known to be regulated by heme, was repressed by both Bach2 
and Bach1 in B cells. Furthermore, the expression of genes for heme uptake
changed in response to B-cell activation and heme administration. Our results
reveal a new function for heme as a ligand of Bach2 and as a modulatory signal
involved in plasma cell differentiation.

PMID: 21444915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2011 Mar;48(2):161-6. doi: 10.3164/jcbn.09-122GFR. Epub 2010
Apr 10.

Bach1 gene ablation reduces steatohepatitis in mouse MCD diet model.

Inoue M(1), Tazuma S, Kanno K, Hyogo H, Igarashi K, Chayama K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551,
Japan.

Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1, a.k.a. HSP-32),
which is an inducible enzyme and has anti-oxidation/anti-inflammatory properties 
shown in various models of organ injuries. Since oxidative stress plays a pivotal
role in the pathogenesis of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), HO-1 induction
would be expected to prevent the development of NASH. In this study, we
investigated the influence of Bach1 ablation in mice on the progression of NASH
in methionine-choline deficient (MCD) diet model. Bach1 ablation resulted in
significant induction of HO-1 mRNA and its activity in the liver. When fed MCD
diet, Bach1(-/-) mice exhibited negligible hepatic steatosis compared to
pronounced steatohepatitis in wild type mice with 6-fold increase in hepatic
triglyceride content. Whereas feeding of MCD diet decreased mRNA expressions of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) a and microsomal triglyceride
transfer protein (MTP) in wild type mice, there were no change in Bach1(-/-)
mice. In addition, hepatic concentration of malondialdehyde (MDA), a biomarker
for oxidative stress as well as plasma alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was
significantly lower in Bach1(-/-) mice. These findings suggest that Bach1
ablation exerts hepatoprotective effect against steatohepatitis presumably via
HO-1 induction and may be a potential therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC3045690
PMID: 21373270  [PubMed]


148. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2011 Mar;48(2):126-33. doi: 10.3164/jcbn.10-61. Epub 2011
Feb 26.

Heme oxygenase-1: a novel therapeutic target for gastrointestinal diseases.

Naito Y(1), Takagi T, Uchiyama K, Yoshikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) is the rate-limiting enzyme in the catabolism of heme,
followed by production of biliverdin, free iron and carbon monoxide (CO). HO-1 is
a stress-responsive protein induced by various oxidative agents. Recent studies
demonstrate that the expression of HO-1 in response to different inflammatory
mediators may contribute to the resolution of inflammation and has protective
effects in several organs against oxidative injury. Although the mechanism
underlying the anti-inflammatory actions of HO-1 remains poorly defined, both CO 
and biliverdin/bilirubin have been implicated in this response. In the
gastrointestinal tract, HO-1 is shown to be transcriptionally induced in response
to oxidative stress, preconditioning and acute inflammation. Recent studies
suggest that the induction of HO-1 expression plays a critical protective role in
intestinal damage models induced by ischemia-reperfusion, indomethacin,
lipopolysaccharide-associated sepsis, trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid, and dextran 
sulfate sodium, indicating that activation of HO-1 may act as an endogenous
defensive mechanism to reduce inflammation and tissue injury in the
gastrointestinal tract. In addition, CO derived from HO-1 is shown to be involved
in the regulation in gastro-intestinal motility. These in vitro and in vivo data 
suggest that HO-1 may be a novel therapeutic target in patients with
gastrointestinal diseases.

PMCID: PMC3045685
PMID: 21373265  [PubMed]


149. J Nutr. 2011 Apr 1;141(4):724S-728S. doi: 10.3945/jn.110.127639. Epub 2011 Feb
23.

Iron homeostasis and nutritional iron deficiency.

Theil EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Council on BioIron at Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute,
Department of Nutrition Sciences and Toxicology, University of California,
Berkeley, CA 94609, USA. etheil@chori.org

Nonheme food ferritin (FTN) iron minerals, nonheme iron complexes, and heme iron 
contribute to the balance between food iron absorption and body iron homeostasis.
Iron absorption depends on membrane transporter proteins DMT1, PCP/HCP1,
ferroportin (FPN), TRF2, and matriptase 2. Mutations in DMT1 and matriptase-2
cause iron deficiency; mutations in FPN, HFE, and TRF2 cause iron excess.
Intracellular iron homeostasis depends on coordinated regulation of iron
trafficking and storage proteins encoded in iron responsive element (IRE)-mRNA.
The noncoding IRE-mRNA structures bind protein repressors, IRP1 or 2, during iron
deficiency. Integration of the IRE-RNA in translation regulators (near the cap)
or turnover elements (after the coding region) increases iron uptake (DMT1/TRF1) 
or decreases iron storage/efflux (FTN/FPN) when IRP binds. An antioxidant
response element in FTN DNA binds Bach1, a heme-sensitive transcription factor
that coordinates expression among antioxidant response proteins like FTN,
thioredoxin reductase, and quinone reductase. FTN, an antioxidant because Fe(2+) 
and O(2) (reactive oxygen species generators) are consumed to make iron mineral, 
is also a nutritional iron concentrate that is an efficiently absorbed, nonheme
source of iron from whole legumes. FTN protein cages contain thousands of
mineralized iron atoms and enter cells by receptor-mediated endocytosis, an
absorption mechanism distinct from transport of nonheme iron salts (ferrous
sulfate), iron chelators (ferric-EDTA), or heme. Recognition of 2 nutritional
nonheme iron sources, small and large (FTN), will aid the solution of iron
deficiency, a major public health problem, and the development of new policies on
iron nutrition.

PMCID: PMC3056584
PMID: 21346101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Future Oncol. 2011 Feb;7(2):253-61. doi: 10.2217/fon.10.191.

Hereditary breast cancer and the BRCA1-associated FANCJ/BACH1/BRIP1.

Cantor SB(1), Guillemette S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 364 
Plantation St., Worcester, MA 01605, USA. sharon.cantor@umassmed.edu

It is clear that FANCJ, also known as BACH1 or BRIP1, is an essential tumor
suppressor gene based on the identification of clinically relevant mutations not 
only in breast cancer, but also the childhood cancer syndrome, Fanconi anemia.
This conclusion is further supported by the direct and functional interaction
between FANCJ and the hereditary breast cancer-associated gene product BRCA1. In 
the absence of the FANCJ DNA helicase or its interaction with BRCA1, cells have
defects in several aspects of the DNA damage response. In particular, the
BRCA1-FANCJ interaction is essential for promoting error-free repair, checkpoint 
control and for limiting DNA damage tolerance. As the number of FANCJ clinical
mutations and affected patients accumulate, it will be critical to understand
whether the associated tumors resemble BRCA-associated tumors. If so, FANCJ
patients could also benefit from new therapies that selectively sensitize DNA
repair-defective tumors and spare healthy cells. In this article, we summarize
the breast cancer-associated FANCJ mutations and discuss functional outcomes for 
DNA repair and tumor suppression.

PMCID: PMC3109611
PMID: 21345144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. EMBO J. 2011 Feb 16;30(4):692-705. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.362. Epub 2011 Jan 14.

Interaction between the helicases genetically linked to Fanconi anemia group J
and Bloom's syndrome.

Suhasini AN(1), Rawtani NA, Wu Y, Sommers JA, Sharma S, Mosedale G, North PS,
Cantor SB, Hickson ID, Brosh RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institute on Aging, NIH, NIH
Biomedical Research Center, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Mar;12(3):138-9.

Bloom's syndrome (BS) and Fanconi anemia (FA) are autosomal recessive disorders
characterized by cancer and chromosomal instability. BS and FA group J arise from
mutations in the BLM and FANCJ genes, respectively, which encode DNA helicases.
In this work, FANCJ and BLM were found to interact physically and functionally in
human cells and co-localize to nuclear foci in response to replication stress.
The cellular level of BLM is strongly dependent upon FANCJ, and BLM is degraded
by a proteasome-mediated pathway when FANCJ is depleted. FANCJ-deficient cells
display increased sister chromatid exchange and sensitivity to replication
stress. Expression of a FANCJ C-terminal fragment that interacts with BLM exerted
a dominant negative effect on hydroxyurea resistance by interfering with the
FANCJ-BLM interaction. FANCJ and BLM synergistically unwound a DNA duplex
substrate with sugar phosphate backbone discontinuity, but not an 'undamaged'
duplex. Collectively, the results suggest that FANCJ catalytic activity and its
effect on BLM protein stability contribute to preservation of genomic stability
and a normal response to replication stress.

PMCID: PMC3041957
PMID: 21240188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Cancer Res. 2011 Mar 1;71(5):1999-2009. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3018. Epub 
2011 Jan 6.

High basal nuclear levels of Nrf2 in acute myeloid leukemia reduces sensitivity
to proteasome inhibitors.

Rushworth SA(1), Bowles KM, MacEwan DJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of East Anglia, Norwich, United Kingdom.

Proteasome inhibitors such as bortezomib exhibit clinical efficacy in multiple
myeloma, but studies in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) have been disappointing to
date. The apparent failure in AML likely reflects a lack of biological
understanding that might clarify applications of proteosome inhibitors in this
disease. Here we show that AML cells are considerably less sensitive than control
noncancerous cells to bortezomib-induced cytotoxicity, permitting most
bortezomib-treated AML cells to survive treatment. We traced reduced bortezomib
sensitivity to increased basal levels of nuclear Nrf2, a transcription factor
that stimulates protective antioxidant enzymes. Bortezomib stimulates
cytotoxicity through accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) but elevated
basal levels of nuclear Nrf2 present in AML cells reduced ROS levels, permitting 
AML cells to survive drug treatment. We further found that the Nrf2
transcriptional repressor Bach1 is rapidly inactivated by bortezomib, allowing
rapid induction of Nrf2-regulated cytoprotective and detoxification genes that
protect AML cells from bortezomib-induced apoptosis. By contrast, nonmalignant
control cells lacked constitutive activation of Nrf2, such that
bortezomib-mediated inactivation of Bach1 led to a delay in induction of
Nrf2-regulated genes, effectively preventing the manifestation of apoptotic
protection that is seen in AML cells. Together, our findings argue that AML might
be rendered sensitive to proteasome inhibitors by cotreatment with either an
Nrf2-inhibitory or Bach1-inhibitory treatment, rationalizing a targeted therapy
against AML.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21212410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Free Radic Biol Med. 2011 Mar 15;50(6):645-66. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.12.023. Epub 2010 Dec 24.

Regulation of iron pathways in response to hypoxia.

Chepelev NL(1), Willmore WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1S 5B6.

Constituting an integral part of a heme's porphyrin ring, iron is essential for
supplying cells and tissues with oxygen. Given tight links between oxygen
delivery and iron availability, it is not surprising that iron deprivation and
oxygen deprivation (hypoxia) have very similar consequences at the molecular
level. Under hypoxia, the expression of major iron homeostasis genes including
transferrin, transferrin receptor, ceruloplasmin, and heme oxygenase-1 is
activated by hypoxia-inducible factors to provide increased iron availability for
erythropoiesis in an attempt to enhance oxygen uptake and delivery to hypoxic
cells. Iron-response proteins (IRP1 and IRP2) and "cap-n-collar" bZIP
transcriptional factors (NE-F2 p45; Nrf1, 2, and 3; Bach1 and 2) also control
gene and protein expression of the key iron homeostasis proteins. In this
article, we give an overview of the mechanisms by which iron pathways are
regulated by hypoxia at multiple levels. In addition, potential clinical benefits
of manipulating iron pathways in the hypoxia-related conditions anemia and
ischemia are discussed.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21185934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 11;286(6):4292-301. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.189555. Epub 2010
Dec 2.

Molecular basis of BACH1/FANCJ recognition by TopBP1 in DNA replication
checkpoint control.

Leung CC(1), Gong Z, Chen J, Glover JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Molecular and Systems Medicine,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2H7, Canada.

The diverse roles of TopBP1 in DNA replication and checkpoint signaling are
associated with the scaffolding ability of TopBP1 to initiate various
protein-protein interactions. The recognition of the BACH1/FANCJ helicase by
TopBP1 is critical for the activation of the DNA replication checkpoint at
stalled replication forks and is facilitated by the C-terminal tandem BRCT7/8
domains of TopBP1 and a phosphorylated Thr(1133) binding motif in BACH1. Here we 
provide the structural basis for this interaction through analysis of the x-ray
crystal structures of TopBP1 BRCT7/8 both free and in complex with a BACH1
phospho-peptide. In contrast to canonical BRCT-phospho-peptide recognition,
TopBP1 BRCT7/8 undergoes a dramatic conformational change upon BACH1 binding such
that the two BRCT repeats pivot about the central BRCT-BRCT interface to provide 
an extensive and deep peptide-binding cleft. Additionally, we provide the first
structural mechanism for Thr(P) recognition among BRCT domains. Together with
systematic mutagenesis studies, we highlight the role of key contacts in
governing the unique specificity of the TopBP1-BACH1 interaction.

PMCID: PMC3039391
PMID: 21127055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2011 Jun 15;14(12):2441-51. doi: 10.1089/ars.2010.3574.
Epub 2011 Mar 21.

Identification of senescence-associated genes and their networks under oxidative 
stress by the analysis of Bach1.

Ota K(1), Dohi Y, Brydun A, Nakanome A, Ito S, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai, Japan.

Cellular senescence is induced in response to DNA damage, caused by genotoxic
stresses, including oxidative stress, and serves as a barrier against malignant
transformation. Tumor-suppressor protein p53 induces genes critical for
implementing cellular senescence. However, the identities of p53 target genes and
other regulators that achieve senescence under oxidative stress remain to be
elucidated. Effector genes for oxidative stress-induced cellular senescence were 
sought, based on the fact that transcription factor Bach1 inhibits this response 
by impeding the transcriptional activity of p53. pRb became hypophosphorylated
more rapidly in Bach1-deficient MEFs than in wild-type cells, suggesting that pRb
activation was involved in their senescence. Bach1-deficient MEFs bypassed the
senescence state when the expression of a subset of p53 target genes, including
p21, Pai1, Noxa, and Perp, was simultaneously reduced by using RNAi. Combined
knockdown of p21 and pRb resulted in vigorous re-proliferation. These results
suggest that oxidative stress-induced cellular senescence is registered by
multiple p53 target genes, which arrest proliferation redundantly, in part by
activating pRb. Our elucidations contrast with previous reports describing
monopolistic regulations of senescence by single p53 target genes.

PMID: 21110788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 17;5(11):e14027. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014027.

PI 3 kinase related kinases-independent proteolysis of BRCA1 regulates Rad51
recruitment during genotoxic stress in human cells.

Hammond-Martel I(1), Pak H, Yu H, Rouget R, Horwitz AA, Parvin JD, Drobetsky EA, 
Affar el B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center,
University of Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The function of BRCA1 in response to ionizing radiation, which
directly generates DNA double strand breaks, has been extensively characterized. 
However previous investigations have produced conflicting data on mutagens that
initially induce other classes of DNA adducts. Because of the fundamental and
clinical importance of understanding BRCA1 function, we sought to rigorously
evaluate the role of this tumor suppressor in response to diverse forms of
genotoxic stress.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We investigated BRCA1 stability and localization 
in various human cells treated with model mutagens that trigger different DNA
damage signaling pathways. We established that, unlike ionizing radiation, either
UVC or methylmethanesulfonate (MMS) (generating bulky DNA adducts or alkylated
bases respectively) induces a transient downregulation of BRCA1 protein which is 
neither prevented nor enhanced by inhibition of PIKKs. Moreover, we found that
the proteasome mediates early degradation of BRCA1, BARD1, BACH1, and Rad52
implying that critical components of the homologous recombination machinery need 
to be functionally abrogated as part of the early response to UV or MMS.
Significantly, we found that inhibition of BRCA1/BARD1 downregulation is
accompanied by the unscheduled recruitment of both proteins to chromatin along
with Rad51. Consistently, treatment of cells with MMS engendered complete
disassembly of Rad51 from pre-formed ionizing radiation-induced foci. Following
the initial phase of BRCA1/BARD1 downregulation, we found that the recovery of
these proteins in foci coincides with the formation of RPA and Rad51 foci. This
indicates that homologous recombination is reactivated at later stage of the
cellular response to MMS, most likely to repair DSBs generated by replication
blocks.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Taken together our results demonstrate that (i) the
stabilities of BRCA1/BARD1 complexes are regulated in a mutagen-specific manner, 
and (ii) indicate the existence of mechanisms that may be required to prevent the
simultaneous recruitment of conflicting signaling pathways to sites of DNA
damage.

PMCID: PMC2984446
PMID: 21103343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2010 Nov;3(11):1409-16. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0118. Epub 2010 Oct 26.

An MLH1 mutation links BACH1/FANCJ to colon cancer, signaling, and insight toward
directed therapy.

Xie J(1), Guillemette S, Peng M, Gilbert C, Buermeyer A, Cantor SB.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Women's Cancers Program, UMass Memorial Cancer Center, Worcester, Massachusetts
01605, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2010 Nov;3(11):1371-4.

Defects in MLH1, as with other mismatch repair (MMR) proteins, are the primary
cause of hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC). Mutations in MMR genes
often disrupt mismatch repair and MMR signaling functions. However, some
HNPCC-associated mutations have unknown pathogenicity. Here, we uncover an MLH1
clinical mutation with a leucine (L)-to-histidine (H) amino acid change at
position 607 that ablates MLH1 binding to FANCJ. Given that a DNA helicase is not
essential for mammalian MMR in vitro, we considered that loss of MLH1 binding to 
FANCJ could alter MMR signaling. Consistent with this hypothesis, FANCJ-deficient
cells exhibit delayed MMR signaling and apoptotic responses that generate
resistance to agents that induce O(6)-methylguanine lesions. Our data indicate
that the delay in MMR signaling provides time for the methylguanine
methyltransferase (MGMT) enzyme to reverse DNA methylation. In essence, FANCJ
deficiency alters the competition between two pathways: MGMT-prosurvival versus
MMR-prodeath. This outcome could explain the HNPCC familial cancers that present 
as microsatellite stable and with intact MMR, such as MLH(L607H). Importantly,
the link between FANCJ and HNPCC provides insight toward directed therapies
because loss of the FANCJ/MLH1 interaction also uniquely sensitizes cells to DNA 
cross-linking agents.

©2010 AACR.

PMID: 20978114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Zhongguo Ying Yong Sheng Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 May;26(2):226-8.

[The regulation of Nrf2/Bachl on gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase in
inflammatory cells from bronchial asthmic patient sputum].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang XF, Dai AG, Hu RC.

PMID: 20684287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Radiat Res. 2010 Jul;174(1):1-13. doi: 10.1667/RR1290.1.

Impact of RING and BRCT domain mutations on BRCA1 protein stability, localization
and recruitment to DNA damage.

Nelson AC(1), Holt JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Program in Cancer Biology, University of Colorado 
Denver, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

Mutations within the tumor suppressor BRCA1 cause the majority of hereditary
breast and ovarian cancers. The BRCA1 protein is an important regulator of DNA
double-strand break repair, and BRCA1-deficient cells are highly sensitive to
ionizing radiation. Furthermore, BRCA1 function may contribute to enforcement of 
the G(2) cell cycle checkpoint. E3-ubiquitin ligase activity is the only known
enzymatic activity of BRCA1, which is mediated by the N-terminal RING finger
domain. The C-terminal BRCT repeat domain, which mediates protein-protein
interactions, is the only other identified structural domain. By investigating
cancer-linked mutations within each domain, we demonstrate that truncation of the
BRCT domain greatly impairs the stability and nuclear localization of BRCA1
protein. A missense mutation within the RING domain does not affect these
biochemical properties. However, both mutant forms of BRCA1 fail to colocalize in
nuclear foci with the known BRCA1-interacting proteins BARD1 and BACH1, which are
important for DNA repair. This failure occurs despite the continued ability of
the RING mutant protein to interact with BACH1 and the ability of the BRCT mutant
to interact with BARD1. Furthermore, neither mutant form of BRCA1 is recruited
into DNA damage-associated foci marked by gamma-H2AX. Therefore, our data suggest
that both the RING and BRCT domains of BRCA1 are required for an early step in
the function of BRCA1 during DNA repair: recruitment to the sites of DNA damage.

PMCID: PMC4550207
PMID: 20681793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Haematologica. 2010 Aug;95(8):1233-6. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.025585.

Multiple regulatory mechanisms act in concert to control ferroportin expression
and heme iron recycling by macrophages.

Beaumont C.

Comment on
    Haematologica. 2010 Aug;95(8):1261-8.
    Haematologica. 2010 Aug;95(8):1269-77.

PMCID: PMC2913068
PMID: 20675742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2010 Jul;51(6):500-7. doi: 10.1002/em.20568.

Assessing the link between BACH1/FANCJ and MLH1 in DNA crosslink repair.

Cantor SB(1), Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA. Sharon.Cantor@umassmed.edu

FANCJ (also known as BRIP1 or BACH1) is a DNA helicase that was originally
identified by its direct interaction with the hereditary breast cancer protein,
BRCA1. Similar to BRCA1, FANCJ function is essential for DNA repair and breast
cancer suppression. FANCJ is also mutated in the cancer prone syndrome Fanconi
anemia, for which patient cells are characterized by extreme sensitivity to
agents that generate DNA interstand crosslinks. Unexpectedly, correction of the
interstrand crosslink sensitivity of FANCJ-null patient cells did not require the
FANCJ/BRCA1 interaction. Instead, FANCJ binding to the mismatch repair protein,
MLH1 was required. Given this finding, we address the role of FANCJ and MLH1 in
DNA crosslink processing and how their functions could be linked in checkpoint
and/or recombination pathways. We speculate that after DNA crosslink processing
and repair, the FANCJ/MLH1 interaction is critical for recovery and restart of
replication. These ideas are considered and summarized in this review.

Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 2010. (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20658644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010 Dec 15;80(12):1895-903. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2010.07.014.
Epub 2010 Jul 17.

Signaling to heme oxygenase-1 and its anti-inflammatory therapeutic potential.

Paine A(1), Eiz-Vesper B, Blasczyk R, Immenschuh S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Transfusion Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.

Heme oxygenase (HO)-1 is the inducible isoform of the first and rate-limiting
enzyme of heme degradation. Induction of HO-1 protects against the cytotoxicity
of oxidative stress and apoptotic cell death. More recently, HO-1 has been
recognized to have major immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory properties, which
have been demonstrated in HO-1 knockout mice and a human case of genetic HO-1
deficiency. Beneficial protective effects of HO-1 in inflammation are not only
mediated via enzymatic degradation of proinflammatory free heme, but also via
production of the anti-inflammatory compounds bilirubin and carbon monoxide. The 
immunomodulatory role of HO-1 is associated with its cell type-specific functions
in myeloid cells (eg. macrophages and monocytes) and in endothelial cells, as
both cell types are crucially involved in the regulation of inflammatory
responses. This review covers the molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways
that are involved in HO-1 gene expression. In particular, it is discussed how
redox-dependent transcriptional activators such as NF-E2 related factor 2 (Nrf2),
NF-<U+03BA>B and AP-1 along with the transcription repressor BTB and CNC homologue 1
(Bach1) control the inducible HO-1 gene expression. The role of central pro- and 
anti-inflammatory cellular signaling cascades including p38 MAPK and
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt in HO-1 regulation is highlighted.
Finally, emerging strategies that apply targeted pharmacological induction of
HO-1 for therapeutic interventions in inflammatory conditions are summarized.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20643109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Blood. 2010 Nov 11;116(19):3780-91. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-11-256016. Epub 2010 
Jul 16.

Fanconi anemia group J mutation abolishes its DNA repair function by uncoupling
DNA translocation from helicase activity or disruption of protein-DNA complexes.

Wu Y(1), Sommers JA, Suhasini AN, Leonard T, Deakyne JS, Mazin AV, Shin-Ya K,
Kitao H, Brosh RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, National Institutes of Health Biomedical Research Center,
Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a genetic disease characterized by congenital
abnormalities, bone marrow failure, and susceptibility to leukemia and other
cancers. FANCJ, one of 13 genes linked to FA, encodes a DNA helicase proposed to 
operate in homologous recombination repair and replicational stress response. The
pathogenic FANCJ-A349P amino acid substitution resides immediately adjacent to a 
highly conserved cysteine of the iron-sulfur domain. Given the genetic linkage of
the FANCJ-A349P allele to FA, we investigated the effect of this particular
mutation on the biochemical and cellular functions of the FANCJ protein. Purified
recombinant FANCJ-A349P protein had reduced iron and was defective in coupling
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis and translocase activity to unwinding
forked duplex or G-quadruplex DNA substrates or disrupting protein-DNA complexes.
The FANCJ-A349P allele failed to rescue cisplatin or telomestatin sensitivity of 
a FA-J null cell line as detected by cell survival or <U+03B3>-H2AX foci formation.
Furthermore, expression of FANCJ-A349P in a wild-type background exerted a
dominant-negative effect, indicating that the mutant protein interferes with
normal DNA metabolism. The ability of FANCJ to use the energy from ATP hydrolysis
to produce the force required to unwind DNA or destabilize protein bound to DNA
is required for its role in DNA repair.

PMCID: PMC2981534
PMID: 20639400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. IUBMB Life. 2010 Jul;62(7):548-53. doi: 10.1002/iub.349.

Does a helicase activity help mismatch repair in eukaryotes?

Song L(1), Yuan F, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Miller School of Medicine,
University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Mismatch repair (MMR) corrects innate DNA replication infidelities. Many
components of eukaryotic MMR have been identified, the molecular mechanism of MMR
has been largely demonstrated, and furthermore the nick-directed MMR reactions
have been reconstituted with purified human proteins in vitro. However, some
fundamental questions still remain to be answered. One such question is whether a
DNA helicase activity is required for MMR in eukaryotes. This short review
presents an overview of the interactions between eukaryotic DNA helicases and MMR
factors, and suggests a possible mechanism for how DNA helicases may be involved 
in repair of DNA mismatches.

(c) 2010 IUBMB IUBMB Life.

PMID: 20552646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 30;285(31):23581-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.068197. Epub 2010
May 25.

Bach1-dependent and -independent regulation of heme oxygenase-1 in keratinocytes.

Okada S(1), Muto A, Ogawa E, Nakanome A, Katoh Y, Ikawa S, Aiba S, Igarashi K,
Okuyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai 980-8574, Japan.

Bach1 is a member of the basic leucine zipper transcription factor family, and
the Bach1/small Maf heterodimer specifically represses transcriptional activity
directed by the Maf recognition element (MARE). Because Bach1 is a repressor of
the oxidative stress response, we examined the function(s) of Bach1 in
keratinocytes subjected to oxidative stress. Oxidative stress induced by H(2)O(2)
led to an increase in MARE activity and expression of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), an
inducible antioxidant defense enzyme. Bach1 depletion by small interfering RNAs
or by deletion of Bach1 enhanced HO-1 expression in the absence of H(2)O(2),
indicating that Bach1 is a critical repressor of HO-1 in keratinocytes. Although 
Bach1-deficient or -reduced keratinocytes expressed higher levels of HO-1 than
control cells in response to H(2)O(2), Bach1 down-regulation did not attenuate
the production of reactive oxygen species by H(2)O(2). In contrast, Bach1
overexpression abolished HO-1 induction by H(2)O(2), which led to increased
reactive oxygen species accumulation. HO-1 was induced during keratinocyte
differentiation, but MARE activity did not change during differentiation.
Furthermore, Bach1 overexpression did not inhibit differentiation-associated
induction of HO-1 expression, suggesting that HO-1 induction in differentiation
is independent of Bach1. Thus, in response to oxidative stress, Bach1 regulates
the oxidation state through the negative control of HO-1 expression prior to
terminal keratinocyte differentiation. However, Bach1-mediated repression is
negated during keratinocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2911280
PMID: 20501657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2009 Dec;60 Suppl 7:149-54.

Inhibition of Bach1 ameliorates indomethacin-induced intestinal injury in mice.

Harusato A(1), Naito Y, Takagi T, Yamada S, Mizushima K, Hirai Y, Horie R, Inoue 
K, Fukumoto K, Hirata I, Omatsu T, Kishimoto E, Uchiyama K, Handa O, Ishikawa T, 
Kokura S, Ichikawa H, Muto A, Igarashi K, Yoshikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of
Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

BTB and CNC homolog 1 (Bach1) is a transcriptional repressor of heme oxygenase-1 
(HO-1). It plays an important role in the feedback regulation of HO-1 expression,
which protects cells from various insults including oxidative stress and
inflammatory cytokines. However, the role of Bach1 in intestinal inflammation
remains unclear. In this study, the role of Bach1 in intestinal mucosal injury
was elucidated using 8-week-old female C57BL/6 (wild-type) and homozygous
Bach1-deficient C57BL/6 mice. Intestinal mucosal injuries induced by a single
subcutaneous administration of indomethacin were evaluated macroscopically,
histologically, and biochemically. Mucosal protein content and chemokine mRNA
levels were determined by real-time PCR. Our results showed that the
indomethacin-induced intestinal injury was remarkably improved in Bach1-deficient
mice. Histological examination showed that the area of injured lesion was
decreased in Bach1-deficient mice compared to wild-type mice. Administration of
indomethacin induced expression of inflammatory chemokines such as KC, MIP1alpha 
and MCP1, which was suppressed in Bach1-deficient mice. Myeloperoxidase activity 
in the intestinal mucosa was also significantly decreased in Bach1-deficient
mice. Additionally, Bach1 deficiency enhanced immunopositivity of HO-1 in the
intestinal mucosa after indomethacin administration. Disruption of the Bach1 gene
thus caused inhibition of mucosal injury, indicating that inhibition of Bach1 may
be a novel therapeutic strategy for treating indomethacin-induced intestinal
injury.

PMID: 20388958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Chem Res Toxicol. 2010 May 17;23(5):977-85. doi: 10.1021/tx100084c.

Cytochrome P450 2A5 constitutive expression and induction by heavy metals is
dependent on redox-sensitive transcription factor Nrf2 in liver.

Lämsä V(1), Levonen AL, Leinonen H, Ylä-Herttuala S, Yamamoto M, Hakkola J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

Mouse cytochrome P450 2A5 (CYP2A5) is upregulated in various pathophysiological
liver diseases and induced by structurally variable hepatotoxic chemicals. A
putative common feature for all of these conditions is altered cellular redox
status. Nuclear factor erythroid 2-like 2 (Nrf2) is a transcription factor that
is post-translationally regulated by oxidative stress and controls the
transcription of numerous protective target genes. In the present study, we have 
extensively characterized the regulation of Cyp2a5 by Nrf2 and compared it to a
well-characterized target gene Hmox1. The treatment of mouse primary hepatocytes 
with lead chloride, methylmercury chloride, or phenethyl isothiocyanate all leads
to nuclear accumulation of Nrf2. Both CYP2A5 and HMOX1 were induced by all three 
compounds; however, HMOX1 responded more rapidly and transiently as compared to
CYP2A5. Experiments in Nrf2(-/-) primary hepatocytes showed that Nrf2 is crucial 
for CYP2A5 induction but not for elevation of HMOX1. Both CYP2A5 and HMOX1 were
upregulated by Nrf2 overexpression and downregulated by Keap1 or Bach1
overexpression. However, in all cases, CYP2A5 responded much more potently.
Results in Nrf2-deficient animals showed that CYP2A5 expression is significantly 
attenuated in the absence of Nrf2, while expression of HMOX1 was unaffected.
Therefore, Cyp2a5 joins the group of genes constitutively regulated by Nrf2. Our 
current results unequivocally show that expression of CYP2A5 is tightly
controlled by Nrf2 in liver. Nrf2 is needed for constitutive expression of
CYP2A5, and CYP2A5 is also sensitively upregulated by an increased level of Nrf2 
protein. Therefore, CYP2A5 upregulation could be a useful indicator for hepatic
activation of the Nrf2 pathway.

PMID: 20402460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 8;5(4):e10061. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010061.

Association between DNA damage response and repair genes and risk of invasive
serous ovarian cancer.

Schildkraut JM(1), Iversen ES, Wilson MA, Clyde MA, Moorman PG, Palmieri RT,
Whitaker R, Bentley RC, Marks JR, Berchuck A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community and Family Medicine, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina, United States of America. schil001@mc.duke.edu

BACKGROUND: We analyzed the association between 53 genes related to DNA repair
and p53-mediated damage response and serous ovarian cancer risk using
case-control data from the North Carolina Ovarian Cancer Study (NCOCS), a
population-based, case-control study.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The analysis was restricted to 364 invasive serous
ovarian cancer cases and 761 controls of white, non-Hispanic race. Statistical
analysis was two staged: a screen using marginal Bayes factors (BFs) for 484 SNPs
and a modeling stage in which we calculated multivariate adjusted posterior
probabilities of association for 77 SNPs that passed the screen. These
probabilities were conditional on subject age at diagnosis/interview, batch, a
DNA quality metric and genotypes of other SNPs and allowed for uncertainty in the
genetic parameterizations of the SNPs and number of associated SNPs. Six SNPs had
Bayes factors greater than 10 in favor of an association with invasive serous
ovarian cancer. These included rs5762746 (median OR(odds ratio)(per allele) =
0.66; 95% credible interval (CI) = 0.44-1.00) and rs6005835 (median OR(per
allele) = 0.69; 95% CI = 0.53-0.91) in CHEK2, rs2078486 (median OR(per allele) = 
1.65; 95% CI = 1.21-2.25) and rs12951053 (median OR(per allele) = 1.65; 95% CI = 
1.20-2.26) in TP53, rs411697 (median OR (rare homozygote) = 0.53; 95% CI = 0.35 -
0.79) in BACH1 and rs10131 (median OR( rare homozygote) = not estimable) in LIG4.
The six most highly associated SNPs are either predicted to be functionally
significant or are in LD with such a variant. The variants in TP53 were confirmed
to be associated in a large follow-up study.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Based on our findings, further follow-up of the DNA
repair and response pathways in a larger dataset is warranted to confirm these
results.

PMCID: PMC2851649
PMID: 20386703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Cancer Sci. 2010 Jun;101(6):1409-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01550.x. Epub 
2010 Mar 2.

Expression of heme oxygenase-1 in human leukemic cells and its regulation by
transcriptional repressor Bach1.

Miyazaki T(1), Kirino Y, Takeno M, Samukawa S, Hama M, Tanaka M, Yamaji S, Ueda
A, Tomita N, Fujita H, Ishigatsubo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

Heme oxygenase (HO)-1 has anti-oxidative, anti-inflammatory, and anti-apoptotic
activities. However, little is known about the regulation of HO-1 in human
primary acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells. Here we investigated the expression
of HO-1 in primary and established AML cells as well as other types of leukemic
cells and normal monocytes, and its regulatory mechanism by the transcriptional
repressor, BTB and CNC homology 1 (Bach1), and the activator, nuclear factor
erythroid-derived 2 related factor 2 (Nrf2). Leukemic cell lines such as U937
expressed little HO-1, whereas most freshly isolated AML cells and monocytes
expressed substantial amounts of HO-1, along with Bach1 and Nrf2. When U937 cells
were treated with phorbol myristate acetate (PHA) or gamma-interferon, they
significantly expressed both HO-1 and Bach1, like primary AML cells. Treatment
with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) enhanced HO-1 expression in U937 cells but
suppressed it in primary monocytes and PMA-treated U937 cells. In HO-1-expressing
cells, Bach1 was localized in the cytoplasm, but Nrf2 was localized in the
nuclei. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay of these cells revealed the
preferential binding of Nrf2 over Bach1 to Maf-recognition elements, the enhancer
regions of the HO-1 gene. The downregulation of the HO-1 gene with siRNA
increased a cytotoxic effect of an anticancer drug on primary AML cells, whereas 
the downregulation of Bach1 increased HO-1 expression, leading to enhanced
survival. These and other results show that Bach1 plays a critical role in
regulating HO-1 gene expression in AML cells and its expression suppresses their 
survival by downregulating HO-1 expression. Thus, functional upregulation of
Bach1 is a potential strategy for antileukemic therapy.

PMID: 20345481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec. 2010;72(1):44-50. doi: 10.1159/000292104. Epub
2010 Mar 24.

Inactivation of the tumor suppressor genes causing the hereditary syndromes
predisposing to head and neck cancer via promoter hypermethylation in sporadic
head and neck cancers.

Smith IM(1), Mithani SK, Mydlarz WK, Chang SS, Califano JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Head and Neck Cancer
Division, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21287-0910, USA.

Fanconi anemia (FA) and dyskeratosis congenita (DC) are rare inherited syndromes 
that cause head and neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC). Prior studies of inherited
forms of cancer have been extremely important in elucidating tumor suppressor
genes inactivated in sporadic tumors. Here, we studied whether sporadic tumors
have epigenetic silencing of the genes causing the inherited forms of HNSCC.
Using bisulfite sequencing, we investigated the incidence of promoter
hypermethylation of the 17 Fanconi- and DC-associated genes in sporadic HNSCC.
Genes that only showed methylation in the tumor patients were chosen for
quantitative methylation-specific PCR (qMSP) in a set of 45 tumor and 16 normal
patients. Three gene promoters showed differences in methylation: FancB (FAAP95, 
FA core complex), FancJ (BRIP1, DNA Helicase/ATPase), and DKC1 (dyskeratin).
Bisulfite sequencing revealed that only FancB and DKC1 showed no methylation in
normal patients, yet the presence of promoter hypermethylation in tumor patients.
On qMSP, 1/16 (6.25%) of the normal mucosal samples from non-cancer patients and 
14/45 (31.1%) of the tumor patients demonstrated hypermethylation of the FancB
locus (p < 0.05). These results suggest that inactivation of FancB may play a
role in the pathogenesis of sporadic HNSCC.

PMCID: PMC2881891
PMID: 20332657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Haematologica. 2010 Aug;95(8):1261-8. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.020123. Epub
2010 Feb 23.

Heme controls ferroportin1 (FPN1) transcription involving Bach1, Nrf2 and a
MARE/ARE sequence motif at position -7007 of the FPN1 promoter.

Marro S(1), Chiabrando D, Messana E, Stolte J, Turco E, Tolosano E, Muckenthaler 
MU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer
Feld 153, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2010 Aug;95(8):1233-6.

BACKGROUND: Macrophages of the reticuloendothelial system play a key role in
recycling iron from hemoglobin of senescent or damaged erythrocytes. Heme
oxygenase 1 degrades the heme moiety and releases inorganic iron that is stored
in ferritin or exported to the plasma via the iron export protein ferroportin. In
the plasma, iron binds to transferrin and is made available for de novo red cell 
synthesis. The aim of this study was to gain insight into the regulatory
mechanisms that control the transcriptional response of iron export protein
ferroportin to hemoglobin in macrophages.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Iron export protein ferroportin mRNA expression was analyzed 
in RAW264.7 mouse macrophages in response to hemoglobin, heme, ferric ammonium
citrate or protoporphyrin treatment or to siRNA mediated knockdown or
overexpression of Btb And Cnc Homology 1 or nuclear accumulation of Nuclear
Factor Erythroid 2-like. Iron export protein ferroportin promoter activity was
analyzed using reporter constructs that contain specific truncations of the iron 
export protein ferroportin promoter or mutations in a newly identified MARE/ARE
element.
RESULTS: We show that iron export protein ferroportin is transcriptionally
co-regulated with heme oxygenase 1 by heme, a degradation product of hemoglobin. 
The protoporphyrin ring of heme is sufficient to increase iron export protein
ferroportin transcriptional activity while the iron released from the heme moiety
controls iron export protein ferroportin translation involving the IRE in the
5'untranslated region. Transcription of iron export protein ferroportin is
inhibited by Btb and Cnc Homology 1 and activated by Nuclear Factor Erythroid
2-like involving a MARE/ARE element located at position -7007/-7016 of the iron
export protein ferroportin promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: This finding suggests that heme controls a macrophage iron recycling
regulon involving Btb and Cnc Homology 1 and Nuclear Factor Erythroid 2-like to
assure the coordinated degradation of heme by heme oxygenase 1, iron storage and 
detoxification by ferritin, and iron export by iron export protein ferroportin.

PMCID: PMC2913073
PMID: 20179090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Oncogene. 2010 Apr 29;29(17):2499-508. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.18. Epub 2010 Feb
22.

Targeting the FANCJ-BRCA1 interaction promotes a switch from recombination to
poleta-dependent bypass.

Xie J(1), Litman R, Wang S, Peng M, Guillemette S, Rooney T, Cantor SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Women's Cancers Program, UMASS Memorial Cancer Center, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

BRCA1 and the DNA helicase FANCJ (also known as BACH1 or BRIP1) have common
functions in breast cancer suppression and DNA repair. However, the functional
significance of the direct interaction between BRCA1 and FANCJ remains unclear.
Here, we have discovered that BRCA1 binding to FANCJ regulates DNA damage repair 
choice. Thus, when FANCJ binding to BRCA1 is ablated, the molecular mechanism
chosen for the repair of damaged DNA is dramatically altered. Specifically, a
FANCJ protein that cannot be phosphorylated at serine 990 or bind BRCA1 inhibits 
DNA repair via homologous recombination and promotes poleta-dependent bypass.
Furthermore, the poleta-dependent bypass promoted by FANCJ requires the direct
binding to the mismatch repair (MMR) protein, MLH1. Together, our findings
implicate that in human cells BRCA1 binding to FANCJ is critical to regulate DNA 
repair choice and promote genomic stability. Moreover, unregulated FANCJ function
could be associated with cancer and/or chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC2909592
PMID: 20173781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Cell. 2010 Feb 12;37(3):438-46. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.01.002.

BACH1/FANCJ acts with TopBP1 and participates early in DNA replication checkpoint
control.

Gong Z(1), Kim JE, Leung CC, Glover JN, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Human TopBP1 plays a critical role in the control of DNA replication checkpoint. 
In this study, we report a specific interaction between TopBP1 and BACH1/FANCJ, a
DNA helicase involved in the repair of DNA crosslinks. The TopBP1/BACH1
interaction is mediated by the very C-terminal tandem BRCT domains of TopBP1 and 
S phase-specific phosphorylation of BACH1 at Thr 1133 site. Interestingly, we
demonstrate that depletion of TopBP1 or BACH1 attenuates the loading of RPA on
chromatin. Moreover, both TopBP1 and BACH1 are required for ATR-dependent
phosphorylation events in response to replication stress. Taken together, our
data suggest that BACH1 has an unexpected early role in replication checkpoint
control. A specific interaction between TopBP1 and BACH1 is likely to be required
for the extension of single-stranded DNA regions and RPA loading following
replication stress, which is a prerequisite for the subsequent activation of
replication checkpoint.

PMCID: PMC3695484
PMID: 20159562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Hepatology. 2010 May;51(5):1494-504. doi: 10.1002/hep.23401.

MicroRNA-196 represses Bach1 protein and hepatitis C virus gene expression in
human hepatoma cells expressing hepatitis C viral proteins.

Hou W(1), Tian Q, Zheng J, Bonkovsky HL.

Author information: 
(1)Liver-Biliary-Pancreatic Center and the Liver, Digestive Diseases, and
Metabolism Laboratory, Carolinas Medical Center, Charlotte, NC 28232-2861, USA.
weihong.hou@carolinashealthcare.org

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) directly induces oxidative stress and liver injury.
Bach1, a basic leucine zipper mammalian transcriptional repressor, negatively
regulates heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1), a key cytoprotective enzyme that has
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities. microRNAs (miRNAs) are small
noncoding RNAs ( approximately 22 nt) that are important regulators of gene
expression. Whether and how miRNAs regulate Bach1 or HCV are largely unknown. The
aims of this study were to determine whether miR-196 regulates Bach1, HMOX1,
and/or HCV gene expression. HCV replicon cell lines (Con1 and 9-13) of the Con1
isolate and J6/JFH1-based HCV cell culture system were used in this study. The
effects of miR-196 mimic on Bach1, HMOX1, and HCV RNA, and protein levels were
measured by way of quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and
Western blotting, respectively. The Dual Glo Luciferase Assay System was used to 
determine reporter activities. miR-196 mimic significantly down-regulated Bach1
and up-regulated HMOX1 gene expression and inhibited HCV expression. Dual
luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that transfection of miR-196 mimic
resulted in a significant decrease in Bach1 3'-untranslated region
(UTR)-dependent luciferase activity but not in mutant Bach1 3'-UTR-dependent
luciferase activity. Moreover, there was no detectable effect of mutant miR-196
on Bach1 3'-UTR-dependent luciferase activity.CONCLUSION: miR-196 directly acts
on the 3'-UTR of Bach1 messenger RNA and translationally represses the expression
of this protein, and up-regulates HMOX1. miR-196 also inhibits HCV expression in 
HCV replicon cell lines (genotype 1b) and in J6/JFH1 (genotype 2a) HCV cell
culture system. Thus, miR-196 plays a role in both HMOX1/Bach1 expression and the
regulation of HCV expression in human hepatocytes. Overexpression of miR-196
holds promise as a potential novel strategy to prevent or ameliorate hepatitis C 
infection, and to protect against liver injury in chronic HCV infection.

PMCID: PMC2862129
PMID: 20127796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Jan 29;6(1):e1000742. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000742.

Upregulation of xCT by KSHV-encoded microRNAs facilitates KSHV dissemination and 
persistence in an environment of oxidative stress.

Qin Z(1), Freitas E, Sullivan R, Mohan S, Bacelieri R, Branch D, Romano M,
Kearney P, Oates J, Plaisance K, Renne R, Kaleeba J, Parsons C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, United States of America.

Upregulation of xCT, the inducible subunit of a membrane-bound amino acid
transporter, replenishes intracellular glutathione stores to maintain cell
viability in an environment of oxidative stress. xCT also serves as a
fusion-entry receptor for the Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), the
causative agent of Kaposi's sarcoma (KS). Ongoing KSHV replication and infection 
of new cell targets is important for KS progression, but whether xCT regulation
within the tumor microenvironment plays a role in KS pathogenesis has not been
determined. Using gene transfer and whole virus infection experiments, we found
that KSHV-encoded microRNAs (KSHV miRNAs) upregulate xCT expression by
macrophages and endothelial cells, largely through miR-K12-11 suppression of
BACH-1-a negative regulator of transcription recognizing antioxidant response
elements within gene promoters. Correlative functional studies reveal that
upregulation of xCT by KSHV miRNAs increases cell permissiveness for KSHV
infection and protects infected cells from death induced by reactive nitrogen
species (RNS). Interestingly, KSHV miRNAs simultaneously upregulate macrophage
secretion of RNS, and biochemical inhibition of RNS secretion by macrophages
significantly reduces their permissiveness for KSHV infection. The clinical
relevance of these findings is supported by our demonstration of increased xCT
expression within more advanced human KS tumors containing a larger number of
KSHV-infected cells. Collectively, these data support a role for KSHV itself in
promoting de novo KSHV infection and the survival of KSHV-infected, RNS-secreting
cells in the tumor microenvironment through the induction of xCT.

PMCID: PMC2813276
PMID: 20126446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. DNA Repair (Amst). 2010 Mar 2;9(3):250-6. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2010.01.005. Epub
2010 Feb 1.

FANCJ: solving problems in DNA replication.

Hiom K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, Ninewells Hospital & Medical School, University
of Dundee, DD1 9SY, Scotland, UK. k.hiom@dundee.ac.uk

The FANCJ protein (also known as BACH1 and BRIP1) is a DNA helicase that is
required to preserve the genetic and structural integrity of the genome in
complex eukaryotes. In humans, mutations in FANCJ are associated with the
chromosome instability disorder Fanconi's anemia and also with the inherited
predisposition early-onset breast cancer. Here I will discuss the contribution of
FANCJ to human disease, its role in maintenance of genome stability and some
current thoughts on the mechanisms through which this is achieved.

(c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20122882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010 May 1;244(3):291-9. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2010.01.004.
Epub 2010 Jan 18.

Arsenic promotes angiogenesis in vitro via a heme oxygenase-1-dependent
mechanism.

Meng D(1), Wang X, Chang Q, Hitron A, Zhang Z, Xu M, Chen G, Luo J, Jiang B, Fang
J, Shi X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences; Shanghai, 200031, China.

Angiogenesis and vessel remodeling are fundamental to the pathogenesis of a
number of diseases caused by environmental arsenic exposure, including
tumorigenesis and cardiovascular diseases. Arsenic (AsIII) has been shown to
stimulate angiogenesis and vascular remodeling in vivo. However, the exact
molecular mechanisms accounting for arsenic-induced angiogenesis are not clear.
The present study investigates the role of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) in sodium
arsenite-mediated angiogenesis in vitro. Transwell assay, three-dimensional
Matrigel assay, RT-PCR, ELISA and immunoblotting were used to determine cell
migration, vascular tube formation, mRNA and protein expression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and luciferase assay were applied to examine the DNA binding 
with protein and HO-1 transcriptional activity. Here, we report that low
concentrations of arsenite (0.1-1 muM) stimulated cell migration and vascular
tube formation in human microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC). Arsenite induced
HO-1 mRNA and protein expression. Knock down of HO-1 expression decreased
arsenite-induced VEGF expression, cell migration, and tube formation. We showed
that arsenite promoted dissociation of Bach1 (a transcriptional repressor) from
the HO-1 enhancers and increased Nrf2 binding to these elements. Site directed
mutagenesis assay identified that Bach1 cysteine residues 557 and 574 were
essential for the induction of HO-1 gene in response to arsenite. These findings 
demonstrate a role for HO-1 in arsenite-mediated angiogenesis in vitro.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20083128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jan 5;107(1):52-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0909153107.
Epub 2009 Dec 4.

JNK-mediated turnover and stabilization of the transcription factor p45/NF-E2
during differentiation of murine erythroleukemia cells.

Lee TL(1), Shyu YC, Hsu PH, Chang CW, Wen SC, Hsiao WY, Tsai MD, Shen CK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan, Republic 
of China.

Regulation of the homeostatic concentrations of specific sets of transcription
factors is essential for correct programming of cell proliferation and
differentiation. We have characterized the signal transduction pathways
regulating the catabolisis of p45/NF-E2, a bZIP factor activating the erythroid
and megakaryocytic gene transcription. Through use of different approaches
including nano-scale proteomics, we show that activated-JNK, or Phospho-JNK
(P-JNK), physically interacts with p45/NF-E2 and phosphorylates its Ser157
residue. This reaction leads to the poly-ubiquitination of p45/NF-E2 at one or
more of six Lys residues, one of which being also a sumoylation site, and its
degradation through the proteasome pathway. Significantly, this regulatory
pathway of p45/NF-E2 by P-JNK exists only in uninduced murine erythroleukemia
(MEL) cells but not in differentiated MEL cells in which JNK is inactivated on
DMSO induction. Based on the above data and analysis of the chromatin-binding
kinetics of p45/NF-E2 and the erythroid gene repressor Bach1 during the early
phase of MEL differentiation, we suggest a model for the regulation of erythroid 
maturation. In the model, the posttranslational modifications and turnover of
p45/NF-E2, as mediated by P-JNK, contribute to the control of its homeostatic
concentration and consequently, its regulatory functions in the progression of
erythroid differentiation and erythroid gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2806728
PMID: 19966288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 1;285(1):153-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.040022. Epub 2009
Nov 6.

Antioxidant-induced phosphorylation of tyrosine 486 leads to rapid nuclear export
of Bach1 that allows Nrf2 to bind to the antioxidant response element and
activate defensive gene expression.

Kaspar JW(1), Jaiswal AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

Antioxidants cause stabilization and nuclear translocation of NF-E2-related
factor 2 (Nrf2), where it binds to the antioxidant response element (ARE) and
induces up-regulation of defensive genes that protect cells against oxidative and
electrophilic stress. Bach1, the negative regulator of Nrf2, competes with Nrf2
for binding to the ARE in the human NQO1 promoter. In this study, we demonstrate 
that Bach1 exits the nucleus within 1-2 h upon antioxidant treatment. Genistein, 
an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases, blocked nuclear export of Bach1. Site-directed 
mutagenesis and immunoprecipitation assays identified tyrosine 486 that was
phosphorylated in response to the antioxidant and was essential for nuclear
export of Bach1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed a competitive
interplay between Bach1 and Nrf2 at 1-2 and 4 h for binding to the human NQO1
ARE. Luciferase and real time PCR assays showed a significant decrease in
antioxidant induction of reporter activity and mRNA levels in cells transfected
with mutant Bach1 compared with wild type. This decrease was due to the absence
of nuclear export of the mutant protein. Bach1 levels inside the nucleus returned
to normal at 4 h after antioxidant treatment in the absence but not in the
presence of protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide. In addition, antioxidant
treatment increased the transcription of Bach1 as shown by pulse chase and real
time PCR experiments. Taken together, these results indicate that increased
synthesis of Bach1 restored its nuclear levels to normal at 4 h. In conclusion,
antioxidant-induced tyrosine 486 phosphorylation leads to nuclear exit of Bach1, 
thus allowing Nrf2 access to the ARE.

PMCID: PMC2804160
PMID: 19897490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Free Radic Biol Med. 2010 Jan 15;48(2):196-206. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2009.10.037. Epub 2009 Oct 27.

A role for Bach1 and HO-2 in suppression of basal and UVA-induced HO-1 expression
in human keratinocytes.

Zhong JL(1), Raval C, Edwards GP, Tyrrell RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, UK.

Ultraviolet A (UVA) radiation is an oxidizing agent that strongly induces the
heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) gene and expression of the protein in cultured human skin
fibroblasts but weakly induces it in skin keratinocytes. Lower basal levels of
HO-1 and much higher basal levels of HO-2 protein are observed in keratinocytes
compared with fibroblasts. Using both overexpression and knockdown approaches, we
demonstrate that HO-2 modulates basal and UVA-induced HO-1 protein levels,
whereas HO-1 levels do not affect HO-2 levels in skin fibroblasts and
keratinocytes. Silencing of Bach1 strongly increases HO-1 levels in transformed
HaCaT keratinocytes and these HO-1 levels are not further increased by either UVA
irradiation or silencing of HO-2. This is consistent with the conclusion that
high constitutive levels of HO-2 expression in keratinocytes are responsible for 
the resistance of these cells to HO-1 induction by UVA radiation and that Bach1
plays a predominant role in influencing the lack of HO-1 expression in
keratinocytes. Bach1 inhibition leading to HO-1 induction reduced
UVA-irradiation-induced damage as monitored both by the extent of LDH release and
by nuclear condensation, so that Bach1 inhibition seems to protect against
UVA-irradiation-induced damage in keratinocytes.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19874887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. FEBS Lett. 2009 Nov 3;583(21):3508-18. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.10.010. Epub
2009 Oct 12.

Prolonged cigarette smoke exposure decreases heme oxygenase-1 and alters Nrf2 and
Bach1 expression in human macrophages: roles of the MAP kinases ERK(1/2) and JNK.

Goven D(1), Boutten A, Leçon-Malas V, Boczkowski J, Bonay M.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U700, Université Paris 7, Faculté de Médecine Denis Diderot-site
Bichat, Paris, France.

Tobacco may be involved in the decreased macrophage heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1)
expression described in smoking-induced severe emphysema, via the nuclear factor 
erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)/Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1
(Keap1)-BTB and CNC homology 1, basic leucine zipper transcription factor 1
(Bach1) pathway. We assessed in vitro effects of cigarette smoke condensate (CS) 
in the human monocyte/macrophage cell line (THP-1). CS exposure led to increased 
HO-1 and nuclear Nrf2 expression (6 h) followed by decreased HO-1 expression
concomitantly with nuclear Nrf2/Bach1 ratio decrease (72h). CS-induced
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation.
Extracellular-signal-regulated kinase(1/2) (ERK(1/2)) and c-Jun NH2-terminal
kinase (JNK) inhibition completely abrogated CS effects on HO-1 expression and
nuclear Nrf2/Bach1 translocation. These results suggest that ERK(1/2) and JNK are
involved in CS-induced biphasic HO-1 expression by a specific regulation of
Nrf2/Keap1-Bach1.

PMID: 19822148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. World J Gastroenterol. 2009 Sep 28;15(36):4499-510.

Iron increases HMOX1 and decreases hepatitis C viral expression in HCV-expressing
cells.

Hou WH(1), Rossi L, Shan Y, Zheng JY, Lambrecht RW, Bonkovsky HL.

Author information: 
(1)Cannon Research Center, Carolinas Medical Center, Charlotte, NC 28203, United 
States. herbert.bonkovsky@carolinashealthcare.org

AIM: To investigate effects of iron on oxidative stress, heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX1)
and hepatitis C viral (HCV) expression in human hepatoma cells stably expressing 
HCV proteins.
METHODS: Effects of iron on oxidative stress, HMOX1, and HCV expression were
assessed in CON1 cells. Measurements included mRNA by quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and protein levels by Western blots.
RESULTS: Iron, in the form of ferric nitrilotriacetate, increased oxidative
stress and up-regulated HMOX1 gene expression. Iron did not affect mRNA or
protein levels of Bach1, a repressor of HMOX1. Silencing the up-regulation of
HMOX1 nuclear factor-erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) by Nrf2-siRNA decreased 
FeNTA-mediated up-regulation of HMOX1 mRNA levels. These iron effects were
completely blocked by deferoxamine (DFO). Iron also significantly decreased
levels of HCV core mRNA and protein by 80%-90%, nonstructural 5A mRNA by 90% and 
protein by about 50% in the Con1 full length HCV replicon cells, whereas DFO
increased them.
CONCLUSION: Excess iron up-regulates HMOX1 and down-regulates HCV gene expression
in hepatoma cells. This probably mitigates liver injury caused by combined iron
overload and HCV infection.

PMCID: PMC2751994
PMID: 19777608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Mol Cell. 2009 Sep 11;35(5):716-23. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.06.034.

Recruitment of fanconi anemia and breast cancer proteins to DNA damage sites is
differentially governed by replication.

Shen X(1), Do H, Li Y, Chung WH, Tomasz M, de Winter JP, Xia B, Elledge SJ, Wang 
W, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 77030, USA.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is characterized by cellular hypersensitivity to DNA
crosslinking agents, but how the Fanconi pathway protects cells from DNA
crosslinks and whether FA proteins act directly on crosslinks remain unclear. We 
developed a chromatin-IP-based strategy termed eChIP and detected association of 
multiple FA proteins with DNA crosslinks in vivo. Interdependence analyses
revealed that crosslink-specific enrichment of various FA proteins is controlled 
by distinct mechanisms. BRCA-related FA proteins (BRCA2, FANCJ/BACH1, and
FANCN/PALB2), but not FA core and I/D2 complexes, require replication for their
crosslink association. FANCD2, but not FANCJ and FANCN, requires the FA core
complex for its recruitment. FA core complex requires nucleotide excision repair 
proteins XPA and XPC for its association. Consistent with the distinct
recruitment mechanism, recombination-independent crosslink repair was inversely
affected in cells deficient of FANC-core versus BRCA-related FA proteins. Thus,
FA proteins participate in distinct DNA damage response mechanisms governed by
DNA replication status.

PMCID: PMC2758766
PMID: 19748364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mutat Res. 2009 Jul 31;668(1-2):54-72. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2009.02.003. Epub
2009 Feb 21.

Cellular and molecular consequences of defective Fanconi anemia proteins in
replication-coupled DNA repair: mechanistic insights.

Thompson LH(1), Hinz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Biology and Biotechnology Division, L452, Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, P.O. Box 808, Livermore, CA 94551-0808, United States.
thompson14@llnl.gov

The Fanconi anemia (FA) molecular network consists of 15 "FANC" proteins, of
which 13 are associated with mutations in patients with this cancer-prone
chromosome instability disorder. Whereas historically the common phenotype
associated with FA mutations is marked sensitivity to DNA interstrand
crosslinking agents, the literature supports a more global role for FANC proteins
in coping with diverse stresses encountered by replicative polymerases. We have
attempted to reconcile and integrate numerous observations into a model in which 
FANC proteins coordinate the following physiological events during DNA crosslink 
repair: (a) activating a FANCM-ATR-dependent S-phase checkpoint, (b) mediating
enzymatic replication-fork breakage and crosslink unhooking, (c) filling the
resulting gap by translesion synthesis (TLS) by error-prone polymerase(s), and
(d) restoring the resulting one-ended double-strand break by homologous
recombination repair (HRR). The FANC core subcomplex (FANCA, B, C, E, F, G, L,
FAAP100) promotes TLS for both crosslink and non-crosslink damage such as
spontaneous oxidative base damage, UV-C photoproducts, and alkylated bases. TLS
likely helps prevent stalled replication forks from breaking, thereby maintaining
chromosome continuity. Diverse DNA damages and replication inhibitors result in
monoubiquitination of the FANCD2-FANCI complex by the FANCL ubiquitin ligase
activity of the core subcomplex upon its recruitment to chromatin by the
FANCM-FAAP24 heterodimeric translocase. We speculate that this translocase
activity acts as the primary damage sensor and helps remodel blocked replication 
forks to facilitate checkpoint activation and repair. Monoubiquitination of
FANCD2-FANCI is needed for promoting HRR, in which the FANCD1/BRCA2 and
FANCN/PALB2 proteins act at an early step. We conclude that the core subcomplex
is required for both TLS and HRR occurring separately for non-crosslink damages
and for both events during crosslink repair. The FANCJ/BRIP1/BACH1 helicase
functions in association with BRCA1 and may remove structural barriers to
replication, such as guanine quadruplex structures, and/or assist in crosslink
unhooking.

PMCID: PMC2714807
PMID: 19622404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Seikagaku. 2009 Jun;81(6):502-10.

[Transcriptional regulation of cellular senescence].

[Article in Japanese]

Igarashi K(1), Dohi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

PMID: 19618874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Sep;30(9):1571-80. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp176. Epub 2009 Jul
16.

Characterization of the cancer chemopreventive NRF2-dependent gene battery in
human keratinocytes: demonstration that the KEAP1-NRF2 pathway, and not the
BACH1-NRF2 pathway, controls cytoprotection against electrophiles as well as
redox-cycling compounds.

MacLeod AK(1), McMahon M, Plummer SM, Higgins LG, Penning TM, Igarashi K, Hayes
JD.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School,
University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 9SY, Scotland, UK.

To better understand the role of transcription factor NF-E2-related factor (NRF) 
2 in the human and its contribution to cancer chemoprevention, we have knocked
down its negative regulators, Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (KEAP1) and
broad-complex, tramtrack and bric à brac and cap'n'collar homology 1 (BACH1), in 
HaCaT keratinocytes. Whole-genome microarray revealed that knockdown of KEAP1
resulted in 23 messenger RNAs (mRNAs) being up-regulated > or = 2.0-fold. mRNA
for aldo-keto reductase (AKR) 1B10, AKR1C1, AKR1C2 and AKR1C3 were induced to the
greatest extent, showing increases of between 12- and 16-fold, whereas mRNA for
glutamate-cysteine ligase catalytic and modifier subunits, NAD(P)H:quinone
oxidoreductase-1 and haem oxygenase-1 (HMOX1) were induced between 2.0- and
4.8-fold. Knockdown of BACH1 increased HMOX1 135-fold but induced the other genes
examined to a maximum of only 2.7-fold. Activation of NRF2, by KEAP1 knockdown,
caused a 75% increase in the amount of glutathione in HaCaT cells and a 1.4- to
1.6-fold increase in their resistance to the electrophiles acrolein, chlorambucil
and cumene hydroperoxide (CuOOH), as well as the redox-cycling agent menadione.
Inhibition of glutathione synthesis during KEAP1 knockdown, by treatment with
buthionine sulfoximine, abrogated resistance to acrolein, chlorambucil and CuOOH,
but not to menadione. In contrast, knockdown of BACH1 did not increase
glutathione levels or resistance to xenobiotics. Knockdown of NRF2 in HaCaT cells
decreased glutathione to approximately 80% of normal homeostatic levels and
similarly reduced their tolerance of electrophiles. Thus, the KEAP1-NRF2 pathway 
determines resistance to electrophiles and redox-cycling compounds in human
keratinocytes through glutathione-dependent and glutathione-independent
mechanisms. This study also shows that AKR1B10, AKR1C1 and AKR1C2 proteins have
potential utility as biomarkers for NRF2 activation in the human.

PMCID: PMC3656619
PMID: 19608619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Nihon Rinsho. 2009 Jul;67(7):1423-8.

[Regulation of cellular senescence by Bach1].

[Article in Japanese]

Igarashi K(1), Ota K, Nakame A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine.

The tumor suppressor p53 induces cellular senescence, an irreversible form of
proliferation arrest, to inhibit carcinogenesis as well as aging of organs and a 
body. While the major cause of cellular senescence and aging is oxidative stress,
little is known about how the p53 activity is regulated under such conditions.
Bach1 inhibits expression of oxidative stress responsive genes by competing with 
Nrf2, the key activator of oxidative stress response. Bach1 inhibits
p53-dependent cellular senescence induced by oxidative stress. Bach1 forms a
protein complex with p53, is recruited to p53 target genes, and inhibits their
expression. These findings provide completely novel insights into how the
activity of p53 is regulated under oxidative stress. Since p53 is the critical
tumor suppressor with huge clinical implications, the newly identified mechanism 
should open new research fields.

PMID: 19591297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Curr Mol Med. 2009 May;9(4):470-82.

FANCJ helicase operates in the Fanconi Anemia DNA repair pathway and the response
to replicational stress.

Wu Y(1), Brosh RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institute on Aging, NIH, NIH
Biomedical Research Center, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by multiple 
congenital anomalies, progressive bone marrow failure, and high cancer risk.
Cells from FA patients exhibit spontaneous chromosomal instability and
hypersensitivity to DNA interstrand cross-linking (ICL) agents. Although the
precise mechanistic details of the FA/BRCA pathway of ICL-repair are not well
understood, progress has been made in the identification of the FA proteins that 
are required for the pathway. Among the 13 FA complementation groups from which
all the FA genes have been cloned, only a few of the FA proteins are predicted to
have direct roles in DNA metabolism. One of the more recently identified FA
proteins, shown to be responsible for complementation of the FA complementation
group J, is the BRCA1 Associated C-terminal Helicase (BACH1, designated FANCJ),
originally identified as a protein associated with breast cancer. FANCJ has been 
proposed to function downstream of FANCD2 monoubiquitination, a critical event in
the FA pathway. Evidence supports a role for FANCJ in a homologous recombination 
(HR) pathway of double strand break (DSB) repair. In this review, we will
summarize the current knowledge in terms of FANCJ functions through its enzymatic
activities and protein interactions. The molecular roles of FANCJ in DNA repair
and the response to replicational stress will be discussed.

PMCID: PMC2763586
PMID: 19519404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Free Radic Biol Med. 2009 Apr 15;46(8):1119-26. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2009.01.017. Epub 2009 Jan 29.

Genetic ablation of the Bach1 gene reduces hyperoxic lung injury in mice: role of
IL-6.

Tanimoto T(1), Hattori N, Senoo T, Furonaka M, Ishikawa N, Fujitaka K, Haruta Y, 
Yokoyama A, Igarashi K, Kohno N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Internal Medicine, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor of the heme oxygenase (HO)-1 gene.
Bach1-null (Bach1(-/-)) mice are reported to be protected from myocardial
ischemia/reperfusion injury; however, the effect of Bach1 disruption on another
oxidative stress model of hyperoxic lung injury has yet to be determined. To
investigate the role of Bach1 in hyperoxic lung injury, Bach1(-/-) mice and
wild-type (WT) mice were exposed to 90% O(2). During hyperoxic exposure, the
survival of Bach1(-/-) mice was significantly longer than that of WT mice.
However, the administration of zinc protoporphyrin, an inhibitor of HO-1
activity, did not change the mortality in either of the mice, thus suggesting
that this protective effect was not mediated by an HO-1 overexpression in
Bach1(-/-) mice. The indices of lung injury in the lungs of Bach1(-/-) mice were 
lower than those of WT mice; unexpectedly, however, the levels of IL-6 in
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid from Bach1(-/-) mice were significantly higher
than those of WT mice. Interestingly, the intrapulmonary administration of small 
interfering RNA against IL-6 was shown to reduce the IL-6 levels in BAL fluids
and shorten the survival in Bach1(-/-) mice during hyperoxic exposure. In
addition, a chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed the binding of Bach1 
to the IL-6 promoter and its detachment after oxidative stress. Considering the
previous observation that the transgenic mice overexpressing IL-6 are protected
from hyperoxic lung injury, these results therefore indicate that IL-6 mediates
an increased survival in Bach1(-/-) mice during hyperoxic exposure.

PMID: 19439223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 3;284(27):18458-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.012229. Epub 2009
May 5.

FANCJ helicase uniquely senses oxidative base damage in either strand of duplex
DNA and is stimulated by replication protein A to unwind the damaged DNA
substrate in a strand-specific manner.

Suhasini AN(1), Sommers JA, Mason AC, Voloshin ON, Camerini-Otero RD, Wold MS,
Brosh RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, Biomedical Research Center, NIA, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

FANCJ mutations are genetically linked to the Fanconi anemia complementation
group J and predispose individuals to breast cancer. Understanding the role of
FANCJ in DNA metabolism and how FANCJ dysfunction leads to tumorigenesis requires
mechanistic studies of FANCJ helicase and its protein partners. In this work, we 
have examined the ability of FANCJ to unwind DNA molecules with specific base
damage that can be mutagenic or lethal. FANCJ was inhibited by a single thymine
glycol, but not 8-oxoguanine, in either the translocating or nontranslocating
strands of the helicase substrate. In contrast, the human RecQ helicases (BLM,
RECQ1, and WRN) display strand-specific inhibition of unwinding by the thymine
glycol damage, whereas other DNA helicases (DinG, DnaB, and UvrD) are not
significantly inhibited by thymine glycol in either strand. In the presence of
replication protein A (RPA), but not Escherichia coli single-stranded DNA-binding
protein, FANCJ efficiently unwound the DNA substrate harboring the thymine glycol
damage in the nontranslocating strand; however, inhibition of FANCJ helicase
activity by the translocating strand thymine glycol was not relieved.
Strand-specific stimulation of human RECQ1 helicase activity was also observed,
and RPA bound with high affinity to single-stranded DNA containing a single
thymine glycol. Based on the biochemical studies, we propose a model for the
specific functional interaction between RPA and FANCJ on the thymine glycol
substrates. These studies are relevant to the roles of RPA, FANCJ, and other DNA 
helicases in the metabolism of damaged DNA that can interfere with basic cellular
processes of DNA metabolism.

PMCID: PMC2709400
PMID: 19419957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Mutat Res. 2009 Jul 31;668(1-2):20-6. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2009.04.002. Epub
2009 Apr 18.

FANCM-FAAP24 and FANCJ: FA proteins that metabolize DNA.

Ali AM(1), Singh TR, Meetei AR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children's 
Research Foundation, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
OH 45229, USA.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare autosomal recessive or X-linked disorder
characterized by aplastic anemia, cancer susceptibility and cellular sensitivity 
to DNA-crosslinking agents. Eight FA proteins (FANCA, -B, -C, -E, -F, -G, -L and 
-M) and three non-FA proteins (FAAP100, FAAP24 and HES1) form the FA nuclear core
complex that is required for monoubiquitination of the FANCD2-FANCI dimer upon
DNA damage. The other three FA proteins, FANCD1/BRCA2, FANCJ/BACH1/BRIP1 and
FANCN/PALB2, act in parallel or downstream of the FANCD2-FANCI dimer. Despite the
isolation and characterization of several FA proteins, the mechanism by which
these proteins protect cells from DNA interstrand crosslinking agents has been
unclear. This is because a majority of the FA proteins lack any recognizable
functional domains that can provide insight into their function. The recently
discovered FANCM (Hef) and FANCJ (BRIP1/BACH1) proteins contain helicase domains,
providing potential insight into the role of FA proteins in DNA repair. FANCM
with its partner, FAAP24, and FANCJ bind and metabolize a variety of DNA
substrates. In this review, we focus on the discovery, structure, and function of
the FANCM-FAAP24 and FANCJ proteins.

PMCID: PMC2714411
PMID: 19379763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Jun 1;107(3):537-47. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22155.

Redox-sensitive regulation of gene expression in human primary macrophages
exposed to inorganic arsenic.

Bourdonnay E(1), Morzadec C, Fardel O, Vernhet L.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U620, Group Toxicité des contaminants de l'environnement, 2 avenue du
Pr. Léon Bernard, 35043 Rennes, France.

Inorganic arsenic is an environmental contaminant toxic for key immune cells. We 
recently reported that low micromolar concentrations of arsenic trioxide
(As(2)O(3)) alter functions and differentiation gene program of human
macrophages. Particularly, prolonged treatment with As(2)O(3) concomitantly
reverses expression of a macrophage-specific gene subset and triggers reactive
oxygen species (ROS) production, suggesting a possible role of cell stress in
As(2)O(3) gene effects. This study was thus designed to determine whether
redox-sensitive signaling pathways could mediate gene expression in
metalloid-exposed macrophages. Our results show that As(2)O(3)-dependent
alterations of stress (HMOX1 and GCLM) and macrophage-specific (MMP9, CCL22, and 
CXCL2) gene expression are not mediated by ROS or related signaling pathways.
Notably, As(2)O(3) alters neither activity of the redox-sensitive transcription
factor Sp1 nor that of AP-1 or NF-kappaB. In contrast, N-acetylcysteine, a potent
cysteine reductive compound, significantly prevents up-regulation of HMOX1, GCLM,
and CXCL2 genes, and repression of MMP9 and CCL22 genes induced by As(2)O(3). In 
addition, we demonstrate that As(2)O(3) markedly alters nuclear levels of Nrf2
and Bach1, two redox-sensitive regulators of stress genes, and represses
expression of the transcription factor EGR2 which is involved in mouse macrophage
differentiation; such effects are reduced by N-acetylcysteine. Finally, we report
that genetic invalidation of EGR2 gene partially mimics metalloid effects; it
significantly represses CCL22 gene expression and weakly induces that of CXCL2.
In conclusion, our results demonstrate that As(2)O(3) alters macrophage gene
expression through redox-sensitive signaling pathways unrelated to ROS production
and reveal the transcription factor EGR2 as a new molecular target of arsenic.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19350554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2009 Mar;217(3):223-9.

Bach1 deficiency ameliorates hepatic injury in a mouse model.

Iida A(1), Inagaki K, Miyazaki A, Yonemori F, Ito E, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Japan Tobacco Inc., Central Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Osaka, Japan.

Bach1 is a basic region-leucine zipper (bZip) protein that forms heterodimers
with the small Maf proteins and functions as a repressor of gene expression. One 
of the target genes of Bach1 is Hmox-1 that encodes heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). HO-1
degrades heme into carbon monoxide (CO), biliverdin, and iron. HO-1 is strongly
induced by various stresses as well as its substrate heme, and protects cells and
tissues against insults through diverse cytoprotective functions of the reaction 
products CO and biliverdin. Bach1-deficiency in mice leads to higher expression
of Hmox-1 in various tissues. Here we investigated the effects of
Bach1-deficiency in mice on tissue injuries: hepatic injury induced by
D-galactosamine (GalN) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and mouse paw edema induced 
by carrageenin, polysaccharide derived from various seaweeds. Bach1-deficiency
suppressed induction of plasma alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate
aminotransferase (AST) activities in response to the GalN/LPS-treatment. However,
production of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) and nitric oxide (NO), both
being cytotoxic mediators in LPS-induced hepatic injury, in Bach1-deficient mice 
and their peritoneal macrophages was similar to wild type controls. In contrast, 
Bach1-deficiency did not affect extent of mouse paw edema induced by carrageenin,
which enhances vascular permeability by activating kinin release. These results
indicate that Bach1 plays an inhibitory role in the cytoprotection of LPS-induced
liver injury but not in the kinin-mediated inflammatory edema. The inhibitory
role for Bach1 may stem from its activity to repress gene expression including
HO-1.

PMID: 19282658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2009 Jul;11(7):1501-17. doi: 10.1089/ARS.2008.2211.

HIF-1 induction attenuates Nrf2-dependent IL-8 expression in human endothelial
cells.

Loboda A(1), Stachurska A, Florczyk U, Rudnicka D, Jazwa A, Wegrzyn J, Kozakowska
M, Stalinska K, Poellinger L, Levonen AL, Yla-Herttuala S, Jozkowicz A, Dulak J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Biophysics and Biotechnology,
Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland.

Through hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), hypoxia regulates the expression of
numerous genes and is a potent inducer of angiogenesis. However, interleukin-8
(IL-8), an important angiogenic mediator, has been reported to be downregulated
by HIF-1, although the mechanisms have not been elucidated. HIF-1 was induced in 
human endothelial cells by hypoxia and dimethyloxaloylglycine (DMOG).
Interestingly, both hypoxia and DMOG attenuated IL-8 expression, and a similar
effect has been obtained by adenoviral overexpression of the stable form of
HIF-1alpha. Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) expression was also downregulated by HIF-1
induction. This suggests similar mechanisms of regulation of IL-8 and HO-1,
indicating the involvement of Nrf2, a transcription factor previously linked to
hypoxia-mediated inhibition of HO-1. Indeed, HIF-1-mediated downregulation of
both IL-8 and HO-1 was associated with both lowered Nrf2 expression and induction
of Bach1, a repressor of Nrf2 transcriptional activity. Accordingly,
overexpression of Nrf2 reversed the inhibitory effect of HIF-1 on IL-8 and HO-1
expression. However, neither overexpression of HO-1 nor HO-1 inhibition affected 
IL-8 synthesis. The data indicate that HIF-1-dependent inhibition of IL-8
expression is caused by downregulation of Nrf2. However, expression of IL-8 is
independent of HO-1. Cross-talk between HIF-1 and Nrf2 may influence the outcome 
of anti-angiogenic therapies aimed at targeting HIF-1. Antioxid.

PMID: 19254160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Genes Cells. 2009 Feb;14(2):167-78. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01259.x. Epub
2008 Jan 12.

Crystal structure of the Bach1 BTB domain and its regulation of homodimerization.

Ito N(1), Watanabe-Matsui M, Igarashi K, Murayama K.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Engineering Research Organization, Tohoku University, Aoba-ku,
Sendai, Japan.

The BTB/POZ domain is known as a protein-protein interaction motif that mediates 
homodimer and higher order self-associations. Proteins containing the BTB domain 
exist throughout eukaryotes; however, there is little information about the
mechanism that determines the oligomeric state of the BTB domain. To address this
question, we have determined the X-ray structure of the mouse Bach1 BTB domain.
The present structure is similar to the previously determined BTB domain folds,
including the human Bach1 BTB domain; however, distinct structural features are
present, such as a novel homodimer interaction surface. The homodimer formation
was found to involve a novel hydrogen bond network and interactions between
hydrophobic surfaces of the kinked N-terminus (N-hook) and the partner's
C-terminal residues. The deletion of the N-hook resulted in the conversion of the
homodimer into a monomer in solution, indicating that the N-hook promotes the
homodimerization of the mBach1 BTB domain. We have also found that the BTB domain
of Bach2, a protein highly related to Bach1, is present as a monomer due to a
short peptide insertion at the N-hook. These results represent the first example 
of the key modulatory element of BTB domain homodimerization.

PMID: 19170764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Mar;20(6):1606-17. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-07-0762. Epub 2009
Jan 21.

Role of the tumor suppressor PTEN in antioxidant responsive element-mediated
transcription and associated histone modifications.

Sakamoto K(1), Iwasaki K, Sugiyama H, Tsuji Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA.

Coordinated regulation of PI3-kinase (PI3K) and the tumor suppressor phosphatase 
and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) plays a pivotal role in
various cell functions. PTEN is deficient in many cancer cells, including Jurkat 
human leukemia. Here, we demonstrate that the status of PTEN determines cellular 
susceptibility to oxidative stress through antioxidant-responsive element
(ARE)-mediated transcription of detoxification genes. We found that ferritin H
transcription was robustly induced in tert-butylhydroquinone (t-BHQ)-treated
Jurkat cells via an ARE, and it was due to PTEN deficiency. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed that p300/CREB-binding protein (CBP) histone 
acetyltransferases and Nrf2 recruitment to the ARE and Bach1 release were blocked
by the PI3K inhibitor LY294002, along with the partial inhibition of Nrf2 nuclear
accumulation. Furthermore, acetylations of histone H3 Lys9 and Lys18, and
deacetylation of Lys14 were associated with the PI3K-dependent ARE activation.
Consistently, PTEN restoration in Jurkat cells inhibited t-BHQ-mediated
expression of ferritin H and another ARE-regulated gene NAD(P)H:quinone
oxidoreductase 1. Conversely, PTEN knockdown in K562 cells enhanced the response 
to t-BHQ. The PTEN status under t-BHQ treatment affected hydrogen
peroxide-mediated caspase-3 cleavage. The PI3K-dependent ferritin H induction was
observed by treatment with other ARE-activating agents ethoxyquin and hemin.
Collectively, the status of PTEN determines chromatin modifications leading to
ARE activation.

PMCID: PMC2655256
PMID: 19158375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 20;284(12):7505-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809019200. Epub 2009 
Jan 16.

FANCJ uses its motor ATPase to destabilize protein-DNA complexes, unwind
triplexes, and inhibit RAD51 strand exchange.

Sommers JA(1), Rawtani N, Gupta R, Bugreev DV, Mazin AV, Cantor SB, Brosh RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, NIA, National Institutes of Health,
National Institutes of Health Biomedical Research Center, Baltimore, Maryland
21224, USA.

Mutations in the FANCJ helicase predispose individuals to breast cancer and are
genetically linked to the Fanconi anemia (FA) complementation group J. FA is a
chromosomal instability disorder characterized by multiple congenital anomalies, 
progressive bone marrow failure, and high cancer risk. FANCJ has been proposed to
function downstream of FANCD2 monoubiquitination, a critical event in the FA
pathway. Evidence supports a role for FANCJ in a homologous recombination pathway
of double strand break repair. In an effort to understand the molecular functions
of FANCJ, we have investigated the ability of purified FANCJ recombinant protein 
to use its motor ATPase function for activities in addition to unwinding of
conventional duplex DNA substrates. These efforts have led to the discovery that 
FANCJ ATP hydrolysis can be used to destabilize protein-DNA complexes and unwind 
triple helix alternate DNA structures. These novel catalytic functions of FANCJ
may be important for its role in cellular DNA repair, recombination, or resolving
DNA structural obstacles to replication. Consistent with this, we show that FANCJ
can inhibit RAD51 strand exchange, an activity that is likely to be important for
its role in controlling DNA repair through homologous recombination.

PMCID: PMC2658046
PMID: 19150983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Neurotrauma. 2009 Jan;26(1):31-9. doi: 10.1089/neu.2008.0667.

Genetic ablation of transcription repressor Bach1 reduces neural tissue damage
and improves locomotor function after spinal cord injury in mice.

Kanno H(1), Ozawa H, Dohi Y, Sekiguchi A, Igarashi K, Itoi E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Tohoku University School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan. kanno-h@isis.ocn.ne.jp

Heme oxygenase (HO)-1 is an inducible cytoprotective enzyme that degrades heme to
iron, carbon monoxide (CO), and biliverdin, the latter two of which are thought
to mediate the anti-inflammatory and antioxidant actions of HO-1. Bach1 is a
transcriptional repressor of the HO-1 gene (Hmox-1). Previous reports have
demonstrated that the genetic ablation of Bach1 engenders an increased HO-1
expression and a marked reduction in the degree of oxidative tissue damage in
vivo. However, the function of Bach1 in spinal cord injury is still not
understood. In the present study, we examined whether Bach1 deficiency increases 
HO-1 expression and reduces neural tissue damage in a spinal cord injury model
using Bach1 knock-out (KO) mice and wild-type (WT) mice. The expression of HO-1
protein in the spinal cord was significantly higher in the Bach1 KO mice than in 
the WT mice before and after injury. The KO mice also had significantly higher
Basso mouse scale scores for locomotor function and larger areas of spared white 
matter than the WT mice at 6 weeks after injury. Neuronal loss and apoptotic cell
death in the injured spinal cord was significantly reduced in the KO mice in
comparison to the WT mice. These results suggest that Bach1 deficiency engenders 
a constitutively higher expression of HO-1 and a dramatic increase in
cytoprotection against spinal cord injury.

PMID: 19119918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009 Jan;34(1):247-8. doi: 10.1038/npp.2008.167.

Protein-protein interactions as therapeutic targets in neuropsychopharmacology.

Reilly MT(1), Cunningham KA, Natarajan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Program in Chemical Biology and
Center for Addiction Research, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX,
USA.

PMID: 19079071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Genome Res. 2009 Feb;19(2):167-77. doi: 10.1101/gr.080259.108. Epub 2008 Dec 3.

A sequence-level map of chromosomal breakpoints in the MCF-7 breast cancer cell
line yields insights into the evolution of a cancer genome.

Hampton OA(1), Den Hollander P, Miller CA, Delgado DA, Li J, Coarfa C, Harris RA,
Richards S, Scherer SE, Muzny DM, Gibbs RA, Lee AV, Milosavljevic A.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Research Laboratory, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

By applying a method that combines end-sequence profiling and massively parallel 
sequencing, we obtained a sequence-level map of chromosomal aberrations in the
genome of the MCF-7 breast cancer cell line. A total of 157 distinct somatic
breakpoints of two distinct types, dispersed and clustered, were identified. A
total of 89 breakpoints are evenly dispersed across the genome. A majority of
dispersed breakpoints are in regions of low copy repeats (LCRs), indicating a
possible role for LCRs in chromosome breakage. The remaining 68 breakpoints form 
four distinct clusters of closely spaced breakpoints that coincide with the four 
highly amplified regions in MCF-7 detected by array CGH located in the
1p13.1-p21.1, 3p14.1-p14.2, 17q22-q24.3, and 20q12-q13.33 chromosomal cytobands. 
The clustered breakpoints are not significantly associated with LCRs. Sequences
flanking most (95%) breakpoint junctions are consistent with double-stranded DNA 
break repair by nonhomologous end-joining or template switching. A total of 79
known or predicted genes are involved in rearrangement events, including 10
fusions of coding exons from different genes and 77 other rearrangements. Four
fusions result in novel expressed chimeric mRNA transcripts. One of the four
expressed fusion products (RAD51C-ATXN7) and one gene truncation (BRIP1 or BACH1)
involve genes coding for members of protein complexes responsible for
homology-driven repair of double-stranded DNA breaks. Another one of the four
expressed fusion products (ARFGEF2-SULF2) involves SULF2, a regulator of cell
growth and angiogenesis. We show that knock-down of SULF2 in cell lines causes
tumorigenic phenotypes, including increased proliferation, enhanced survival, and
increased anchorage-independent growth.

PMCID: PMC2652200
PMID: 19056696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Neurosurg Spine. 2008 Dec;9(6):611-20. doi: 10.3171/SPI.2008.10.08488.

Modulation of the secondary injury process after spinal cord injury in
Bach1-deficient mice by heme oxygenase-1.

Yamada K(1), Tanaka N, Nakanishi K, Kamei N, Ishikawa M, Mizuno T, Igarashi K,
Ochi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Biomedical Science,
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. yamada.kiyo@leaf.ocn.ne.jp

OBJECT: Oxidative stress contributes to secondary injury after spinal cord injury
(SCI). The expression of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), which protects cells from
various insults including oxidative stress, is upregulated in injured spinal
cords. Mice deficient in Bach1 (Bach1-/-), a transcriptional repressor of the
HO-1 and beta-globin genes, express high levels of HO-1 mRNA and protein in
various organs. The authors hypothesized that HO-1 modulates the secondary injury
process after SCI in Bach1(-/-) mice.
METHODS: Male C57BL/6 (wild-type) and homozygous Bach1(-/-) C57BL/6 mice were
subjected to moderate SCI, and differences in hindlimb motor function, and
electrophysiological, molecular biological, and histopathological changes were
assessed for 2 weeks.
RESULTS: Functional recovery was greater, and motor evoked potentials were
significantly larger in Bach1(-/-) mice than in wild-type mice throughout the
observation period. The expression of HO-1 mRNA in the spinal cord was
significantly increased in both mice until 3 days after injury, and it was
significantly higher in Bach1(-/-) mice than in wild-type mice at every
assessment point. Histological examination using Luxol fast blue staining at 1
day after injury showed that the injured areas were smaller in Bach1(-/-) mice
than in wild-type mice. The HO-1 immunoreactivity was not detected in uninjured
spinal cord, but 3 days postinjury the number of HO-1-immunoreactive cells was
obviously higher in the injured area in both mice, particularly in Bach1(-/-)
mice. The HO-1 was primarily induced in microglia/macrophage in both mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that HO-1 modulates the secondary injury
process, and high HO-1 expression may preserve spinal cord function in the early 
stages after SCI in Bach1(-/-) mice. Treatment that induces HO-1 expression at
these early stages may preserve the functional outcome after SCI.

PMID: 19035757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. DNA Repair (Amst). 2009 Feb 1;8(2):242-52. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.10.011.
Epub 2008 Nov 29.

Human MutL-complexes monitor homologous recombination independently of mismatch
repair.

Siehler SY(1), Schrauder M, Gerischer U, Cantor S, Marra G, Wiesmüller L.

Author information: 
(1)Universitatsfrauenklinik, Prittwitzstrasse 43, D-89075 Ulm, Germany.

The role of mismatch repair proteins has been well studied in the context of DNA 
repair following DNA polymerase errors. Particularly in yeast, MSH2 and MSH6 have
also been implicated in the regulation of genetic recombination, whereas MutL
homologs appeared to be less important. So far, little is known about the role of
the human MutL homolog hMLH1 in recombination, but recently described molecular
interactions suggest an involvement. To identify activities of hMLH1 in this
process, we applied an EGFP-based assay for the analysis of different mechanisms 
of DNA repair, initiated by a targeted double-stranded DNA break. We analysed 12 
human cellular systems, differing in the hMLH1 and concomitantly in the hPMS1 and
hPMS2 status via inducible protein expression, genetic reconstitution, or RNA
interference. We demonstrate that hMLH1 and its complex partners hPMS1 and hPMS2 
downregulate conservative homologous recombination (HR), particularly when
involving DNA sequences with only short stretches of uninterrupted homology.
Unexpectedly, hMSH2 is dispensable for this effect. Moreover, the
damage-signaling kinase ATM and its substrates BLM and BACH1 are not strictly
required, but the combined effect of ATM/ATR-signaling components may mediate the
anti-recombinogenic effect. Our data indicate a protective role of
hMutL-complexes in a process which may lead to detrimental genome rearrangements,
in a manner which does not depend on mismatch repair.

PMCID: PMC2909591
PMID: 19022408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Int J Hematol. 2008 Dec;88(5):543-50. doi: 10.1007/s12185-008-0199-8. Epub 2008
Nov 15.

Defects of FA/BRCA pathway in lymphoma cell lines.

Xiao H(1), Zhang KJ, Xia B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei,
People's Republic of China. huixiaowh@yahoo.com.cn

The aim was to find the possible relationship between defects in the FA/BRCA
pathway of genomic maintenance and potential pathogenesis of T and B cell
lymphoma. We screened 29 cell lines derived from diverse subtypes of lymphoma for
possible FA pathway defects. The results indicated: no defect in FANCD2
ubiquitination, BRCA2 and FANCJ expression; absence of FANCN protein in three
cell lines: HT, Sudhl4 and JEKO-1. This absence was correlated with enhanced
MMC-induced G2 arrest, growth inhibition and high chromosomal breakage rate in
the three cell lines. We only found one substitution in HT and JEKO-1 exon-5a
fragment: c.1769C > T, p. A590V. But in another lymphoma cell line Sudhl4 with
FANCN absence, we have not found any mutation. In conclusion, this mutation maybe
the reason which caused FANCN protein expression absent or made the protein very 
unstable and lose its function in HT and JEKO-1 cell lines.

PMID: 19011769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2008 Dec;15(12):1246-54. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1516. Epub 2008
Nov 16.

Bach1 inhibits oxidative stress-induced cellular senescence by impeding p53
function on chromatin.

Dohi Y(1), Ikura T, Hoshikawa Y, Katoh Y, Ota K, Nakanome A, Muto A, Omura S,
Ohta T, Ito A, Yoshida M, Noda T, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Cellular senescence is one of the key strategies to suppress expansion of cells
with mutations. Senescence is induced in response to genotoxic and oxidative
stress. Here we show that the transcription factor Bach1 (BTB and CNC homology 1,
basic leucine zipper transcription factor 1), which inhibits oxidative
stress-inducible genes, is a crucial negative regulator of oxidative
stress-induced cellular senescence. Bach1-deficient murine embryonic fibroblasts 
showed a propensity to undergo more rapid and profound p53-dependent premature
senescence than control wild-type cells in response to oxidative stress. Bach1
formed a complex that contained p53, histone deacetylase 1 and nuclear
co-repressor N-coR. Bach1 was recruited to a subset of p53 target genes and
contributed to impeding p53 action by promoting histone deacetylation. Because
Bach1 is regulated by oxidative stress and heme, our data show that Bach1
connects oxygen metabolism and cellular senescence as a negative regulator of
p53.

PMID: 19011633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 26;283(52):36132-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808152200. Epub 2008 
Oct 31.

FANCJ is a structure-specific DNA helicase associated with the maintenance of
genomic G/C tracts.

London TB(1), Barber LJ, Mosedale G, Kelly GP, Balasubramanian S, Hickson ID,
Boulton SJ, Hiom K.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a heritable human cancer-susceptibility disorder,
delineating a genetically heterogenous pathway for the repair of
replication-blocking lesions such as interstrand DNA cross-links. Here we
demonstrate that one component of this pathway, FANCJ, is a structure-specific
DNA helicase that dissociates guanine quadruplex DNA (G4 DNA) in vitro. Moreover,
in contrast with previously identified G4 DNA helicases, such as the Bloom's
helicase (BLM), FANCJ unwinds G4 substrates with 5'-3' polarity. In the FA-J
human patient cell line EUFA0030 the loss of FANCJ G4 unwinding function
correlates with the accumulation of large genomic deletions in the vicinity of
sequences, which match the G4 DNA signature. Together these findings support a
role for FANCJ in the maintenance of potentially unstable genomic G/C tracts
during replication.

PMCID: PMC2662291
PMID: 18978354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Pediatr Res. 2009 Feb;65(2):145-9. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e318191eedc.

Bach1 modulates heme oxygenase-1 expression in the neonatal mouse lung.

Kassovska-Bratinova S(1), Yang G, Igarashi K, Dennery PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), the rate-limiting enzyme of heme degradation and
antioxidant defense protein, is induced in the lungs of animals exposed to
hyperoxia. However, high levels of HO-1 expression may be deleterious, thus
necessitating tight regulation. Previous reports show maturational differences in
rat HO-1 regulation in hyperoxia, as newborns do not up-regulate HO-1mRNA
compared with adults. To better understand the differential response of lung HO-1
to hyperoxia, we exposed newborn and adult mice to >95% oxygen. The newborn lungs
had reduced HO-1 mRNA induction compared with adults and newborn transgenic mice 
over-expressing luciferase driven by the 15 kb HO-1 promoter (HO-1/Luc Tg) had
less increased light emission in hyperoxia compared with adults. Compared with
adults, levels of the repressor of HO-1 transcription, Bach1, were higher in the 
neonatal lung as was nuclear protein-DNA binding to the antioxidant response
element (ARE) from HO-1. Furthermore, at baseline and in hyperoxia, chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) revealed increased Bach1 binding to the HO-1 distal
enhancers (DEs) in the neonates compared with adults. These data suggest that
elevated levels of Bach1 may help to limit HO-1 induction in the newborn at
baseline and in response to oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC2708090
PMID: 18948842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Fukuoka Igaku Zasshi. 2008 Jun;99(6):115-22.

[Fanconi anemia and genomic instability].

[Article in Japanese]

Kitao H(1), Fujinaka Y, Kubo N, Nakanoko T, Yoshinaga K, Tokunaga E, Saeki H,
Endo K, Morita M, Kakeji Y, Maehara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University.

PMID: 18833937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Chem Res Toxicol. 2008 Sep;21(9):1649-50. doi: 10.1021/tx800272t.

Spotlight.

Rouzer CA.

PMID: 18788831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Exp Ther Oncol. 2008;7(2):153-67.

Nrf2-dependent induction of human ABC transporter ABCG2 and heme oxygenase-1 in
HepG2 cells by photoactivation of porphyrins: biochemical implications for cancer
cell response to photodynamic therapy.

Hagiya Y(1), Adachi T, Ogura S, An R, Tamura A, Nakagawa H, Okura I, Mochizuki T,
Ishikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Photodynamic therapy is a recently developed anticancer treatment that utilizes
the generation of singlet oxygen and other reactive oxygen species in cancer
tissue. Nrf2, an NF-E2-related transcription factor, plays a pivotal role in
transcriptional upregulation of many target genes, including those for
metabolizing enzymes and transporters essential for cellular defense in response 
to oxidative stress. In the present study, we examined the potential involvement 
of Nrf2 in the induction of human ABC transporter ABCG2 and heme oxygenase-1
(HO-1). When HepG2 cells were incubated with non-toxic concentrations of
delta-aminolevulinic acid, protoporphyrin IX, or pheophorbide a and then exposed 
to visible light for 90 min, the mRNA level of HO-1 began increasing markedly,
reaching the maximal level in 4 h. Following the transient induction of HO-1, the
mRNA level of ABCG2 gradually increased in a time-dependent manner, whereas the
ABCB6 mRNA level was little affected. Nrf2-specific siRNA treatments suppressed
the induction of both ABCG2 and HO-1 after the photoactivation of porphyrins,
suggesting that Nrf2 is a common regulator for transcriptional activation of the 
ABCG2 and HO-1 genes. On the other hand, the mRNA level of HO-1 was remarkably
enhanced by Zn(2+)-protoporphyrin IX or hemin even in the absence of light. This 
induction may be attributed to inactivation of Bach1, a repressor for the HO-1
gene, by those compounds. Since patients have demonstrated individual defferences
in their response to photodynamic therapy, transcriptional activation of the
ABCG2 and HO-1 genes in cancer cells may affect patients' responses to
photodynamic therapy.

PMID: 18771089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Biochemistry. 2008 Sep 16;47(37):9866-79. doi: 10.1021/bi702247d. Epub 2008 Aug
22.

Kinetic analysis of interaction of BRCA1 tandem breast cancer c-terminal domains 
with phosphorylated peptides reveals two binding conformations.

Nominé Y(1), Botuyan MV, Bajzer Z, Owen WG, Caride AJ, Wasielewski E, Mer G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, 200 First Street Southwest, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Tandem breast cancer C-terminal (BRCT) domains, present in many DNA repair and
cell cycle checkpoint signaling proteins, are phosphoprotein binding modules. The
best-characterized tandem BRCT domains to date are from the protein BRCA1
(BRCA1-BRCT), an E3 ubiquitin ligase that has been linked to breast and ovarian
cancer. While X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy studies have uncovered
the structural determinants of specificity of BRCA1-BRCT for phosphorylated
peptides, a detailed kinetic and thermodynamic characterization of the
interaction is also required to understand how structure and dynamics are
connected and therefore better probe the mechanism of phosphopeptide recognition 
by BRCT domains. Through a global analysis of binding kinetics data obtained from
surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and stopped-flow fluorescence spectroscopy, we
show that the recognition mechanism is complex and best modeled by two
equilibrium conformations of BRCA1-BRCT in the free state that both interact with
a phosphopeptide, with dissociation constants ( K d) in the micromolar range. We 
show that the apparent global dissociation constant derived from this kinetic
analysis is similar to the K d values measured using steady-state SPR, isothermal
titration calorimetry, and fluorescence anisotropy. The dynamic nature of
BRCA1-BRCT may facilitate the binding of BRCA1 to different phosphorylated
protein targets.

PMCID: PMC2574583
PMID: 18717574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Curr Biol. 2008 Jul 22;18(14):R613-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.06.011.

Genomic stability: FANCJ-dependent G4 DNA repair.

Maizels N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 1959 NE
Pacific St., Seattle, Washington 98195-7650, USA. maizels@u.washington.edu

G-rich regions have the potential to form G4 DNA upon replication, which can lead
to genomic instability. FANCJ, a G4 DNA helicase, has been shown to be critical
for the stability of regions that match the G4 signature motif by experiments
analyzing its nematode homolog.

PMCID: PMC3806494
PMID: 18644339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Hypertens Res. 2008 Apr;31(4):783-92. doi: 10.1291/hypres.31.783.

Ablation of the bach1 gene leads to the suppression of atherosclerosis in bach1
and apolipoprotein E double knockout mice.

Watari Y(1), Yamamoto Y, Brydun A, Ishida T, Mito S, Yoshizumi M, Igarashi K,
Chayama K, Ohshima T, Ozono R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Molecular Science, Hiroshima University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.

This study was designed to determine whether Bach1 gene ablation leads to
suppression of atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E (Apo E)/Bach1 double knockout 
(DKO) mice. Apo E/Bach1 DKO mice were generated by intercrossing Apo E knockout
(KO) and Bach1 KO mice. The animals were fed a high-fat diet for 8 weeks, and the
atherosclerotic plaques in the thoracic and abdominal aorta were visualized by
oil red O staining. In DKO mice, the total plaque area was reduced by 32%
compared with that in Apo E KO mice. In DKO mice, heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) was
upregulated in the endothelium and, to a lesser extent, in vascular smooth
muscles. In atherosclerotic plaques in Apo E KO mice and DKO mice, HO-1 was
abundantly expressed in the endothelium and macrophages. Urine excretion of
8-iso-prostaglandin (PG) F2alpha, a marker for lipid peroxidation, was reduced in
DKO mice compared with that in Apo E KO mice. The effects of Bach1 ablation on
the plaque area and 8-iso-PG F2alpha excretion were almost completely abolished
by treating DKO mice with Sn protoporphyrin, an inhibitor of HO activity.
Disruption of the Bach1 gene in Apo E KO mice caused inhibition of
atherosclerosis through upregulation of HO-1. Inhibition of Bach1, conversely,
may be a novel therapeutic strategy to treat atherosclerotic diseases.

PMID: 18633191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Jul 15;14(14):4672-80. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0087.

A novel breast cancer-associated BRIP1 (FANCJ/BACH1) germ-line mutation impairs
protein stability and function.

De Nicolo A(1), Tancredi M, Lombardi G, Flemma CC, Barbuti S, Di Cristofano C,
Sobhian B, Bevilacqua G, Drapkin R, Caligo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.

PURPOSE: BRCA1-interacting protein 1 (BRIP1; FANCJ/BACH1), which encodes a DNA
helicase that interacts with BRCA1, has been suggested to be a low-penetrance
breast cancer predisposing gene. We aimed to assess whether BRIP1 mutations
contribute to breast cancer susceptibility in our population and, if so, to
investigate the effect of such mutation(s) on BRIP1 function.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A series of 49 breast/ovarian cancer families, devoid of a
BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation, were screened for BRIP1 mutations. Functional analyses,
including coimmunoprecipitation and stability assays, were employed to further
characterize a previously unreported variant.
RESULTS: Five sequence alterations were identified, of which four had been
already described. Herein, we report a novel BRIP1 germ-line mutation identified 
in a woman with early-onset breast cancer. The mutation consists of a
4-nucleotide deletion (c.2992-2995delAAGA) in BRIP1 exon 20 that causes a shift
in the reading frame, disrupts the BRCA1-binding domain of BRIP1, and creates a
premature stop codon. Functional analysis of the recombinant mutant protein in
transfected cells showed that the truncation interferes with the stability of the
protein and with its ability to interact with BRCA1. Loss of the wild-type BRIP1 
allele with retention of the mutated one was observed in the patient's breast
tumor tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: These results, by showing that the newly identified BRIP1
c.2992-2995delAAGA mutation is associated with instability and functional
impairment of the encoded protein, provide further evidence of a breast
cancer-related role for BRIP1.

PMCID: PMC2561321
PMID: 18628483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Thorax. 2008 Oct;63(10):916-24. doi: 10.1136/thx.2007.091181. Epub 2008 Jun 17.

Altered Nrf2/Keap1-Bach1 equilibrium in pulmonary emphysema.

Goven D(1), Boutten A, Leçon-Malas V, Marchal-Sommé J, Amara N, Crestani B,
Fournier M, Lesèche G, Soler P, Boczkowski J, Bonay M.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U700, Faculté de Médecine Paris 7, Site X Bichat, BP416, 75870 Paris
Cedex 18, France.

BACKGROUND: Oxidative stress, resulting from the increased oxidative burden and
decreased level of antioxidant proteins, plays a role in the pathophysiology of
smoking-related pulmonary emphysema. Expression of several antioxidant proteins, 
such as heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), glutathione peroxidase 2 (GPX2) and
NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1), results from an equilibrium created by
positive or negative regulation by the transcription factors Nrf2, Keap1 and
Bach1, respectively. However, whether the expression of these transcription
factors is altered in emphysema and could account for decreased expression of
antioxidant proteins is not known. A study was undertaken to investigate the
expression and subcellular localisation of Nrf2, Keap1 and Bach1 as potential
regulators of HO-1, GPX2 and NQO1 in alveolar macrophages, a key cell in
oxidative stress, in lung surgical specimens from non-smokers without emphysema
and smokers with and without emphysema.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Western blot, immunohistochemical and laser scanning
confocal analysis revealed that the Nrf2 protein level decreased significantly in
whole lung tissue and alveolar macrophages (cytosol and nucleus) in patients with
emphysema compared with those without emphysema. Conversely, Bach1 and Keap1
levels were increased in patients with emphysema. These modifications were
associated with a parallel decrease in the expression of HO-1, GPX2 and NQO1 at
the cellular level, which was inversely correlated with airway obstruction and
distension indexes, and increased macrophage expression of the lipid peroxidation
product 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal. Silencing RNA experiments in vitro in THP-1 cells
were performed to confirm the cause-effect relation between the loss of Nrf2 and 
the decrease in HO-1, NQO1 and GPX2 expression. Nrf2/Keap1-Bach1 equilibrium was 
altered in alveolar macrophages in pulmonary emphysema, which points to a
decreased stress response phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: This finding opens a new view of the pathophysiology of emphysema
and could provide the basis for new therapeutic approaches based on preservation 
and/or restoration of such equilibrium.

PMID: 18559366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Neurosci Lett. 2008 Aug 1;440(2):160-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.04.082. Epub
2008 Apr 26.

Regulation of heme oxygenase-1 by transcription factor Bach1 in the mouse brain.

Sakoda E(1), Igarashi K, Sun J, Kurisu K, Tashiro S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 
University, Japan. sakodae@kure-nh.go.jp

Oxidative stress has been implicated in tissue damage from traumatic brain
injury. Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) is an inducible enzyme that degrades prooxidant
heme to radical-scavenging biliverdin/bilirubin in order to protect cells from
oxidative stress. Although HO-1 is induced after induction of brain damage, the
regulatory mechanism of HO-1 in the brain is still unclear. Bach1 is a
transcriptional repressor of the HO-1 gene, and plays a critical role in tissue
protection from oxidative stress by reperfusion injury of the myocardium. In this
study, we examined the role of Bach1 in HO-1 regulation of the various brain
sites by investigating the expression of Bach1 and HO-1 in brain tissues of mice 
bearing Bach1-deficient (Bach1(-/-)) or wild-type (Bach1(+/+)) genes. While the
expression levels of Bach1 mRNA in the olfactory bulb were significantly higher
than other brain areas, those at the cortex showed the lowest activity.
Bach1(-/-) mice showed significantly higher HO-1 mRNA expression levels than
Bach1(+/+) mice in all brain sites studied. Moreover, higher induction of HO-1
was observed around damaged tissues after cold injury in Bach1(-/-) than
Bach1(+/+) mice. Thus, Bach1 plays an important role in regulating the
constitutive and inducible expression levels of HO-1 in the brain. Although a
significantly higher level of HO-1 was observed in Bach1(-/-) than Bach1(+/+)
mice, genetic ablation of the Bach1 gene failed to show any tissue protective
effect after cold injury was inflicted on the cortex.

PMID: 18555605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 15;283(33):22363-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801784200. Epub 2008
Jun 11.

BACH1 is a specific repressor of HMOX1 that is inactivated by arsenite.

Reichard JF(1), Sartor MA, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental Genetics,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267, USA.
john.reichard@childrens.harvard.edu

Intracellular heme is a redox active molecule that can be detrimental to cells at
high concentrations or under oxidizing conditions. To prevent accumulation, the
inducible enzyme heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX1) catalyzes degradation of heme. In the
absence of elevated intracellular heme or oxidative stress, the basic region
leucine zipper transcriptional regulator BACH1 binds HMOX1 antioxidant response
elements and represses transcription. Conversely, increased intracellular heme or
sulfhydryl oxidation inactivate BACH1, permitting transcriptional induction of
HMOX1. Here, we investigate the effect of BACH1 inactivation on the induction of 
HMOX1 and as a mechanism for broader gene induction. We show that BACH1 is
inactivated at low micromolar arsenite concentrations and that BACH1 inactivation
is necessary and sufficient for transcriptional induction of HMOX1. Because BACH1
is thought to interact with antioxidant response element motifs, we further
examined the role of BACH1 as a regulator of inducible antioxidant gene
expression by assessing the global profile of gene expression following BACH1
knockdown using small interfering RNA. The loss of BACH1 function in human
keratinocytes results almost exclusively in HMOX1 induction, suggesting that
BACH1 may function as a rheostat regulating levels of intracellular free heme.

PMCID: PMC2504887
PMID: 18550526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009 May;115(1):51-5. doi: 10.1007/s10549-008-0052-z.
Epub 2008 May 16.

Mutation analysis of BRIP1/BACH1 in BRCA1/BRCA2 negative Chinese women with early
onset breast cancer or affected relatives.

Cao AY(1), Huang J, Hu Z, Li WF, Ma ZL, Tang LL, Zhang B, Su FX, Zhou J, Di GH,
Shen KW, Wu J, Lu JS, Luo JM, Yuan WT, Shen ZZ, Huang W, Shao ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Breast Cancer Institute, Cancer Hospital/Cancer
Institute, Shanghai Medical College, Institutes of Biomedical Science, Fudan
University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

The proper interaction between BRIP1/BACH1 and BRCA1 protein has been found to be
crucial for BRCA1-mediated DNA double-strand break repair and BRIP1/BACH1
mutations were estimated to confer a relative risk for breast cancer of 2.0 in
western populations. In Chinese population, BRCA1 mutations could explain a
relatively large proportion of inherited breast cancer cases in comparison with
BRCA2 mutations, which probably deduced a hypothesis that those genes involved in
BRCA1-mediated DNA repair pathway might play a more significant role in the
etiology of Chinese breast cancer. To investigate the contribution of BRIP1/BACH1
mutations to the predisposition of Chinese non-BRCA1/BRCA2 hereditary breast
cancer, we screened all the coding exons and adjacent intronic splice junction
regions of BRIP1/BACH1 in 357 Chinese women with early-onset breast cancer or
affected relatives from five different breast disease clinical centers in China, 
using PCR-DHPLC and DNA sequencing analysis. Some genetic variants identified in 
the cases were then studied in 864 normal controls with no personal or family
history of breast cancer. We found no protein-truncated mutations in our
population, while a novel recurrent non-synonymous variant, Q944E, was detected
in two independent families in contrast with none in the controls, interestingly,
this alteration occurs in the BRCA1 binding domain of the BACH1 protein. Then a
further study performed on the two mutation positive families revealed the
partial co-segregation of this mutation allele with cancer. The novel alteration 
Q944E identified in our study possibly represents a rare disease-related allele, 
nevertheless functional analysis is still warranted to resolve the ability of
this altered BACH1 protein to bind BRCA1. Altogether, the results of our study
indicated that germline mutations in BRIP1/BACH were extremely rare in Chinese
population and there was no evidence for the recommendation of BRIP1/BACH1 for
genetic testing in Chinese.

PMID: 18483852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Biochemistry. 2008 May 27;47(21):5767-73. doi: 10.1021/bi800314m. Epub 2008 May
2.

Structural evidence for direct interactions between the BRCT domains of human
BRCA1 and a phospho-peptide from human ACC1.

Shen Y(1), Tong L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York City, New
York 10027, USA.

The tandem BRCA1 C-terminal (BRCT) domains are phospho-serine/threonine
recognition modules essential for the function of BRCA1. Recent studies suggest
that acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 (ACC1), an enzyme with crucial roles in de novo
fatty acid biosynthesis and lipogenesis and essential for cancer cell survival,
may be a novel binding partner for BRCA1, through interactions with its BRCT
domains. We report here the crystal structure at 3.2 A resolution of human BRCA1 
BRCT domains in complex with a phospho-peptide from human ACC1 (p-ACC1 peptide,
with the sequence 1258-DSPPQ-pS-PTFPEAGH-1271), which provides molecular evidence
for direct interactions between BRCA1 and ACC1. The p-ACC1 peptide is bound in an
extended conformation, located in a groove between the tandem BRCT domains. There
are recognizable and significant structural differences to the binding modes of
two other phospho-peptides to these domains, from BACH1 and CtIP, even though
they share a conserved pSer-Pro-(Thr/Val)-Phe motif. Our studies establish a
framework for understanding the regulation of lipid biosynthesis by BRCA1 through
its inhibition of ACC1 activity, which could be a novel tumor suppressor function
of BRCA1.

PMCID: PMC2392887
PMID: 18452305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Hypertension. 2008 Jun;51(6):1570-7. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.107.102566.
Epub 2008 Apr 21.

Myocardial protection against pressure overload in mice lacking Bach1, a
transcriptional repressor of heme oxygenase-1.

Mito S(1), Ozono R, Oshima T, Yano Y, Watari Y, Yamamoto Y, Brydun A, Igarashi K,
Yoshizumi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Physiology and Medicine, Hiroshima University
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Japan.

Bach1 is a stress-responsive transcriptional factor that is thought to control
the expression levels of cytoprotective factors, including heme-oxygenase (HO)-1.
In the present study, we investigated the roles of Bach1 in the development of
left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy and remodeling induced by transverse aortic
constriction (TAC) in vivo using Bach1 gene-deficient (Bach1(-/-)) mice. TAC for 
3 weeks in wild-type control (Bach1(+/+)) mice produced LV hypertrophy and
remodeling manifested by increased heart weight, histological findings showing
increased myocyte cross-sectional area (CSA) and interstitial fibrosis (picro
Sirius red staining), reexpressions of ANP, BNP, and betaMHC genes, and
echocardiographic findings showing wall thickening, LV dilatation, and reduced LV
contraction. Deletion of Bach1 caused significant reductions in heart weight (by 
16%), CSA (by 36%), tissue collagen content (by 38%), and gene expression levels 
of ANP (by 75%), BNP (by 45%), and betaMHC (by 74%). Echocardiography revealed
reduced LV dimension and ameliorated LV contractile function. Deletion of Bach1
in the LV caused marked upregulation of HO-1 protein accompanied by elevated HO
activity in both basal or TAC-stimulated conditions. Treatment of Bach1(-/-) mice
with tin-protoporphyrin, an inhibitor of HO, abolished the antihypertrophic and
antiremodeling effects of Bach1 gene ablation. These results suggest that
deletion of Bach1 caused upregulation of cytoprotective HO-1, thereby inhibiting 
TAC-induced LV hypertrophy and remodeling, at least in part, through activation
of HO. Bach1 repressively controls myocardial HO-1 expression both in basal and
stressed conditions, inhibition of Bach1 may be a novel therapeutic strategy to
protect the myocardium from pressure overload.

PMID: 18426999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;28(12):4116-28. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02210-07. Epub 2008 Apr 
21.

FANCJ helicase defective in Fanconia anemia and breast cancer unwinds
G-quadruplex DNA to defend genomic stability.

Wu Y(1), Shin-ya K, Brosh RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institute on Aging, NIH, 5600
Nathan Shock Drive, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

FANCJ mutations are associated with breast cancer and genetically linked to the
bone marrow disease Fanconi anemia (FA). The genomic instability of FA-J mutant
cells suggests that FANCJ helicase functions in the replicational stress
response. A putative helicase with sequence similarity to FANCJ in Caenorhabditis
elegans (DOG-1) and mouse (RTEL) is required for poly(G) tract maintenance,
suggesting its involvement in the resolution of alternate DNA structures that
impede replication. Under physiological conditions, guanine-rich sequences
spontaneously assemble into four-stranded structures (G quadruplexes [G4]) that
influence genomic stability. FANCJ unwound G4 DNA substrates in an
ATPase-dependent manner. FANCJ G4 unwinding is specific since another superfamily
2 helicase, RECQ1, failed to unwind all G4 substrates tested under conditions in 
which the helicase unwound duplex DNA. Replication protein A stimulated FANCJ G4 
unwinding, whereas the mismatch repair complex MSH2/MSH6 inhibited this activity.
FANCJ-depleted cells treated with the G4-interactive compound telomestatin
displayed impaired proliferation and elevated levels of apoptosis and DNA damage 
compared to small interfering RNA control cells, suggesting that G4 DNA is a
physiological substrate of FANCJ. Although the FA pathway has been classically
described in terms of interstrand cross-link (ICL) repair, the cellular defects
associated with FANCJ mutation extend beyond the reduced ability to repair ICLs
and involve other types of DNA structural roadblocks to replication.

PMCID: PMC2423121
PMID: 18426915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Hum Genet. 2008;53(7):579-91. doi: 10.1007/s10038-008-0285-z. Epub 2008 Apr 15.

Mutational analysis of the breast cancer susceptibility gene BRIP1 /BACH1/FANCJ
in high-risk non-BRCA1/BRCA2 breast cancer families.

Guénard F(1), Labrie Y, Ouellette G, Joly Beauparlant C, Simard J, Durocher F;
INHERIT BRCAs.

Collaborators: Bessette P, Chiquette J, Laframboise R, Lepine J, Lesperance B,
Pichette R, Plante M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genomics Laboratory, Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research
Centre, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec and Laval University, 2705
Laurier Boulevard, Québec city, QC, Canada, G1V 4G2.

The BRIP1 gene encodes a helicase interacting with BRCA1, which contributes to
BRCA1-associated DNA repair function. Germ-line BRIP1 mutations affecting the
helicase domain activity have been identified in early onset breast cancer
patients. In addition, BRIP1 was recently identified as deficient in Fanconi
anemia (FA) complementation group J. Given the growing evidence now linking
BRCA1, BRCA2, and the FA pathway, as well as the involvement of FA proteins
(BRCA2/FANCD1 and PALB2/FANCN) in breast cancer susceptibility, we sought to
evaluate the contribution of FANCJ gene alterations regarding breast cancer
susceptibility among our cohort of 96 breast cancer individuals from high-risk
non-BRCA1/2 French Canadian families. No deleterious mutation, exon deletion, or 
retention of intronic portions could be identified. However, extensive analysis
of the promoter and whole exonic and flanking intronic regions of FANCJ led to
the identification of 42 variants, including 22 novel variants not previously
reported, four of which were located in the promoter region. Transcription
factors analysis revealed a potential involvement of FANCJ promoter variants in
regulation of FANCJ expression, and reporter gene assays were performed. The
allelic frequency was assessed in a cohort of 73 unaffected French Canadian
individuals, and haplotype analysis and tagging single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) identification were also performed. Although our study unlikely involves
FANCJ as a high-risk predisposition gene in non-BRCA1/2 high-risk French Canadian
families, the possible association of FANCJ missense variants with phenotypes
associated with FA, such as childhood cancer, cannot be excluded.

PMID: 18414782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Virol. 2008 Jun;82(11):5295-306. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02380-07. Epub 2008 Mar 26.

MicroRNA-155 is an Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene that modulates Epstein-Barr
virus-regulated gene expression pathways.

Yin Q(1), McBride J, Fewell C, Lacey M, Wang X, Lin Z, Cameron J, Flemington EK.

Author information: 
(1)Louisiana Cancer Research Consortium, New Orleans, USA.

The cellular microRNA miR-155 has been shown to be involved in lymphocyte
activation and is expressed in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-infected cells displaying
type III latency gene expression but not type I latency gene expression. We show 
here that the elevated levels of miR-155 in type III latency cells is due to EBV 
gene expression and not epigenetic differences in cell lines tested, and we show 
that expression in EBV-infected cells requires a conserved AP-1 element in the
miR-155 promoter. Gene expression analysis was carried out in a type I latency
cell line transduced with an miR-155-expressing retrovirus. This analysis
identified both miR-155-suppressed and -induced cellular mRNAs and suggested that
in addition to direct targeting of 3' untranslated regions (UTRs), miR-155 alters
gene expression in part through the alteration of signal transduction pathways.
3' UTR reporter analysis of predicted miR-155 target genes identified the
transcriptional regulatory genes encoding BACH1, ZIC3, HIVEP2, CEBPB, ZNF652,
ARID2, and SMAD5 as miR-155 targets. Western blot analysis of the most highly
suppressed of these, BACH1, showed lower expression in cells transduced with a
miR-155 retrovirus. Inspection of the promoters from genes regulated in
EBV-infected cells and in cells infected with an miR-155 retrovirus identified
potential binding sequences for BACH1 and ZIC3. Together, these experiments
suggest that the induction of miR-155 by EBV contributes to EBV-mediated
signaling in part through the modulation of transcriptional regulatory factors.

PMCID: PMC2395216
PMID: 18367535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Oncogene. 2008 Jul 10;27(30):4233-41. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.51. Epub 2008 Mar 17.

Expression of the BRCA1-interacting protein Brip1/BACH1/FANCJ is driven by E2F
and correlates with human breast cancer malignancy.

Eelen G(1), Vanden Bempt I, Verlinden L, Drijkoningen M, Smeets A, Neven P,
Christiaens MR, Marchal K, Bouillon R, Verstuyf A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorium voor Experimentele Geneeskunde en Endocrinologie (LEGENDO),
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Mutations in the BRCA1-interacting DEAH helicase Brip1 confer an increased risk
of breast cancer. In the present study we aimed to unravel the transcriptional
control of Brip1 and to determine its expression levels in a set of 101 primary
invasive breast carcinomas. Transcription of Brip1 was found to be cell
growth-related and controlled by the E2F/retinoblastoma (Rb) pathway through a
conserved E2F-responsive site. Repression of Brip1 expression by the cell
growth-inhibiting compound 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 depended on this same
E2F-responsive site. In spite of its role as a tumor suppressor, both
quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR analyses and immunohistochemical stainings
showed significantly elevated Brip1 expression levels in grade 3 tumors as
compared to grade 1 or 2 carcinomas. Furthermore, increased Brip1 transcript
levels were found in tumors with an estrogen receptor-negative, progesterone
receptor-negative or HER-2-positive status. In conclusion, these data show that
Brip1 is a genuine target gene for the E2F/Rb pathway and that elevated
expression levels of Brip1 are detected in primary invasive breast carcinomas
with unfavorable characteristics.

PMID: 18345034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Mar;1779(3):195-203. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2008.01.006. Epub 2008 Feb 14.

Zinc mesoporphyrin induces rapid and marked degradation of the transcription
factor Bach1 and up-regulates HO-1.

Hou W(1), Shan Y, Zheng J, Lambrecht RW, Donohue SE, Bonkovsky HL.

Author information: 
(1)The Liver-Biliary-Pancreatic Center, Carolinas Medical Center, Charlotte, NC
28232-2861, USA.

Heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) is the first and rate-controlling enzyme in heme
degradation. Bach1 is a mammalian transcriptional repressor of HO-1. To
understand how zinc mesoporphyrin (ZnMP) induces the expression of HO-1, we
investigated the effects of ZnMP on Bach1 mRNA and protein levels in human
hepatoma Huh-7 cells by quantitative RT-PCR and Western blots. We found that ZnMP
markedly up-regulated HO-1 mRNA and protein levels, and rapidly and significantly
decreased Bach1 protein levels by increasing degradation of Bach1 protein [half
life (t(1/2)) from 19 h to 45 min], whereas ZnMP did not influence Bach1 mRNA
levels. The proteasome inhibitors, epoxomicin and MG132, significantly inhibited 
degradation of Bach1 by ZnMP in a dose-dependent fashion, indicating that the
degradation of Bach1 by ZnMP is proteasome-dependent. Purified Bach1 C-terminal
fragment bound heme, but there was no evidence for binding of ZnMP to the
heme-binding region of Bach1. In conclusion, ZnMP produces profound
post-transcriptional down-regulation of Bach1 protein levels and transcriptional 
up-regulation of HO-1. Our results indicate that ZnMP up-regulates HO-1 gene
expression by markedly increasing Bach1 protein degradation in a
proteasome-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC2346609
PMID: 18325350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Orthop Res. 2008 Jun;26(6):894-8. doi: 10.1002/jor.20579.

Oxidative stress reaction in the meniscus of Bach 1 deficient mice: potential
prevention of meniscal degeneration.

Ochiai S(1), Mizuno T, Deie M, Igarashi K, Hamada Y, Ochi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima City, Hiroshima,
734-8551 Japan.

Bach 1 is a transcription factor that negatively regulates the transcription of
heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), a stress-responding protein. In this study, we
investigated the reaction to oxidative stress in the meniscus of Bach 1 deficient
mice, and the suppression of meniscal degeneration by the induction of HO-1. We
carried out a comparative study between Bach 1 deficient mice and wild type mice,
in which the oxidative stress reaction and age-related changes were investigated 
using the menisci of 6-, 12-, and 24-week-old mice. The degrees of meniscal
degeneration and expression of HO-1 were evaluated using the menisci cultured
under oxidative stress with cadmium chloride or interleukin-1 beta. The
age-related changes in the meniscus were histologically examined. The expression 
of HO-1 was higher, and the degrees of histological degeneration were lower in
the Bach 1 deficient mice than in wild type mice (HO-1 mRNA expression: In both
the Cd group and the IL group, two-fourfold higher in the meniscus). The
age-related changes were lower in the Bach 1 deficient mice than in wild type
mice. In 24-week-old mice, a moderate decrease in the cell density and
proteoglycan content was observed in wild type mice compared with Bach 1
deficient mice. In the menisci of Bach 1 deficient mice, the anti-oxidative
stress activity was considered to be increased by abrogating the suppression of
HO-1 expression, resulting in a reduction of histological degeneration. This
finding showed a potential new strategy for the prevention and treatment of
meniscal degeneration.

(c) 2008 Orthopaedic Research Society.

PMID: 18271013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Anal Biochem. 2008 Apr 1;375(1):60-70. Epub 2007 Dec 5.

Dual-fluorophore quantitative high-throughput screen for inhibitors of
BRCT-phosphoprotein interaction.

Simeonov A(1), Yasgar A, Jadhav A, Lokesh GL, Klumpp C, Michael S, Austin CP,
Natarajan A, Inglese J.

Author information: 
(1)NIH Chemical Genomics Center, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Finding specific small-molecule inhibitors of protein-protein interactions
remains a significant challenge. Recently, attention has grown toward "hot spot" 
interactions where binding is dominated by a limited number of amino acid
contacts, theoretically offering an increased opportunity for disruption by small
molecules. Inhibitors of the interaction between BRCT (the C-terminal portion of 
BRCA1, a key tumor suppressor protein with various functions) and phosphorylated 
proteins (Abraxas/BACH1/CtIP), implicated in DNA damage response and repair
pathways, should prove to be useful in studying BRCA1's role in cancer and in
potentially sensitizing tumors to chemotherapeutic agents. We developed and
miniaturized to a 1536-well format and 3-mul final volume a pair of fluorescence 
polarization (FP) assays using fluorescein- and rhodamine-labeled pBACH1
fragment. To minimize the effect of fluorescence artifacts and to increase the
overall robustness of the screen, the 75,552 compound library members all were
assayed against both the fluorescein- and rhodamine-labeled probe-protein
complexes in separate but interleaved reactions. In addition, every library
compound was tested over a range of concentrations following the quantitative
high-throughput screening (qHTS) paradigm. Analyses of the screening results led 
to the selection and subsequent confirmation of 16 compounds active in both
assays. Faced with a traditionally difficult protein-protein interaction assay,
by performing two-fluorophore qHTS, we were able to confidently select a number
of actives for further studies.

PMCID: PMC3389998
PMID: 18158907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Mar;28(5):1470-9. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

DOG-1 is the Caenorhabditis elegans BRIP1/FANCJ homologue and functions in
interstrand cross-link repair.

Youds JL(1), Barber LJ, Ward JD, Collis SJ, O'Neil NJ, Boulton SJ, Rose AM.

Author information: 
(1)DNA Damage Response Laboratory, Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute,
Clare Hall Laboratories, Blanche Lane, South Mimms EN6 3LD, United Kingdom.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a cancer susceptibility syndrome characterized by
defective DNA interstrand cross-link (ICL) repair. Here, we show that DOG-1 is
the Caenorhabditis elegans homologue of FANCJ, a helicase mutated in FA-J
patients. DOG-1 performs a conserved role in ICL repair, as dog-1 mutants are
hypersensitive to ICL-inducing agents, but not to UVC irradiation or X rays.
Genetic analysis indicated that dog-1 is epistatic with fcd-2 (C. elegans FANCD2)
but is nonepistatic with brc-1 (C. elegans BRCA1), thus establishing the
existence of two distinct pathways of ICL repair in worms. Furthermore, DOG-1 is 
dispensable for FCD-2 and RAD-51 focus formation, suggesting that DOG-1 operates 
downstream of FCD-2 and RAD-51 in ICL repair. DOG-1 was previously implicated in 
poly(G)/poly(C) (G/C) tract maintenance during DNA replication. G/C tracts remain
stable in the absence of ATL-1, CLK-2 (FA pathway activators), FCD-2, BRC-2, and 
MLH-1 (associated FA components), implying that DOG-1 is the sole FA component
required for G/C tract maintenance in a wild-type background. However, FCD-2 is
required to promote deletion-free repair at G/C tracts in dog-1 mutants,
consistent with a role for FA factors at the replication fork. The functional
conservation between DOG-1 and FANCJ suggests a possible role for FANCJ in G/C
tract maintenance in human cells.

PMCID: PMC2258786
PMID: 18086896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Nature. 2007 Dec 13;450(7172):1096-9.

A viral microRNA functions as an orthologue of cellular miR-155.

Gottwein E(1), Mukherjee N, Sachse C, Frenzel C, Majoros WH, Chi JT, Braich R,
Manoharan M, Soutschek J, Ohler U, Cullen BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

All metazoan eukaryotes express microRNAs (miRNAs), roughly 22-nucleotide
regulatory RNAs that can repress the expression of messenger RNAs bearing
complementary sequences. Several DNA viruses also express miRNAs in infected
cells, suggesting a role in viral replication and pathogenesis. Although specific
viral miRNAs have been shown to autoregulate viral mRNAs or downregulate cellular
mRNAs, the function of most viral miRNAs remains unknown. Here we report that the
miR-K12-11 miRNA encoded by Kaposi's-sarcoma-associated herpes virus (KSHV) shows
significant homology to cellular miR-155, including the entire miRNA 'seed'
region. Using a range of assays, we show that expression of physiological levels 
of miR-K12-11 or miR-155 results in the downregulation of an extensive set of
common mRNA targets, including genes with known roles in cell growth regulation. 
Our findings indicate that viral miR-K12-11 functions as an orthologue of
cellular miR-155 and probably evolved to exploit a pre-existing gene regulatory
pathway in B cells. Moreover, the known aetiological role of miR-155 in B-cell
transformation suggests that miR-K12-11 may contribute to the induction of
KSHV-positive B-cell tumours in infected patients.

PMCID: PMC2614920
PMID: 18075594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jan 18;283(3):1732-43. Epub 2007 Nov 20.

The iron-containing domain is essential in Rad3 helicases for coupling of ATP
hydrolysis to DNA translocation and for targeting the helicase to the
single-stranded DNA-double-stranded DNA junction.

Pugh RA(1), Honda M, Leesley H, Thomas A, Lin Y, Nilges MJ, Cann IK, Spies M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Department of Animal Sciences, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

Helicases often achieve functional specificity through utilization of unique
structural features incorporated into an otherwise conserved core. The archaeal
Rad3 (xeroderma pigmentosum group D protein (XPD)) helicase is a prototypical
member of the Rad3 family, distinct from other related (superfamily II) SF2
enzymes because of a unique insertion containing an iron-sulfur (FeS) cluster.
This insertion may represent an auxiliary domain responsible for modifying
helicase activity or for conferring specificity for selected DNA repair
intermediates. The importance of the FeS cluster for the fine-tuning of Rad3-DNA 
interactions is illustrated by several clinically relevant point mutations in the
FeS domain of human Bach1 (FancJ) and XPD helicases that result in distinct
disease phenotypes. Here we analyzed the substrate specificity of the Rad3 (XPD) 
helicase from Ferroplasma acidarmanus (FacRad3) and probed the importance of the 
FeS cluster for Rad3-DNA interactions. We found that the FeS cluster stabilizes
secondary structure of the auxiliary domain important for coupling of
single-stranded (ss) DNA-dependent ATP hydrolysis to ssDNA translocation.
Additionally, we observed specific quenching of the Cy5 fluorescent dye when the 
FeS cluster of a bound helicase is positioned in close proximity to a Cy5
fluorophore incorporated into the DNA molecule. Taking advantage of this Cy5
quenching, we developed an equilibrium assay for analysis of the Rad3
interactions with various DNA substrates. We determined that the FeS
cluster-containing domain recognizes the ssDNA-double-stranded DNA junction and
positions the helicase in an orientation consistent with duplex unwinding.
Although it interacts specifically with the junction, the enzyme binds tightly to
ssDNA, and the single-stranded regions of the substrate are the major
contributors to the energetics of FacRad3-substrate interactions.

PMID: 18029358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(21):7074-86. Epub 2007 Oct 16.

Heme oxygenase-1 induction by NRF2 requires inactivation of the transcriptional
repressor BACH1.

Reichard JF(1), Motz GT, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental Genetics,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0056, USA.
john.reichard@childrens.harvard.edu

Oxidative stress activates the transcription factor NRF2, which in turn binds
cis-acting antioxidant response element (ARE) enhancers and induces expression of
protective antioxidant genes. In contrast, the transcriptional repressor BACH1
binds ARE-like enhancers in cells naïve to oxidative stress and antagonizes NRF2 
binding until it becomes inactivated by pro-oxidants. Here, we describe the
dynamic roles of BACH1 and NRF2 in the transcription of the heme oxygenase-1
(HMOX1) gene. HMOX1 induction, elicited by arsenite-mediated oxidative stress,
follows inactivation of BACH1 and precedes activation of NRF2. BACH1 repression
is dominant over NRF2-mediated HMOX1 transcription and inactivation of BACH1 is a
prerequisite for HMOX1 induction. In contrast, thioredoxin reductase 1 (TXNRD1)
is regulated by NRF2 but not by BACH1. By comparing the expression levels of
HMOX1 with TXNRD1, we show that nuclear accumulation of NRF2 is not necessary for
HMOX1 induction; rather, BACH1 inactivation permits NRF2 already present in the
nucleus at low basal levels to bind the HMOX1 promoter and elicit HMOX1
induction. Thus, BACH1 confers an additional level of regulation to ARE-dependent
genes that reveals a new dimension to the oxidative stress response.

PMCID: PMC2175339
PMID: 17942419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Gastroenterology. 2007 Oct;133(4):1166-74. Epub 2007 Aug 3.

Reciprocal effects of micro-RNA-122 on expression of heme oxygenase-1 and
hepatitis C virus genes in human hepatocytes.

Shan Y(1), Zheng J, Lambrecht RW, Bonkovsky HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
Connecticut, USA. ying.shan@umassmed.edu

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) is an antioxidant defense and key
cytoprotective enzyme, which is repressed by Bach1. Micro-RNA-122 (miR-122) is
specifically expressed and highly abundant in human liver and required for
replication of hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA. This study was to assess whether a
specific miR-122 antagomir down-regulates HCV protein replication and
up-regulates HO-1.
METHODS: We transfected antagomir of miR-122, 2'-O-methyl-mimic miR-122, or
nonspecific control antagomir, into wild-type (WT) Huh-7 cells or Huh-7 stably
replicating HCV subgenomic protein core through nonstructural protein 3 of HCV
(NS3) (CNS3 replicon cells) or NS3-5B (9-13 replicon cells).
RESULTS: Antagomir of miR-122 reduced the abundance of HCV RNA by 64% in CNS3 and
by 84% in 9-13 cells. Transfection with 2'-O-methlyl-mimic miR-122 increased HCV 
levels up to 2.5-fold. Antagomir of miR-122 also decreased Bach1 and increased
HO-1 mRNA levels in CNS3, 9-13, and WT Huh-7 cells. Increasing HO-1 by silencing 
Bach1 with 50 nmol/L Bach1-short interfering RNA or by treatment with 5 mumol/L
cobalt protoporphyrin or heme (known inducers of HO-1) decreased HCV RNA and
protein by 50% in HCV replicon cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Down-regulation of HCV replication using an antagomir targeted to
miR-122 is effective, specific, and selective. Increasing HO-1, by silencing the 
Bach1 gene or by treatment with cobalt protoporphyrin or heme, decreases HCV
replication. Thus, miR-122 plays an important role in the regulation of HCV
replication and HO-1/Bach1 expression in hepatocytes. Down-regulation of miR-122 
and up-regulation of HO-1 may be new strategies for anti-HCV intervention and
cytoprotection.

PMCID: PMC2128739
PMID: 17919492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 23;282(47):34365-71. Epub 2007 Sep 26.

Bach1 repression of ferritin and thioredoxin reductase1 is heme-sensitive in
cells and in vitro and coordinates expression with heme oxygenase1, beta-globin, 
and NADP(H) quinone (oxido) reductase1.

Hintze KJ(1), Katoh Y, Igarashi K, Theil EC.

Author information: 
(1)Council for BioIron at CHORI, Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, 
5700 Martin Luther King Jr. Way, Oakland, CA 94609, USA.

Ferritin gene transcription is regulated by heme as is ferritin mRNA translation,
which is mediated by the well studied mRNA.IRE/IRP protein complex. The
heme-sensitive DNA sequence in ferritin genes is the maf recognition/antioxidant 
response element present in several other genes that are induced by heme and
repressed by Bach1. We now report that chromatin immunoprecipitated with Bach1
antiserum contains ferritin DNA sequences. In addition, overexpression of Bach1
protein in the transfected cells decreased ferritin expression, indicating
insufficient endogenous Bach1 for full repression; decreasing Bach1 with
antisense RNA increased ferritin expression. Thioredoxin reductase1, a gene that 
also contains a maf recognition/antioxidant response element but is less studied,
responded similarly to ferritin, as did the positive controls heme oxygenase1 and
NADP(H) quinone (oxido) reductase1. Bach1-DNA promoter interactions in cells were
confirmed in vitro with soluble, recombinant Bach1 protein and revealed a
quantitative range of Bach1/DNA stabilities: ferritin L approximately ferritin H 
approximately beta-globin, beta-globin approximately 2-fold >heme oxygenase1 =
quinone reductase beta-globin approximately 4-fold >thioredoxin reductase1. Such 
results indicate the possibility that modulation of cellular Bach1 concentrations
will have variable effects among the genes coordinately regulated by maf
recognition/antioxidant response elements in iron/oxygen/antioxidant metabolism.

PMID: 17901053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Virol. 2007 Dec;81(23):12836-45. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus encodes an ortholog of miR-155.

Skalsky RL(1), Samols MA, Plaisance KB, Boss IW, Riva A, Lopez MC, Baker HV,
Renne R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, and Shands Cancer Center,
1376 Mowry Road, Gainesville, FL 32610-3633, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that posttranscriptionally regulate
gene expression by binding to 3'-untranslated regions (3'UTRs) of target mRNAs.
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), a virus linked to malignancies
including primary effusion lymphoma (PEL), encodes 12 miRNA genes, but only a few
regulatory targets are known. We found that KSHV-miR-K12-11 shares 100% seed
sequence homology with hsa-miR-155, an miRNA frequently found to be up-regulated 
in lymphomas and critically important for B-cell development. Based on this seed 
sequence homology, we hypothesized that both miRNAs regulate a common set of
target genes and, as a result, could have similar biological activities.
Examination of five PEL lines showed that PELs do not express miR-155 but do
express high levels of miR-K12-11. Bioinformatic tools predicted the
transcriptional repressor BACH-1 to be targeted by both miRNAs, and ectopic
expression of either miR-155 or miR-K12-11 inhibited a BACH-1 3'UTR-containing
reporter. Furthermore, BACH-1 protein levels are low in cells expressing either
miRNA. Gene expression profiling of miRNA-expressing stable cell lines revealed
66 genes that were commonly down-regulated. For select genes, miRNA targeting was
confirmed by reporter assays. Thus, based on our in silico predictions, reporter 
assays, and expression profiling data, miR-K12-11 and miR-155 regulate a common
set of cellular targets. Given the role of miR-155 during B-cell maturation, we
speculate that miR-K12-11 may contribute to the distinct developmental phenotype 
of PEL cells, which are blocked in a late stage of B-cell development. Together, 
these findings indicate that KSHV miR-K12-11 is an ortholog of miR-155.

PMCID: PMC2169101
PMID: 17881434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2007 Sep;213(1):1-16.

Heme as a magnificent molecule with multiple missions: heme determines its own
fate and governs cellular homeostasis.

Furuyama K(1), Kaneko K, Vargas PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Applied Physiology, Tohoku University
School of Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.
k-furuya@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

Heme is a prosthetic group of various types of proteins, such as hemoglobin,
myoglobin, cytochrome c, cytochrome p450, catalase and peroxidase. In addition,
heme is involved in a variety of biological events by modulating the function or 
the state of hemoproteins. For example, protein synthesis is inhibited in
erythroid cells under heme deficiency, as the consequence of the activation of
heme-regulated inhibitor (HRI). Iron concentration in the cell is sensed and
regulated by the heme-mediated oxidization and subsequent degradation of iron
regulatory protein 2 (IRP2). Heme also binds to certain types of potassium
channels, thereby inhibiting transmembrane K(+) currents. Importantly, heme
determines its own fate; namely, heme regulates its synthesis and degradation
through the feedback mechanisms, by which intracellular heme level is precisely
maintained. Heme reduces heme synthesis by suppressing the expression of
non-specific 5-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS1) and stimulates heme breakdown by 
inducing heme oxygenase (HO)-1 expression. ALAS1 and HO-1 are the rate limiting
enzymes in heme biosynthesis and catabolism, respectively. Accordingly, under the
heme-rich condition, heme binds to cysteine-proline (CP) motifs of ALAS1 and
those of transcriptional repressor Bach1, thereby leading to repression of
mitochondrial transport of ALAS1 and induction of HO-1 transcription,
respectively. Moreover, chemosensing functions of HO-2 containing CP motifs,
another isozyme of HO, have been unveiled recently. In this review article, we
summarize and update the pleiotropic effects of heme on various biological events
and the regulatory network of heme biosynthesis and catabolism.

PMID: 17785948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. IUBMB Life. 2007 Aug-Sep;59(8-9):542-51.

Bach1, a heme-dependent transcription factor, reveals presence of multiple heme
binding sites with distinct coordination structure.

Hira S(1), Tomita T, Matsui T, Igarashi K, Ikeda-Saito M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials, Tohoku
University, Sendai, Japan.

The mammalian transcription factor Bach1 functions as a repressor of the
enhancers of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) gene (Hmox-1) by forming heterodimers with
the small Maf proteins such as MafK. The transcription of Hmox-1 is regulated by 
the substrate of HO-1, heme. Heme induces expression of Hmox-1 in part by
inhibiting the binding of Bach1 to the enhancers and inducing the nuclear export 
of Bach1. A dipeptide motif of cysteine and proline (CP motif) in Bach1 is
essential for the heme-mediated regulation. In this study, we show that five
molecules of heme bind to Bach1 by the heme-titration assay. The Bach1-heme
complex exhibits an absorption spectrum with a major Soret peak at 371 nm and
Raman band at 343 cm(-1) in high amounts of heme and a spectrum containing the
major Soret peak at 423 nm at low heme concentrations. The spectroscopic
characterization indicates that Bach1 has two kinds of heme-binding sites with
different coordination structures. Mutagenesis studies have established that four
molecules of heme bind to the cysteine residues of four CP motifs in the C
terminus of Bach1. These results raise the possibility that two separated
activities of Bach1, DNA-binding and nuclear export, are regulated by heme
binding at the different CP motifs of Bach1 respectively, but not by cooperative 
heme-binding.

PMID: 17701549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Sep 5;129(35):10658-9. Epub 2007 Aug 9.

Thermodynamics of phosphopeptide tethering to BRCT: the structural minima for
inhibitor design.

Lokesh GL(1), Muralidhara BK, Negi SS, Natarajan A.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Biology Program, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Sealy
Center for Structural Biology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston,
Texas 77555, USA.

PMID: 17685618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;27(19):6962-71. Epub 2007 Aug 6.

Heme induces ubiquitination and degradation of the transcription factor Bach1.

Zenke-Kawasaki Y(1), Dohi Y, Katoh Y, Ikura T, Ikura M, Asahara T, Tokunaga F,
Iwai K, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Seiryo-Machi
2-1, Sendai, Japan.

The transcription repressor Bach1 is a sensor and effector of heme that regulates
the expression of heme oxygenase 1 and globin genes. Heme binds to Bach1,
inhibiting its DNA binding activity and inducing its nuclear export. We found
that hemin further induced the degradation of endogenous Bach1 in NIH 3T3 cells, 
murine embryonic fibroblasts, and murine erythroleukemia cells. In contrast,
succinylacetone, an inhibitor of heme synthesis, caused accumulation of Bach1 in 
murine embryonic fibroblasts, indicating that physiological levels of heme
regulated the Bach1 turnover. Polyubiquitination and rapid degradation of
overexpressed Bach1 were induced by hemin treatment. HOIL-1, an ubiquitin-protein
ligase which recognizes heme-bound, oxidized iron regulatory protein 2, was found
to bind with Bach1 when both were overexpressed in NIH 3T3 cells. HOIL-1
stimulated the polyubiquitination of Bach1 in a purified in vitro ubiquitination 
system depending on the intact heme binding motifs of Bach1. Expression of
dominant-negative HOIL-1 in murine erythroleukemia cells resulted in higher
stability of endogenous Bach1, raising the possibility that the heme-regulated
degradation involved HOIL-1 in murine erythroleukemia cells. These results
suggest that heme within a cell regulates the polyubiquitination and degradation 
of Bach1.

PMCID: PMC2099246
PMID: 17682061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;27(19):6733-41. Epub 2007 Jul 30.

Activation of BRCA1/BRCA2-associated helicase BACH1 is required for timely
progression through S phase.

Kumaraswamy E(1), Shiekhattar R.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

BACH1 (also known as FANCJ and BRIP1) is a DNA helicase that directly interacts
with the C-terminal BRCT repeat of the breast cancer susceptibility protein
BRCA1. Previous biochemical and functional analyses have suggested a role for the
BACH1 homolog in Caenorhabditis elegans during DNA replication. Here, we report
the association of BACH1 with a distinct BRCA1/BRCA2-containing complex during
the S phase of the cell cycle. Depletion of BACH1 or BRCA1 using small
interfering RNAs results in delayed entry into the S phase of the cell cycle.
Such timely progression through S phase requires the helicase activity of BACH1. 
Importantly, cells expressing a dominant negative mutation in BACH1 that results 
in a defective helicase displayed increased activation of DNA damage checkpoints 
and genomic instability. BACH1 helicase is silenced during the G(1) phase of the 
cell cycle and is activated through a dephosphorylation event as cells enter S
phase. These results point to a critical role for BACH1 helicase activity not
only in the timely progression through the S phase but also in maintaining
genomic stability.

PMCID: PMC2099226
PMID: 17664283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007 Aug;14(8):710-5. Epub 2007 Jul 22.

CCDC98 is a BRCA1-BRCT domain-binding protein involved in the DNA damage
response.

Kim H(1), Huang J, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, P.O. 
Box 208040, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

The product of the breast cancer-1 gene, BRCA1, plays a crucial part in the DNA
damage response through its interactions with many proteins, including BACH1,
CtIP and RAP80. Here we identify a coiled-coil domain-containing protein, CCDC98,
as a BRCA1-interacting protein. CCDC98 colocalizes with BRCA1 and is required for
the formation of BRCA1 foci in response to ionizing radiation. Moreover, like
BRCA1, CCDC98 has a role in radiation sensitivity and damage-induced G2/M
checkpoint control. Together, these results suggest that CCDC98 is a mediator of 
BRCA1 function involved in the mammalian DNA damage response.

PMID: 17643122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Blood. 2007 Oct 1;110(7):2390-8. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

FANCJ (BACH1) helicase forms DNA damage inducible foci with replication protein A
and interacts physically and functionally with the single-stranded DNA-binding
protein.

Gupta R(1), Sharma S, Sommers JA, Kenny MK, Cantor SB, Brosh RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institute on Aging (NIA),
National Institutes of Health (NIH), Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

The BRCA1 associated C-terminal helicase (BACH1, designated FANCJ) is implicated 
in the chromosomal instability genetic disorder Fanconi anemia (FA) and
hereditary breast cancer. A critical role of FANCJ helicase may be to restart
replication as a component of downstream events that occur during the repair of
DNA cross-links or double-strand breaks. We investigated the potential
interaction of FANCJ with replication protein A (RPA), a single-stranded
DNA-binding protein implicated in both DNA replication and repair. FANCJ and RPA 
were shown to coimmunoprecipitate most likely through a direct interaction of
FANCJ and the RPA70 subunit. Moreover, dependent on the presence of BRCA1, FANCJ 
colocalizes with RPA in nuclear foci after DNA damage. Our data are consistent
with a model in which FANCJ associates with RPA in a DNA damage-inducible manner 
and through the protein interaction RPA stimulates FANCJ helicase to better
unwind duplex DNA substrates. These findings identify RPA as the first regulatory
partner of FANCJ. The FANCJ-RPA interaction is likely to be important for the
role of the helicase to more efficiently unwind DNA repair intermediates to
maintain genomic stability.

PMCID: PMC1988918
PMID: 17596542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. EMBO J. 2007 Jul 11;26(13):3238-49. Epub 2007 Jun 21.

The FANCJ/MutLalpha interaction is required for correction of the cross-link
response in FA-J cells.

Peng M(1), Litman R, Xie J, Sharma S, Brosh RM Jr, Cantor SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School
Women's Cancers Program, UMASS Memorial Cancer Center, Worcester, MA, USA.

FANCJ also called BACH1/BRIP1 was first linked to hereditary breast cancer
through its direct interaction with BRCA1. FANCJ was also recently identified as 
a Fanconi anemia (FA) gene product, establishing FANCJ as an essential tumor
suppressor. Similar to other FA cells, FANCJ-null (FA-J) cells accumulate 4N DNA 
content in response to DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs). This accumulation is
corrected by reintroduction of wild-type FANCJ. Here, we show that FANCJ
interacts with the mismatch repair complex MutLalpha, composed of PMS2 and MLH1. 
Specifically, FANCJ directly interacts with MLH1 independent of BRCA1, through
its helicase domain. Genetic studies reveal that FANCJ helicase activity and MLH1
binding, but not BRCA1 binding, are essential to correct the FA-J cells'
ICL-induced 4N DNA accumulation and sensitivity to ICLs. These results suggest
that the FANCJ/MutLalpha interaction, but not FANCJ/BRCA1 interaction, is
essential for establishment of a normal ICL-induced response. The functional role
of the FANCJ/MutLalpha complex demonstrates a novel link between FA and MMR, and 
predicts a broader role for FANCJ in DNA damage signaling independent of BRCA1.

PMCID: PMC1914102
PMID: 17581638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Science. 2007 May 25;316(5828):1194-8.

Abraxas and RAP80 form a BRCA1 protein complex required for the DNA damage
response.

Wang B(1), Matsuoka S, Ballif BA, Zhang D, Smogorzewska A, Gygi SP, Elledge SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Center for Genetics and Genomics, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2007 May 25;316(5828):1138-9.

The BRCT repeats of the breast and ovarian cancer predisposition protein BRCA1
are essential for tumor suppression. Phosphopeptide affinity proteomic analysis
identified a protein, Abraxas, that directly binds the BRCA1 BRCT repeats through
a phospho-Ser-X-X-Phe motif. Abraxas binds BRCA1 to the mutual exclusion of BACH1
(BRCA1-associated C-terminal helicase) and CtIP (CtBP-interacting protein),
forming a third type of BRCA1 complex. Abraxas recruits the ubiquitin-interacting
motif (UIM)-containing protein RAP80 to BRCA1. Both Abraxas and RAP80 were
required for DNA damage resistance, G(2)-M checkpoint control, and DNA repair.
RAP80 was required for optimal accumulation of BRCA1 on damaged DNA (foci) in
response to ionizing radiation, and the UIM domains alone were capable of foci
formation. The RAP80-Abraxas complex may help recruit BRCA1 to DNA damage sites
in part through recognition of ubiquitinated proteins.

PMCID: PMC3573690
PMID: 17525340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. BMC Cancer. 2007 May 15;7:83.

BRIP1 (BACH1) variants and familial breast cancer risk: a case-control study.

Frank B(1), Hemminki K, Meindl A, Wappenschmidt B, Sutter C, Kiechle M, Bugert P,
Schmutzler RK, Bartram CR, Burwinkel B.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-University Group Molecular Epidemiology, German Cancer Research
Center, DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany. b.frank@dkfz.de

BACKGROUND: Inactivating and truncating mutations of the nuclear
BRCA1-interacting protein 1 (BRIP1) have been shown to be the major cause of
Fanconi anaemia and, due to subsequent alterations of BRCA1 function, predispose 
to breast cancer (BC).
METHODS: We investigated the effect of BRIP1 -64G>A and Pro919Ser on familial BC 
risk by means of TaqMan allelic discrimination, analysing BRCA1/BRCA2
mutation-negative index patients of 571 German BC families and 712 control
individuals.
RESULTS: No significant differences in genotype frequencies between BC cases and 
controls for BRIP1 -64G>A and Pro919Ser were observed.
CONCLUSION: We found no effect of the putatively functional BRIP1 variants -64G>A
and Pro919Ser on the risk of familial BC.

PMCID: PMC1887536
PMID: 17504528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Jun;1774(6):772-80. Epub 2007 Apr 6.

Thermal unfolding of human BRCA1 BRCT-domain variants.

Nikolopoulos G(1), Pyrpassopoulos S, Thanassoulas A, Klimentzou P, Zikos C,
Vlassi M, Vorgias CE, Yannoukakos D, Nounesis G.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Scientific Research Demokritos, 153 10 Aghia Paraskevi,
Greece.

Missense mutations at the BRCT domain of human BRCA1 protein have been associated
with an elevated risk for hereditary breast/ovarian cancer. They have been shown 
to affect the binding site and they have also been proposed to affect domain
stability, severely hampering the protein's tumor suppressor function. In order
to assess the impact of various such mutations upon the stability and the
function of the BRCT domain, heat-induced denaturation has been employed to study
the thermal unfolding of variants M1775R and R1699W, which have been linked with 
the disease, as well as of V1833M, which has been reported for patients with a
family history. Calorimetric and circular dichroism results reveal that in pH
9.0, 5 mM borate buffer, 200 mM NaCl, analogously to wild type BRCT, all three
variants undergo partial thermal unfolding to a denatured state, which retains
most of the native's structural characteristics. With respect to wild-type BRCT, 
the mutation M1775R induces the most severe effects especially upon the
thermostability, while R1699W also has a strong impact. On the other hand, the
thermal unfolding of variant V1833M is only moderately affected relative to
wild-type BRCT. Moreover, isothermal titration calorimetric measurements reveal
that contrary to M1775R and R1699W variants, V1833M binds to BACH1 and CtIP
phosphopeptides.

PMID: 17493881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Cell Prolif. 2007 Apr;40(2):268-81.

Identification of stathmin 1 expression induced by Epstein-Barr virus in human B 
lymphocytes.

Baik SY(1), Yun HS, Lee HJ, Lee MH, Jung SE, Kim JW, Jeon JP, Shin YK, Rhee HS,
Kimm KC, Han BG.

Author information: 
(1)Biobank for Health Sciences, Center for Genome Sciences, National Institute of
Health, Korea Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Seoul, South Korea.

INTRODUCTION: The Epstein-Barr virus transforms resting B cells into
proliferating lymphoblastoid cells, the origin of cell lines.
METHOD AND RESULTS: Our cDNA microarray analyses led to the identification of 232
up-regulated and 112 down-regulated genes with more than a 3-fold difference in
lymphoblastoid cell lines compared to resting B cells. The functional
classification of these genes exhibited the distinct expression signature for
cell proliferation, cell cycle and an immune response. Among them, we verified
the differential expression of several oncogenes such as stathmin 1 (STMN1),
RAB27A, RAB9A, BACH1 and BACH2 using quantitative real-time reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reactions or Western blot analysis. Expression of 
STMN1 (which is involved in regulation of the microtubule filament system, cell
growth and S-phase of cell cycle) was increased in lymphoblastoid cell line as
well as in 7-day post-Epstein-Barr virus infection B cells, compared to resting B
cells.
CONCLUSION: Thus, this study suggests that Epstein-Barr virus infection induces
STMN1 expression, which play a role in cell cycle progression and proliferation
in the human B lymphocyte.

PMID: 17472732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Mar 16;354(3):757-63. Epub 2007 Jan 18.

The role of Bach1 in the induction of heme oxygenase by tin mesoporphyrin.

Abate A(1), Zhao H, Wong RJ, Stevenson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, 300 Pasteur 
Drive, Rm. S-230, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Tin mesoporphyrin (SnMP), a competitive heme oxygenase (HO) inhibitor, also
induces HO-1 mRNA and protein expression by a mechanism that is not fully
understood. We examined whether the induction by SnMP is mediated by a
de-repression of Bach1, a transcription factor that suppresses the HO-1 gene.
Incubation of NIH3T3-HO-1-luc cells with SnMP attenuated HO activity with a
concomitant increase in HO-1 mRNA and protein and a decrease in Bach1 and HO-2
proteins, which was not due to transcriptional down-regulation, but accelerated
protein decay. Similarly, HO-1 protein degradation was increased by SnMP, despite
of an elevation in HO-1 transcription. Transfection of Bach1 shRNA in Hepa cells 
raised basal HO-1 expression significantly, and SnMP treatment further increased 
HO-1 mRNA. In conclusion, SnMP induces HO-1 expression not only by de-repressing 
the HO-1 promoter by binding Bach1, but also by accelerating Bach1 degradation.

PMCID: PMC1805812
PMID: 17257585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Med Sci (Paris). 2006 Dec;22(12):1087-94.

[DNA helicases and human diseases].

[Article in French]

Uhring M(1), Poterszman A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de génétique et de biologie moléculaire et cellulaire, UMR 7104
CNRS/Inserm/ULP, 1, rue Laurent-Fries, BP 10142, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, France.

DNA helicases are molecular motors that catalyse the unwinding of energetically
unstable structures into single strands and have therefore an essential role in
nearly all metabolism transactions. Defects in helicase function can result in
human syndromes in which predisposition to cancer and genomic instability are
common features. So far different helicase genes have been found associated in 8 
such disorders. RecQ helicases are a family of conserved enzymes required for
maintaining the genome integrity that function as suppressors of inappropriate
recombination. Mutations in RecQ4, BLM and WRN give rise to various disorders:
Bloom syndrome, Rothmund-Thomson syndrome, and Werner syndrome characterized by
genomic instability and increased cancer susceptibility. The DNA helicase
BRIP1/BACH1 is involved in double-strand break repair and is defective in Fanconi
anemia complementation group J. Mutations in XPD and XPB genes can result in
xeroderma pigmentosum, Cockayne syndrome and trichothiodystrophy, three genetic
disorders with different clinical features but with association of transcription 
and NER defects. This review summarizes our current knowledge on the diverse
biological functions of these helicases and the molecular basis of the associated
diseases.

PMID: 17156731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006;34(22):6673-83. Epub 2006 Dec 1.

Inhibition of BACH1 (FANCJ) helicase by backbone discontinuity is overcome by
increased motor ATPase or length of loading strand.

Gupta R(1), Sharma S, Doherty KM, Sommers JA, Cantor SB, Brosh RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institute on Aging, NIH, 5600
Nathan Shock Drive, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

The BRCA1 associated C-terminal helicase (BACH1) associated with breast cancer
has been implicated in double strand break (DSB) repair. More recently, BACH1
(FANCJ) has been genetically linked to the chromosomal instability disorder
Fanconi Anemia (FA). Understanding the roles of BACH1 in cellular DNA metabolism 
and how BACH1 dysfunction leads to tumorigenesis requires a comprehensive
investigation of its catalytic mechanism and molecular functions in DNA repair.
In this study, we have determined that BACH1 helicase contacts with both the
translocating and the non-translocating strands of the duplex are critical for
its ability to track along the sugar phosphate backbone and unwind dsDNA. An
increased motor ATPase of a BACH1 helicase domain variant (M299I) enabled the
helicase to unwind the backbone-modified DNA substrate in a more proficient
manner. Alternatively, increasing the length of the 5' tail of the DNA substrate 
allowed BACH1 to overcome the backbone discontinuity, suggesting that BACH1
loading mechanism is critical for its ability to unwind damaged DNA molecules.

PMCID: PMC1751539
PMID: 17145708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Dec;5(12):1632-6. Epub 2006 Dec 5.

Altered expression of FANCL confers mitomycin C sensitivity in Calu-6 lung cancer
cells.

Zhang J(1), Wang X, Lin CJ, Couch FJ, Fei P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Dec;5(12):1637-9.

Fanconi anemia (FA) results from mutations in a group of genes whose products,
including BRCA2 and BACH1/BRIP1, are known to function in one common pathway (the
FA-BRCA pathway) to guard genome integrity, especially when challenged by DNA
crosslinking agents, such as Cisplatin and mitomycin C (MMC). The extremely high 
incidence of cancer in FA patients reveals the essentialness of this pathway in
tumor suppression. However, this pathway's involvement in nonFA cancers is not
well understood. To evaluate the contribution of the FA-BRCA pathway to cancer,
we investigated the integrity of the FA-BRCA pathway in ten human cancer cell
lines. We found that the Calu-6 lung cancer cell line carries a defective FA-BRCA
pathway. In this cell line, the examination of six FA proteins, essential for the
activation of the FA-BRCA pathway, detected substantially reduced expression of
FANCL, a catalytic subunit of the ubiquitin ligase/E3-complex. Reconstitution of 
FANCL in these cells restored the activation of the FA-BRCA pathway, but MMC
sensitivity of the cells with a complemented FA-BRCA pathway was decreased as
compared to the cells with an impaired FA-BRCA pathway. Collectively, the
abnormal FANCL expression is the cause leading to a defective FA-BRCA pathway,
which confers the sensitivity of Calu-6 cells to MMC. This suggests that the
correlation of an intact FA-BRCA pathway with MMC resistance may emerge as a
common mechanism underlying resistance to DNA crosslinking agents in cancer
patients.

PMID: 17106252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Inorg Biochem. 2006 Dec;100(12):2074-8. Epub 2006 Sep 23.

Integrating iron and oxygen/antioxidant signals via a combinatorial array of DNA 
- (antioxidant response elements) and mRNA (iron responsive elements) sequences.

Theil EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)CHORI (Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute), Oakland, CA 94609,
USA. etheil@chori.org

Fe (cellular iron), O (dioxygen, antioxidant inducers, hydrogen peroxide), and P 
(protein phosphorylation) signals combine to regulate DNA activity
(transcription/mRNA synthesis) for antioxidant/Phase II response proteins (e.g., 
ferritin H, ferritin L, thioredoxin reductase I, NAD(P)H quinone oxido-reductase,
heme oxygenase1 and beta-globin) and mRNA activity for proteins of iron
transport, storage or oxygen metabolism (e.g., ferritin H, ferritin L,
transferrin receptor1, ferroportin, mt-aconitase-TCA cycle and aminolevulinate
synthase - heme biosynthesis). Ferritin regulation links the two groups of
genetic controls via DNA (ARE-antioxidant response element) and mRNA (IRE-iron
responsive element) structures. More is known about the IRE-mRNA and protein
repressors, IRPs (iron regulatory proteins/aconitase homologues), than the
DNA-ARE and protein repressors, e.g., Bach1. Iron responsive elements are very
similar (65-80% sequence identity), but each mRNA has sufficient IRE specificity 
(>90% phylogenetic sequence conservation), that IRP binding and signal responses 
vary quantitatively. The structural specificity of each IRE-RNA provides an
opportunity for finding small molecule regulators in vitro, and possibly in vivo.
The potential of manipulating mRNA function with small molecules targeted to
specific RNA regulatory structures, e.g., ferritin mRNA in iron overload, or
viral mRNA control structures for replication, is high.

PMID: 17084901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. FASEB J. 2006 Dec;20(14):2651-3. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

Role of Bach1 and Nrf2 in up-regulation of the heme oxygenase-1 gene by cobalt
protoporphyrin.

Shan Y(1), Lambrecht RW, Donohue SE, Bonkovsky HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
Connecticut, USA. shan@uchc.edu

Comment in
    FASEB J. 2007 Sep;21(11):2639; author reply 2640.

Heme oxygenase (HO) catalyzes the conversion of heme to biliverdin with the
release of iron and carbon monoxide. HO-1 is highly inducible by a large number
of physical and chemical factors. CoPP is known to be a potent and effective
inducer of HO-1 activity in many tissues. Here we report that CoPP up-regulates
HO-1 via Bach1 and Nrf2 in human liver cells. CoPP did not influence hepatic
Bach1 or Nrf2 mRNA levels, but markedly reduced Bach1 protein levels by
increasing degradation of Bach1 protein (t(1/2) from 19 h to 2.8 h), and
increased Nrf2 by decreasing degradation of Nrf2 protein (t(1/2) from 2.5 h to 9 
h). Silencing Bach1 by Bach1-siRNA significantly increased levels of HO-1 mRNA
and protein, and addition of CoPP up-regulated HO-1 mRNA and protein further.
However, silencing Nrf2 mRNA by Nrf2-siRNA did not significantly change baseline 
HO-1 mRNA or protein levels, but significantly decreased 5-10 microM
CoPP-mediated up-regulation of HO-1 mRNA levels compared with CoPP alone.
Transfection with equal amounts of non-Bach1 or non-Nrf2 related control siRNA
did not reduce Bach1 or Nrf2 mRNA or protein, confirming the specificity of
Bach1- and Nrf2-siRNA in Huh-7 cells. We conclude that the pathway of
CoPP-mediated induction of HO-1 involves the repression of Bach1 and
up-regulation of the Nrf2 protein by post-transcriptional site(s) of action.
Because CoPP, unlike heme, is neither a prooxidant nor a substrate for HO-1, it
might be considered as a potential therapeutic agent in situations where
up-regulation of HO-1 is desired.

PMID: 17065227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Proteins. 2007 Jan 1;66(1):69-86.

Cancer-related mutations in BRCA1-BRCT cause long-range structural changes in
protein-protein binding sites: a molecular dynamics study.

Gough CA(1), Gojobori T, Imanishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Database Group, Japan Biological Information Research Center, Japan
Biological Informatics Consortium, AIST Bio-IT Research Building, 2-42 Aomi,
Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-0064, Japan. cgough@jbirc.aist.go.jp

Cancer-associated mutations in the BRCT domain of BRCA1 (BRCA1-BRCT) abolish its 
tumor suppressor function by disrupting interactions with other proteins such as 
BACH1. Many cancer-related mutations do not cause sufficient destabilization to
lead to global unfolding under physiological conditions, and thus abrogation of
function probably is due to localized structural changes. To explore the reasons 
for mutation-induced loss of function, the authors performed molecular dynamics
simulations on three cancer-associated mutants, A1708E, M1775R, and Y1853ter, and
on the wild type and benign M1652I mutant, and compared the structures and
fluctuations. Only the cancer-associated mutants exhibited significant backbone
structure differences from the wild-type crystal structure in BACH1-binding
regions, some of which are far from the mutation sites. Backbone differences of
the A1708E mutant from the liganded wild type structure in these regions are much
larger than those of the unliganded wild type X-ray or molecular dynamics
structures. These BACH1-binding regions of the cancer-associated mutants also
exhibited increases in their fluctuation magnitudes compared with the same
regions in the wild type and M1562I mutant, as quantified by quasiharmonic
analysis. Several of the regions of increased fluctuation magnitude correspond to
correlated motions of residues in contact that provide a continuous path of
fluctuating amino acids in contact from the A1708E and Y1853ter mutation sites to
the BACH1-binding sites with altered structure and dynamics. The increased
fluctuations in the disease-related mutants suggest an increase in vibrational
entropy in the unliganded state that could result in a larger entropy loss in the
disease-related mutants upon binding BACH1 than in the wild type. To investigate 
this possibility, vibrational entropies of the A1708E and wild type in the free
state and bound to a BACH1-derived phosphopeptide were calculated using
quasiharmonic analysis, to determine the binding entropy difference DeltaDeltaS
between the A1708E mutant and the wild type. DeltaDeltaS was determined to be
-4.0 cal mol(-1) K(-1), with an uncertainty of 2 cal mol(-1) K(-1); that is, the 
entropy loss upon binding the peptide is 4.0 cal mol(-1) K(-1) greater for the
A1708E mutant, corresponding to an entropic contribution to the DeltaDeltaG of
binding (-TDeltaDeltaS) 1.1 kcal mol(-1) more positive for the mutant. The
observed differences in structure, flexibility, and entropy of binding likely are
responsible for abolition of BACH1 binding, and illustrate that many disease-
related mutations could have very long-range effects. The methods described here 
have potential for identifying correlated motions responsible for other
long-range effects of deleterious mutations.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17063491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Oncogene. 2006 Sep 25;25(43):5875-84.

Fanconi anaemia genes and susceptibility to cancer.

Mathew CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)King's College London School of Medicine, Division of Genetics and Molecular
Medicine, Guy's Hospital, London, UK. christopher.mathew@genetics.kcl.ac.uk

Fanconi anaemia (FA) is a rare recessive disorder associated with chromosomal
fragility, aplastic anaemia, congenital abnormalities and a high risk of cancer, 
including acute myeloid leukaemia and squamous cell carcinomas. The
identification of 11 different FA genes has revealed a complex web of interacting
proteins that are involved in the recognition or repair of DNA interstrand
crosslinks and perhaps other forms of DNA damage. Bi-allelic mutations in BRCA2
are associated with a rare and highly cancer-prone form of FA, and the DNA
helicase BRIP1 (formerly BACH1) is mutated in FA group J. There is little
convincing evidence that FA heterozygotes are at increased risk of cancer, but
larger studies are needed to address the possibility of modest risk effects.
Somatic inactivation of the FA pathway by mutation or epigenetic silencing has
been observed in several different types of sporadic cancer, and this may have
important implications for targeted chemotherapy. Inhibition of this pathway
represents a possible route to sensitization of tumours to DNA crosslinking drugs
such as cisplatin.

PMID: 16998502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Cell Res. 2006 Aug;16(8):681-92.

Heme: a versatile signaling molecule controlling the activities of diverse
regulators ranging from transcription factors to MAP kinases.

Mense SM(1), Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Columbia University, Mailman
School of Public Health, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Heme (iron protoporphyrin IX) is an essential molecule for numerous living
organisms. Not only does it serve as a prosthetic group in enzymes, it also acts 
as a signaling molecule that controls diverse molecular and cellular processes
ranging from signal transduction to protein complex assembly. Deficient heme
synthesis or function impacts the hematopoietic, hepatic and nervous systems in
humans. Recent studies have revealed a series of heme-regulated transcription
factors and signal transducers including Hap1, a heme-activated transcription
factor that mediates the effects of oxygen on gene transcription in the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae; Bach1, a transcriptional repressor that is negatively
regulated by heme in mammalian cells; IRR, an iron regulatory protein that
mediates the iron-dependant regulation of heme synthesis in the bacterium
Bradyrhizobium japonicum; and heme-regulated inhibitor, an eucaryotic initiation 
factor 2alpha kinase that coordinates protein synthesis with heme availability in
reticulocytes. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge about how heme 
controls the activity of these transcriptional regulators and signal transducers,
and discuss diseases associated with defective heme synthesis, degradation and
function.

PMID: 16894358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Genes Cells. 2006 Jul;11(7):791-803.

Genetic ablation of the transcription repressor Bach1 leads to myocardial
protection against ischemia/reperfusion in mice.

Yano Y(1), Ozono R, Oishi Y, Kambe M, Yoshizumi M, Ishida T, Omura S, Oshima T,
Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Hiroshima University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551,
Japan.

Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor of heme oxygenase-1 gene (Hmox-1) and
beta-globin gene. Heme oxygenase (HO)-1 is an inducible cytoprotective enzyme
that degrades pro-oxidant heme to carbon monoxide (CO) and biliverdin/bilirubin, 
which are thought to mediate anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant actions of HO-1. 
In the present study, we investigated the role of Bach1 in tissue protection
against myocardial ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury in vivo using mice lacking
the Bach1 gene (Bach1(-/-)) and wild-type (Bach1(+/+)) mice. In Bach1(-/-) mice, 
myocardial expression of HO-1 protein was constitutively up-regulated by 3.4-fold
compared to that in Bach1(+/+) mice. While myocardial I/R induced HO-1 protein in
ischemic myocytes in both strains of mice, the extent of induction was
significantly greater in Bach1(-/-) mice than in Bach1(+/+) mice. Myocardial
infarction was markedly reduced in size by 48.4% in Bach1(-/-) mice. Pretreatment
of Bach1(-/-) mice with zinc-protoporphyrin, an inhibitor of HO activity,
abolished the infarction-reducing effect of Bach1 disruption, indicating that
reduction in the infarct size was mediated, at least in part, by HO-1 activity.
Thus, Bach1 plays a pivotal role in setting the levels of both constitutive and
inducible expression of HO-1 in the myocardium. Bach1 inactivation during I/R
appears to be a key mechanism controlling the activation level of cytoprotective 
program involving HO-1.

PMID: 16824198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2006 May-Jun;8(5-6):1069-80.

beta-Carotene and cigarette smoke condensate regulate heme oxygenase-1 and its
repressor factor Bach1: relationship with cell growth.

Palozza P(1), Serini S, Currò D, Calviello G, Igarashi K, Mancuso C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Pathology, Catholic University School of Medicine, Rome, 
Italy. p.palozza@rm.unicatt.it

It has been reported that beta-carotene is able to increase lung cancer risk in
chronic smokers, but the mechanism for this association remains unknown. This
article reports the first evidence that beta-carotene, combined with cigarette
smoke condensate (TAR), regulates heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) via its transcriptional
factor Bach1 and modulates cell growth. Both immortalized rat fibroblasts (RAT-1)
and human lung cancer cells (Mv1Lu) exposed to TAR (25 microg/ml), exhibited an
initial (6 h) induction of HO-1, followed by a late (24 h) repression due to the 
activation of Bach1. Heme oxygenase-1 repression was much more consistent when
TAR was administered in combination with beta-carotene (1 microM) for 24 h; at
this concentration the carotenoid per se did not have any effect on HO-1.
Interestingly, the HO-1 repression following TAR plus beta-carotene treatment
caused a resynchronization of RAT-1 cell-cycle with a significant increase in the
S-phase, and this was probably due to the decreased intracellular levels of
carbon monoxide and bilirubin, both of which have antiproliferative effects. The 
role of HO-1 repression in increasing cell growth was also confirmed in Mv1Lu
cells by the "knock down" of the Bach1 gene, thus demonstrating as HO-1
repression is a conserved mechanism by which cells can react to oxidative stress.

PMID: 16771696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2006 Apr;7(2):87-93.

New biotechnological methods to reduce oxidative stress in the cardiovascular
system: focusing on the Bach1/heme oxygenase-1 pathway.

Ozono R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Hiroshima University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan. ozono@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

Oxidative stress is involved in the mechanism of atherosclerotic lesion formation
and in the mechanisms underlying the development of other pathogenic conditions
of the cardiovascular system, including endothelial dysfunction, hypertension,
and heart failure. Reducing oxidative stress may be a reasonable therapeutic
approach to treat cardiovascular diseases. HO-1 is a cytoprotective enzyme that
is induced in response to oxidative stress and degrades heme into carbon monoxide
(CO) and bilirubin, both of which have cytoprotective effects. A substantial body
of evidence suggests that introduction of HO-1, either pharmacologically or by a 
gene delivery technique, confers cytoprotection in ischemic heart disease and
atherosclerosis in animals. Recent studies have revealed that CO has
anti-inflammatory properties and that administration of CO provides protection
against atherosclerosis and ischemic heart disease. Discovery of Bach1, a
transcriptional repressor of HO-1, has greatly contributed to the understanding
of the regulation of HO-11 expression, providing a clue to a development of
alternative method to enhance HO activity. Bach1 normally represses HO-1
expression. However, upon exposure to oxidative stress, Bach1 loses its
repressive activity and is exported out of the nucleus, which in turn results in 
the upregulation of HO-1. Bach1 knockout mice, expressing an increased amount of 
HO-1, are resistant to pro-atherosclerotic and ischemic stresses. These findings 
indicate that inhibition of Bach1 may be a novel approach to enhance protection
against stress. In summary, the Bach1-HO-1 system is an important defense
mechanism against oxidative stress. Development of a safe and effective method to
enhance this pathway, such as Bach1 inhibitor, may be of great clinical
relevance.

PMID: 16724942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Jul 15;312(12):2264-78. Epub 2006 Apr 24.

Bach2 is involved in neuronal differentiation of N1E-115 neuroblastoma cells.

Shim KS(1), Rosner M, Freilinger A, Lubec G, Hengstschläger M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of Vienna,
Währinger Gürtel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

Bach1 and Bach2 are evolutionarily related members of the BTB-basic region
leucine zipper transcription factor family. We found that Bach2 downregulates
cell proliferation of N1E-115 cells and negatively affects their potential to
differentiate. Nuclear localization of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 
is known to arrest cell cycle progression, and cytoplasmic p21 has been shown to 
promote neuronal differentiation of N1E-115 cells. We found that ectopic Bach2
causes upregulation of p21 expression in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm in
undifferentiated N1E-115 cells. In differentiated cells, Bach2 specifically
triggers upregulation of cytoplasmic p21. Our data suggest that Bach2 expression 
could represent a switch during the process of neuronal differentiation. Bach2 is
not expressed in neuronal precursor cells. It would have negative effects on
proliferation and differentiation of these cells. In differentiated neuronal
cells Bach2 expression is upregulated, which could allow Bach2 to function as a
gatekeeper of the differentiated status.

PMID: 16631738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Hepatol. 2006 Jul;45(1):5-12. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

HCV proteins increase expression of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and decrease
expression of Bach1 in human hepatoma cells.

Ghaziani T(1), Shan Y, Lambrecht RW, Donohue SE, Pietschmann T, Bartenschlager R,
Bonkovsky HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, 263
Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030-1111, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Hepatitis C infection induces hepatic oxidative stress. Heme
oxygenase (HO), the rate-controlling enzyme of heme catabolism, plays a key role 
as a protector against oxidative, and other stresses. Other recent work has
implicated Bach1, a heme binding protein that represses gene expression, in the
regulation of HO-1 gene expression.
METHODS: We investigated the effects of HCV polyprotein expression on expression 
of HO-1 and Bach1 genes in human hepatoma cells (Huh-7 cells).
RESULTS: HO-1 was up-regulated in the cell line expressing HCV proteins from core
up to the aminoterminal domain of NS3. Addition of increasing concentrations of
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) led to down-regulation of HO-1 in cells expressing HCV
proteins. In contrast, Bach1 was significantly down-regulated in these cells.
Sodium arsenite, a strong inducer of oxidative stress and HO-1, reduced Bach1
expression in wild type Huh-7 cells, and NAC partially abrogated this decrease.
CONCLUSIONS: Huh-7 cells expressing HCV proteins show significant up-regulation
of the HO-1 gene, and reciprocal down-regulation of the Bach1 gene. Exogenous
oxidative stressors and anti-oxidants can modulate expression of these genes.
These and other results suggest a key role of down-regulation of Bach1 and
up-regulation of HO-1 in diminishing cytotoxic effects of HCV proteins in human
hepatocytes.

PMID: 16530877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Fam Cancer. 2006;5(1):89-93.

Insights into the molecular basis of human hereditary breast cancer from studies 
of the BRCA1 BRCT domain.

Glover JN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, T6G 2H7, Edmonton, AB,
Canada. mark.glover@ualberta.ca

The C-terminal, BRCT repeats of BRCA1 are essential for the tumor suppressor
function of this protein. Here we review structural and functional studies of
this domain. Both repeats adopt similar folds and pack in an intimate,
head-to-tail manner. The domain binds phosphorylated targets such as the DNA
damage-associated kinase BACH1, with a specificity for pSer-X-X-Phe motifs.
Structural studies reveal that the N-terminal repeat is responsible for pSer
binding while a groove at the interface of the two repeats recognizes the Phe.
Missense variants identified in breast cancer screening programs often disrupt
these interactions and these molecular defects may lead to an increased cancer
risk.

PMID: 16528612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Pharmacol Ther. 2006 Aug;111(2):327-45. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

Heme as key regulator of major mammalian cellular functions: molecular, cellular,
and pharmacological aspects.

Tsiftsoglou AS(1), Tsamadou AI, Papadopoulou LC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki (A.U.TH.), Thessaloniki GR54124, Macedonia, Greece.
tsif@pharm.auth.gr

Heme (iron protoporphyrin IX) exists as prosthetic group in several hemoproteins,
which include respiration cytochromes, gas sensors, P450 enzymes (CYPs),
catalases, peroxidases, nitric oxide synthases (NOS), guanyl cyclases, and even
transcriptional factors. Hemin (the oxidized form of iron protoporphyrin IX) on
the other hand is an essential regulator of gene expression and growth promoter
of hematopoietic progenitor cells. This review is focused on the major
developments occurred in this field of heme biosynthesis and catabolism and their
implications in our understanding the pathogenesis of heme-related disorders like
anemias, acute porphyrias, hematological malignancies (leukemias), and other
disorders. Heme is transported into hematopoietic cells and enters the nucleus
where it activates gene expression by removing transcriptional potential
repressors, like Bach1, from enhancer DNA sequences. Evidence also exists to
indicate that heme acts like a signaling ligand in cell respiration and
metabolism, stress response adaptive processes, and even transcription of several
genes. Impaired heme biosynthesis or heme deficiency lead to hematological
disorders, tissue degeneration, and aging, while heme prevents cell damage via
activation of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) gene. Therefore, heme, besides being a key 
regulator of mammalian functions, can be also a useful therapeutic agent alone or
in combination with other drugs in several heme-related disorders.

PMID: 16513178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Anal Biochem. 2006 May 1;352(1):135-41. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

High-throughput fluorescence polarization assay to identify small molecule
inhibitors of BRCT domains of breast cancer gene 1.

Lokesh GL(1), Rachamallu A, Kumar GD, Natarajan A.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Biology Program, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, USA.

The C-terminus region of the 1863 residue early onset of breast cancer gene 1
(BRCA1) nuclear protein contains a tandem globular carboxy terminus domain termed
BRCT. The BRCT repeats in BRCA1 are phosphoserine- and/or
phosphothreonine-specific binding modules. The interaction of the BRCT(BRCA1)
domains with phosphorylated BRCA1-associated carboxyl terminal helicase (BACH1)
is cell cycle regulated and is essential for DNA damage-induced checkpoint
control during the transition from the G(2) phase to the M phase of the cell
cycle. Development of a competitive, homogeneous, high-throughput fluorescence
polarization (FP) assay to identify small molecule inhibitors of
BRCT(BRCA1)-BACH1 interaction is reported here. The FP assay was used for
measuring binding affinities and inhibition constants of BACH1 peptides and small
molecule inhibitors of BRCT(BRCA1) domains, respectively. A fluorescently labeled
wild-type BACH1 decapeptide (BDP1) containing the critical phosphoserine, a
phenylalanine at (P+3), and a GST-BRCT fusion protein were used to establish the 
FP assay. BDP1 has a dissociation constant (K(d)) of 1.58+/-0.01microM and a
dynamic range (DeltamP) of 164.9+/-1.9. The assay tolerates 20% dimethyl
sulfoxide, which enables screening poorly soluble compounds. Under optimized
conditions, a Z' factor of 0.87 was achieved in a 384-well format for
high-throughput screening.

PMID: 16500609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Blood. 2006 Jun 1;107(11):4223-33. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Molecular pathogenesis of Fanconi anemia: recent progress.

Taniguchi T(1), D'Andrea AD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA, USA.

A rare genetic disease, Fanconi anemia (FA), now attracts broader attention from 
cancer biologists and basic researchers in the DNA repair and ubiquitin biology
fields as well as from hematologists. FA is a chromosome instability syndrome
characterized by childhood-onset aplastic anemia, cancer or leukemia
susceptibility, and cellular hypersensitivity to DNA crosslinking agents.
Identification of 11 genes for FA has led to progress in the molecular
understanding of this disease. FA proteins, including a ubiquitin ligase (FANCL),
a monoubiquitinated protein (FANCD2), a helicase (FANCJ/BACH1/BRIP1), and a
breast/ovarian cancer susceptibility protein (FANCD1/BRCA2), appear to cooperate 
in a pathway leading to the recognition and repair of damaged DNA. Molecular
interactions among FA proteins and responsible proteins for other chromosome
instability syndromes (BLM, NBS1, MRE11, ATM, and ATR) have also been found.
Furthermore, inactivation of FA genes has been observed in a wide variety of
human cancers in the general population. These findings have broad implications
for predicting the sensitivity and resistance of tumors to widely used anticancer
DNA crosslinking agents (cisplatin, mitomycin C, and melphalan). Here, we
summarize recent progress in the molecular biology of FA and discuss roles of the
FA proteins in DNA repair and cancer biology.

PMID: 16493006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Feb 28;103(9):3339-44. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Identification of distinct molecular phenotypes in acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia by gene expression profiling.

Bourquin JP(1), Subramanian A, Langebrake C, Reinhardt D, Bernard O, Ballerini P,
Baruchel A, Cavé H, Dastugue N, Hasle H, Kaspers GL, Lessard M, Michaux L, Vyas
P, van Wering E, Zwaan CM, Golub TR, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Children's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Individuals with Down syndrome (DS) are predisposed to develop acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL), characterized by expression of truncated GATA1 
transcription factor protein (GATA1s) due to somatic mutation. The treatment
outcome for DS-AMKL is more favorable than for AMKL in non-DS patients. To gain
insight into gene expression differences in AMKL, we compared 24 DS and 39 non-DS
AMKL samples. We found that non-DS-AMKL samples cluster in two groups,
characterized by differences in expression of HOX/TALE family members. Both of
these groups are distinct from DS-AMKL, independent of chromosome 21 gene
expression. To explore alterations of the GATA1 transcriptome, we used
cross-species comparison with genes regulated by GATA1 expression in murine
erythroid precursors. Genes repressed after GATA1 induction in the murine system,
most notably GATA-2, MYC, and KIT, show increased expression in DS-AMKL,
suggesting that GATA1s fail to repress this class of genes. Only a subset of
genes that are up-regulated upon GATA1 induction in the murine system show
increased expression in DS-AMKL, including GATA1 and BACH1, a probable negative
regulator of megakaryocytic differentiation located on chromosome 21.
Surprisingly, expression of the chromosome 21 gene RUNX1, a known regulator of
megakaryopoiesis, was not elevated in DS-AMKL. Our results identify relevant
signatures for distinct AMKL entities and provide insight into gene expression
changes associated with these related leukemias.

PMCID: PMC1413912
PMID: 16492768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2006 Jan-Feb;8(1-2):107-18.

The heme-Bach1 pathway in the regulation of oxidative stress response and
erythroid differentiation.

Igarashi K(1), Sun J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan. igarak@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

Heme--as a prosthetic group of proteins required for oxygen transport and
storage, respiration, and biosynthetic pathways--is essential for practically all
forms of life. Additionally, the degradation products of heme (i.e., carbon
monoxide, biliverdin, and bilirubin) produced by the enzymatic actions of heme
oxygenase (HO) and biliverdin reductase, possess various biological activities in
vivo. In mammalian cells, heme also functions as an intracellular regulator of
gene expression by virtue of its ability to bind to Bach1, a transcription factor
that functions in association with small Maf proteins. Normally, such complexes
function as repressors by binding to specific target sequences, the Maf
recognition element (MARE), within enhancers of genes encoding proteins such as
HO-1 and beta-globin. By binding to Bach1, heme induces selective removal of the 
repressor from the gene enhancers permitting subsequent occupancy of the MAREs by
activators that, interestingly, also contain small Maf proteins. Thus small Maf
proteins play dual functions in gene expression: complexes with Bach1 repress
MARE-dependent gene expression, whereas heterodimers with NF-E2 p45 or related
factors (Nrf1, Nrf2, and Nrf3) activate MARE-driven genes. By modulating the
equilibrium of the small Maf heterodimer network, heme regulates expression of
the cytoprotective enzyme HO-1 during the stress response and of beta-globin
during erythroid differentiation. Implications of such heme-regulated gene
expression in human diseases including atherosclerosis are discussed.

PMID: 16487043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2006 Jan-Feb;8(1-2):60-7.

Heme oxygenase-1 gene enhancer manifests silencing activity in a chromatin
environment prior to oxidative stress.

Dohi Y(1), Alam J, Yoshizumi M, Sun J, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Chemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Science, Hiroshima, Japan.

The expression of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) is regulated by E1 and E2 enhancers,
both of which contain multiple Maf recognition elements (MAREs). In living cells,
MAREs are bound by Bach1/MafK heterodimers, hence maintaining a quiescent state
of the HO-1 gene (hmox-1). However, in transient transfection assays, they act as
transcriptional enhancers. Therefore MAREs may manifest their function only in a 
chromatin environment. By using NIH3T3 cell pools stably transfected with EGFP
reporter genes driven by the wild-type or mutated E2 enhancer, we demonstrate
that the E2 MAREs function as transcriptional silencers depending on the binding 
of Bach1/MafK heterodimer in vivo only in a chromatin environment. After cadmium 
treatment, they switched into transcriptional enhancers. Surprisingly, single
MARE site did not exhibit such function. Furthermore, by using DNase I
hypersensitivity assay, we demonstrate that simple chromatin condensations were
not involved in the Bach1-mediated repression. We conclude that, in a chromatin
environment, the E2 MAREs function as transcriptional silencers depending on
binding of Bach1/MafK heterodimer.

PMID: 16487038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Oncogene. 2006 Apr 6;25(15):2245-53.

BACH1 is a DNA repair protein supporting BRCA1 damage response.

Peng M(1), Litman R, Jin Z, Fong G, Cantor SB.

Author information: 
(1)UMASS Medical School, Cancer Biology, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The link between defects in BRCA1 and breast cancer development may be best
understood by deciphering the role of associated proteins. BRCA1 associated
C-terminal helicase (BACH1) interacts directly with the BRCA1 C-terminal BRCT
repeats, which are important for BRCA1 DNA repair and are mutated in the majority
of BRCA1 familial cancers. Thus, BACH1 is a likely candidate for mediating BRCA1 
DNA repair and tumor suppression functions. Although previous evidence using
overexpression of a dominant negative BACH1 has suggested that BACH1 is involved 
in BRCA1-DNA repair function, our results using BACH1 deficient cells provide
direct evidence for involvement of BACH1 in DNA repair as well as for localizing 
BRCA1. Following DNA damage BACH1 is modified by phosphorylation, displays a
BRCA1-like nuclear foci pattern and colocalizes with gamma-H2AX. Given that the
BACH1/BRCA1 complex is unaltered by DNA damage and the intensity of BRCA1 foci is
diminished in BACH1 deficient cells, BACH1 may serve to not only facilitate DNA
repair, but also maintain BRCA1 in DNA damage foci.

PMID: 16462773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2006 Jan;103(1):7-14.

[Molecular mechanisms of oxidative stress response and implications in diseases].

[Article in Japanese]

Igarashi K(1), Dohi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine.

PMID: 16444980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. BMC Cancer. 2006 Jan 24;6:19.

BACH1 Ser919Pro variant and breast cancer risk.

Vahteristo P(1), Yliannala K, Tamminen A, Eerola H, Blomqvist C, Nevanlinna H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland. pia.vahteristo@helsinki.fi

BACKGROUND: BACH1 (BRCA1-associated C-terminal helicase 1; also known as
BRCA1-interacting protein 1, BRIP1) is a helicase protein that interacts in vivo 
with BRCA1, the protein product of one of the major genes for hereditary
predisposition to breast cancer. Previously, two BACH1 germ line missense
mutations have been identified in early-onset breast cancer patients with and
without family history of breast and ovarian cancer. In this study, we aimed to
evaluate whether there are BACH1 genetic variants that contribute to breast
cancer risk in Finland.
METHODS: The BACH1 gene was screened for germ line alterations among probands
from 43 Finnish BRCA1/2 negative breast cancer families. Recently, one of the
observed common variants, Ser-allele of the Ser919Pro polymorphism, was suggested
to associate with an increased breast cancer risk, and was here evaluated in an
independent, large series of 888 unselected breast cancer patients and in 736
healthy controls.
RESULTS: Six BACH1 germ line alterations were observed in the mutation analysis, 
but none of these were found to associate with the cancer phenotype. The
Val193Ile variant that was seen in only one family was further screened in an
independent series of 346 familial breast cancer cases and 183 healthy controls, 
but no additional carriers were observed. Individuals with the BACH1
Ser919-allele were not found to have an increased breast cancer risk when the
Pro/Ser heterozygotes (OR 0.90; 95% CI 0.70-1.16; p = 0.427) or Ser/Ser
homozygotes (OR 1.02; 95% CI 0.76-1.35; p = 0.91) were compared to Pro/Pro
homozygotes, and there was no association of the variant with any breast tumor
characteristics, age at cancer diagnosis, family history of cancer, or survival.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the BACH1 Ser919 is not a breast cancer
predisposition allele in the Finnish study population. Together with previous
studies, our results also indicate that although some rare germ line variants in 
BACH1 may contribute to breast cancer development, the contribution of BACH1
germline alterations to familial breast cancer seems marginal.

PMCID: PMC1368988
PMID: 16430786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2005;15(3):217-28.

Increased dosage of the RUNX1/AML1 gene: a third mode of RUNX leukemia?

Osato M(1), Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Oncology Research Institute, National
University of Singapore. motomi@imcb.a-star.edu.sg

RUNX1/AML1, located on chromosome 21, is a key factor in the generation and
maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells and the gene most frequently implicated
in human leukemias. Chromosome translocations and point mutations are
well-documented genetic alterations in RUNX leukemia (also known as CBF
leukemia). In addition, overdosage or overexpression of RUNX1 is suspected to be 
a third mode of RUNX1 involvement in leukemogenesis. The possibility that this
mode might underlie Down syndrome-related leukemias caused by trisomy of
chromosome 21 is discussed.

PMID: 16390318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Cell. 2005 Dec 29;123(7):1191-8.

Fanconi anemia (cross)linked to DNA repair.

Niedernhofer LJ(1), Lalai AS, Hoeijmakers JH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomedical Genetics, Medical Genetic Center, Department of Cell
Biology and Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, P.O. Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.

Fanconi anemia is characterized by hypersensitivity to DNA interstrand crosslinks
(ICLs) and susceptibility to tumor formation. Despite the identification of
numerous Fanconi anemia (FANC) genes, the mechanism by which proteins encoded by 
these genes protect a cell from DNA interstrand crosslinks remains unclear. The
recent discovery of two DNA helicases that, when defective, cause Fanconi anemia 
tips the balance in favor of the direct involvement of the FANC proteins in DNA
repair and the bypass of DNA lesions.

PMID: 16377561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Cell Cycle. 2006 Jan;5(2):164-7. Epub 2006 Jan 16.

Assessing the link between BACH1 and BRCA1 in the FA pathway.

Cantor SB(1), Andreassen PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Women's Cancers Program, UMASS Memorial Cancer Center, Worcester, Massachusetts
01605, USA. Sharon.Cantor@umassmed.edu

The BACH1 helicase was initially identified by its direct binding to BRCA1 and,
thus, was linked to hereditary breast cancer. More recently, BACH1 was identified
as the gene defective in the J complementation group of Fanconi anemia (FA). FA
is a multigenetic disorder characterized by cellular sensitivity to crosslinkers 
and chromosome instability. Because FANCD2 monoubiquitination is intact in BACH1 
deficient cells, BACH1 appears to act downstream in the FA pathway akin to
BRCA2/FANCD1. Interestingly, while BRCA1 has various interactions with FA
proteins it has not been identified as an FA gene. As the race to uncover the
last few unknown FA complementation groups comes to an end, future work will be
required to uncover how these gene products function to combat the effects of DNA
damage and maintain genomic stability. In particular, it remains elusive whether 
BRCA1 is functionally linked to the FA pathway through its interaction with
BACH1/FANCJ. This review focuses on a model for the connection of BRCA1 to BACH1 
in the FA pathway. We predict that BRCA1 regulates the BACH1 helicase activity to
coordinate the timely displacement of Rad51 from nucleofilaments, promoting error
free repair and ultimately maintaining chromosomal integrity.

PMID: 16357529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Breast Cancer Res. 2005;7(6):R1005-16. Epub 2005 Oct 21.

Mutation analysis of FANCD2, BRIP1/BACH1, LMO4 and SFN in familial breast cancer.

Lewis AG(1), Flanagan J, Marsh A, Pupo GM, Mann G, Spurdle AB, Lindeman GJ,
Visvader JE, Brown MA, Chenevix-Trench G; Kathleen Cuningham Foundation
Consortium for Research into Familial Breast Cancer.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Genetics, Queensland Institute of Medical Research,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. aaronL@qimr.edu.au

INTRODUCTION: Mutations in known predisposition genes account for only about a
third of all multiple-case breast cancer families. We hypothesized that germline 
mutations in FANCD2, BRIP1/BACH1, LMO4 and SFN may account for some of the
unexplained multiple-case breast cancer families.
METHODS: The families used in this study were ascertained through the Kathleen
Cuningham Foundation Consortium for Research into Familial Breast Cancer
(kConFab). Denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) analysis of 
the coding regions of these four genes was conducted in the youngest affected
cases of 30 to 267 non-BRCA1/2 breast cancer families. In addition, a further 399
index cases were also screened for mutations in two functionally significant
regions of the FANCD2 gene and 253 index cases were screened for two previously
reported mutations in BACH1 (p. P47A and p. M299I).
RESULTS: DHPLC analysis of FANCD2 identified six silent exonic variants, and a
large number of intronic variants, which tagged two common haplotypes. One
protein truncating variant was found in BRIP1/BACH1, as well as four missense
variants, a silent change and a variant in the 3' untranslated region. No
missense or splice site mutations were found in LMO4 or SFN. Analysis of the
missense, silent and frameshift variants of FANCD2 and BACH1 in relatives of the 
index cases, and in a panel of controls, found no evidence suggestive of
pathogenicity.
CONCLUSION: There is no evidence that highly penetrant exonic or splice site
mutations in FANCD2, BRIP1/BACH1, LMO4 or SFN contribute to familial breast
cancer. Large scale association studies will be necessary to determine whether
any of the polymorphisms or haplotypes identified in these genes contributes to
breast cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC1410737
PMID: 16280053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cancer Cell. 2005 Sep;8(3):255-65.

BACH1 is critical for homologous recombination and appears to be the Fanconi
anemia gene product FANCJ.

Litman R(1), Peng M, Jin Z, Zhang F, Zhang J, Powell S, Andreassen PR, Cantor SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, 01605, USA.

We showed in this study that cells deficient of the BRCA1-associated BACH1
helicase, also known as BRIP1, failed to elicit homologous recombination (HR)
after DNA double-stranded breaks (DSBs). BACH1-deficient cells were also
sensitive to mitomycin C (MMC) and underwent MMC-induced chromosome instability. 
Moreover, we identified a homozygous nonsense mutation in BACH1 in a FA-J
patient-derived cell line and could not detect BACH1 protein in this cell line.
Expression of wild-type BACH1 in this cell line reduced the accumulation of cells
at G2/M phases following exposure to DNA crosslinkers, a characteristic of
Fanconi anemia (FA) cells. These results support the conclusion that BACH1 is
FANCJ.

PMID: 16153896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Nat Genet. 2005 Sep;37(9):931-3. Epub 2005 Aug 21.

The BRCA1-interacting helicase BRIP1 is deficient in Fanconi anemia.

Levran O(1), Attwooll C, Henry RT, Milton KL, Neveling K, Rio P, Batish SD, Kalb 
R, Velleuer E, Barral S, Ott J, Petrini J, Schindler D, Hanenberg H, Auerbach AD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Human Genetics & Hematology, The Rockefeller University, New
York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2005 Sep;37(9):921-2.

Seven Fanconi anemia-associated proteins (FANCA, FANCB, FANCC, FANCE, FANCF,
FANCG and FANCL) form a nuclear Fanconi anemia core complex that activates the
monoubiquitination of FANCD2, targeting FANCD2 to BRCA1-containing nuclear foci. 
Cells from individuals with Fanconi anemia of complementation groups D1 and J
(FA-D1 and FA-J) have normal FANCD2 ubiquitination. Using genetic mapping,
mutation identification and western-blot data, we identify the defective protein 
in FA-J cells as BRIP1 (also called BACH1), a DNA helicase that is a binding
partner of the breast cancer tumor suppressor BRCA1.

PMID: 16116424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Nat Genet. 2005 Sep;37(9):953-7. Epub 2005 Aug 21.

The BRIP1 helicase functions independently of BRCA1 in the Fanconi anemia pathway
for DNA crosslink repair.

Bridge WL(1), Vandenberg CJ, Franklin RJ, Hiom K.

Author information: 
(1)Protein & Nucleic Acid Chemistry Division, MRC Laboratory of Molecular
Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2005 Sep;37(9):921-2.

BRIP1 (also called BACH1) is a DEAH helicase that interacts with the BRCT domain 
of BRCA1 (refs. 1-6) and has an important role in BRCA1-dependent DNA repair and 
checkpoint functions. We cloned the chicken ortholog of BRIP1 and established a
homozygous knockout in the avian B-cell line DT40. The phenotype of these brip1
mutant cells in response to DNA damage differs from that of brca1 mutant cells
and more closely resembles that of fancc mutant cells, with a profound
sensitivity to the DNA-crosslinking agent cisplatin and acute cell-cycle arrest
in late S-G2 phase. These defects are corrected by expression of human BRIP1
lacking the BRCT-interaction domain. Moreover, in human cells exposed to
mitomycin C, short interfering RNA-mediated knock-down of BRIP1 leads to a
substantial increase in chromosome aberrations, a characteristic phenotype of
cells derived from individuals with Fanconi anemia. Because brip1 mutant cells
are proficient for ubiquitination of FANCD2 protein, our data indicate that BRIP1
has a function in the Fanconi anemia pathway that is independent of BRCA1 and
downstream of FANCD2 activation.

PMID: 16116421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Dec 9;338(1):558-67. Epub 2005 Aug 15.

Heme oxygenase and heme degradation.

Kikuchi G(1), Yoshida T, Noguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

The microsomal heme oxygenase system consists of heme oxygenase (HO) and
NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase, and plays a key role in the physiological
catabolism of heme which yields biliverdin, carbon monoxide, and iron as the
final products. Heme degradation proceeds essentially as a series of
autocatalytic oxidation reactions involving heme bound to HO. Large amounts of HO
proteins from human and rat can now be prepared in truncated soluble form, and
the crystal structures of some HO proteins have been determined. These advances
have greatly facilitated the understanding of the mechanisms of individual steps 
of the HO reaction. HO can be induced in animals by the administration of heme or
several other substances; the induction is shown to involve Bach1, a
translational repressor. The induced HO is assumed to have cytoprotective
effects. An uninducible HO isozyme, HO-2, has been identified, so the authentic
HO is now called HO-1. HOs are also widely distributed in invertebrates, higher
plants, algae, and bacteria, and function in various ways according to the needs 
of individual species.

PMID: 16115609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Biochemistry. 2005 Aug 23;44(33):10941-6.

Structural basis for cell cycle checkpoint control by the BRCA1-CtIP complex.

Varma AK(1), Brown RS, Birrane G, Ladias JA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Laboratory and Macromolecular Crystallography Unit,
Division of Experimental Medicine, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The breast and ovarian tumor suppressor BRCA1 has important functions in cell
cycle checkpoint control and DNA repair. Two tandem BRCA1 C-terminal (BRCT)
domains are essential for the tumor suppression activity of BRCA1 and interact in
a phosphorylation-dependent manner with proteins involved in DNA damage-induced
checkpoint control, including the DNA helicase BACH1 and the CtBP-interacting
protein (CtIP). The crystal structure of the BRCA1 BRCT repeats bound to the
PTRVSpSPVFGAT phosphopeptide corresponding to residues 322-333 of human CtIP was 
determined at 2.5 A resolution. The peptide binds to a cleft formed by the
interface of the two BRCTs in a two-pronged manner, with phospho-Ser327 and
Phe330 anchoring the peptide through extensive contacts with BRCA1 residues.
Several hydrogen bonds and salt bridges that stabilize the BRCA1-BACH1 complex
are missing in the BRCA1-CtIP interaction, offering a structural basis for the
approximately 5-fold lower affinity of BRCA1 for CtIP compared to that of BACH1, 
as determined by isothermal titration calorimetry. Importantly, the side chain of
Arg1775 in the cancer-associated BRCA1 mutation M1775R sterically clashes with
the phenyl ring of CtIP Phe330, disrupting the BRCA1-CtIP interaction. These
results provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the dynamic
selection of target proteins involved in DNA repair and cell cycle control by
BRCA1 and reveal how certain cancer-associated mutations affect these
interactions.

PMID: 16101277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 8;280(27):25450-60. Epub 2005 May 5.

Analysis of the DNA substrate specificity of the human BACH1 helicase associated 
with breast cancer.

Gupta R(1), Sharma S, Sommers JA, Jin Z, Cantor SB, Brosh RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, NIA, National Institutes of Health,
Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

We have investigated the DNA substrate specificity of BACH1 (BRCA1-associated
C-terminal helicase). The importance of various DNA structural elements for
efficient unwinding by purified recombinant BACH1 helicase was examined. The
results indicated that BACH1 preferentially binds and unwinds a forked duplex
substrate compared with a duplex flanked by only one single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) 
tail. In support of its DNA substrate preference, helicase sequestration studies 
revealed that BACH1 can be preferentially trapped by forked duplex molecules.
BACH1 helicase requires a minimal 5 ' ssDNA tail of 15 nucleotides for unwinding 
of conventional duplex DNA substrates; however, the enzyme is able to
catalytically release the third strand of the homologous recombination
intermediate D-loop structure irrespective of DNA tail status. In contrast, BACH1
completely fails to unwind a synthetic Holliday junction structure. Moreover,
BACH1 requires nucleic acid continuity in the 5 ' ssDNA tail of the forked duplex
substrate within six nucleotides of the ssDNA-dsDNA junction to initiate
efficiently DNA unwinding. These studies provide the first detailed information
on the DNA substrate specificity of BACH1 helicase and provide insight to the
types of DNA structures the enzyme is likely to act upon to perform its functions
in DNA repair or recombination.

PMID: 15878853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Free Radic Biol Med. 2005 May 15;38(10):1344-52.

Redox regulation of the transcriptional repressor Bach1.

Ishikawa M(1), Numazawa S, Yoshida T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Toxicology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Showa
University, Tokyo 142-8555, Japan.

Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor of heme oxygenase-1, one of the most
inducible phase 2 proteins. Bach1 binds in conjunction with a small Maf protein
to tandem repeats of the antioxidant response element (ARE) and quenches the
target gene expression. On the other hand, the transactivator Nrf2 binds and
up-regulates the ARE-governed gene expression. By using a sulfhydryl oxidizing
agent, diamide, here we provide evidence which indicates that the Bach1 function 
is regulated by the redox state. Diamide showed restricted Nrf2 nuclear
translocation and ARE-driven reporter activity but reversed the ARE
transcriptional activity suppressed by ectopically expressed Bach1. Substitution 
of the conserved cysteine residue in the DNA binding domain of Bach1 to serine
(C574S mutant) caused a refractory response to the diamide-mediated reactivation 
of the Bach1-suppressed reporter activity. Moreover, diamide induced cytoplasmic 
translocation of the GFP-Bach1 fusion protein but failed to translocate the
fusion protein consisting of the C574S mutant. These data suggest that redox
regulation of Bach1 is an alternative mechanism to induce multiple ARE-governed
genes.

PMID: 15855052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Biochem. 2005 Mar;137(3):287-96.

Dynamic cytoplasmic anchoring of the transcription factor Bach1 by intracellular 
hyaluronic acid binding protein IHABP.

Yamasaki C(1), Tashiro S, Nishito Y, Sueda T, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Chemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Kasumi 1-2-3, Hiroshima 734-8551.

Bach1 functions as a transcriptional repressor of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and the
beta-globin genes. The enhancer regions of these genes contain multiple Maf
recognition elements (MAREs) to which Bach1 can bind. Previous studies have shown
that increased levels of heme and cadmium induce the nuclear export of Bach1,
resulting in cytoplasmic accumulation. By means of a yeast two hybrid screening
using Bach1 as bait, we identified the intracellular hyaluronic acid binding
protein (IHABP) as a potential regulator of Bach1. IHABP is a
microtubule-associated protein that may regulate the organization of the
cytoskeletal network. A series of domain analyses revealed that a region of Bach1
previously implicated in cytoplasmic accumulation was necessary for
IHABP-binding. A C-terminal region of IHABP was necessary for Bach1-binding.
Overexpressed Bach1 colocalized with IHABP in the cytoplasm, forming fiber-like
structures on microtubules. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP)
analysis revealed a dynamic nature of the Bach1-IHABP interaction in living
cells. The repression of HO-1 reporter activity by Bach1 was attenuated by
co-transfecting IHABP in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, the overexpression of
IHABP induced the endogenous HO-1 gene in NIH3T3 cells. The overall results
suggest that IHABP regulates the subcelluar localization of Bach1 in order to
fine-tune transactivation of Bach1 target genes such as HO-1.

PMID: 15809329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2005 Apr;205(4):297-318.

Aquisition, mobilization and utilization of cellular iron and heme: endless
findings and growing evidence of tight regulation.

Taketani S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Kyoto Institute of Technology, Matsugasaki,
Sakyou-ku, Kyoto 606-8585, USA. taketani@ipc.kit.ac.jp

Iron is fastidiously utilized by living cells, since it is an essential element, 
but is toxic in excess. Cells take up iron via a transferrin-transferrin
receptor-dependent endocytotic process. The iron thus taken up is used for
essential biological functions including oxygen transport, electron transfer, and
DNA synthesis. The intracellular level of iron is tightly controlled, through
regulation of the cellular uptake of iron and the sequestering of low molecular
labile iron into the storage protein ferritin. The known proteins of iron
transport and storage, transferrin, transferrin receptor and ferritin, have been 
recently linked with a number of newly identified proteins that are responsible
for inherited diseases of iron metabolisms and play critical roles in the
maintenance of iron homeostasis. These proteins are involved in regulation of
intracellular levels of iron, iron transport, and heme transport and the
oxygen-dependent regulation of gene expression. On the other hand, most iron is
transported into mitochondria and immediately used for the biosynthesis of heme
in erythroid cells. The heme biosynthesis in mitochondria is coupled with the
supply of iron, and the heme, exported from mitochondria, is utilized as
prosthetic groups of hemeproteins. Furthermore, non-erythroid and erythroid cells
possess the different regulatory systems for the biosynthesis of heme; iron
positively regulates the biosynthesis in erythroid cells while heme negatively
regulates it in non-erythroid cells. Because of the toxicity and insolubility of 
heme, the intracellular level of uncommitted heme is maintained at a low
concentration (< 10(-9)M). The influx and efflux of heme also help to prevent
cytotoxicity. Finally, heme-binding transcriptional factors such as Bach1 and
NPAS2 regulate the transcription of several genes involved in the synthesis and
degradation of heme-hemeproteins. The discovery of new molecules related to
disorders of iron and heme metabolism is ascribable to a complete mechanistic
understanding of the cellular network of iron homeostasis. The network of
interactions that link iron and heme metabolisms with functions of cellular
regulation involving oxidative stress and inflammations contributes to new
insights into clinical aspects of disorders.

PMID: 15750326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Genes Cells. 2005 Mar;10(3):277-85.

Effects of genetic ablation of bach1 upon smooth muscle cell proliferation and
atherosclerosis after cuff injury.

Omura S(1), Suzuki H, Toyofuku M, Ozono R, Kohno N, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Chemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor of the cytoprotective enzyme heme
oxygenase-1 (HO-1). Although HO-1 protects against atherosclerosis, the function 
of Bach1 in this process is poorly understood. We isolated peritoneal macrophages
and aortic smooth muscle cells (SMC) from wild-type and bach1-deficient mice.
bach1-Deficient macrophages expressed increased levels of HO-1 and showed
elevated phagocytic activity when incubated with 0.75 microm microspheres. In
SMC, bach1-ablation resulted in increased expression of HO-1 and decreased
proliferation in bromodeoxyuridine incorporation assay as compared with wild-type
cells. The up-regulated phagocytic activity and reduced SMC proliferation of
bach1-deficient cells were not restored by Zinc (II) protoporphyrin IX, an
inhibitor of HO, suggesting that HO-independent mechanisms are also involved in
the regulation of phagocytosis of macrophages and proliferation of SMC by Bach1. 
In wild-type mice, cuff placement around femoral artery caused pronounced intimal
proliferation without affecting the media, thus resulting in intimal to medial
(I/M) volume ratio of 65.6%. bach1-deficient mice had less degree of intimal
growth (I/M ratio of 45.6%). These results indicate that Bach1 plays a critical
role in the regulation of HO-1 expression, macrophage function, SMC proliferation
and neointimal formation. Bach1 may regulate gene expression in these cells
during inflammation and atherogenesis.

PMID: 15743416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):16891-900. Epub 2005 Feb 24.

Bach1 competes with Nrf2 leading to negative regulation of the antioxidant
response element (ARE)-mediated NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 gene expression 
and induction in response to antioxidants.

Dhakshinamoorthy S(1), Jain AK, Bloom DA, Jaiswal AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, 
USA.

The antioxidant response element (ARE) and Nrf2 are known to regulate the
expression and coordinated induction of genes encoding detoxifying enzymes
including NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase1 (NQO1) in response to antioxidants. In 
this report, we demonstrate that overexpression of the transcription factor Bach1
in Hep-G2 cells negatively regulated NQO1 gene expression and induction in
response to antioxidant t-BHQ. Bandshift and supershift assays revealed that
Bach1 binds to the ARE as a heterodimer with small Maf proteins but not as a
homodimer or heterodimer with Nrf2. The transfection and ChIP assays revealed
that Bach1 and Nrf2 competed with each other to regulate ARE-mediated gene
expression. Heme, a negative regulator of Bach1 relieved the Bach1 repression of 
NQO1 gene expression in transfected cells. The transcription of Bach1 and Nrf2
did not change in response to t-BHQ. Immunofluorescence assays and Western blot
analysis revealed that both Bach1 and Nrf2 localized in the cytoplasm and nucleus
of the untreated cells. The treatment of cells with t-BHQ resulted in the nuclear
accumulation of both Bach1 and Nrf2. Interestingly, the t-BHQ-induced nuclear
accumulation of Bach1 was significantly delayed over that of Nrf2. These results 
led to the conclusion that a balance of Nrf2 versus Bach1 inside the nucleus
influences up- or down-regulation of ARE-mediated gene expression. The results
further suggest that antioxidant-induced delayed accumulation of Bach1
contributes to the down-regulation of ARE-regulated genes, presumably to reduce
the antioxidant enzymes to normal levels.

PMID: 15734732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Blood. 2005 Apr 15;105(8):3100-8. Epub 2004 Dec 21.

Transgenic expression of BACH1 transcription factor results in megakaryocytic
impairment.

Toki T(1), Katsuoka F, Kanezaki R, Xu G, Kurotaki H, Sun J, Kamio T, Watanabe S, 
Tandai S, Terui K, Yagihashi S, Komatsu N, Igarashi K, Yamamoto M, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Hirosaki,
Aomori, 036-8563 Japan.

Both nuclear factor erythroid 2 45 kDa subunit (p45) and BTB and CNC homolog 1
(Bach) transcription factors can form dimers with one of the small Maf proteins, 
and these heterodimers bind to the musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene (Maf)
recognition element (MARE). MARE is known to act as a critical cis-regulatory
element of erythroid and megakaryocytic genes. Although detailed analyses of
p45-null mutant mice and small maf compound mutant mice revealed that these
factors are both critical for platelet production, the functional contributions
of Bach1 and the relationship or redundancy between Bach1 and p45 in
megakaryocytes remain to be clarified. To address these issues, we generated
transgenic lines of mice bearing human BACH1 cDNA under the control of the GATA-1
locus hematopoietic regulatory domain. The transgenic mouse lines showed
significant thrombocytopenia associated with impaired maturation of the
megakaryocytes, and they developed myelofibrosis. The megakaryocytes in the
transgenic mice exhibited reduced proplatelet formation, and the modal ploidy
class of megakaryocytes was 2N, indicating the impairment of endomitosis.
Transcription of the p45 target genes was down-regulated and we indeed found that
BACH1 binds to the thromboxane synthase gene, one of the target genes for p45 in 
megakaryocytes. These findings thus provide evidence that BACH1 acts as a
transcriptional repressor in the regulation of MARE-dependent genes in
megakaryocytes.

PMID: 15613547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Nov;24(21):9478-86.

DNA damage-induced cell cycle checkpoint control requires CtIP, a
phosphorylation-dependent binding partner of BRCA1 C-terminal domains.

Yu X(1), Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The BRCA1 C-terminal (BRCT) domain has recently been implicated as a
phospho-protein binding domain. We demonstrate here that a CTBP-interacting
protein CtIP interacts with BRCA1 BRCT domains in a phosphorylation-dependent
manner. The CtIP/BRCA1 complex only exists in G(2) phase and is required for DNA 
damage-induced Chk1 phosphorylation and the G(2)/M transition checkpoint.
However, the CtIP/BRCA1 complex is not required for the damage-induced G(2)
accumulation checkpoint, which is controlled by a separate BRCA1/BACH1 complex.
Taken together, these data not only implicate CtIP as a critical player in cell
cycle checkpoint control but also provide molecular mechanisms by which BRCA1
controls multiple cell cycle transitions after DNA damage.

PMCID: PMC522253
PMID: 15485915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 10;279(50):51769-74. Epub 2004 Oct 1.

Role of Bach-1 in regulation of heme oxygenase-1 in human liver cells: insights
from studies with small interfering RNAS.

Shan Y(1), Lambrecht RW, Ghaziani T, Donohue SE, Bonkovsky HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Pharmacology, the General Clinical Research Center 
of the University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut 06030,
USA. Shan@uchc.edu

Heme oxygenase-1 is an antioxidant defense enzyme that converts heme to
biliverdin, iron, and carbon monoxide. Bach-1 is a bZip protein that forms
heterodimers with small Maf proteins and was reported recently to down-regulate
the HO-1 gene in mice. Using small interfering RNAs targeted to human Bach-1
mRNA, we investigated whether modulation of human hepatic Bach-1 expression by
small interfering (si)RNA technology influences heme oxygenase-1 gene expression.
We found that Bach-1 siRNAs transfected into Huh-7 cells significantly reduced
Bach-1 mRNA and protein levels approximately 80%, compared with non siRNA-treated
cells. In contrast, transfection with the same amounts of nonspecific control
duplexes or LaminB2-duplex did not reduce Bach-1 mRNA or protein levels,
confirming the specificity of Bach-1 siRNA. Expression of the heme oxygenase-1
gene in Bach-1 siRNA-transfected cells was up-regulated 7-fold, compared with
cells without Bach-1 siRNA. The effect of increasing concentrations of heme to
up-regulate levels of heme oxygenase-1 was more pronounced when Bach-1 siRNA was 
present. Taken together, these results indicated that Bach-1 has a specific and
selective ability to repress expression of human hepatic heme oxygenase-1.
Silencing of Bach-1 by siRNAs is a useful method for up-regulating HO-1 gene
expression. Exogenous heme produces additional up-regulation, beyond that
produced by Bach-1 siRNAs, suggesting that heme does not act solely through its
effects on Bach-1.

PMID: 15465821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Nov 5;324(1):77-85.

Heme-dependent up-regulation of the alpha-globin gene expression by
transcriptional repressor Bach1 in erythroid cells.

Tahara T(1), Sun J, Igarashi K, Taketani S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Kyoto Institute of Technology, Kyoto 606-8585,
Japan.

The transcriptional factor Bach1 forms a heterodimer with small Maf family, and
functions as a repressor of the Maf recognition element (MARE) in vivo. To
investigate the involvement of Bach1 in the heme-dependent regulation of the
expression of the alpha-globin gene, human erythroleukemia K562 cells were
cultured with succinylacetone (SA), a heme biosynthetic inhibitor, and the level 
of alpha-globin mRNA was examined. A decrease of alpha-globin mRNA was observed
in SA-treated cells, which was restored by the addition of hemin. The
heme-dependent expression of alpha-globin occurred at the transcriptional level
since the expression of human alpha-globin gene promoter-reporter gene containing
hypersensitive site-40 (HS-40) was decreased when K562 cells were cultured with
SA. Hemin treatment restored the decrease of the promoter activity by SA. The
regulation of the HS-40 activity by heme was dependent on the NF-E2/AP-1 (NA)
site, which is similar to MARE. The NA site-binding activity of Bach1 in K562
increased upon SA-treatment, and the increase was diminished by the addition of
hemin. The transient expression of Bach1 and mutated Bach1 lacking CP motifs
suppressed the HS-40 activity, and cancellation of the repressor activity by
hemin was observed when wild-type Bach1 was expressed. The expression of NF-E2
strengthened the restoration of the Bach1-effect by hemin. Interestingly, nuclear
localization of Bach1 increased when cells were treated with SA, while hemin
induced the nuclear export of Bach1. These results indicated that heme plays an
important role in the induction of alpha-globin gene expression through
disrupting the interaction of Bach1 and the NA site in HS-40 enhancer in
erythroid cells.

PMID: 15464985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2004 Oct;6(5):924-33.

Regulation of heme oxygenase-1 gene transcription: recent advances and highlights
from the International Conference (Uppsala, 2003) on Heme Oxygenase.

Alam J(1), Igarashi K, Immenschuh S, Shibahara S, Tyrrell RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Ochsner Clinic Foundation, New Orleans, LA
70121, USA. jalam@ochsner.org

Recent investigations into the regulation of heme oxygenase-1 gene (hmox-1)
transcription have exposed mechanisms of increasing diversity and complexity
worthy of a gene whose expression is modulated by a seemingly endless array of
physiological, pathophysiological, and nonphysiological agents and conditions.
For instance, contrary to initial and prevalent assumptions that
inducer-dependent gene stimulation is mediated principally by the positive action
of transcription activators, it now appears that such induction may occur
secondarily to deactivation of the repressor protein, Bach1. As a further
complication, heme and cadmium, two potent inducers of the hmox-1 gene, inhibit
Bach1 function by different mechanisms-by inhibition of DNA binding or promotion 
of nuclear export, respectively. Bach1 also plays a role in signal-dependent
hmox-1 gene repression, an increasingly appreciated phenomenon that is manifested
in a species- and cell-specific manner. Although extreme concentrations of the
heme oxygenase-1 protein resulting from the opposing phenomena of gene activation
and repression have physiological consequences, even minor modulation in the
level of this enzyme, as elicited by variations in the length of a dinucleotide
repeat region within the human hmox-1 promoter, may be of clinical relevance.
Finally, mechanistic diversity is also apparent in the type and combination of
protein kinase-dependent, signal transduction pathways used during hmox-1 gene
activation.

PMID: 15345152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2004 Oct;6(5):819-24.

Why heme needs to be degraded to iron, biliverdin IXalpha, and carbon monoxide?

Sassa S.

A large amount of hemoglobin is degraded daily to heme and globin and is
replenished by biosynthesis in the bone marrow erythroblasts. "Free heme" can be 
dissociated from apohemoglobin in vitro and, conversely, native hemoglobin can be
renatured from them. Then why does heme need to be degraded to iron, biliverdin
IXalpha, and carbon monoxide in vivo? Free heme, i.e., a protein-unbound heme,
exists in cells at a very minute concentration and exerts regulatory functions
such as the repression of nonspecific delta-aminolevulinate synthase expression
and the induction of microsomal heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). The latter gene
expression occurs by way of free heme-mediated derepression of Bach1, a mammalian
heme-responsive transcription factor that suppresses the activation of the HO-1
gene. All these events occur at free heme concentrations below 1 microM. In
contrast, free heme concentration greater than 1 microM can be toxic because it
catalyzes the production of reactive oxygen species. To cope with this problem,
the body is equipped with various defense mechanisms against high free heme
concentrations. HO is one of the major players in these mechanisms, and it
catabolizes free heme to iron, biliverdin IXalpha, and carbon monoxide. These
three metabolites of heme by HO reactions have additional important functions and
are involved in various critical cellular events. Thus, the breakdown of heme to 
smaller elements has its own significance in essential cellular metabolism.

PMID: 15345141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Aug;24(16):7130-9.

Oxidative stress sensor Keap1 functions as an adaptor for Cul3-based E3 ligase to
regulate proteasomal degradation of Nrf2.

Kobayashi A(1), Kang MI, Okawa H, Ohtsuji M, Zenke Y, Chiba T, Igarashi K,
Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, and JST-ERATO Environmental Response Project, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba 305-8575, Japan.

Transcription factor Nrf2 is a major regulator of genes encoding phase 2
detoxifying enzymes and antioxidant stress proteins in response to electrophilic 
agents and oxidative stress. In the absence of such stimuli, Nrf2 is inactive
owing to its cytoplasmic retention by Keap1 and rapid degradation through the
proteasome system. We examined the contribution of Keap1 to the rapid turnover of
Nrf2 (half-life of less than 20 min) and found that a direct association between 
Keap1 and Nrf2 is required for Nrf2 degradation. In a series of domain function
analyses of Keap1, we found that both the BTB and intervening-region (IVR)
domains are crucial for Nrf2 degradation, implying that these two domains act to 
recruit ubiquitin-proteasome factors. Indeed, Cullin 3 (Cul3), a subunit of the
E3 ligase complex, was found to interact specifically with Keap1 in vivo. Keap1
associates with the N-terminal region of Cul3 through the IVR domain and promotes
the ubiquitination of Nrf2 in cooperation with the Cul3-Roc1 complex. These
results thus provide solid evidence that Keap1 functions as an adaptor of
Cul3-based E3 ligase. To our knowledge, Nrf2 and Keap1 are the first reported
mammalian substrate and adaptor, respectively, of the Cul3-based E3 ligase
system.

PMCID: PMC479737
PMID: 15282312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Structure. 2004 Jul;12(7):1137-46.

Structural basis of BACH1 phosphopeptide recognition by BRCA1 tandem BRCT
domains.

Botuyan MV(1), Nominé Y, Yu X, Juranic N, Macura S, Chen J, Mer G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, 
200 First Street S.W., Rochester, MN 55905 USA.

BRCT tandem domains, found in many proteins involved in DNA damage checkpoint and
DNA repair pathways, were recently shown to be phosphopeptide binding motifs.
Using solution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and mutational
analysis, we have characterized the interaction of BRCA1-BRCT domains with a
phosphoserine-containing peptide derived from the DNA repair helicase BACH1. We
show that a phenylalanine in the +3 position from the phosphoserine of BACH1 is
bound to a conserved hydrophobic pocket formed between the two BRCT domains and
that recognition of the phosphate group is mediated by lysine and serine side
chains from the amino-terminal BRCT domain. Mutations that prevent phosphopeptide
binding abolish BRCA1 function in DNA damage-induced checkpoint control. Our NMR 
data also reveal a dynamic interaction between BRCA1-BRCT and BACH1, where the
bound phosphopeptide exists as an equilibrium of two conformations and where
BRCA1-BRCT undergoes a transition to a more rigid conformation upon peptide
binding.

PMCID: PMC3652423
PMID: 15242590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Jul;271(14):3076-84.

Expression of heme oxygenase-1 is repressed by interferon-gamma and induced by
hypoxia in human retinal pigment epithelial cells.

Udono-Fujimori R(1), Takahashi K, Takeda K, Furuyama K, Kaneko K, Takahashi S,
Tamai M, Shibahara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Applied Physiology, Tohoku University
School of Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.

The retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) is essential for maintenance of
photoreceptors and normally functions under conditions enriched with reactive
oxygen species. RPE therefore expresses various defense enzymes against oxidative
stress, including heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). HO-1 catalyzes heme breakdown to
release iron, carbon monoxide, and biliverdin, which is reduced to bilirubin, a
potent radical scavenger. HO-1 expression is induced by various environmental
factors, which has been established as a defense mechanism. To explore the
hypothesis that the expression level of HO-1 is reduced in those RPE cells under 
certain conditions, we analyzed the effects of interferon-gamma and hypoxia, each
of which represses the expression of HO-1 mRNA in other types of human cells.
Expression levels of HO-1 mRNA were reduced by interferon-gamma in two human RPE 
cell lines, D407 and ARPE-19, which was consistently associated with the
induction of mRNA for Bach1, a transcriptional repressor for the HO-1 gene. On
the other hand, HO-1 and Bach1 mRNAs were induced by hypoxia in D407 cells but
remained unchanged in ARPE-19 cells, suggesting that Bach1 is not a sole
regulator for HO-1 expression. The hypoxia-mediated induction of HO-1 mRNA in
D407 cells depends on gene transcription and protein synthesis, as judged by the 
effects of their inhibitors. The half-life of HO-1 mRNA did not change during
hypoxia. Thus, hypoxia may increase transcription of the HO-1 gene through a
certain protein factor in RPE cells. These results indicate that RPE cells
maintain retinal homeostasis by repressing or inducing the expression of HO-1,
depending on the microenvironment.

PMID: 15233805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Zhongguo Wei Zhong Bing Ji Jiu Yi Xue. 2004 Jun;16(6):338-44.

[Analysis of the early and late gene expression of lipopolysaccharide activated
macrophages by cDNA microarray].

[Article in Chinese]

Li CH(1), Zhang AQ, Liu JC, Zang CB, Chen MY, Xu YX, Huang ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Institute of General Surgery, General
Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100853, China. lichh@301hospital.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To study the early and late changes in mRNA expression in macrophages 
in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) with a cDNA microarray approach using the
Clontech Atlas microarray.
METHODS: mRNA was isolated from unstimulated control and LPS stimulated murine
peritoneal macrophages at 2 hours and 24 hours poststimulation, converted to
(33)P radiolabeled cDNA, and hybridized to mouse array membranes.
RESULTS: In macrophages being stimulated for 2 hours, 69 out of 1 176 genes were 
found to differ by over 3-fold compared with the control. Among them 44 genes
were up-regulated and 25 genes were down-regulated. In macrophages stimulated for
24 hours, 11 genes were up-regulated and 26 genes were down-regulated compared
with the control. Only 8 genes were identified both at 2 hours and at 24 hours
poststimulation. The expressions of many genes encoding transcription factor,
cytokines, cell signaling modulators and apoptosis associated proteins were found
to have changed. Some genes that were not previously linked to this model, such
as bric-a-brac (BTB) and cap-n-collar(CNC) homology 1(BACH1), early growth
response protein 2 (EGR2), E47 interaction protein 1 (EIP1), Ngfi-A binding
protein 2 (NAB2), myeloblastosis oncogene-like protein (MYBL2), neurofibromatosis
1 (NF1), ciliarry neurotropic factor (CNTF) and semaphorin 4A (Sema4A).
CONCLUSION: This study has allowed us to identify genes that may potentially be
regulated by LPS at early and late phase in macrophages. These may contribute to 
better understanding of the mechanism underlying LPS or bacteria induced
inflammatory and immune response following infection and trauma.

PMID: 15182443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. EMBO J. 2004 Jul 7;23(13):2544-53. Epub 2004 Jun 3.

Heme regulates gene expression by triggering Crm1-dependent nuclear export of
Bach1.

Suzuki H(1), Tashiro S, Hira S, Sun J, Yamazaki C, Zenke Y, Ikeda-Saito M,
Yoshida M, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Chemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 2014 Aug 1;33(15):1727.

Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor of heme oxygenase-1 and beta-globin genes,
both of which are known to be transcriptionally induced by heme. To test the
hypothesis that heme regulates the activity of Bach1, we expressed wild type and 
mutated versions of Bach1 together with or without its heterodimer partner MafK
in human 293T and GM02063 cells and examined their subcellular localization.
Inhibition of heme synthesis enhanced the nuclear accumulation of Bach1, whereas 
treating cells with hemin resulted in nuclear exclusion of Bach1. While the
cadmium-inducible nuclear export signal (NES) of Bach1 was dispensable for the
heme response, a region containing two of the heme-binding motifs was found to be
critical for the heme-induced nuclear exclusion. This region functioned as a
heme-regulated NES dependent on the exporter Crm1. These results extend the
regulatory roles for heme in protein sorting, and suggest that Bach1 transduces
metabolic activity into gene expression.

PMCID: PMC449764
PMID: 15175654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2004 Jun;11(6):512-8. Epub 2004 May 9.

Structure and mechanism of BRCA1 BRCT domain recognition of phosphorylated BACH1 
with implications for cancer.

Clapperton JA(1), Manke IA, Lowery DM, Ho T, Haire LF, Yaffe MB, Smerdon SJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Medical Research, Division of Protein Structure, The
Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2004 Jun;11(6):489.

Germline mutations in the BRCA1 tumor suppressor gene often result in a
significant increase in susceptibility to breast and ovarian cancers. Although
the molecular basis of their effects remains largely obscure, many mutations are 
known to target the highly conserved C-terminal BRCT repeats that function as a
phosphoserine/phosphothreonine-binding module. We report the X-ray crystal
structure at a resolution of 1.85 A of the BRCA1 tandem BRCT domains in complex
with a phosphorylated peptide representing the minimal interacting region of the 
DEAH-box helicase BACH1. The structure reveals the determinants of this novel
class of BRCA1 binding events. We show that a subset of disease-linked mutations 
act through specific disruption of phospho-dependent BRCA1 interactions rather
than through gross structural perturbation of the tandem BRCT domains.

PMID: 15133502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mol Cell. 2004 May 7;14(3):405-12.

Structure of the BRCT repeats of BRCA1 bound to a BACH1 phosphopeptide:
implications for signaling.

Shiozaki EN(1), Gu L, Yan N, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Lewis Thomas Laboratory, Princeton
University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.

The recognition of the phosphorylated BACH1 helicase by the BRCA1 C-terminal
(BRCT) repeats is important to the tumor suppressor function of BRCA1. Here we
report the crystal structure of the BRCT repeats of human BRCA1 bound to a
phosphorylated BACH1 peptide at 2.3 A resolution. The phosphorylated serine 990
and phenylalanine 993 of BACH1 anchor the binding to BRCA1 through specific
interactions with a surface cleft at the junction of the two BRCT repeats. This
surface cleft is highly conserved in BRCA1 across species, suggesting an
evolutionarily conserved function of phosphopeptide recognition. Importantly,
conserved amino acids critical for BACH1 binding are frequently targeted for
missense mutations in breast cancer. These mutations greatly diminish the ability
of BRCA1 to interact with the phosphorylated BACH1 peptide. Additional structural
analysis revealed significant implications for understanding the function of the 
BRCT family of proteins in DNA damage and repair signaling.

PMID: 15125843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. BMC Cancer. 2004 Mar 12;4:9.

Kin-cohort estimates for familial breast cancer risk in relation to variants in
DNA base excision repair, BRCA1 interacting and growth factor genes.

Sigurdson AJ(1), Hauptmann M, Chatterjee N, Alexander BH, Doody MM, Rutter JL,
Struewing JP.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Epidemiology Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics,
National Cancer Institute, NIH, DHHS, 6120 Executive Boulevard, Bethesda,
Maryland, 20892-7238, USA. sigurdsa@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Subtle functional deficiencies in highly conserved DNA repair or
growth regulatory processes resulting from polymorphic variation may increase
genetic susceptibility to breast cancer. Polymorphisms in DNA repair genes can
impact protein function leading to genomic instability facilitated by growth
stimulation and increased cancer risk. Thus, 19 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in eight genes involved in base excision repair (XRCC1, APEX, POLD1),
BRCA1 protein interaction (BRIP1, ZNF350, BRCA2), and growth regulation (TGFss1, 
IGFBP3) were evaluated.
METHODS: Genomic DNA samples were used in Taqman 5'-nuclease assays for most
SNPs. Breast cancer risk to ages 50 and 70 were estimated using the kin-cohort
method in which genotypes of relatives are inferred based on the known genotype
of the index subject and Mendelian inheritance patterns. Family cancer history
data was collected from a series of genotyped breast cancer cases (N = 748)
identified within a cohort of female US radiologic technologists. Among 2,430
female first-degree relatives of cases, 190 breast cancers were reported.
RESULTS: Genotypes associated with increased risk were: XRCC1 R194W (WW and RW
vs. RR, cumulative risk up to age 70, risk ratio (RR) = 2.3; 95% CI 1.3-3.8);
XRCC1 R399Q (QQ vs. RR, cumulative risk up to age 70, RR = 1.9; 1.1-3.9); and
BRIP1 (or BACH1) P919S (SS vs. PP, cumulative risk up to age 50, RR = 6.9;
1.6-29.3). The risk for those heterozygous for BRCA2 N372H and APEX D148E were
significantly lower than risks for homozygotes of either allele, and these were
the only two results that remained significant after adjusting for multiple
comparisons. No associations with breast cancer were observed for: APEX Q51H;
XRCC1 R280H; IGFPB3 -202A>C; TGFss1 L10P, P25R, and T263I; BRCA2 N289H and
T1915M; BRIP1 -64A>C; and ZNF350 (or ZBRK1) 1845C>T, L66P, R501S, and S472P.
CONCLUSION: Some variants in genes within the base-excision repair pathway
(XRCC1) and BRCA1 interacting proteins (BRIP1) may play a role as low penetrance 
breast cancer risk alleles. Previous association studies of breast cancer and
BRCA2 N372H and functional observations for APEX D148E ran counter to our
findings of decreased risks. Due to the many comparisons, cautious interpretation
and replication of these relationships are warranted.

PMCID: PMC408462
PMID: 15113441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Neural Transm Suppl. 2003;(67):193-205.

Overexpression of transcription factor BACH1 in fetal Down syndrome brain.

Ferrando-Miguel R(1), Cheon MS, Yang JW, Lubec G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Vienna, Austria.

There is a series of about 12 transcription factors expressed on chromosome 21.
These transcription factors (TFs) are major candidates for playing a pathogenetic
role for the abnormal wiring of the brain in fetal Down Syndrome (DS) as
approximately 5,000 TFs are developmentally involved in the complex architecture 
of the human brain. TF derangement in DS has been already reported and we decided
to contribute to the problem by studying four TFs encoded on chromosome 21 in
fetal DS brain. We used fetal cortex of 8 DS fetuses and 6 controls (females)
from the 18-19th week of gestation. Brain homogenates were subject to
immunoblotting using goat-anti-BACH1, rabbit anti-heme oxygenase 1 (HO1), rabbit 
anti-ERG, rabbit anti-RUNX1 and goat anti-SIM2 l. Antibodies against beta-actin
were used to normalise cell loss and antibodies against neuron-specific enolase
were used to compensate neuronal loss. BACH1 was significantly overexpressed in
fetal DS (p < 0.008) as compared to controls whereas RUNX1 and ERG proteins were 
comparable between groups, and SIM2 l was not detectable in any specimen. BACH1
was even significantly increased in the DS panel when normalised versus the
housekeeping protein beta-actin (p < 0.01) or the neuron specific enolase (p <
0.01). HO-1 was found comparable between groups. BACH1, a member of the family of
BTB-basic leucine zipper transcription factors, regulates gene expression through
the NF-E2 site. More specifically, BACH1 suppresses expression of HO1. Increased 
BACH1, however, did not lead to decreased HO1, which would have explained
oxidative stress observed in fetal DS.

PMID: 15068251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Neural Transm Suppl. 2003;(67):39-49.

Aberrant protein expression of transcription factors BACH1 and ERG, both encoded 
on chromosome 21, in brains of patients with Down syndrome and Alzheimer's
disease.

Shim KS(1), Ferrando-Miguel R, Lubec G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Down syndrome (DS; trisomy 21) is a genetic disorder associated with early mental
retardation and patients inevitably develop Alzheimer's disease (AD)-like
neuropathological changes. The molecular defects underlying the DS-phenotype may 
be due to overexpression of genes encoded on chromosome 21. This so-called gene
dosage hypothesis is still controversial and demands systematic work on protein
expression. A series of transcription factors (TF) are encoded on chromosome 21
and are considered to play a pathogenetic role in DS. We therefore decided to
study brain expression of TF encoded on chromosome 21 in patients with DS and AD 
compared to controls: Frontal cortex of 6 male DS patients, 6 male patients with 
AD and 6 male controls were used for the experiments. Immunoblotting was used to 
determine protein levels of TF BACH1, ERG, SIM2 and RUNX1. SIM2 and RUNX1 were
comparable between groups, while BACH1 was significantly reduced in DS, and ERG
was increased in DS and AD as compared to controls. These findings may indicate
that DS pathogenesis cannot be simply explained by the gene dosage effect
hypothesis and that results of ERG expression in DS were paralleling those in AD 
probably reflecting a common pathogenetic mechanism possibly explaining why all
DS patients develop AD like neuropathology from the fourth decade. We conclude
that TF derangement is not only due to the process of neurodegeneration and
propose that TFs BACH1 and ERG play a role for the development of AD-like
neuropathology in DS and pathogenesis of AD per se and the manifold increase of
ERG in both disorders may form a pivotal pathogenetic link.

PMID: 15068237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Genetics. 2004 Jan;166(1):33-42.

Chl1p, a DNA helicase-like protein in budding yeast, functions in
sister-chromatid cohesion.

Skibbens RV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania 
18015, USA. rvs3@leigh.edu

From the time of DNA replication until anaphase onset, sister chromatids remain
tightly paired along their length. Ctf7p/Eco1p is essential to establish
sister-chromatid pairing during S-phase and associates with DNA replication
components. DNA helicases precede the DNA replication fork and thus will first
encounter chromatin sites destined for cohesion. In this study, I provide the
first evidence that a DNA helicase is required for proper sister-chromatid
cohesion. Characterizations of chl1 mutant cells reveal that CHL1 interacts
genetically with both CTF7/ECO1 and CTF18/CHL12, two genes that function in
sister-chromatid cohesion. Consistent with genetic interactions, Chl1p physically
associates with Ctf7p/Eco1p both in vivo and in vitro. Finally, a functional
assay reveals that Chl1p is critical for sister-chromatid cohesion. Within the
budding yeast genome, Chl1p exhibits the highest degree of sequence similarity to
human CHL1 isoforms and BACH1. Previous studies revealed that human CHLR1
exhibits DNA helicase-like activities and that BACH1 is a helicase-like protein
that associates with the tumor suppressor BRCA1 to maintain genome integrity. Our
findings document a novel role for Chl1p in sister-chromatid cohesion and provide
new insights into the possible mechanisms through which DNA helicases may
contribute to cancer progression when mutated.

PMCID: PMC1470669
PMID: 15020404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Feb 24;101(8):2357-62.

The BRCA1-associated protein BACH1 is a DNA helicase targeted by clinically
relevant inactivating mutations.

Cantor S(1), Drapkin R, Zhang F, Lin Y, Han J, Pamidi S, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Lazare Research Building, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Apr 27;101(17):6834.

BACH1 is a nuclear protein that directly interacts with the highly conserved,
C-terminal BRCT repeats of the tumor suppressor, BRCA1. Mutations within the BRCT
repeats disrupt the interaction between BRCA1 and BACH1, lead to defects in DNA
repair, and result in breast and ovarian cancer. BACH1 is necessary for efficient
double-strand break repair in a manner that depends on its association with
BRCA1. Moreover, some women with early-onset breast cancer and no abnormalities
in either BRCA1 or BRCA2 carry germline BACH1 coding sequence changes, suggesting
that abnormal BACH1 function contributes to tumor induction. Here, we show that
BACH1 is both a DNA-dependent ATPase and a 5'-to-3' DNA helicase. In two patients
with early-onset breast cancer who carry distinct germline BACH1 coding sequence 
changes, the resulting proteins are defective in helicase activity, indicating
that these sequence changes disrupt protein function. These results reinforce the
notion that mutant BACH1 participates in breast cancer development.

PMCID: PMC356955
PMID: 14983014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Feb 10;101(6):1461-6. Epub 2004 Jan 27.

Heme regulates the dynamic exchange of Bach1 and NF-E2-related factors in the Maf
transcription factor network.

Sun J(1), Brand M, Zenke Y, Tashiro S, Groudine M, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Chemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Kasumi 1-2-3, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Small Maf proteins serve as dual-function transcription factors through an
exchange of their heterodimerization partners. For example, as heterodimers with 
hematopoietic cell-specific p45 NF-E2 or NF-E2-related factors (Nrf), they
activate the beta-globin or antioxidative stress enzyme heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1)
genes, respectively. In contrast, together with Bach1, they repress these same
genes. However, the signals leading to this partner exchange are not known. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in NIH 3T3 cells, we show that heme, an
inducer of ho-1, promotes displacement of Bach1 from the MafK-occupied ho-1
enhancers, which is followed by Nrf2 binding to these elements. Whereas histone
H3 at the ho-1 enhancers and promoter is hyperacetylated irrespective of gene
activity, exposure of cells to heme results in de novo hyperacetylation and
hypermethylation of histone H3 in the transcribed region. These data indicate
that, under normal conditions, the chromatin structure of ho-1 is in a
preactivation state, but transcription is repressed by Bach1. Heme induces
switching of Maf dimers, resulting in ho-1 expression. Heme also promotes
displacement of Bach1 from the beta-globin locus control region without affecting
MafK binding in murine erythroleukemia cells. Thus, heme functions as a signaling
molecule for gene expression in higher eukaryotes.

PMCID: PMC341742
PMID: 14747657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2004 Jan;11(1):73-80. Epub 2003 Dec 29.

Dynamic changes in transcription factor complexes during erythroid
differentiation revealed by quantitative proteomics.

Brand M(1), Ranish JA, Kummer NT, Hamilton J, Igarashi K, Francastel C, Chi TH,
Crabtree GR, Aebersold R, Groudine M.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109, USA.

During erythroid differentiation, beta-globin gene expression is regulated by the
locus control region (LCR). The transcription factor NF-E2p18/MafK binds within
this region and is essential for beta-globin expression in murine erythroleukemia
(MEL) cells. Here we use the isotope-coded affinity tag (ICAT) technique of
quantitative mass spectrometry to compare proteins interacting with NF-E2p18/MafK
during differentiation. Our results define MafK as a 'dual-function' molecule
that shifts from a repressive to an activating mode during erythroid
differentiation. The exchange of MafK dimerization partner from Bach1 to NF-E2p45
is a key step in the switch from the repressed to the active state. This shift is
associated with changes in the interaction of MafK with co-repressors and
co-activators. Thus, our results suggest that in addition to its role as a
cis-acting activator of beta-globin gene expression in differentiated erythroid
cells, the LCR also promotes an active repression of beta-globin transcription in
committed cells before terminal differentiation.

PMID: 14718926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 13;279(7):5480-7. Epub 2003 Dec 1.

Heme positively regulates the expression of beta-globin at the locus control
region via the transcriptional factor Bach1 in erythroid cells.

Tahara T(1), Sun J, Nakanishi K, Yamamoto M, Mori H, Saito T, Fujita H, Igarashi 
K, Taketani S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Kyoto Institute of Technology, Kyoto 606-8585,
Japan.

The transcription factor Bach1 heterodimerizes with small Maf proteins to repress
Maf recognition element (MARE)-dependent gene expression. The repressor activity 
of Bach1 is inhibited by the direct binding of heme. To investigate the
involvement of Bach1 in the heme-dependent regulation of the expression of the
beta-globin gene, mouse erythroleukemia (MEL) cells were cultured with
succinylacetone (SA), a specific inhibitor of heme biosynthesis, and the level of
beta-globin mRNA was examined. A marked decrease of beta-globin mRNA in
SA-treated cells was observed, and this decrease was reversed by the addition of 
hemin. An iron chelator, desferrioxamine, also lowered the level of beta-globin
mRNA. The heme-dependent expression of beta-globin is a transcriptional event
since the expression of the human beta-globin gene promoter-reporter gene
containing the microlocus control region (microLCR) was inhibited when human
erythroleukemia K562 cells and MEL cells were cultured with SA. Hemin treatment
restored the decrease in promoter activity caused by SA. The control of the
microLCR-beta-globin promoter reporter gene by heme was dependent on DNase
I-hypersensitive site 2 (HS2), which contains MARE. The MARE binding activity of 
Bach1 in K562 and MEL cells increased upon SA treatment, and the increase was
diminished by the treatment with hemin. Transient expression of Bach1 suppressed 
the microLCR activity, and this repressor activity was cancelled by treatment
with hemin. The expression of a mutated Bach1 lacking heme-binding sites led to a
loss in the heme responsiveness of the microLCR. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that Bach1 bound to the MARE of HS2
increased by the treatment of MEL cells with SA, and this was cancelled by hemin.
We propose that heme positively regulates the beta-globin gene expression by
blocking the interaction of Bach1 with the MARE in the LCR.

PMID: 14660636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2003 Aug;200(4):167-86.

The heme oxygenase dilemma in cellular homeostasis: new insights for the feedback
regulation of heme catabolism.

Shibahara S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Applied Physiology, Tohoku University
School of Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575 Japan.
shibahar@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

Heme must be synthesized and degraded within an individual nucleated cell. Heme
degradation is catalyzed by the two isozymes of heme oxygenase, heme oxygenase-1 
(HO-1) and HO-2, eventually yielding biliverdin/bilirubin, CO, and iron. These
products possess important physiological roles but are potentially toxic to
cells. Characteristically, human HO-1 contains no Cys residues, whereas HO-2
contains the potential heme-binding motifs of the Cys-Pro dipeptide. Expression
of HO-1 is inducible or repressible, depending on cell types or cellular
microenvironments, but expression levels of HO-2 are fairly constant. Thus, the
main regulation of heme catabolism is a problem of the balance between induction 
and repression of HO-1. Notably, HO-1 expression is induced by heme in all
mammalian cells examined, but is repressed by hypoxia in certain types of
cultured human cells. The recent discovery of Bach1 as a heme-regulated and
hypoxia-inducible repressor for transcription of the HO-1 gene has provided a
missing link in the feedback control of heme catabolism. On the other hand, the
human HO-1 gene promoter contains the (GT)n repeat polymorphism and a single
nucleotide polymorphism (-427A --> T), both of which may contribute to
fine-tuning of the transcription. Importantly, long (GT)n alleles are associated 
with susceptibility to smoking-induced emphysema or coronary artery disease, but 
may provide with resistance to cerebral malaria. The latter finding suggests a
novel therapeutic strategy with inhibitors of HO-1 for the treatment of cerebral 
malaria. We discuss the potential regulatory role of Bach1 and HO-2 in heme
catabolism and update the understanding of the regulation of HO-1 expression.

PMID: 14580148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 26;278(52):52914-8. Epub 2003 Oct 24.

Phosphopeptide binding specificities of BRCA1 COOH-terminal (BRCT) domains.

Rodriguez M(1), Yu X, Chen J, Songyang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Protein phosphorylation by protein kinases may generate docking sites for other
proteins. It thus allows the assembly of signaling complexes in response to
kinase activation. Several protein domains that bind phosphoserine or
phosphothreonine residues have been identified, including the 14-3-3, PIN1, FHA, 
KIX, WD-40 domain, and polo box (Yaffe, M. B., and Elia, A. E. (2001) Curr. Opin.
Cell Biol. 13, 131-138; Elia, A. E., Cantley, L. C., and Yaffe, M. B. (2003)
Science 299, 1228-1231). The BRCA1 COOH-terminal (BRCT) domains are protein
modules found in many proteins that regulate DNA damage responses (Koonin, E. V.,
Altschul, S. F., and Bork, P. (1996) Nat. Genet. 13, 266-268). Whether BRCT
domains can mediate phosphorylation-dependent interactions has not been
systematically investigated. We report here that the BRCT domains also recognize 
phosphopeptides. Oriented peptide library analysis indicated that the BRCT
domains from BRCA1, MDC1, BARD1, and DNA Ligase IV preferred distinct
phosphoserine-containing peptides. In addition, the interaction between BRCA1 and
the BRCT binding motif of BACH1 was required for BACH1 checkpoint activity.
Furthermore, BRCT domains of the yeast DNA repair protein Rad9 could bind
phosphopeptides, suggesting that the BRCT domains represent a class of ancient
phosphopeptide-binding modules. Potential targets of BRCT domains were identified
through data base search. Structural analysis of BRCA1 BRCT repeats also
predicted conserved residues that may form the phosphopeptide-binding pocket.
Thus, the BRCT repeats are a new family of phosphopeptide-binding domains in DNA 
damage responses.

PMID: 14578343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Science. 2003 Oct 24;302(5645):639-42.

The BRCT domain is a phospho-protein binding domain.

Yu X(1), Chini CC, He M, Mer G, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2003 Oct 24;302(5645):579-80.

The carboxyl-terminal domain (BRCT) of the Breast Cancer Gene 1 (BRCA1) protein
is an evolutionarily conserved module that exists in a large number of proteins
from prokaryotes to eukaryotes. Although most BRCT domain-containing proteins
participate in DNA-damage checkpoint or DNA-repair pathways, or both, the
function of the BRCT domain is not fully understood. We show that the BRCA1 BRCT 
domain directly interacts with phosphorylated BRCA1-Associated Carboxyl-terminal 
Helicase (BACH1). This specific interaction between BRCA1 and phosphorylated
BACH1 is cell cycle regulated and is required for DNA damage-induced checkpoint
control during the transition from G2 to M phase of the cell cycle. Further, we
show that two other BRCT domains interact with their respective physiological
partners in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Thirteen additional BRCT domains 
also preferentially bind phospho-peptides rather than nonphosphorylated control
peptides. These data imply that the BRCT domain is a phospho-protein binding
domain involved in cell cycle control.

PMID: 14576433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. DNA Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;22(8):479-87.

Nrf2 regulates thromboxane synthase gene expression in human lung cells.

Yaekashiwa M(1), Wang LH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Texas-Houston, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Thromboxane A(2) synthase (TXAS) converts prostaglandin H(2) to thromboxane A(2),
a potent inducer of vaso-constriction and platelet aggregation. TXAS expression
level is cell type preferential; high in hematopoietic cells and low in
nonhematopoietic cells. We previously showed that p45 NF-E2 activated the TXAS
promoter in hematopoietic cells via binding to the nucleotides -86/-77 from the
transcriptional start site [Yaekashiwa and Wang (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277,
22497-22508]. We reported here that, by transient transfection analysis, this
region was also critical for TXAS trans-activation in the A549 and WI-38 lung
cells. Mutation of the NF-E2 site greatly reduced TXAS promoter activity in these
two types of cells. Using stably transfected A549 cells, we showed that an NF-E2 
mutation retained only 0.25% of the wild-type promoter activity. Ecotopic
expression of NF-E2 related factors showed that Nrf2, but not Nrf1, Nrf3, or
Bach1, activated TXAS promoter in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay using the stably transfected A549 cells demonstrated
that Nrf2 bound the TXAS NF-E2 site in vivo. TXAS gene thus utilizes the same
cis-acting element but different trans-acting factors to confer cell-preferential
expression. We also showed that forced expression of p300 upregulated TXAS gene
in a dose-dependent manner. Mutation of NF-E2 site, but not TATA or initiator
site, abolished the p300-mediated activation of TXAS gene.

PMID: 14565864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 5;278(49):49246-53. Epub 2003 Sep 22.

Cadmium induces nuclear export of Bach1, a transcriptional repressor of heme
oxygenase-1 gene.

Suzuki H(1), Tashiro S, Sun J, Doi H, Satomi S, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Chemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

The export of certain nuclear proteins is involved in the regulation of various
nuclear functions, including transcription. In some cases, the export of target
proteins is induced upon environmental or cellular cues, resulting in conditional
gene expression. The small Maf proteins appear to be critical regulators of heme 
oxygenase (HO)-1, an anti-oxidant defense enzyme that degrades heme into iron,
carbon monoxide, and biliverdin. Although ho-1 is repressed by Bach1/small Maf
heterodimers, it is activated by Nrf2/small Maf heterodimers, indicating that
Bach1 and Nrf2 compete with each other. We anticipated that the nuclear
concentration of Bach1 might be regulated to ensure that the entire system
effectively responds to various stimuli. We carried out detailed domain analysis 
of Bach1 in an effort to understand how various inducers of HO-1 inactivate
Bach1. We show here that cadmium, a strong inducer of HO-1, activates the nuclear
export of Bach1. This cadmium-induced export of Bach1 was mediated in trans by
its C-terminal region that is conserved between Bach1 and Bach2. The nuclear
export of Bach2 was also induced by cadmium, indicating that the cadmium
responsibility is shared between Bach1 and Bach2. The nuclear export of Bach1 was
dependent on Crm1/Exportin-1 as well as the extracellular signal-regulated
kinase-1/2 (ERK1/2) activity. These results indicate that the nuclear export of
Bach1 constitutes an important regulatory mechanism to relieve the Bach1-mediated
repression of genes such as ho-1.

PMID: 14504288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Leukemia. 2003 Sep;17(9):1891-900.

Novel potential ALL low-risk markers revealed by gene expression profiling with
new high-throughput SSH-CCS-PCR.

Qiu J(1), Gunaratne P, Peterson LE, Khurana D, Walsham N, Loulseged H, Karni RJ, 
Roussel E, Gibbs RA, Margolin JF, Gingras MC.

Author information: 
(1)Texas Children's Cancer Center and Department of Pediatrics, department of
Baylor College of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The current systems of risk grouping in pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) fail to predict therapeutic success in 10-35% of patients. To identify
better predictive markers of clinical behavior in ALL, we have developed an
integrated approach for gene expression profiling that couples suppression
subtractive hybridization, concatenated cDNA sequencing, and reverse
transcriptase real-time quantitative PCR. Using this approach, a total of 600
differentially expressed genes were identified between t(4;11) ALL and pre-B ALL 
with no determinant chromosomal translocation. The expression of 67 genes was
analyzed in different cytogenetic ALL subgroups and B lymphocytes isolated from
healthy donors. Three genes, BACH1, TP53BPL, and H2B/S, were consistently
expressed as a significant cluster associated with the low-risk ALL subgroups. A 
total of 42 genes were differentially expressed in ALL vs normal B lymphocytes,
with no specific association with any particular ALL subgroups. The remaining 22 
genes were part of a specific expression profile associated with the
hyperdiploid, t(12;21), or t(4;11) subgroups. Using an unsupervised hierarchical 
cluster analysis, the discriminating power of these specific expression profiles 
allowed the clustering of patients according to their subgroups. These genes
could help to understand the difference in treatment response and become
therapeutical targets to improve ALL clinical outcomes.

PMID: 12970791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Hum Mutat. 2003 Aug;22(2):121-8.

Mutational analysis of the BRCA1-interacting genes ZNF350/ZBRK1 and BRIP1/BACH1
among BRCA1 and BRCA2-negative probands from breast-ovarian cancer families and
among early-onset breast cancer cases and reference individuals.

Rutter JL(1), Smith AM, Dávila MR, Sigurdson AJ, Giusti RM, Pineda MA, Doody MM, 
Tucker MA, Greene MH, Zhang J, Struewing JP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Population Genetics, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.

Two potential breast cancer susceptibility genes, encoding the BRCA1-interacting 
proteins ZNF350 (or ZBRK1) and BRIP1 (or BACH1), have been identified in yeast
two-hybrid screens. We sequenced these genes in probands from 21 families with
potentially inherited breast/ovarian cancer, all of which were negative for
BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations. Families had at least one case of male breast cancer, two 
cases of ovarian cancer, or three or more cases of breast and ovarian cancer. In 
addition, 58 early-onset (before age 35) breast cancer cases and 30 reference
individuals were analyzed. Of 17 variants detected in ZBRK1, a missense mutation 
Val524Ile was identified in the proband of one high-risk family, but no other
family members were available for testing. Of 25 variants identified in BRIP1, in
addition to four common silent or missense mutations, we identified Gln540Leu, a 
non-conservative amino acid change, in a single familial proband with
inflammatory breast cancer, but this mutation was not present in her three
relatives with breast cancer. Haplotype analysis suggests that all ZBRK1 SNPs
fall within a single block with two SNPs capturing 92% of the haplotype
diversity, while the BRIP1 SNPs fall in two blocks, with five SNPs capturing 89% 
of the haplotype diversity. Based on sequencing of ZBRK1 and BRIP1 in 21
BRCA1/2-negative probands from inherited breast/ovarian cancer families, it
appears unlikely that mutations in these genes account for a significant fraction
of inherited breast cancer. Further analysis in unselected cases will be required
to know whether the identified variants play a role in genetic predisposition to 
breast cancer in the general population. Hum Mutat 22:121-128, 2003. Published
2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12872252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Nihon Eiseigaku Zasshi. 2003 May;58(2):248-53.

[Molecular biology of iron in nutritional science].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujita H(1), Nishitani C, Nakajima M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Biology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
North 15 West 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

Iron is regarded as one of the most important nutriments, and many diseases are
related to iron deficiency or its overload. Approximately 70% of iron in the body
is located in heme, functioning as hemoglobin, myoglobin, and cytochrome P450.
Iron itself also has many catalytic functions through the iron-sulfa cluster. It 
is believed that iron and/or heme plays significant roles in regulation of genes,
however, little about the mechanism has been elucidated. Recently, not only iron 
but also heme has been identified as important regulators of gene activation via 
oxygen sensing. For example, iron controls the oxygen response of HIF-1 activity 
by two mechanisms; in cytosol, the half life of HIF-1 alpha is determined by
hydroxylation of Pro, and transcriptional activity of HIF1 alpha in nuclei is
disturbed by hydroxylation of Asn. Hemoproteins in prokaryotes such as FixL, Dos,
and HemAT were found to be oxygen sensors, however, little has been reported in
eukaryotes. Our finding on Bach1 seems to be the first report of heme and
oxygen-mediated regulation of genes in vertebrates. Understanding of these newly 
identified mechanisms in iron- and heme-controlled genes is essential in the
field of nutritional science. We therefore summarize here the recent findings
indicating mechanisms of iron as transcriptional regulators.

PMID: 12806962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Seikagaku. 2003 Mar;75(3):213-8.

[Heme oxygenase-1: for whom is its expression suppressed?].

[Article in Japanese]

Takahashi K(1), Shibahara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Applied Physiology, Tohoku University
School of Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan.

PMID: 12704842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Masui. 2002 Dec;51 Suppl:S16-25.

[Oxidative stress protection by heme].

[Article in Japanese]

Igarashi K, Sun H.

PMID: 12655711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Int J Cancer. 2003 Apr 10;104(3):389-91.

BACH1 517C-->T transition impairs protein translocation to nucleus: a role in
breast cancer susceptibility?

Lei H, Vorechovsky I.

PMID: 12569564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Eur J Cancer. 2003 Feb;39(3):366-71.

No evidence of involvement of germline BACH1 mutations in Finnish breast and
ovarian cancer families.

Karppinen SM(1), Vuosku J, Heikkinen K, Allinen M, Winqvist R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu University Hospital/University of Oulu, 
PO Box 24, FIN-90029 OYS, Finland.

Recently BACH1, a novel putative DNA helicase mapping to chromosome 17q22, was
reported to interact specifically with BRCA1, and was suggested to be a candidate
gene for predisposition to breast and ovarian cancers. Here, we screened 214
breast and ovarian cancer patients from 151 Finnish families for germline BACH1
mutations by utilising conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE) and
genomic sequencing analysis. Four sequence alterations were observed in the exon 
regions of BACH1, three of which have been previously reported and were
classified as polymorphisms. In 1 patient, a novel heterozygous 3101C>T variant
was observed resulting in a proline to leucine substitution at codon 1034
(Pro1034Leu). This amino acid change occurs in the BRCA1 binding domain of the
BACH1 protein. Although the 3101C>T transition was also found in one of the 304
control individuals with an unknown cancer status, it still remains possible that
this alteration could represent a rare disease-related allele in the population. 
Functional assays are needed to resolve the biological significance of this novel
BACH1 missense variant. Altogether, the available data suggest that germline
mutations in BACH1 are extremely rare.

PMID: 12565990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 14;278(11):9125-33. Epub 2003 Jan 2.

Bach1 functions as a hypoxia-inducible repressor for the heme oxygenase-1 gene in
human cells.

Kitamuro T(1), Takahashi K, Ogawa K, Udono-Fujimori R, Takeda K, Furuyama K,
Nakayama M, Sun J, Fujita H, Hida W, Hattori T, Shirato K, Igarashi K, Shibahara 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Applied Physiology, Tohoku University
School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) catalyzes heme breakdown, eventually releasing iron,
carbon monoxide, and bilirubin IXalpha. HO-1 is induced by its substrate heme and
various environmental factors, which represents a protective response against
oxidative stresses. Here we show that hypoxia represses HO-1 expression in three 
human cell types but induces it in rat, bovine, and monkey cells, indicating the 
inter-species difference in the hypoxic regulation of HO-1 expression. The
hypoxia-mediated repression of HO-1 expression is consistently associated with
the induction of Bach1, a heme-regulated transcriptional repressor, in human
cells. Bach1 is a basic leucine zipper protein, forming a heterodimer with a
small Maf protein. Expression of HO-1 was also reduced in human cells when
exposed to interferon-gamma or an iron chelator desferrioxamine, each of which
induced Bach1 expression. In contrast, induction of HO-1 expression by CoCl(2) is
associated with reduced expression of Bach1 mRNA. Thus, expression of HO-1 and
Bach1 is inversely regulated. We have identified a Maf recognition element in the
human HO-1 gene that is required for repression of a reporter gene by hypoxia and
targeted by Bach1. Therefore, Bach1 functions as a hypoxia-inducible repressor
for the HO-1 gene, thereby contributing to fine-tuning of oxygen homeostasis in
human cells.

PMID: 12511571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. EMBO J. 2002 Oct 1;21(19):5216-24.

Hemoprotein Bach1 regulates enhancer availability of heme oxygenase-1 gene.

Sun J(1), Hoshino H, Takaku K, Nakajima O, Muto A, Suzuki H, Tashiro S, Takahashi
S, Shibahara S, Alam J, Taketo MM, Yamamoto M, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Chemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Kasumi 1-2-3, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) protects cells from various insults including oxidative
stress. Transcriptional activators, including the Nrf2/Maf heterodimer, have been
the focus of studies on the inducible expression of ho-1. Here we show that a
heme-binding factor, Bach1, is a critical physiological repressor of ho-1. Bach1 
bound to the multiple Maf recognition elements (MAREs) of ho-1 enhancers with
MafK in vitro and repressed their activity in vivo, while heme abrogated this
repressor function of Bach1 by inhibiting its binding to the ho-1 enhancers. Gene
targeting experiments in mice revealed that, in the absence of Bach1, ho-1 became
expressed constitutively at high levels in various tissues under normal
physiological conditions. By analyzing bach1/nrf2 compound-deficient mice, we
documented antagonistic activities of Bach1 and Nrf2 in several tissues.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that small Maf proteins participate in
both repression and activation of ho-1. Thus, regulation of ho-1 involves a
direct sensing of heme levels by Bach1 (by analogy to lac repressor sensitivity
to lactose), generating a simple feedback loop whereby the substrate effects
repressor-activator antagonism.

PMCID: PMC129038
PMID: 12356737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Biochem. 2002 Sep;132(3):427-31.

Expression of the oxidative stress-regulated transcription factor bach2 in
differentiating neuronal cells.

Hoshino H(1), Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculure and Life Sciences, 
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

Bach2 is an oxidative stress-regulated transcription factor and functions as a
repressor of gene expression directed by the TPA-response element, the Maf
recognition element, and the antioxidant responsive element. To investigate the
possibility that these enhancers are regulated in a tissue-specific manner, we
analyzed expression of Bach2 during differentiation of neural cells. Bach2 was
induced upon neuronal differentiation of P19 embryonic carcinoma cells, while its
related factor Bach1 did not show significant change. By using affinity-purified 
anti-Bach2 antibodies, expression of Bach2 in mouse embryos was determined. High 
levels of Bach2 antigen were found in differentiating neuronal and lens cells in 
day 12.5 embryos. Consistent with the fact that subcellular localization of Bach2
is regulated by nuclear export in cultured cells, extensive Bach2-staining was
found in the cytoplasmic regions of developing neuronal and lens cells. These
results suggest that Bach2 regulates AP-1- and Maf-dependent gene expression
during development of neuronal and lens cells and that its activity may be
regulated by nuclear export in these cells.

PMID: 12204112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Environ Health Prev Med. 2002 Jul;7(3):103-12. doi: 10.1265/ehpm.2002.103.

Regulatory heme and trichloroethylene intoxication: A possible explanation of the
case of "A Civil Action".

Fujita H(1), Nishitani C, Ogawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Biology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
North 15, West 7, Kita-ku, 060-8638, Supporo, Japan.

In 1998, a amovie entitled "A Civil Action" was released. The movie described the
Woburn case, begun in 1982 and concluded in 1990, one of the most famous cases of
trichloroethylene pollution. In a small town near Boston, twelve children died of
leukemia, which seemed attributable to trichloroethylene contamination of the
drinking water. The victims, however, could not win the case, since evidence that
the identified chemicals could cause leukemia and other human illnesses was
rather sketchy. There have been many cases of trichloroethylene pollution in
industrial nations including Japan, therefore, we reconsidered the missing link. 
Our conclusion is that the disease occurred not by a direct effect of the
chemical hazard on biological macromolecules but by an indirect effect through
the physiological system such as signal transduction and transcriptional
regulation. In 1984, we reported a marked reduction in the regulatory heme pool
by trichloroethylene exposure, however, the biological significance was not well 
understood. Recently, we found that the DNA binding activity of Bach1, a negative
regulator of genes, is controlled by heme, the regulation of which seems to
explain how leukemia develops. The heterodimer of Bach1 with MafK recognizes Maf 
recognition elements (MAREs) competing with the erythroid type positive
regulator, a complex of NF-E2 with MafK. Bach1/MafK occupies MAREs under lower
heme conditions, whereas MAREs are open to NF-E2/MafK along with increasing heme 
concentration. Since the NF-E2/MafK function is closely related to normal
erythroid differentiation, of which disorders such as sideroblastic anemia are
often related to neoplasia; i.e., a clonal disorder that can progress to
leukemia. Thus, a marked decline in regulatory heme by trichloroethylene
intoxication could be one of the pathways to leukemia.

PMCID: PMC2723491
PMID: 21432291  [PubMed]


322. Mol Pharmacol. 2002 May;61(5):1174-83.

Identification of albumin precursor protein, Phi AP3, and alpha-smooth muscle
actin as novel components of redox sensing machinery in vascular smooth muscle
cells.

Holderman MT(1), Miller KP, Dangott LJ, Ramos KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Center for Environmental and Rural 
Health, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843-4455, USA.

Aerobic organisms are continually subjected to environmental stressors that
compromise redox homeostasis and induce cellular injury. In vascular smooth
muscle cells (vSMCs), the activation/repression of redox-regulated genes after
environmental stress often involves protein binding to cis-acting antioxidant
response elements (AREs). The present study was conducted to identify proteins
that participate in redox-regulated protein binding to human c-Ha-ras and mouse
glutathione S-transferase A1 AREs in vSMCs after oxidant injury. Challenge of
vSMCs with 0.3 or 3 microM hydrogen peroxide, 3-methylcholanthrene,
benzo[a]pyrene-7,8-diol, 3-hydroxy benzo[a]pyrene, and benzo[a]pyrene-3,6-quinone
induced concentration-related increases in ARE protein binding. The profiles of
ARE complex assembly were comparable, but exhibited chemical specificity.
Pretreatment with 0.5 mM N-acetylcysteine inhibited activation of ARE protein
binding in hydrogen peroxide-treated cells. Preparative electrophoretic mobility 
shift assays coupled to Western analysis identified NF-E2-related proteins 1 and 
2 and JunD in complexes assembled on AREs. Polyethylenimine affinity and
sequence-specific serial immobilized DNA affinity chromatography followed by
N-terminal sequencing identified albumin precursor protein, phi AP3, and
alpha-smooth muscle actin as members of the ARE signaling pathway. Sequence
analysis of albumin protein revealed homology to the redox-regulated
transcription factors Bach1 and 2, as well as cytoskeletal and molecular motor
proteins. These results implicate albumin precursor protein, phi AP3, and
alpha-smooth muscle actin as participants in redox sensing in vSMCs, and suggest 
that protein complex assembly involves interactions between leucine zipper and
zinc finger transcription factors with cytoskeletal proteins.

PMID: 11961136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 7;277(23):20724-33. Epub 2002 Mar 28.

Activation of Maf/AP-1 repressor Bach2 by oxidative stress promotes apoptosis and
its interaction with promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies.

Muto A(1), Tashiro S, Tsuchiya H, Kume A, Kanno M, Ito E, Yamamoto M, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, Hiroshima
734-8551, Japan.

The oxidative stress response operates by inducing the expression of genes that
counteract the stress. We show here that the oxidative stress-responsive
transcription factor Bach2 is a generic inhibitor of gene expression directed by 
the 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate response element, the Maf recognition
element, and the antioxidant-responsive element. The Bach2-enhanced green
fluorescent protein bicistronic retrovirus was used to monitor the fate of
Bach2-expressing cells at the single cell level. Bach2 exerted an inhibitory
effect on NIH3T3 cell proliferation and caused massive apoptosis upon mild
oxidative stress in both NIH3T3 and Raji B-lymphoid cells. Interestingly, Bach1, 
a highly homologous protein, could not induce cell death, demonstrating the
specificity for the apoptosis induction. Although both oxidative stress and
leptomycin B, an inhibitor of nuclear export, induce nuclear accumulation of
Bach2, the leptomycin B-induced nuclear accumulation of Bach2 was not sufficient 
to elicit apoptosis. Upon oxidative stress, Bach2 formed nuclear foci that
associated with promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies. Our results suggest that
Bach2 constitutes a cell lineage-specific system that couples oxidative stress
and cell death and that inhibition of 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
response element, the Maf recognition element, and the antioxidant-responsive
element upon oxidative stress may be critical determinants for apoptosis.

PMID: 11923289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Int J Cancer. 2002 Apr 1;98(4):638-9.

No mutations in the BACH1 gene in BRCA1 and BRCA2 negative breast-cancer families
linked to 17q22.

Luo L, Lei H, Du Q, von Wachenfeldt A, Kockum I, Luthman H, Vorechovsky I,
Lindblom A.

PMID: 11920628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Breast Cancer Res. 2002;4(1):9-13. Epub 2001 Nov 20.

Distinct functions of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in double-strand break repair.

Liu Y(1), West SC.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund, Clare Hall Laboratories, South Mimms,
Hertfordshire, UK.

Individuals carrying BRCA mutations are predisposed to breast cancer. The BRCA1
and BRCA2 proteins are required for homologous recombination and DNA break
repair, leading to the suggestion that they act in concert. However, direct
evidence of a stable BRCA1/BRCA2 complex has not been demonstrated. Rather, the
two proteins have been found as constituents of discrete, but perhaps
nonexclusive complexes that are critical for repair. We discuss the interaction
of BRCA1 with the BACH1 and BARD1 proteins, and suggest that the pleiotropic
nature of mutations in BRCA1 may be associated with defects in protein--protein
interactions. In contrast, the role of BRCA2 in DNA repair may be more defined by
its direct interaction with the RAD51 recombinase.

PMCID: PMC138716
PMID: 11879553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Genes Dev. 2002 Mar 1;16(5):583-93.

Structure of the 53BP1 BRCT region bound to p53 and its comparison to the Brca1
BRCT structure.

Joo WS(1), Jeffrey PD, Cantor SB, Finnin MS, Livingston DM, Pavletich NP.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Biochemistry and Biophysics Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Brca1 C-terminal (BRCT) domains are a common protein-protein interaction motif in
proteins involved in the DNA damage response and DNA repair. The DNA-damage
response protein 53BP1 has two BRCT domains that bind to the DNA-binding domain
of p53. The 53BP1 tandem-BRCT region is homologous to the tandem-BRCT region of
Brca1, which is involved in double-strand break repair and homologous
recombination and which binds BACH1, a member of the DEAH helicase family. Here
we report the structures of a human 53BP1-p53 complex and of the rat Brca1 BRCT
repeats. The 53BP1-p53 structure shows that the two BRCT repeats are arranged
tandemly and pack extensively through an interface that also involves the
inter-repeat linker. The first BRCT repeat and the linker together bind p53 on a 
region that overlaps with the DNA-binding surface of p53 and involves p53
residues that are mutated in cancer and are important for DNA binding. Comparison
with the structure of the tandem-BRCT region of Brca1 shows a remarkable
conservation of the repeat arrangement and of the inter-BRCT repeat interface.
Analysis of human BRCA1 tumor-derived mutations and conservation identifies a
potential protein-binding site that we show through mutagenesis is involved in
BACH1 binding. The BACH1-binding region of Brca1 consists of a unique insertion
in the first BRCT repeat and the inter-repeat linker and is analogous to the
region of 53BP1 that binds p53.

PMCID: PMC155350
PMID: 11877378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Nihon Eiseigaku Zasshi. 2002 Jan;56(4):615-21.

[Heme metabolism in stress response].

[Article in Japanese]

Ogawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Biology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
Sapporo, 060-8638, Japan.

Heme and its metabolism fulfill significant roles in many homeostatic and
adaptative reactions. For example, heme (protein) senses oxygen concentration to 
regulate hypoxia response genes such as erythropoietin, and free heme, a
proxidant, controls levels of several oxidative stress response proteins as well 
as that of a few enzymes in the heme metabolic pathway. Heme oxygenase (HO) is
the key enzyme in heme catabolism, which degrades heme to Fe, CO, and biliverdin.
CO is known as a gaseous messenger in the vascular and nervous systems.
Biliverdin is rapidly converted to bilirubin, whose antioxidative effect is
proposed to protect cells against reactive oxygen species. HO-1, the inducible
isozyme of HO, is induced not only by its substrate heme, but also NO, metals,
hypoxia, and various other stimuli. Studies on HO-1 deficiency indicate that
induction of HO-1 is essential to homeostasis, at least in humans. Heme response 
elements (HREs), which mediate the induction of HO-1 expression by heme, are
identified in enhancer regions of the mouse HO-1 gene. HRE shares a nucleotide
sequence with the Maf recognition element (MARE). A transcriptional activator,
Nrf2, has been shown to participate in HO-1 induction by several stimuli,
including heme via HRE. A heme-binding transcription factor such as yeast Hap1
had been supposed to also exist in vertebrates, however, no such factor had been 
identified. Recently, we found that a mammalian transcription repressor, Bach1,
directly binds heme, and that the DNA binding activity of Bach1 is negatively
regulated by heme. Bach1 is capable of competing the binding to MARE with
activators including Nrf2, therefore, HO-1 and other stress response genes
bearing MARE may be regulated by heme via the MARE-binding transcription factors.
Further analyses on the gene regulatory mechanism by heme would help us to
understand the stress response system, especially against oxidative stress.

PMID: 11868390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Nihon Eiseigaku Zasshi. 2002 Jan;56(4):603-5.

[Proteins in response to environmental stress].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujita H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Biology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
North 15, West 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. alfujita@med.hokudai.ac.jp

Last decade, remarkable progress was achieved in the field of environmental
sciences, especially those related to biological functions against environmental 
stress. Recent progress has been focused on the transcriptional control of
proteins, such as cytochrome P450, UDP-glucronosyltransferase, and
metallothionein. Along with these studies, entirely new functions of some
proteins were identified; for example heme oxygenase-1, originally isolated by
the catalytic activity of heme, is nowadays recognized as one of the stress
proteins. We are, therefore, interested in the relationship among proteins of
body defense mechanisms; i.e., co-regulation of two (or more) distinct proteins, 
and why they should be under the same regulation. One possible idea is that they 
are members of the defense system against active oxygen, which will be described 
by Drs. Sato and Inoue in a future review. Alternatively, they might have evolved
from an ancestor of the defense system that originally protected from oxygen
toxicity. Findings on AhR/Arnt and HIF1 systems demonstrating that they are
members of the same PAS family seem to support this hypothesis. One of the
missing links of the hypothesis is the so called oxygen sensor, suggesting (a)
hemoprotein in 1988. A review by Dr. Ogawa on Bach1, the first vertebrate
transcription factor controlled by heme, will provide on answers to the missing
links. Through this series of reviews, we have a rough map of the biological
system against environmental stress to explore the new frontier of environmental 
science.

PMID: 11868388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Biochem J. 2002 Feb 1;361(Pt 3):629-33.

Induction of Bach1 and ARA70 gene expression at an early stage of adipocyte
differentiation of mouse 3T3-L1 cells.

Nishizuka M(1), Tsuchiya T, Nishihara T, Imagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Biochemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Osaka University, 1-6 Yamada-Oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Using a subtraction method, we have isolated genes that are induced early in the 
differentiation of mouse 3T3-L1 preadipocyte cells into adipocytes. These include
the genes encoding transcription factors and signalling proteins, as well as
unknown genes. Bach1, a transcription factor, and ARA70, a cofactor, were rapidly
induced during differentiation. The induction of these two genes was observed
only in growth-arrested 3T3-L1 cells, and not in proliferating cells. In NIH-3T3 
cells, no induction was observed under either set of conditions. These results
strongly indicate that Bach1 and ARA70 have valuable roles at the onset of
adipocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1222346
PMID: 11802793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Mutat Res. 2001 Nov 1;487(1-2):67-71.

SUVi and BACH1: a new subfamily of mammalian helicases?

Menichini P(1), Linial M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mutagenesis, National Cancer Research Institute IST, Largo R.
Benzi 10, 16132, Genova, Italy. menikini@hp380.ist.unige.it

The RecQ family of DNA helicases have been shown to be important for the
maintenance of genomic integrity in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Members of this
family are genes responsible for cancer predisposition disorders like Bloom's
syndrome, Werner's syndrome and Rothmund-Thomson syndrome. Here, we show the
sequence homologies between two recently identified mammalian helicases, namely
SUVi and BACH1. These two genes also share strong homologies with other members
of the RecQ family. On the basis of published data and sequence analysis we
suggest that SUVi/BACH1 may represent a novel subfamily of mammalian helicases,
functioning in the processing of lesions induced by different genotoxic agents.

PMID: 11595410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Biochem. 2001 Sep;130(3):385-92.

The promoter of mouse transcription repressor bach1 is regulated by Sp1 and
trans-activated by Bach1.

Sun J(1), Muto A, Hoshino H, Kobayashi A, Nishimura S, Yamamoto M, Hayashi N, Ito
E, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, Kasumi
Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

The Maf recognition element (MARE) is regulated by both activators and
repressors. Bach1 and Bach2 repress MARE-dependent transcription by forming
heterodimers with Maf-related oncoproteins. In order to gain an understanding of 
the regulation of bach1 gene expression, we analyzed the structure of the mouse
bach1 gene. Comparison of the exon-intron structure of the bach1 gene with those 
of other NF-E2-related genes indicated that bach1 and bach2 constitute an
evolutionarily distinct subfamily among bZip factors. The bach1 promoter region
contains two GC boxes that are important for its basal activity and are bound by 
Sp1 in K562 cell extracts. In addition, we found an evolutionarily conserved
MARE-like element located downstream of the transcription initiation site.
Deletion of this element resulted in a higher promoter activity in K562 cells.
Bach1 trans-activated its own promoter depending on the presence of the MARE-like
element in co-transfection assays. However, Bach1 did not bind to the MARE-like
element in electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA). These results suggest
that Bach1 activates its own promoter indirectly by inhibiting the putative
repressor. Such a positive feedback regulation by the repressor Bach1 may play an
important role in maintaining the expression of Bach1 while consolidating
repression of other genes with MARE.

PMID: 11530014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. EMBO J. 2001 Jun 1;20(11):2835-43.

Heme mediates derepression of Maf recognition element through direct binding to
transcription repressor Bach1.

Ogawa K(1), Sun J, Taketani S, Nakajima O, Nishitani C, Sassa S, Hayashi N,
Yamamoto M, Shibahara S, Fujita H, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Biology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

Heme controls expression of genes involved in the synthesis of globins and heme. 
The mammalian transcription factor Bach1 functions as a repressor of the Maf
recognition element (MARE) by forming antagonizing hetero-oligomers with the
small Maf family proteins. We show here that heme binds specifically to Bach1 and
regulates its DNA-binding activity. Deletion studies demonstrated that a
heme-binding region of Bach1 is confined within its C-terminal region that
possesses four dipeptide cysteine-proline (CP) motifs. Mutations in all of the CP
motifs of Bach1 abolished its interaction with heme. The DNA-binding activity of 
Bach1 as a MafK hetero-oligomer was markedly inhibited by heme in gel mobility
shift assays. The repressor activity of Bach1 was lost upon addition of hemin in 
transfected cells. These results suggest that increased levels of heme inactivate
the repressor Bach1, resulting in induction of a host of genes with MARES:

PMCID: PMC125477
PMID: 11387216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Cell. 2001 Apr 6;105(1):149-60.

BACH1, a novel helicase-like protein, interacts directly with BRCA1 and
contributes to its DNA repair function.

Cantor SB(1), Bell DW, Ganesan S, Kass EM, Drapkin R, Grossman S, Wahrer DC,
Sgroi DC, Lane WS, Haber DA, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and the Harvard, Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

BRCA1 interacts in vivo with a novel protein, BACH1, a member of the DEAH
helicase family. BACH1 binds directly to the BRCT repeats of BRCA1. A BACH1
derivative, bearing a mutation in a residue that was essential for catalytic
function in other helicases, interfered with normal double-strand break repair in
a manner that was dependent on its BRCA1 binding function. Thus, BACH1/BRCA1
complex formation contributes to a key BRCA1 activity. In addition, germline
BACH1 mutations affecting the helicase domain were detected in two early-onset
breast cancer patients and not in 200 matched controls. Thus, it is conceivable
that, like BRCA1, BACH1 is a target of germline cancer-inducing mutations.

PMID: 11301010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2000 Dec;192(4):259-73.

Expression of transcription factors during megakaryocytic differentiation of
CD34+ cells from human cord blood induced by thrombopoietin.

Terui K(1), Takahashi Y, Kitazawa J, Toki T, Yokoyama M, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

Although normal megakaryocytic development has been shown to require the presence
of functional GATA-1 and NF-E2 transcription factors in vivo, the roles of other 
members of the GATA binding factors and NF-E2 family during megakaryocytic
differentiation are unclear. the present study, the expression of GATA family
members, GATA-1 and GATA-2, a GATA-binding factor, EVI-1, the large subunit of
NF-E2 factor, p45 and the related factors, Nrf1, Nrf2, Nrf3, BACH1, BACH2, and
the small subunit of NF-E2, MAFK and MAFG has been examined in human
megakaryocytic and erythroid cells by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction. CD34+ cells isolated from human cord blood were induced to unilineage
megakaryocytic or erythroid differentiation in liquid suspension culture in the
presense of thrombopoietin or erythropoietin, respectively. Each lineage was
identified by monoclonal antibody against GPIIb/IIIa or glycophorin A. In
megakaryocytic culture, p45, Nrf1, Nrf2, BACH1, MAFK and MAFG mRNAs were induced 
similarly to erythroid culture. Nrf3 mRNA was barely detected in both cultures.
BACH2 was induced only in megakaryocytic culture, although the level of
expression was low. Furthermore, the profiles of transcription factors involved
in hematopoiesis, EVI-1 and Ets-1 mRNAs were induced only in megakaryocytic
culture. Megakaryocytic and erythroid differentiation pathways are closely
related to each other, and these two lineage cells share a number of
lineage-specific transcription factors. However, the results showed that the
profile of the expression of these transcription factors in megakaryocytic cells 
is distinct from that of erythroid lineage. The dynamic changes in the levels of 
different transcription factors that occur during primary megakaryocytic
differentiation suggest that the levels of these factors may influence the
progression to specific hematopoietic pathways.

PMID: 11286316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Electron Microsc (Tokyo). 2000;49(3):407-13.

Atomic force microscopy proposes a 'kiss and pull' mechanism for enhancer
function. off.

Yoshimura SH(1), Yoshida C, Igarashi K, Takeyasu K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Human and Environmental Studies, Kyoto University, Japan.

The DNase I-hyper-sensitive sites (HS2-HS4) in the beta-globin gene enhancer
region (locus control region; LCR) have been known as the target of Bach1/MafK
heterodimers. We have demonstrated previously by utilizing atomic force
microscopy (AFM) that Bach1/MafK mediates the formation of a looped-DNA structure
in the LCR fragment. Here we perform further detailed analyses of the loop
structure formed between each HSs by AFM, and propose a novel model for the
enhancer/protein interaction: the Bach1/MafK heterodimer preferentially binds to 
HS2 with highest affinity and to HS3 with lower affinity. However, they assemble 
to each other to form a stable complex of four heterodimers and mediate a
DNA-loop formation. Once the DNA loop is formed between HS2 and HS3, the
Bach1/MafK complex at the HS3 side leaves the HS3 and starts to slide along the
DNA strand towards HS2 with the other side of the complex fixed at the HS2
region. This 'kiss and pull' model will contribute to understand the function of 
regulatory proteins at enhancer regions in terms of higher-order structure of
DNA, e.g. nucleosomes and chromatin.

PMID: 11108028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 9;276(10):7278-84. Epub 2000 Nov 7.

Transcription factor BACH1 is recruited to the nucleus by its novel alternative
spliced isoform.

Kanezaki R(1), Toki T, Yokoyama M, Yomogida K, Sugiyama K, Yamamoto M, Igarashi
K, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine and Department of Biology,
Faculty of Sciences, Hirosaki University, Hirosaki 036-8563, Japan.

The transcription factor Bach1 is a member of a novel family of broad complex,
tramtrack, bric-a-brac/poxvirus and zinc finger (BTB/POZ) basic region leucine
zipper factors. Bach1 forms a heterodimer with MafK, a member of the small Maf
protein family (MafF, MafG, and MafK), which recognizes the NF-E2/Maf recognition
element, a cis-regulatory motif containing a
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-responsive element. Here we describe the
gene structure of human BACH1, including a newly identified promoter and an
alternatively RNA-spliced truncated form of BACH1, designated BACH1t, abundantly 
transcribed in human testis. The alternate splicing originated from the usage of 
a novel exon located 5.6 kilobase pairs downstream of the exon encoding the
leucine zipper domain, and produced a protein that contained the conserved
BTB/POZ, Cap'n collar, and basic region domains, but lacked the leucine zipper
domain essential for NF-E2/Maf recognition element binding. Subcellular
localization studies using green fluorescent protein as a reporter showed that
full-length BACH1 localized to the cytoplasm, whereas BACH1t accumulated in the
nucleus. Interestingly, coexpression of BACH1 and BACH1t demonstrated interaction
between the molecules and the induction of nuclear import of BACH1. These results
suggested that BACH1t recruits BACH1 to the nucleus through BTB domain-mediated
interaction.

PMID: 11069897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Seikagaku. 2000 Apr;72(4):257-68.

[Function of NF-E2-related transcription factors].

[Article in Japanese]

Igarashi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hiroshima University Faculty of Medicine,
Hiroshima.

PMID: 10853363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 19;275(20):15370-6.

Oxidative stress abolishes leptomycin B-sensitive nuclear export of transcription
repressor Bach2 that counteracts activation of Maf recognition element.

Hoshino H(1), Kobayashi A, Yoshida M, Kudo N, Oyake T, Motohashi H, Hayashi N,
Yamamoto M, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Seiryo-machi
2-1, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

The mammalian transcription activator Nrf2 plays critical roles in executing
oxidative stress response by binding to the regulatory DNA sequence Maf
recognition element. Bach2 is an Nrf2-related transcription repressor and a
tissue-specific partner of the Maf oncoprotein family. We show here how Bach2 is 
regulated by an oxidative stress-sensitive conditional nuclear export. In
cultured cells, Bach2 was localized in cytoplasm through its C-terminal
evolutionarily conserved cytoplasmic localization signal (CLS). The CLS directed 
leptomycin B-sensitive nuclear export of reporter proteins, suggesting its
dependence on the nuclear exporter Crm1/exportin 1. However, the CLS sequence
does not bear a resemblance to the leucine-rich class of nuclear export signal,
and mutagenesis analysis indicated that a stretch of nonhydrophobic amino acids
is essential for its activity. Oxidative stressors aborted the CLS activity and
induced nuclear accumulation of Bach2. Whereas oxidative stress is known to
activate MARE-dependent transcription, overexpression of Bach2 in cultured cells 
silenced the inducibility of MARE. The results suggest that Bach2 mediates
nucleocytoplasmic communication to couple oxidative stress and transcription
repression in mammalian cells.

PMID: 10809773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Genes Cells. 1999 Nov;4(11):643-55.

Long range interaction of cis-DNA elements mediated by architectural
transcription factor Bach1.

Yoshida C(1), Tokumasu F, Hohmura KI, Bungert J, Hayashi N, Nagasawa T, Engel JD,
Yamamoto M, Takeyasu K, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai
980-8575, Japan.

BACKGROUND: A central question in vertebrate transcriptional regulation is how
cis-regulatory modules, including enhancers, silencers and promoters, communicate
with each other over long distances to mandate proper gene expression. In order
to address this question we analysed protein/DNA interactions in the human
beta-globin locus control region (LCR). One of the many proteins that are
potentially implicated in LCR function is Bach1. Bach1 possesses a basic leucine 
zipper (bZip) domain, as well as a BTB/POZ domain that has been shown to be
involved in the regulation of chromatin structure. Bach1 forms heterodimers with 
small Maf proteins through its leucine zipper and binds to Maf recognition
elements (MARE).
RESULTS: Using atomic force microscopy we visualized large looped DNA structures 
between MAREs located in different regulatory elements within the human
beta-globin LCR that were mediated by Bach1/MafK heterodimers. The formation of
these DNA loops required the Bach1 BTB/POZ protein interaction domain.
Furthermore, in transfection studies we found that Bach1 repressed the enhancer
activity of the LCR in a BTB/POZ domain-dependent manner.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that Bach1 and other BTB/POZ transcription
factors may represent a class of nuclear architectural proteins that mediate long
range interactions between cis-regulatory elements in order to regulate gene
expression.

PMID: 10620011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 1999 Sep;44(12 Suppl):1771-9.

[BTB/POZ domain proteins in nuclear structure and DNA loop formation].

[Article in Japanese]

Yoshida C(1), Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai,
Japan.

PMID: 10503013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Rinsho Ketsueki. 1999 Apr;40(4):280-3.

[The role of NF-E2 related transcription factors in hematopoiesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Itou E.

PMID: 10355135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 8;273(19):11783-90.

Multivalent DNA binding complex generated by small Maf and Bach1 as a possible
biochemical basis for beta-globin locus control region complex.

Igarashi K(1), Hoshino H, Muto A, Suwabe N, Nishikawa S, Nakauchi H, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research
Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tenno-dai 1-1-1, Tsukuba 305, Japan.

The human beta-globin locus control region (LCR) is required to properly regulate
chromatin domain opening, replication timing, and globin gene activation. The LCR
contains multiple NF-E2 sites (Maf recognition elements, MAREs) that allow the
binding of various basic leucine zipper (bZip) proteins like p45 NF-E2, Nrf1,
Nrf2, Bach1, and Bach2, in some cases as obligate heterodimers with a small Maf
protein. In addition to the bZip domain, the Bach proteins bear a BTB/POZ domain,
which has been implicated in the regulation of chromatin structure. We show here 
that Bach1 is highly expressed in hematopoietic cells and constitutes one of the 
two MARE-binding activities in murine erythroleukemic (MEL) cells. We further
demonstrate that Bach1/MafK heterodimers interact with each other through the BTB
domain, generating a multimeric and multivalent DNA binding complex. These
results strongly implicate Bach1/MafK heterodimer as an architectural
transcription factor that mediates interactions among multiple MAREs. Such a
factor could then provide a model for assembly of the theoretical beta-globin LCR
"holocomplex. " Other BTB domain proteins have already been demonstrated to be
involved in remodeling chromatin, and thus this class of proteins likely promote 
the formation of nucleoprotein complexes required to establish the architecture
of regulatory domains.

PMID: 9565602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Seikagaku. 1998 Feb;70(2):114-8.

[Function of LCR-binding protein Bach1 as an architectural transcription factor].

[Article in Japanese]

Igarashi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)TARA center, University of Tsukuba.

PMID: 9549412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Hum Genet. 1998 Mar;102(3):282-8.

Isolation of the human BACH1 transcription regulator gene, which maps to
chromosome 21q22.1.

Blouin JL(1), Duriaux Saïl G, Guipponi M, Rossier C, Pappasavas MP, Antonarakis
SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Centre Médical Universitaire, Genève,
Switzerland.

In order to contribute to the development of the transcriptional map of
chromosome 21, we performed exon trapping using cosmid clones mapped in the
region 21q22.1-22.2 and identified a number of potential exons. One of the
trapped exons (Genbank No. AF026200) showed a strong homology with the mouse
Bach1 gene (Genbank No. D86603), a transcription factor regulating gene
expression. We then isolated the full-length coding region of the human BACH1
gene using expressed sequence tags, reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction and rapid amplification of cDNA ends. The predicted BACH1 protein
contains 736 amino acids and is 88% identical to its mouse homolog. It contains
basic leucine zipper and BTB-zinc finger domains (which are directly involved in 
DNA binding for transcription regulation). The BACH1 gene maps in a relatively
gene-poor region on 21q22.1 in yeast artificial chromosome 814c1 of the
collection of Chumakov et al. Northern blot analysis revealed that it is
expressed as an mRNA species of approximately 5.8 kb in all 16 adult and 4 fetal 
tissues examined; an additional mRNA species of 2.8 kb was observed in adult
testis. The contribution of the BACH1 gene to the pathophysiology of trisomy or
monosomy 21 is unknown. In addition, no monogenic disorders associated with
mutations in the BACH1 gene have yet been identified.

PMID: 9544839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Genomics. 1998 Jan 15;47(2):300-6.

Characterization of a human homolog (BACH1) of the mouse Bach1 gene encoding a
BTB-basic leucine zipper transcription factor and its mapping to chromosome
21q22.1.

Ohira M(1), Seki N, Nagase T, Ishikawa K, Nomura N, Ohara O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Structure, Kazusa DNA Research Institute, Chiba, Japan.
oohira@kazusa.or.jp

Clinical interest in the genes on human chromosome 21, especially with respect to
Down syndrome (DS), has provided a strong impetus for the creation of a
transcript map of this chromosome. In an effort to identify new human genes on
the basis of cDNA analysis, we found several cDNA clones that corresponded to
chromosome 21-specific transcripts. One of these, ha2303, showed strong
similarity to the murine transcription factor Bach1. We subsequently determined
the entire nucleotide sequence of this cDNA clone and found it to contain the
whole coding sequence. The gene, termed BACH1, encodes a 736-amino-acid
polypeptide with 80.3% identity to the murine Bach1 protein and contains a
Cap'n'collar (CNC)-type basic leucine zipper (bZip) domain and a protein
interaction motif, the BTB domain. Northern blot analysis revealed that BACH1 was
expressed in all tissues examined. Mapping using the NotI restriction map and the
YAC contig map showed that the BACH1 gene is located at 21q22.1 between the NotI 
sites LA329 (D21S338) and LL60 (D21S389) and within approximately 400 kb of
LA329. Both the prospective function and the chromosomal location suggest that
this gene may be a DS candidate gene, contributing to certain DS phenotypes, and 
is possibly involved in certain features of monosomy 21.

PMID: 9479503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Nov;16(11):6083-95.

Bach proteins belong to a novel family of BTB-basic leucine zipper transcription 
factors that interact with MafK and regulate transcription through the NF-E2
site.

Oyake T(1), Itoh K, Motohashi H, Hayashi N, Hoshino H, Nishizawa M, Yamamoto M,
Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai,
Japan.

Members of the small Maf family (MafK, MafF, and MafG) are basic region leucine
zipper (bZip) proteins that can function as transcriptional activators or
repressors. The dimer compositions of their DNA binding forms determine whether
the small Maf family proteins activate or repress transcription. Using a yeast
two-hybrid screen with a GAL4-MafK fusion protein, we have identified two novel
bZip transcription factors, Bach1 and Bach2, as heterodimerization partners of
MafK. In addition to a Cap'n'collar-type bZip domain, these Bach proteins possess
a BTB domain which is a protein interaction motif; Bach1 and Bach2 show
significant similarity to each other in these regions but are otherwise
divergent. Whereas expression of Bach1 appears ubiquitous, that of Bach2 is
restricted to monocytes and neuronal cells. Bach proteins bind in vitro to NF-E2 
binding sites, recognition elements for the hematopoietic transcription factor
NF-E2, by forming heterodimers with MafK. Furthermore, a DNA binding complex that
contained MafK as well as Bach2 or a protein related closely to Bach2 was found
to be present in mouse brain cells. Bach1 and Bach2 function as transcription
repressors in transfection assays using fibroblast cells, but they function as a 
transcriptional activator and repressor, respectively, in cultured erythroid
cells. The results suggest that members of the Bach family play important roles
in coordinating transcription activation and repression by MafK.

PMCID: PMC231611
PMID: 8887638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


