
1. Seikagaku. 2016 Feb;88(1):31-5.

[Extensive analysis of protein phosphorylation: An example of transcription
factor Bach2].

[Article in Japanese]

Shima H, Ando R, Tamahara T, Igarashi K.

PMID: 27025005  [PubMed - in process]


2. J Fish Biol. 2016 Mar 16. doi: 10.1111/jfb.12931. [Epub ahead of print]

The spatial-temporal expression and functional divergence of bach homologs in
zebrafish Danio rerio.

Luo Q(1), Wu C(1), Sun S(1), Lu F(1), Xie L(1), Zhao H(1), Zhong X(1), Zhou Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, School of 
Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, 430079, P.R. China.

The spatial-temporal expressions of bach1a, bach1b, bach2a and bach2b in early
development of zebrafish Danio rerio embryos were examined in the present study
by whole mount in situ hybridization. Transcripts of all genes were found at the 
one cell stage, suggesting that these four genes are maternally inherited. From
the phylogenetic analyses, Bach1a and Bach1b from fishes form a well-supported
group with two sub-groups. Bach2a and Bach2b, however, did not fall into one
clade, suggesting that Bach2 proteins diverged faster or earlier than Bach1
proteins in fishes. The differentially regulated expression of the exocrine
zymogen (such as the trypsin-like gene, tryl) of both paralogs of bach1 and
bach2, respectively, showed that their functions are still active and already
divergent, coinciding with subfunction partitioning.

© 2016 The Fisheries Society of the British Isles.

PMID: 26992035  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Mar 11. pii: gkw159. [Epub ahead of print]

Repurposing the CRISPR-Cas9 system for targeted DNA methylation.

Vojta A(1), Dobrinic P(1), Tadic V(1), Bockor L(1), Korac P(1), Julg B(2), Klasic
M(1), Zoldoš V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Division of Molecular Biology, University of Zagreb,
Faculty of Science, Zagreb, HR-10000, Croatia. (2)Ragon Institute of MGHT, MIT
and Harvard, 400 Technology Square, Cambridge, MA, USA. (3)Department of Biology,
Division of Molecular Biology, University of Zagreb, Faculty of Science, Zagreb, 
HR-10000, Croatia vzoldos@biol.pmf.hr.

Epigenetic studies relied so far on correlations between epigenetic marks and
gene expression pattern. Technologies developed for epigenome editing now enable 
direct study of functional relevance of precise epigenetic modifications and gene
regulation. The reversible nature of epigenetic modifications, including DNA
methylation, has been already exploited in cancer therapy for remodeling the
aberrant epigenetic landscape. However, this was achieved non-selectively using
epigenetic inhibitors. Epigenetic editing at specific loci represents a novel
approach that might selectively and heritably alter gene expression. Here, we
developed a CRISPR-Cas9-based tool for specific DNA methylation consisting of
deactivated Cas9 (dCas9) nuclease and catalytic domain of the DNA
methyltransferase DNMT3A targeted by co-expression of a guide RNA to any 20 bp
DNA sequence followed by the NGG trinucleotide. We demonstrated targeted CpG
methylation in a ~35 bp wide region by the fusion protein. We also showed that
multiple guide RNAs could target the dCas9-DNMT3A construct to multiple adjacent 
sites, which enabled methylation of a larger part of the promoter. DNA
methylation activity was specific for the targeted region and heritable across
mitotic divisions. Finally, we demonstrated that directed DNA methylation of a
wider promoter region of the target loci IL6ST and BACH2 decreased their
expression.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26969735  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2016 Mar 3. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetic variants associated with rheumatoid arthritis patients and serotypes in
European populations.

Ruiz-Larrañaga O(1), Uribarri M(2), Alcaro MC(3), Escorza-Treviño S(2), Del Amo
J(2), Iriondo M(4), Manzano C(4), Migliorini P(5), Lóránd V(6), Estonba A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology,
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain. otsanda.ruiz@ehu.eus.
(2)Department of Research and Development, Progenika Biopharma S.A., Derio,
Spain. (3)Department of Research and Development, Toscana Biomarkers s.r.l.,
Siena, Italy. (4)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal
Physiology, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain. (5)Clinical
Immunology Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of 
Pisa, Italy. (6)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, University of Pécs,
Medical Center, Pécs, Hungary.

OBJECTIVES: To replicate the association of rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
susceptibility loci in an independent European sample and to assess their
specificity with anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA) status.
METHODS: A selection of 64 SNP previously associated with RA have been typed in a
cohort of 267 RA patients (169 ACPA-positive and 98 ACPA-negative) and 152
controls from the Rheumatology Units of the University Hospital of Pisa (Italy)
and the University of Pécs Medical Center (Hungary). Regression analyses were
performed first considering overall RA patients and secondly, taking both
serotype subgroups as different disease entities. The results have been adjusted 
for age, gender and origin of individuals.
RESULTS: The well-known CD2, REL, TNFAIP3, IRF5, PTPRC, and CCR6 have been
confirmed as RA disease associated loci together with recently discovered BACH2, 
RASGRP1, and IKZF3 loci, taking all RA patients as a unique phenotype. Results
from both serological subgroups separately reflect the specificity of these
susceptibility loci and show additional ACPA-positive specific associations for
variants at IL6R, IL2RA, BLK, DDX6, IL6, and TLE3 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The results from GAPAID project are consistent with previously
established RA disease associations for CD2, PTPRC, REL, CCR6, TNFAIP3, IRF5,
BLK, IL2RA, and DDX6 loci. In addition, IL6R, BACH2, RASGRP1, TLE3, and IKZF3 are
replicated for the first time in an independent European population and IL6
appears to be a suggestive new RA associated locus. The stratified analysis based
on ACPA status provides further support for distinct genetic aetiologies of RA
subsets, which might have therapeutic implications.

PMID: 26939566  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Feb 19;17(2). pii: E250. doi: 10.3390/ijms17020250.

Assessment of Radiation Induced Therapeutic Effect and Cytotoxicity in Cancer
Patients Based on Transcriptomic Profiling.

Karim S(1), Mirza Z(2), Chaudhary AG(3), Abuzenadah AM(4,)(5), Gari M(6),
Al-Qahtani MH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research, Faculty of Applied Medical 
Sciences, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
skarim1@kau.edu.sa. (2)King Fahd Medical Research Center, King Abdulaziz
University, P.O. Box 80216, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia. zmirza1@kau.edu.sa.
(3)Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research, Faculty of Applied Medical 
Sciences, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
adeel.gc@gmail.com. (4)Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research, Faculty
of Applied Medical Sciences, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi
Arabia. adel_abuzenadah@hotmail.com. (5)King Abdullah City for Science and
Technology Innovation Center for Personalized Medicine, King Abdulaziz
University, P.O. Box 80216, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
adel_abuzenadah@hotmail.com. (6)Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine
Research, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 
21589, Saudi Arabia. mgari@kau.edu.sa. (7)Center of Excellence in Genomic
Medicine Research, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, King Abdulaziz
University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia. mhalqahtani@kau.edu.sa.

Toxicity induced by radiation therapy is a curse for cancer patients undergoing
treatment. It is imperative to understand and define an ideal condition where the
positive effects notably outweigh the negative. We used a microarray
meta-analysis approach to measure global gene-expression before and after
radiation exposure. Bioinformatic tools were used for pathways, network, gene
ontology and toxicity related studies. We found 429 differentially expressed
genes at fold change >2 and p-value <0.05. The most significantly upregulated
genes were synuclein alpha (SNCA), carbonic anhydrase I (CA1), X-linked Kx blood 
group (XK), glycophorin A and B (GYPA and GYPB), and hemogen (HEMGN), while
downregulated ones were membrane-spanning 4-domains, subfamily A member 1
(MS4A1), immunoglobulin heavy constant mu (IGHM), chemokine (C-C motif) receptor 
7 (CCR7), BTB and CNC homology 1 transcription factor 2 (BACH2), and B-cell
CLL/lymphoma 11B (BCL11B). Pathway analysis revealed calcium-induced T lymphocyte
apoptosis and the role of nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) in
regulation of the immune response as the most inhibited pathways, while apoptosis
signaling was significantly activated. Most of the normal biofunctions were
significantly decreased while cell death and survival process were activated.
Gene ontology enrichment analysis revealed the immune system process as the most 
overrepresented group under the biological process category. Toxicity function
analysis identified liver, kidney and heart to be the most affected organs during
and after radiation therapy. The identified biomarkers and alterations in
molecular pathways induced by radiation therapy should be further investigated to
reduce the cytotoxicity and development of fatigue.

PMCID: PMC4783980
PMID: 26907258  [PubMed - in process]


6. Curr Opin Immunol. 2016 Apr;39:136-42. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2016.01.012. Epub 2016 
Feb 16.

Orchestration of B lymphoid cells and their inner myeloid by Bach.

Igarashi K(1), Itoh-Nakadai A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Center for Regulatory Epigenome and Diseases,
Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575,
Japan. Electronic address: igarashi@med.tohoku.ac.jp. (2)Department of
Experimental Immunology, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku
University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

The transcription repressor Bach2 is required for class switch recombination and 
somatic hypermutation of antibody genes in B cells, and proper development of
effector and regulatory T cells. In addition, Bach2 and its related factor Bach1 
promote B cell commitment of progenitor cells by repressing myeloid-related
genes. Bach2 and the myeloid regulators C/EBPß and C/EBPa mutually repress their 
expression, forming a gene regulatory network (GRN) that dictates the process of 
lineage commitment. Bach2 forms another GRN with the plasma cell regulator
Blimp-1, in which Bach2 and Blimp-1 mutually repress their expression. Since
Bach2 expression is reduced in plasma cells, the repression of myeloid-related
genes in B cells may be dissolved upon terminal differentiation of B cells to
plasma cells. The Bach2 GRNs support the myeloid-based model of hematopoiesis.
Myeloid-like characteristics suppressed or manifested in B cells by modifying
differentiation trajectories of B and myeloid cells may be termed as 'inner
myeloid' after the concept of 'inner fish'.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26894991  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Immunol. 2016 Feb 15;196(4):1655-65. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500897. Epub 2016
Jan 22.

Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1A Is a Cell-Intrinsic Transcription Factor Required
for B Cell Differentiation and Development in Mice.

von Wnuck Lipinski K(1), Sattler K(1), Peters S(1), Weske S(1), Keul P(1), Klump 
H(2), Heusch G(1), Göthert JR(3), Levkau B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathophysiology, West German Heart and Vascular Center,
University Hospital Essen, 45122 Essen, Germany; (2)Institute for Transfusion
Medicine, University Hospital Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, 45122 Essen,
Germany; and. (3)Department of Hematology, University Hospital Essen, University 
of Duisburg-Essen, 45122 Essen, Germany. (4)Institute for Pathophysiology, West
German Heart and Vascular Center, University Hospital Essen, 45122 Essen,
Germany; bodo.levkau@uni-due.de.

The hepatocyte NF (HNF) family of transcription factors regulates the complex
gene networks involved in lipid, carbohydrate, and protein metabolism. In humans,
HNF1A mutations cause maturity onset of diabetes in the young type 3, whereas
murine HNF6 participates in fetal liver B lymphopoiesis. In this study, we have
identified a crucial role for the prototypical member of the family HNF1A in
adult bone marrow B lymphopoiesis. HNF1A(-/-) mice exhibited a clear reduction in
total blood and splenic B cells and a further pronounced one in transitional B
cells. In HNF1A(-/-) bone marrow, all B cell progenitors-from pre-pro-/early
pro-B cells to immature B cells-were dramatically reduced and their proliferation
rate suppressed. IL-7 administration in vivo failed to boost B cell development
in HNF1A(-/-) mice, whereas IL-7 stimulation of HNF1A(-/-) B cell progenitors in 
vitro revealed a marked impairment in STAT5 phosphorylation. The B cell
differentiation potential of HNF1A(-/-) common lymphoid progenitors was severely 
impaired in vitro, and the expression of the B lymphopoiesis-promoting
transcription factors E2A, EBF1, Pax5, and Bach2 was reduced in B cell
progenitors in vivo. HNF1A(-/-) bone marrow chimera featured a dramatic defect in
B lymphopoiesis recapitulating that of global HNF1A deficiency. The HNF1A(-/-)
lymphopoiesis defect was confined to B cells as T lymphopoiesis was unaffected,
and bone marrow common lymphoid progenitors and hematopoietic stem cells were
even increased. Our data demonstrate that HNF1A is an important cell-intrinsic
transcription factor in adult B lymphopoiesis and suggest the IL-7R/STAT5 module 
to be causally involved in mediating its function.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26800876  [PubMed - in process]


8. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 18;291(12):6316-30. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.713842. Epub 2016
Jan 19.

Epigenetic Regulation of the Blimp-1 Gene (Prdm1) in B Cells Involves Bach2 and
Histone Deacetylase 3.

Tanaka H(1), Muto A(2), Shima H(2), Katoh Y(3), Sax N(2), Tajima S(4), Brydun
A(4), Ikura T(5), Yoshizawa N(6), Masai H(6), Hoshikawa Y(7), Noda T(7), Nio
M(8), Ochiai K(2), Igarashi K(9).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and the Department of Pediatric Surgery,
Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Seiryo-machi 1-1, Sendai 980-0874.
(2)From the Department of Biochemistry and CREST, Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575. (3)From the Department of Biochemistry
and Center for Regulatory Epigenome and Diseases,Tohoku University Graduate
School of Medicine, Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575. (4)From the Department of 
Biochemistry and. (5)the Radiation Biology Center, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8501. (6)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Sciences, Kamikitazawa 1-6, 
Tokyo 156-8506, and. (7)the Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Cancer
Institute, Ariake 3-10-6, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. (8)the Department of Pediatric
Surgery, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Seiryo-machi 1-1, Sendai 
980-0874. (9)From the Department of Biochemistry and CREST, Japan Science and
Technology Agency, Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575, Center for Regulatory
Epigenome and Diseases,Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575, igarashi@med.tohoku.ac.jp.

B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 1 (Blimp-1) encoded by Prdm1 is a master 
regulator of plasma cell differentiation. The transcription factor Bach2
represses Blimp-1 expression in B cells to stall terminal differentiation, by
which it supports reactions such as class switch recombination of the antibody
genes. We found that histones H3 and H4 around the Prdm1 intron 5 Maf recognition
element were acetylated at higher levels in X63/0 plasma cells expressing Blimp-1
than in BAL17 mature B cells lacking its expression. Conversely, methylation of
H3-K9 was lower in X63/0 cells than BAL17 cells. Purification of the Bach2
complex in BAL17 cells revealed its interaction with histone deacetylase 3
(HDAC3), nuclear co-repressors NCoR1 and NCoR2, transducin ß-like 1X-linked
(Tbl1x), and RAP1-interacting factor homolog (Rif1). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation confirmed the binding of HDAC3 and Rif1 to the Prdm1 locus.
Reduction of HDAC3 or NCoR1 expression by RNA interference in B cells resulted in
an increased Prdm1 mRNA expression. Bach2 is suggested to cooperate with
HDAC3-containing co-repressor complexes in B cells to regulate the stage-specific
expression of Prdm1 by writing epigenetic modifications at the Prdm1 locus.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 26786103  [PubMed - in process]


9. J Autoimmun. 2016 Apr;68:23-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2015.12.003. Epub 2016 Jan 9.

Hypomethylation within gene promoter regions and type 1 diabetes in discordant
monozygotic twins.

Elboudwarej E(1), Cole M(1), Briggs FB(1), Fouts A(2), Fain PR(2), Quach H(1),
Quach D(1), Sinclair E(3), Criswell LA(4), Lane JA(5), Steck AK(2), Barcellos
LF(1), Noble JA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Genetic Epidemiology and Genomics Laboratory, School
of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. (2)University of
Colorado Denver, Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, Denver, CO, USA.
(3)San Francisco General Hospital and University of California, San Francisco
(UCSF), San Francisco, CA, USA. (4)University of California, San Francisco,
Department of Medicine, USA. (5)Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute,
Oakland, CA, USA. (6)Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, CA,
USA. Electronic address: jnoble@chori.org.

Genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes (T1D) is well supported by
epidemiologic evidence; however, disease risk cannot be entirely explained by
established genetic variants identified so far. This study addresses the question
of whether epigenetic modification of the inherited DNA sequence may contribute
to T1D susceptibility. Using the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip array
(450k), a total of seven long-term disease-discordant monozygotic (MZ) twin pairs
and five pairs of HLA-identical, disease-discordant non-twin siblings (NTS) were 
examined for associations between DNA methylation (DNAm) and T1D. Strong evidence
for global hypomethylation of CpG sites within promoter regions in MZ twins with 
TID compared to twins without T1D was observed. DNA methylation data were then
grouped into three categories of CpG sites for further analysis, including those 
within: 1) the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) region, 2) non-MHC genes
with reported T1D association through genome wide association studies (GWAS), and
3) the epigenome, or remainder of sites that did not include MHC and T1D
associated genes. Initial results showed modest methylation differences between
discordant MZ twins for the MHC region and T1D-associated CpG sites, BACH2,
INS-IGF2, and CLEC16A (DNAm difference range: 2.2%-5.0%). In the epigenome CpG
set, the greatest methylation differences were observed in MAGI2, FANCC, and
PCDHB16, (DNAm difference range: 6.9%-16.1%). These findings were not observed in
the HLA-identical NTS pairs. Targeted pyrosequencing of five candidate CpG loci
identified using the 450k array in the original discordant MZ twins produced
similar results using control DNA samples, indicating strong agreement between
the two DNA methylation profiling platforms. However, findings for the top five
candidate CpG loci were not replicated in six additional T1D-discordant MZ twin
pairs. Our results indicate global DNA hypomethylation within gene promoter
regions may contribute to T1D; however, findings do not support the involvement
of large DNAm differences at single CpG sites alone in T1D.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4792657 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26782299  [PubMed - in process]


10. Arthritis Res Ther. 2016 Jan 18;18(1):12. doi: 10.1186/s13075-016-0920-6.

A longitudinal genome-wide association study of anti-tumor necrosis factor
response among Japanese patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Honne K(1), Hallgrímsdóttir I(2), Wu C(3,)(4), Sebro R(5), Jewell NP(6), Sakurai 
T(7), Iwamoto M(1), Minota S(1), Jawaheer D(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Jichi Medical University,
Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan. (2)23andme, Mountain View, CA, USA. (3)Research Unit 
of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Institute of Clinical Research, University of
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. (4)Department of Obstertics & Gynecology,
Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark. (5)Department of Radiology,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
(6)School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA.
(7)Inoue Hospital, Takasaki, Gunma, Japan. (8)Center for Genetics, Children's
Hospital Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, CA, 94609, USA.
djawaheer@chori.org.

BACKGROUND: Studies of Caucasian patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) to
identify genetic biomarkers of anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) response have
used response at a single time point as the phenotype with which single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) associations have been tested. The findings have
been inconsistent across studies. Among Japanese patients, only a few SNPs have
been investigated. We report here the first genome-wide association study (GWAS) 
to identify genetic biomarkers of anti-TNF response among Japanese RA patients,
using response at 2 time-points for a more reliable clinical phenotype over time.
METHODS: Disease Activity Scores based on 28 joint counts (DAS28) were assessed
at baseline (before initial therapy), and after 3 and 6 months in 487 Japanese RA
patients starting anti-TNF therapy for the first time or switching to a new
anti-TNF agent. A genome-wide panel of SNPs was genotyped and additional SNPs
were imputed. Using change in DAS28 scores from baseline at both 3 (<U+0394>DAS-3) and
6 months (<U+0394>DAS-6) as the response phenotype, a longitudinal genome-wide
association analysis was conducted using generalized estimating equations (GEE)
models, adjusting for baseline DAS28, treatment duration, type of anti-TNF agent 
and concomitant methotrexate. Cross-sectional analyses were performed using
multivariate linear regression models, with response from a single time point
(<U+0394>DAS-3 or <U+0394>DAS-6) as phenotype; all other variables were the same as in the GEE 
models.
RESULTS: In the GEE models, borderline significant association was observed at 3 
chromosomal regions (6q15: rs284515, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>6.6x10(-7); 6q27: rs75908454,
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>6.3x10(-7) and 10q25.3: rs1679568, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>8.1x10(-7)), extending to numerous
SNPs in linkage disequilibrium (LD) across each region. Potential candidate genes
in these regions include MAP3K7, BACH2 (6q15), GFRA1 (10q25.3), and WDR27 (6q27).
The association at GFRA1 replicates a previous finding from a Caucasian dataset. 
In the cross-sectional analyses, <U+0394>DAS-6 was significantly associated with the
6q15 locus (rs284511, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.5x10(-8)). No other significant or borderline
significant associations were identified.
CONCLUSION: Three genomic regions demonstrated significant or borderline
significant associations with anti-TNF response in our dataset of Japanese RA
patients, including a locus previously associated among Caucasians. Using
repeated measures of response as phenotype enhanced the power to detect these
associations.

PMCID: PMC4718049
PMID: 26776603  [PubMed - in process]


11. PLoS Comput Biol. 2016 Jan 11;12(1):e1004696. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004696. 
eCollection 2016.

A Network Model to Describe the Terminal Differentiation of B Cells.

Méndez A(1,)(2), Mendoza L(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Doctorado en Ciencias Bioquímicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México, Ciudad de México, México. (2)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México, México. (3)C3, Centro 
de Ciencias de la Complejidad, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de
México, México.

Terminal differentiation of B cells is an essential process for the humoral
immune response in vertebrates and is achieved by the concerted action of several
transcription factors in response to antigen recognition and extracellular
signals provided by T-helper cells. While there is a wealth of experimental data 
regarding the molecular and cellular signals involved in this process, there is
no general consensus regarding the structure and dynamical properties of the
underlying regulatory network controlling this process. We developed a dynamical 
model of the regulatory network controlling terminal differentiation of B cells. 
The structure of the network was inferred from experimental data available in the
literature, and its dynamical behavior was analyzed by modeling the network both 
as a discrete and a continuous dynamical systems. The steady states of these
models are consistent with the patterns of activation reported for the Naive, GC,
Mem, and PC cell types. Moreover, the models are able to describe the patterns of
differentiation from the precursor Naive to any of the GC, Mem, or PC cell types 
in response to a specific set of extracellular signals. We simulated all possible
single loss- and gain-of-function mutants, corroborating the importance of Pax5, 
Bcl6, Bach2, Irf4, and Blimp1 as key regulators of B cell differentiation
process. The model is able to represent the directional nature of terminal B cell
differentiation and qualitatively describes key differentiation events from a
precursor cell to terminally differentiated B cells.

PMCID: PMC4720151
PMID: 26751566  [PubMed - in process]


12. J Clin Invest. 2016 Feb 1;126(2):599-604. doi: 10.1172/JCI82884. Epub 2016 Jan 5.

The transcription factor BACH2 promotes tumor immunosuppression.

Roychoudhuri R, Eil RL, Clever D, Klebanoff CA, Sukumar M, Grant FM, Yu Z, Mehta 
G, Liu H, Jin P, Ji Y, Palmer DC, Pan JH, Chichura A, Crompton JG, Patel SJ,
Stroncek D, Wang E, Marincola FM, Okkenhaug K, Gattinoni L, Restifo NP.

The immune system has a powerful ability to recognize and kill cancer cells, but 
its function is often suppressed within tumors, preventing clearance of disease. 
Functionally diverse innate and adaptive cellular lineages either drive or
constrain immune reactions within tumors. The transcription factor (TF) BACH2
regulates the differentiation of multiple innate and adaptive cellular lineages, 
but its role in controlling tumor immunity has not been elucidated. Here, we
demonstrate that BACH2 is required to establish immunosuppression within tumors. 
Tumor growth was markedly impaired in Bach2-deficient mice and coincided with
intratumoral activation of both innate and adaptive immunity. However, augmented 
tumor clearance in the absence of Bach2 was dependent upon the adaptive immune
system. Analysis of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes from Bach2-deficient mice
revealed high frequencies of rapidly proliferating effector CD4+ and CD8+ T cells
that expressed the inflammatory cytokine IFN-<U+03B3>. Effector T cell activation
coincided with a reduction in the frequency of intratumoral Foxp3+ Tregs.
Mechanistically, BACH2 promoted tumor immunosuppression through Treg-mediated
inhibition of intratumoral CD8+ T cells and IFN-<U+03B3>. These findings demonstrate
that BACH2 is a key component of the molecular program of tumor immunosuppression
and identify therapeutic targets for the reversal of immunosuppression in cancer.

PMCID: PMC4731158 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26731475  [PubMed - in process]


13. Epigenetics. 2015 Dec 2;10(12):1121-32. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1111504.

DNA methylation profiling to assess pathogenicity of BRCA1 unclassified variants 
in breast cancer.

Flower KJ(1), Shenker NS(1), El-Bahrawy M(2), Goldgar DE(3), Parsons MT(4);
KConFab Investigators; Affect study group, Spurdle AB(4), Morris JR(5), Brown
R(1,)(6), Flanagan JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Epigenetics Unit; Department of Surgery and Cancer; Imperial College London 
; UK. (2)b Department of Histopathology ; Hammersmith Hospital; Imperial College 
London ; UK. (3)c Huntsman Cancer Institute; University of Utah ; Salt Lake City 
, UT , USA. (4)d QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute ; Brisbane , QLD ,
Australia. (5)f Genome Stability Unit; School of Cancer Sciences; University of
Birmingham ; UK. (6)g Section of Molecular Pathology; Institute for Cancer
Research ; Sutton , UK.

Germline pathogenic mutations in BRCA1 increase risk of developing breast cancer.
Screening for mutations in BRCA1 frequently identifies sequence variants of
unknown pathogenicity and recent work has aimed to develop methods for
determining pathogenicity. We previously observed that tumor DNA methylation can 
differentiate BRCA1-mutated from BRCA1-wild type tumors. We hypothesized that we 
could predict pathogenicity of variants based on DNA methylation profiles of
tumors that had arisen in carriers of unclassified variants. We selected 150 FFPE
breast tumor DNA samples [47 BRCA1 pathogenic mutation carriers, 65 BRCAx
(BRCA1-wild type), 38 BRCA1 test variants] and analyzed a subset (n=54) using the
Illumina 450K methylation platform, using the remaining samples for bisulphite
pyrosequencing validation. Three validated markers (BACH2, C8orf31, and
LOC654342) were combined with sequence bioinformatics in a model to predict
pathogenicity of 27 variants (independent test set).  Predictions were compared
with standard multifactorial likelihood analysis. Prediction was consistent for
c.5194-12G>A (IVS 19-12 G>A) (P>0.99); 13 variants were considered not pathogenic
or likely not pathogenic using both approaches. We conclude that tumor DNA
methylation data alone has potential to be used in prediction of BRCA1 variant
pathogenicity but is not independent of estrogen receptor status and grade, which
are used in current multifactorial models to predict pathogenicity.

PMID: 26727311  [PubMed - in process]


14. MBio. 2015 Dec 15;6(6):e01863-15. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01863-15.

Common Viral Integration Sites Identified in Avian Leukosis Virus-Induced B-Cell 
Lymphomas.

Justice JF 4th(1), Morgan RW(2), Beemon KL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware,
USA. (3)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
KLB@jhu.edu.

Avian leukosis virus (ALV) induces B-cell lymphoma and other neoplasms in
chickens by integrating within or near cancer genes and perturbing their
expression. Four genes--MYC, MYB, Mir-155, and TERT--have previously been
identified as common integration sites in these virus-induced lymphomas and are
thought to play a causal role in tumorigenesis. In this study, we employ
high-throughput sequencing to identify additional genes driving tumorigenesis in 
ALV-induced B-cell lymphomas. In addition to the four genes implicated
previously, we identify other genes as common integration sites, including
TNFRSF1A, MEF2C, CTDSPL, TAB2, RUNX1, MLL5, CXorf57, and BACH2. We also analyze
the genome-wide ALV integration landscape in vivo and find increased frequency of
ALV integration near transcriptional start sites and within transcripts. Previous
work has shown ALV prefers a weak consensus sequence for integration in cultured 
human cells. We confirm this consensus sequence for ALV integration in vivo in
the chicken genome.IMPORTANCE: Avian leukosis virus induces B-cell lymphomas in
chickens. Earlier studies showed that ALV can induce tumors through insertional
mutagenesis, and several genes have been implicated in the development of these
tumors. In this study, we use high-throughput sequencing to reveal the
genome-wide ALV integration landscape in ALV-induced B-cell lymphomas. We find
elevated levels of ALV integration near transcription start sites and use common 
integration site analysis to greatly expand the number of genes implicated in the
development of these tumors. Interestingly, we identify several genes targeted by
viral insertions that have not been previously shown to be involved in cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Justice et al.

PMCID: PMC4701831
PMID: 26670384  [PubMed - in process]


15. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 11;5:17957. doi: 10.1038/srep17957.

Uncovering MicroRNA Regulatory Hubs that Modulate Plasma Cell Differentiation.

Tsai DY(1,)(2), Hung KH(1,)(3), Lin IY(1), Su ST(1), Wu SY(4), Chung CH(1), Wang 
TC(1,)(5), Li WH(1,)(5), Shih AC(4), Lin KI(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan. (2)Institute of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112,
Taiwan. (3)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei 112, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Information Science, Academia
Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan. (5)Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica,
Taipei 115, Taiwan.

Using genome-wide approaches, we studied the microRNA (miRNA) expression profile 
during human plasma cell (PC) differentiation induced by stimulation of human
blood B cells with T follicular helper cell-dependent signals. Combining the
profiles of differentially expressed genes in PC differentiation with gene
ontology (GO) analysis revealed that a significant group of genes involved in the
transcription factor (TF) activity was preferentially changed. We thus focused on
studying the effects of differentially expressed miRNAs on several key TFs in PC 
differentiation. Cohorts of differentially expressed miRNAs cooperating as miRNA 
hubs were predicted and validated to modulate key TFs, including a down-regulated
miRNA hub containing miR-101-3p, -125b-5p, and -223-3p contributing to induction 
of PRDM1 as well as an up-regulated miRNA hub containing miR-34a-5p, -148a-3p,
and -183-5p suppressing BCL6, BACH2, and FOXP1. Induced expression of NF-<U+03BA>B and
PRDM1 during PC differentiation controlled the expression of up- and
down-regulated miRNA hubs, respectively. Co-expression of miR-101-3p, -125b-5p,
and -223-3p in stimulated B cells showed synergistic effects on inhibition of PC 
formation, which can be rescued by re-introduction of PRDM1. Together, we
catalogue the complex roadmap of miRNAs and their functional interplay in
collaboratively directing PC differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4675970
PMID: 26655851  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 22;291(4):1826-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.661702. Epub 2015 
Nov 30.

The Transcription Factor Bach2 Is Phosphorylated at Multiple Sites in Murine B
Cells but a Single Site Prevents Its Nuclear Localization.

Ando R(1), Shima H(2), Tamahara T(3), Sato Y(4), Watanabe-Matsui M(4), Kato H(4),
Sax N(2), Motohashi H(5), Taguchi K(6), Yamamoto M(6), Nio M(7), Maeda T(8),
Ochiai K(9), Muto A(2), Igarashi K(10).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Biochemistry, Pediatric Surgery, and. (2)From the
Departments of Biochemistry, CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency,
Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575, and. (3)From the Departments of Biochemistry, 
CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575,
and the Department of Preventive Dentistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Dentistry, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Sendai 980-8575. (4)From the Departments of
Biochemistry. (5)Department of Gene Expression Regulation, Institute of
Development, Aging, and Cancer, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Sendai
980-8575. (6)Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575. (7)Pediatric Surgery, and. (8)the Laboratory
of Membrane Proteins, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University
of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan. (9)From the Departments of
Biochemistry, CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Seiryo-machi 2-1,
Sendai 980-8575, and Center for Regulatory Epigenome and Diseases, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575.
(10)From the Departments of Biochemistry, CREST, Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575, and Center for Regulatory Epigenome
and Diseases, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Seiryo-machi 2-1,
Sendai 980-8575, igarashi@med.tohoku.ac.jp.

The transcription factor Bach2 regulates the immune system at multiple points,
including class switch recombination (CSR) in activated B cells and the function 
of T cells in part by restricting their terminal differentiation. However, the
regulation of Bach2 expression and its activity in the immune cells are still
unclear. Here, we demonstrated that Bach2 mRNA expression decreased in
Pten-deficient primary B cells. Bach2 was phosphorylated in primary B cells,
which was increased upon the activation of the B cell receptor by an
anti-immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody or CD40 ligand. Using specific inhibitors of
kinases, the phosphorylation of Bach2 in activated B cells was shown to depend on
the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt-mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
pathway. The complex of mTOR and Raptor phosphorylated Bach2 in vitro. We
identified multiple new phosphorylation sites of Bach2 by mass spectrometry
analysis of epitope-tagged Bach2 expressed in the mature B cell line BAL17. Among
the sites identified, serine 535 (Ser-535) was critical for the regulation of
Bach2 because a single mutation of Ser-535 abolished cytoplasmic accumulation of 
Bach2, promoting its nuclear accumulation in pre-B cells, whereas Ser-509 played 
an auxiliary role. Bach2 repressor activity was enhanced by the Ser-535 mutation 
in B cells. These results suggest that the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway inhibits Bach2
by both repressing its expression and inducing its phosphorylation in B cells.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4722461 [Available on 2017-01-22]
PMID: 26620562  [PubMed - in process]


17. Immunol Res. 2016 Feb;64(1):181-90. doi: 10.1007/s12026-015-8736-z.

Influence of miR-30b regulating humoral immune response by genetic difference.

Duan ZQ(1,)(2), Shi JD(3), Wu MN(3), Hu NZ(3), Hu YZ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shanxi Medical University, 56 South Xinjian Road, Taiyuan, 030001, Shanxi,
People's Republic of China. duanzhiq@163.com. (2)The Second Hospital of Shanxi
Medical University, 382 Wuyi Road, Taiyuan, 030001, Shanxi, People's Republic of 
China. duanzhiq@163.com. (3)Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 935 Jiaoling Road, Kunming,
650118, Yunnan, People's Republic of China. (4)Institute of Medical Biology,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 935
Jiaoling Road, Kunming, 650118, Yunnan, People's Republic of China.
huyunzhangym@126.com.

Investigation of genetic difference will be beneficial to researchers to
understand the origins and nature of diseases. Previous studies have revealed
that L-kynurenine (L-Kyn) level was changed significantly in patient with cancer 
and that miR-30b play different role in tumor cells and immune cells. Moreover,
it has been also conformed that miR-30b involved in the process of L-Kyn-mediated
suppression of humoral immune responses induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in
human normal B cells separated from volunteers' peripheral blood. Nevertheless,
the miR-30b role regulating humoral immune response in B lymphoma cells has been 
still unclear due to the genetic difference between normal cells and tumor cells.
The current study demonstrated that the selected concentration of L-Kyn (100,
1000 µM) significantly reduced the immunoglobulin M secretion induced by LPS when
compared with the control group in B lymphoma, CH12.LX, and BCL-1 cells, which
had, at least, incomplete dependence on Aryl hydrocarbon receptor, the receptor
of L-Kyn. In addition, although L-Kyn (100 µM) significantly attenuated the
expression of miR-30b in BCL-1 cells rather than in CH12.LX cells, no significant
differences in the strength of L-Kyn-mediated suppression of humoral immune
responses induced by LPS were detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
between the LPS (10 µg/ml) + L-Kyn (100 µM) group and the LPS (10 µg/ml) + L-Kyn 
(100 µM) + miR-30b mimics/miR-30b inhibitor group in CH12.LX and BCL-1 cells,
respectively. Further data also showed that mouse Bach2 mRNA was a novel target
of miR-30b. These results suggest that genetic difference among cells has a great
influence on the miR-30b role in the process of L-Kyn-mediated suppression of
humoral immune responses induced by LPS.

PMID: 26590946  [PubMed - in process]


18. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 2. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.399. [Epub ahead of print]

The NF-<U+03BA>B subunit c-Rel regulates Bach2 tumour suppressor expression in B-cell
lymphoma.

Hunter JE(1), Butterworth JA(1), Zhao B(2), Sellier H(1), Campbell KJ(3), Thomas 
HD(4), Bacon CM(4), Cockell SJ(5), Gewurz BE(2), Perkins ND(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences (ICaMB), Newcastle University
Medical School, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK. (2)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
MA, USA. (3)The Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Glasgow, UK. (4)Northern
Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK. (5)Bioinformatics Support
Unit, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.

The REL gene, encoding the NF-<U+03BA>B subunit c-Rel, is frequently amplified in B-cell
lymphoma and functions as a tumour-promoting transcription factor. Here we report
the surprising result that c-rel-/- mice display significantly earlier
lymphomagenesis in the c-Myc driven, Eµ-Myc model of B-cell lymphoma. c-Rel loss 
also led to earlier onset of disease in a separate TCL1-Tg-driven lymphoma model.
Tumour reimplantation experiments indicated that this is an effect intrinsic to
the Eµ-Myc lymphoma cells but, counterintuitively, c-rel-/- Eµ-Myc lymphoma cells
were more sensitive to apoptotic stimuli. To learn more about why loss of c-Rel
led to earlier onset of disease, microarray gene expression analysis was
performed on B cells from 4-week-old, wild-type and c-rel-/- Eµ-Myc mice.
Extensive changes in gene expression were not seen at this age, but among those
transcripts significantly downregulated by the loss of c-Rel was the B-cell
tumour suppressor BTB and CNC homology 2 (Bach2). Quantitative PCR and western
blot analysis confirmed loss of Bach2 in c-Rel mutant Eµ-Myc tumours at both 4
weeks and the terminal stages of disease. Moreover, Bach2 expression was also
downregulated in c-rel-/- TCL1-Tg mice and RelA Thr505Ala mutant Eµ-Myc mice.
Analysis of wild-type Eµ-Myc mice demonstrated that the population expressing low
levels of Bach2 exhibited the earlier onset of lymphoma seen in c-rel-/- mice.
Confirming the relevance of these findings to human disease, analysis of
chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing data revealed that Bach2 is a c-Rel and 
NF-<U+03BA>B target gene in transformed human B cells, whereas treatment of Burkitt's
lymphoma cells with inhibitors of the NF-<U+03BA>B/I<U+03BA>B kinase pathway or deletion of
c-Rel or RelA resulted in loss of Bach2 expression. These data reveal a
surprising tumour suppressor role for c-Rel in lymphoma development explained by 
regulation of Bach2 expression, underlining the context-dependent complexity of
NF-<U+03BA>B signalling in cancer.Oncogene advance online publication, 2 November 2015; 
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.399.

PMID: 26522720  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 7;10(10):e0140049. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140049.
eCollection 2015.

Transcriptome Analysis of CD4+ T Cells in Coeliac Disease Reveals Imprint of
BACH2 and IFN<U+03B3> Regulation.

Quinn EM(1), Coleman C(1), Molloy B(1), Dominguez Castro P(1), Cormican P(2),
Trimble V(1), Mahmud N(1), McManus R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Trinity Centre, St
James's Hospital, Dublin, 8, Ireland. (2)Animal and Bioscience Research
Department, Grange Research Centre, Teagasc, Dunsany, Ireland.

Genetic studies have to date identified 43 genome wide significant coeliac
disease susceptibility (CD) loci comprising over 70 candidate genes. However, how
altered regulation of such disease associated genes contributes to CD
pathogenesis remains to be elucidated. Recently there has been considerable
emphasis on characterising cell type specific and stimulus dependent genetic
variants. Therefore in this study we used RNA sequencing to profile over 70
transcriptomes of CD4+ T cells, a cell type crucial for CD pathogenesis, in both 
stimulated and resting samples from individuals with CD and unaffected controls. 
We identified extensive transcriptional changes across all conditions, with the
previously established CD gene IFNy the most strongly up-regulated gene (log2
fold change 4.6; P(adjusted) = 2.40x10(-11)) in CD4+ T cells from CD patients
compared to controls. We show a significant correlation of differentially
expressed genes with genetic studies of the disease to date (P(adjusted) =
0.002), and 21 CD candidate susceptibility genes are differentially expressed
under one or more of the conditions used in this study. Pathway analysis revealed
significant enrichment of immune related processes. Co-expression network
analysis identified several modules of coordinately expressed CD genes. Two
modules were particularly highly enriched for differentially expressed genes
(P<2.2x10(-16)) and highlighted IFNy and the genetically associated transcription
factor BACH2 which showed significantly reduced expression in coeliac samples
(log2FC -1.75; P(adjusted) = 3.6x10(-3)) as key regulatory genes in CD. Genes
regulated by BACH2 were very significantly over-represented among our
differentially expressed genes (P<2.2x10(-16)) indicating that reduced expression
of this master regulator of T cell differentiation promotes a pro-inflammatory
response and strongly corroborates genetic evidence that BACH2 plays an important
role in CD pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4596691
PMID: 26444573  [PubMed - in process]


20. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2015;13(12):1425-8. doi:
10.1586/14787210.2015.1094375. Epub 2015 Sep 28.

Lethal influenza infection: Is a macrophage to blame?

Halstead ES(1), Chroneos ZC(2).

Author information: 
(1)a 1 Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pulmonary Critical Care, Medicine,
Pulmonary Immunology and Physiology Laboratory, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Pennsylvania State University Hershey Children's Hospital,
Hershey, PA, USA. (2)b 2 Department of Pediatrics, Microbiology and Immunology,
Pulmonary Immunology and Physiology Laboratory, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA.

Alveolar macrophages (AMs) are critical for immunity against influenza A virus
(IAV) infection. Depletion, hyporeactivity, and disruption of AM development and 
differentiation are all associated with lethal IAV infection. AMs drive the
innate immune response that limits IAV infection. AMs are crucial for
steady-state homeostasis of pulmonary surfactant, and in turn surfactant proteins
regulate AMs and participate in host defense against IAV. Known factors that are 
necessary for AM function and differentiation in vivo include surfactant
proteins, the growth factor GM-CSF, the hormone receptor PPAR<U+03B3>, and the
transcription factors PU.1 and Bach2. Although PU.1 and PPAR<U+03B3> are downstream
effectors of GM-CSF, Bach2 works independently. GM-CSF and Bach2-deficient AMs
have phenotypes with immature or alternatively activated states of
differentiation, respectively, and both extremes are unsuitable for surfactant
homeostasis. The activation state of AMs and the local microenvironment may
determine the development of symptomatic versus asymptomatic IAV infection in
different individuals.

PMID: 26414622  [PubMed - in process]


21. Diabetes Care. 2015 Oct;38 Suppl 2:S8-13. doi: 10.2337/dcs15-2003.

Shared Genetic Basis for Type 1 Diabetes, Islet Autoantibodies, and
Autoantibodies Associated With Other Immune-Mediated Diseases in Families With
Type 1 Diabetes.

Brorsson CA(1), Pociot F(2); Type 1 Diabetes Genetics Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Department of Systems Biology,
Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark Copenhagen Diabetes Research
Center, Department of Pediatrics E, Herlev University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark. 
(2)Copenhagen Diabetes Research Center, Department of Pediatrics E, Herlev
University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark flemming.pociot.01@regionh.dk.

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a polygenic autoimmune disease that is often present
with autoantibodies directed against pancreatic islet proteins. Many genetic
susceptibility loci are shared with other autoimmune or immune-mediated diseases 
that also cosegregate in families with T1D. The aim of this study was to
investigate whether susceptibility loci identified in genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) of T1D were also associated with autoantibody positivity in
individuals with diabetes. Fifty single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
genotyped in 6,556 multiethnic cases collected by the Type 1 Diabetes Genetics
Consortium (T1DGC). These were tested for association with three islet
autoantibodies-against autoantibodies to GAD (GADA), IA-2 (IA-2A), and zinc
transporter 8 (ZnT8A)-and autoantibodies against thyroid peroxidase (TPOA) in
autoimmune thyroid disease, gastric parietal cells (PCA) in autoimmune gastritis,
transglutaminase (TGA) in celiac disease, and 21-hydroxylase (21-OHA) in
autoimmune hypoadrenalism. In addition to the MHC region, we identify SNPs in
five susceptibility loci (IFIH1, PTPN22, SH2B3, BACH2, and CTLA4) as
significantly associated with more than one autoantibody at a false discovery
rate less than 5%. IFIH1/2q24 demonstrated the most unrestricted association, as 
significant association was demonstrated for PCA, TPOA, GADA, 21-OHA, and IA-2A. 
In addition, 11 loci were significantly associated with a single autoantibody.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMCID: PMC4582910 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26405073  [PubMed - in process]


22. Cell Signal. 2015 Nov;27(11):2191-200. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.07.016. Epub
2015 Jul 22.

Discontinuing MEK inhibitors in tumor cells with an acquired resistance increases
migration and invasion.

Nörz D(1), Grottke A(2), Bach J(3), Herzberger C(4), Hofmann BT(5), Nashan B(6), 
Jücker M(7), Ewald F(8).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Medicine, Institute of Biochemistry and Signal
Transduction, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. Electronic
address: 6161867@stud.uke.uni-hamburg.de. (2)Center for Experimental Medicine,
Institute of Biochemistry and Signal Transduction, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. Electronic address: grottke.astrid@googlemail.com.
(3)Center for Experimental Medicine, Institute of Biochemistry and Signal
Transduction, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. Electronic
address: johanna.bach2@googlemail.com. (4)Center for Experimental Medicine,
Institute of Biochemistry and Signal Transduction, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. Electronic address:
christiane.herzberger@googlemail.com. (5)Department of General, Visceral and
Thoracic Surgery, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany.
Electronic address: mail@bianca-hofmann.de. (6)Department of Hepatobiliary and
Transplant Surgery, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Martinistrasse52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany. Electronic address: nashan@uke.de.
(7)Center for Experimental Medicine, Institute of Biochemistry and Signal
Transduction, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. Electronic
address: juecker@uke.de. (8)Department of Hepatobiliary and Transplant Surgery,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistrasse52, 20246 Hamburg,
Germany. Electronic address: f.ewald@uke.de.

BACKGROUND: Development of small molecular inhibitors against BRAF and MEK has
been a breakthrough in the treatment of malignant melanoma. However, the
long-term effect is foiled in virtually all patients by the emergence of
resistant tumor cell populations. Therefore, mechanisms resulting in the acquired
resistance against BRAF and MEK inhibitors have gained much attention and several
strategies have been proposed to overcome tumor resistance, including interval
treatment or withdrawal of these compounds after disease progression.
METHODS: Using a panel of cell lines with an acquired resistance against MEK
inhibitors, we have evaluated the sensitivity of these cells against compounds
targeting AKT/mTOR signaling, as well as novel ERK1/2 inhibitors. Furthermore,
the effects of withdrawal of MEK inhibitor on migration in resistant cell lines
were analyzed.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that withdrawal of BRAF or MEK inhibitors in tumor cells 
with an acquired resistance results in reactivation of ERK1/2 signaling and
upregulation of EMT-inducing transcription factors, leading to a highly migratory
and invasive phenotype of cancer cells. Furthermore, we show that migration in
these cells is independent from AKT/mTOR signaling. However, combined targeting
of AKT/mTOR using MK-2206 and AZD8055 efficiently inhibits proliferation in all
resistant tumor cell lines analyzed.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that combined targeting of MEK/AKT/mTOR or treatment with
a novel ERK1/2 inhibitor downstream of BRAF/MEK suppresses proliferation as well 
as migration and invasion in resistant tumor cells. We provide a rationale
against the discontinuation of BRAF or MEK inhibitors in patients with an
acquired resistance, and provide a rationale for combined targeting of AKT/mTOR
and MEK/ERK1/2, or direct targeting of ERK1/2 as an effective treatment strategy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26210887  [PubMed - in process]


23. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2015 Jul 6;69:729-43. doi:
10.5604/17322693.1160360.

[CNC proteins in physiology and pathology].

[Article in Polish]

Gegotek A(1), Skrzydlewska E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zaklad Chemii Nieorganicznej i Analitycznej, Uniwersytet Medyczny w
Bialymstoku.

CNC proteins consist of Bach1, Bach2 and 4 homologous transcription factors:
Nrf1, Nrf2, Nrf3 and p45NF-E2. Transcription factors belonging to this group of
proteins play a crucial role in protection of cells against oxidative stress.
Under physiological conditions, they remain in the cytoplasm in the inactive form
or are degraded. However, in oxidative stress conditions, they are translocated
to the nucleus, and bind to DNA in the ARE sequence. Consequently, there is
transcription of genes encoding cytoprotective proteins, such as phase II
enzymes, or low molecular weight antioxidant proteins (i.e., thioredoxin,
ferritin, metallothionein) responsible for protecting cells from reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) action. The activity of transcriptional proteins depends directly
on the redox state of the cell. ROS as second messenger signals, control
inhibitors of cytoplasmic CNC proteins or potentiate the activity of kinases
(MAPK, PKC, PI3K, PERK), leading to phosphorylation of transcription factors.
This is conducive to translocation of these molecules into the nucleus and to
formation of complexes that initiate the gene expression. Disorders of regulation
of the activity of transcription factors belonging to the CNC proteins caused by 
gene mutations, epigenetic modifications or increased activity of p62, p21, or
k-Ras, B-Raf and c-Myc oncogenes, induce changes in the level of ARE-dependent
gene expression, which can lead even to the development of carcinogenesis. On the
other hand, Nrf transcription factors, inducing the expression of antioxidants
and enzymes responsible for the detoxification of xenobiotics, can be considered 
as a potential target of the action of chemopreventive factors in anticancer
therapy.

PMID: 26206989  [PubMed - in process]


24. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Nov;67(11):2978-89. doi: 10.1002/art.39273.

Association of systemic lupus erythematosus with decreased immunosuppressive
potential of the IgG glycome.

Vuckovic F(1), Krištic J(1), Gudelj I(1), Teruel M(2), Keser T(3), Pezer M(1),
Pucic-Bakovic M(1), Štambuk J(1), Trbojevic-Akmacic I(1), Barrios C(4), Pavic
T(3), Menni C(5), Wang Y(6), Zhou Y(7), Cui L(8), Song H(8), Zeng Q(9), Guo X(6),
Pons-Estel BA(10), McKeigue P(11), Leslie Patrick A(12), Gornik O(3), Spector
TD(5), Harjacek M(13), Alarcon-Riquelme M(14), Molokhia M(5), Wang W(15), Lauc
G(16).

Author information: 
(1)Genos Ltd., Glycoscience Research Laboratory, Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Pfizer-University of Granada-Junta de Andalucia Centre for Genomics and
Oncological Research (GENYO), Granada, Spain. (3)University of Zagreb, Zagreb,
Croatia. (4)King's College London, London, UK, and Hospital del Mar and Institut 
Mar d'Investigacions Mediques, Barcelona, Spain. (5)King's College London,
London, UK. (6)Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. (7)Beijing Tiantan
Hospital and Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. (8)Affiliated Kailuan
General Hospital of Hebei United University, Tangshan, China. (9)International
Medical Center and Chinese People's Liberation Army General Hospital, Beijing,
China. (10)Sanatorio Parque, Rosario, Argentina. (11)University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK. (12)Kavanagh Street Medical Centre, Port of Spain, Trinidad, West 
Indies. (13)Clinical Hospital Center Sestre Milosrdnice, Zagreb, Croatia.
(14)Pfizer-University of Granada-Junta de Andalucia Centre for Genomics and
Oncological Research (GENYO), Granada, Spain, and Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City. (15)Capital Medical University, Beijing, China, and
Edith Cowan University, Perth, Western Australia, Australia. (16)Genos Ltd.,
Glycoscience Research Laboratory, and University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.

OBJECTIVE: Glycans attached to the Fc portion of IgG are important modulators of 
IgG effector functions. Interindividual differences in IgG glycome composition
are large and they associate strongly with different inflammatory and autoimmune 
diseases. IKZF1, HLA-DQ2A/B, and BACH2 genetic loci that affect IgG glycome
composition show pleiotropy with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), indicating a
potentially causative role of aberrant IgG glycosylation in SLE. We undertook
this large multicenter case-control study to determine whether SLE is associated 
with altered IgG glycosylation.
METHODS: Using ultra-performance liquid chromatography analysis of released
glycans, we analyzed the composition of the IgG glycome in 261 SLE patients and
247 matched controls of Latin American Mestizo origin (the discovery cohort) and 
in 2 independent replication cohorts of different ethnicity (108 SLE patients and
193 controls from Trinidad, and 106 SLE patients and 105 controls from China).
RESULTS: Multiple statistically significant differences in IgG glycome
composition were observed between patients and controls. The most significant
changes included decreased galactosylation and sialylation of IgG (which regulate
proinflammatory and antiinflammatory actions of IgG) as well as decreased core
fucose and increased bisecting N-acetylglucosamine (which affect
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity).
CONCLUSION: The IgG glycome in SLE patients is significantly altered in a way
that decreases immunosuppressive action of circulating immunoglobulins. The
magnitude of observed changes is associated with the intensity of the disease,
indicating that aberrant IgG glycome composition or changes in IgG glycosylation 
may be an important molecular mechanism in SLE.

© 2015 The Authors. Arthritis & Rheumatology is published by Wiley Periodicals,
Inc. on behalf of the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC4626261 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26200652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biomed Rep. 2015 May;3(3):327-332. Epub 2015 Feb 10.

Association investigation of BACH2 rs3757247 and SOD2 rs4880 polymorphisms with
the type 1 diabetes and diabetes long-term complications risk in the Polish
population.

Wegner M(1), Mostowska A(2), Araszkiewicz A(3), Choudhury M(4),
Piorunska-Stolzmann M(5), Zozulinska-Ziolkiewicz D(3), Wierusz-Wysocka B(3),
Jagodzinski PP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lipid Metabolism Laboratory, Department of General Chemistry, Chemistry and
Clinical Biochemistry, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan 60-780,
Poland. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Poznan 60-781, Poland. (3)Department of Internal Medicine and
Diabetology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan 60-843, Poland.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Texas A&M Health Science Center College
of Pharmacy, Kingsville 78363, TX, USA. (5)Department of Clinical Biochemistry
and Laboratory Medicine, Chemistry and Clinical Biochemistry, Poznan University
of Medical Sciences, Poznan 60-780, Poland.

Genetic factors are indicated in the development of type 1 diabetes (DM1).
Recently, nucleotide variants of BACH2 and SOD2 have been associated with this
chronic condition. Therefore, the purpose of the present study was to investigate
the contribution of BACH2 rs3757247 and SOD2 rs4880 (Ala16Val) polymorphisms to
the risk of DM1 and diabetes long-term complications. Selected polymorphic
variants of BACH2 and SOD2 were investigated in a group of 141 patients with DM1 
and in a group of age, gender-matched healthy subjects (n=369) using a
high-resolution melting curve method. There was no evidence for either allelic or
genotypic association with the risk of DM1 and diabetes chronic complications for
analysed polymorphisms. In addition, no interaction between BACH2 and SOD2
variants in the development of this condition was observed. However, the
frequency of BACH2 rs3757247 AG and AA genotypes was statistically different
between DM1 patients with retinopathy and healthy individuals (odds ratio, 2.455;
95% confidence interval, 0.999-6.035; P=0.044), but this result did not survive
multiple testing corrections. The present study did not confirm the involvement
of BACH2 rs3757247 and SOD2 rs4880 polymorphisms in the development of DM1 and
diabetes long-term complications. Further studies in a larger population sample
are required.

PMCID: PMC4461856
PMID: 26137231  [PubMed]


26. J Cell Sci. 2015 Jul 1;128(13):2388-400. doi: 10.1242/jcs.169441. Epub 2015 May
28.

Genome-wide RNAi screen for nuclear actin reveals a network of cofilin
regulators.

Dopie J(1), Rajakylä EK(1), Joensuu MS(1), Huet G(1), Ferrantelli E(1), Xie T(2),
Jäälinoja H(3), Jokitalo E(4), Vartiainen MK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cell and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biotechnology, University 
of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland. (2)Image and Data Analysis Core (IDAC),
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Light Microscopy Unit,
Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Program in Cell and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biotechnology, University 
of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland Electron Microscopy Unit, Institute of
Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (5)Program in Cell and 
Molecular Biology, Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, 00014
Helsinki, Finland maria.vartiainen@helsinki.fi.

Nuclear actin plays an important role in many processes that regulate gene
expression. Cytoplasmic actin dynamics are tightly controlled by numerous
actin-binding proteins, but regulation of nuclear actin has remained unclear.
Here, we performed a genome-wide RNA interference (RNAi) screen in Drosophila
cells to identify proteins that influence either nuclear polymerization or import
of actin. We validate 19 factors as specific hits, and show that Chinmo (known as
Bach2 in mammals), SNF4A<U+03B3> (Prkag1 in mammals) and Rab18 play a role in nuclear
localization of actin in both fly and mammalian cells. We identify several new
regulators of cofilin activity, and characterize modulators of both cofilin
kinases and phosphatase. For example, Chinmo/Bach2, which regulates nuclear actin
levels also in vivo, maintains active cofilin by repressing the expression of the
kinase Cdi (Tesk in mammals). Finally, we show that Nup98 and lamin are
candidates for regulating nuclear actin polymerization. Our screen therefore
reveals new aspects of actin regulation and links nuclear actin to many cellular 
processes.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4510847
PMID: 26021350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Meta Gene. 2015 May 15;4:129-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mgene.2015.04.002. eCollection
2015.

Enriched transcription factor signatures in triple negative breast cancer
indicates possible targeted therapies with existing drugs.

Willis S(1), De P(1), Dey N(1), Long B(2), Young B(1), Sparano JA(3), Wang V(4), 
Davidson NE(5), Leyland-Jones BR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Avera Cancer Institute, Sioux Falls, SD, United States. (2)The Scripps
Research Institute, Jupiter, FL, United States. (3)Montefiore Medical Center,
Bronx, NY, United States. (4)Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, United
States. (5)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute and UPMC Cancer Center,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States.

PURPOSE: Triple negative (TN) breast cancers which lack expression of the
estrogen (ER), progesterone (PR), and human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2)
receptors convey a poor prognosis due in part to a lack of targeted therapies.
METHODS: To identify viable targets for the treatment of TN disease, we have
conducted a gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) on seven different breast cancer 
whole genome gene expression cohorts comparing TN vs. ER + HER2 - to identify
consistently enriched genes that share a common promoter motif. The seven cohorts
were profiled on three different genome expression platforms (Affymetrix,
Illumina and RNAseq) consisting in total of 2088 samples with IHC metadata.
RESULTS: GSEA identified enriched gene expression patterns in TN samples that
share common promoter motifs associated with SOX9, E2F1, HIF1A, HMGA1, MYC BACH2,
CEBPB, and GCNF/NR6A1. Unexpectedly, NR6A1 an orphan nuclear receptor normally
expressed in germ cells of gonads is highly expressed in TN and ER + HER2 -
samples making it an ideal drug target.
CONCLUSION: With the increasing number of large sample size breast cancer
cohorts, an exploratory analysis of genes that are consistently enriched in TN
sharing common promoter motifs allows for the identification of possible
therapeutic targets with extensive validation in patient derived data sets.

PMID: 26005638  [PubMed]


28. Immunogenetics. 2015 Jun;67(5-6):277-82. doi: 10.1007/s00251-015-0839-0. Epub
2015 Apr 24.

Genetic link of type 1 diabetes susceptibility loci with rheumatoid arthritis in 
Pakistani patients.

Kiani AK(1), Jahangir S, John P, Bhatti A, Zia A, Wang X, Demirci FY, Kamboh MI.

Author information: 
(1)Atta ur Rahman School of Applied Biosciences, National University of Sciences 
and Technology, Sector H-12, Islamabad, Pakistan.

Erratum in
    Immunogenetics. 2015 Aug;67(8):477. Jahngir, Sidrah [corrected to Jahangir,
Sidrah].

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and type 1 diabetes (T1D) are two autoimmune disorders 
that have been reported to co-occur in the same subjects or in different subjects
from the same family. This suggests the sharing of disease susceptibility loci
between RA and T1D. This study was aimed to find out such susceptibility loci
that are common in both T1D and RA in Pakistani population. A total of 366
Pakistanis comprising related and unrelated RA cases and controls were recruited.
Blood samples were collected from all patients followed by DNA isolation.
Thirty-one single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously reported to be
associated with T1D were genotyped in RA cases and controls using TaqMan SNP
genotyping assays. Data was analyzed using FamCC software. We have identified
seven SNP associations that survived multiple testing corrections using false
discovery rate: SKAP2/rs7804356 (p = 2.47E-04), GLIS3/rs7020673 (p = 2.86E-04),
GSDMB/rs2290400 (p = 23.48E-04), BACH2/rs11755527 (p = 9.16E-04), C6orf173/
rs9388489 (p = 3.11E-03), PRKCQ/DKFZp667F0711/ rs947474 (p = 4.53E-03), and DLK1/
rs941576 (p = 9.51E-03). Our results support the presence of overlapping loci
between RA and T1D in Pakistani patients.

PMID: 25904084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Br J Ophthalmol. 2015 Aug;99(8):1150-4. doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2014-306163.
Epub 2015 Apr 14.

No association between Bach2 gene polymorphisms with Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada
syndrome (VKH) and Behcet's disease (BD) in a Chinese Han population.

Gao X(1), Tan X(1), Qin J(1), Lv S(1), Hou S(1), Kijlstra A(2), Yang P(1).

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing Key
Laboratory of Ophthalmology and Chongqing Eye Institute, Chongqing, P. R. China. 
(2)University Eye Clinic Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Bach2 was reported to play a key role in T lymphocyte development and
maturation to mediate immunological homeostasis. Several autoimmune and
immune-related diseases were shown to be associated with Bach2 gene
polymorphisms. The current study was designed to explore the association between 
Bach2 gene polymorphism with Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome and Behcet's
disease (BD) in a Chinese Han population.
METHODS: -427 patients with BD, 422 patients with VKH and 623 controls were
recruited for the first stage from a Chinese Han population. The second stage
included another set of 388 patients with BD and 460 healthy subjects. PCR
fragment length polymorphism methodology was used for genotyping. Frequencies of 
genotypes and alleles were measured by direct counting and compared between cases
and controls by <U+03C7>(2) test.
RESULTS: No difference could be detected between patients suffering from BD or
VKH with healthy controls concerning allele and genotype frequencies of
rs11755527, rs3757247, rs12212193 and rs2474619. Although in the first stage the 
frequencies of genotype CC and AC of rs2474619 showed a weak statistical
difference between BD and the control group (Pc=0.02), the difference was lost
after the second stage and combined stage experiment.
CONCLUSIONS: The investigated Bach2 gene polymorphisms (rs11755527, rs3757247,
rs12212193 and rs2474619) are not related to the susceptibility to either VKH or 
BD in our investigated Chinese Han population.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRY: This project was registered in the Chinese Clinical
Trial Registry (registration number: ChiCTR-CCC-12002184).

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25873652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 10;6:6750. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7750.

Mitochondrial function provides instructive signals for activation-induced B-cell
fates.

Jang KJ(1), Mano H(1), Aoki K(2), Hayashi T(1), Muto A(3), Nambu Y(1), Takahashi 
K(4), Itoh K(5), Taketani S(6), Nutt SL(7), Igarashi K(3), Shimizu A(1), Sugai
M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, Institute for Advancement of Clinical
and Translational Science, Kyoto University Hospital, 54 Shogoin-Kawahara-cho,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (2)Division of Pharmacology, School of Medicine,
University of Fukui, 23-3 Matsuokashimoaizuki, Eiheiji-cho, Yoshida-gun, Fukui
910-1193, Japan. (3)1] Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate
School of Medicine, Seiryo-machi 2-1, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan [2]
CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Seiryo-machi 2-1, Aoba-ku, Sendai,
Miyagi 980-8575, Japan. (4)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Kyoto
University Hospital, 54 Shogoin-Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
(5)Department of Clinical Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, 54 Shogoin-Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
(6)Department of Biotechnology, Kyoto Institute of Technology, Matsugasaki,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8585, Japan. (7)1] The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Melbourne, Victoria 3052, Australia [2] Department of Medical
Biology, University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia. (8)1] Department of
Experimental Therapeutics, Institute for Advancement of Clinical and
Translational Science, Kyoto University Hospital, 54 Shogoin-Kawahara-cho,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan [2] Division of Molecular Genetics, Department of
Biochemistry and Bioinformative Sciences, School of Medicine, University of
Fukui, 23-3 Matsuokashimoaizuki, Eiheiji-cho, Yoshida-gun, Fukui 910-1193, Japan.

During immune reactions, functionally distinct B-cell subsets are generated by
stochastic processes, including class-switch recombination (CSR) and plasma cell 
differentiation (PCD). In this study, we show a strong association between
individual B-cell fates and mitochondrial functions. CSR occurs specifically in
activated B cells with increased mitochondrial mass and membrane potential, which
augment mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mROS), whereas PCD occurs in cells
with decreased mitochondrial mass and potential. These events are consequences of
initial slight changes in mROS in mitochondria(high) B-cell populations. In
CSR-committed cells, mROS attenuates haeme synthesis by inhibiting ferrous ion
addition to protoporphyrin IX, thereby maintaining Bach2 function. Reduced mROS
then promotes PCD by increasing haeme synthesis. In PCD-committed cells, Blimp1
reduces mitochondrial mass, thereby reducing mROS levels. Identifying mROS as a
haeme synthesis regulator increases the understanding of mechanisms regulating
haeme homeostasis and cell fate determination after B-cell activation.

PMCID: PMC4403446
PMID: 25857523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Nature. 2015 Apr 23;520(7548):558-62. doi: 10.1038/nature14154. Epub 2015 Feb 16.

Super-enhancers delineate disease-associated regulatory nodes in T cells.

Vahedi G(1), Kanno Y(1), Furumoto Y(2), Jiang K(1), Parker SC(3), Erdos MR(3),
Davis SR(4), Roychoudhuri R(4), Restifo NP(4), Gadina M(2), Tang Z(5), Ruan Y(5),
Collins FS(3), Sartorelli V(6), O'Shea JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases (NIAMS), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. (2)Translational Immunology Section, NIAMS, NIH,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. (3)Medical Genomics and Metabolic Genetics Branch,
National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
(4)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA. (5)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine and Department of
Genetic and Development Biology, University of Connecticut, Farmington,
Connecticut 06030, USA. (6)Laboratory of Muscle Stem Cells and Gene Regulation,
NIAMS, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Enhancers regulate spatiotemporal gene expression and impart cell-specific
transcriptional outputs that drive cell identity. Super-enhancers (SEs), also
known as stretch-enhancers, are a subset of enhancers especially important for
genes associated with cell identity and genetic risk of disease. CD4(+) T cells
are critical for host defence and autoimmunity. Here we analysed maps of mouse
T-cell SEs as a non-biased means of identifying key regulatory nodes involved in 
cell specification. We found that cytokines and cytokine receptors were the
dominant class of genes exhibiting SE architecture in T cells. Nonetheless, the
locus encoding Bach2, a key negative regulator of effector differentiation,
emerged as the most prominent T-cell SE, revealing a network in which
SE-associated genes critical for T-cell biology are repressed by BACH2.
Disease-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms for immune-mediated disorders,
including rheumatoid arthritis, were highly enriched for T-cell SEs versus
typical enhancers or SEs in other cell lineages. Intriguingly, treatment of T
cells with the Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor tofacitinib disproportionately
altered the expression of rheumatoid arthritis risk genes with SE structures.
Together, these results indicate that genes with SE architecture in T cells
encompass a variety of cytokines and cytokine receptors but are controlled by a
'guardian' transcription factor, itself endowed with an SE. Thus, enumeration of 
SEs allows the unbiased determination of key regulatory nodes in T cells, which
are preferentially modulated by pharmacological intervention.

PMCID: PMC4409450
PMID: 25686607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Apr;45(4):1206-15. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444637. Epub 2015 Mar 
12.

miR-148a promotes plasma cell differentiation and targets the germinal center
transcription factors Mitf and Bach2.

Porstner M(1), Winkelmann R, Daum P, Schmid J, Pracht K, Côrte-Real J, Schreiber 
S, Haftmann C, Brandl A, Mashreghi MF, Gelse K, Hauke M, Wirries I, Zwick M, Roth
E, Radbruch A, Wittmann J, Jäck HM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine III,
Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for Molecular Medicine, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Erlangen, Germany.

B cells undergo affinity maturation and class switch recombination of their
immunoglobulin receptors during a germinal center (GC) reaction, before they
differentiate into long-lived antibody-secreting plasma cells (PCs).
Transcription factors such as Bach2 and Mitf are essential during this process,
as they delay premature differentiation of GC B cells by repressing Blimp-1 and
IRF4, two transcription factors required for terminal PC differentiation.
Therefore, Bach2 and Mitf expression must be attenuated in activated B cells to
allow terminal PC differentiation, but the precise mechanism remains enigmatic.
Here, we provide evidence that miR-148a, a small noncoding microRNA, fosters PC
differentiation and survival. Next-generation sequencing revealed that miR-148a
is the most abundant microRNA in primary human and murine PCs, and its expression
is upregulated in activated murine B cells and coincides with Blimp-1 synthesis. 
miR-148a targets Bach2, Mitf and proapoptotic factors such as PTEN and Bim. When 
prematurely expressed, miR-148a promotes the differentiation and survival of
plasmablasts and reduces frequencies of IgG1(+) cells in primary B-cell cultures.
In summary, we propose that miR-148a is a new player in the regulatory network
controlling terminal PC differentiation and could, therefore, be a therapeutic
target for interfering with PC differentiation and survival.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25678371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Neuroimmunol. 2015 Feb 15;279:75-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2015.01.004. Epub
2015 Jan 21.

Anti-inflammatory genes associated with multiple sclerosis: a gene expression
study.

Perga S(1), Montarolo F(2), Martire S(2), Berchialla P(3), Malucchi S(4),
Bertolotto A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Institute Cavalieri Ottolenghi (NICO), Orbassano, TO, Italy;
University Hospital San Luigi Gonzaga, Neurobiology Unit, Neurologia 2 - CReSM
(Centro Riferimento Regionale Sclerosi Multipla), Orbassano, TO, Italy.
Electronic address: simona.perga@unito.it. (2)Neuroscience Institute Cavalieri
Ottolenghi (NICO), Orbassano, TO, Italy; University Hospital San Luigi Gonzaga,
Neurobiology Unit, Neurologia 2 - CReSM (Centro Riferimento Regionale Sclerosi
Multipla), Orbassano, TO, Italy. (3)Department of Clinical and Biological
Sciences, University of Turin, Torino, TO, Italy. (4)University Hospital San
Luigi Gonzaga, Neurobiology Unit, Neurologia 2 - CReSM (Centro Riferimento
Regionale Sclerosi Multipla), Orbassano, TO, Italy.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune inflammatory disease of the central
nervous system caused by a complex interaction between multiple genes and
environmental factors. HLA region is the strongest susceptibility locus, but
recent huge genome-wide association studies identified new susceptibility genes. 
Among these, BACH2, PTGER4, RGS1 and ZFP36L1 were highlighted. Here, a gene
expression analysis revealed that three of them, namely BACH2, PTGER4 and
ZFP36L1, are down-regulated in MS patients' blood cells compared to healthy
subjects. Interestingly, all these genes are involved in the immune system
regulation with predominant anti-inflammatory role and their reduction could
predispose to MS development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25670004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Brain. 2015 Apr;138(Pt 4):902-17. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu408. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

New candidates for CD4 T cell pathogenicity in experimental neuroinflammation and
multiple sclerosis.

Hoppmann N(1), Graetz C(1), Paterka M(1), Poisa-Beiro L(1), Larochelle C(1),
Hasan M(1), Lill CM(2), Zipp F(1), Siffrin V(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Neurology, Focus Program Translational Neuroscience (FTN) and 
Immunotherapy (FZI), Rhine-Main Neuroscience Network (rmn), University Medical
Centre of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Langenbeckstr. 1, 55131 Mainz,
Germany. (2)1 Department of Neurology, Focus Program Translational Neuroscience
(FTN) and Immunotherapy (FZI), Rhine-Main Neuroscience Network (rmn), University 
Medical Centre of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Langenbeckstr. 1,
55131 Mainz, Germany 2 Neuropsychiatric Genetics Group, Department of Vertebrate 
Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestr. 63-73, 14195
Berlin, Germany 3 Platform for Genome Analytics, Institutes for Neurogenetics &
Integrative and Experimental Genomics, University of Lübeck,
Maria-Goeppert-Str.1, 23562 Lübeck, Germany. (3)1 Department of Neurology, Focus 
Program Translational Neuroscience (FTN) and Immunotherapy (FZI), Rhine-Main
Neuroscience Network (rmn), University Medical Centre of the Johannes Gutenberg
University Mainz, Langenbeckstr. 1, 55131 Mainz, Germany siffrinv@gmx.de.

Multiple sclerosis is a chronic autoimmune demyelinating disease of the central
nervous system, which is thought to be triggered by environmental factors in
genetically susceptible individuals leading to activation of autoreactive T
lymphocytes. Large multi-centre genome-wide association studies have identified
multiple genetic risk loci in multiple sclerosis. In this study, we investigated 
T cell transcriptomic changes in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, an
animal model for multiple sclerosis. We correlated these findings with the
multiple sclerosis risk genes postulated by the most recent Immunochip analysis
and found that multiple sclerosis susceptibility genes were significantly
regulated in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Our data indicate that
nine distinct genes associated with multiple sclerosis risk, Bach2, Il2ra, Irf8, 
Mertk, Odf3b, Plek, Rgs1, Slc30a7 and Thada, can be confirmed to be
differentially regulated in pathogenic CD4(+) T cells. During the effector phase 
within the inflamed CNS, CD4(+) T cells undergo comprehensive transformation and 
we identified key transcription factors and signalling networks involved in this 
process. The transformation was linked to metabolic changes with the involvement 
of liver X receptor/retinoid X receptor signalling and cholesterol biosynthesis, 
which might control the T cell effector function in the central nervous system.
Thus, our study confirms the involvement of multiple sclerosis risk genes in the 
pathophysiology of the animal model and sheds light on additional
disease-relevant inflammatory networks.

© The Author (2015). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25665584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2015 Apr;108(1):137-42. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2015.01.022. Epub 2015 Jan 21.

Association of 32 type 1 diabetes risk loci in Pakistani patients.

Kiani AK(1), John P(2), Bhatti A(3), Zia A(3), Shahid G(4), Akhtar P(5), Wang
X(6), Demirci FY(6), Kamboh MI(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Healthcare Biotechnology, Atta-ur-Rahman School of Applied
Biosciences (ASAB), National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST),
Islamabad, Pakistan. Electronic address: ayshakiani@gmail.com. (2)Department of
Healthcare Biotechnology, Atta-ur-Rahman School of Applied Biosciences (ASAB),
National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST), Islamabad, Pakistan.
Electronic address: pjohn72@hotmail.com. (3)Department of Healthcare
Biotechnology, Atta-ur-Rahman School of Applied Biosciences (ASAB), National
University of Sciences and Technology (NUST), Islamabad, Pakistan. (4)Pakistan
Institute of Medical Sciences (PIMS), Islamabad, Pakistan. (5)Fauji Foundation
Hospital, Rawalpindi, Pakistan. (6)Department of Human Genetics, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

AIM: To identify risk alleles contributing towards type 1 diabetes in Pakistani
patients.
INTRODUCTION: Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune disease which is caused by
destruction of insulin producing ß cells by immune system. Genetic predisposition
as well as environmental factors contribute to its etiology. To date more than 40
risk loci have been identified for T1D.
METHODOLOGY: A total of 191 family-based and unrelated T1D cases and controls
were recruited. DNA was extracted and 32 genome-wide significant single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously reported in Europeans were genotyped. 
Genotyping was performed using TaqMan SNP genotyping assays and the data was
analyzed using FamCC software.
RESULTS: Our results showed significant association of 10 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) with T1D at p<0.01, including HLA-DQA1/rs9272346,
ERBB3/rs2292239, SIRPG/rs2281808, IL2-KIAA1109/rs4505848, GLIS3/rs7020673,
CD226/rs763361, PTPN2/rs478582, IKZF1/rs10272724, BACH2/rs11755527,
C6orf173/rs9388489, whereas 5 more SNPs showed their association at 0.01<p<0.05
in Pakistani population.
CONCLUSION: We have replicated many of the T1D loci established among Europeans
in a Pakistani population.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25661663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cell Immunol. 2015 Mar;294(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2015.01.010. Epub 2015 
Jan 28.

BRAD4 plays a critical role in germinal center response by regulating Bcl-6 and
NF-<U+03BA>B activation.

Gao F(1), Yang Y(1), Wang Z(2), Gao X(3), Zheng B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, Institutes of Biology and
Medical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. (2)Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, East China
Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China. Electronic address:
zywang01@sibs.ac.cn. (3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity,
Institutes of Biology and Medical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123,
China. Electronic address: xmgao@suda.edu.cn. (4)Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, East China Normal
University, Shanghai 200241, China; Department of Pathology and Immunology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address:
bzheng@bcm.edu.

Germinal center (GC) reaction is a T cell-dependent process in which activated B 
cells undergo clonal expansion and functional maturation to produce high affinity
antibodies and differentiate into memory B cells(1). Here we demonstrate a new
role of bromodomain and extraterminal domain (BET) protein BRD4 in GC B cell
development. We found that during B cell differentiation stage there was an
elevated expression of BRD4 in GC B cells and inhibition of BRD4 by small
molecule inhibitors led to the suppression of GC formation and correspondent
antibody responses in a Td antigen immunization model. At the molecular level, we
found that the effects of BRD4 in primary GC B cell differentiation and B cell
lymphoma were mediated through the impaired phosphorylation and translocation of 
NF-<U+03BA>Bp65 and further down-regulation of B-cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6) expression. Thus
this study reveals a novel function of BRD4 in controlling the GC B cell
development pathway.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25656449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2015 Jan 1;565:25-31. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2014.11.005. Epub 
2014 Nov 18.

Heme binds to an intrinsically disordered region of Bach2 and alters its
conformation.

Watanabe-Matsui M(1), Matsumoto T(2), Matsui T(3), Ikeda-Saito M(3), Muto A(1),
Murayama K(4), Igarashi K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan. (2)Rigaku Corporation, Akishima, Japan. (3)Institute of
Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials, Tohoku University, Sendai,
Japan. (4)Division of Biomedical Measurements and Diagnostics, Tohoku University 
Graduate School of Biomedical Engineering, Sendai, Japan; Division of Structural 
and Synthetic Biology, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Yokohama, Japan. Electronic
address: kmura@bme.tohoku.ac.jp. (5)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan; Center for Regulatory Epigenome and
Diseases, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan; CREST,
Japan Science and Technology Agency, Sendai, Japan. Electronic address:
igarashi@med.tohoku.ac.jp.

The transcriptional repressor Bach2 regulates humoral and cellular immunity,
including antibody class switching. It possesses a basic leucine zipper domain
that mediates DNA binding. Heme inhibits the DNA-binding activity of Bach2 in
vitro and induces the degradation of Bach2 in B cells. However, the structural
basis of the heme-Bach2 interaction has not been identified. Spectroscopic
analyses revealed that Bach2(331-520) is the heme-binding domain, as it includes 
three Cys-Pro motifs known to be important for heme binding. Heme-titration
experiments demonstrated the presence of 5- and 6-coordinated heme-binding modes.
Circular dichroism measurements indicated that Bach2(331-520) exists mostly in a 
random-coil conformation. However, dynamic light scattering analyses showed that,
upon heme binding to Bach2(331-520), this region becomes denatured at a lower
temperature, as compared with unbound Bach2(331-520). In addition, small-angle
X-ray scattering and chemical modification analyses revealed that heme binding
induces conformational alterations within the unstructured region. A GAL4-based
luciferase assay in 293T cells showed that heme alters the protein interactions
mediated by Bach2(331-520). These observations suggested that the unstructured
region of Bach2 is important for heme binding, and consequently for its
functional regulation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25444856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 15;193(12):5933-50. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401702. Epub 2014 
Nov 12.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors upregulate B cell microRNAs that silence AID and
Blimp-1 expression for epigenetic modulation of antibody and autoantibody
responses.

White CA(1), Pone EJ(2), Lam T(1), Tat C(1), Hayama KL(2), Li G(1), Zan H(1),
Casali P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas School of
Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, 
TX 78229; and Institute for Immunology, University of California, Irvine, CA
92697. (2)Institute for Immunology, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas School of
Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, 
TX 78229; and Institute for Immunology, University of California, Irvine, CA
92697 pcasali@uthscsa.edu.

Class-switch DNA recombination (CSR) and somatic hypermutation (SHM), which
require activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), and plasma cell
differentiation, which requires B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1
(Blimp-1), are critical for the generation of class-switched and hypermutated
(mature) Ab and autoantibody responses. We show that histone deacetylase
inhibitors valproic acid and butyrate dampened AICDA/Aicda (AID) and PRDM1/Prdm1 
(Blimp-1) mRNAs by upregulating miR-155, miR-181b, and miR-361 to silence
AICDA/Aicda, and miR-23b, miR-30a, and miR-125b to silence PRDM1/Prdm1, in human 
and mouse B cells. This led to downregulation of AID, Blimp-1, and X-box binding 
protein 1, thereby inhibiting CSR, SHM, and plasma cell differentiation without
altering B cell viability or proliferation. The selectivity of histone
deacetylase inhibitor-mediated silencing of AICDA/Aicda and PRDM1/Prdm1 was
emphasized by unchanged expression of HoxC4 and Irf4 (important
inducers/modulators of AICDA/Aicda), Rev1 and Ung (central elements for CSR/SHM),
and Bcl6, Bach2, or Pax5 (repressors of PRDM1/Prdm1 expression), as well as
unchanged expression of miR-19a/b, miR-20a, and miR-25, which are not known to
regulate AICDA/Aicda or PRDM1/Prdm1. Through these B cell-intrinsic epigenetic
mechanisms, valproic acid blunted class-switched and hypermutated T-dependent and
T-independent Ab responses in C57BL/6 mice. In addition, it decreased
class-switched and hypermutated autoantibodies, ameliorated disease, and extended
survival in lupus MRL/Fas(lpr/lpr) mice. Our findings outline epigenetic
mechanisms that modulate expression of an enzyme (AID) and transcription factors 
(Blimp-1 and X-box binding protein 1) that are critical to the B cell
differentiation processes that underpin Ab and autoantibody responses. They also 
provide therapeutic proof-of-principle in autoantibody-mediated autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4258531
PMID: 25392531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Virol. 2015 Jan;89(1):713-29. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02570-14. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

High-throughput RNA sequencing-based virome analysis of 50 lymphoma cell lines
from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia project.

Cao S(1), Strong MJ(1), Wang X(1), Moss WN(2), Concha M(1), Lin Z(1), O'Grady
T(1), Baddoo M(1), Fewell C(1), Renne R(3), Flemington EK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Tulane Health Sciences Center and Tulane Cancer Center, New Orleans,
Louisiana, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Genetics Microbiology, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA. (4)Tulane Health Sciences Center and Tulane
Cancer Center, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA eflemin@tulane.edu.

Using high-throughput RNA sequencing data from 50 common lymphoma cell culture
models from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia project, we performed an unbiased
global interrogation for the presence of a panel of 740 viruses and strains known
to infect human and other mammalian cells. This led to the findings of previously
identified infections by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus
(KSHV), and human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1). In addition, we also
found a previously unreported infection of one cell line (DEL) with a murine
leukemia virus. High expression of murine leukemia virus (MuLV) transcripts was
observed in DEL cells, and we identified four transcriptionally active
integration sites, one being in the TNFRSF6B gene. We also found low levels of
MuLV reads in a number of other cell lines and provided evidence suggesting
cross-contamination during sequencing. Analysis of HTLV-1 integrations in two
cell lines, HuT 102 and MJ, identified 14 and 66 transcriptionally active
integration sites with potentially activating integrations in immune regulatory
genes, including interleukin-15 (IL-15), IL-6ST, STAT5B, HIVEP1, and IL-9R.
Although KSHV and EBV do not typically integrate into the genome, we investigated
a previously identified integration of EBV into the BACH2 locus in Raji cells.
This analysis identified a BACH2 disruption mechanism involving splice donor
sequestration. Through viral gene expression analysis, we detected expression of 
stable intronic RNAs from the EBV BamHI W repeats that may be part of long
transcripts spanning the repeat region. We also observed transcripts at the EBV
vIL-10 locus exclusively in the Hodgkin's lymphoma cell line, Hs 611.T, the
expression of which were uncoupled from other lytic genes. Assessment of the KSHV
viral transcriptome in BCP-1 cells showed expression of the viral immune
regulators, K2/vIL-6, K4/vIL-8-like vCCL1, and K5/E2-ubiquitin ligase 1 that was 
significantly higher than expression of the latency-associated nuclear antigen.
Together, this investigation sheds light into the virus composition across these 
lymphoma model systems and provides insights into common viral mechanistic
principles.IMPORTANCE: Viruses cause cancer in humans. In lymphomas the
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV) and human
T-lymphotropic virus type 1 are major contributors to oncogenesis. We assessed
virus-host interactions using a high throughput sequencing method that
facilitates the discovery of new virus-host associations and the investigation
into how the viruses alter their host environment. We found a previously unknown 
murine leukemia virus infection in one cell line. We identified cellular genes,
including cytokine regulators, that are disrupted by virus integration, and we
determined mechanisms through which virus integration causes deregulation of
cellular gene expression. Investigation into the KSHV transcriptome in the BCP-1 
cell line revealed high-level expression of immune signaling genes. EBV
transcriptome analysis showed expression of vIL-10 transcripts in a Hodgkin's
lymphoma that was uncoupled from lytic genes. These findings illustrate unique
mechanisms of viral gene regulation and to the importance of virus-mediated host 
immune signaling in lymphomas.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4301145
PMID: 25355872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2015 Oct;83(4):556-62. doi: 10.1111/cen.12640. Epub 2014
Dec 22.

The association of thyroid peroxidase antibody risk loci with susceptibility to
and phenotype of Graves' disease.

Kus A(1), Szymanski K(2), Peeters RP(3), Miskiewicz P(1), Porcu E(4,)(5), Pistis 
G(4,)(5), Sanna S(4), Naitza S(4), Ploski R(2), Medici M(3), Bednarczuk T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Endocrinology, Medical University of
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. (2)Department of Medical Genetics, Centre for
Biostructure, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. (3)Department of
Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica (IRGB), Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, c/o Cittadella Universitaria di Monserrato, Monserrato, Cagliari,
Italy. (5)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Universita di Sassari, Sassari,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Despite great progress, the genetic basis of Graves' disease (GD)
remains poorly understood. Recently, a population-based genomewide association
study (GWAS) identified five novel loci (ATXN2/SH2B3, MAGI3, BACH2, TPO and
KALRN) as significantly associated with the presence of thyroid peroxidase
autoantibodies (TPOAbs), whereas several other loci showed suggestive
association.
METHODS: In this study, we investigated 16 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
associated with TPOAbs for the association with susceptibility to and phenotype
of GD in a cohort of 647 patients with GD and 769 controls from a Polish
Caucasian population.
RESULTS: SNPs within/near HCP5 (rs3094228, P = 1·6 × 10(-12) , OR = 1·88), MAGI3 
(rs1230666, P = 1·9 × 10(-5) , OR = 1·51) and ATXN2/SH2B3 (rs653178, P = 0·0015, 
OR = 1·28) loci were significantly associated with susceptibility to GD. Allele
frequencies differed significantly in subgroups of patients with GD stratified by
age of GD onset for HCP5 (P = 0·0014, OR = 1·50) and showed a suggestive
difference for MAGI3 (P = 0·0035, OR = 1·50) SNPs. Although rs11675434 located
near TPO showed no association with GD susceptibility, it was significantly
associated with the presence of clinically evident Graves' ophthalmopathy (GO,
P = 5·2 × 10(-5) , OR = 1·64), and this effect was independent from smoking
status, age of GD onset and gender.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study showing an association of the ATXN2/SH2B3
locus with susceptibility to GD. Furthermore, we observed a novel significant
association within the HLA region at a SNP located near HCP5 and confirmed the
association of the MAGI3 locus with GD susceptibility. HCP5 and MAGI3 SNPs were
further correlated with age of GD onset. Finally, we identified TPO as a new
susceptibility locus for GO.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25345847  [PubMed - in process]


41. Nat Immunol. 2014 Dec;15(12):1171-80. doi: 10.1038/ni.3024. Epub 2014 Oct 26.

The transcription repressors Bach2 and Bach1 promote B cell development by
repressing the myeloid program.

Itoh-Nakadai A(1), Hikota R(2), Muto A(1), Kometani K(3), Watanabe-Matsui M(2),
Sato Y(2), Kobayashi M(2), Nakamura A(2), Miura Y(2), Yano Y(4), Tashiro S(4),
Sun J(4), Ikawa T(5), Ochiai K(6), Kurosaki T(7), Igarashi K(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sendai, Japan. [2] CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Sendai, Japan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan. (3)RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(4)Department of Cellular Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, Graduate School of Biomedical Science, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima,
Japan. (5)Laboratory for Immune Regeneration RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan. (6)1] Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. [2] CREST, Japan Science and
Technology Agency, Sendai, Japan. [3] Center for Regulatory Epigenome and
Diseases, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (7)1]
RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan. [2] WPI
Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

Mature lymphoid cells express the transcription repressor Bach2, which imposes
regulation on humoral and cellular immunity. Here we found critical roles for
Bach2 in the development of cells of the B lineage, commencing from the common
lymphoid progenitor (CLP) stage, with Bach1 as an auxiliary. Overexpression of
Bach2 in pre-pro-B cells deficient in the transcription factor EBF1 and
single-cell analysis of CLPs revealed that Bach2 and Bach1 repressed the
expression of genes important for myeloid cells ('myeloid genes'). Bach2 and
Bach1 bound to presumptive regulatory regions of the myeloid genes. Bach2(hi)
CLPs showed resistance to myeloid differentiation even when cultured under
myeloid conditions. Our results suggest that Bach2 functions with Bach1 and EBF1 
to promote B cell development by repressing myeloid genes in CLPs.

PMID: 25344725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Diabetologia. 2014 Dec;57(12):2521-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-014-3362-1. Epub 2014
Sep 4.

Feature ranking of type 1 diabetes susceptibility genes improves prediction of
type 1 diabetes.

Winkler C(1), Krumsiek J, Buettner F, Angermüller C, Giannopoulou EZ, Theis FJ,
Ziegler AG, Bonifacio E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Diabetes Research, Helmholtz Zentrum München, and Forschergruppe 
Diabetes, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Ingolstaedter
Landstr. 1, 85764, Neuherberg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2015 Jan;58(1):206.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: More than 40 regions of the human genome confer susceptibility
for type 1 diabetes and could be used to establish population screening
strategies. The aim of our study was to identify weighted sets of SNP
combinations for type 1 diabetes prediction.
METHODS: We applied multivariable logistic regression and Bayesian feature
selection to the Type 1 Diabetes Genetics Consortium (T1DGC) dataset with
genotyping of HLA plus 40 SNPs within other type 1 diabetes-associated gene
regions in 4,574 cases and 1,207 controls. We tested the weighted models in an
independent validation set (765 cases, 423 controls), and assessed their
performance in 1,772 prospectively followed children.
RESULTS: The inclusion of 40 non-HLA gene SNPs significantly improved the
prediction of type 1 diabetes over that provided by HLA alone
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.1<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-25)), with a receiver operating characteristic AUC of 0.87 in the 
T1DGC set, and 0.84 in the validation set. Feature selection identified HLA plus 
nine SNPs from the PTPN22, INS, IL2RA, ERBB3, ORMDL3, BACH2, IL27, GLIS3 and RNLS
genes that could achieve similar prediction accuracy as the total SNP set.
Application of this ten SNP model to prospectively followed children was able to 
improve risk stratification over that achieved by HLA genotype alone.
CONCLUSIONS: We provided a weighted risk model with selected SNPs that could be
considered for recruitment of infants into studies of early type 1 diabetes
natural history or appropriately safe prevention.

PMID: 25186292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Immunol Rev. 2014 Sep;261(1):116-25. doi: 10.1111/imr.12201.

Orchestration of plasma cell differentiation by Bach2 and its gene regulatory
network.

Igarashi K(1), Ochiai K, Itoh-Nakadai A, Muto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan; CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Sendai, Japan.

Bach2 is a basic region-leucine zipper (bZip) transcription factor that forms
heterodimers with small Maf oncoproteins and binds to target genes, thus
repressing their expression. Bach2 is required for class switch recombination
(CSR) and somatic hypermutation (SHM) of immunoglobulin genes in activated B
cells. Bach2 represses the expression of Prdm1 encoding Blimp-1 repressor and
thereby inhibits terminal differentiation of B cells to plasma cells. This causes
a delay in the induction of Prdm1, thereby securing a time window for the
expression of Aicda encoding activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) required
for both CSR and SHM. Based on the characteristics of a gene regulatory network
(GRN) involving Bach2 and Prdm1 and its dynamics, a 'delay-driven diversity'
model was introduced to explain the responses of activated B cells. Bach2 is also
required for the proper differentiation and function of peripheral T cells. In
the absence of Bach2, CD4(+) T cells show increased differentiation to effector
cells producing higher levels of Th2-related cytokines, such as IL-4 and IL-10,
and a reduction in the generation of regulatory T cells. Bach2 represses many
genes in T cells, including Prdm1, suggesting that the Bach2-Prdm1 pathway is
also important in maintaining the homeostasis of T cells. Furthermore, Bach2 is
essential for the function of alveolar macrophages. Therefore, Bach2 orchestrates
both acquired and innate immunity at multiple points. Its connection with disease
is also reviewed in this report.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25123280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Int J Cancer. 2015 Mar 1;136(5):1033-42. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29072. Epub 2014 Jul
22.

Characterization of genomic imbalances in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma by
detailed SNP-chip analysis.

Scholtysik R(1), Kreuz M, Hummel M, Rosolowski M, Szczepanowski M, Klapper W,
Loeffler M, Trümper L, Siebert R, Küppers R; Molecular Mechanisms in Malignant
Lymphomas Network Project of the Deutsche Krebshilfe.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), Faculty of Medicine, University
of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

The pathogenesis of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) is only partly
understood. We analyzed 148 DLBCL by single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-chips
to characterize genomic imbalances. Seventy-nine cases were of the germinal
center B-cell like (GCB) type of DLBCL, 49 of the activated B-cell like (ABC)
subtype and 20 were unclassified DLBCL. Twenty-four regions of recurrent genomic 
gains and 38 regions of recurrent genomic losses were identified over the whole
cohort, with a median of 25 imbalances per case for ABC-DLBCL and 19 per case for
GCB-DLBCL. Several recurrent copy number changes showed differential frequencies 
in the GCB- and ABC-DLBCL subgroups, including gains of HDAC7A predominantly in
GCB-DLBCL (38% of cases) and losses of BACH2 and CASP8AP2 predominantly in
ABC-DLBCL (35%), hinting at disparate pathogenetic mechanisms in these entities. 
Correlating gene expression and copy number revealed a strong gene dosage effect 
in all tumors, with 34% of probesets showing a concordant expression change in
affected regions. Two new potential tumor suppressor genes emerging from the
analysis, CASP3 and IL5RA, were sequenced in ten and 16 candidate cases,
respectively. However, no mutations were found, pointing to a potential
haploinsufficiency effect of these genes, considering their reduced expression in
cases with deletions. Our study thus describes differences and similarities in
the landscape of genomic aberrations in the DLBCL subgroups in a large collection
of cases, confirming already known targets, but also discovering novel copy
number changes with possible pathogenetic relevance.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 25042405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Science. 2014 Jul 11;345(6193):143-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1257426.

HIV/AIDS. Persistence by proliferation?

Margolis D(1), Bushman F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Microbiology and Immunology, and Epidemiology,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 120 Mason Farm Road, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-7042, USA. dmargo@med.unc.edu bushman@mail.med.upenn.edu. (2)Perelman
School of Medicine, 3610 Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
dmargo@med.unc.edu bushman@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Comment on
    Science. 2014 Aug 1;345(6196):570-3.
    Science. 2014 Jul 11;345(6193):179-83.

PMID: 25013050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Science. 2014 Aug 1;345(6196):570-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1256304. Epub 2014 Jul 
10.

HIV latency. Proliferation of cells with HIV integrated into cancer genes
contributes to persistent infection.

Wagner TA(1), McLaughlin S(1), Garg K(2), Cheung CY(2), Larsen BB(3), Styrchak
S(4), Huang HC(4), Edlefsen PT(5), Mullins JI(3), Frenkel LM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Children's Research Institute, 1900 9th Avenue, Seattle, WA 98101,
USA. University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. (2)Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA. (3)University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Seattle Children's Research Institute, 1900 9th Avenue, Seattle, WA 98101,
USA. (5)University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA. (6)Seattle Children's Research Institute, 1900
9th Avenue, Seattle, WA 98101, USA. University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
lfrenkel@uw.edu.

Comment in
    Science. 2014 Jul 11;345(6193):143-4.

Antiretroviral treatment (ART) of HIV infection suppresses viral replication. Yet
if ART is stopped, virus reemerges because of the persistence of infected cells. 
We evaluated the contribution of infected-cell proliferation and sites of
proviral integration to HIV persistence. A total of 534 HIV integration sites
(IS) and 63 adjacent HIV env sequences were derived from three study participants
over 11.3 to 12.7 years of ART. Each participant had identical viral sequences
integrated at the same position in multiple cells, demonstrating infected-cell
proliferation. Integrations were overrepresented in genes associated with cancer 
and favored in 12 genes across multiple participants. Over time on ART, a greater
proportion of persisting proviruses were in proliferating cells. HIV integration 
into specific genes may promote proliferation of HIV-infected cells, slowing
viral decay during ART.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4230336
PMID: 25011556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Science. 2014 Jul 11;345(6193):179-83. doi: 10.1126/science.1254194. Epub 2014
Jun 26.

HIV latency. Specific HIV integration sites are linked to clonal expansion and
persistence of infected cells.

Maldarelli F(1), Wu X(2), Su L(2), Simonetti FR(3), Shao W(2), Hill S(1),
Spindler J(1), Ferris AL(1), Mellors JW(4), Kearney MF(1), Coffin JM(5), Hughes
SH(6).

Author information: 
(1)HIV Drug Resistance Program, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702,
USA. (2)Leidos Biomedical Research, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. (3)HIV Drug
Resistance Program, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences L. Sacco, University of Milan,
20122 Milan, Italy. (4)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. (5)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology,
Tufts University, Boston, MA 02111, USA. (6)HIV Drug Resistance Program, National
Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. hughesst@mail.nih.gov.

Comment in
    Science. 2014 Jul 11;345(6193):143-4.

The persistence of HIV-infected cells in individuals on suppressive combination
antiretroviral therapy (cART) presents a major barrier for curing HIV infections.
HIV integrates its DNA into many sites in the host genome; we identified 2410
integration sites in peripheral blood lymphocytes of five infected individuals on
cART. About 40% of the integrations were in clonally expanded cells.
Approximately 50% of the infected cells in one patient were from a single clone, 
and some clones persisted for many years. There were multiple independent
integrations in several genes, including MKL2 and BACH2; many of these
integrations were in clonally expanded cells. Our findings show that HIV
integration sites can play a critical role in expansion and persistence of
HIV-infected cells.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4262401
PMID: 24968937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cancer Lett. 2014 Sep 1;351(2):206-14. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.05.009. Epub
2014 May 23.

Epigenetic silencing of BTB and CNC homology 2 and concerted promoter CpG
methylation in gastric cancer.

Haam K(1), Kim HJ(1), Lee KT(2), Kim JH(2), Kim M(1), Kim SY(1), Noh SM(3), Song 
KS(3), Kim YS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, 125 Gwahak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea;
Department of Functional Genomics, Korea University of Science and Technology,
125 Gwahak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea. (2)Medical
Genomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, 125 Gwahak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea.
(3)College of Medicine, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 301-747, Republic
of Korea. (4)Medical Genomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience and Biotechnology, 125 Gwahak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-806,
Republic of Korea; Department of Functional Genomics, Korea University of Science
and Technology, 125 Gwahak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: yongsung@kribb.re.kr.

BTB and CNC homology 2 (BACH2) is a lymphoid-specific transcription factor with a
prominent role in B-cell development. Genetic polymorphisms within a single locus
encoding BACH2 are associated with various autoimmune diseases and allergies. In 
this study, restriction landmark genomic scanning revealed methylation at a NotI 
site in a CpG island covering the BACH2 promoter in gastric cancer cell lines and
primary gastric tumors. Increased methylation of the BACH2 promoter was observed 
in 52% (43/83) of primary gastric tumors, and BACH2 hypermethylation was
significantly associated with decreased gene expression. Treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and/or trichostatin. A restored BACH2 expression in
BACH2-silenced gastric cancer cell lines, and knockdown of BACH2 using short
hairpin RNA (i.e. RNA interference) increased cell proliferation in gastric
cancer cells. Clinicopathologic data showed that decreased BACH2 expression
occurred significantly more frequently in intestinal-type (27/44, 61%) compared
with diffuse-type (13/50, 26%) gastric cancers (P<0.001). Furthermore, BACH2
promoter methylation paralleled that of previously identified targets, such as
LRRC3B, LIMS2, PRKD1 and POPDC3, in a given set of gastric tumors. We propose
that concerted methylation in many promoters plays a role in accelerating gastric
tumor formation and that methylated promoter loci may be targets for therapeutic 
treatment, such as the recently introduced technique of epigenetic editing.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24858026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS One. 2014 May 16;9(5):e97849. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097849. eCollection
2014.

Formaldehyde-Assisted Isolation of Regulatory Elements (FAIRE) analysis uncovers 
broad changes in chromatin structure resulting from hexavalent chromium exposure.

Ovesen JL(1), Fan Y(1), Zhang X(1), Chen J(1), Medvedovic M(1), Xia Y(1), Puga
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental Genetics,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of 
America.

The ability of chromatin to switch back and forth from open euchromatin to closed
heterochromatin is vital for transcriptional regulation and genomic stability,
but its dynamic structure is subject to disruption by exposure to environmental
agents such as hexavalent chromium. Cr(VI) exposure disrupts chromatin remodeling
mechanisms and causes chromosomal damage through formation of free radicals,
Cr-DNA adducts, and DNA-Cr-protein cross-links. In addition, acute,
high-concentration, and chronic, low-concentration exposures to Cr(VI) lead to
significantly different transcriptional and genomic stability outcomes. We used
mouse hepatoma Hepa-1c1c7 cells to investigate how transcriptional responses to
chromium treatment might correlate with structural chromatin changes. We used
Formaldehyde-Assisted Isolation of Regulatory Elements (FAIRE) analysis coupled
with deep sequencing to identify regions of the genome that may switch between
open and closed chromatin in response to exposure to varying Cr(VI)
concentrations. At either Cr(VI) concentration, chromatin domains surrounding
binding sites for AP-1 transcription factors become significantly open, whereas
BACH2 and CTCF binding sites are open solely at the low and high concentrations, 
respectively. Parallel gene expression profiling using RNA-seq indicates that the
structural chromatin changes caused by Cr(VI) affect gene expression levels in
the target areas that vary depending on Cr(VI) concentration, but show no
correlation between global changes in the overall transcriptional response and
Cr(VI) concentration. Our results suggest that FAIRE may be a useful technique to
map chromatin elements targeted by DNA damaging agents for which there is no
prior knowledge of their specificity, and to identify subsequent transcriptomic
changes induced by those agents.

PMCID: PMC4023961
PMID: 24837440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 May 27;111(21):E2219-28. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1400958111. Epub 2014 May 12.

Mechanistic rationale for targeting the unfolded protein response in pre-B acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Kharabi Masouleh B(1), Geng H(2), Hurtz C(2), Chan LN(2), Logan AC(3), Chang
MS(4), Huang C(5), Swaminathan S(2), Sun H(6), Paietta E(7), Melnick AM(5),
Koeffler P(6), Müschen M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine andDepartment of Oncology, Hematology and
Stem Cell Transplantation, Rheinisch-Westfaelische Technische Hochschule Aachen
University Medical School, 52070 Aachen, Germany; (2)Department of Laboratory
Medicine and. (3)Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143; (4)Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90027;
(5)Departments of Medicine andPharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New
York, NY 10065; (6)Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048; and.
(7)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10466. 
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine and markus.muschen@ucsf.edu.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) pathway, a stress-induced signaling cascade
emanating from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), regulates the expression and
activity of molecules including BiP (HSPA5), IRE1 (ERN1), Blimp-1 (PRDM1), and
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1). These molecules are required for terminal
differentiation of B cells into plasma cells and expressed at high levels in
plasma cell-derived multiple myeloma. Although these molecules have no known role
at early stages of B-cell development, here we show that their expression
transiently peaks at the pre-B-cell receptor checkpoint. Inducible, Cre-mediated 
deletion of Hspa5, Prdm1, and Xbp1 consistently induces cellular stress and cell 
death in normal pre-B cells and in pre-B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) 
driven by BCR-ABL1- and NRAS(G12D) oncogenes. Mechanistically, expression and
activity of the UPR downstream effector XBP1 is regulated positively by STAT5 and
negatively by the B-cell-specific transcriptional repressors BACH2 and BCL6. In
two clinical trials for children and adults with ALL, high XBP1 mRNA levels at
the time of diagnosis predicted poor outcome. A small molecule inhibitor of
ERN1-mediated XBP1 activation induced selective cell death of patient-derived
pre-B ALL cells in vitro and significantly prolonged survival of transplant
recipient mice in vivo. Collectively, these studies reveal that pre-B ALL cells
are uniquely vulnerable to ER stress and identify the UPR pathway and its
downstream effector XBP1 as novel therapeutic targets to overcome drug resistance
in pre-B ALL.

PMCID: PMC4040579
PMID: 24821775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nat Commun. 2014 Apr 2;5:3555. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4555.

The Menin-Bach2 axis is critical for regulating CD4 T-cell senescence and
cytokine homeostasis.

Kuwahara M(1), Suzuki J(2), Tofukuji S(2), Yamada T(3), Kanoh M(3), Matsumoto
A(3), Maruyama S(4), Kometani K(5), Kurosaki T(6), Ohara O(2), Nakayama T(7),
Yamashita M(8).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime University,
Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime 791-0295, Japan [2] Translational Research Center, Ehime 
University Hospital, Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime 791-0295, Japan. (2)Laboratory of
Medical Genomics, Department of Human Genome Research, Kazusa DNA Research
Institute, Kisarazu, Chiba 292-0818, Japan. (3)Department of Infection and Host
Defenses, Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime University, Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime 
791-0295, Japan. (4)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime 
University, Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime 791-0295, Japan. (5)Laboratory for Lymphocyte
Differentiation, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (6)1] Laboratory for Lymphocyte Differentiation, RIKEN 
Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan [2]
Department of Lymphocyte Differentiation, WPI Immunology Frontier Research
Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (7)1] Department of
Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chuo-ku, Chiba
260-8670, Japan [2] CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Chuo-ku, Chiba
260-8670, Japan. (8)1] Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Ehime University, Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime 791-0295, Japan [2] Translational
Research Center, Ehime University Hospital, Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime 791-0295,
Japan [3] Department of Infection and Host Defenses, Graduate School of Medicine,
Ehime University, Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime 791-0295, Japan [4] PRESTO, Japan
Science and Technology Agency, Ehime University, Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime
791-0295, Japan.

Although CD4 T-cell senescence plays an important role in immunosenescence, the
mechanism behind this process remains unclear. Here we show that T cell-specific 
Menin deficiency results in the premature senescence of CD4 T cells, which is
accompanied by the senescence-associated secretory phenotype after antigenic
stimulation and dysregulated cytokine production. Menin is required for the
expansion and survival of antigen-stimulated CD4 T cells in vivo and acts by
targeting Bach2, which is known to regulate immune homeostasis and cytokine
production. Menin binds to the Bach2 locus and controls its expression through
maintenance of histone acetylation. Menin binding at the Bach2 locus and the
Bach2 expression are decreased in the senescent CD4 T cells. These findings
reveal a critical role of the Menin-Bach2 pathway in regulating CD4 T-cell
senescence and cytokine homeostasis, thus indicating the involvement of this
pathway in the inhibition of immunosenescence.

PMCID: PMC3988815
PMID: 24694524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2014;232(4):229-53.

Wearing red for signaling: the heme-bach axis in heme metabolism, oxidative
stress response and iron immunology.

Igarashi K(1), Watanabe-Matsui M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine.

The connection between gene regulation and metabolism is an old issue that
warrants revisiting in order to understand both normal as well as pathogenic
processes in higher eukaryotes. Metabolites affect the gene expression by either 
binding to transcription factors or serving as donors for post-translational
modification, such as that involving acetylation and methylation. The focus of
this review is heme, a prosthetic group of proteins that includes hemoglobin and 
cytochromes. Heme has been shown to bind to several transcription factors,
including Bach1 and Bach2, in higher eukaryotes. Heme inhibits the
transcriptional repressor activity of Bach1, resulting in the derepression of its
target genes, such as globin in erythroid cells and heme oxygenase-1 in diverse
cell types. Since Bach2 is important for class switch recombination and somatic
hypermutation of immunoglobulin genes as well as regulatory and effector T cell
differentiation and the macrophage function, the heme-Bach2 axis may regulate the
immune response as a signaling cascade. We discuss future issues regarding the
topic of the iron/heme-gene regulation network based on current understanding of 
the heme-Bach axis, including the concept of "iron immunology" as the synthesis
of the iron metabolism and the immune response.

PMID: 24681888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Diabetes. 2014 Jul;63(7):2516-27. doi: 10.2337/db13-1443. Epub 2014 Mar 7.

BACH2, a candidate risk gene for type 1 diabetes, regulates apoptosis in
pancreatic ß-cells via JNK1 modulation and crosstalk with the candidate gene
PTPN2.

Marroquí L(1), Santin I(2), Dos Santos RS(1), Marselli L(3), Marchetti P(3),
Eizirik DL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Université Libre de Bruxelles Center for 
Diabetes Research, Medical Faculty, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels,
Belgium. (2)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Université Libre de Bruxelles
Center for Diabetes Research, Medical Faculty, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Brussels, BelgiumEndocrinology and Diabetes Research Group, BioCruces Health
Research Institute and Spanish Biomedical Research Centre in Diabetes and
Associated Metabolic Disorders, Barakaldo, Spain. (3)Department of Endocrinology 
and Metabolism, Metabolic Unit, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (4)Laboratory of
Experimental Medicine, Université Libre de Bruxelles Center for Diabetes
Research, Medical Faculty, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium
deizirik@ulb.ac.be.

Type 1 diabetes is a chronic autoimmune disease characterized by specific
destruction of pancreatic ß-cells by the immune system. Linkage and genome-wide
association studies have identified more than 50 loci across the human genome
associated with risk of type 1 diabetes. Recently, basic leucine zipper
transcription factor 2 (BACH2) has been associated with genetic risk to develop
type 1 diabetes, in an effect ascribed to the immune system. We evaluated whether
BACH2 may also play a role in immune-mediated pancreatic ß-cell apoptosis. BACH2 
inhibition exacerbated cytokine-induced ß-cell apoptosis in human and rodent
ß-cells by the mitochondrial pathway of cell death, whereas BACH2 overexpression 
had protective effects. BACH2 silencing and exposure to proinflammatory cytokines
increased phosphorylation of the proapoptotic protein JNK1 by upregulation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 7 (MKK7) and downregulation of PTPN2.
JNK1 increased phosphorylation of the proapoptotic protein BIM, and both JNK1 and
BIM knockdown protected ß-cells against cytokine-induced apoptosis in
BACH2-silenced cells. The present findings suggest that the type 1 diabetes
candidate gene BACH2 regulates proinflammatory cytokine-induced apoptotic
pathways in pancreatic ß-cells by crosstalk with another candidate gene, PTPN2,
and activation of JNK1 and BIM. This clarifies an unexpected and relevant
mechanism by which BACH2 may contribute to diabetes.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association.

PMID: 24608439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Immunol. 2014 Dec;62(2):315-20. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2014.01.009. Epub 2014 
Mar 4.

Transcriptional and metabolic pre-B cell receptor-mediated checkpoints:
implications for autoimmune diseases.

Zouali M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, UMR 1132, F-75475 Paris, France; Université Paris Diderot, Sorbone
Paris Cité, F-75475 Paris, France. Electronic address: moncef.zouali@wanadoo.fr.

At the pre-B cell stage of lymphocyte development, immunoglobulin light-chains
are not yet produced, and heavy-chains are covalently linked to surrogate
light-chains composed of VpreB and <U+03BB>5 to form the pre-B cell receptor (pre-BCR)
in a non-covalent association with signal-transducing modules. Even tough the
pre-BCR does not have the potential to bind conventional antigens, accumulating
evidence indicates that pre-BCR-mediated checkpoints are important both for
negative and positive selection of self-reactivity, and that defects in these
regulatory nodes may be associated with autoimmune disease. Thus, the
transcription factor BACH2, which represents a susceptibility locus for
rheumatoid arthritis, has recently emerged as a crucial mediator of negative
selection at a pre-BCR checkpoint. The lysosome-associated protein LAPTM5, which 
is highly expressed in an animal model of Sjögren's syndrome, plays a role in
down-modulation of the pre-BCR. Studies of copy number variation in rheumatoid
arthritis suggest that a reduced dosage of the VPREB1 gene is involved in disease
pathogenesis. Notably, animal models of autoimmune disease exhibit defects in
pre-B to naïve B cell checkpoints. Administration of a pre-BCR ligand, which also
plays a role in anergy both in human and murine B lymphocytes, ameliorates
disease in experimental models of autoimmunity. Further investigation is required
to gain a better insight into the molecular mechanisms of pre-BCR-mediated
checkpoints and to determine their relevance to autoimmune diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24602812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Diabetes. 2014 Jul;63(7):2506-15. doi: 10.2337/db13-1716. Epub 2014 Mar 4.

Risk of type 1 diabetes progression in islet autoantibody-positive children can
be further stratified using expression patterns of multiple genes implicated in
peripheral blood lymphocyte activation and function.

Jin Y(1), Sharma A(2), Bai S(3), Davis C(3), Liu H(4), Hopkins D(3), Barriga
K(5), Rewers M(6), She JX(7).

Author information: 
(1)Sino-American Institute of Translational Medicine, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Nanjing University of Technology, Nanjing, ChinaCenter for
Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, GADepartment of Pathology, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA. (2)Center for Biotechnology and Genomic 
Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta,
GADepartment of Pathology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, GA. (3)Center for Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine,
Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA.
(4)Sino-American Institute of Translational Medicine, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Nanjing University of Technology, Nanjing, ChinaCenter for
Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, GA. (5)Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, Aurora, 
CO. (6)Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, Aurora, CO jshe@gru.edu
marian.rewers@ucdenver.edu. (7)Sino-American Institute of Translational Medicine,
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nanjing University of Technology, Nanjing,
ChinaCenter for Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GADepartment of Pathology, Medical College
of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA jshe@gru.edu
marian.rewers@ucdenver.edu.

There is tremendous scientific and clinical value to further improving the
predictive power of autoantibodies because autoantibody-positive (AbP) children
have heterogeneous rates of progression to clinical diabetes. This study explored
the potential of gene expression profiles as biomarkers for risk stratification
among 104 AbP subjects from the Diabetes Autoimmunity Study in the Young (DAISY) 
using a discovery data set based on microarray and a validation data set based on
real-time RT-PCR. The microarray data identified 454 candidate genes with
expression levels associated with various type 1 diabetes (T1D) progression
rates. RT-PCR analyses of the top-27 candidate genes confirmed 5 genes (BACH2,
IGLL3, EIF3A, CDC20, and TXNDC5) associated with differential progression and
implicated in lymphocyte activation and function. Multivariate analyses of these 
five genes in the discovery and validation data sets identified and confirmed
four multigene models (BI, ICE, BICE, and BITE, with each letter representing a
gene) that consistently stratify high- and low-risk subsets of AbP subjects with 
hazard ratios >6 (P < 0.01). The results suggest that these genes may be involved
in T1D pathogenesis and potentially serve as excellent gene expression biomarkers
to predict the risk of progression to clinical diabetes for AbP subjects.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association.

PMCID: PMC4066338
PMID: 24595351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. PLoS Genet. 2014 Feb 27;10(2):e1004123. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004123.
eCollection 2014.

Identification of novel genetic Loci associated with thyroid peroxidase
antibodies and clinical thyroid disease.

Medici M, Porcu E, Pistis G, Teumer A, Brown SJ, Jensen RA, Rawal R, Roef GL,
Plantinga TS, Vermeulen SH, Lahti J, Simmonds MJ, Husemoen LL, Freathy RM,
Shields BM, Pietzner D, Nagy R, Broer L, Chaker L, Korevaar TI, Plia MG, Sala C, 
Völker U, Richards JB, Sweep FC, Gieger C, Corre T, Kajantie E, Thuesen B, Taes
YE, Visser WE, Hattersley AT, Kratzsch J, Hamilton A, Li W, Homuth G, Lobina M,
Mariotti S, Soranzo N, Cocca M, Nauck M, Spielhagen C, Ross A, Arnold A, van de
Bunt M, Liyanarachchi S, Heier M, Grabe HJ, Masciullo C, Galesloot TE, Lim EM,
Reischl E, Leedman PJ, Lai S, Delitala A, Bremner AP, Philips DI, Beilby JP,
Mulas A, Vocale M, Abecasis G, Forsen T, James A, Widen E, Hui J, Prokisch H,
Rietzschel EE, Palotie A, Feddema P, Fletcher SJ, Schramm K, Rotter JI, Kluttig
A, Radke D, Traglia M, Surdulescu GL, He H, Franklyn JA, Tiller D, Vaidya B, de
Meyer T, Jørgensen T, Eriksson JG, O'Leary PC, Wichmann E, Hermus AR, Psaty BM,
Ittermann T, Hofman A, Bosi E, Schlessinger D, Wallaschofski H, Pirastu N,
Aulchenko YS, de la Chapelle A, Netea-Maier RT, Gough SC, Meyer Zu Schwabedissen 
H, Frayling TM, Kaufman JM, Linneberg A, Räikkönen K, Smit JW, Kiemeney LA,
Rivadeneira F, Uitterlinden AG, Walsh JP, Meisinger C, den Heijer M, Visser TJ,
Spector TD, Wilson SG, Völzke H, Cappola A, Toniolo D, Sanna S, Naitza S, Peeters
RP.

Autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITD) are common, affecting 2-5% of the general
population. Individuals with positive thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPOAbs) have
an increased risk of autoimmune hypothyroidism (Hashimoto's thyroiditis), as well
as autoimmune hyperthyroidism (Graves' disease). As the possible causative genes 
of TPOAbs and AITD remain largely unknown, we performed GWAS meta-analyses in
18,297 individuals for TPOAb-positivity (1769 TPOAb-positives and 16,528
TPOAb-negatives) and in 12,353 individuals for TPOAb serum levels, with
replication in 8,990 individuals. Significant associations (P<5×10(-8)) were
detected at TPO-rs11675434, ATXN2-rs653178, and BACH2-rs10944479 for
TPOAb-positivity, and at TPO-rs11675434, MAGI3-rs1230666, and KALRN-rs2010099 for
TPOAb levels. Individual and combined effects (genetic risk scores) of these
variants on (subclinical) hypo- and hyperthyroidism, goiter and thyroid cancer
were studied. Individuals with a high genetic risk score had, besides an
increased risk of TPOAb-positivity (OR: 2.18, 95% CI 1.68-2.81, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>8.1×10(-8)), 
a higher risk of increased thyroid-stimulating hormone levels (OR: 1.51, 95% CI
1.26-1.82, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.9×10(-6)), as well as a decreased risk of goiter (OR: 0.77, 95% 
CI 0.66-0.89, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.5×10(-4)). The MAGI3 and BACH2 variants were associated with 
an increased risk of hyperthyroidism, which was replicated in an independent
cohort of patients with Graves' disease (OR: 1.37, 95% CI 1.22-1.54,
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.2×10(-7) and OR: 1.25, 95% CI 1.12-1.39, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.2×10(-5)). The MAGI3 variant
was also associated with an increased risk of hypothyroidism (OR: 1.57, 95% CI
1.18-2.10, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.9×10(-3)). This first GWAS meta-analysis for TPOAbs identified
five newly associated loci, three of which were also associated with clinical
thyroid disease. With these markers we identified a large subgroup in the general
population with a substantially increased risk of TPOAbs. The results provide
insight into why individuals with thyroid autoimmunity do or do not eventually
develop thyroid disease, and these markers may therefore predict which
TPOAb-positives are particularly at risk of developing clinical thyroid
dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC3937134
PMID: 24586183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2014;10(5):1295-305. doi: 10.4161/hv.28099. Epub 2014 Feb 
28.

Attenuation of antigenic immunogenicity by kynurenine, a novel suppressive
adjuvant.

Duan Z(1), Duan Y(2), Lei H(2), Hu N(1), Shi J(1), Shen D(1), Wang X(1), Hu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biology; Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking
Union Medical College; Kunming, PR China. (2)Shanxi Agricultural University;
Taigu, Shanxi, PR China.

A novel therapeutic strategy is required for autoimmune diseases characterized by
the production of autoantibody, because current clinical strategies have
limitations. Vaccination against autoimmune diseases is a feasible strategy
because vaccines induce immune response memory and the antigen specificity.
However, no suitable adjuvant is available to direct the immune response toward
tolerance or suppression. In the current study, we evaluated whether kynurenine
(Kyn) could serve as a novel suppressive adjuvant to decrease the humoral immune 
responses against hepatitis A virus (HAV) in the ICR mouse model in vivo and
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in B cells in vitro. The underlying mechanisms of
Kyn-mediated suppression of LPS-induced IgM responses were explored. The results 
showed that Kyn significantly decreased HAV immunogenicity when co-administered
with HAV, and that Kyn (100 µM/1000 µM) impaired IgM generation compared with
that induced by LPS alone. We also demonstrated that microRNA30b (miR30b) played 
a critical role in the process of Kyn-mediated suppression of IgM responses
induced by LPS, and that Bach2, a transcriptional repressor of B cell terminal
differentiation, was a novel target of miR30b. These findings suggest that Kyn
can serve as a novel and effective suppressive adjuvant for vaccines.

PMID: 24583631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Blood. 2014 Feb 13;123(7):950. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-01-542449.

The polyphony of BACH2.

Dave SS(1).

Author information: 
(1)DUKE UNIVERSITY.

Comment on
    Blood. 2014 Feb 13;123(7):1012-20.

PMCID: PMC3924930
PMID: 24526774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Cancer Sci. 2014 Apr;105(4):437-44. doi: 10.1111/cas.12361. Epub 2014 Mar 8.

Association between BACH2 expression and clinical prognosis in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma.

Ichikawa S(1), Fukuhara N, Katsushima H, Takahashi T, Yamamoto J, Yokoyama H,
Sasaki O, Fukuhara O, Nomura J, Ishizawa K, Ichinohasama R, Muto A, Igarashi K,
Harigae H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

BACH2, a B cell-specific transcriptional repressor, plays a significant role in B
cell maturation. Despite a number of previous studies, the clinicopathological
significance of BACH2 expression in diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) remains
to be established. The present study was performed to validate the significance
of BACH2 expression as a predictor of prognosis in DLBCL. A total of 94 DLBCL
cases were included in the present study. All were diagnosed between 2008 and
2011, and thorough clinical and pathological investigations were possible,
including immunohistochemical analysis of BACH2. Eighteen cases were selected by 
positive MYC gene alteration (MYC+ group) according to cytogenetic study. The
remaining 76 cases were subclassified into germinal center B cell phenotype (GCB 
group, 38 cases) or non-GCB phenotype (non-GCB group, 38 cases). There were no
significant differences between the two groups with regard to clinical
characteristics and outcomes. In the GCB group, 21 cases were judged to have high
BACH2 expression, with 19 cases in the non-GCB group. In cases with high BACH2
expression in GCB and non-GCB groups, the 3-year overall survival (OS) rate was
significantly shorter than that with low expression (71.7% vs 91.3%, P = 0.0256).
In the MYC+ group, 15 cases had high BACH2 expression levels. Although overall
the MYC+ group showed short survival time (3-year OS 35.0%), 3 out of 4 cases
with low BACH2 expression are alive without disease relapse at the time of
publication of this paper. In conclusion, BACH2 expression level is a promising
predictor of prognosis for DLBCL.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4317811
PMID: 24450488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 1;192(3):985-95. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302378. Epub 2013 Dec
23.

Bach2 regulates homeostasis of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells and protects against
fatal lung disease in mice.

Kim EH(1), Gasper DJ, Lee SH, Plisch EH, Svaren J, Suresh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
53706;

Variants of the Bach2 gene are linked to vitiligo, celiac disease, and type 1
diabetes, but the underlying immunological mechanisms are unknown. In this study,
we demonstrate that Bach2 plays crucial roles in maintaining T cell quiescence
and governing the differentiation, activation, and survival of Foxp3(+)
regulatory T (Treg) cells. Bach2-deficient T cells display spontaneous activation
and produce elevated levels of Th1/Th2-type cytokines. Without Bach2, Treg cells 
exhibit diminished Foxp3 expression, depleted numbers, hyperactivation, enhanced 
proliferation, and profound loss of competitive fitness in vivo. Mechanistically,
reduced survival of Bach2-deficient Treg cells was associated with reduced Bcl-2 
and Mcl-1 levels and elevated Bim/Bcl-2 ratio. Additionally, Bach2 deficiency
induced selective loss of Helios(-)Foxp3(+) Treg cells and a Treg cell
transcriptome skewed toward the Th1/Th2 effector program at the expense of the
Treg program. In vitro experiments confirmed that Bach2: 1) is indispensable for 
TCR/TGF-ß-induced Foxp3 expression; and 2) mitigates aberrant differentiation of 
Treg cells by repression of the competing Gata3-driven Th2 effector program.
Importantly, perturbations in the differentiation of induced Treg cells was
linked to a fatal Th2-type chronic inflammatory lung disease in Bach2-deficient
mice. Thus, Bach2 enforces T cell quiescence, promotes the development and
survival of Treg lineage, restrains aberrant differentiation of Treg cells, and
protects against immune-mediated diseases.

PMCID: PMC3946995
PMID: 24367030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Hum Genet. 2014 May;133(5):661-71. doi: 10.1007/s00439-013-1404-2. Epub 2013 Dec 
12.

Identification of BACH2 as a susceptibility gene for Graves' disease in the
Chinese Han population based on a three-stage genome-wide association study.

Liu W(1), Wang HN, Gu ZH, Yang SY, Ye XP, Pan CM, Zhao SX, Xue LQ, Xie HJ, Yu SS,
Guo CC, Du WH, Liang J, Zhang XM, Yuan GY, Li CG, Su Q, Gao GQ, Song HD; China
Consortium for the Genetics of Autoimmune Thyroid Disease.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Molecular Medicine Center, Ruijin
Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China.

The BACH2 gene regulates B cell differentiation and function and has been
reported to be a shared susceptibility gene for several autoimmune diseases. Our 
previous genome-wide association study (GWAS) indicated that several single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the BACH2 gene are associated with Graves'
disease (GD) in the Chinese Han population; however, the association did not
achieve genome-wide significance levels. Recently, this association of BACH2 with
GD was confirmed in Caucasians in the UK population, but fine mapping in this
region has not yet been reported. Here, we provide a refined analysis of a 331-kb
region in the BACH2 gene, which harbors 359 SNPs, using GWAS data from 1,442 GD
patients and 1,468 controls. The SNPs rs2474619 and rs9344996 were implied as the
independent variants associated with GD by forward and two-locus logistic
regression analysis. We genotyped eight out of 10 tagSNPs with P < 1 × 10(-3) in 
3,508 GD patients and 3,209 controls, the results also showed that rs2474619 was 
independently associated with GD in the combined population from GWAS and the
second stage (P = 1.81 × 10(-5)). The rs2474619 and rs9344996 were further
genotyped in the third stage cohorts, and rs2474619 showed evidence of
association with GD at genome-wide significance levels in the combined population
(P = 3.28 × 10(-8), odds ratio = 1.13). The association of rs9344996 with GD can 
be explained by its linkage to rs2474619 in the combined population. Our study
clearly demonstrated that BACH2 is a susceptibility gene for GD in the Chinese
Han population and further supported rs2474619, in intron 2 of BACH2, is the best
association signal with GD. However, the mechanism by which BACH2 confers
increased risk of GD requires further study.

PMID: 24346624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2830. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3830.

A genome-wide regulatory network identifies key transcription factors for memory 
CD8<U+207A> T-cell development.

Hu G(1), Chen J(1).

Author information: 
(1)David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research and Department of
Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139,
USA.

Memory CD8<U+207A> T-cell development is defined by the expression of a specific set of 
memory signature genes. Despite recent progress, many components of the
transcriptional control of memory CD8<U+207A> T-cell development are still unknown. To
identify transcription factors and their interactions in memory CD8<U+207A> T-cell
development, we construct a genome-wide regulatory network and apply it to
identify key transcription factors that regulate memory signature genes. Most of 
the known transcription factors having a role in memory CD8<U+207A> T-cell development
are rediscovered and about a dozen new ones are also identified. Sox4, Bhlhe40,
Bach2 and Runx2 are experimentally verified, and Bach2 is further shown to
promote both development and recall proliferation of memory CD8<U+207A> T cells through 
Prdm1 and Id3. Gene perturbation study identifies the interactions between the
transcription factors, with Sox4 positioned as a hub. The identified
transcription factors and insights into their interactions should facilitate
further dissection of molecular mechanisms underlying memory CD8<U+207A> T-cell
development.

PMCID: PMC3999894
PMID: 24335726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Trends Immunol. 2014 Mar;35(3):131-7. doi: 10.1016/j.it.2013.11.002. Epub 2013
Dec 10.

BACH2-BCL6 balance regulates selection at the pre-B cell receptor checkpoint.

Swaminathan S(1), Duy C(2), Müschen M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA. (3)Department of Laboratory
Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
Electronic address: markus.muschen@ucsf.edu.

At the pre-B cell receptor (BCR) checkpoint, developing pre-B cells are selected 
for successful rearrangement of V(H)-DJ(H) gene segments and expression of a
pre-BCR. Reduced stringency at this checkpoint may obstruct the B cell repertoire
with nonfunctional B cell clones. Earlier studies have described that activation 
of B cell lymphoma/leukemia (BCL)6 by a functional pre-BCR mediates positive
selection of pre-B cells that have passed the checkpoint. This concept is now
further elaborated by the recent finding that the BTB and CNC homology 1 basic
leucine zipper transcription factor 2 (BACH2) induces negative selection and
opposes BCL6 function prior to the pre-BCR checkpoint. Here, we discuss the
antagonism between BCL6 and BACH2 during early B cell development, as well as its
implications in both repertoire selection and counter-selection of premalignant
clones for leukemia suppression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3943645
PMID: 24332591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Blood. 2014 Feb 13;123(7):1012-20. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-07-518605. Epub 2013
Nov 25.

Cooperative transcriptional repression by BCL6 and BACH2 in germinal center
B-cell differentiation.

Huang C(1), Geng H, Boss I, Wang L, Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, 
NY; and.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Feb 13;123(7):950.

The transcriptional repressors BCL6 and BACH2 are crucial regulators of germinal 
center (GC) B-cell fate, and are known to interact and repress transcription of
PRDM1, a key driver of plasma cell differentiation. How these factors cooperate
is not fully understood. Herein, we show that GC formation is only minimally
impaired in Bcl6(+/-) or Bach2(+/-) mice, although double heterozygous
Bcl6(+/-)Bach2(+/-) mice exhibit profound reduction in GC formation. Splenic B
cells from Bcl6(+/-) Bach2(+/-) mice display accelerated plasmacytic
differentiation and high expression of key plasma cell genes such as Prdm1, Xbp1,
and CD138. Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing revealed that in B cells,
BACH2 is mostly bound to genes together with its heterodimer partner MAFK. The
BACH2-MAFK complex binds to sets of genes known to be involved in the GC
response, 60% of which are also targets of BCL6. Approximately 30% of BACH2 peaks
overlap with BCL6, including cis-regulatory sequences of the PRDM1 gene. BCL6
also modulates BACH2 protein stability and their protein levels are positively
correlated in GC B cells. Therefore, BCL6 and BACH2 cooperate to orchestrate gene
expression patterning in GC B cells through both transcriptional and biochemical 
mechanisms, which collectively determine the proper initiation and timing of
terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3924924
PMID: 24277074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Exp Med. 2013 Oct 21;210(11):2191-204. doi: 10.1084/jem.20130028. Epub 2013 Oct
14.

Transcription repressor Bach2 is required for pulmonary surfactant homeostasis
and alveolar macrophage function.

Nakamura A(1), Ebina-Shibuya R, Itoh-Nakadai A, Muto A, Shima H, Saigusa D, Aoki 
J, Ebina M, Nukiwa T, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, 2 Division of Respiratory Medicine, and 3 Center
for Regulatory Epigenome and Diseases, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) results from a dysfunction of alveolar
macrophages (AMs), chiefly due to disruptions in the signaling of granulocyte
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). We found that mice deficient for
the B lymphoid transcription repressor BTB and CNC homology 2 (Bach2) developed
PAP-like accumulation of surfactant proteins in the lungs. Bach2 was expressed in
AMs, and Bach2-deficient AMs showed alterations in lipid handling in comparison
with wild-type (WT) cells. Although Bach2-deficient AMs showed a normal
expression of the genes involved in the GM-CSF signaling, they showed an altered 
expression of the genes involved in chemotaxis, lipid metabolism, and alternative
M2 macrophage activation with increased expression of Ym1 and arginase-1, and the
M2 regulator Irf4. Peritoneal Bach2-deficient macrophages showed increased Ym1
expression when stimulated with interleukin-4. More eosinophils were present in
the lung and peritoneal cavity of Bach2-deficient mice compared with WT mice. The
PAP-like lesions in Bach2-deficient mice were relieved by WT bone marrow
transplantation even after their development, confirming the hematopoietic origin
of the lesions. These results indicate that Bach2 is required for the functional 
maturation of AMs and pulmonary homeostasis, independently of the GM-CSF
signaling.

PMCID: PMC3804940
PMID: 24127487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. DNA Repair (Amst). 2013 Nov;12(11):982-92. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2013.08.016.
Epub 2013 Sep 24.

BACH2: a marker of DNA damage and ageing.

Uittenboogaard LM(1), Payan-Gomez C, Pothof J, van Ijcken W, Mastroberardino PG, 
van der Pluijm I, Hoeijmakers JH, Tresini M.

Author information: 
(1)MGC Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Center for Biomedical Genetics,
Erasmus Medical Center, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

DNA damage and ageing share expression changes involving alterations in many
aspects of metabolism, suppression of growth and upregulation of defence and
genome maintenance systems. "Omics" technologies have permitted large-scale
parallel measurements covering global cellular constituents and aided the
identification of specific response pathways that change during ageing and after 
DNA damage. We have set out to identify genes with highly conserved response
patterns through meta-analysis of mRNA expression datasets collected during
natural ageing and accelerated ageing caused by a Transcription-Coupled
Nucleotide Excision Repair (TC-NER) defect in a diverse set of organs and tissues
in mice, and from in vitro UV-induced DNA damage in a variety of murine cells.
The identified set of genes that show similar expression patterns in response to 
organ ageing (accelerated and normal), and endogenously and exogenously induced
DNA damage, consists of genes involved in anti-oxidant systems and includes the
transcription factor Bach2 as one of the most consistent markers. BACH2 was
originally identified as a partner of the small Maf proteins and antagonist of
the NRF2 anti-oxidant defence pathway and has been implicated in B-cell
differentiation and immune system homeostasis. Although BACH2 has never before
been associated with UV-induced damage or ageing, it shows a strong
downregulation in both conditions. We have characterized the dynamics of Bach2
expression in response to DNA damage and show that it is a highly sensitive
responder to transcription-blocking DNA lesions. Gene expression profiling using 
Affymetrix microarray analysis after siRNA-mediated silencing of Bach2 identified
cell cycle and transcription regulation as the most significantly altered
processes consistent with a function as transcription factor affecting
proliferation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3912324
PMID: 24075570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cancer Cell. 2013 Sep 9;24(3):282-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.08.017.

A Bach2 link between pre-B cell receptor checkpoint and pre-B cell ALL.

Ye BH(1), Mai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA. Electronic address: hilda.ye@einstein.yu.edu.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2013 Aug;19(8):1014-22.

Bach2 is a transcription factor required for affinity maturation of B cells. A
recent study reveals, quite unexpectedly, that Bach2 also plays a key role in the
pre-B cell receptor checkpoint and functions as a tumor suppressor in pre-B cell 
acute lymphocytic leukemia.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24029225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Arthritis Rheum. 2013 Dec;65(12):3058-62. doi: 10.1002/art.38183.

Identification of BACH2 and RAD51B as rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility loci in
a meta-analysis of genome-wide data.

McAllister K(1), Yarwood A, Bowes J, Orozco G, Viatte S, Diogo D, Hocking LJ,
Steer S, Wordsworth P, Wilson AG, Morgan AW; UK Rheumatoid Arthritis Genetics
Consortium; Rheumatoid Arthritis Consortium International, Kremer JM, Pappas D,
Gregersen P, Klareskog L, Plenge R, Barton A, Greenberg J, Worthington J, Eyre S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, NIHR Manchester Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research 
Unit, and Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.

OBJECTIVE: A recent high-density fine-mapping (ImmunoChip) study of genetic
associations in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) identified 14 risk loci with validated 
genome-wide significance, as well as a number of loci showing associations
suggestive of significance (P = 5 × 10(-5) < 5 × 10(-8)), but these have yet to
be replicated. The aim of this study was to determine whether these potentially
significant loci are involved in the pathogenesis of RA, and to explore whether
any of the loci are associated with a specific RA serotype.
METHODS: A total of 16 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were selected for
genotyping and association analyses in 2 independent validation cohorts,
comprising 6,106 RA cases and 4,290 controls. A meta-analysis of the data from
the original ImmunoChip discovery cohort and from both validation cohorts was
carried out, for a combined total of 17,581 RA cases and 20,160 controls. In
addition, stratified analysis of patient subsets, defined according to their
anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibody status, was performed.
RESULTS: A significant association with RA risk (P < 0.05) was replicated for 6
of the SNPs assessed in the validation cohorts. All SNPs in the validation study 
had odds ratios (ORs) for RA susceptibility in the same direction as those in the
ImmunoChip discovery study. One SNP, rs72928038, mapping to an intron of BACH2,
achieved genome-wide significance in the meta-analysis (P = 1.2 × 10(-8), OR
1.12), and a second SNP, rs911263, mapping to an intron of RAD51B, was
significantly associated in the anti-CCP-positive RA subgroup (P = 4 × 10(-8), OR
0.89), confirming that both are RA susceptibility loci.
CONCLUSION: This study provides robust evidence for an association of RA
susceptibility with genes involved in B cell differentiation (BACH2) and DNA
repair (RAD51B). The finding that the RAD51B gene exhibited different
associations based on serologic subtype adds to the expanding knowledge base in
defining subgroups of RA.

© 2013 The Authors. Arthritis & Rheumatism is published by Wiley Periodicals,
Inc. on behalf of the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC4034583
PMID: 24022229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 2;8(8):e69126. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069126. Print 2013.

Nuclear translocation of B-cell-specific transcription factor, BACH2, modulates
ROS mediated cytotoxic responses in mantle cell lymphoma.

Chen Z(1), Pittman EF, Romaguera J, Fayad L, Wang M, Neelapu SS, McLaughlin P,
Kwak L, McCarty N.

Author information: 
(1)Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine for the Prevention of Human
Diseases (IMM) University of Texas-Health Science Center at Houston, Houston,
Texas, United States of America.

BACH2, a B-cell specific transcription factor, plays a critical role in oxidative
stress-mediated apoptosis. Bortezomib (Velcade(TM)) is widely used to treat
relapsed mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) patients despite varying clinical outcomes.
As one of the potential mechanisms of action, bortezomib was reported to elicit
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress which triggers reactive oxygen species (ROS).
In the present study, we investigated the redox-sensitive intracellular mechanism
that might play a critical role in bortezomib response in MCL cells. We
demonstrated that in MCL cells that are sensitive to bortezomib treatments, BACH2
was translocated to the nucleus in response to bortezomib and induced apoptotic
responses through the modulation of anti-oxidative and anti-apoptotic genes. On
the other hand, in bortezomib resistant cells, BACH2 expression was confined in
the cytoplasm and no suppression of antiapoptotic or antioxidative genes, Nrf2,
Gss, CAT, HO-1 and MCL1, was detected. Importantly, levels of BACH2 were
significantly higher in bortezomib sensitive MCL patient cells, indicating that
BACH2 levels could be an indicator for clinical bortezomib responses. BACH2
translocation to the cytoplasm after phosphorylation was inhibited by PI3K
inhibitors and combinatory regimens of bortezomib and PI3K inhibitors sensitized 
MCL cells to bortezomib. These data suggest that cellular distribution of BACH2
in response to ROS determines the threshold for the induction of apoptosis.
Therapies that inhibit BACH2 phosphorylation could be the key for increasing
bortezomib cytotoxic response in patients.

PMCID: PMC3732253
PMID: 23936317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Immunity. 2013 Jul 25;39(1):89-91. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.07.009.

Plasma cells for hire: prior experience required.

Hagman J(1), Lukin K.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Department of Immunology, K516B, National Jewish Health, 1400
Jackson Street, Denver, CO 80206, USA. hagmanj@njhealth.org

Comment on
    Immunity. 2013 Jul 25;39(1):136-47.

Activation of IgG<U+207A> memory B cells accounts for much of the antibodies in
secondary immune responses. Here, Kometani et al. (2013) demonstrate that reduced
amounts of Bach2 in antigen-experienced memory B cells control the robust
production of IgG1<U+207A> plasma cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3755473
PMID: 23890066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Pathol Int. 2013 Jul;63(7):339-44. doi: 10.1111/pin.12076.

Over-expression of BACH2 is related to ongoing somatic hypermutation of the
immunoglobulin heavy chain gene variable region of de novo diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma.

Kikuchi T(1), Tokunaka M, Kikuti YY, Carreras J, Ogura G, Takekoshi S, Kojima M, 
Ando K, Hashimoto Y, Abe M, Takata K, Yoshino T, Muto A, Igarashi K, Nakamura N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan.

The basic region-leucine zipper (bZip) factor BTB, CNC homology 2 (BACH2) is
known to have important roles in class switch recombination and somatic
hypermutation (SHM) of the immunoglobulin (Ig) gene. In this study, we
investigated the relationship between the expression of BACH2 and the status of
SHM of the Ig heavy chain gene variable region (IgHV) for SHM in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). We examined 20 cases of DLBCL, 13 of which were germinal
center B-cell (GCB) DLBCL and 7 were non-GCB DLBCL. Seven cases were negative, 6 
were positive (cytoplasmic expression) and 7 were strongly positive (both nuclear
and cytoplasmic expression) for BACH2. Confirmed mutation (CM) was identified in 
8 cases and the CM index (number of confirmed mutations per 10 subclones) was
distributed from 0 to 5. A CM index of 7 strongly positive (over-expression)
cases with BACH2 were distributed from 0 to 5, and that of 7 negative and 6
positive cases were distributed from 0 to 1. Over-expression of BACH2 was
statistically related to CM index (P = 0.008). In conclusion, over-expression of 
BACH2 is critical for ongoing SHM of IgHV in DLBCL, and our data suggest that
BACH2 may play an essential role for SHM of the Ig gene in B-cell lymphoma.

© 2013 The Authors. Pathology International © 2013 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23865571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Nat Med. 2013 Aug;19(8):1014-22. doi: 10.1038/nm.3247. Epub 2013 Jul 14.

BACH2 mediates negative selection and p53-dependent tumor suppression at the
pre-B cell receptor checkpoint.

Swaminathan S(1), Huang C, Geng H, Chen Z, Harvey R, Kang H, Ng C, Titz B, Hurtz 
C, Sadiyah MF, Nowak D, Thoennissen GB, Rand V, Graeber TG, Koeffler HP, Carroll 
WL, Willman CL, Hall AG, Igarashi K, Melnick A, Müschen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2013 Sep 9;24(3):282-4.

The B cell-specific transcription factor BACH2 is required for affinity
maturation of B cells. Here we show that Bach2-mediated activation of p53 is
required for stringent elimination of pre-B cells that failed to productively
rearrange immunoglobulin VH-DJH gene segments. After productive VH-DJH gene
rearrangement, pre-B cell receptor signaling ends BACH2-mediated negative
selection through B cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6)-mediated repression of p53. In
patients with pre-B acute lymphoblastic leukemia, the BACH2-mediated checkpoint
control is compromised by deletions, rare somatic mutations and loss of its
upstream activator, PAX5. Low levels of BACH2 expression in these patients
represent a strong independent predictor of poor clinical outcome. In this study,
we demonstrate that Bach2(+/+) pre-B cells resist leukemic transformation by Myc 
through Bach2-dependent upregulation of p53 and do not initiate fatal leukemia in
transplant-recipient mice. Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing and gene
expression analyses carried out by us revealed that BACH2 competes with BCL6 for 
promoter binding and reverses BCL6-mediated repression of p53 and other cell
cycle checkpoint-control genes. These findings identify BACH2 as a crucial
mediator of negative selection at the pre-B cell receptor checkpoint and a
safeguard against leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3954721
PMID: 23852341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Immunity. 2013 Jul 25;39(1):136-47. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.06.011. Epub 2013 
Jul 11.

Repression of the transcription factor Bach2 contributes to predisposition of
IgG1 memory B cells toward plasma cell differentiation.

Kometani K(1), Nakagawa R, Shinnakasu R, Kaji T, Rybouchkin A, Moriyama S,
Furukawa K, Koseki H, Takemori T, Kurosaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Lymphocyte Differentiation, Research Center for Allergy and
Immunology, RIKEN, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2013 Jul 25;39(1):89-91.

Memory B cells are essential for generating rapid and robust secondary antibody
responses. It has been thought that the unique cytoplasmic domain of IgG causes
the prompt activation of antigen-experienced IgG memory B cells. To assess this
model, we have generated a mouse containing IgG1 B cells that have never
encountered antigen. We found that, upon challenge, antigen-experienced IgG1
memory B cells rapidly differentiated into plasma cells, whereas nonexperienced
IgG1 B cells did not, suggesting the importance of the stimulation history. In
addition, our results suggest that repression of the Bach2 transcription factor, 
which results from antigen experience, contributes to predisposition of IgG1
memory B cells to differentiate into plasma cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23850379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Arthritis Rheum. 2013 Oct;65(10):2703-12. doi: 10.1002/art.38059.

Extension of the germinal center stage of B cell development promotes
autoantibodies in BXD2 mice.

Wang JH(1), New JS, Xie S, Yang P, Wu Q, Li J, Luo B, Ding Y, Druey KM, Hsu HC,
Mountz JD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Alabama at, Birmingham.

OBJECTIVE: Regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) proteins inhibit chemokine
signaling by desensitizing G protein-coupled receptor signals. This study was
undertaken to determine the mechanisms by which RGS13 promotes the generation of 
pathogenic autoantibodies in germinal centers (GCs), using BXD2-Rgs13-/- mice.
METHODS: Confocal and light microscopy imaging techniques were used to determine 
the location of cells that express RGS13 and activation-induced cytidine
deaminase (AID) in the mouse spleen, and the number of plasmablasts. The levels
of GC and plasma cell program transcripts in GC B cells were determined by
real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Differential
interleukin-17 (IL-17)-mediated expression of RGS13 in GC versus non-GC B cells
was analyzed using A20 and 70Z/3 B cells.
RESULTS: In the spleens of BXD2 mice, RGS13 was mainly expressed by GC B cells
and was stimulated by IL-17 but not IL-21. IL-17 up-regulated RGS13 in A20 GC
cells but not 70Z/3 non-GC B cells. BXD2- Rgs13-/- mice exhibited smaller GCs and
lower AID levels, suggesting lower somatic hypermutation and affinity maturation.
However, GC B cells from BXD2- Rgs13-/- mice showed increased levels of IgMbright
plasmablasts, up-regulation of the genes encoding plasma program, including
interferon regulatory factor 4, B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 1, and
X-box binding protein 1 and the p-CREB target genes Fosb and Obf1, and
down-regulation of the GC program genes Aid, Pax5, and Bach2 compared to BXD2
mice. BXD2-Rgs13-/- mice had lower titers of IgG autoantibodies and IgG deposits 
in the glomeruli, suggesting reduced autoantibody pathogenicity.
CONCLUSION: RGS13 deficiency is associated with a reduction in GC program genes
and the exit of fewer pathogenic IgM plasmablasts in BXD2 mice. Our findings
indicate that prolonged GC program, mediated by up-regulation of RGS13, enhances 
AID expression and enables the generation of pathogenic autoantibodies in
autoreactive GCs.

Published 2013. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMCID: PMC3979745
PMID: 23818250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Immunol Cell Biol. 2013 Sep;91(8):491-2. doi: 10.1038/icb.2013.32. Epub 2013 Jul 
2.

Transcription factor Bach2 balances tolerance and immunity.

Kallies A(1), Vasanthakumar A.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.

Comment on
    Nature. 2013 Jun 27;498(7455):506-10.

PMID: 23817578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 25;110(26):10735-40. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1306691110. Epub 2013 Jun 10.

Bach2 maintains T cells in a naive state by suppressing effector memory-related
genes.

Tsukumo S(1), Unno M, Muto A, Takeuchi A, Kometani K, Kurosaki T, Igarashi K,
Saito T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Signaling, RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and
Immunology, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

The transcriptional repressor BTB and CNC homology 2 (Bach2) is thought to be
mainly expressed in B cells with specific functions such as class switch
recombination and somatic hypermutation, but its function in T cells is not
known. We found equal Bach2 expression in T cells and analyzed its function using
Bach2-deficient (-/-) mice. Although T-cell development was normal, numbers of
peripheral naive T cells were decreased, which rapidly produced Th2 cytokines
after TCR stimulation. Bach2(-/-) naive T cells highly expressed genes related to
effector-memory T cells such as CCR4, ST-2 and Blimp-1. Enhanced expression of
these genes induced Bach2(-/-) naive T cells to migrate toward CCR4-ligand and
respond to IL33. Forced expression of Bach2 restored the expression of these
genes. Using Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-seq analysis, we identified
S100 calcium binding protein a, Heme oxigenase 1, and prolyl hydroxylase 3 as
Bach2 direct target genes, which are highly expressed in effector-memory T cells.
These findings indicate that Bach2 suppresses effector memory-related genes to
maintain the naive T-cell state and regulates generation of effector-memory T
cells.

PMCID: PMC3696756
PMID: 23754397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Nature. 2013 Jun 27;498(7455):506-10. doi: 10.1038/nature12199. Epub 2013 Jun 2.

BACH2 represses effector programs to stabilize T(reg)-mediated immune
homeostasis.

Roychoudhuri R(1), Hirahara K, Mousavi K, Clever D, Klebanoff CA, Bonelli M,
Sciumè G, Zare H, Vahedi G, Dema B, Yu Z, Liu H, Takahashi H, Rao M, Muranski P, 
Crompton JG, Punkosdy G, Bedognetti D, Wang E, Hoffmann V, Rivera J, Marincola
FM, Nakamura A, Sartorelli V, Kanno Y, Gattinoni L, Muto A, Igarashi K, O'Shea
JJ, Restifo NP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. roychoudhuri@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Immunol Cell Biol. 2013 Sep;91(8):491-2.

Through their functional diversification, distinct lineages of CD4(+) T cells can
act to either drive or constrain immune-mediated pathology. Transcription factors
are critical in the generation of cellular diversity, and negative regulators
antagonistic to alternate fates often act in conjunction with positive regulators
to stabilize lineage commitment. Genetic polymorphisms within a single locus
encoding the transcription factor BACH2 are associated with numerous autoimmune
and allergic diseases including asthma, Crohn's disease, coeliac disease,
vitiligo, multiple sclerosis and type 1 diabetes. Although these associations
point to a shared mechanism underlying susceptibility to diverse immune-mediated 
diseases, a function for BACH2 in the maintenance of immune homeostasis has not
been established. Here, by studying mice in which the Bach2 gene is disrupted, we
define BACH2 as a broad regulator of immune activation that stabilizes
immunoregulatory capacity while repressing the differentiation programs of
multiple effector lineages in CD4(+) T cells. BACH2 was required for efficient
formation of regulatory (Treg) cells and consequently for suppression of lethal
inflammation in a manner that was Treg-cell-dependent. Assessment of the
genome-wide function of BACH2, however, revealed that it represses genes
associated with effector cell differentiation. Consequently, its absence during
Treg polarization resulted in inappropriate diversion to effector lineages. In
addition, BACH2 constrained full effector differentiation within TH1, TH2 and
TH17 cell lineages. These findings identify BACH2 as a key regulator of CD4(+)
T-cell differentiation that prevents inflammatory disease by controlling the
balance between tolerance and immunity.

PMCID: PMC3710737
PMID: 23728300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Apr 1;268(1):17-26. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2013.01.015.
Epub 2013 Jan 26.

All-or-none suppression of B cell terminal differentiation by environmental
contaminant 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Zhang Q(1), Kline DE, Bhattacharya S, Crawford RB, Conolly RB, Thomas RS,
Andersen ME, Kaminski NE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemical Safety Sciences, The Hamner Institutes for Health
Sciences, NC 27709, USA. qzhang@thehamner.org

Many environmental contaminants can disrupt the adaptive immune response.
Exposure to the ubiquitous aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) ligand
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and other agonists suppresses the
antibody response. The underlying pathway mechanism by which TCDD alters B cell
function is not well understood. The present study investigated the mechanism of 
AhR-mediated pathways and mode of suppression by which TCDD perturbs terminal
differentiation of B cells to plasma cells and thereby impairs antibody
production. An integrated approach combining computational pathway modeling and
in vitro assays with primary mouse B cells activated by lipopolysaccharide was
employed. We demonstrated that suppression of the IgM response by TCDD occurs in 
an all-or-none (binary) rather than graded mode: i.e., it reduces the number of
IgM-secreting cells in a concentration-dependent manner without affecting the IgM
content in individual plasma cells. The mathematical model of the gene regulatory
circuit underpinning B cell differentiation revealed that two previously
identified AhR-regulated pathways, inhibition of signaling protein AP-1 and
activation of transcription factor Bach2, could account for the all-or-none mode 
of suppression. Both pathways disrupt the operation of a bistable-switch circuit 
that contains transcription factors Bcl6, Prdm1, Pax5, and Bach2 and regulates B 
cell fate. The model further predicted that by transcriptionally activating
Bach2, TCDD might delay B cell differentiation and increase the likelihood of
isotype switching, thereby altering the antibody repertoire. In conclusion, the
present study revealed the mode and specific pathway mechanisms by which the
environmental immunosuppressant TCDD suppresses B cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3594464
PMID: 23357550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2012 Nov;42(11):1035-42. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hys148. Epub 2012
Sep 14.

Double-hit lymphomas constitute a highly aggressive subgroup in diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas in the era of rituximab.

Kobayashi T(1), Tsutsumi Y, Sakamoto N, Nagoshi H, Yamamoto-Sugitani M, Shimura
Y, Mizutani S, Matsumoto Y, Nishida K, Horiike S, Asano N, Nakamura S, Kuroda J, 
Taniwaki M.

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine, and Department of Hematology, Kyoto First Red
Cross Hospital, 465 Kajii-cho, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The incorporation of rituximab in immunochemotherapy has improved
treatment outcomes for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, but the prognosis for some 
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas remains dismal. Identification of adverse
prognostic subgroups is essential for the choice of appropriate therapeutic
strategy.
METHODS: We retrospectively investigated the impact of so-called 'double-hit'
cytogenetic abnormalities, i.e. cytogenetic abnormalities involving c-MYC
co-existing with other poor prognostic cytogenetic abnormalities involving BCL2, 
BCL6 or BACH2, on treatment outcomes for 93 consecutive diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma patients.
RESULTS: According to the revised international prognostic index, no patients
were cytogenetically diagnosed with double-hit lymphomas in the 'very good' risk 
group or in the 'good' risk group, while 5 of 33 patients had double-hit
lymphomas in the 'poor' risk group. All the double-hit lymphoma patients
possessed both nodal and extranodal involvement. The overall complete response
rate was 89.3%, overall survival 87.1% and progression-free survival 75.8% over 2
years (median observation period: 644 days). The complete response rates were
93.2% for the non-double-hit lymphoma patients and 40.0% for the double-hit
lymphoma patients. Significantly longer progression-free survival and overall
survival were observed for the 'very good' and the 'good' risk patients than for 
the 'poor' risk patients. Moreover, the progression-free survival of double-hit
lymphoma was significantly shorter than that of the non-double-hit lymphoma
'poor' risk patients (P = 0.016). In addition, the overall survival of the
double-hit lymphoma patients also tended to be shorter than that of the
non-double-hit lymphoma 'poor' risk group.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of double-hit lymphoma can help discriminate a
subgroup of highly aggressive diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and indicate the
need for the development of novel therapeutic strategies for double-hit lymphoma.

PMID: 22984125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mod Pathol. 2013 Jan;26(1):22-31. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.127. Epub 2012 Aug 
17.

Duodenal follicular lymphoma lacks AID but expresses BACH2 and has memory B-cell 
characteristics.

Takata K(1), Sato Y, Nakamura N, Tokunaka M, Miki Y, Yukie Kikuti Y, Igarashi K, 
Ito E, Harigae H, Kato S, Hayashi E, Oka T, Hoshii Y, Tari A, Okada H, Al-Kader
LA, Maeda Y, Tanimoto M, Kinoshita T, Yoshino T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.

Erratum in
    Mod Pathol. 2013 Aug;26(8):1152. Mohamad, Abd Alkader Lamia [corrected to
Al-Kader, Lamia Abd].

We have reported previously that duodenal follicular lymphoma (FL) is distinct
from nodal FL and showed more resemblance to mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
lymphoma, and that FL frequently involved the duodenal second portion. In the
present study, we examined duodenal FLs and gastric/colonic FLs to clarify the
clinicopathological and immunological differences between the tumor types. We
analyzed 8 samples of gastric FL, 17 of duodenal ones, and 5 of colonic/rectal
ones, and characterized them by immunohistochemistry, immunogenotyping, and
histology. Gastric and colonic FLs presented in submucosal to subserosal areas,
whereas duodenal ones presented in the mucosal to submucosal layers.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that duodenal FLs exhibited the following
phenotypes: CD10 (+), B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2) (+), BCL-6 (+),
activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) (-), BACH2 (+), CD27 (+), MUM-1 (-), 
Blimp-1 (-), and loose CD21 network (duodenal pattern). Gastric/colonic FLs
exhibited the following phenotypes: CD10 (+), BCL-2 (+), BCL-6 (+), AID (+),
BACH2 (+), CD27 (-), MUM-1 (-), Blimp-1 (-), and a dense CD21 network (nodal
pattern). Expression of AID and CD27 in lymphoma cells and the CD21 network
pattern were considerably different between duodenal FLs and gastric/colonic
ones. Moreover, in situ hybridization revealed that, in the duodenal FLs, BACH2
was expressed at the periphery of the tumor follicle and tumor villi. The number 
of immunoglobulin heavy-chain variable domains VH4 and VH5 were higher in
duodenal follicular lymphomoas than in gastric FLs. The lymphoma cells of
duodenal FLs are different from those of gastric/colonic FLs, and duodenal FL is 
distinct even within the gastrointestinal tract. Somatic hypermutation in
immunoglobulin genes and CD27 expression are hallmarks of memory B cells. We
suggest that duodenal FL cells are in the memory B-cell stage, and require BACH2 
instead of AID for ongoing mutation.

PMID: 22899287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Leukemia. 2013 Feb;27(2):409-15. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.220. Epub 2012 Aug 3.

Transcriptional suppression of BACH2 by the Bcr-Abl oncoprotein is mediated by
PAX5.

Casolari DA(1), Makri M, Yoshida C, Muto A, Igarashi K, Melo JV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology University 
of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Bach2 is a lymphoid-specific transcription factor with a prominent role in B-cell
development and apoptosis-induction in response to oxidative stress. We
previously showed that Bach2 is downregulated in chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML),
and here we demonstrate the mechanism by which Bcr-Abl mediates this phenomenon. 
We have cloned a 3.9<U+2009>Kb genomic DNA fragment upstream of the transcription
initiation site, and delineated the core and proximal BACH2 promoter regions.
Transient BCR-ABL expression led to significant reduction in BACH2 promoter
activity and this effect was dependent on the kinase function of the oncoprotein.
Sequential deletions disclosed several regulatory elements within the promoter
region, as well as within BACH2 exonic sequences. Analysis of these elements and 
transient transfection assays led to the identification of the Pax5 transcription
factor as a potent trans-activator of BACH2, whose effect is predominantly
mediated through occupation of a binding site on the BACH2 promoter, as
demonstrated by both in vitro and in vivo experiments. Overall, our data show
that Pax5 functions as an intermediate effector in the Bcr-Abl-mediated
transcriptional repression of BACH2. The current results, combined with previous 
reports, establish Pax5 and Bach2 as transcriptional targets of Bcr-Abl, whose
downregulation may contribute to lymphoid blast crisis of CML.

PMID: 22858985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40332. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040332. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Genome-wide detection of genes targeted by non-Ig somatic hypermutation in
lymphoma.

Jiang Y(1), Soong TD, Wang L, Melnick AM, Elemento O.

Author information: 
(1)HRH Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for Computational
Biomedicine and Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York, United States of America.

The processes of somatic hypermutation (SHM) and class switch recombination
introduced by activation-induced cytosine deaminase (AICDA) at the Immunoglobulin
(Ig) loci are key steps for creating a pool of diversified antibodies in germinal
center B cells (GCBs). Unfortunately, AICDA can also accidentally introduce
mutations at bystander loci, particularly within the 5' regulatory regions of
proto-oncogenes relevant to diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCL). Since current
methods for genomewide sequencing such as Exon Capture and RNAseq only target
mutations in coding regions, to date non-Ig promoter SHMs have been studied only 
in a handful genes. We designed a novel approach integrating bioinformatics tools
with next generation sequencing technology to identify regulatory loci targeted
by SHM genome-wide. We observed increased numbers of SHM associated sequence
variant hotspots in lymphoma cells as compared to primary normal germinal center 
B cells. Many of these SHM hotspots map to genes that have not been reported
before as mutated, including BACH2, BTG2, CXCR4, CIITA, EBF1, PIM2, and TCL1A,
etc., all of which have potential roles in B cell survival, differentiation, and 
malignant transformation. In addition, using BCL6 and BACH2 as examples, we
demonstrated that SHM sites identified in these 5' regulatory regions greatly
altered their transcription activities in a reporter assay. Our approach provides
a first cost-efficient, genome-wide method to identify regulatory mutations and
non-Ig SHM hotspots.

PMCID: PMC3395700
PMID: 22808135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Immunol. 2012 Jul 1;189(1):161-73. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200301. Epub 2012 May
25.

IL-2 requirement for human plasma cell generation: coupling differentiation and
proliferation by enhancing MAPK-ERK signaling.

Le Gallou S(1), Caron G, Delaloy C, Rossille D, Tarte K, Fest T.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, Unité Mixte de Recherche 917, Rennes F-35043, France.

Mature B cell differentiation involves a well-established transcription factor
cascade. However, the temporal dynamics of cell signaling pathways regulating
transcription factor network and coordinating cell proliferation and
differentiation remain poorly defined. To gain insight into the molecular
processes and extrinsic cues required for B cell differentiation, we set up a
controlled primary culture system to differentiate human naive B cells into
plasma cells (PCs). We identified T cell-produced IL-2 to be critically involved 
in ERK1/2-triggered PC differentiation. IL-2 drove activated B cell
differentiation toward PC independently of its proliferation and survival
functions. Indeed, IL-2 potentiated ERK activation and subsequent BACH2 and IRF8 
downregulation, sustaining BLIMP1 expression, the master regulator for PC
differentiation. Inhibition of the MAPK-ERK pathway, unlike STAT5 signaling,
impaired IL-2-induced PC differentiation and rescued the expression profile of
BACH2 and IRF8. These results identify IL-2 as a crucial early input in mature B 
cell fate commitment.

PMID: 22634617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Nat Genet. 2012 May 6;44(6):676-80. doi: 10.1038/ng.2272.

Genome-wide association analyses identify 13 new susceptibility loci for
generalized vitiligo.

Jin Y(1), Birlea SA, Fain PR, Ferrara TM, Ben S, Riccardi SL, Cole JB, Gowan K,
Holland PJ, Bennett DC, Luiten RM, Wolkerstorfer A, van der Veen JP, Hartmann A, 
Eichner S, Schuler G, van Geel N, Lambert J, Kemp EH, Gawkrodger DJ, Weetman AP, 
Taïeb A, Jouary T, Ezzedine K, Wallace MR, McCormack WT, Picardo M, Leone G,
Overbeck A, Silverberg NB, Spritz RA.

Author information: 
(1)Human Medical Genetics Program, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, Colorado, USA.

We previously reported a genome-wide association study (GWAS) identifying 14
susceptibility loci for generalized vitiligo. We report here a second GWAS (450
individuals with vitiligo (cases) and 3,182 controls), an independent replication
study (1,440 cases and 1,316 controls) and a meta-analysis (3,187 cases and 6,723
controls) identifying 13 additional vitiligo-associated loci. These include
OCA2-HERC2 (combined P = 3.80 × 10(-8)), MC1R (P = 1.82 × 10(-13)), a region near
TYR (P = 1.57 × 10(-13)), IFIH1 (P = 4.91 × 10(-15)), CD80 (P = 3.78 × 10(-10)), 
CLNK (P = 1.56 × 10(-8)), BACH2 (P = 2.53 × 10(-8)), SLA (P = 1.58 × 10(-8)),
CASP7 (P = 3.56 × 10(-8)), CD44 (P = 1.78 × 10(-9)), IKZF4 (P = 2.75 × 10(-14)), 
SH2B3 (P = 3.54 × 10(-18)) and TOB2 (P = 6.81 × 10(-10)). Most vitiligo
susceptibility loci encode immunoregulatory proteins or melanocyte components
that likely mediate immune targeting and the relationships among vitiligo,
melanoma, and eye, skin and hair coloration.

PMCID: PMC3366044
PMID: 22561518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Gut. 2013 Jul;62(7):977-84. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301833. Epub 2012 Apr 28.

Next generation exome sequencing of paediatric inflammatory bowel disease
patients identifies rare and novel variants in candidate genes.

Christodoulou K(1), Wiskin AE, Gibson J, Tapper W, Willis C, Afzal NA,
Upstill-Goddard R, Holloway JW, Simpson MA, Beattie RM, Collins A, Ennis S.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Epidemiology and Genomic Informatics Group, Human Genetics & Genomic
Medicine, University of Southampton, University Hospital Southampton NHS
Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK.

BACKGROUND: Multiple genes have been implicated by association studies in
altering inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) predisposition. Paediatric patients
often manifest more extensive disease and a particularly severe disease course.
It is likely that genetic predisposition plays a more substantial role in this
group.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the spectrum of rare and novel variation in known IBD
susceptibility genes using exome sequencing analysis in eight individual cases of
childhood onset severe disease.
DESIGN: DNA samples from the eight patients underwent targeted exome capture and 
sequencing. Data were processed through an analytical pipeline to align sequence 
reads, conduct quality checks, and identify and annotate variants where patient
sequence differed from the reference sequence. For each patient, the entire
complement of rare variation within strongly associated candidate genes was
catalogued.
RESULTS: Across the panel of 169 known IBD susceptibility genes, approximately
300 variants in 104 genes were found. Excluding splicing and HLA-class variants, 
58 variants across 39 of these genes were classified as rare, with an alternative
allele frequency of <5%, of which 17 were novel. Only two patients with early
onset Crohn's disease exhibited rare deleterious variations within NOD2: the
previously described R702W variant was the sole NOD2 variant in one patient,
while the second patient also carried the L1007 frameshift insertion. Both
patients harboured other potentially damaging mutations in the GSDMB, ERAP2 and
SEC16A genes. The two patients severely affected with ulcerative colitis
exhibited a distinct profile: both carried potentially detrimental variation in
the BACH2 and IL10 genes not seen in other patients.
CONCLUSION: For each of the eight individuals studied, all non-synonymous,
truncating and frameshift mutations across all known IBD genes were identified. A
unique profile of rare and potentially damaging variants was evident for each
patient with this complex disease.

PMCID: PMC3686259
PMID: 22543157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Proteomics Bioinform. 2012 Jan 30;5(2). pii: 1000210.

Transcriptomic Profiling of Medial Temporal Lobe Epilepsy.

Venugopal AK(1), Sameer Kumar GS, Mahadevan A, Selvan LD, Marimuthu A, Dikshit
JB, Tata P, Ramachandra Y, Chaerkady R, Sinha S, Chandramouli B, Arivazhagan A,
Satishchandra P, Shankar S, Pandey A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore, India ;
Department of Biotechnology, Kuvempu University, Shimoga, India ;
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA ; Departments of Biological Chemistry,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Epilepsy is one of the most prevalent neurological disorders affecting ~1% of the
population. Medial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) is the most frequent type of
epilepsy observed in adults who do not respond to pharmacological treatment. The 
reason for intractability in these patients has not been systematically studied. 
Further, no markers are available that can predict the subset of patients who
will not respond to pharmacotherapy. To identify potential biomarkers of
epileptogenicity, we compared the mRNA profiles of surgically resected tissue
from seizure zones with non-seizure zones from cases of intractable MTLE. We
identified 413 genes that exhibited =2-fold change that were statistically
significant across these two groups. Several of these differentially expressed
genes have not been previously described in the context of MTLE including claudin
11 (CLDN11) and bone morphogenetic protein receptor, type IB (BMPR1B). In
addition, we found significant downregulation of a subset of gamma-aminobutyric
acid (GABA) associated genes. We also identified molecules such as BACH2 and
ADAMTS15, which are already known to be associated with epilepsy. We validated
one upregulated molecule, serine/threonine kinase 31 (STK31) and one
downregulated molecule, SMARCA4, by immunohistochemical labeling of tissue
sections. These molecules need to be further confirmed in large-scale studies to 
determine their potential use as diagnostic as well as prognostic markers in
intractable MTLE.

PMCID: PMC3593120
PMID: 23483634  [PubMed]


87. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2012 Jan;68(Pt 1):26-34. doi:
10.1107/S0907444911048335. Epub 2011 Dec 9.

The structure of the Bach2 POZ-domain dimer reveals an intersubunit disulfide
bond.

Rosbrook GO(1), Stead MA, Carr SB, Wright SC.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, England.

Bach2 is a transcriptional repressor that is expressed during specific stages of 
B-cell development and in neuronal cells. It plays a critical role in modulating 
class-switch recombination during the differentiation of mature B cells to
antibody-secreting plasma cells and it is also an important regulator of
apoptotic responses to oxidative stress. Bach2 has been implicated both as an
oncogene and as a tumour suppressor in human malignancy. The interaction of Bach2
with its target genes is mediated via its basic leucine-zipper region, whereas
the N-terminal POZ domain recruits transcriptional co-repressors and class II
histone deacetylases. Here, the crystal structure of the human Bach2 POZ domain
is reported at 2.1 Å resolution. The Bach2 POZ-domain dimer resembles the
POZ-domain dimers of the POZ zinc finger transcription factors and dimerization
is independent of an N-terminal region that has previously been implicated in the
dimerization of the POZ basic leucine-zipper protein Bach1. The Bach2 POZ domain 
crystallized in two forms which differed by the presence of an intersubunit
disulfide bond. The intersubunit disulfide bond is present both in bacterially
expressed Bach2 POZ domain in solution and in protein expressed in transfected
eukaryotic cells. These crystal structures will be relevant for understanding the
regulation of Bach2 in response to oxidative stress and for the design of
therapeutics that target the Bach2 POZ domain in human malignancy.

PMID: 22194330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Am J Clin Pathol. 2011 Dec;136(6):960-9. doi: 10.1309/AJCPDQNP2U5DZHVV.

Multiparametric flow cytometry for identification and fluorescence activated cell
sorting of five distinct B-cell subpopulations in normal tonsil tissue.

Kjeldsen MK(1), Perez-Andres M, Schmitz A, Johansen P, Boegsted M, Nyegaard M,
Gaihede M, Bukh A, Johnsen HE, Orfao A, Dybkaer K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Aalborg Hospital, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aalborg, Denmark.

The purpose of this study was to establish a procedure capable of isolating
distinct B-cell subpopulations from human tonsils as a basis for subsequent
molecular analyses. Overall, 5 distinct B-cell subpopulations were purified from 
fresh tonsils based on their fluorescence surface marker expression: naive B
cells, centroblasts, centrocytes, memory B cells, and plasmablasts. The
immunophenotypic identity of the subpopulations was verified by quantitative
real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction using the proliferation
marker MKI-67 and 6 B-cell-associated differentiation markers (BACH2, BCL6, PAX5,
IRF4, PRDM1, and XBP1). Furthermore, within the centroblast compartment, large
and small centroblasts could be distinguished and large centroblasts were shown
to proliferate with a morphologic appearance of a "centroblast"-like cell but
with lower gene expression of the germinal center markers BCL6 and BACH2 vs small
centroblasts. This study has established a detailed and fast procedure for
simultaneous sorting of up to 5 distinct maturation-associated B-cell
subpopulations from human tonsils.

PMID: 22095383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Semin Immunol. 2011 Oct;23(5):341-9. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2011.08.010. Epub 2011
Sep 15.

The genetic network controlling plasma cell differentiation.

Nutt SL(1), Taubenheim N, Hasbold J, Corcoran LM, Hodgkin PD.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade,
Parkville, Victoria, 3050, Australia.

Upon activation by antigen, mature B cells undergo immunoglobulin class switch
recombination and differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells, the
endpoint of the B cell developmental lineage. Careful quantitation of these
processes, which are stochastic, independent and strongly linked to the division 
history of the cell, has revealed that populations of B cells behave in a highly 
predictable manner. Considerable progress has also been made in the last few
years in understanding the gene regulatory network that controls the B cell to
plasma cell transition. The mutually exclusive transcriptomes of B cells and
plasma cells are maintained by the antagonistic influences of two groups of
transcription factors, those that maintain the B cell program, including Pax5,
Bach2 and Bcl6, and those that promote and facilitate plasma cell
differentiation, notably Irf4, Blimp1 and Xbp1. In this review, we discuss
progress in the definition of both the transcriptional and cellular events
occurring during late B cell differentiation, as integrating these two approaches
is crucial to defining a regulatory network that faithfully reflects the
stochastic features and complexity of the humoral immune response.

2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21924923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Lancet. 2011 Sep 10;378(9795):1006-14. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60874-X.

Identification of IL6R and chromosome 11q13.5 as risk loci for asthma.

Ferreira MA(1), Matheson MC, Duffy DL, Marks GB, Hui J, Le Souëf P, Danoy P,
Baltic S, Nyholt DR, Jenkins M, Hayden C, Willemsen G, Ang W, Kuokkanen M, Beilby
J, Cheah F, de Geus EJ, Ramasamy A, Vedantam S, Salomaa V, Madden PA, Heath AC,
Hopper JL, Visscher PM, Musk B, Leeder SR, Jarvelin MR, Pennell C, Boomsma DI,
Hirschhorn JN, Walters H, Martin NG, James A, Jones G, Abramson MJ, Robertson CF,
Dharmage SC, Brown MA, Montgomery GW, Thompson PJ; Australian Asthma Genetics
Consortium.

Collaborators: Mészáros D, Roberts M, Southey MC, Tovey ER, Warrington NM,
Kattenberg M, Palmer LJ, Price L, Wright MJ, Gordon SD, Chung LP, Henders AK,
Giles G, Hottenga JJ, Thomas PS, Temple S, Whitfield JB, Feather I, Hartikainen
AL, Haahtela T, Laitinen T, Jousilahti P, Eriksson JG, Widen E, Raitakari OT,
Lehtimäki T, Kähönen M, Viikari J, Palotie A, Gajdos ZK, Lyon HN, O'Connor GT,
Morrison S, Sly PD, Mitrpant C, Britton WJ, John D, Holt PG, Kemp AS.

Author information: 
(1)The Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
manuel.ferreira@qimr.edu.au

Comment in
    Lancet. 2011 Sep 10;378(9795):967-8.

BACKGROUND: We aimed to identify novel genetic variants affecting asthma risk,
since these might provide novel insights into molecular mechanisms underlying the
disease.
METHODS: We did a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in 2669
physician-diagnosed asthmatics and 4528 controls from Australia. Seven loci were 
prioritised for replication after combining our results with those from the
GABRIEL consortium (n=26,475), and these were tested in an additional 25,358
independent samples from four in-silico cohorts. Quantitative multi-marker scores
of genetic load were constructed on the basis of results from the GABRIEL study
and tested for association with asthma in our Australian GWAS dataset.
FINDINGS: Two loci were confirmed to associate with asthma risk in the
replication cohorts and reached genome-wide significance in the combined analysis
of all available studies (n=57,800): rs4129267 (OR 1·09, combined p=2·4×10(-8))
in the interleukin-6 receptor (IL6R) gene and rs7130588 (OR 1·09, p=1·8×10(-8))
on chromosome 11q13.5 near the leucine-rich repeat containing 32 gene (LRRC32,
also known as GARP). The 11q13.5 locus was significantly associated with atopic
status among asthmatics (OR 1·33, p=7×10(-4)), suggesting that it is a risk
factor for allergic but not non-allergic asthma. Multi-marker association results
are consistent with a highly polygenic contribution to asthma risk, including
loci with weak effects that might be shared with other immune-related diseases,
such as NDFIP1, HLA-B, LPP, and BACH2.
INTERPRETATION: The IL6R association further supports the hypothesis that
cytokine signalling dysregulation affects asthma risk, and raises the possibility
that an IL6R antagonist (tocilizumab) may be effective to treat the disease,
perhaps in a genotype-dependent manner. Results for the 11q13.5 locus suggest
that it directly increases the risk of allergic sensitisation which, in turn,
increases the risk of subsequent development of asthma. Larger or more
functionally focused studies are needed to characterise the many loci with modest
effects that remain to be identified for asthma.
FUNDING: National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia. A full list
of funding sources is provided in the webappendix.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3517659
PMID: 21907864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. PLoS Genet. 2011 Aug;7(8):e1002216. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002216. Epub 2011 
Aug 4.

Genome-wide association analysis of autoantibody positivity in type 1 diabetes
cases.

Plagnol V(1), Howson JM, Smyth DJ, Walker N, Hafler JP, Wallace C, Stevens H,
Jackson L, Simmonds MJ; Type 1 Diabetes Genetics Consortium, Bingley PJ, Gough
SC, Todd JA.

Author information: 
(1)Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflammation
Laboratory, Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research, National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. v.plagnol@ucl.ac.uk

The genetic basis of autoantibody production is largely unknown outside of
associations located in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) human
leukocyte antigen (HLA) region. The aim of this study is the discovery of new
genetic associations with autoantibody positivity using genome-wide association
scan single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data in type 1 diabetes (T1D) patients 
with autoantibody measurements. We measured two anti-islet autoantibodies,
glutamate decarboxylase (GADA, n = 2,506), insulinoma-associated antigen 2
(IA-2A, n = 2,498), antibodies to the autoimmune thyroid (Graves') disease (AITD)
autoantigen thyroid peroxidase (TPOA, n = 8,300), and antibodies against gastric 
parietal cells (PCA, n = 4,328) that are associated with autoimmune gastritis.
Two loci passed a stringent genome-wide significance level (p<10(-10)):
1q23/FCRL3 with IA-2A and 9q34/ABO with PCA. Eleven of 52 non-MHC T1D loci showed
evidence of association with at least one autoantibody at a false discovery rate 
of 16%: 16p11/IL27-IA-2A, 2q24/IFIH1-IA-2A and PCA, 2q32/STAT4-TPOA,
10p15/IL2RA-GADA, 6q15/BACH2-TPOA, 21q22/UBASH3A-TPOA, 1p13/PTPN22-TPOA,
2q33/CTLA4-TPOA, 4q27/IL2/TPOA, 15q14/RASGRP1/TPOA, and 12q24/SH2B3-GADA and
TPOA. Analysis of the TPOA-associated loci in 2,477 cases with Graves' disease
identified two new AITD loci (BACH2 and UBASH3A).

PMCID: PMC3150451
PMID: 21829393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2011 Jun;52(6):376-86.

[Structure and dynamics of gene regulatory network for humoral immune response].

Muto A, Itoh-Nakadai A, Igarashi K.

PMID: 21737990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Jun 17;12:243. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-243.

RegNetB: predicting relevant regulator-gene relationships in localized prostate
tumor samples.

Alvarez A(1), Woolf PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109, USA.

BACKGROUND: A central question in cancer biology is what changes cause a healthy 
cell to form a tumor. Gene expression data could provide insight into this
question, but it is difficult to distinguish between a gene that causes a change 
in gene expression from a gene that is affected by this change. Furthermore, the 
proteins that regulate gene expression are often themselves not regulated at the 
transcriptional level. Here we propose a Bayesian modeling framework we term
RegNetB that uses mechanistic information about the gene regulatory network to
distinguish between factors that cause a change in expression and genes that are 
affected by the change. We test this framework using human gene expression data
describing localized prostate cancer progression.
RESULTS: The top regulatory relationships identified by RegNetB include the
regulation of RLN1, RLN2, by PAX4, the regulation of ACPP (PAP) by JUN, BACH1 and
BACH2, and the co-regulation of PGC and GDF15 by MAZ and TAF8. These target genes
are known to participate in tumor progression, but the suggested regulatory roles
of PAX4, BACH1, BACH2, MAZ and TAF8 in the process is new.
CONCLUSION: Integrating gene expression data and regulatory topologies can aid in
identifying potentially causal mechanisms for observed changes in gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC3128037
PMID: 21682879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Aug;41(8):2404-13. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141553. Epub 2011 Jul 
6.

Alternate pathways for Bcl6-mediated regulation of B cell to plasma cell
differentiation.

Alinikula J(1), Nera KP, Junttila S, Lassila O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Turku, Turku,
Finland. jukka.alinikula@utu.fi

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2011 Aug;41(8):2148-51.

The transcription factor Bcl6 regulates germinal center formation and
differentiation of B cells into high-affinity antibody-producing plasma cells.
The direct double-negative regulatory circuit between Bcl6 and Blimp-1 is well
established. We now reveal alternative mechanisms for Bcl6-mediated regulation of
B-cell differentiation to plasma cells and show with DT40 cells that Bcl6
directly promotes the expression of Bach2, a known suppressor of Blimp-1.
Moreover, Bcl6 suppresses Blimp-1 expression through direct binding to the IRF4
gene, as well as by promoting the expression of MITF, a known suppressor of IRF4.
We also provide evidence that Bcl6 is needed for the expression of AID and UNG,
the indispensable proteins for somatic hypermutation and class-switch
recombination, and UNG appears to be a direct Bcl6 target. Our findings reveal a 
complex regulatory network in which Bcl6 acts as a key element dictating the
transition of DT40 B cells to plasma cells.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21674482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Genome Res. 2011 Jul;21(7):1109-21. doi: 10.1101/gr.118992.110. Epub 2011 May 2.

Prioritizing candidate disease genes by network-based boosting of genome-wide
association data.

Lee I(1), Blom UM, Wang PI, Shim JE, Marcotte EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei
University, 262 Seongsanno, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, Korea. insuklee@yonsei.ac.kr

Network "guilt by association" (GBA) is a proven approach for identifying novel
disease genes based on the observation that similar mutational phenotypes arise
from functionally related genes. In principle, this approach could account even
for nonadditive genetic interactions, which underlie the synergistic combinations
of mutations often linked to complex diseases. Here, we analyze a large-scale,
human gene functional interaction network (dubbed HumanNet). We show that
candidate disease genes can be effectively identified by GBA in cross-validated
tests using label propagation algorithms related to Google's PageRank. However,
GBA has been shown to work poorly in genome-wide association studies (GWAS),
where many genes are somewhat implicated, but few are known with very high
certainty. Here, we resolve this by explicitly modeling the uncertainty of the
associations and incorporating the uncertainty for the seed set into the GBA
framework. We observe a significant boost in the power to detect validated
candidate genes for Crohn's disease and type 2 diabetes by comparing our
predictions to results from follow-up meta-analyses, with incorporation of the
network serving to highlight the JAK-STAT pathway and associated adaptors
GRB2/SHC1 in Crohn's disease and BACH2 in type 2 diabetes. Consideration of the
network during GWAS thus conveys some of the benefits of enrolling more
participants in the GWAS study. More generally, we demonstrate that a functional 
network of human genes provides a valuable statistical framework for prioritizing
candidate disease genes, both for candidate gene-based and GWAS-based studies.

PMCID: PMC3129253
PMID: 21536720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Blood. 2011 May 19;117(20):5438-48. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-07-296483. Epub 2011 
Mar 28.

Heme regulates B-cell differentiation, antibody class switch, and heme
oxygenase-1 expression in B cells as a ligand of Bach2.

Watanabe-Matsui M(1), Muto A, Matsui T, Itoh-Nakadai A, Nakajima O, Murayama K,
Yamamoto M, Ikeda-Saito M, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai, Japan.

Heme binds to proteins to modulate their function, thereby functioning as a
signaling molecule in a variety of biologic events. We found that heme bound to
Bach2, a transcription factor essential for humoral immunity, including antibody 
class switch. Heme inhibited the DNA binding activity of Bach2 in vitro and
reduced its half-life in B cells. When added to B-cell primary cultures, heme
enhanced the transcription of Blimp-1, the master regulator of plasma cells, and 
skewed plasma cell differentiation toward the IgM isotype, decreasing the IgG
levels in vitro. Intraperitoneal injection of heme in mice inhibited the
production of antigen-specific IgM when heme was administered simultaneously with
the antigen but not when it was administered after antigen exposure, suggesting
that heme also modulates the early phase of B-cell responses to antigen. Heme
oxygenase-1, which is known to be regulated by heme, was repressed by both Bach2 
and Bach1 in B cells. Furthermore, the expression of genes for heme uptake
changed in response to B-cell activation and heme administration. Our results
reveal a new function for heme as a ligand of Bach2 and as a modulatory signal
involved in plasma cell differentiation.

PMID: 21444915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Nat Genet. 2011 May;43(5):470-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.796. Epub 2011 Mar 27.

Mutant nucleophosmin and cooperating pathways drive leukemia initiation and
progression in mice.

Vassiliou GS(1), Cooper JL, Rad R, Li J, Rice S, Uren A, Rad L, Ellis P, Andrews 
R, Banerjee R, Grove C, Wang W, Liu P, Wright P, Arends M, Bradley A.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Genomics Team, The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust
Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK. gsv20@sanger.ac.uk

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a molecularly diverse malignancy with a poor
prognosis whose largest subgroup is characterized by somatic mutations in NPM1,
which encodes nucleophosmin. These mutations, termed NPM1c, result in cytoplasmic
dislocation of nucleophosmin and are associated with distinctive transcriptional 
signatures, yet their role in leukemogenesis remains obscure. Here we report that
activation of a humanized Npm1c knock-in allele in mouse hemopoietic stem cells
causes Hox gene overexpression, enhanced self renewal and expanded myelopoiesis. 
One third of mice developed delayed-onset AML, suggesting a requirement for
cooperating mutations. We identified such mutations using a Sleeping Beauty
transposon, which caused rapid-onset AML in 80% of mice with Npm1c, associated
with mutually exclusive integrations in Csf2, Flt3 or Rasgrp1 in 55 of 70
leukemias. We also identified recurrent integrations in known and newly
discovered leukemia genes including Nf1, Bach2, Dleu2 and Nup98. Our results
provide new pathogenetic insights and identify possible therapeutic targets in
NPM1c+ AML.

PMCID: PMC3084174
PMID: 21441929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Jun;50(6):389-96. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20863. Epub
2011 Mar 15.

A BACH2-BCL2L1 fusion gene resulting from a t(6;20)(q15;q11.2) chromosomal
translocation in the lymphoma cell line BLUE-1.

Türkmen S(1), Riehn M, Klopocki E, Molkentin M, Reinhardt R, Burmeister T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Charité CVK, Berlin, Germany.

Abnormalities of the long arm of chromosome 6 are a common feature in various
B-cell malignancies. In most cases, the genes involved have not yet been clearly 
identified. We have molecularly characterized the recently established Burkitt
lymphoma cell line BLUE-1 that carries a t(6;20)(q15;q11.2) rearrangement in
addition to the typical t(8;14) with MYC-IGH fusion. To identify the gene loci
involved on both chromosomes we applied a sequential BAC clone mapping strategy. 
By using RT-PCR we were finally able to detect a chimeric mRNA transcript showing
a fusion of the first (non-coding) exon of BACH2 (BTB and CNC homology 1, basic
leucine zipper transcription factor 2) on 6q15 to the second exon of BCL2L1
(BCL-X) on 20q11. Various fusion transcripts were detected for different BCL2L1
(BCL-XL) isoforms. The fusion ultimately results in strong expression of the
BCL2L1 (BCL-XL) anti-apoptosis protein, as demonstrated by immunoblotting. This
is the first report that shows the involvement of both BCL2L1 and the
transcription factor BACH2 in a chromosomal rearrangement. It points to BACH2 as 
a possibly important target in lymphomas with 6q aberrations, although other
genes on 6q are probably also involved in these cases. Moreover, it suggests that
members of the BCL2 anti-apoptosis gene family other than BCL2 itself might also 
be involved in lymphoma.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21412927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Apr;50(4):207-16. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20845. Epub
2011 Jan 13.

Identification of IGHCd-BACH2 fusion transcripts resulting from cryptic
chromosomal rearrangements of 14q32 with 6q15 in aggressive B-cell
lymphoma/leukemia.

Kobayashi S(1), Taki T, Chinen Y, Tsutsumi Y, Ohshiro M, Kobayashi T, Matsumoto
Y, Kuroda J, Horiike S, Nishida K, Taniwaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Hematology and Oncology, Kyoto Prefectural University 
of Medicine Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto, Japan.

In B-cell malignancies, genes implicated in B-cell differentiation, germinal
center formation, apoptosis, and cell cycle regulation are juxtaposed to
immunoglobulin loci through chromosomal translocations. In this study, we
identified the BTB and CNC homology 2 (BACH2) gene as a novel translocation
partner of the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) locus in a patient with
IGH-MYC-positive, highly aggressive B-cell lymphoma/leukemia carrying
der(14)t(8;14) and del(6)(q15). Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis using
an IGH/MYC probe detected an IGH-MYC fusion signal on der(14) and IGH signal on
del(6). Genome copy number analysis showed a deletion in the 6q15-25 region and a
centromeric breakpoint within the BACH2 gene. cDNA bubble polymerase chain
reaction using BACH2 primers revealed that the first exon of Cd was fused to the 
5'-untranslated region of BACH2 exon 2. The Cd-BACH2 fusion transcript consisted 
of exon 1 of Cd and exons 2 to 9 of BACH2, encompassing the entire BACH2 coding
region, and the BACH2 was highly expressed in this patient. These results
indicate that Cd-BACH2 fusion may cause constitutive activation of BACH2.
Although additional screening of 47 samples of B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
(B-NHL) patients and 29 cell lines derived from B-cell malignancies by
double-color fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis detected a split signal 
with deletion of centromeric region of BACH2 only in a patient with follicular
lymphoma, BACH2 was highly expressed in lymphoma cells of the patient and B-NHL
cell lines with IGH-MYC translocation. These findings suggest that BACH2 plays a 
critical role in B-cell lymphomagenesis, especially related to IGH-MYC
translocation in some way.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21319257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011 Apr 15;252(2):150-8. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2011.01.020. Epub 2011 Feb 4.

Regulation of Bach2 by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor as a mechanism for
suppression of B-cell differentiation by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

De Abrew KN(1), Phadnis AS, Crawford RB, Kaminski NE, Thomas RS.

Author information: 
(1)The Hamner Institutes for Health Sciences, 6 Davis Drive, Research Triangle
Park, NC 27709, USA.

Exposure to the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) agonist,
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) alters B-cell differentiation and
suppresses antibody production. Previous genomic studies in mouse B cells
identified Bach2 as a direct target of the AHR. Bach2 is known to repress
expression of Prdm1, a key transcription factor involved in B-cell
differentiation, by binding to Maf elements (MAREs) in the regulatory regions of 
the gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by quantitative PCR in
TCDD-treated lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated B cells showed increased binding 
of the AHR within the first intron in the Bach2 gene. The binding was further
confirmed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). TCDD also induced
expression of Bach2 in activated as well as resting B cells from 2 to 24h
post-treatment in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Expression of Prdm1
was decreased by TCDD at 24h and was consistent with repression by Bach2.
Increased DNA binding activity to the intron 5 MARE with increasing TCDD
concentrations was observed by EMSA. Supershifts identified the presence of Bach2
in the DNA binding complex associated with the intron 5 MARE of Prdm1. Functional
validation of the role of Bach2 in the suppression of B-cell differentiation by
TCDD was performed using RNA interference (RNAi). Knockdown of Bach2 showed
approximately 40% reversal in the TCDD-induced suppression of IgM secretion when 
compared to controls. The results suggest that the transcriptional regulation of 
Bach2 by the AHR is one of the mechanisms involved in the suppression of B-cell
differentiation by TCDD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3106294
PMID: 21296099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. EMBO J. 2010 Dec 1;29(23):3896-7. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.282. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

Bach2: plasma-cell differentiation takes a break.

Kallies A(1), Nutt SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia. kallies@wehi.edu.au

Comment on
    EMBO J. 2010 Dec 1;29(23):4048-61.

PMCID: PMC3020641
PMID: 21124298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Virology. 2011 Feb 5;410(1):151-60. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2010.11.001. Epub 2010
Nov 27.

HIV gene expression from intact proviruses positioned in bacterial artificial
chromosomes at integration sites previously identified in latently infected T
cells.

Eipers PG(1), Salazar-Gonzalez JF, Morrow CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 802 Kaul
Building, 720 20th Street South, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

HIV integration predominantly occurs in introns of transcriptionally active
genes. To study the impact of the integration site on HIV gene expression, a
complete HIV-1 provirus (with GFP as a fusion with Nef) was inserted into
bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) at three sites previously identified in
latent T cells of patients: topoisomerase II (Top2A), DNA methyltransferase 1
(DNMT1), or basic leucine transcription factor 2 (BACH2). Transfection of BAC-HIV
into 293T cells resulted in a fourfold difference in production of infectious
HIV-1. Cell lines were established that contained BAC-Top2A, BAC-DNMT1, or
BAC-BACH2, but only BAC-DNMT1 spontaneously produced virus, albeit at a low
level. Stimulation with TNF-a resulted in virus production from four of five
BAC-Top2A and all BAC-DNMT1 cell lines, but not from the BAC-BACH2 lines. The
results of these studies highlight differences between integration sites
identified in latent T cells to support virus production and reactivation from
latency.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3034240
PMID: 21115184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Nat Genet. 2010 Dec;42(12):1118-25. doi: 10.1038/ng.717.

Genome-wide meta-analysis increases to 71 the number of confirmed Crohn's disease
susceptibility loci.

Franke A(1), McGovern DP, Barrett JC, Wang K, Radford-Smith GL, Ahmad T, Lees CW,
Balschun T, Lee J, Roberts R, Anderson CA, Bis JC, Bumpstead S, Ellinghaus D,
Festen EM, Georges M, Green T, Haritunians T, Jostins L, Latiano A, Mathew CG,
Montgomery GW, Prescott NJ, Raychaudhuri S, Rotter JI, Schumm P, Sharma Y, Simms 
LA, Taylor KD, Whiteman D, Wijmenga C, Baldassano RN, Barclay M, Bayless TM,
Brand S, Büning C, Cohen A, Colombel JF, Cottone M, Stronati L, Denson T, De Vos 
M, D'Inca R, Dubinsky M, Edwards C, Florin T, Franchimont D, Gearry R, Glas J,
Van Gossum A, Guthery SL, Halfvarson J, Verspaget HW, Hugot JP, Karban A, Laukens
D, Lawrance I, Lemann M, Levine A, Libioulle C, Louis E, Mowat C, Newman W, Panés
J, Phillips A, Proctor DD, Regueiro M, Russell R, Rutgeerts P, Sanderson J, Sans 
M, Seibold F, Steinhart AH, Stokkers PC, Torkvist L, Kullak-Ublick G, Wilson D,
Walters T, Targan SR, Brant SR, Rioux JD, D'Amato M, Weersma RK, Kugathasan S,
Griffiths AM, Mansfield JC, Vermeire S, Duerr RH, Silverberg MS, Satsangi J,
Schreiber S, Cho JH, Annese V, Hakonarson H, Daly MJ, Parkes M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, 
Kiel, Germany.

We undertook a meta-analysis of six Crohn's disease genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) comprising 6,333 affected individuals (cases) and 15,056 controls 
and followed up the top association signals in 15,694 cases, 14,026 controls and 
414 parent-offspring trios. We identified 30 new susceptibility loci meeting
genome-wide significance (P < 5 × 10<U+207B>8). A series of in silico analyses
highlighted particular genes within these loci and, together with manual
curation, implicated functionally interesting candidate genes including SMAD3,
ERAP2, IL10, IL2RA, TYK2, FUT2, DNMT3A, DENND1B, BACH2 and TAGAP. Combined with
previously confirmed loci, these results identify 71 distinct loci with
genome-wide significant evidence for association with Crohn's disease.

PMCID: PMC3299551
PMID: 21102463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. EMBO J. 2010 Dec 1;29(23):4048-61. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.257. Epub 2010 Oct 15.

Bach2 represses plasma cell gene regulatory network in B cells to promote
antibody class switch.

Muto A(1), Ochiai K, Kimura Y, Itoh-Nakadai A, Calame KL, Ikebe D, Tashiro S,
Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2010 Dec 1;29(23):3896-7.

Two transcription factors, Pax5 and Blimp-1, form a gene regulatory network (GRN)
with a double-negative loop, which defines either B-cell (Pax5 high) or plasma
cell (Blimp-1 high) status as a binary switch. However, it is unclear how this
B-cell GRN registers class switch DNA recombination (CSR), an event that takes
place before the terminal differentiation to plasma cells. In the absence of
Bach2 encoding a transcription factor required for CSR, mouse splenic B cells
more frequently and rapidly expressed Blimp-1 and differentiated to IgM plasma
cells as compared with wild-type cells. Genetic loss of Blimp-1 in Bach2(-/-) B
cells was sufficient to restore CSR. These data with mathematical modelling of
the GRN indicate that Bach2 achieves a time delay in Blimp-1 induction, which
inhibits plasma cell differentiation and promotes CSR (Delay-Driven Diversity
model for CSR). Reduction in mature B-cell numbers in Bach2(-/-) mice was not
rescued by Blimp-1 ablation, indicating that Bach2 regulates B-cell
differentiation and function through Blimp-1-dependent and -independent GRNs.

PMCID: PMC3020649
PMID: 20953163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Exp Hematol. 2010 Dec;38(12):1251-60. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2010.08.005. Epub
2010 Sep 24.

Intrinsic and extrinsic effects of mafG deficiency on hematopoietic recovery
following bone marrow transplant.

Li XM(1), Hu Z, Zafar AB, Jorgensen ML, Bungert J, Slayton W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

OBJECTIVE: MafG is the small subunit of the transcription factor NF-E2 that
controls terminal megakaryocyte maturation and platelet release. Studies were
conducted to evaluate the intrinsic and extrinsic effects of mafG deficiency on
bone marrow engraftment kinetics.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used mafG knockout mice either as donors or recipients 
in bone marrow transplantations with wild-type mice and compared the engraftment 
kinetics to transplantations using wild-type donors and recipients. We measured
peripheral cell counts, the presence of circulating donor-derived cells by flow
cytometry, changes in the cellularity of the bone marrow and splenic weight on
day 5, 7, 14, and 1 month post-transplantation.
RESULTS: Compared to wild-type recipients, mafG recipients had delayed platelet
and leukocyte recovery and lower spleen weight at early time points after
transplantation. Intrinsic effects: When mafG-deficient bone marrow served as
donor source, we observed more rapid recovery of bone marrow cellularity and
increased splenic hematopoiesis. The finding of increased short-term
hematopoietic stem cells and progenitors in the mafG-deficient bone marrow could 
explain the accelerated hematopoietic recovery after transplantation.
Furthermore, the expression of Bach 2, which can form a heterodimer with mafG
protein, was found to be greatly reduced, while Notch 1 expression was increased 
in mafG-deficient mice. Extrinsic effects: When mafG-deficient mice were
transplant recipients, there were delays in recovery of normal levels of marrow
and splenic hematopoiesis as well as circulating leukocytes and platelets.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that mafG expression has intrinsic and
extrinsic effects on hematopoietic engraftment following bone marrow
transplantation.

Copyright © 2010 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20813153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Nat Genet. 2010 Apr;42(4):295-302. doi: 10.1038/ng.543. Epub 2010 Feb 28.

Multiple common variants for celiac disease influencing immune gene expression.

Dubois PC(1), Trynka G, Franke L, Hunt KA, Romanos J, Curtotti A, Zhernakova A,
Heap GA, Adány R, Aromaa A, Bardella MT, van den Berg LH, Bockett NA, de la
Concha EG, Dema B, Fehrmann RS, Fernández-Arquero M, Fiatal S, Grandone E, Green 
PM, Groen HJ, Gwilliam R, Houwen RH, Hunt SE, Kaukinen K, Kelleher D,
Korponay-Szabo I, Kurppa K, MacMathuna P, Mäki M, Mazzilli MC, McCann OT, Mearin 
ML, Mein CA, Mirza MM, Mistry V, Mora B, Morley KI, Mulder CJ, Murray JA, Núñez
C, Oosterom E, Ophoff RA, Polanco I, Peltonen L, Platteel M, Rybak A, Salomaa V, 
Schweizer JJ, Sperandeo MP, Tack GJ, Turner G, Veldink JH, Verbeek WH, Weersma
RK, Wolters VM, Urcelay E, Cukrowska B, Greco L, Neuhausen SL, McManus R,
Barisani D, Deloukas P, Barrett JC, Saavalainen P, Wijmenga C, van Heel DA.

Author information: 
(1)Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and The London School
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet.2010 May;42(5):465.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2010 Apr;42(4):281-2.

We performed a second-generation genome-wide association study of 4,533
individuals with celiac disease (cases) and 10,750 control subjects. We genotyped
113 selected SNPs with P(GWAS) < 10(-4) and 18 SNPs from 14 known loci in a
further 4,918 cases and 5,684 controls. Variants from 13 new regions reached
genome-wide significance (P(combined) < 5 x 10(-8)); most contain genes with
immune functions (BACH2, CCR4, CD80, CIITA-SOCS1-CLEC16A, ICOSLG and ZMIZ1), with
ETS1, RUNX3, THEMIS and TNFRSF14 having key roles in thymic T-cell selection.
There was evidence to suggest associations for a further 13 regions. In an
expression quantitative trait meta-analysis of 1,469 whole blood samples, 20 of
38 (52.6%) tested loci had celiac risk variants correlated (P < 0.0028, FDR 5%)
with cis gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2847618
PMID: 20190752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Virol. 2010 Apr;84(8):3780-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02088-09. Epub 2010 Feb 3.

Antisense transcription in gammaretroviruses as a mechanism of insertional
activation of host genes.

Rasmussen MH(1), Ballarín-González B, Liu J, Lassen LB, Füchtbauer A, Füchtbauer 
EM, Nielsen AL, Pedersen FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, C.F. Møllers Allé 3, 1.130, Aarhus
University, DK-8000 Arhus C, Denmark.

Transcription of retroviruses is initiated at the U3-R region boundary in the
integrated provirus and continues unidirectionally to produce genomic and mRNA
products of positive polarity. Several studies have recently demonstrated the
existence of naturally occurring protein-encoding transcripts of negative
polarity in complex retroviruses. We report here on the identification of
transcripts of negative polarity in simple murine leukemia virus (MLV). In T-cell
and B-cell lymphomas induced by SL3-3 and Akv MLV, antisense transcripts
initiated in the U3 region of the proviral 5' long terminal repeat (LTR) and
continued into the cellular proto-oncogenes Jdp2 and Bach2 to create chimeric
transcripts consisting of viral and host sequence. The phenomenon was validated
in vivo using a knock-in mouse model homozygous for a single LTR at a position
known to activate Nras in B-cell lymphomas. A 5' rapid amplification of cDNA ends
(RACE) analysis indicated a broad spectrum of initiation sites within the U3
region of the 5' LTR. Our data show for the first time transcriptional activity
of negative polarity initiating in the U3 region of simple retroviruses and
suggest a novel mechanism of insertional activation of host genes. Elucidation of
the nature and potential regulatory role of 5' LTR antisense transcription will
be relevant to the design of therapeutic vectors and may contribute to the
increasing recognition of pervasive eukaryotic transcription.

PMCID: PMC2849499
PMID: 20130045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Leukemia. 2010 Mar;24(3):629-37. doi: 10.1038/leu.2009.274. Epub 2010 Jan 7.

Deregulation of microRNA expression in the different genetic subtypes of multiple
myeloma and correlation with gene expression profiling.

Gutiérrez NC(1), Sarasquete ME, Misiewicz-Krzeminska I, Delgado M, De Las Rivas
J, Ticona FV, Fermiñán E, Martín-Jiménez P, Chillón C, Risueño A, Hernández JM,
García-Sanz R, González M, San Miguel JF.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Hematología, Hospital Universitario, Centro de Investigación del
Cáncer-IBMCC (USAL-CSIC), Salamanca, Spain.

Specific microRNA (miRNA) signatures have been associated with different
cytogenetic subtypes in acute leukemias. This finding prompted us to investigate 
potential associations between genetic abnormalities in multiple myeloma (MM) and
singular miRNA expression profiles. Moreover, global gene expression profiling
was also analyzed to find correlated miRNA gene expression and select miRNA
target genes that show such correlation. For this purpose, we analyzed the
expression level of 365 miRNAs and the gene expression profiling in 60 newly
diagnosed MM patients, selected to represent the most relevant recurrent genetic 
abnormalities. Supervised analysis showed significantly deregulated miRNAs in the
different cytogenetic subtypes as compared with normal PC. It is interesting to
note that miR-1 and miR-133a clustered on the same chromosomal loci, were
specifically overexpressed in the cases with t(14;16). The analysis of the
relationship between miRNA expression and their respective target genes showed a 
conserved inverse correlation between several miRNAs deregulated in MM cells and 
CCND2 expression level. These results illustrate, for the first time, that miRNA 
expression pattern in MM is associated with genetic abnormalities, and that the
correlation of the expression profile of miRNA and their putative mRNA targets is
useful to find statistically significant protein-coding genes in MM pathogenesis 
associated with changes in specific miRNAs.

PMID: 20054351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Blood. 2009 Sep 10;114(11):2280-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-208215. Epub 2009
Jul 16.

Mice deficient for CD137 ligand are predisposed to develop germinal
center-derived B-cell lymphoma.

Middendorp S(1), Xiao Y, Song JY, Peperzak V, Krijger PH, Jacobs H, Borst J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

In the germinal center (GC), B cells proliferate dramatically and diversify their
immunoglobulin genes, which increases the risk of malignant transformation. The
GC B-cell reaction relies on crosstalk with follicular dendritic cells (FDCs), to
which the costimulatory receptor CD137 on FDCs and its ligand on GC B cells
potentially contribute. We report that mice deficient for CD137 ligand (CD137L)
are predisposed to develop B-cell lymphoma, with an incidence of approximately
60% at 12 months of age. Lymphoma membrane markers were characteristic of GC B
cells. Longitudinal histologic analysis identified the GC as site of oncogenic
transformation and classified 85% of the malignancies found in approximately 200 
mice as GC-derived B-cell lymphoma. To delineate the mechanism underlying
lymphomagenesis, gene expression profiles of wild-type and CD137L-deficient GC B 
cells were compared. CD137L deficiency was associated with enhanced expression of
a limited gene set that included Bcl-10 and the GC response regulators Bcl-6,
Spi-B, Elf-1, Bach2, and activation-induced cytidine deaminase. Among these are
proto-oncogenes that mediate GC B-cell lymphoma development in humans. We
conclude that CD137L ordinarily regulates the GC B-cell response and thereby acts
as a tumor suppressor.

PMID: 19608748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Genes Cells. 2009 Feb;14(2):167-78. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01259.x. Epub
2008 Jan 12.

Crystal structure of the Bach1 BTB domain and its regulation of homodimerization.

Ito N(1), Watanabe-Matsui M, Igarashi K, Murayama K.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Engineering Research Organization, Tohoku University, Aoba-ku,
Sendai, Japan.

The BTB/POZ domain is known as a protein-protein interaction motif that mediates 
homodimer and higher order self-associations. Proteins containing the BTB domain 
exist throughout eukaryotes; however, there is little information about the
mechanism that determines the oligomeric state of the BTB domain. To address this
question, we have determined the X-ray structure of the mouse Bach1 BTB domain.
The present structure is similar to the previously determined BTB domain folds,
including the human Bach1 BTB domain; however, distinct structural features are
present, such as a novel homodimer interaction surface. The homodimer formation
was found to involve a novel hydrogen bond network and interactions between
hydrophobic surfaces of the kinked N-terminus (N-hook) and the partner's
C-terminal residues. The deletion of the N-hook resulted in the conversion of the
homodimer into a monomer in solution, indicating that the N-hook promotes the
homodimerization of the mBach1 BTB domain. We have also found that the BTB domain
of Bach2, a protein highly related to Bach1, is present as a monomer due to a
short peptide insertion at the N-hook. These results represent the first example 
of the key modulatory element of BTB domain homodimerization.

PMID: 19170764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. BMC Mol Biol. 2009 Jan 21;10:2. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-2.

Identification of novel Bach2 transcripts and protein isoforms through tagging
analysis of retroviral integrations in B-cell lymphomas.

Liu J(1), Sørensen AB, Wang B, Wabl M, Nielsen AL, Pedersen FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, C.F. Møllers Allé 1.130, University of
Aarhus, Aarhus C, Denmark. jul@mb.au.dk

BACKGROUND: The Bach2 gene functions as a transcriptional repressor in B-cells,
showing high expression level only before the plasma cell stage. Several lines of
evidence indicate that Bach2 is a B-cell specific tumor suppressor. We here
address patterns of insertional mutagenesis and expression of Bach2 is a murine
retroviral model of B-cell lymphoma induction.
RESULTS: We report that the Bach2 gene is a target of proviral integrations in
B-cell lymphomas induced by murine leukemia virus. An alternative Bach2 promoter 
was identified within intron 2 and this promoter was activated in one of the
tumors harboring proviral integration. The alternative promoter was active in
both normal and tumor tissue and the tissue specificity of the two Bach2
promoters was similar. Three different alternatively used Bach2 terminal exons
were identified to be located in intron 4. The inclusion of these exons resulted 
in the generation of Bach2 mRNA with open reading frames lacking the bZIP DNA
binding domain present in the normal Bach2 protein, but retaining a partial BTB
protein dimerization domain. Such Bach2 protein was excluded from the cell
nucleus.
CONCLUSION: We have identified an alternative promoter and new protein isoforms
of Bach2. Our data imply that activation of an alternative promoter by proviral
integration serves as a possible mechanism of up-regulation of the Bach2 gene
with a potential role in B-cell lymphomagenesis. The finding of novel Bach2
transcripts and protein isoforms will facilitate a better insight into the normal
and pathophysiological regulation of the Bach2 gene.

PMCID: PMC2635362
PMID: 19159451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nat Genet. 2008 Dec;40(12):1399-401. doi: 10.1038/ng.249. Epub 2008 Nov 2.

Meta-analysis of genome-wide association study data identifies additional type 1 
diabetes risk loci.

Cooper JD(1), Smyth DJ, Smiles AM, Plagnol V, Walker NM, Allen JE, Downes K,
Barrett JC, Healy BC, Mychaleckyj JC, Warram JH, Todd JA.

Author information: 
(1)Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflammation
Laboratory, Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.
jason.cooper@cimr.cam.ac.uk

We carried out a meta-analysis of data from three genome-wide association (GWA)
studies of type 1 diabetes (T1D), testing 305,090 SNPs in 3,561 T1D cases and
4,646 controls of European ancestry. We obtained further support for 4q27
(IL2-IL21, P = 1.9 x 10(-8)) and, after genotyping an additional 6,225 cases,
6,946 controls and 2,828 families, convincing evidence for four previously
unknown and distinct risk loci in chromosome regions 6q15 (BACH2, P = 4.7 x
10(-12)), 10p15 (PRKCQ, P = 3.7 x 10(-9)), 15q24 (CTSH, P = 3.2 x 10(-15)) and
22q13 (C1QTNF6, P = 2.0 x 10(-8)).

PMCID: PMC2635556
PMID: 18978792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Dec 19;377(3):852-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.079. Epub 2008 Oct 24.

14-3-3 regulates the nuclear import of class IIa histone deacetylases.

Nishino TG(1), Miyazaki M, Hoshino H, Miwa Y, Horinouchi S, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Genetics Laboratory/Chemical Genomics Research Group, RIKEN Advanced 
Science Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Class IIa histone deacetylases (HDACs) form complexes with a class of
transcriptional repressors in the nucleus. While screening for compounds that
could block the association of HDAC4 with the BTB domain-containing
transcriptional repressor Bach2, we discovered that phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate (PMA) induced the cytoplasmic retention of HDAC4 mutants lacking a
nuclear export signal (NES). Although PMA treatment and PKD overexpression has
been proposed to facilitate the nuclear export of class IIa HDACs by creating
14-3-3 binding sites containing phosphoserines, our experiments using HDAC
mutants demonstrated that PMA greatly reduces nuclear import. PMA treatment
repressed the NLS activity in a manner dependent on 14-3-3 binding. These results
suggest that nuclear HDAC4 is not tethered in the nucleus, but instead shuttles
between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Phosphorylation-induced 14-3-3 binding
biases the balance of nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling toward the cytoplasm by
inhibiting nuclear import.

PMID: 18952052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Leuk Res. 2009 May;33(5):731-4. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2008.09.007. Epub 2008 Oct
16.

High levels of BACH2 associated with lower levels of BCL2 transcript abundance in
t(14;18)(q21;q34) translocation positive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Green M(1), Gandhi MK, Camilleri E, Marlton P, Lea R, Griffiths L.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Centre, Griffith Institute for Health and Medical Research, 
Griffith University, Queensland 9726, Australia.

The t(14;18)(q21;q34) BCL2 translocation is a common genetic alteration in
follicular and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. However, it is not invariably
associated with BCL2 gene overexpression due to undefined mechanisms that
regulate expression from the proximal immunoglobulin heavy-chain (IgH) promoter. 
The BACH2 transcriptional repressor is able to modulate activity of this
promoter. Here we have shown that, in tumor samples with BCL2 translocation,
those with high levels of BACH2 had significantly lower BCL2 transcript abundance
compared to those with low levels of BACH2. This indicates that BACH2 may be
partially responsible for regulation of BCL2 expression from the
t(14;18)(q21;q34) translocation.

PMID: 18929412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Diabetes. 2009 Jan;58(1):290-5. doi: 10.2337/db08-1022. Epub 2008 Oct 7.

Follow-up analysis of genome-wide association data identifies novel loci for type
1 diabetes.

Grant SF(1), Qu HQ, Bradfield JP, Marchand L, Kim CE, Glessner JT, Grabs R,
Taback SP, Frackelton EC, Eckert AW, Annaiah K, Lawson ML, Otieno FG, Santa E,
Shaner JL, Smith RM, Skraban R, Imielinski M, Chiavacci RM, Grundmeier RW,
Stanley CA, Kirsch SE, Waggott D, Paterson AD, Monos DS; DCCT/EDIC Research
Group, Polychronakos C, Hakonarson H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Applied Genomics, Abramson Research Center, The Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Two recent genome-wide association (GWA) studies have revealed novel
loci for type 1 diabetes, a common multifactorial disease with a strong genetic
component. To fully utilize the GWA data that we had obtained by genotyping 563
type 1 diabetes probands and 1,146 control subjects, as well as 483 case
subject-parent trios, using the Illumina HumanHap550 BeadChip, we designed a full
stage 2 study to capture other possible association signals.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: From our existing datasets, we selected 982 markers 
with P < 0.05 in both GWA cohorts. Genotyping these in an independent set of 636 
nuclear families with 974 affected offspring revealed 75 markers that also had P 
< 0.05 in this third cohort. Among these, six single nucleotide polymorphisms in 
five novel loci also had P < 0.05 in the Wellcome Trust Case-Control Consortium
dataset and were further tested in 1,303 type 1 diabetes probands from the
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions
and Complications (DCCT/EDIC) plus 1,673 control subjects.
RESULTS: Two markers (rs9976767 and rs3757247) remained significant after
adjusting for the number of tests in this last cohort; they reside in UBASH3A (OR
1.16; combined P = 2.33 x 10(-8)) and BACH2 (1.13; combined P = 1.25 x 10(-6)).
CONCLUSIONS: Evaluation of a large number of statistical GWA candidates in
several independent cohorts has revealed additional loci that are associated with
type 1 diabetes. The two genes at these respective loci, UBASH3A and BACH2, are
both biologically relevant to autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC2606889
PMID: 18840781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Leukemia. 2008 Dec;22(12):2201-7. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.234. Epub 2008 Sep 4.

Regulation of IL-2 expression by transcription factor BACH2 in umbilical cord
blood CD4+ T cells.

Lesniewski ML(1), Haviernik P, Weitzel RP, Kadereit S, Kozik MM, Fanning LR, Yang
YC, Hegerfeldt Y, Finney MR, Ratajczak MZ, Greco N, Paul P, Maciejewski J,
Laughlin MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH 44106-7284, USA.

On activation, umbilical cord blood (UCB) CD4(+) T cells demonstrate reduced
expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma), whereas maintaining equivalent interleukin-2 (IL-2) levels, as
compared with adult peripheral blood (PB) CD4(+) T cells. Nuclear factor of
activated T cells (NFAT1) protein, a transcription factor known to regulate the
expression of IL-2, TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma, is reduced in resting and activated 
UCB CD4(+) T cells. In contrast, expression of
Broad-complex-Tramtrack-Bric-a-Brac and Cap'n'collar homology 1 bZip
transcription factor 2 (BACH2) was shown by gene array analyses to be increased
in UCB CD4(+) T cells and was validated by qRT-PCR. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation, BACH2 was shown binding to the human IL-2 proximal promoter.
Knockdown experiments of BACH2 by transient transfection of UCB CD4(+) T cells
with BACH2 siRNA resulted in significant reductions in stimulated IL-2
production. Decreased IL-2 gene transcription in UCB CD4(+) T cells transfected
with BACH2 siRNA was confirmed by a human IL-2 luciferase assay. In summary,
BACH2 maintains IL-2 expression in UCB CD4(+) T cells at levels equivalent to
adult PB CD4(+) T cells despite reduced NFAT1 protein expression. Thus, BACH2
expression is necessary to maintain IL-2 production when NFAT1 protein is
reduced, potentially impacting UCB graft CD4(+) T-cell allogeneic responses.

PMID: 18769450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Leukemia. 2009 Mar;23(3):581-3. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.223. Epub 2008 Aug 28.

Expression profiling of persistent polyclonal B-cell lymphocytosis suggests
constitutive expression of the AP-1 transcription complex and downregulation of
Fas-apoptotic and TGFbeta signalling pathways.

Lawrie CH, Shilling R, Troussard X, Cattan H, Mossafa H, Pezzella F, Boultwood J,
Wainscoat JS, Hatton CS.

PMID: 18754033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Int Immunol. 2008 Mar;20(3):453-60. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxn005. Epub 2008 Feb 5.

Regulation of the plasma cell transcription factor Blimp-1 gene by Bach2 and
Bcl6.

Ochiai K(1), Muto A, Tanaka H, Takahashi S, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 1 (Blimp-1) is a key regulator for plasma
cell differentiation. Prior to the terminal differentiation into plasma cells,
Blimp-1 expression is suppressed in B cells by transcription repressors BTB and
CNC homology 2 (Bach2) and B cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6). Bach2 binds to the Maf
recognition element (MARE) of the promoter upstream region of the Blimp-1 gene
(Prdm1) by forming a heterodimer with MafK. Bach2 and Bcl6 were found to interact
with each other in B cells. While both Bach2 and Bcl6 possess the BTB domain
which mediates protein-protein interactions, they interacted in a BTB-independent
manner. Bcl6 is known to repress Prdm1 through a Bcl6 recognition element 1 in
the intron 5, in which a putative, evolutionarily conserved MARE was identified. 
Both repressed the expression of a reporter gene containing the intron 5 region
depending on the presence of the respective binding sites in 18-81 pre-B cells.
Co-expression of Bach2 and Bcl6 resulted in further repression of the reporter
plasmid. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed MafK to bind to the intron
MARE in various B cell lines, thus suggesting that it binds as a heterodimer with
Bach2. Therefore, the interaction between Bach2 and Bcl6 might be crucial for the
proper repression of Prdm1 in B cells.

PMID: 18256039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Feb 15;314(4):903-13. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.12.013. Epub
2007 Dec 23.

The mobility of Bach2 nuclear foci is regulated by SUMO-1 modification.

Kono K(1), Harano Y, Hoshino H, Kobayashi M, Bazett-Jones DP, Muto A, Igarashi K,
Tashiro S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, Hiroshima University, Kasumi 1-2-3, Minamiku, Hiroshima 734-8553,
Japan.

The small ubiquitin-like modifier-1 (SUMO-1) modulates the functions of nuclear
proteins by changing their structure and/or subnuclear localization. Several
nuclear proteins form dynamic higher order nuclear structures, termed
non-chromatin nuclear domains, which are involved in the regulation of nuclear
function. However, the role that SUMO modification of the component proteins
plays in the regulation of the activity and function of nuclear domains is
unclear. Here we demonstrate that nuclear domains formed by Bach2, a
transcription repressor, show restricted movement and undergo fusion events upon 
oxidative stress. Mutation of the SUMO-acceptor lysines in Bach2 alters the
behavior of these nuclear foci and results in a decreased frequency of fusion
events. We propose that SUMO modification is an important regulatory system for
the mobility of the nuclear domains formed by Bach2.

PMID: 18201693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jan 18;365(3):426-32. Epub 2007 Nov 6.

The role of Bach2 in nucleic acid-triggered antiviral innate immune responses.

Hong SW(1), Kim S, Lee DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and BK School of Molecular Science, Pohang University 
of Science and Technology, Pohang 790-784, Republic of Korea.

Bach2, a bZIP transcription factor originally identified as interacting with the 
small Maf family of bZIP proteins, has been shown to play important roles in
oxidative stress-mediated cell death. Here, we examine the role of Bach2 in cell 
death during double-stranded (ds)RNA- and dsDNA-triggered antiviral innate immune
responses. Bach2 expression was induced in HeLa cells upon dsRNA/dsDNA treatment 
and the suppression of Bach2 expression by siRNA treatment alleviated cell death 
triggered by dsRNA and dsDNA. Unexpectedly, DNA microarray analysis revealed that
siRNA-mediated suppression of Bach2 resulted in the attenuated activation of
genes involved in the antiviral innate immune response after dsRNA treatment. Our
study thus demonstrates a novel role for Bach2 as a key regulator of nucleic
acid-triggered antiviral responses in human cells.

PMID: 17991429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Biochem. 2007 Jun;141(6):783-9.

Architecture and dynamics of the transcription factor network that regulates
B-to-plasma cell differentiation.

Igarashi K(1), Ochiai K, Muto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. igarak@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

Upon antigen stimulation, B lymphoid cells undergo terminal differentiation into 
antibody-secreting plasma cells. This process accompanies drastic changes in cell
functions such as a loss of B-cell identity, induction of secretory apparatus,
and an extremely increased transcription of antibody genes. These changes are the
result of re-wiring of a transcription factor network in B and plasma cells.
While the transcription repressor Blimp-1 induces plasma cell differentiation,
another repressor Bach2 has emerged as a negative regulator of Blimp-1 in B
cells. These two transcription factors, together with other several factors,
appear to constitute a main transcriptional regulatory network for the terminal
differentiation process of plasma cells from B cells.

PMID: 17569706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cell Prolif. 2007 Apr;40(2):268-81.

Identification of stathmin 1 expression induced by Epstein-Barr virus in human B 
lymphocytes.

Baik SY(1), Yun HS, Lee HJ, Lee MH, Jung SE, Kim JW, Jeon JP, Shin YK, Rhee HS,
Kimm KC, Han BG.

Author information: 
(1)Biobank for Health Sciences, Center for Genome Sciences, National Institute of
Health, Korea Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Seoul, South Korea.

INTRODUCTION: The Epstein-Barr virus transforms resting B cells into
proliferating lymphoblastoid cells, the origin of cell lines.
METHOD AND RESULTS: Our cDNA microarray analyses led to the identification of 232
up-regulated and 112 down-regulated genes with more than a 3-fold difference in
lymphoblastoid cell lines compared to resting B cells. The functional
classification of these genes exhibited the distinct expression signature for
cell proliferation, cell cycle and an immune response. Among them, we verified
the differential expression of several oncogenes such as stathmin 1 (STMN1),
RAB27A, RAB9A, BACH1 and BACH2 using quantitative real-time reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reactions or Western blot analysis. Expression of 
STMN1 (which is involved in regulation of the microtubule filament system, cell
growth and S-phase of cell cycle) was increased in lymphoblastoid cell line as
well as in 7-day post-Epstein-Barr virus infection B cells, compared to resting B
cells.
CONCLUSION: Thus, this study suggests that Epstein-Barr virus infection induces
STMN1 expression, which play a role in cell cycle progression and proliferation
in the human B lymphocyte.

PMID: 17472732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 1;67(7):3320-8.

Gene expression signature of human cancer cell lines treated with the ras
inhibitor salirasib (S-farnesylthiosalicylic acid).

Blum R(1), Elkon R, Yaari S, Zundelevich A, Jacob-Hirsch J, Rechavi G, Shamir R, 
Kloog Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiochemistry, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel 
Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Deregulation of Ras pathways results in complex abnormalities of multiple
signaling cascades that contribute to human malignancies. Ras is therefore
considered an appropriate target for cancer therapy. In light of the complexity
of the deregulated Ras pathway, it is important to decipher at the molecular
level the response of cancer cells to Ras inhibitors that would reregulate it. In
the present study, we used gene expression profiling as a robust method for the
global dissection of gene expression alterations that resulted from treatment
with the Ras inhibitor S-farnesylthiosalicylic acid (FTS; salirasib). Use of a
ranking-based procedure, combined with functional analysis and promoter sequence 
analysis, enabled us to decipher the common and most prominent patterns of the
transcriptional response of five different human cancer cell lines to FTS.
Remarkably, the analysis identified a distinctive core transcriptional response
to FTS that was common to all cancer cell lines tested. This signature fits well 
to a recently described deregulated Ras pathway signature that predicted
sensitivity to FTS. Taken together, these studies provide strong support for the 
conclusion that FTS specifically reregulates defective Ras pathways in human
tumor cells. Ras pathway reregulation by FTS was manifested by repression of
E2F-regulated and NF-Y-regulated genes and of the transcription factor FOS (all
of which control cell proliferation), repression of survivin expression (which
blocks apoptosis), and induction of activating transcription factor-regulated and
Bach2-regulated genes (which participate in translation and stress responses).
Our results suggest that cancer patients with deregulated Ras pathway tumors
might benefit from FTS treatment.

PMID: 17409441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Biochem. 2007 May;141(5):719-27. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

Co-repressor SMRT and class II histone deacetylases promote Bach2 nuclear
retention and formation of nuclear foci that are responsible for local
transcriptional repression.

Hoshino H(1), Nishino TG, Tashiro S, Miyazaki M, Ohmiya Y, Igarashi K, Horinouchi
S, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)CREST Research Project, Japan Science and Technology Corp., Saitama 332-0012, 
Japan.

Bach2 is a member of the BTB-basic region leucine zipper factor family and
represses transcription activity directed by the TPA response element, the Maf
recognition element (MARE) and the antioxidant-responsive element. Recently, it
was reported that upon oxidative stress Bach2 forms nuclear foci surrounding the 
promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) bodies and specifically represses the transcription
around the PML bodies. Here we report that expression of the silencing mediator
of retinoid and thyroid receptor (SMRT) and histone deacetylase4 (HDAC4) enhances
the formation of the Bach2 foci in the nuclear matrix. SMRT mediates the HDAC4
binding to Bach2, and HDAC4 facilitates the retention of Bach2 in the foci.
Scratch transcription labelling and 3D-reconstruction from the confocal images
demonstrated that transcription is suppressed in and around the Bach2 foci.
Indeed, Bach2 bound MARE and repressed the expression from the chromosomally
integrated MARE-driven reporter gene when co-expressed with SMRT and HDAC4. Our
observations suggest that both SMRT and HDAC4 play an important role in nuclear
retention and the Bach2 focus formation in the mammalian cell nucleus, which may 
contribute to the local transcription repression.

PMID: 17383980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Infect Dis. 2007 Mar 1;195(5):716-25. Epub 2007 Jan 18.

Recurrent HIV-1 integration at the BACH2 locus in resting CD4+ T cell populations
during effective highly active antiretroviral therapy.

Ikeda T(1), Shibata J, Yoshimura K, Koito A, Matsushita S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Retrovirology and Infectious Diseases, Center for AIDS
Research, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

The persistence of latent human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) has been
considered one of the major obstacles for eradication of the virus in infected
individuals receiving successful antiretroviral therapy. To determine the
contribution of integration sites to viral latency within clinical settings, an
inverse polymerase chain reaction method was used to analyze integration sites in
CD4(+) T cells from patients showing long-term undetectable plasma viral RNA. Of 
457 sites identified in 7 patients, almost all (96%) resided within
transcriptional units, usually in introns of the human genome. Studies of 18
genes in which HIV-1 integrates found them to be actively expressed in resting
CD4(+) T cells. On the other hand, integration sites in the alpha satellite
region was also identified in some patients, albeit at low frequency. Of
particular interest, HIV-1-infected cells with multiple identical integration
sites were detected in longitudinal analysis of samples from 3 patients,
suggesting that these cells persist for long periods and that clonal expansion
may occur. Furthermore, strong integration clusters in the BACH2 gene were
observed in 2 patients (31% in patient 1 and 5% in patient 3). Our findings not
only raise the possibility of biased target-site integration but also provide
mechanistic insights into the long-term persistence of HIV-1.

PMID: 17262715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Leukemia. 2007 Mar;21(3):541-9. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

Gene expression profiling of B lymphocytes and plasma cells from Waldenström's
macroglobulinemia: comparison with expression patterns of the same cell
counterparts from chronic lymphocytic leukemia, multiple myeloma and normal
individuals.

Gutiérrez NC(1), Ocio EM, de Las Rivas J, Maiso P, Delgado M, Fermiñán E, Arcos
MJ, Sánchez ML, Hernández JM, San Miguel JF.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Hematología, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca and Centro de
Investigación del Cáncer (CIC), Universidad de Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain.

The tumoral clone of Waldenström's macroglobulinemia (WM) shows a wide
morphological heterogeneity, which ranges from B lymphocytes (BL) to plasma cells
(PC). By means of genome-wide expression profiling we have been able to identify 
genes exclusively deregulated in BL and PC from WM, but with a similar expression
pattern in their corresponding cell counterparts from chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) and multiple myeloma (MM), as well as normal individuals. The
differentially expressed genes have important functions in B-cell differentiation
and oncogenesis. Thus, two of the genes downregulated in WM-BL were IL4R, which
plays a relevant role in CLL B-cell survival, and BACH2, which participates in
the development of class-switched PC. Interestingly, one of the upregulated genes
in WM-BL was IL6. A set of four genes was able to discriminate clonal BL from WM 
and CLL: LEF1 (WNT/beta-catenin pathway), MARCKS, ATXN1 and FMOD. We also found
deregulation of genes involved in plasma cell differentiation such as PAX5, which
was overexpressed in WM-PC, and IRF4 and BLIMP1, which were underexpressed. In
addition, three of the target genes activated by PAX5 - CD79, BLNK and SYK - were
upregulated in WM-PC. In summary, these results indicate that both PC and BL from
WM are genetically different from the MM and CLL cell counterpart.

PMID: 17252022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 15;281(50):38226-34. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

Plasmacytic transcription factor Blimp-1 is repressed by Bach2 in B cells.

Ochiai K(1), Katoh Y, Ikura T, Hoshikawa Y, Noda T, Karasuyama H, Tashiro S, Muto
A, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Bach2 is a B cell-specific transcription repressor whose deficiency in mice
causes a reduced class switch recombination and a reduced somatic hypermutation
of immunoglobulin genes. Little is known about the direct target genes of Bach2
in B cells. By analyzing various B cell and plasma cell lines, we showed that the
expression patterns of Bach2 and Blimp-1 (B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein
1), a master regulator of plasma cell differentiation, are mutually exclusive.
The reporter gene of the Blimp-1 gene (Prdm1) was repressed by the overexpression
of Bach2 in B cell lines. The heterodimer of Bach2/MafK bound to the Maf
recognition element located upstream of the Prdm1 promoter in an electrophoretic 
mobility shift assay. The binding of MafK in B cells to the Prdm1 Maf recognition
element was confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. When MafK was
purified from the BAL17 B cell line, a significant portion of it was present as a
heterodimer with Bach2, with no apparent formation of MafK homodimer. These
results strongly suggest that Bach2 represses the expression of Blimp-1 together 
with MafK in B cells prior to plasma cell differentiation. Accordingly, the
knockdown of Bach2 mRNA using short hairpin RNA in BAL17 cells resulted in higher
levels of Prdm1 expression after the stimulation of B cell receptor by surface
IgM cross-linking. Induction of Prdm1 was more robust and faster in primary
Bach2-deficient B cells than in wild-type control B cells upon lipopolysaccharide
stimulation. Therefore, the Prdm1 regulation in B cells involves the repression
by Bach2, which may be cancelled upon terminal plasma cell differentiation.

PMID: 17046816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 Jan;46(1):67-74.

Nuclear positioning of the BACH2 gene in BCR-ABL positive leukemic cells.

Ono A(1), Kono K, Ikebe D, Muto A, Sun J, Kobayashi M, Ueda K, Melo JV, Igarashi 
K, Tashiro S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, Graduate school of Biomedical Science, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima,
Japan.

BACH2 is a B-cell-specific transcription repressor and is also know as a tumor
suppressor in B cell malignancy. Expression of BACH2 is induced in BCR-ABL
positive lymphoid cell lines including BV173 by imatinib, a molecular targeting
agent for the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Here we show that the 
activity of the BACH2 gene is related to the nuclear positioning of the gene
loci. We examined the spatial association of the BACH2 gene with the centromeric 
heterochromatin, a transcriptionally repressive subnuclear compartment, by
comparing cells with low (BV173 and K562) and high (NAMALWA) levels of BACH2
mRNA. The BACH2 gene was located closer to the centromeric heterochromatin in
BV173 and K562 cells as compared to NAMALWA cells. In BV173 cells, the
BACH2-centromere distance increased after imatinib treatment to levels similar to
those in NAMALWA cells. We also found that diethylmaleate, an oxidative stressor,
enhanced the antiproliferative effect of imatinib in only BV173 cells. Since
BACH2 induces apoptosis by oxidative stress, these observations suggest that
down-regulation of the BACH2 gene through the interaction with centromeric
heterochromatin would take part in leukomogenesis of BCR-ABL positive lymphoid
leukemia.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17044046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Blood. 2007 Feb 1;109(3):1211-9. Epub 2006 Oct 3.

Bcr-Abl signaling through the PI-3/S6 kinase pathway inhibits nuclear
translocation of the transcription factor Bach2, which represses the
antiapoptotic factor heme oxygenase-1.

Yoshida C(1), Yoshida F, Sears DE, Hart SM, Ikebe D, Muto A, Basu S, Igarashi K, 
Melo JV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, UK.

The malignant phenotype of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is due to the abnormal 
tyrosine kinase activity of the Bcr-Abl oncoprotein. We have previously reported 
that expression of the Bach2 transcription factor, which induces apoptosis in
response to oxidative stress, is greatly reduced in CML cells. Because these
cells are resistant to apoptosis, we tested whether Bach2 could also be regulated
through posttranslational mechanisms that promote inhibition of the apoptotic
response to mutagenic stimuli in CML. We found that Bach2 is phosphorylated on
S521 via the phosphatidylinositol-3/S6 kinase pathway, and substitution of this
site to alanine leads to nuclear accumulation of the protein, indicating that
this phosphorylation is important for its subcellular localization. Ectopic
expression of the S521 mutant imparts greater impairment to CML cell growth than 
the wild-type factor. Furthermore, we showed that Bach2 transcriptionally
represses heme oxygenase-1, an antiapoptotic factor up-regulated in CML. Because 
CML cells are known to produce high levels of intracellular reactive oxygen
species, overexpression of heme oxygenase-1 resulting from inhibition of Bach2
activity may contribute to their genomic instability and leukemic phenotype.

PMID: 17018862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Oncogene. 2007 Jan 11;26(2):198-214. Epub 2006 Jul 10.

Differentially androgen-modulated genes in ovarian epithelial cells from BRCA
mutation carriers and control patients predict ovarian cancer survival and
disease progression.

Motamed-Khorasani A(1), Jurisica I, Letarte M, Shaw PA, Parkes RK, Zhang X,
Evangelou A, Rosen B, Murphy KJ, Brown TJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mt Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

Epidemiological studies have implicated androgens in the etiology and progression
of epithelial ovarian cancer. We previously reported that some androgen responses
were dysregulated in malignant ovarian epithelial cells relative to control,
non-malignant ovarian surface epithelial (OSE) cells. Moreover, dysregulated
androgen responses were observed in OSE cells derived from patients with germline
BRCA-1 or -2 mutations (OSEb), which account for the majority of familial ovarian
cancer predisposition, and such altered responses may be involved in ovarian
carcinogenesis or progression. In the present study, gene expression profiling
using cDNA microarrays identified 17 genes differentially expressed in response
to continuous androgen exposure in OSEb cells and ovarian cancer cells as
compared to OSE cells derived from control patients. A subset of these
differentially affected genes was selected and verified by quantitative real-time
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Six of the gene products mapped 
to the OPHID protein-protein interaction database, and five were networked within
two interacting partners. Basic leucine zipper transcription factor 2 (BACH2) and
acetylcholinesterase (ACHE), which were upregulated by androgen in OSEb cells
relative to OSE cells, were further investigated using an ovarian cancer tissue
microarray from a separate set of 149 clinical samples. Both cytoplasmic ACHE and
BACH2 immunostaining were significantly increased in ovarian cancer relative to
benign cases. High levels of cytoplasmic ACHE staining correlated with decreased 
survival, whereas nuclear BACH2 staining correlated with decreased time to
disease recurrence. The finding that products of genes differentially responsive 
to androgen in OSEb cells may predict survival and disease progression supports a
role for altered androgen effects in ovarian cancer. In addition to BACH2 and
ACHE, this study highlights a set of potentially functionally related genes for
further investigation in ovarian cancer.

PMID: 16832351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Dec 1;99(5):1308-25.

A limited number of genes are involved in the differentiation of germinal center 
B cells.

Nakayama Y(1), Stabach P, Maher SE, Mahajan MC, Masiar P, Liao C, Zhang X, Ye ZJ,
Tuck D, Bothwell AL, Newburger PE, Weissman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, 300 Cedar St., New
Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA. yasuhiro.nakayama@yale.edu

Mature B cells, upon activation, progressively differentiate through centroblasts
into centrocytes and finally to plasmacytes that express large amounts of
selected immunoglobulins. A significant part of this maturation is thought to
involve induction of the unfolded protein response (UPR). We have compared gene
expression in normal germinal center centroblasts, centrocytes, lymphoblastoid
cells undergoing induced UPR, and the CCL155 plasmacytoma cell line. In the
centroblast to centrocyte transition there is a change in the expression of a
relatively small number of genes. These include a limited subset of the genes
upregulated by a fully activated UPR as well as a small number of other
transcription factors, some disulphide isomerases, and other genes. This is
consistent with a model in which this transition is mediated by changes in the
levels of expression of transcription factor B-lymphocyte-induced maturation
protein 1 (Blimp1) (PRDM1), BACH2, X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), interferon
regulatory factor 4 (IRF4), and possibly vitamin D receptor (VDR) expression,
together with post-transcriptional changes and a limited induction of aspects of 
the UPR.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16795035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Proteome Res. 2006 Jun;5(6):1460-8.

Consequence of gastrin-releasing peptide receptor activation in a human colon
cancer cell line: a proteomic approach.

Ruginis T(1), Taglia L, Matusiak D, Lee BS, Benya RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago and Chicago Veterans
Administration Medical Center (West Side Division), Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) and its receptor (GRPR) are aberrantly
up-regulated in colon cancer. When expressed, they act as morphogens, retaining
tumor cells in a better differentiated state and retarding metastasis. To
identify targets activated in response to GRPR signaling we studied Caco-2 and
HT-29 cells, colon cancer cell lines that expresses GRPR as a function of
confluence. Total cell protein was extracted from pre-confluent cells (expressing
GRP/GRPR) cultured in serum-free media in the presence or absence of
GRPR-specific antagonist; as well as from confluent cells that do not express
GRPR. Overall, we identified 5 proteins that are specifically down-regulated
after GRP/GRPR expression: Bach2, creatine kinase B, p47, and two that could not 
be identified; and 6 proteins that are up-regulated: gephyrin, HSP70, HP1,
ICAM-1, ACAT, and one that could not be identified. These findings suggest that
the mechanism(s) by which GRP/GRPR mediate its morphogenic effects in colon
cancer involve the actions of a number of hitherto unappreciated proteins.

PMID: 16739997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Jul 15;312(12):2264-78. Epub 2006 Apr 24.

Bach2 is involved in neuronal differentiation of N1E-115 neuroblastoma cells.

Shim KS(1), Rosner M, Freilinger A, Lubec G, Hengstschläger M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of Vienna,
Währinger Gürtel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

Bach1 and Bach2 are evolutionarily related members of the BTB-basic region
leucine zipper transcription factor family. We found that Bach2 downregulates
cell proliferation of N1E-115 cells and negatively affects their potential to
differentiate. Nuclear localization of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 
is known to arrest cell cycle progression, and cytoplasmic p21 has been shown to 
promote neuronal differentiation of N1E-115 cells. We found that ectopic Bach2
causes upregulation of p21 expression in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm in
undifferentiated N1E-115 cells. In differentiated cells, Bach2 specifically
triggers upregulation of cytoplasmic p21. Our data suggest that Bach2 expression 
could represent a switch during the process of neuronal differentiation. Bach2 is
not expressed in neuronal precursor cells. It would have negative effects on
proliferation and differentiation of these cells. In differentiated neuronal
cells Bach2 expression is upregulated, which could allow Bach2 to function as a
gatekeeper of the differentiated status.

PMID: 16631738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Clin Oncol. 2005 Nov 1;23(31):8012-7.

Prognostic significance of BACH2 expression in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: a
study of the Osaka Lymphoma Study Group.

Sakane-Ishikawa E(1), Nakatsuka S, Tomita Y, Fujita S, Nakamichi I, Takakuwa T,
Sugiyama H, Fukuhara S, Hino M, Kanamaru A, Soma T, Tsukaguchi M, Igarashi K,
Kanakura Y, Aozasa K; Osaka Lymphoma Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, 
Japan.

PURPOSE: BACH2, a B-cell-specific transcription repressor, is abundantly
expressed in lymphocytes of B-cell lineage as well as B-cell lymphoma cell lines.
BACH2 possesses an inhibitory effect on proliferation of Raji cell lines derived 
from Burkitt's lymphoma. In this study, the prognostic significance of BACH2
expression was examined in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: BACH2 expression was immunohistochemically examined on the 
paraffin-embedded sections obtained by biopsy from 108 patients (62 males and 46 
females; age range, 23 to 85 years) with DLBCL. Staining intensity in the
cytoplasm of the tumor cells was categorized as equal to or stronger (level 1) or
weaker (level 2) than that in the endothelial cells in the same specimens.
RESULTS: Level 1 and 2 expression of BACH2 was found in 32.4% and 67.6% of
patients, respectively. Patients with level 1 expression showed significantly
better disease-free and overall survival rate than those with level 2 expression 
(both P < .05). Multivariate analysis revealed BACH2 expression level together
with performance status, elevated serum level of lactate dehydrogenase, and
treatment response to be independent factors for prognosis of the patients.
CONCLUSION: BACH2 expression level is a useful marker to predict disease-free and
overall survival of patients with DLBCL.

PMID: 16258099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Seikagaku. 2005 May;77(5):427-31.

[Bach2 orchestrates the transcriptional programme of B cell activation].

[Article in Japanese]

Muto A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry,Tohoku University School of Medicine, Aoba-ku,
Sendai, Japan.

PMID: 15952334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Br J Haematol. 2005 Mar;128(5):636-44.

Changes in gene expression profiles of multiple myeloma cells induced by arsenic 
trioxide (ATO): possible mechanisms to explain ATO resistance in vivo.

Zhou P(1), Kalakonda N, Comenzo RL.

Author information: 
(1)Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY, USA.

Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable plasma cell malignancy marked by eventual
resistance to therapy. Although arsenic trioxide (ATO) can induce apoptosis in MM
cell lines, the in vivo activity of ATO in MM has been disappointing. The
existence of ATO resistance mechanisms in MM can be inferred. We sought to
generate hypotheses for ATO resistance by studying the gene expression profiles
of MM cells that survived in culture with 0.5 micromol/l ATO. Among the 31 genes 
whose quantitative levels of expression (QLE) significantly increased in ATO were
haem oxygenase 1 (HO-1) and metallothionein-2A (MT-2A). Among the 56 genes whose 
QLE were significantly decreased were genes that modulate cell cycling [BTBD2 and
IGFBP7 (mac25)] and sensitivity to reactive oxygen species (ROS) (BACH2). HO-1
exerts an anti-apoptotic effect in ischaemic cells, and MT-2A chelates ATO
intracellularly. Inhibition of HO-1 with tin protoporphyrin enhances ROS in MM
cells in ATO, and addition of N-acetylcysteine increases MT-2A. Protective
antioxidant responses occur in MM cells exposed to ATO, and may occur in stromal 
cells as well, and act to quench ROS and provide diffusible anti-apoptotic
factors. They may also involve cysteine-rich proteins that chelate ATO and
modulate redox-sensitive residues on proteins, such as nuclear factor kappa B and
p53. A better understanding of ATO resistance will enable ATO to be combined with
other agents for MM.

PMID: 15725085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2005 Jan-Feb;27(1):3-14.

Cocaine-induced changes in the expression of apoptosis-related genes in the fetal
mouse cerebral wall.

Novikova SI(1), He F, Bai J, Badan I, Lidow IA, Lidow MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, and Program of Neuroscience, University of 
Maryland, Baltimore, 5-A-12, HHH, 666 W. Baltimore Street, Baltimore, MD 21201,
United States.

Erratum in
    Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2005 May-Jun;27(3):525-6.

It has been demonstrated that exposure to cocaine increases cell death in the
fetal CNS. To examine the molecular mechanisms of this effect, we employed mouse 
oligo microarrays followed by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (real-time RT-PCR) to compare expressions of apoptosis-related genes in 
the cerebral wall of 18-day-old (E18) fetuses from cocaine-treated (20 mg/kg
cocaine, s.c., b.i.d., E8th-E18th) and drug-naive (saline, s.c.) mice. Out of
approximately 400 relevant genes in the arrays, 53 showed alterations in
expression in cocaine-exposed fetuses. Upregulation was observed in 35
proapoptotic and 8 antiapoptotic genes; 4 proapoptotic and 6 antiapoptotic genes 
were down-regulated. The affected genes encode a wide range of apoptosis-related 
proteins, including death receptors (NTF-R1, NTF-R2, DR3, DR5, LTbeta-R, GITR,
P57 TR-1) and their adaptor and regulatory proteins (MASGE-D1, TRAF-2, SIVA, MET,
FLIP, FAIM, IAP1, ATFA), members of transcription regulatory pathways (JNK,
NF-kappaB, P53), members of BCL-2 family of proteins (BID, BAD, BAX, BIK, NIP21, 
NIP3, NIX, BCL-2), DNA damage sensor (PARP-1), caspases and their substrates and 
regulatory proteins (caspases 8, 4, 9, and 3, ACINUS, CIDE-A, CIDE-B, GAS2),
mitochondrially released factors (cytochrome c, AIF, PRG3), specific endoplasmic 
reticulum- and oxidative stress-associated factors (BACH2, ABL1, ALG2, CHOP),
members of cell survival AKT and HSP70 pathways (PIK3GA, PTEN, HSP70, BAG1,
BAG2), and others. This suggests that cocaine affects survival of developing
cerebral cells via multiple apoptosis-regulating mechanisms.

PMID: 15681117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Nature. 2004 Jun 3;429(6991):566-71. Epub 2004 May 19.

The transcriptional programme of antibody class switching involves the repressor 
Bach2.

Muto A(1), Tashiro S, Nakajima O, Hoshino H, Takahashi S, Sakoda E, Ikebe D,
Yamamoto M, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Chemistry and Leukemia Program Project, Hiroshima
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Activated B cells differentiate to plasma cells to secrete IgM or, after
undergoing class switch recombination (CSR), to secrete other classes of
immunoglobulins. Diversification of antibody function by CSR is important for
humoral immunity. However, it remains unclear how the decision for the
bifurcation is made. Bach2 is a B-cell-specific transcription repressor
interacting with the small Maf proteins whose expression is high only before the 
plasma cell stage. Here we show that Bach2 is critical for CSR and somatic
hypermutation (SHM) of immunoglobulin genes. Genetic ablation of Bach2 in mice
revealed that Bach2 was required for both T-cell-independent and T-cell-dependent
IgG responses and SHM. When stimulated in vitro, Bach2-deficient B cells produced
IgM, as did wild-type cells, and abundantly expressed Blimp-1 (refs 9, 10) and
XBP-1 (ref. 11), critical regulators of the plasmacytic differentiation,
indicating that Bach2 was not required for the plasmacytic differentiation
itself. However, they failed to undergo efficient CSR. These findings define
Bach2 as a key regulator of antibody response and provide an insight into the
orchestration of CSR and SHM during plasma cell differentiation.

PMID: 15152264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Eur J Neurosci. 2004 May;19(9):2511-8.

NQO1 activity in the main and the accessory olfactory systems correlates with the
zonal topography of projection maps.

Gussing F(1), Bohm S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, Umeå, SE901 87, Sweden.

The mouse olfactory epithelium (OE) is divided into spatial zones, each
containing neurons expressing zone-specific subsets of odorant receptor genes.
Likewise, the vomeronasal (VN) organ is organized into apical and basal
subpopulations of neurons expressing different VN receptor gene families. Axons
projecting from the different OE zones and VN subpopulations form synapses within
circumscribed regions in the glomerular layer of the olfactory bulb (OB) and
accessory olfactory bulb (AOB), respectively. We here show that mature neurons in
one defined zone selectively express NADPH:quinone oxidoreductase (NQO1), an
enzyme that catalyses reduction of quinones. Immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization analyses show non-overlapping expression of NQO1 and the Rb8 neural
cell adhesion molecule (RNCAM/OCAM) in OE and axon terminals within glomeruli of 
the OB. In addition, NQO1 immunoreactivity reveals selective, zone-specific axon 
fasciculation in the olfactory nerve. VN subpopulations do not show complementary
patterns of RNCAM and NQO1 immunoreactivity, instead both genes are co-expressed 
in apical VN neurons that project to the rostral AOB. These results indicate that
one division of both the accessory and the main olfactory projection maps are
composed of sensory neurons that are specialized to reduce environmental and/or
endogenously produced quinones via an NQO1-dependent mechanism. The role of NQO1 
in bioactivation of quinoidal drugs also points to a connection between
zone-specific NQO1 expression and zone-specific toxicity of certain olfactory
toxins.

PMID: 15128404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Apr;24(8):3473-84.

Repression of PML nuclear body-associated transcription by oxidative
stress-activated Bach2.

Tashiro S(1), Muto A, Tanimoto K, Tsuchiya H, Suzuki H, Hoshino H, Yoshida M,
Walter J, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Chemistry and Leukemia Program Project, Hiroshima
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.
ktashiro@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

Several lines of evidence suggest that gene expression is regulated not only by
the interaction between transcription factors and DNA but also by the
higher-order architecture of the cell nucleus. PML bodies are one of the most
prominent nuclear substructures which have been implicated in transcription
regulation during apoptosis and stress responses. Bach2 is a member of the
BTB-basic region leucine zipper factor family and represses transcription
activity directed by the 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate response element,
the Maf recognition element, and the antioxidant-responsive element. Bach2 forms 
nuclear foci associated with PML bodies upon oxidative stress. Here, we
demonstrate that transcription activity associated with PML bodies is selectively
repressed by the recruitment of Bach2 around PML bodies. Fluorescence recovery
after photobleaching experiments revealed that Bach2 showed rapid turnover in the
nuclear foci. The Bach2 N-terminal region including the BTB domain is essential
for the focus formation. Sumoylation of Bach2 is required for the recruitment of 
the protein around PML bodies. These observations represent the first example of 
modulation of transcription activity associated with PML bodies by a
sequence-specific transcription factor upon oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC381671
PMID: 15060166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Am J Pathol. 2004 Mar;164(3):967-74.

Integration of Epstein-Barr virus into chromosome 6q15 of Burkitt lymphoma cell
line (Raji) induces loss of BACH2 expression.

Takakuwa T(1), Luo WJ, Ham MF, Sakane-Ishikawa F, Wada N, Aozasa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine,
Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka, Japan. takakuwa@molpath.med.osaka-u.ac

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) initially isolated from cultured Burkitt lymphoma (BL)
cells, is a well-known oncogenic virus. The Raji cell line was established from
BL tissue and used for research worldwide. Previous study showed that each Raji
cell contains an average of 50-60 EBV genome equivalents, and a significant
proportion of the EBV genome is linearly integrated into host genome through
BamHI-W close to the BamHI-Y fragment. However, a definitive EBV integration site
in the chromosome has not been identified as yet. In this study, direct evidence 
that EBV DNA is integrated into the host genome was provided through cloning of
the fragments containing nucleotide sequence of Raji integration sites.
Integrated EBV DNA consisted of the BamHI-W fragment at one end and BamHI-D
fragment at another end. Both junction sites were highly guanine/cytosine-rich.
The BamHI-W fragment and the adjacent part of chromosome 6 showed 70% homology,
while no homology was found between the BamHI-D and adjacent host sequences. EBV 
was present at intron 1 of the BACH2 gene located on chromosome 6q15. BACH2 was
not expressed in the Raji cell line. Because BACH2 is a putative tumor suppressor
gene, loss of its expression through EBV integration might contribute to
lymphomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC1614712
PMID: 14982850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 5;278(49):49246-53. Epub 2003 Sep 22.

Cadmium induces nuclear export of Bach1, a transcriptional repressor of heme
oxygenase-1 gene.

Suzuki H(1), Tashiro S, Sun J, Doi H, Satomi S, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Chemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

The export of certain nuclear proteins is involved in the regulation of various
nuclear functions, including transcription. In some cases, the export of target
proteins is induced upon environmental or cellular cues, resulting in conditional
gene expression. The small Maf proteins appear to be critical regulators of heme 
oxygenase (HO)-1, an anti-oxidant defense enzyme that degrades heme into iron,
carbon monoxide, and biliverdin. Although ho-1 is repressed by Bach1/small Maf
heterodimers, it is activated by Nrf2/small Maf heterodimers, indicating that
Bach1 and Nrf2 compete with each other. We anticipated that the nuclear
concentration of Bach1 might be regulated to ensure that the entire system
effectively responds to various stimuli. We carried out detailed domain analysis 
of Bach1 in an effort to understand how various inducers of HO-1 inactivate
Bach1. We show here that cadmium, a strong inducer of HO-1, activates the nuclear
export of Bach1. This cadmium-induced export of Bach1 was mediated in trans by
its C-terminal region that is conserved between Bach1 and Bach2. The nuclear
export of Bach2 was also induced by cadmium, indicating that the cadmium
responsibility is shared between Bach1 and Bach2. The nuclear export of Bach1 was
dependent on Crm1/Exportin-1 as well as the extracellular signal-regulated
kinase-1/2 (ERK1/2) activity. These results indicate that the nuclear export of
Bach1 constitutes an important regulatory mechanism to relieve the Bach1-mediated
repression of genes such as ho-1.

PMID: 14504288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Blood. 2003 Nov 1;102(9):3317-22. Epub 2003 Jun 26.

B-cell-specific transcription factor BACH2 modifies the cytotoxic effects of
anticancer drugs.

Kamio T(1), Toki T, Kanezaki R, Sasaki S, Tandai S, Terui K, Ikebe D, Igarashi K,
Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Hirosaki,
Aomori 036-8563 Japan.

The transcription factor Bach2, a member of the CNC family of proteins, binds to 
the Maf recognition element (MARE) by forming homodimers or dimerizing with small
Maf transcription factors. Bach2-expressing cells show reduced proliferation and 
undergo spontaneous cell death. The inhibition of BCR/ABL tyrosine kinase
activity by STI571 in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) cell lines and CD34+ cells
from patients with CML in lymphoid crisis results in induction of BACH2
expression. We show here that BACH2 modifies the in vitro cytotoxicity of
anticancer drugs. The cytotoxic effects of commonly used anticancer agents were
studied by overexpression of BACH2 in RAJI lymphoid cells, a cell line that does 
not express endogenous BACH2. Cell growth inhibition was determined by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. Clones
overexpressing BACH2 were more sensitive to etoposide, doxorubicin, and
cytarabine than control RAJI cells, whereas there were no significant differences
in the sensitivity of either cells to methotrexate or vincristine. Interestingly,
we found that the former drugs were oxidative stressors that induced the nuclear 
accumulation of BACH2. In contrast, methotrexate or vincristine did not induce
production of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nuclear
accumulation of BACH2. These results, coupled with our previous data showing that
BACH2 promotes oxidative stress-induced cell death, suggest that combination
chemotherapy involving STI571 and anticancer drugs that produce ROS may be of
benefit in the treatment of Philadelphia chromosome 1 (Ph1)-positive leukemia.

PMID: 12829606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;23(4):1163-74.

Small Maf compound mutants display central nervous system neuronal degeneration, 
aberrant transcription, and Bach protein mislocalization coincident with
myoclonus and abnormal startle response.

Katsuoka F(1), Motohashi H, Tamagawa Y, Kure S, Igarashi K, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research
Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

The small Maf proteins form heterodimers with CNC and Bach family proteins to
elicit transcriptional responses from Maf recognition elements (MAREs). We
previously reported germ line-targeted deficiencies in mafG plus mafK compound
mutant mice. The most prominent mutant phenotype was a progressive maf
dosage-dependent neuromuscular dysfunction. However, there has been no previous
report regarding the effects of altered small-maf gene expression on neurological
dysfunction. We show here that MafG and MafK are expressed in discrete central
nervous system (CNS) neurons and that mafG::mafK compound mutants display
neuronal degeneration coincident with surprisingly selective MARE-dependent
transcriptional abnormalities. The CNS morphological changes are concurrent with 
the onset of a neurological disorder in the mutants, and the behavioral changes
are accompanied by reduced glycine receptor subunit accumulation. Bach/small Maf 
heterodimers, which normally generate transcriptional repressors, were
significantly underrepresented in nuclear extracts prepared from maf mutant
brains, and Bach proteins fail to accumulate normally in nuclei. Thus compound
mafG::mafK mutants develop age- and maf gene dosage-dependent cell-autonomous
neuronal deficiencies that lead to profound neurological defects.

PMCID: PMC141134
PMID: 12556477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Rev Neurosci. 2002;13(3):209-19.

Gene expression profiles--a new dynamic and functional dimension to the
exploration of learning and memory.

D'Agata V(1), Cavallaro S.

Author information: 
(1)Blanchette Rockefeller Neurosciences Institute, West Virginia University,
Rockville, MD 20850, USA.

Many experiments in the past have demonstrated the requirement of de novo gene
expression during the long-term retention of learning and memory. Although
previous studies implicated individual genes or genetic pathways in learning and 
memory they did not uncover the collective behaviors of the genes. In view of the
broad variety of genes and the cross-talk of genetic pathways, gene expression
profiles offer a new dynamic and functional dimension to the exploration of
learning and memory. This review illustrates how DNA microarray-based gene
expression profiling may help to dissect and analyze the complex mechanisms
involved in gene regulation during the acquisition and storage of memory.

PMID: 12405225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Biochem. 2002 Sep;132(3):427-31.

Expression of the oxidative stress-regulated transcription factor bach2 in
differentiating neuronal cells.

Hoshino H(1), Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculure and Life Sciences, 
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

Bach2 is an oxidative stress-regulated transcription factor and functions as a
repressor of gene expression directed by the TPA-response element, the Maf
recognition element, and the antioxidant responsive element. To investigate the
possibility that these enhancers are regulated in a tissue-specific manner, we
analyzed expression of Bach2 during differentiation of neural cells. Bach2 was
induced upon neuronal differentiation of P19 embryonic carcinoma cells, while its
related factor Bach1 did not show significant change. By using affinity-purified 
anti-Bach2 antibodies, expression of Bach2 in mouse embryos was determined. High 
levels of Bach2 antigen were found in differentiating neuronal and lens cells in 
day 12.5 embryos. Consistent with the fact that subcellular localization of Bach2
is regulated by nuclear export in cultured cells, extensive Bach2-staining was
found in the cytoplasmic regions of developing neuronal and lens cells. These
results suggest that Bach2 regulates AP-1- and Maf-dependent gene expression
during development of neuronal and lens cells and that its activity may be
regulated by nuclear export in these cells.

PMID: 12204112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Reprod Toxicol. 2002 May-Jun;16(3):223-36.

Microarray analysis of altered gene expression in the TM4 Sertoli-like cell line 
exposed to chromium(III) chloride.

Cheng RY(1), Alvord WG, Powell D, Kasprzak KS, Anderson LM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Comparative Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute at
Frederick, National Institutes of Health, Box B, Building 538, Fort Detrick,
Frederick, MD 21702, USA. rcheng@ncicrf.gov

Chromium(III) chloride is a common human exposure metal that is a preconceptional
carcinogen in mice, although it enters cells poorly, and is non-toxic and
non-carcinogenic in most biologic systems. An indirect effect on sperm is
postulated, and this effect might be mediated through the testicular Sertoli
cells that influence spermatogenesis. To test this possibility, we exposed mouse 
TM4 Sertoli-like cultured cells to 1mM CrCl(3) x 6H(2)O, a non-toxic dose, for 7 
days and then extracted mRNA for microarray analysis. The chromium(III) chloride 
had modest effects on the expression of many genes, in the range of 1.5-2.3-fold.
These effects provided an opportunity for development of statistical approaches
for sifting microarray data in a situation where differences were small. Data
were winnowed by screening for those ratios that fell outside the 99% confidence 
limits and/or represented a > or = 50% change in expression in the three
comparison pairs. Fifty-two genes/clones were significant after the Bonferroni
adjustment for multiple comparisons. The largest average increase was observed
for the transcription factor Bach2, and this increase was confirmed by RT-PCR.
The results show that Cr(III) has significant effects on gene expression in a
Sertoli-like cell line.

PMID: 12128095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 7;277(23):20724-33. Epub 2002 Mar 28.

Activation of Maf/AP-1 repressor Bach2 by oxidative stress promotes apoptosis and
its interaction with promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies.

Muto A(1), Tashiro S, Tsuchiya H, Kume A, Kanno M, Ito E, Yamamoto M, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, Hiroshima
734-8551, Japan.

The oxidative stress response operates by inducing the expression of genes that
counteract the stress. We show here that the oxidative stress-responsive
transcription factor Bach2 is a generic inhibitor of gene expression directed by 
the 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate response element, the Maf recognition
element, and the antioxidant-responsive element. The Bach2-enhanced green
fluorescent protein bicistronic retrovirus was used to monitor the fate of
Bach2-expressing cells at the single cell level. Bach2 exerted an inhibitory
effect on NIH3T3 cell proliferation and caused massive apoptosis upon mild
oxidative stress in both NIH3T3 and Raji B-lymphoid cells. Interestingly, Bach1, 
a highly homologous protein, could not induce cell death, demonstrating the
specificity for the apoptosis induction. Although both oxidative stress and
leptomycin B, an inhibitor of nuclear export, induce nuclear accumulation of
Bach2, the leptomycin B-induced nuclear accumulation of Bach2 was not sufficient 
to elicit apoptosis. Upon oxidative stress, Bach2 formed nuclear foci that
associated with promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies. Our results suggest that
Bach2 constitutes a cell lineage-specific system that couples oxidative stress
and cell death and that inhibition of 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
response element, the Maf recognition element, and the antioxidant-responsive
element upon oxidative stress may be critical determinants for apoptosis.

PMID: 11923289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2001 Dec;32(4):353-63.

Transcription factor BACH2 is transcriptionally regulated by the BCR/ABL
oncogene.

Vieira SA(1), Deininger MW, Sorour A, Sinclair P, Foroni L, Goldman JM, Melo JV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Imperial College School of Medicine, Hammersmith
Hospital, London, UK.

Expression of BCR/ABL, a constitutively active tyrosine kinase, is a primary
event in the pathogenesis of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and Ph-positive acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ALL). Inhibition of the BCR/ABL kinase activity in the
BV173 CML cell line with STI571 resulted in a significant overexpression of a
10-kb novel mRNA, found to be the human ortholog of the murine Bach2, a
B-cell-specific transcription factor. The human BACH2 cDNA is >9,120 bp long and 
includes an open reading frame of 2,526 bp encoding a protein with a basic
leucine zipper (bZip) and a BTB/POZ domain, mediating DNA-binding and
heterodimerization. BACH2 was consistently upregulated (2-10-fold) in all 10 Ph+ 
lymphoid lines tested following BCR/ABL inhibition. In CML myeloid cell lines (n 
= 8) and BCR/ABL-negative lines (n = 6), BACH2 was either undetectable by
Northern blotting or did not change in response to STI571, suggesting that BACH2 
repression by BCR/ABL may be specifically relevant to lymphoid transformation.
Quantitative RT/PCR revealed a significantly lower level of BACH2 expression in
leukocytes from patients with CML (n = 24) as compared to normal individuals (n =
23) (P < 0.0005). Moreover, CD34+ cells treated in vitro with STI571 exhibited a 
consistent upregulation of BACH2 in 8 of 10 CMLs but in none of the 9 normal
individuals tested. Transcription regulation of BACH2 in BCR/ABL-positive cells
was exerted via the MEK pathways, as shown by their responses to the
U0126-specific inhibitor. Radiation hybrid mapping and FISH revealed that BACH2
is located on chromosome 6, band q15, a region frequently associated with
deletions in ALL and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, suggesting its possible role as a
tumor suppressor gene. However, no rearrangement or loss of signal was observed
by Southern blotting in 34 lymphomas, 10 B-cell ALLs, or seven reactive lymph
nodes. The pattern of BACH2 expression in BCR/ABL-positive cells suggests that
transcriptional repression by this regulator is impaired in CML and may
contribute to the emergence of lymphoid blast crisis.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11746976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biochem. 2001 Sep;130(3):385-92.

The promoter of mouse transcription repressor bach1 is regulated by Sp1 and
trans-activated by Bach1.

Sun J(1), Muto A, Hoshino H, Kobayashi A, Nishimura S, Yamamoto M, Hayashi N, Ito
E, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, Kasumi
Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

The Maf recognition element (MARE) is regulated by both activators and
repressors. Bach1 and Bach2 repress MARE-dependent transcription by forming
heterodimers with Maf-related oncoproteins. In order to gain an understanding of 
the regulation of bach1 gene expression, we analyzed the structure of the mouse
bach1 gene. Comparison of the exon-intron structure of the bach1 gene with those 
of other NF-E2-related genes indicated that bach1 and bach2 constitute an
evolutionarily distinct subfamily among bZip factors. The bach1 promoter region
contains two GC boxes that are important for its basal activity and are bound by 
Sp1 in K562 cell extracts. In addition, we found an evolutionarily conserved
MARE-like element located downstream of the transcription initiation site.
Deletion of this element resulted in a higher promoter activity in K562 cells.
Bach1 trans-activated its own promoter depending on the presence of the MARE-like
element in co-transfection assays. However, Bach1 did not bind to the MARE-like
element in electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA). These results suggest
that Bach1 activates its own promoter indirectly by inhibiting the putative
repressor. Such a positive feedback regulation by the repressor Bach1 may play an
important role in maintaining the expression of Bach1 while consolidating
repression of other genes with MARE.

PMID: 11530014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2000 Dec;192(4):259-73.

Expression of transcription factors during megakaryocytic differentiation of
CD34+ cells from human cord blood induced by thrombopoietin.

Terui K(1), Takahashi Y, Kitazawa J, Toki T, Yokoyama M, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

Although normal megakaryocytic development has been shown to require the presence
of functional GATA-1 and NF-E2 transcription factors in vivo, the roles of other 
members of the GATA binding factors and NF-E2 family during megakaryocytic
differentiation are unclear. the present study, the expression of GATA family
members, GATA-1 and GATA-2, a GATA-binding factor, EVI-1, the large subunit of
NF-E2 factor, p45 and the related factors, Nrf1, Nrf2, Nrf3, BACH1, BACH2, and
the small subunit of NF-E2, MAFK and MAFG has been examined in human
megakaryocytic and erythroid cells by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction. CD34+ cells isolated from human cord blood were induced to unilineage
megakaryocytic or erythroid differentiation in liquid suspension culture in the
presense of thrombopoietin or erythropoietin, respectively. Each lineage was
identified by monoclonal antibody against GPIIb/IIIa or glycophorin A. In
megakaryocytic culture, p45, Nrf1, Nrf2, BACH1, MAFK and MAFG mRNAs were induced 
similarly to erythroid culture. Nrf3 mRNA was barely detected in both cultures.
BACH2 was induced only in megakaryocytic culture, although the level of
expression was low. Furthermore, the profiles of transcription factors involved
in hematopoiesis, EVI-1 and Ets-1 mRNAs were induced only in megakaryocytic
culture. Megakaryocytic and erythroid differentiation pathways are closely
related to each other, and these two lineage cells share a number of
lineage-specific transcription factors. However, the results showed that the
profile of the expression of these transcription factors in megakaryocytic cells 
is distinct from that of erythroid lineage. The dynamic changes in the levels of 
different transcription factors that occur during primary megakaryocytic
differentiation suggest that the levels of these factors may influence the
progression to specific hematopoietic pathways.

PMID: 11286316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Oncogene. 2000 Aug 3;19(33):3739-49.

Cloning and expression of human B cell-specific transcription factor BACH2 mapped
to chromosome 6q15.

Sasaki S(1), Ito E, Toki T, Maekawa T, Kanezaki R, Umenai T, Muto A, Nagai H,
Kinoshita T, Yamamoto M, Inazawa J, Taketo MM, Nakahata T, Igarashi K, Yokoyama
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Hirosaki University, Japan.

The transcription factor Bach2, a member of the BTB-basic region leucine zipper
(bZip) factor family, binds to a 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
(TPA)-responsive element and the related Maf-recognition element (MARE) by
forming homodimers or heterodimers with Maf-related transcription factors. Bach2 
regulates transcription by binding to these elements. To understand the function 
in hematopoiesis, we isolated a cDNA clone for human Bach2 (BACH2) encoding a
protein of 841 amino acid residues with a deduced amino acid sequence having
89.5% identity to mouse homolog. Among human hematopoietic cell lines, BACH2 is
expressed abundantly only in some B-lymphocytic cell lines. RT-PCR analysis of
hematopoietic cells revealed that BACH2 mRNA is expressed in primary B-cells.
Enforced expression of BACH2 in a human Burkitt cell line, RAJI that does not
express endogenous BACH2, resulted in marked reduction of clonogenic activity,
indicating that BACH2 possesses an inhibitory effect on cell proliferation. By
fluorescent in situ hybridization, the BACH2 gene was localized to chromosome
6q15. Because deletion of the long arm of chromosome 6 (6q) is one of the
commonest chromosomal alterations in human B-cell lymphoma, we examined for the
loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the BACH2 gene in human B-cell non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas (NHL). Among 25 informative cases, five (20%) showed LOH. These results
indicate that BACH2 plays important roles in regulation of B cell development.

PMID: 10949928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Seikagaku. 2000 Apr;72(4):257-68.

[Function of NF-E2-related transcription factors].

[Article in Japanese]

Igarashi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hiroshima University Faculty of Medicine,
Hiroshima.

PMID: 10853363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 19;275(20):15370-6.

Oxidative stress abolishes leptomycin B-sensitive nuclear export of transcription
repressor Bach2 that counteracts activation of Maf recognition element.

Hoshino H(1), Kobayashi A, Yoshida M, Kudo N, Oyake T, Motohashi H, Hayashi N,
Yamamoto M, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Seiryo-machi
2-1, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

The mammalian transcription activator Nrf2 plays critical roles in executing
oxidative stress response by binding to the regulatory DNA sequence Maf
recognition element. Bach2 is an Nrf2-related transcription repressor and a
tissue-specific partner of the Maf oncoprotein family. We show here how Bach2 is 
regulated by an oxidative stress-sensitive conditional nuclear export. In
cultured cells, Bach2 was localized in cytoplasm through its C-terminal
evolutionarily conserved cytoplasmic localization signal (CLS). The CLS directed 
leptomycin B-sensitive nuclear export of reporter proteins, suggesting its
dependence on the nuclear exporter Crm1/exportin 1. However, the CLS sequence
does not bear a resemblance to the leucine-rich class of nuclear export signal,
and mutagenesis analysis indicated that a stretch of nonhydrophobic amino acids
is essential for its activity. Oxidative stressors aborted the CLS activity and
induced nuclear accumulation of Bach2. Whereas oxidative stress is known to
activate MARE-dependent transcription, overexpression of Bach2 in cultured cells 
silenced the inducibility of MARE. The results suggest that Bach2 mediates
nucleocytoplasmic communication to couple oxidative stress and transcription
repression in mammalian cells.

PMID: 10809773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Mar;20(5):1733-46.

A combinatorial code for gene expression generated by transcription factor Bach2 
and MAZR (MAZ-related factor) through the BTB/POZ domain.

Kobayashi A(1), Yamagiwa H, Hoshino H, Muto A, Sato K, Morita M, Hayashi N,
Yamamoto M, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai
980-8575, Japan.

Bach2 is a B-cell- and neuron-specific transcription repressor that forms
heterodimers with the Maf-related oncoproteins. We show here that Bach2 activates
transcription by interacting with its novel partner MAZR. MAZR was isolated by
the yeast two-hybrid screen using the BTB/POZ domain of Bach2 as bait. Besides
the BTB/POZ domain, MAZR possesses Zn finger motifs that are closely related to
those of the Myc-associated Zn finger (MAZ) protein. MAZR mRNA was coexpressed
with Bach2 in B cells among hematopoietic cells and in developing mouse limb
buds, suggesting a cooperative role for MAZR and Bach2 in these cells. MAZR forms
homo- and hetero-oligomers with Bach2 through the BTB domain, which oligomers
bind to guanine-rich sequences. Unlike MAZ, MAZR functioned as a strong activator
of the c-myc promoter in transfection assays with B cells. However, it does not
possess a typical activation domain, suggesting a role for it as an unusual type 
of transactivator. The fgf4 gene, which regulates morphogenesis of limb buds,
contains both guanine-rich sequences and a Bach2 binding site in its regulatory
region. In transfection assays using fibroblast cells, the fgf4 gene was
upregulated in the presence of both MAZR and Bach2 in a BTB/POZ domain-dependent 
manner. The results provide a new perspective on the function of BTB/POZ domain
factors and indicate that BTB/POZ domain-mediated oligomers of transcription
factors may serve as combinatorial codes for gene expression.

PMCID: PMC85356
PMID: 10669750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Rinsho Ketsueki. 1999 Apr;40(4):280-3.

[The role of NF-E2 related transcription factors in hematopoiesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Itou E.

PMID: 10355135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. EMBO J. 1998 Oct 1;17(19):5734-43.

Identification of Bach2 as a B-cell-specific partner for small maf proteins that 
negatively regulate the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene 3' enhancer.

Muto A(1), Hoshino H, Madisen L, Yanai N, Obinata M, Karasuyama H, Hayashi N,
Nakauchi H, Yamamoto M, Groudine M, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine,
Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, USA.

Maf family transcription factors are important regulators in various
differentiation systems. Putative Maf recognition elements (MAREs) are found in
the 3' enhancer region of the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) gene. These
elements are bound in B-cell extracts by a heterodimeric protein complex
containing both Bach2 and a small Maf protein. Analysis of normal hematopoietic
cells revealed that Bach2 is specifically expressed in B cells. Bach2 is
abundantly expressed in the early stages of B-cell differentiation and turned off
in terminally differentiated cells. Bach2 acts together with MafK as a negative
effector of the IgH 3' enhancer and binds to the co-repressor SMRT (silencing
mediator of retinoid and thyroid receptor). Hence the Bach2-small-Maf heterodimer
may represent the first example of a B-cell lineage, and of a developmental
stage-restricted negative effector of the MARE in the IgH 3' enhancer region.

PMCID: PMC1170901
PMID: 9755173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 8;273(19):11783-90.

Multivalent DNA binding complex generated by small Maf and Bach1 as a possible
biochemical basis for beta-globin locus control region complex.

Igarashi K(1), Hoshino H, Muto A, Suwabe N, Nishikawa S, Nakauchi H, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research
Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tenno-dai 1-1-1, Tsukuba 305, Japan.

The human beta-globin locus control region (LCR) is required to properly regulate
chromatin domain opening, replication timing, and globin gene activation. The LCR
contains multiple NF-E2 sites (Maf recognition elements, MAREs) that allow the
binding of various basic leucine zipper (bZip) proteins like p45 NF-E2, Nrf1,
Nrf2, Bach1, and Bach2, in some cases as obligate heterodimers with a small Maf
protein. In addition to the bZip domain, the Bach proteins bear a BTB/POZ domain,
which has been implicated in the regulation of chromatin structure. We show here 
that Bach1 is highly expressed in hematopoietic cells and constitutes one of the 
two MARE-binding activities in murine erythroleukemic (MEL) cells. We further
demonstrate that Bach1/MafK heterodimers interact with each other through the BTB
domain, generating a multimeric and multivalent DNA binding complex. These
results strongly implicate Bach1/MafK heterodimer as an architectural
transcription factor that mediates interactions among multiple MAREs. Such a
factor could then provide a model for assembly of the theoretical beta-globin LCR
"holocomplex. " Other BTB domain proteins have already been demonstrated to be
involved in remodeling chromatin, and thus this class of proteins likely promote 
the formation of nucleoprotein complexes required to establish the architecture
of regulatory domains.

PMID: 9565602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Nov;16(11):6083-95.

Bach proteins belong to a novel family of BTB-basic leucine zipper transcription 
factors that interact with MafK and regulate transcription through the NF-E2
site.

Oyake T(1), Itoh K, Motohashi H, Hayashi N, Hoshino H, Nishizawa M, Yamamoto M,
Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai,
Japan.

Members of the small Maf family (MafK, MafF, and MafG) are basic region leucine
zipper (bZip) proteins that can function as transcriptional activators or
repressors. The dimer compositions of their DNA binding forms determine whether
the small Maf family proteins activate or repress transcription. Using a yeast
two-hybrid screen with a GAL4-MafK fusion protein, we have identified two novel
bZip transcription factors, Bach1 and Bach2, as heterodimerization partners of
MafK. In addition to a Cap'n'collar-type bZip domain, these Bach proteins possess
a BTB domain which is a protein interaction motif; Bach1 and Bach2 show
significant similarity to each other in these regions but are otherwise
divergent. Whereas expression of Bach1 appears ubiquitous, that of Bach2 is
restricted to monocytes and neuronal cells. Bach proteins bind in vitro to NF-E2 
binding sites, recognition elements for the hematopoietic transcription factor
NF-E2, by forming heterodimers with MafK. Furthermore, a DNA binding complex that
contained MafK as well as Bach2 or a protein related closely to Bach2 was found
to be present in mouse brain cells. Bach1 and Bach2 function as transcription
repressors in transfection assays using fibroblast cells, but they function as a 
transcriptional activator and repressor, respectively, in cultured erythroid
cells. The results suggest that members of the Bach family play important roles
in coordinating transcription activation and repression by MafK.

PMCID: PMC231611
PMID: 8887638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


