
1. J Med Chem. 2016 Mar 30. [Epub ahead of print]

The "Gatekeeper" Residue Influences the Mode of Binding of Acetyl Indoles to
Bromodomains.

Unzue A(1), Zhao H(1), Lolli G(1), Dong J(1), Zhu J(1), Zechner M(1), Dolbois
A(1), Caflisch A(1), Nevado C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and ‡Department of Biochemistry, University of Zürich 
, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Zürich, Switzerland.

Small-molecule hits for the bromodomains of CREBBP and BAZ2B have been identified
by scaffold hopping followed by docking of a set of ~200 compounds containing the
acetyl indole scaffold. Chemical synthesis of nearly 30 derivatives has resulted 
in ligands of representatives of three subfamilies of human bromodomains with
favorable ligand efficiency. The X-ray crystal structures of three different
bromodomains (CREBBP, BAZ2B, and BRPF1b) in complex with acetyl indole
derivatives reveal the influence of the gatekeeper residue on the orientation of 
small-molecule ligands in the acetyl lysine binding site.

PMID: 26982797  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. ACS Chem Biol. 2016 Mar 18;11(3):800-7. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.5b00914.

High-Throughput Fragment Docking into the BAZ2B Bromodomain: Efficient in Silico 
Screening for X-Ray Crystallography.

Lolli G(1), Caflisch A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Zürich , Winterthurerstrasse 190,
CH-8057, Zürich, Switzerland.

Bromodomains are protein modules that bind to acetylated lysine side chains in
histones and other proteins. The bromodomain adjacent to zinc finger domain
protein 2B (BAZ2B) has been reported to be poorly druggable. Here, we screened an
in-house library of 350 fragments by automatic docking to the BAZ2B bromodomain. 
The top 12 fragments according to the predicted binding energy were selected for 
experiments of soaking into apo crystals of BAZ2B which yielded the structure of 
the complex for four of them, which is a hit rate of 33%. Additional crystal
structures were solved for BAZ2B and two scaffolds identified by analogy. For
three topologically similar fragments, the crystal structures reveal binding
modes with different penetration, i.e., with zero, one, and two water molecules, 
respectively, located between the fragment and the side chain of a conserved
tyrosine (Tyr1901) in the bottom of the acetyl lysine pocket of BAZ2B.
Furthermore, a remarkable stereoselectivity of the acetyl lysine pocket emerges
from the crystal structures of the bromodomains of BAZ2B and SMARCA4 in complex
with the chiral diol MPD (2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol).

PMID: 26942307  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Med Chem. 2016 Feb 25;59(4):1410-24. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b00209. Epub
2015 Apr 6.

Discovery and Characterization of GSK2801, a Selective Chemical Probe for the
Bromodomains BAZ2A and BAZ2B.

Chen P(1), Chaikuad A(2), Bamborough P(3), Bantscheff M(4), Bountra C(5), Chung
CW(3), Fedorov O(2,)(5), Grandi P(4), Jung D(1), Lesniak R(1), Lindon M, Müller
S(2,)(5), Philpott M(2,)(5), Prinjha R, Rogers C(2,)(5), Selenski C(1), Tallant
C(2,)(5), Werner T(4), Willson TM(1), Knapp S(2,)(5,)(6), Drewry DH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Biology, GlaxoSmithKline , Research Triangle Park, 5
Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709-3398, United States.
(2)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, Structural Genomics Consortium,
University of Oxford , Old Road Campus Research Building, Roosevelt Drive,
Headington, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom. (3)Computational & Structural
Chemistry, Molecular Discovery Research, and <U+22A5>Epinova, Discovery Performance
Unit, GlaxoSmithKline R&D , Stevenage, Hertfordshire SG1 2NY, United Kingdom.
(4)Cellzome GmbH, Molecular Discovery Research, GlaxoSmithKline , Meyerhofstrasse
1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, Target
Discovery Institute, University of Oxford , NDM Research Building, Roosevelt
Drive, Headington, Oxford OX3 7FZ, United Kingdom. (6)Institute for
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University , Max-von-Laue-Str.
9, D-60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Bromodomains are acetyl-lysine specific protein interaction domains that have
recently emerged as a new target class for the development of inhibitors that
modulate gene transcription. The two closely related bromodomain containing
proteins BAZ2A and BAZ2B constitute the central scaffolding protein of the
nucleolar remodeling complex (NoRC) that regulates the expression of noncoding
RNAs. However, BAZ2 bromodomains have low predicted druggability and so far no
selective inhibitors have been published. Here we report the development of
GSK2801, a potent, selective and cell active acetyl-lysine competitive inhibitor 
of BAZ2A and BAZ2B bromodomains as well as the inactive control compound GSK8573.
GSK2801 binds to BAZ2 bromodomains with dissociation constants (KD) of 136 and
257 nM for BAZ2B and BAZ2A, respectively. Crystal structures demonstrated a
canonical acetyl-lysine competitive binding mode. Cellular activity was
demonstrated using fluorescent recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) monitoring
displacement of GFP-BAZ2A from acetylated chromatin. A pharmacokinetic study in
mice showed that GSK2801 had reasonable in vivo exposure after oral dosing, with 
modest clearance and reasonable plasma stability. Thus, GSK2801 represents a
versatile tool compound for cellular and in vivo studies to understand the role
of BAZ2 bromodomains in chromatin biology.

PMCID: PMC4770311
PMID: 25799074  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Med Chem. 2015 Mar 12;58(5):2553-9. doi: 10.1021/jm501963e. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

Structure enabled design of BAZ2-ICR, a chemical probe targeting the bromodomains
of BAZ2A and BAZ2B.

Drouin L(1), McGrath S, Vidler LR, Chaikuad A, Monteiro O, Tallant C, Philpott M,
Rogers C, Fedorov O, Liu M, Akhtar W, Hayes A, Raynaud F, Müller S, Knapp S,
Hoelder S.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Cancer Research, Division of Cancer Therapeutics, Cancer
Research UK Cancer Therapeutics Unit , 15 Cotswold Road, Sutton, London SM2 5NG, 
U.K.

The bromodomain containing proteins BAZ2A/B play essential roles in chromatin
remodeling and regulation of noncoding RNAs. We present the structure based
discovery of a potent, selective, and cell active inhibitor 13 (BAZ2-ICR) of the 
BAZ2A/B bromodomains through rapid optimization of a weakly potent starting
point. A key feature of the presented inhibitors is an intramolecular aromatic
stacking interaction that efficiently occupies the shallow bromodomain pockets.
13 represents an excellent chemical probe for functional studies of the BAZ2
bromodomains in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4441536
PMID: 25719566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Structure. 2015 Jan 6;23(1):80-92. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2014.10.017. Epub 2014 Dec 
18.

Molecular basis of histone tail recognition by human TIP5 PHD finger and
bromodomain of the chromatin remodeling complex NoRC.

Tallant C(1), Valentini E(2), Fedorov O(3), Overvoorde L(4), Ferguson FM(4),
Filippakopoulos P(5), Svergun DI(2), Knapp S(3), Ciulli A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge
CB2 1EW, UK; Structural Genomics Consortium, Nuffield Department of Clinical
Medicine, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research Building, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK; Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of
Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, NDM Research Building, Roosevelt Drive, 
Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK. (2)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Hamburg Outstation,
c/o DESY, Notkestrasse 85, 22603 Hamburg, Germany. (3)Structural Genomics
Consortium, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, Old
Road Campus Research Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK; Target
Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University of
Oxford, NDM Research Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK. (4)Department
of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW, UK.
(5)Structural Genomics Consortium, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine,
University of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford 
OX3 7DQ, UK; Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Nuffield Department of
Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK.
(6)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge
CB2 1EW, UK; Division of Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery, College of Life
Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK. Electronic
address: a.ciulli@dundee.ac.uk.

Binding of the chromatin remodeling complex NoRC to RNA complementary to the rDNA
promoter mediates transcriptional repression. TIP5, the largest subunit of NoRC, 
is involved in recruitment to rDNA by interactions with promoter-bound TTF-I,
pRNA, and acetylation of H4K16. TIP5 domains that recognize posttranslational
modifications on histones are essential for recruitment of NoRC to chromatin, but
how these reader modules recognize site-specific histone tails has remained
elusive. Here, we report crystal structures of PHD zinc finger and bromodomains
from human TIP5 and BAZ2B in free form and bound to H3 and/or H4 histones. PHD
finger functions as an independent structural module in recognizing unmodified H3
histone tails, and the bromodomain prefers H3 and H4 acetylation marks followed
by a key basic residue, KacXXR. Further low-resolution analyses of
PHD-bromodomain modules provide molecular insights into their trans histone tail 
recognition, required for nucleosome recruitment and transcriptional repression
of the NoRC complex.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4291147
PMID: 25533489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Biochemistry. 2014 Oct 28;53(42):6706-16. doi: 10.1021/bi500909d. Epub 2014 Oct
15.

Binding hotspots of BAZ2B bromodomain: Histone interaction revealed by solution
NMR driven docking.

Ferguson FM(1), Dias DM, Rodrigues JP, Wienk H, Boelens R, Bonvin AM, Abell C,
Ciulli A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge , Lensfield Road, Cambridge, 
CB2 1EW, U.K.

Bromodomains are epigenetic reader domains, which have come under increasing
scrutiny both from academic and pharmaceutical research groups. Effective
targeting of the BAZ2B bromodomain by small molecule inhibitors has been recently
reported, but no structural information is yet available on the interaction with 
its natural binding partner, acetylated histone H3K14ac. We have assigned the
BAZ2B bromodomain and studied its interaction with H3K14ac acetylated peptides by
NMR spectroscopy using both chemical shift perturbation (CSP) data and clean
chemical exchange (CLEANEX-PM) NMR experiments. The latter was used to
characterize water molecules known to play an important role in mediating
interactions. Besides the anticipated Kac binding site, we consistently found the
bromodomain BC loop as hotspots for the interaction. This information was used to
create a data-driven model for the complex using HADDOCK. Our findings provide
both structure and dynamics characterization that will be useful in the quest for
potent and selective inhibitors to probe the function of the BAZ2B bromodomain.

PMCID: PMC4458377
PMID: 25266743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Med Chem. 2013 Dec 27;56(24):10183-7. doi: 10.1021/jm401582c. Epub 2013 Dec 13.

Targeting low-druggability bromodomains: fragment based screening and inhibitor
design against the BAZ2B bromodomain.

Ferguson FM(1), Fedorov O, Chaikuad A, Philpott M, Muniz JR, Felletar I, von
Delft F, Heightman T, Knapp S, Abell C, Ciulli A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge , Lensfield Road, Cambridge, 
CB2 1EW, U.K.

Bromodomains are epigenetic reader domains that have recently become popular
targets. In contrast to BET bromodomains, which have proven druggable,
bromodomains from other regions of the phylogenetic tree have shallower pockets. 
We describe successful targeting of the challenging BAZ2B bromodomain using
biophysical fragment screening and structure-based optimization of high
ligand-efficiency fragments into a novel series of low-micromolar inhibitors. Our
results provide attractive leads for development of BAZ2B chemical probes and
indicate the whole family may be tractable.

PMCID: PMC3905694
PMID: 24304323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. ChemMedChem. 2014 Mar;9(3):573-9. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201300156. Epub 2013 Jun 26.

Structured water molecules in the binding site of bromodomains can be displaced
by cosolvent.

Huang D(1), Rossini E, Steiner S, Caflisch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 190,
8057 Zürich (Switzerland). dhuang@bioc.uzh.ch.

Bromodomains are a-helical bundles of approximately 110 residues that recognize
acetylated lysine side chains mainly on histone tails. Bromodomains are known to 
play an important role in cancer and inflammation, and as such, significant
efforts are being made to identify small-molecule inhibitors of these epigenetic 
reader proteins. Here, explicit solvent molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of
two bromodomains (BAZ2B and CREBBP) are used to analyze the water molecules that 
seem to be conserved at the bottom of the acetyl-lysine binding site in most
crystal structures of bromodomains. The MD runs suggest that the occupancy of the
structured water molecules is influenced by conformational transitions of the
loop that connects helices Z and A. Additional simulations in the presence of
50 molecules of cosolvent (i.e., 440 mM of dimethylsulfoxide, methanol, or
ethanol) indicate that some of the structured water molecules can be displaced
transiently. The residence time in the acetyl-lysine binding site is calculated
to be about 1 ns, 2-5 ns, and 10-30 ns for methanol, ethanol, and
dimethylsulfoxide, respectively, while the affinity of the three cosolvents for
BAZ2B and CREBBP is in the range of 50-500 mM. The results described have
implications for ligand design, suggesting that only structured water molecules
that do not exchange with cosolvent should be maintained in crystal structures
used for docking campaigns, and that hydroxy substituents should be incorporated 
in the ligand so as to map the structured water molecules replaced by (m)ethanol.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23804246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. FEBS Lett. 2013 Jul 11;587(14):2158-63. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.05.032. Epub 
2013 May 25.

Does bromodomain flexibility influence histone recognition?

Steiner S(1), Magno A, Huang D, Caflisch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190,
CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

Bromodomains are protein modules that selectively recognize histones by binding
to acetylated lysines. Here, we have carried out multiple molecular dynamics
simulations of 20 human bromodomains to investigate the flexibility of their
binding site. Some bromodomains show alternative side chain orientations of three
evolutionarily conserved residues: the Asn involved in acetyl-lysine binding and 
two conserved aromatic residues. Furthermore, for the BAZ2B and CREBBP
bromodomains we observe occlusion of the binding site which is coupled to the
displacement of the two aromatic residues. In contrast to available structures,
the simulations reveal large variability of the binding site accessibility. The
simulations suggest that the flexibility of the bromodomain binding site and
presence of self-occluded metastable states influence the recognition of
acetyl-lysine on histone tails.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23711371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS Genet. 2011 Jun;7(6):e1002158. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002158. Epub 2011 
Jun 30.

Identification of a sudden cardiac death susceptibility locus at 2q24.2 through
genome-wide association in European ancestry individuals.

Arking DE(1), Junttila MJ, Goyette P, Huertas-Vazquez A, Eijgelsheim M, Blom MT, 
Newton-Cheh C, Reinier K, Teodorescu C, Uy-Evanado A, Carter-Monroe N, Kaikkonen 
KS, Kortelainen ML, Boucher G, Lagacé C, Moes A, Zhao X, Kolodgie F, Rivadeneira 
F, Hofman A, Witteman JC, Uitterlinden AG, Marsman RF, Pazoki R, Bardai A, Koster
RW, Dehghan A, Hwang SJ, Bhatnagar P, Post W, Hilton G, Prineas RJ, Li M, Köttgen
A, Ehret G, Boerwinkle E, Coresh J, Kao WH, Psaty BM, Tomaselli GF, Sotoodehnia
N, Siscovick DS, Burke GL, Marbán E, Spooner PM, Cupples LA, Jui J, Gunson K,
Kesäniemi YA, Wilde AA, Tardif JC, O'Donnell CJ, Bezzina CR, Virmani R, Stricker 
BH, Tan HL, Albert CM, Chakravarti A, Rioux JD, Huikuri HV, Chugh SS.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
arking@jhmi.edu

Sudden cardiac death (SCD) continues to be one of the leading causes of mortality
worldwide, with an annual incidence estimated at 250,000-300,000 in the United
States and with the vast majority occurring in the setting of coronary disease.
We performed a genome-wide association meta-analysis in 1,283 SCD cases and
>20,000 control individuals of European ancestry from 5 studies, with follow-up
genotyping in up to 3,119 SCD cases and 11,146 controls from 11 European ancestry
studies, and identify the BAZ2B locus as associated with SCD (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.8×10(-10)).
The risk allele, while ancestral, has a frequency of ~1.4%, suggesting strong
negative selection and increases risk for SCD by 1.92-fold per allele (95% CI
1.57-2.34). We also tested the role of 49 SNPs previously implicated in
modulating electrocardiographic traits (QRS, QT, and RR intervals). Consistent
with epidemiological studies showing increased risk of SCD with prolonged QRS/QT 
intervals, the interval-prolonging alleles are in aggregate associated with
increased risk for SCD (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.006).

PMCID: PMC3128111
PMID: 21738491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Genomics. 2000 Jan 1;63(1):40-5.

A novel family of bromodomain genes.

Jones MH(1), Hamana N, Nezu Ji, Shimane M.

Author information: 
(1)Chugai Research Institute for Molecular Medicine, 153-2 Nagai, Niihari,
Ibaraki, 300-4101, Japan. mike@cimmed.com

The bromodomain is a structural motif characteristic of proteins involved in
chromatin-dependent regulation of transcription. Bromodomain proteins have been
identified as integral components of chromatin remodeling complexes and
frequently possess histone acetyltransferase activity. Their encoding genes have 
been identified at translocation breakpoints, and at least one, CBP, is a tumor
suppressor gene. We have identified a series of novel bromodomain genes by EST
database and cDNA library screening. Comparison of sequences for four clones
indicated that they represent genes belonging to a novel bromodomain family.
Full-length sequences for these genes, which are widely expressed, predict
encoded proteins of between 1527 and 1972 amino acids. In addition to a
carboxy-terminal bromodomain, an adjacent PHD finger, and a WACZ motif, at least 
four other conserved novel motifs are present in each protein. The genes contain 
regions conserved with Drosophila Acf1 and Caenorhabditis elegans ZK783.4. The
novel genes, termed BAZ1A, BAZ1B, BAZ2A, and BAZ2B, localize to chromosomes
14q12-q13, 7q11-q21, 12q24.3-qter, and 2q23-q24, respectively. Conservation of
multiple domains throughout these genes with Acf1 indicates that they are likely 
to be components of chromatin remodeling complexes.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10662543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


