
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2016 Mar 28. [Epub ahead of print]

Cell and gene therapy for the beta-thalassemias: advances and prospects.

Mansilla-Soto J(1), Riviere I(2), Boulad F(3), Sadelain M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Center for Cell Engineering , 1250
First Avenue , Schwartz building , Room S10-18 , New York, New York, United
States , 10065 ; mansillj@mskcc.org. (2)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
Center for Cell Engineering, New York, New York, United States ;
rivierei@mskcc.org. (3)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Center for Cell
Engineering, New York, New York, United States ; bouladf@MSKCC.ORG. (4)Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Center for Cell Engineering , 1275 York Avenue ,
Box 182 , Suite S 1021 , New York, New York, United States , 10065 ;
m-sadelain@ski.mskcc.org.

The beta-thalassemias are inherited anemias caused by mutations that severely
reduce or abolish expression of the beta-globin gene. Like sickle cell disease, a
related beta-globin gene disorder, they are ideal candidates for performing a
genetic correction in patient hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). The most advanced 
approach utilizes complex lentiviral vectors encoding the human ß-globin gene, as
first reported by May et al. in 2000. Considerable progress towards the clinical 
implementation of this approach has been made in the past five years, based on
effective CD34+ cell mobilization and improved lentiviral vector manufacturing.
Four trials have been initiated in the US and Europe. Of 16 evaluable subjects, 6
have achieved transfusion independence. One of them developed a durable clonal
expansion, which regressed after several years without transformation. While
globin lentiviral vectors have so far proven to be safe, this occurrence suggests
that powerful insulators with robust enhancer-blocking activity will further
enhance this approach. The combined discovery of Bcl11a-mediated <U+03B3>-globin gene
silencing and advances in gene editing are the foundations for another gene
therapy approach, which aims to reactivate fetal hemoglobin (HbF) production. Its
clinical translation will hinge on the safety and efficiency of gene targeting in
true HSCs and the induction of sufficient levels of HbF to achieve transfusion
independence. Altogether, the progress achieved over the past 15 years bodes well
for finding a genetic cure for severe globin disorders in the next decade.

PMID: 27021486  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Hematol Oncol Stem Cell Ther. 2016 Mar 17. pii: S1658-3876(16)30003-6. doi:
10.1016/j.hemonc.2016.02.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Modifying effect of XmnI, BCL11A, and HBS1L-MYB on clinical appearances: A study 
on ß-thalassemia and hemoglobin E/ß-thalassemia patients in Indonesia.

Rujito L(1), Basalamah M(2), Siswandari W(3), Setyono J(4), Wulandari G(5),
Mulatsih S(6), Sofro AS(7), Sadewa AH(8), Sutaryo S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Jenderal Soedirman
University, Purwokerto, Central Java, Indonesia. Electronic address:
l.rujito@unsoed.ac.id. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Banyumas General Hospital,
Banyumas, Central Java, Indonesia. (3)Department of Clinical Pathology, Faculty
of Medicine, Jenderal Soedirman University, Purwokerto, Central Java, Indonesia. 
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Jenderal Soedirman
University, Purwokerto, Central Java, Indonesia. (5)Indonesian Red Cross,
Banyumas Unit, Purwokerto, Central Java, Indonesia. (6)Department of Pediatrics, 
Sardjito Central General Hospital, Sekip, Yogyakarta, Indonesia. (7)Department of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Yayasan Rumah Sakit Islam (YARSI) University, 
Cempaka Putih, Jakarta, Indonesia. (8)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of
Medicine, Gadjah Mada University, Yogyakarta, Indonesia.

OBJECTIVE/BACKGROUND: Thalassemia is a monogenic hematologic disease that has the
highest prevalence globally. In addition, there is complexity of the genetic
background associated with a variety of phenotypes presented among patients.
Genetic heterogeneity related to fetal hemoglobin (HbF) production has been
reported as an influencing phenotypic factor of ß-thalassemia (ß-thal).
Therefore, this study aimed to find the effect of these genetic modifiers,
especially in the XmnI locus, rs11886868, rs766432 (BCL11A), and rs9399137
(HBS1L-MYB), among ß-thal and HbE/ß-thal patients in Indonesia, according to
laboratory and clinical outcomes, including HbF levels and clinical scores. This 
study was also designed to compare these modifying effects among ß-thal and
HbE/ß-thal patients in Indonesia.
METHODS: A total of 189 patients with genotyping of ß-thal and HbE/ß-thal were
included in this study. The erythrocytes index and Hb electrophoresis
measurements were calculated using appropriate methods. The severity of ß-thal
and HbE/ß-thal was classified based on the Mahidol score. Polymorphism of the
XmnI locus, rs11886868, rs766432 (BCL11A), and rs9399137 (HBS1L-MYB) was
determined using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) and amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS)
methods.
RESULTS: The distributions of minor allele in the XmnI locus, rs11886868,
rs766432, and rs9399137 were 14%, 22%, 19% and 18% respectively. The variation
allele in the XmnI locus, rs11886868, and rs766432 showed a significant value for
modifying HbF and clinical score in HbE/ß-thal patients, but rs9399137 did not
demonstrate such features. In ß-thal patients, however, no correlation was found 
for any single-nucleotide polymorphisms and clinical appearance.
CONCLUSION: The XmnI locus, rs11886868, and rs766432 have a modifying effect on
HbF and clinical score in HbE/ß-thal patients in Indonesia, but not in ß-thal
patients.

Copyright © 2016 King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27009595  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2016 Mar 9. doi: 10.1111/nyas.13024. [Epub ahead of print]

Regulation of the fetal hemoglobin silencing factor BCL11A.

Basak A(1,)(2,)(3), Sankaran VG(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research,
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. (2)Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. (3)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

The clinical severity of sickle cell disease and ß-thalassemia, the major
disorders of ß-globin, can be ameliorated by increased production of fetal
hemoglobin (HbF). Here, we provide a brief overview of the fetal-to-adult
hemoglobin switch that occurs in humans shortly after birth and review our
current understanding of one of the most potent known regulators of this
switching process, the multiple zinc finger-containing transcription factor
BCL11A. Originally identified in genome-wide association studies, multiple
orthogonal lines of evidence have validated BCL11A as a key regulator of
hemoglobin switching and as a promising therapeutic target for HbF induction. We 
discuss recent studies that have highlighted its importance in silencing the
HbF-encoding genes and discuss opportunities that exist to further understand the
regulation of BCL11A and its mechanism of action, which could provide new insight
into opportunities to induce HbF for therapeutic purposes.

© 2016 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 26963603  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. J Mol Med (Berl). 2016 Feb 27. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeted next-generation sequencing for molecular diagnosis of
endometriosis-associated ovarian cancer.

Er TK(1,)(2), Su YF(3), Wu CC(4), Chen CC(5), Wang J(6), Hsieh TH(7),
Herreros-Villanueva M(8), Chen WT(4), Chen YT(3,)(4), Liu TC(2,)(9), Chen HS(7), 
Tsai EM(10,)(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Nutrition Biotechnology, College of Medical and
Health Science, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan. (2)Division of Molecular
Diagnostics, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (3)Graduate Institute 
of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. (4)Department of Pathology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (5)Institute of Medical Science and Technology, National Sun
Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (6)Department of Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (7)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung, 80708, Taiwan. (8)Department of Gastroenterology, 
Hospital Donostia/Instituto Biodonostia, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red
de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Universidad del País Vasco
UPV/EHU, San Sebastián, Spain. (9)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department
of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(10)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. tsaieing@yahoo.com. (11)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, 80708, Taiwan. tsaieing@yahoo.com. (12)Research Center for
Environmental Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
tsaieing@yahoo.com.

Recent molecular and pathological studies suggest that endometriosis may serve as
a precursor of ovarian cancer (endometriosis-associated ovarian cancer, EAOC),
especially of the endometrioid and clear cell subtypes. Accordingly, this study
had two cardinal aims: first, to obtain mutation profiles of EAOC from Taiwanese 
patients; and second, to determine whether somatic mutations present in EAOC can 
be detected in preneoplastic lesions. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
tissues were obtained from ten endometriosis patients with malignant
transformation. Macrodissection was performed to separate four different types of
cells from FFPE sections in six patients. The four types of samples included
normal endometrium, ectopic endometriotic lesion, atypical endometriosis, and
carcinoma. Ultra-deep (>1000×) targeted sequencing was performed on 409
cancer-related genes to identify pathogenic mutations associated with EAOC. The
most frequently mutated genes were PIK3CA (6/10) and ARID1A (5/10). Other
recurrently mutated genes included ETS1, MLH1, PRKDC (3/10 each), and AMER1,
ARID2, BCL11A, CREBBP, ERBB2, EXT1, FANCD2, MSH6, NF1, NOTCH1, NUMA1, PDE4DIP,
PPP2R1A, RNF213, and SYNE1 (2/10 each). Importantly, in five of the six patients,
identical somatic mutations were detected in atypical endometriosis and tumor
lesions. In two patients, genetic alterations were also detected in ectopic
endometriotic lesions, indicating the presence of genetic alterations in
preneoplastic lesion. Genetic analysis in preneoplastic lesions may help to
identify high-risk patients at early stage of malignant transformation and also
shed new light on fundamental aspects of the molecular pathogenesis of EAOC.KEY
MESSAGES: Molecular characterization of endometriosis-associated ovarian cancer
genes by targeted NGS. Candidate genes predictive of malignant transformation
were identified. Chromatin remodeling, PI3K-AKT-mTOR, Notch signaling, and
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway may promote cell malignant transformation.

PMID: 26920370  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Br J Haematol. 2016 Feb 16. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13961. [Epub ahead of print]

Reduced rate of sickle-related complications in Brazilian patients carrying
HbF-promoting alleles at the BCL11A and HMIP-2 loci.

Leonardo FC(1), Brugnerotto AF(1), Domingos IF(2), Fertrin KY(1), de Albuquerque 
DM(1), Bezerra MA(2), Araújo AS(3), Saad ST(1), Costa FF(1), Menzel S(4), Conran 
N(1), Thein SL(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Centre, School of Medicine, University of Campinas- UNICAMP,
Campinas, Brazil. (2)Department of Genetics, Federal University of Pernambuco,
Recife, Brazil. (3)Haematology and Haemotherapy Foundation of Pernambuco
(HEMOPE), Recife, Brazil. (4)Department of Molecular Haematology, Division of
Cancer Studies, King's College London Faculty of Life Sciences & Medicine,
London, UK. (5)Sickle Cell Branch, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, NIH,
Bethesda, MD, USA.

The presence of high levels of fetal haemoglobin (HbF) provides well-validated
clinical benefits to patients with sickle cell anaemia (SCA). Nevertheless it has
been difficult to show clear direct effects of the known genetic HbF modifiers,
such as the enhancer polymorphisms for haematopoietic transcription factors
BCL11A and MYB, on SCA severity. Investigating SCA patients from Brazil, with a
high degree of European genetic admixture, we have detected strong effects of
these variants on HbF levels. Critically, we have shown, for the first time, that
the presence of such HbF-promoting variants leads to a reduced rate of SCA
complications, especially stroke.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26888013  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2016 Feb 11. doi: 10.1111/nyas.13001. [Epub ahead of print]

Recent advances in globin research using genome-wide association studies and gene
editing.

Orkin SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

A long-sought goal in the hemoglobin field has been an improved understanding of 
the mechanisms that regulate the switch from fetal (HbF) to adult (HbA)
hemoglobin during development. With such knowledge, the hope is that strategies
for directed reactivation of HbF in adults could be devised as an approach to
therapy for the ß-hemoglobinopathies thalassemia and sickle cell disease. Recent 
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) led to identification of three loci
(BCL11A, HBS1L-MYB, and the ß-globin cluster itself) in which natural genetic
variation is correlated with different HbF levels in populations. Here, the
central role of BCL11A in control of HbF is reviewed from the perspective of how 
findings may be translated to gene therapy in the not-too-distant future. This
summary traces the evolution of recent studies from the initial recognition of
BCL11A through GWAS to identification of critical sequences in an enhancer
required for its erythroid-specific expression, thereby highlighting an Achilles 
heel for genome editing.

© 2016 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 26866328  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Cell J. 2016 Winter;17(4):583-92. Epub 2016 Jan 17.

MicroRNA Expression in ß-Thalassemia and Sickle Cell Disease: A Role in The
Induction of Fetal Hemoglobin.

Saki N(1), Abroun S(2), Soleimani M(2), Kavianpour M(1), Shahjahani M(1),
Mohammadi-Asl J(3), Hajizamani S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Health Research Institute, Research Center of Thalassemia and
Hemoglobinopathy, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran. 
(2)Department of Hematology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran. (3)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, 
Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.

Today the regulatory role of microRNAs (miRs) is well characterized in many
diverse cel- lular processes. MiR-based regulation is categorized under
epigenetic regulatory mecha- nisms. These small non-coding RNAs participate in
producing and maturing erythrocytes, expressing hematopoietic factors and
regulating expression of globin genes by post-tran- scriptional gene silencing.
The changes in expression of miRs (miR-144/-320/-451/-503) in thalassemic/sickle 
cells compared with normal erythrocytes may cause clinical severity. According to
the suppressive effects of certain miRs (miR-15a/-16-1/-23a/-26b/-27a/-451) on a 
number of transcription factors [myeloblastosis oncogene (MYB), B-cell lymphoma
11A (BCL11A), GATA1, Krüppel-like factor 3 (KLF3) and specificity protein 1
(Sp1)] during ß globin gene expression, It has been possible to increasing <U+03B3>
globin gene expression and fetal hemoglobin (HbF) production. Therefore, this
strategy can be used as a novel therapy in infusing HbF and improving clinical
complications of patients with hemoglobi- nopathies.

PMCID: PMC4746408
PMID: 26862517  [PubMed]


8. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 3;11(2):e0146802. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146802.
eCollection 2016.

Krüppel-Like Transcription Factor KLF1 Is Required for Optimal <U+03B3>- and ß-Globin
Expression in Human Fetal Erythroblasts.

Vinjamur DS(1), Alhashem YN(1), Mohamad SF(1), Amin P(1), Williams DC Jr(2,)(3), 
Lloyd JA(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
Richmond, Virginia, United States of America. (2)Massey Cancer Center, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pathology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia,
United States of America.

In human adult erythroid cells, lower than normal levels of Krüppel-like
transcription factor 1 (KLF1) are generally associated with decreased adult ß-
and increased fetal <U+03B3>-globin gene expression. KLF1 also regulates BCL11A, a known
repressor of adult <U+03B3>-globin expression. In seeming contrast to the findings in
adult cells, lower amounts of KLF1 correlate with both reduced embryonic and
reduced fetal ß-like globin mRNA in mouse embryonic erythroid cells. The role of 
KLF1 in primary human fetal erythroid cells, which express both <U+03B3>- and ß-globin
mRNA, is less well understood. Therefore, we studied the role of KLF1 in ex vivo 
differentiated CD34+ umbilical cord blood cells (UCB erythroblasts), representing
the fetal milieu. In UCB erythroblasts, KLF1 binds to the ß-globin locus control 
region (LCR), and the ß-globin promoter. There is very little KLF1 binding
detectable at the <U+03B3>-globin promoter. Correspondingly, when cultured fetal UCB
erythroblasts are subjected to lentiviral KLF1 knockdown, the active histone mark
H3K4me3 and RNA pol II recruitment are diminished at the ß- but not the <U+03B3>-globin 
gene. The amount of KLF1 expression strongly positively correlates with ß-globin 
mRNA and weakly positively correlates with BCL11A mRNA. With modest KLF1
knockdown, mimicking haploinsufficiency, <U+03B3>-globin mRNA is increased in UCB
erythroblasts, as is common in adult cells. However, a threshold level of KLF1 is
evidently required, or there is no absolute increase in <U+03B3>-globin mRNA in UCB
erythroblasts. Therefore, the role of KLF1 in <U+03B3>-globin regulation in fetal
erythroblasts is complex, with both positive and negative facets. Furthermore, in
UCB erythroblasts, diminished BCL11A is not sufficient to induce <U+03B3>-globin in the 
absence of KLF1. These findings have implications for the manipulation of BCL11A 
and/or KLF1 to induce <U+03B3>-globin for therapy of the ß-hemoglobinopathies.

PMCID: PMC4739742
PMID: 26840243  [PubMed - in process]


9. Science. 2016 Jan 15;351(6270):285-9. doi: 10.1126/science.aad3312.

Transcription factors LRF and BCL11A independently repress expression of fetal
hemoglobin.

Masuda T(1), Wang X(2), Maeda M(1), Canver MC(3), Sher F(3), Funnell AP(4),
Fisher C(5), Suciu M(5), Martyn GE(4), Norton LJ(4), Zhu C(1), Kurita R(6),
Nakamura Y(7), Xu J(8), Higgs DR(5), Crossley M(4), Bauer DE(3), Orkin SH(9),
Kharchenko PV(10), Maeda T(11).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Department of Biomedical
Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Department
of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (4)School of
Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
NSW 2052, Australia. (5)Medical Research Council, Molecular Haematology Unit,
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford University, Oxford, UK.
(6)Cell Engineering Division, RIKEN BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. 
(7)Cell Engineering Division, RIKEN BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. 
Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(8)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Department of
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
Children's Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (9)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Department
of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (10)Department of Biomedical
Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
peter.kharchenko@post.harvard.edu tmaeda@partners.org. (11)Division of
Hematology, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. peter.kharchenko@post.harvard.edu
tmaeda@partners.org.

Genes encoding human ß-type globin undergo a developmental switch from embryonic 
to fetal to adult-type expression. Mutations in the adult form cause inherited
hemoglobinopathies or globin disorders, including sickle cell disease and
thalassemia. Some experimental results have suggested that these diseases could
be treated by induction of fetal-type hemoglobin (HbF). However, the mechanisms
that repress HbF in adults remain unclear. We found that the LRF/ZBTB7A
transcription factor occupies fetal <U+03B3>-globin genes and maintains the nucleosome
density necessary for <U+03B3>-globin gene silencing in adults, and that LRF confers its
repressive activity through a NuRD repressor complex independent of the fetal
globin repressor BCL11A. Our study may provide additional opportunities for
therapeutic targeting in the treatment of hemoglobinopathies.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4778394 [Available on 2016-07-15]
PMID: 26816381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Br J Haematol. 2016 Mar;172(6):958-65. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13909. Epub 2016 Jan 13.

The genetic basis of asymptomatic codon 8 frame-shift (HBB:c25_26delAA) ß(0)
-thalassaemia homozygotes.

Jiang Z(1), Luo HY(1), Huang S(1), Farrell JJ(1), Davis L(1), Théberge R(2),
Benson KA(1), Riolueang S(3), Viprakasit V(3), Al-Allawi NA(4), Ünal S(5), Gümrük
F(5), Akar N(6), Basak AN(7), Osorio L(8), Badens C(9), Pissard S(10), Joly
P(11), Campbell AD(12), Gallagher PG(13), Steinberg MH(1), Forget BG(14), Chui
DH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston University 
School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. (2)Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, 
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. (3)Department of
Paediatrics and Thalassaemia Centre, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. (4)Faculty of Medical Sciences, Scientific
Research Centre, University of Duhok, Duhok, Iraq. (5)Division of Paediatric
Haematology, Department of Paediatrics, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
(6)Department of Paediatric Molecular Genetics, Medical School, Ankara
University, Ankara, Turkey. (7)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Neurodegeneration Research Laboratory, Bogaziçi University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(8)Laboratório de Genética Molecular, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal. (9)Laboratoire de génétique
moléculaire, Centre de référence Thalassémies, APHM, Hôpital d'enfants de la
Timone, Marseille, France. (10)Departement de genetique, GHU Henri Mondor,
Créteil, France. (11)Laboratoire de Biochimie et de Biologie Moléculaire, Hôpital
Edouard Herriot, Unité de Pathologie Moléculaire du Globule Rouge, Hospices
Civils & Université Claude Bernard-Lyon 1, Lyon, France. (12)Department of
Pediatrics, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(13)Departments of Pediatrics, Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT, USA. (14)Departments of Medicine, Genetics, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.

Two 21-year old dizygotic twin men of Iraqi descent were homozygous for HBB codon
8, deletion of two nucleotides (-AA) frame-shift ß(0) -thalassaemia mutation
(FSC8; HBB:c25_26delAA). Both were clinically well, had splenomegaly, and were
never transfused. They had mild microcytic anaemia (Hb 120-130 g/l) and 98% of
their haemoglobin was fetal haemoglobin (HbF). Both were carriers of Hph
a-thalassaemia mutation. On the three major HbF quantitative trait loci (QTL),
the twins were homozygous for G>A HBG2 Xmn1 site at single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) rs7482144, homozygous for 3-bp deletion HBS1L-MYB intergenic
polymorphism (HMIP) at rs66650371, and heterozygous for the A>C BCL11A intron 2
polymorphism at rs766432. These findings were compared with those found in 22
other FSC8 homozygote patients: four presented with thalassaemia intermedia
phenotype, and 18 were transfusion dependent. The inheritance of homozygosity for
HMIP 3-bp deletion at rs66650371 and heterozygosity for Hph a-thalassaemia
mutation was found in the twins and not found in any of the other 22 patients.
Further studies are needed to uncover likely additional genetic variants that
could contribute to the exceptionally high HbF levels and mild phenotype in these
twins.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26771086  [PubMed - in process]


11. Leuk Res. 2016 Feb;41:71-5. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2015.12.001. Epub 2015 Dec 7.

BCL11A expression in acute myeloid leukemia.

Tao H(1), Ma X(2), Su G(1), Yin J(1), Xie X(1), Hu C(1), Chen Z(1), Tan D(1), Xu 
Z(1), Zheng Y(1), Liu H(2), He C(1), Mao ZJ(3), Yin H(4), Wang Z(1), Chang W(2), 
Gale RP(5), Chen Z(2), Wu D(2), Yin B(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Soochow
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu province, China. (2)The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Soochow University, Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Suzhou, Jiangsu province,
China. (3)Seattle Cancer Center Alliance, University of Washington Medical
Center, Seattle, WA, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, PR China. (5)Haematology Research Centre, Division of Experimental
Medicine, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK.
(6)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Soochow
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu province, China; Thrombosis and Hemostasis Key Lab of
the Ministry of Health, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu province, China;
Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology, Soochow University, Suzhou,
Jiangsu province, China. Electronic address: yinbin@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: BCL11A encodes a C2H2 type zinc-finger protein. During normal
haematopoietic cell differentiation BCL11A expression is down-regulated. Data in 
mice suggest up-regulation of BCL11A is involved in the pathogenesis of myeloid
leukaemias. BCL11A expression in persons with acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is
not systematically studied.
OBJECTIVE: Interrogate associations between BCL11A expression at diagnosis and
clinical and laboratory valuables and outcomes in newly-diagnosed persons with
AML.
METHODS: We determined BCL11A mRNA levels in bone marrow and blood mononuclear
cells in 292 consecutive newly-diagnosed subjects with AML by reverse transcript 
and real-time polymerase chain reaction. Data were compared to mRNA levels in
bone marrow cells of normals.
RESULTS: Subjects with BCL11A transcript levels at diagnosis exceeding the median
value of 2.434 (±3.423 SD; 25th-75th inter-quartile range, 1.33-4.29) had higher 
WBC levels, a greater proportion of bone marrow myeloblasts, were more likely to 
be FAB M0 subtype, less likely to be FAB M3 subtype, more likely to be in the
intermediate cytogenetic risk cohort, less likely to have a complex karyotype and
more likely to have DNMT3A(R882) and FLT3-ITD mutations than subjects with
transcript levels below the median value. In 89 subjects receiving conventional
induction chemotherapy the complete remission rate was 54% (95% confidence
interval [CI]; 33, 75%) in the lower BCL11A cohort and 65% (45, 85%; P=0.26) in
the higher BCL11A cohort. 3 year survival was 33% (2, 65%) in the lower BCL11A
cohort and 15% (0, 39%; P=0.35) in the high BCL11A cohort.
CONCLUSION: BCL11A transcript levels at diagnosis was significantly associated
with several clinical and laboratory variables. There were also non-significant
associations with complete remission rate and survival. These data suggest a
possible role for BCL11A expression in AML biology.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26707798  [PubMed - in process]


12. BMC Cancer. 2015 Dec 18;15:984. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1955-9.

The genomic and transcriptomic landscape of anaplastic thyroid cancer:
implications for therapy.

Kasaian K(1), Wiseman SM(2), Walker BA(3), Schein JE(4), Zhao Y(5), Hirst M(6),
Moore RA(7), Mungall AJ(8), Marra MA(9,)(10), Jones SJ(11,)(12,)(13,)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. kkasaian@bcgsc.ca. (2)Department of Surgery,
St. Paul's Hospital and University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. SMWiseman@providencehealth.bc.ca. (3)Department of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, St. Paul's Hospital and University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. BWalker@providencehealth.bc.ca. (4)Canada's 
Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada. jschein@bcgsc.ca. (5)Canada's Michael Smith Genome
Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada. yzhao@bcgsc.ca. (6)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British
Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. mhirst@bcgsc.ca.
(7)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. rmoore@bcgsc.ca. (8)Canada's Michael Smith
Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. amungall@bcgsc.ca. (9)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences
Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
mmarra@bcgsc.ca. (10)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. mmarra@bcgsc.ca. (11)Canada's
Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada. sjones@bcgsc.ca. (12)Department of Medical Genetics,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
sjones@bcgsc.ca. (13)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon
Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada. sjones@bcgsc.ca. (14), 570 
West 7th Ave, Vancouver, British Columbia, V5Z 4S6, Canada. sjones@bcgsc.ca.

BACKGROUND: Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is the most undifferentiated form of
thyroid cancer and one of the deadliest of all adult solid malignancies. Here we 
report the first genomic and transcriptomic profile of anaplastic thyroid cancer 
including those of several unique cell lines and outline novel potential drivers 
of malignancy and targets of therapy.
METHODS: We describe whole genomic and transcriptomic profiles of 1 primary
anaplastic thyroid tumor and 3 authenticated cell lines. Those profiles augmented
by the transcriptomes of 4 additional and unique cell lines were compared to 58
pairs of papillary thyroid carcinoma and matched normal tissue transcriptomes
from The Cancer Genome Atlas study.
RESULTS: The most prevalent mutations were those of TP53 and BRAF; repeated
alterations of the epigenetic machinery such as frame-shift deletions of HDAC10
and EP300, loss of SMARCA2 and fusions of MECP2, BCL11A and SS18 were observed.
Sequence data displayed aneuploidy and large regions of copy loss and gain in all
genomes. Common regions of gain were however evident encompassing chromosomes 5p 
and 20q. We found novel anaplastic gene fusions including MKRN1-BRAF, FGFR2-OGDH 
and SS18-SLC5A11, all expressed in-frame fusions involving a known
proto-oncogene. Comparison of the anaplastic thyroid cancer expression datasets
with the papillary thyroid cancer and normal thyroid tissue transcriptomes
suggested several known drug targets such as FGFRs, VEGFRs, KIT and RET to have
lower expression levels in anaplastic specimens compared with both papillary
thyroid cancers and normal tissues, confirming the observed lack of response to
therapies targeting these pathways. Further integrative data analysis identified 
the mTOR signaling pathway as a potential therapeutic target in this disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma possessed heterogeneous and unique
profiles revealing the significance of detailed molecular profiling of individual
tumors and the treatment of each as a unique entity; the cell line sequence data 
promises to facilitate the more accurate and intentional drug screening studies
for anaplastic thyroid cancer.

PMCID: PMC4683857
PMID: 26680454  [PubMed - in process]


13. Blood. 2016 Mar 17;127(11):1481-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-09-667923. Epub 2015 
Dec 17.

Pomalidomide reverses <U+03B3>-globin silencing through the transcriptional
reprogramming of adult hematopoietic progenitors.

Dulmovits BM(1), Appiah-Kubi AO(1), Papoin J(2), Hale J(3), He M(4), Al-Abed
Y(4), Didier S(2), Gould M(5), Husain-Krautter S(2), Singh SA(5), Chan KW(6),
Vlachos A(5), Allen SL(7), Taylor N(8), Marambaud P(9), An X(3), Gallagher
PG(10), Mohandas N(3), Lipton JM(11), Liu JM(12), Blanc L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Erythropoiesis, The Feinstein Institute for
Medical Research, Manhasset, NY; Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine,
Hempstead, NY; (2)Laboratory of Developmental Erythropoiesis, The Feinstein
Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY; (3)Red Cell Physiology Laboratory,
New York Blood Center, New York, NY; (4)Center for Molecular Innovation, The
Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY; (5)Hofstra North
Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY; (6)BioTheryX Inc, San Diego, CA;
(7)Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY; North Shore-LIJ
Cancer Institute, Lake Success, NY; (8)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de
Montpellier, Unité Mixte de Recherche 5535, Montpellier, France; (9)Litwin Zucker
Research Center, The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY;
(10)Yale Center for Excellence in Molecular Hematology, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven CT; and. (11)Laboratory of Developmental Erythropoiesis, The 
Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY; Hofstra North Shore-LIJ 
School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY; Les Nelkin Memorial Pediatric Oncology
Laboratory, The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY.
(12)Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY; Les Nelkin
Memorial Pediatric Oncology Laboratory, The Feinstein Institute for Medical
Research, Manhasset, NY.

Current therapeutic strategies for sickle cell anemia are aimed at reactivating
fetal hemoglobin. Pomalidomide, a third-generation immunomodulatory drug, was
proposed to induce fetal hemoglobin production by an unknown mechanism. Here, we 
report that pomalidomide induced a fetal-like erythroid differentiation program, 
leading to a reversion of <U+03B3>-globin silencing in adult human erythroblasts.
Pomalidomide acted early by transiently delaying erythropoiesis at the
burst-forming unit-erythroid/colony-forming unit-erythroid transition, but
without affecting terminal differentiation. Further, the transcription networks
involved in <U+03B3>-globin repression were selectively and differentially affected by
pomalidomide including BCL11A, SOX6, IKZF1, KLF1, and LSD1. IKAROS (IKZF1), a
known target of pomalidomide, was degraded by the proteasome, but was not the key
effector of this program, because genetic ablation of IKZF1 did not phenocopy
pomalidomide treatment. Notably, the pomalidomide-induced reprogramming was
conserved in hematopoietic progenitors from individuals with sickle cell anemia. 
Moreover, multiple myeloma patients treated with pomalidomide demonstrated
increased in vivo <U+03B3>-globin levels in their erythrocytes. Together, these data
reveal the molecular mechanisms by which pomalidomide reactivates fetal
hemoglobin, reinforcing its potential as a treatment for patients with
ß-hemoglobinopathies.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4797024 [Available on 2017-03-17]
PMID: 26679864  [PubMed - in process]


14. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2016 Jan;56(1):62-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2015.10.004. Epub
2015 Oct 27.

Therapeutic fetal-globin inducers reduce transcriptional repression in
hemoglobinopathy erythroid progenitors through distinct mechanisms.

Dai Y(1), Sangerman J(1), Luo HY(2), Fucharoen S(3), Chui DH(2), Faller DV(4),
Perrine SP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Hemoglobinopathy Thalassemia Research Unit and Cancer Center, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States. (2)Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United
States. (3)Thalassemia Research Center, Mahidol University, Phuttamonthon,
Thailand. (4)Hemoglobinopathy Thalassemia Research Unit and Cancer Center, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States; Phoenicia BioSciences, 
Inc., Newton, MA, United States. (5)Hemoglobinopathy Thalassemia Research Unit
and Cancer Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United
States; Phoenicia BioSciences, Inc., Newton, MA, United States; Center for
Hemoglobin Research in Minorities, Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Howard
University College of Medicine, Washington DC, United States. Electronic address:
sperrine@bu.edu.

Pharmacologic augmentation of <U+03B3>-globin expression sufficient to reduce anemia and
clinical severity in patients with diverse hemoglobinopathies has been
challenging. In studies here, representative molecules from four chemical
classes, representing several distinct primary mechanisms of action, were
investigated for effects on <U+03B3>-globin transcriptional repressors, including
components of the NuRD complex (LSD1 and HDACs 2-3), and the downstream repressor
BCL11A, in erythroid progenitors from hemoglobinopathy patients. Two HDAC
inhibitors (MS-275 and SB939), a short-chain fatty acid derivative (sodium
dimethylbutyrate [SDMB]), and an agent identified in high-throughput screening,
Benserazide, were studied. These therapeutics induced <U+03B3>-globin mRNA in
progenitors above same subject controls up to 20-fold, and increased
F-reticulocytes up to 20%. Cellular protein levels of BCL11A, LSD-1, and KLF1
were suppressed by the compounds. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated a 3.6-fold reduction in LSD1 and HDAC3 occupancy in the <U+03B3>-globin
gene promoter with Benserazide exposure, 3-fold reduction in LSD-1 and HDAC2
occupancy in the <U+03B3>-globin gene promoter with SDMB exposure, while markers of gene
activation (histone H3K9 acetylation and H3K4 demethylation), were enriched
5.7-fold. These findings identify clinical-stage oral therapeutics which inhibit 
or displace major co-repressors of <U+03B3>-globin gene transcription and may suggest a 
rationale for combination therapy to produce enhanced efficacy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4667977 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26603726  [PubMed - in process]


15. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 24;10(11):e0143607. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143607.
eCollection 2015.

The Association of Type 2 Diabetes Loci Identified in Genome-Wide Association
Studies with Metabolic Syndrome and Its Components in a Chinese Population with
Type 2 Diabetes.

Kong X(1), Zhang X(1), Xing X(1), Zhang B(1), Hong J(1), Yang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.

Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is prevalent in type 2 diabetes (T2D) patients. The
comorbidity of MetS and T2D increases the risk of cardiovascular complications.
The aim of the present study was to determine the T2D-related genetic variants
that contribute to MetS-related components in T2D patients of Chinese ancestry.
We successfully genotyped 25 genome wide association study validated T2D-related 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) among 5,169 T2D individuals and 4,560
normal glycemic controls recruited from the Chinese National Diabetes and
Metabolic Disorders Study (DMS). We defined MetS in this population using the
harmonized criteria (2009) combined with the Chinese criteria for abdominal
obesity. The associations between SNPs and MetS-related components, as well as
the associations between SNPs and risk for T2D with or without MetS, were
subjected to logistic regression analysis adjusted for age and sex. Results
showed that the T2D risk alleles of rs243021 located near BCL11A, rs10830963 in
MTNR1B, and rs2237895 in KCNQ1 were related to a lower risk for abdominal obesity
in T2D patients (rs243021: 0.92 (0.84, 1.00), P = 4.42 × 10-2; rs10830963: 0.92
(0.85, 1.00), P = 4.07 × 10-2; rs2237895: 0.89 (0.82, 0.98), P = 1.29 × 10-2).
The T2D risk alleles of rs972283 near KLF14 contributed to a higher risk of
elevated blood pressure (1.10 (1.00, 1.22), P = 4.48 × 10-2), while the T2D risk 
allele of rs7903146 in TCF7L2 was related to a lower risk for elevated blood
pressure (0.74 (0.61, 0.90), P = 2.56 × 10-3). The T2D risk alleles of rs972283
near KLF14 and rs11634397 near ZFAND6 were associated with a higher risk for
elevated triglycerides (rs972283: 1.11 (1.02, 1.24), P = 1.46 × 10-2; rs11634397:
1.14 (1.00, 1.29), P = 4.66 × 10-2), while the T2D risk alleles of rs780094 in
GCKR and rs7903146 in TCF7L2 were related to a lower risk of elevated
triglycerides (rs780094: 0.86 (0.80, 0.93), P = 1.35 × 10-4; rs7903146: 0.82
(0.69, 0.98), P = 3.18 × 10-2). The genotype risk score of the 25 T2D-related
SNPs was related to a lower risk for abdominal obesity (Ptrend = 1.29 × 10-2) and
lower waist circumference (P = 2.20 × 10-3). Genetic variants of WFS1, CDKAL1,
CDKN2BAS, TCF7L2, HHEX, KCNQ1, TSPAN8/LGR5, FTO, and TCF2 were associated with
the risk for T2D with MetS, as well as the risk for development of T2D with at
least one of the MetS components (P < 0.05). In addition, genetic variants of
BCL11A, GCKR, ADAMTS9, CDKAL1, KLF14, CDKN2BAS, TCF7L2, CDC123/CAMK1D, HHEX,
MTNR1B, and KCNQ1 contributed to the risk for T2D without MetS (P < 0.05). In
conclusion, these findings highlight the contribution of T2D-related genetic loci
to MetS in a Chinese Han population. The study also provides insight into the
pleotropic effects of genome-wide association loci of diabetes on metabolic
regulation.

PMCID: PMC4657988
PMID: 26599349  [PubMed - in process]


16. Hemoglobin. 2016;40(1):16-9. doi: 10.3109/03630269.2015.1086880. Epub 2015 Nov
11.

Clinical, Hematological and Molecular Analysis of Homozygous Hb E (HBB:
c.79G<U+2009>><U+2009>A) in the Indian Population.

Jayasree D(1), Shaji RV(1), George B(1), Mathews V(1), Srivastava A(1), Edison
ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Haematology , Christian Medical College , Vellore , Tamil Nadu
, India.

Homozygous Hb E [ß26(B8)Glu<U+2192>Lys; HBB: c.79G<U+2009>><U+2009>A] is a clinically mild disease
with no significant symptoms. Very few studies are available on clinical
variability in Hb E disorders. We report the profile of a series of homozygous Hb
E patients in the Indian population. We analyzed various genetic factors that
contribute to the heterogeneity in the phenotype of homozygous Hb E patients.
Analysis of these parameters further enhances our understanding of the Hb E
syndrome.

PMID: 26554862  [PubMed - in process]


17. J Thorac Dis. 2015 Sep;7(9):1630-6. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2015.09.39.

The BCL11A-XL expression predicts relapse in squamous cell carcinoma and large
cell carcinoma.

Zhang N(1), Jiang BY(1), Zhang XC(1), Xie Z(1), Su J(1), Zhang Q(1), Han JF(1),
Tu HY(1), Wu YL(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Southern Medical University, Graduate School, Guangzhou, China ; 2 Guangdong
Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General Hospital & Guangdong Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: The B cell leukemia 11A (BCL11A) gene was identified as a
proto-oncogene in hematopoietic cell malignancies and breast cancer. Alternative 
RNA splicing generates three main transcripts designated as Extra-long (XL; 5.9
kb/125 kD), Long (L; 3.8 kb/100 kD) and Short (S; 2.4 kb/35 kD). Our previous
study results demonstrated that BCL11A expression levels were specifically
upregulated in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tissues, especially in squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC) and large cell carcinoma (LCC).
METHODS: In this study, we detected the BCL11A protein isoforms with
immunohistochemistry (IHC) method in NSCLC with in a cohort (n=40) of BCL11A
overexpression NSCLC patients. All 40 cases were BCL11A overexpression including 
27 SCCs, 8 LCCs and 5 adenocarcinomas (ACs). Relationship between BCL11A isoforms
and the clinicopathological parameters were also analyzed.
RESULTS: Compare to the BCL11A-L and S isoforms, the BCL11A-XL isoform was
specifically expressed in SCC and LCC (P=0.006). There were 19 (19/40, 47.5%)
cases positive for BCL11A-XL expression, SCC accounted for 63.2% (12/19) and LCC 
accounted for 36.8% (7/19). The survival analysis indicated that BCL11A-XL
expression was an independent prognostic factor for disease-free survival (DFS)
[hazards ratio (HR) 0.246; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.065-0.939, P=0.040]
but not for overall survival (OS) in patients with SCC and LCC.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrated that the BCL11A-XL isoform might be a
potential prognostic biomarker of SCC and LCC.

PMCID: PMC4598500
PMID: 26543611  [PubMed]


18. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 21;5:15215. doi: 10.1038/srep15215.

Transcription factor and miRNA co-regulatory network reveals shared and specific 
regulators in the development of B cell and T cell.

Lin Y(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Zhang Q(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Zhang HM(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Liu
W(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Liu CJ(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Li Q(5), Guo AY(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Bioinformatics &Molecular Imaging Key Laboratory, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China. (2)Department of Bioinformatics and
Systems Biology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074,
China. (3)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China. (4)College
of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, 430074, China. (5)Institute of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, China.

The maturation process of lymphocyte was related to many blood diseases, such as 
lymphoma and lymphoid leukemia. Many TFs and miRNAs were separately studied in
the development of B and T cells. In this study, we aim to discover the TF and
miRNA co-regulation and identify key regulators in the B and T cells maturation. 
We obtained the candidate genes, miRNAs and TFs for each stage of their
maturation, then constructed the TF-miRNA-gene feed-forward loops (FFLs) for each
stage by our previous methods. Statistical test for FFLs indicated their
enrichment and significance. TF-miRNA co-regulatory networks for each stage were 
constructed by combining their FFLs. Hub analysis revealed the key regulators in 
each stage, for example, MYC, STAT5A, PAX5 and miR-17<U+2009>~<U+2009>92 in the transition of
pro-B cells into pre-B cells. We also identified a few common regulators and
modules in two stages of B cell maturation (e.g. miR-146a/NFKB1/BCL11A) and two
stages of T cell maturation (e.g. miR-20/CCND2/SORL1), as well as some shared
regulators in the early stages of both B and T cell development. Our network will
help to increase understanding of mature process of B and T cell, as well as the 
related blood diseases.

PMCID: PMC4613730
PMID: 26487345  [PubMed - in process]


19. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Oct 20;112(42):12974-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1517729112. Epub 2015 Oct 5.

Discovery of progenitor cell signatures by time-series synexpression analysis
during Drosophila embryonic cell immortalization.

Dequéant ML(1), Fagegaltier D(2), Hu Y(3), Spirohn K(3), Simcox A(4), Hannon
GJ(5), Perrimon N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
mdequeant@genetics.med.harvard.edu perrimon@receptor.med.harvard.edu. (2)Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratories, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724; (3)Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115. (4)Department of Molecular
Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210; (5)Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724;
(6)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115
mdequeant@genetics.med.harvard.edu perrimon@receptor.med.harvard.edu.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 17;112(46):E6408.

The use of time series profiling to identify groups of functionally related genes
(synexpression groups) is a powerful approach for the discovery of gene function.
Here we apply this strategy during Ras(V12) immortalization of Drosophila
embryonic cells, a phenomenon not well characterized. Using high-resolution
transcriptional time-series datasets, we generated a gene network based on
temporal expression profile similarities. This analysis revealed that common
immortalized cells are related to adult muscle precursors (AMPs), a stem
cell-like population contributing to adult muscles and sharing properties with
vertebrate satellite cells. Remarkably, the immortalized cells retained the
capacity for myogenic differentiation when treated with the steroid hormone
ecdysone. Further, we validated in vivo the transcription factor CG9650, the
ortholog of mammalian Bcl11a/b, as a regulator of AMP proliferation predicted by 
our analysis. Our study demonstrates the power of time series synexpression
analysis to characterize Drosophila embryonic progenitor lines and identify
stem/progenitor cell regulators.

PMCID: PMC4620889 [Available on 2016-04-20]
PMID: 26438832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. OMICS. 2015 Oct;19(10):627-31. doi: 10.1089/omi.2015.0124. Epub 2015 Sep 22.

Association between Variants at BCL11A Erythroid-Specific Enhancer and Fetal
Hemoglobin Levels among Sickle Cell Disease Patients in Cameroon: Implications
for Future Therapeutic Interventions.

Pule GD(1), Ngo Bitoungui VJ(2), Chetcha Chemegni B(2), Kengne AP(3), Antonarakis
S(4), Wonkam A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Human Genetics, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Cape Town , Cape Town, South Africa . (2)2 Faculty of
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaoundé, Cameroon . (3)3
Non-Communicable Diseases Research Unit, South African Medical Research Council ,
Cape Town, South Africa . (4)4 Department of Genetic Medicine and Development,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva , Switzerland .

Variants in BCL11A were previously associated with fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels 
among Cameroonian sickle cell disease (SCD) patients, however explaining only ~2%
of the variance. In the same patients, we have investigated the relationship
between HbF and two SNPs in a BCL11A erythroid-specific enhancer (N=626). Minor
allele frequencies in rs7606173 and rs1427407 were 0.42 and 0.24, respectively.
Both variants were significantly associated with HbF levels (p=3.11e-08 and
p=6.04e-06, respectively) and explained 8% and 6.2% variations, respectively.
These data have confirmed a stronger effect on HbF of genomic variations at the
BCL11A erythroid-specific enhancer among patients with SCD in Cameroon, the first
report on a West African population. The relevance of these findings is of prime 
importance because the disruption of this enhancer would alter BCL11A expression 
in erythroid precursors and thus HbF expression, while sparing the induced
functional challenges of any alterations on the expression of this transcription 
factor in non-erythroid lineages, thus providing an attractive approach for new
treatment strategies of SCD.

PMCID: PMC4615773 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26393293  [PubMed - in process]


21. Genome Biol. 2015 Sep 21;16:199. doi: 10.1186/s13059-015-0778-y.

Single-cell analysis reveals key roles for Bcl11a in regulating stem cell fate
decisions.

Powers AN(1,)(2), Satija R(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)New York Genome Center, New York, NY, 10012, USA. rsatija@nygenome.org. (2)New
York University, Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York, NY, 10012,
USA. rsatija@nygenome.org.

Cell-cycle fluctuations drive significant transcriptomic heterogeneity in murine 
hematopoietic stem cells. Additionally, deletion of Bcl11a alters the regulation 
of hematopoietic stem cell quiescence, self-renewal, and fate choice.

PMCID: PMC4576375
PMID: 26390863  [PubMed - in process]


22. Genome Biol. 2015 Sep 21;16(1):178. doi: 10.1186/s13059-015-0739-5.

Single-cell transcriptomic reconstruction reveals cell cycle and multi-lineage
differentiation defects in Bcl11a-deficient hematopoietic stem cells.

Tsang JC(1), Yu Y(1), Burke S(1), Buettner F(2,)(3), Wang C(1), Kolodziejczyk
AA(1,)(2), Teichmann SA(1,)(2), Lu L(1,)(4), Liu P(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridgeshire, CB10 1SA, UK. (2)EMBL-European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome
Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, CB10 1SD, UK. (3)Helmholtz Zentrum 
München - German Research Center for Environmental Health, Institute of
Computational Biology, Neuherberg, Germany. (4)Shanghai Institute of Immunology, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200025, China.
(5)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridgeshire, CB10 1SA, UK. pl2@sanger.ac.uk. (6)Wellcome Trust - Medical
Research Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Tennis
Court Road, Cambridge, CB2 1QR, UK. pl2@sanger.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are a rare cell type with the ability
of long-term self-renewal and multipotency to reconstitute all blood lineages.
HSCs are typically purified from the bone marrow using cell surface markers.
Recent studies have identified significant cellular heterogeneities in the HSC
compartment with subsets of HSCs displaying lineage bias. We previously
discovered that the transcription factor Bcl11a has critical functions in the
lymphoid development of the HSC compartment.
RESULTS: In this report, we employ single-cell transcriptomic analysis to dissect
the molecular heterogeneities in HSCs. We profile the transcriptomes of 180
highly purified HSCs (Bcl11a (+/+) and Bcl11a (-/-)). Detailed analysis of the
RNA-seq data identifies cell cycle activity as the major source of transcriptomic
variation in the HSC compartment, which allows reconstruction of HSC cell cycle
progression in silico. Single-cell RNA-seq profiling of Bcl11a (-/-) HSCs reveals
abnormal proliferative phenotypes. Analysis of lineage gene expression suggests
that the Bcl11a (-/-) HSCs are constituted of two distinct
myeloerythroid-restricted subpopulations. Remarkably, similar myeloid-restricted 
cells could also be detected in the wild-type HSC compartment, suggesting
selective elimination of lymphoid-competent HSCs after Bcl11a deletion. These
defects are experimentally validated in serial transplantation experiments where 
Bcl11a (-/-) HSCs are myeloerythroid-restricted and defective in self-renewal.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates the power of single-cell transcriptomics in
dissecting cellular process and lineage heterogeneities in stem cell
compartments, and further reveals the molecular and cellular defects in the
Bcl11a-deficient HSC compartment.

PMCID: PMC4576406
PMID: 26387834  [PubMed - in process]


23. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2015 Aug;33:62-70. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2015.08.001. Epub 2015
Sep 14.

Hemoglobin switching's surprise: the versatile transcription factor BCL11A is a
master repressor of fetal hemoglobin.

Bauer DE(1), Orkin SH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, United States; Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, United States; Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, United States; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA
02138, United States. Electronic address: daniel.bauer@childrens.harvard.edu.
(2)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, United States; Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, United States; Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, United States; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA
02138, United States; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, United
States. Electronic address: stuart_orkin@dfci.harvard.edu.

The major disorders of ß-globin, sickle cell disease and ß-thalassemia, may be
ameliorated by expression of the fetal gene paralog <U+03B3>-globin. Uncertainty
regarding the mechanisms repressing fetal hemoglobin in the adult stage has
served as a puzzle of developmental gene regulation as well as a barrier to
rational therapeutic design. Recent genome-wide association studies implicated
the zinc-finger transcriptional repressor BCL11A in fetal hemoglobin regulation. 
Extensive genetic analyses have validated BCL11A as a potent repressor of fetal
hemoglobin level. Studies of BCL11A exemplify how contextual gene regulation may 
often be the substrate for trait-associated common genetic variation. These
discoveries have suggested novel rational approaches for the ß-hemoglobin
disorders including therapeutic genome editing.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4705561 [Available on 2016-09-14]
PMID: 26375765  [PubMed - in process]


24. Nature. 2015 Nov 12;527(7577):192-7. doi: 10.1038/nature15521. Epub 2015 Sep 16.

BCL11A enhancer dissection by Cas9-mediated in situ saturating mutagenesis.

Canver MC(1), Smith EC(1), Sher F(1), Pinello L(2), Sanjana NE(3), Shalem O(3),
Chen DD(1), Schupp PG(1), Vinjamur DS(1), Garcia SP(2), Luc S(1), Kurita R(4),
Nakamura Y(4,)(5), Fujiwara Y(1,)(6), Maeda T(7), Yuan GC(2), Zhang F(3), Orkin
SH(1,)(6), Bauer DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Department of
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA. (2)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. 
(3)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, McGovern Institute for Brain Research,
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences and Department of Biological
Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA. (4)Cell Engineering
Division, RIKEN BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.
(5)Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8577, Japan. (6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA. (7)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Enhancers, critical determinants of cellular identity, are commonly recognized by
correlative chromatin marks and gain-of-function potential, although only
loss-of-function studies can demonstrate their requirement in the native genomic 
context. Previously, we identified an erythroid enhancer of human BCL11A, subject
to common genetic variation associated with the fetal haemoglobin level, the
mouse orthologue of which is necessary for erythroid BCL11A expression. Here we
develop pooled clustered regularly interspaced palindromic repeat (CRISPR)-Cas9
guide RNA libraries to perform in situ saturating mutagenesis of the human and
mouse enhancers. This approach reveals critical minimal features and discrete
vulnerabilities of these enhancers. Despite conserved function of the composite
enhancers, their architecture diverges. The crucial human sequences appear to be 
primate-specific. Through editing of primary human progenitors and mouse
transgenesis, we validate the BCL11A erythroid enhancer as a target for fetal
haemoglobin reinduction. The detailed enhancer map will inform therapeutic genome
editing, and the screening approach described here is generally applicable to
functional interrogation of non-coding genomic elements.

PMCID: PMC4644101 [Available on 2016-05-12]
PMID: 26375006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Exp Hematol. 2015 Dec;43(12):1062-1071.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2015.08.011.
Epub 2015 Sep 3.

Development and characterization of K562 cell clones expressing BCL11A-XL:
Decreased hemoglobin production with fetal hemoglobin inducers and its rescue
with mithramycin.

Finotti A(1), Gasparello J(2), Breveglieri G(1), Cosenza LC(1), Montagner G(2),
Bresciani A(3), Altamura S(3), Bianchi N(2), Martini E(2), Gallerani E(2),
Borgatti M(1), Gambari R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for the Development of Pharmacological and Pharmacogenomic Therapy 
of Thalassaemia, Biotechnology Center, Ferrara University, Ferrara, Italy;
Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Ferrara University, Ferrara,
Italy. (2)Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Ferrara University,
Ferrara, Italy. (3)Department of biology, Pomezia, Italy. (4)Laboratory for the
Development of Pharmacological and Pharmacogenomic Therapy of Thalassaemia,
Biotechnology Center, Ferrara University, Ferrara, Italy; Department of Life
Sciences and Biotechnology, Ferrara University, Ferrara, Italy. Electronic
address: gam@unife.it.

Induction of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) is considered a promising strategy in the
treatment of ß-thalassemia, in which production of adult hemoglobin (HbA) is
impaired by mutations affecting the ß-globin gene. Recent results indicate that
B-cell lymphoma/leukemia 11A (BCL11A) is a major repressor of <U+03B3>-globin gene
expression. Therefore, disrupting the binding of the BCL11A transcriptional
repressor complex to the <U+03B3>-globin gene promoter provides a novel approach for
inducing expression of the <U+03B3>-globin genes. To develop a cellular screening system
for the identification of BCL11A inhibitors, we produced K562 cell clones with
integrated copies of a BCL11A-XL expressing vector. We characterized 12 K562
clones expressing different levels of BCL11A-XL and found that a clear inverse
relationship does exist between the levels of BCL11A-XL and the extent of
hemoglobinization induced by a panel of HbF inducers. Using mithramycin as an
inducer, we found that this molecule was the only HbF inducer efficient in
rescuing the ability to differentiate along the erythroid program, even in K562
cell clones expressing high levels of BCL11A-XL, suggesting that BCL11A-XL
activity is counteracted by mithramycin.

Copyright © 2015 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4670904
PMID: 26342260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Expert Rev Hematol. 2015 Oct;8(5):669-79. doi: 10.1586/17474086.2015.1078235.
Epub 2015 Sep 1.

A systematic review of known mechanisms of hydroxyurea-induced fetal hemoglobin
for treatment of sickle cell disease.

Pule GD(1), Mowla S, Novitzky N, Wiysonge CS, Wonkam A.

Author information: 
(1)a 1 Department of Medicine, Division of Human Genetics, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, Republic of South Africa.

AIM: To report on molecular mechanisms of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) induction by
hydroxyurea (HU) for the treatment of sickle cell disease.
STUDY DESIGN: Systematic review.
RESULTS: Studies have provided consistent associations between genomic variations
in HbF-promoting loci and variable HbF level in response to HU. Numerous signal
transduction pathways have been implicated, through the identification of key
genomic variants in BCL11A, HBS1L-MYB, SAR1 or XmnI polymorphism that predispose 
the response to the treatment, and signal transduction pathways that modulate
<U+03B3>-globin expression (cAMP/cGMP; Gia/c-Jun N-terminal kinase/Jun; methylation and 
miRNA). Three main molecular pathways have been reported: i) Epigenetic
modifications, transcriptional events and signaling pathways involved in
HU-mediated response, ii) Signaling pathways involving HU-mediated response and
iii) Post-transcriptional pathways (regulation by miRNAs).
CONCLUSIONS: The complete picture of HU-mediated mechanisms of HbF production in 
Sickle Cell Disease remains elusive. Research on post-transcriptional mechanisms 
could lead to therapeutic targets that may minimize alterations to the cellular
transcriptome.

PMID: 26327494  [PubMed - in process]


27. J Diabetes Res. 2015;2015:613236. doi: 10.1155/2015/613236. Epub 2015 Jul 28.

Association Analysis of Genetic Variants with Type 2 Diabetes in a Mongolian
Population in China.

Bai H(1), Liu H(1), Suyalatu S(1), Guo X(2), Chu S(1), Chen Y(3), Lan T(3),
Borjigin B(1), Orlov YL(4), Posukh OL(4), Yang X(5), Guilan G(1), Osipova LP(6), 
Wu Q(1), Narisu N(7).

Author information: 
(1)Inner Mongolia University for the Nationalities, Tongliao, Inner Mongolia
028000, China. (2)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China ; Department of Biology,
University of Copenhagen, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen
518083, China. (4)The Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences (SB RAS), Novosibirsk 630090, Russia ; Novosibirsk
State University, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia. (5)College of Animal Science and
Technology, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, China. (6)The
Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of
Sciences (SB RAS), Novosibirsk 630090, Russia. (7)Medical Genomics and Metabolic 
Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

The large scale genome wide association studies (GWAS) have identified
approximately 80 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) conferring susceptibility
to type 2 diabetes (T2D). However, most of these loci have not been replicated in
diverse populations and much genetic heterogeneity has been observed across
ethnic groups. We tested 28 SNPs previously found to be associated with T2D by
GWAS in a Mongolian sample of Northern China (497 diagnosed with T2D and 469
controls) for association with T2D and diabetes related quantitative traits. We
replicated T2D association of 11 SNPs, namely, rs7578326 (IRS1), rs1531343
(HMGA2), rs8042680 (PRC1), rs7578597 (THADA), rs1333051 (CDKN2), rs6723108
(TMEM163), rs163182 and rs2237897 (KCNQ1), rs1387153 (MTNR1B), rs243021 (BCL11A),
and rs10229583 (PAX4) in our sample. Further, we showed that risk allele of the
strongest T2D associated SNP in our sample, rs757832 (IRS1), is associated with
increased level of TG. We observed substantial difference of T2D risk allele
frequency between the Mongolian sample and the 1000G Caucasian sample for a few
SNPs, including rs6723108 (TMEM163) whose risk allele reaches near fixation in
the Mongolian sample. Further study of genetic architecture of these variants in 
susceptibility of T2D is needed to understand the role of these variants in
heterogeneous populations.

PMCID: PMC4531200
PMID: 26290879  [PubMed - in process]


28. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2015 Nov;19(6):711-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2015.07.013.
Epub 2015 Aug 4.

A de-novo interstitial microduplication involving 2p16.1-p15 and mirroring
2p16.1-p15 microdeletion syndrome: Clinical and molecular analysis.

Mimouni-Bloch A(1), Yeshaya J(2), Kahana S(3), Maya I(4), Basel-Vanagaite L(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Pediatric Neurology and Developmental Unit, Loewenstein Rehabilitation
Hospital 278 Ahuza Street, Raanana, 43100, Israel; Sackler Faculty of Medicine,
Tel-Aviv University, P.O. 39040, Ramat-Aviv, Tel-Aviv, 69978, Israel. Electronic 
address: Aviva100@bezeqint.net. (2)Raphael Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin
Medical Center Beilinson Campus and Schneider Children's Medical Center of
Israel, Derech Ze'ev Jabotinsky 39, Petah Tikva, 4941492, Israel. Electronic
address: JYeshaya@clalit.org.il. (3)Raphael Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin
Medical Center Beilinson Campus and Schneider Children's Medical Center of
Israel, Derech Ze'ev Jabotinsky 39, Petah Tikva, 4941492, Israel. Electronic
address: Saritka1@clalit.org.il. (4)Raphael Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin
Medical Center Beilinson Campus and Schneider Children's Medical Center of
Israel, Derech Ze'ev Jabotinsky 39, Petah Tikva, 4941492, Israel. Electronic
address: Iditdanny@gmail.com. (5)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv
University, P.O. 39040, Ramat-Aviv, Tel-Aviv, 69978, Israel; Raphael Recanati
Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center Beilinson Campus and Schneider Children's
Medical Center of Israel, Derech Ze'ev Jabotinsky 39, Petah Tikva, 4941492,
Israel; Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Rabin Medical Center, Derech Ze'ev
Jabotinsky 39, Petah Tikva, 4941492, Israel. Electronic address:
basel@post.tau.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: Microdeletions of various sizes in the 2p16.1-p15 chromosomal region 
have been grouped together under the 2p16.1-p15 microdeletion syndrome. Children 
with this syndrome generally share certain features including microcephaly,
developmental delay, facial dysmorphism, urogenital and skeletal abnormalities.
We present a child with a de-novo interstitial 1665 kb duplication of 2p16.1-p15.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Clinical features of this child are distinct from those of
children with the 2p16.1-p15 microdeletion syndrome, specifically the head
circumference which is within the normal range and mild intellectual disability
with absence of autistic behaviors. Microduplications many times bear milder
clinical phenotypes in comparison with corresponding microdeletion syndromes.
Indeed, as compared to the microdeletion syndrome patients, the 2p16.1-p15
microduplication seems to have a milder cognitive effect and no effect on other
body systems. Limited information available in genetic databases about cases with
overlapping duplications indicates that they all have abnormal developmental
phenotypes.
CONCLUSION: The involvement of genes in this location including BCL11A, USP34 and
PEX13, affecting fundamental developmental processes both within and outside the 
nervous system may explain the clinical features of the individual described in
this report.

Copyright © 2015 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26278498  [PubMed - in process]


29. Neuron. 2015 Jul 15;87(2):311-25. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.06.023.

Bcl11a (Ctip1) Controls Migration of Cortical Projection Neurons through
Regulation of Sema3c.

Wiegreffe C(1), Simon R(1), Peschkes K(1), Kling C(1), Strehle M(2), Cheng J(1), 
Srivatsa S(3), Liu P(4), Jenkins NA(5), Copeland NG(5), Tarabykin V(6), Britsch
S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Anatomy, Ulm University,
Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany. (2)Max Delbrück Center for
Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany. (3)Institute
of Cell Biology and Neurobiology, Center for Anatomy, Charité-Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Virchowweg 6, 10117 Berlin, Germany. (4)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, 
Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1HH, UK. (5)The Methodist Hospital Research Institute,
6670 Bertner Avenue, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (6)Institute of Cell Biology and
Neurobiology, Center for Anatomy, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Virchowweg 
6, 10117 Berlin, Germany; Institute of Biology and Biomedicine, Lobachevsky State
University of Nizhny Novgerod, 23 Prospekt Gagarina (Gagarin Avenue), 603950
Nizhny Novgorod, Russia. (7)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Anatomy, Ulm
University, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany. Electronic address:
stefan.britsch@uni-ulm.de.

During neocortical development, neurons undergo polarization, oriented migration,
and layer-type-specific differentiation. The transcriptional programs underlying 
these processes are not completely understood. Here, we show that the
transcription factor Bcl11a regulates polarity and migration of upper layer
neurons. Bcl11a-deficient late-born neurons fail to correctly switch from
multipolar to bipolar morphology, resulting in impaired radial migration. We show
that the expression of Sema3c is increased in migrating Bcl11a-deficient neurons 
and that Bcl11a is a direct negative regulator of Sema3c transcription. In vivo
gain-of-function and rescue experiments demonstrate that Sema3c is a major
downstream effector of Bcl11a required for the cell polarity switch and for the
migration of upper layer neurons. Our data uncover a novel
Bcl11a/Sema3c-dependent regulatory pathway used by migrating cortical neurons.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26182416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Aug;55(2):161-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2015.05.006. Epub 
2015 May 27.

Intermediaries of branched chain amino acid metabolism induce fetal hemoglobin,
and repress SOX6 and BCL11A, in definitive erythroid cells.

Karkashon S(1), Raghupathy R(1), Bhatia H(1), Dutta A(1), Hess S(2), Higgs J(3), 
Tifft CJ(3), Little JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Oncology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center, 1300 Morris Park Blvd., Bronx, NY 10461, 
United States. (2)California Institute of Technology, Beckman Institute, Proteome
Exploration Laboratory, 1200 E California Blvd, MC139-74, Pasadena, CA 91125,
United States. (3)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Center for Hospital-based 
Specialties, Children's National Medical Center, 111 Michigan Ave. N.W.,
Washington, DC 20010-2970, United States. (4)Division of Hematology, Department
of Oncology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center,
1300 Morris Park Blvd., Bronx, NY 10461, United States. Electronic address:
Jane.little@uhhospitals.org.

High levels of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) can ameliorate human ß-globin gene
disorders. The short chain fatty acid butyrate is the paradigmatic metabolic
intermediary that induces HbF. Inherited disorders of branched-chain amino acid
(BCAA) metabolism have been associated with supranormal HbF levels beyond
infancy, e.g., propionic acidemia (PA) and methylmalonic acidemia (MMA). We
tested intermediaries of BCAA metabolism for their effects on definitive
erythropoiesis. Like butyrate, the elevated BCAA intermediaries isovalerate,
isobutyrate, and propionate, induce fetal globin gene expression in murine EryD
in vitro, are associated with bulk histone H3 hyperacylation, and repress the
transcription of key gamma globin regulatory factors, notably BCL11A and SOX6.
Metabolic intermediaries that are elevated in Maple Syrup Urine Disease (MSUD)
affect none of these processes. Percent HbF and gamma (<U+03B3>) chain isoforms were
also measured in non-anemic, therapeutically optimized subjects with MSUD (Group 
I, n=6) or with Isovaleric Acidemia (IVA), MMA, or PA (Group II, n=5). Mean HbF
was 0.24 ± 0.15% in Group I and 0.87 ± 0.13% in Group II (p=.01); only the G<U+03B3>
isoform was detected. We conclude that a family of biochemically related
intermediaries of branched chain amino acid metabolism induces fetal hemoglobin
during definitive erythropoiesis, with mechanisms that mirror those so far
identified for butyrate.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26142333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Aug;55(2):95-100. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2015.05.004. Epub
2015 May 12.

Impact of epigenetic mechanisms on therapeutic approaches of hemoglobinopathies.

Costa D(1), Capuano M(2), Sommese L(2), Napoli C(3).

Author information: 
(1)U.O.C. Immunohematology, Transfusion Medicine and Transplant Immunology
(SIMT), Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria (AOU), Second University of Naples,
Italy. Electronic address: dario.costa@policliniconapoli.it. (2)U.O.C.
Immunohematology, Transfusion Medicine and Transplant Immunology (SIMT), Azienda 
Ospedaliera Universitaria (AOU), Second University of Naples, Italy. (3)U.O.C.
Immunohematology, Transfusion Medicine and Transplant Immunology (SIMT), Azienda 
Ospedaliera Universitaria (AOU), Second University of Naples, Italy; Department
of Medical, Surgical, Neurological, Metabolic and Geriatric Sciences, Second
University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

Hemoglobinopathies are inherited disorders characterized by anomalies of
structure, function or production of globin chains. From conception to adulthood,
the different expressions over time of the various globin chains depend on the
activation/deactivation of different globin genes through methylation and
chromatin remodeling processes. The most significant clinical disorders are
ß-thalassemia and sickle cell disease. The clinical management of these disorders
engages regular blood transfusions. Another therapy is represented by allogeneic 
hematopoietic cells transplantation. There are several studies based on the
innovative therapeutic strategies that involve some epigenetic mechanisms focused
on the reactivation of <U+03B3>-globin gene expression. The induction of fetal
hemoglobin expression in adulthood is an effective therapy for these disorders.
Particularly interesting are the recent data on miRNAs showing the interaction of
these molecules with different transcription factors such as MYB, KLF, BCL11A and
SOX6. The aim of this review was to report an update on the dynamic epigenetic
modifications as targets for therapy in hemoglobinopathies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26142322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Hematology. 2015 Jun 30. [Epub ahead of print]

rs11886868 and rs4671393 of BCL11A associated with HbF level variation and
modulate clinical events among sickle cell anemia patients.

Chaouch L, Moumni I, Ouragini H, Darragi I, Kalai M, Chaouachi D, Boudrigua I,
Hafsia R, Abbes S.

Aims Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) modulates the phenotype of sickle cell anemia (SCA)
by inhibiting deoxy sickle hemoglobin (HbS) polymerization. HbF genes are
genetically regulated, and the level of HbF and its distribution among sickle
erythrocytes is highly variable. Herein, we aimed to determine whether two
functional polymorphisms of BCL11A are implicated in the variation of HbF and
clinical events in SCA Tunisian patients. Material and methods The studied
population consisted of 148 SCA patients with SS phenotype. The group of patients
was divided into two subgroups according to the threshold point of %HbF which is 
15%. Genotyping of rs11886868 and rs4671393 was performed using PCR/Sequencing.
To test for trait association with the candidate SNPs, genotype and allele
frequencies between 'group who had %HbF < 15' and 'group who had %HbF >15'
(controls) were compared using Pearson's chi-square test (compare 2, version
1.02). The association of each genotype and the combined genotype with
complications was performed by logistic regression test. Results Our findings
showed that the majority of patients carried genotype CT of rs11886868 and
genotypes AG and GG of rs4671393 present HbF level < 15%. RR = 0.08, RR = 0.176, 
and RR = 0.189, respectively. The results showed a significant association
between the alleles T of rs11886868 and G of rs4671393 and %HbF < 15% with
P = 0.016; RR = 0.39 and P = 8.9 × 10(-3): RR = 0.567, respectively.
Interestingly, the C allele of the rs11886868 and the A allele of the rs46713939 
were associated with an ameliorated phenotype in patient's SCA. The combination
of the genotypes GG and CT explains more phenotypic variance than the sum of the 
two BCL11A SNPs taken individually.

PMID: 26125973  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


33. Mol Ther. 2015 Sep;23(9):1465-74. doi: 10.1038/mt.2015.113. Epub 2015 Jun 17.

miRNA-embedded shRNAs for Lineage-specific BCL11A Knockdown and Hemoglobin F
Induction.

Guda S(1,)(2), Brendel C(1,)(2), Renella R(1,)(2,)(3), Du P(1,)(4), Bauer
DE(1,)(2,)(3), Canver MC(2), Grenier JK(5), Grimson AW(6), Kamran SC(2,)(7),
Thornton J(1,)(4), de Boer H(1), Root DE(5), Milsom MD(8), Orkin
SH(1,)(2,)(3,)(7), Gregory RI(1,)(4), Williams DA(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (4)Stem Cell Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Department 
of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School,
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (5)Genetic Perturbation 
Platform, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology & Genetics, College of Arts and Sciences,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA. (7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (8)Division of Stem Cells and Cancer, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg Institute for Stem Cell Technology and
Experimental Medicine, Heidelberg, Germany.

RNA interference (RNAi) technology using short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) expressed
via RNA polymerase (pol) III promoters has been widely exploited to modulate gene
expression in a variety of mammalian cell types. For certain applications, such
as lineage-specific knockdown, embedding targeting sequences into pol II-driven
microRNA (miRNA) architecture is required. Here, using the potential therapeutic 
target BCL11A, we demonstrate that pol III-driven shRNAs lead to significantly
increased knockdown but also increased cytotoxcity in comparison to pol II-driven
miRNA adapted shRNAs (shRNA(miR)) in multiple hematopoietic cell lines. We show
that the two expression systems yield mature guide strand sequences that differ
by a 4<U+2009>bp shift. This results in alternate seed sequences and consequently
influences the efficacy of target gene knockdown. Incorporating a corresponding
4<U+2009>bp shift into the guide strand of shRNA(miR)s resulted in improved knockdown
efficiency of BCL11A. This was associated with a significant de-repression of the
hemoglobin target of BCL11A, human <U+03B3>-globin or the murine homolog Hbb-y. Our
results suggest the requirement for optimization of shRNA sequences upon
incorporation into a miRNA backbone. These findings have important implications
in future design of shRNA(miR)s for RNAi-based therapy in hemoglobinopathies and 
other diseases requiring lineage-specific expression of gene silencing sequences.

PMID: 26080908  [PubMed - in process]


34. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 8;10(6):e0129431. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129431.
eCollection 2015.

Variation in Gamma-Globin Expression before and after Induction with Hydroxyurea 
Associated with BCL11A, KLF1 and TAL1.

Grieco AJ(1), Billett HH(2), Green NS(3), Driscoll MC(4), Bouhassira EE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York, United States of America. (2)Division of Hematology, Department of
Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center/Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx,
New York, United States of America. (3)Division of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology/Stem Cell Transplantation, Department of Pediatrics, Columbia
University, New York, New York, United States of America. (4)Department of
Pediatrics, Division of Hematology-Oncology, AECOM, Bronx, New York, United
States of America.

The molecular mechanisms governing <U+03B3>-globin expression in a subset of fetal
hemoglobin (a2<U+03B3>2: HbF) expressing red blood cells (F-cells) and the mechanisms
underlying the variability of response to hydroxyurea induced <U+03B3>-globin expression
in the treatment of sickle cell disease are not completely understood. Here we
analyzed intra-person clonal populations of basophilic erythroblasts (baso-Es)
derived from bone marrow common myeloid progenitors in serum free cultures and
report the level of fetal hemoglobin production in F-cells negatively correlates 
with expression of BCL11A, KLF1 and TAL1. We then examined the effects of
hydroxyurea on these three transcription factors and conclude that a successful
induction of <U+03B3>-globin includes a reduction in BCL11A, KLF1 and TAL1 expression.
These data suggests that expression changes in this transcription factor network 
modulate <U+03B3>-globin expression in F-cells during steady state erythropoiesis and
after induction with hydroxyurea.

PMCID: PMC4459969
PMID: 26053062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Cell Mol Immunol. 2015 Jun 8. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2015.39. [Epub ahead of print]

The non-canonical Wnt pathway negatively regulates dendritic cell differentiation
by inhibiting the expansion of Flt3(+) lymphocyte-primed multipotent precursors.

Xiao J(1), Zhou H(1), Wu N(1), Wu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life Sciences, Tsinghua University School of 
Medicine, Beijing 100084, China.

The differentiation of dendritic cells (DC) is affected by the aging process.
However, the molecular mechanisms responsible for the alteration of DC
development in aged mice have not been clarified. Recently, Wnt5a was reported to
be an important aging-related molecule in hematopoietic systems. Here, we
hypothesized that the increased expression of Wnt5a in aged hematopoietic
precursors led to deficient DC differentiation in aged mice. The percentages and 
cell numbers of plasmacytoid DC (pDC) and CD172a(-)CD8a(+)conventional DC (cDC)
were decreased in aged mice compared to young mice. Further analysis indicated
that the hematopoietic precursors that gave rise to DC, including Flt3(+)
lymphoid-primed multipotent precursors (LMPP), common lymphoid progenitors (CLP) 
and common DC precursors (CDP), were all decreased in the bone marrow of aged
mice. Overexpression of Wnt5a in hematopoietic precursors strongly affected the
differentiation of cDC and pDC in vivo. Treatment of hematopoietic stem cells
(HSC) with Wnt5a led to a significant decrease in the differentiation of the
LMPP, CLP and CDP populations that was similar to the decrease observed in the
bone marrow (BM) HSC of aged mice. Molecular studies demonstrated that Wnt5a
negatively regulated the expression of an array of genes important for DC
differentiation, including Flt3, Gfi-1, Ikaros, Bcl11a, and IL-7R, by activating 
the Wnt5a-Cdc42 pathway. Finally, we rejuvenated DC differentiation from aged
precursors by blocking the non-canonical Wnt pathway. Our study identified the
key roles of the non-canonical Wnt pathway in DC differentiation and DC
aging.Cellular & Molecular Immunology advance online publication, 8 June 2015;
doi:10.1038/cmi.2015.39.

PMID: 26051474  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


36. Blood. 2015 Jul 2;126(1):89-93. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-04-638528. Epub 2015 May 
27.

2p15-p16.1 microdeletions encompassing and proximal to BCL11A are associated with
elevated HbF in addition to neurologic impairment.

Funnell AP(1), Prontera P(2), Ottaviani V(3), Piccione M(4), Giambona A(5),
Maggio A(5), Ciaffoni F(6), Stehling-Sun S(1), Marra M(6), Masiello F(6),
Varricchio L(7), Stamatoyannopoulos JA(8), Migliaccio AR(9), Papayannopoulou
T(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA;
(2)Centro di Riferimento Regionale Genetica Medica, Azienda
Ospedaliera-Universitaria di Perugia, Perugia, Italy; (3)Genetica Medica, IRCCS
"Ospedale Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza," San Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy;
(4)Dipartimento Scienze per la Promozione della Salute e Materno-Infantile "G.
D'Alessandro," Università degli Studi di Palermo, Palermo, Italy; (5)Unità
Operative Complesse di Ematologia delle Malattie Rare del Sangue e degli Organi
Emopoietici, Palermo, Italy; (6)Department of Biologia Cellulare and
Neuroscience, Istituto Superiore Sanita, Rome, Italy; (7)Department of Medicine, 
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY; (8)Department of Genome Sciences,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA; Division of Oncology, Department of
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA; (9)Department of Medicine, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY; Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy; and. (10)Division of Hematology,
Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.

Elevated fetal hemoglobin (HbF) ameliorates the clinical severity of
hemoglobinopathies such as ß-thalassemia and sickle cell anemia. Currently, the
only curative approach for individuals under chronic transfusion/chelation
support therapy is allogeneic stem cell transplantation. However, recent analyses
of heritable variations in HbF levels have provided a new therapeutic target for 
HbF reactivation: the transcriptional repressor BCL11A. Erythroid-specific BCL11A
abrogation is now actively being sought as a therapeutic avenue, but the specific
impact of such disruption in humans remains to be determined. Although single
nucleotide polymorphisms in BCL11A erythroid regulatory elements have been
reported, coding mutations are scarcer. It is thus of great interest that
patients have recently been described with microdeletions encompassing BCL11A.
These patients display neurodevelopmental abnormalities, but whether they show
increased HbF has not been reported. We have examined the hematological
phenotype, HbF levels, and erythroid BCL11A expression in 3 such patients.
Haploinsufficiency of BCL11A induces only partial developmental <U+03B3>-globin
silencing. Of greater interest is that a patient with a downstream deletion
exhibits reduced BCL11A expression and increased HbF. Novel erythroid-specific
regulatory elements in this region may be required for normal erythroid BCL11A
expression, whereas loss of separate elements in the developing brain may explain
the neurological phenotype.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4492199 [Available on 2016-07-02]
PMID: 26019277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jul;35(14):2541-53. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00035-15. Epub 2015 May 
18.

Pharmacological Induction of Human Fetal Globin Gene in Hydroxyurea-Resistant
Primary Adult Erythroid Cells.

Chou YC(1), Chen RL(1), Lai ZS(1), Song JS(2), Chao YS(2), Shen CK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Institute 
of Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Research, National Health Research
Institutes, Miaoli, Taiwan. (3)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica,
Taipei, Taiwan ckshen@imb.sinica.edu.tw.

Pharmacological induction of the fetal <U+03B3> globin gene and the consequent formation
of HbF (a2/<U+03B3>2) in adult erythroid cells are one feasible therapeutic strategy for
sickle cell disease (SCD) and severe ß-thalassemias. Hydroxyurea (HU) is the
current drug of choice for SCD, but serious side effects limit its clinical use. 
Moreover, 30 to 50% of patients are irresponsive to HU treatment. We have used
high-throughput screening to identify
benzo[de]benzo[4,5]imidazo[2,1-a]isoquinolin-7-one and its derivatives (compounds
I to VI) as potent <U+03B3> globin inducers. Of the compounds, I to V exert superior <U+03B3>
globin induction and have better therapeutic potential than HU, likely because of
their activation of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling
pathway and modulation of expression levels and/or chromosome binding of <U+03B3> globin
gene regulators, including BCL11A, and chromatin structure over the <U+03B3> globin
promoter. Unlike sodium butyrate (NaB), the global levels of acetylated histones 
H3 and H4 are not changed by compound II treatment. Remarkably, compound II
induces the <U+03B3> globin gene in HU-resistant primary human adult erythroid cells,
the p38 signaling pathway of which appears to be irresponsive to HU and NaB as
well as compound II. This study provides a new framework for the development of
new and superior compounds for treating SCD and severe ß-thalassemias.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4475914
PMID: 25986606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Eur J Med Genet. 2015 Jun-Jul;58(6-7):351-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.04.006.
Epub 2015 May 13.

Brain malformations in a patient with deletion 2p16.1: A refinement of the
phenotype to BCL11A.

Balci TB(1), Sawyer SL(1), Davila J(2), Humphreys P(3), Dyment DA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa,
Canada. (2)Department of Radiology, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario,
Ottawa, Canada. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neurology, Children's
Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Canada. (4)Department of Genetics,
Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Canada. Electronic address:
ddyment@cheo.on.ca.

Microdeletions of 2p15-16.1 have been reported in 15 patients with a recognizable
syndrome of dysmorphic features, intellectual disability and microcephaly. Facial
features include telecanthus, short palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, a broad
nasal root, smooth and long philtrum and large ears. Brain malformations can be
observed in this syndrome and include hypoplasia of the corpus callosum and a
simplified cortical gyral pattern. Case reports have narrowed the critical region
of the neurodevelopmental phenotype to a region that spans the B-cell
CLL/lymphoma 11A (BCL11A) gene. Here we present a 3-year-old normocephalic girl
with moderate development delay and dysmorphic features including a prominent
forehead, telecanthus, depressed nasal bridge, thin upper vermilion and a small
chin. Magnetic resonance imaging shows enlargement of the lateral, third and
fourth ventricles and hypoplastic corpus callosum, cerebellar vermis and pons.
Array CGH revealed a 0.875 Mb de novo deletion at 2p16.1 that includes only
BCL11A. The moderate delays, hypoplastic and dysmorphic corpus callosum and
hippocampi and the facial features are in keeping with the previously described
2p15-16.1 microdeletion syndrome. However, hypoplasia of the pons and cerebellum 
are not commonly recognized features and are reminiscent of the brain
malformations observed in individuals with a mutation in CASK. CASK is known to
interact with BCL11A in the normal growth of axons. This case report highlights
the role of BCL11A in 2p15-16.1 microdeletion syndrome and the unique phenotype
suggests a common pathway for BCL11A and other genes in neurodevelopment.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25979662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Neurosci. 2015 May 13;35(19):7552-64. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0169-15.2015.

The Specification of Cortical Subcerebral Projection Neurons Depends on the
Direct Repression of TBR1 by CTIP1/BCL11a.

Cánovas J(1), Berndt FA(1), Sepúlveda H(2), Aguilar R(2), Veloso FA(2), Montecino
M(2), Oliva C(1), Maass JC(3), Sierralta J(4), Kukuljan M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute and Program of Physiology and Biophysics,
Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile, Santiago 8380453, Chile. (2)Center for
Biomedical Research and FONDAP Center for Genome Regulation, Universidad Andrés
Bello, Santiago 8370146, Chile, and. (3)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute and
Program of Physiology and Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile, 
Santiago 8380453, Chile, Department of Otolaryngology, Hospital Clínico,
Universidad de Chile, Santiago 8380456, Chile. (4)Biomedical Neuroscience
Institute and Program of Physiology and Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine,
Universidad de Chile, Santiago 8380453, Chile, kukuljan@med.uchile.cl
jimena@neuro.med.uchile.cl.

The acquisition of distinct neuronal fates is fundamental for the function of the
cerebral cortex. We find that the development of subcerebral projections from
layer 5 neurons in the mouse neocortex depends on the high levels of expression
of the transcription factor CTIP1; CTIP1 is coexpressed with CTIP2 in neurons
that project to subcerebral targets and with SATB2 in those that project to the
contralateral cortex. CTIP1 directly represses Tbr1 in layer 5, which appears as 
a critical step for the acquisition of the subcerebral fate. In contrast, lower
levels of CTIP1 in layer 6 are required for TBR1 expression, which directs the
corticothalamic fate. CTIP1 does not appear to play a critical role in the
acquisition of the callosal projection fate in layer 5. These findings unravel a 
key step in the acquisition of cell fate for closely related corticofugal neurons
and indicate that differential dosages of transcriptions factors are critical to 
specify different neuronal identities.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/357552-13$15.00/0.

PMID: 25972180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cardiovasc J Afr. 2015 Mar-Apr;26(2 Suppl 1):S50-5. doi: 10.5830/CVJA-2015-040.

Sickle cell disease and H3Africa: enhancing genomic research on cardiovascular
diseases in African patients.

Wonkam A(1), Makani J(2), Ofori-Aquah S(3), Nnodu OE(4), Treadwell M(5), Royal
C(6), Ohene-Frempong K(7); Members of the H3Africa Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, South Africa. ambroise.wonkam@uct.ac.za. (2)Muhimbili University of Health 
and Allied Sciences, Dar-Es-Salaam, Tanzania. (3)Center for Translational and
International Hematology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA.
(4)Department of Haematology and Blood Transfusion, College of Health Sciences,
University of Abuja, Abuja, Nigeria/Department of Haematology and Blood
Transfusion, University of Abuja Teaching Hospital, Gwagwalada, Abuja, Nigeria.
(5)Hematology/Oncology Department, UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital, Oakland,
USA. (6)Department of African and African American Studies, Duke University,
Durham, USA. (7)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Comprehensive Sickle Cell
Centre, Philadelphia, USA.

BACKGROUND: Sickle cell disease (SCD) has a high prevalence in sub-Saharan
Africa. There are several cardiovascular phenotypes in SCD that contribute to its
morbidity and mortality.
DISCUSSION: SCD is characterised by marked clinical variability, with genetic
factors playing key modulating roles. Studies in Tanzania and Cameroon have
reported that singlenucleotide polymorphisms in BCL11A and HBS1L-MYB loci and
co-inheritance of alpha-thalassaemia impact on foetal haemoglobin levels and
clinical severity. The prevalence of overt stroke among SCD patients in Cameroon 
(6.7%) and Nigeria (8.7%) suggests a higher burden than in high-income countries.
There is also some evidence of high burden of kidney disease and pulmonary
hypertension in SCD; however, the burden and genetics of these cardiovascular
conditions have seldom been investigated in Africa.
CONCLUSIONS: Several H3Africa projects are focused on cardiovascular diseases and
present major opportunities to build genome-based research on existing SCD
platforms in Africa to transform the health outcomes of patients.

PMCID: PMC4547555
PMID: 25962948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Bioinformatics. 2015 Sep 1;31(17):2879-81. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv284.
Epub 2015 May 6.

Identification of C2H2-ZF binding preferences from ChIP-seq data using RCADE.

Najafabadi HS(1), Albu M(1), Hughes TR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada. (2)Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, Department of Molecular Genetics,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada and Canadian Institute for Advanced
Research, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Current methods for motif discovery from chromatin immunoprecipitation followed
by sequencing (ChIP-seq) data often identify non-targeted transcription factor
(TF) motifs, and are even further limited when peak sequences are similar due to 
common ancestry rather than common binding factors. The latter aspect
particularly affects a large number of proteins from the Cys2His2 zinc finger
(C2H2-ZF) class of TFs, as their binding sites are often dominated by endogenous 
retroelements that have highly similar sequences. Here, we present recognition
code-assisted discovery of regulatory elements (RCADE) for motif discovery from
C2H2-ZF ChIP-seq data. RCADE combines predictions from a DNA recognition code of 
C2H2-ZFs with ChIP-seq data to identify models that represent the genuine DNA
binding preferences of C2H2-ZF proteins. We show that RCADE is able to identify
generalizable binding models even from peaks that are exclusively located within 
the repeat regions of the genome, where state-of-the-art motif finding approaches
largely fail.AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: RCADE is available as a webserver
and also for download at http://rcade.ccbr.utoronto.ca/.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.
CONTACT: t.hughes@utoronto.ca.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4547615
PMID: 25953800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Clin Invest. 2015 Jun;125(6):2363-8. doi: 10.1172/JCI81163. Epub 2015 May 4.

BCL11A deletions result in fetal hemoglobin persistence and neurodevelopmental
alterations.

Basak A, Hancarova M, Ulirsch JC, Balci TB, Trkova M, Pelisek M, Vlckova M,
Muzikova K, Cermak J, Trka J, Dyment DA, Orkin SH, Daly MJ, Sedlacek Z, Sankaran 
VG.

A transition from fetal hemoglobin (HbF) to adult hemoglobin (HbA) normally
occurs within a few months after birth. Increased production of HbF after this
period of infancy ameliorates clinical symptoms of the major disorders of adult
ß-hemoglobin: ß-thalassemia and sickle cell disease. The transcription factor
BCL11A silences HbF and has been an attractive therapeutic target for increasing 
HbF levels; however, it is not clear to what extent BCL11A inhibits HbF
production or mediates other developmental functions in humans. Here, we
identified and characterized 3 patients with rare microdeletions of 2p15-p16.1
who presented with an autism spectrum disorder and developmental delay. Moreover,
these patients all exhibited substantial persistence of HbF but otherwise
retained apparently normal hematologic and immunologic function. Of the genes
within 2p15-p16.1, only BCL11A was commonly deleted in all of the patients.
Evaluation of gene expression data sets from developing and adult human brains
revealed that BCL11A expression patterns are similar to other genes associated
with neurodevelopmental disorders. Additionally, common SNPs within the second
intron of BCL11A are strongly associated with schizophrenia. Together, the study 
of these rare patients and orthogonal genetic data demonstrates that BCL11A plays
a central role in silencing HbF in humans and implicates BCL11A as an important
factor for neurodevelopment.

PMCID: PMC4497765
PMID: 25938782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Apr;54(4):315-20. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2015.02.001. Epub
2015 Feb 21.

Polymorphic variations influencing fetal hemoglobin levels: association study in 
beta-thalassemia carriers and in normal individuals of Portuguese origin.

Pereira C(1), Relvas L(2), Bento C(2), Abade A(1), Ribeiro ML(2), Manco L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Anthropology and Health (CIAS), Department of Life
Sciences, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. (2)Department of Hematology, 
Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra (CHUC), Coimbra, Portugal.
(3)Research Centre for Anthropology and Health (CIAS), Department of Life
Sciences, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal; Department of Hematology,
Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra (CHUC), Coimbra, Portugal.
Electronic address: lmanco@antrop.uc.pt.

Three major loci have been associated with HbF levels, including -158C/T (XmnI)
at HBG2 promoter region, and several polymorphisms at BCL11A intron-2 and
HBS1L-MYB (HMIP) intergenic region. Mutations in the KLF1 gene were recently
associated with increased HbF levels. This study aims to evaluate whether genetic
variability at these loci influences HbF levels in ß-thalassemia carriers and in 
normal individuals of Portuguese origin. Sixty five ß-thalassemia carriers, HbF
levels ranging from 0.2% to 9.5%, and 60 individuals with normal hematological
parameters, HbF levels ranging from 0.2% to 7.4%, were selected for this study.
In ß-thal carriers linear regression models revealed a strong statistical
significant association for HBG2 (XmnI) rs7482144 (ß=0.455; P=5.858×10(-7)), and 
nominal significance for BCL11A rs766432 (ß=0.215; P=0.029) and HMIP rs9399137
(ß=0.209; P=0.011). In normal individuals, a case (HbF>2%; n=15) vs. control
(HbF<1.7%; n=45) model, showed nominal significant associations for BCL11A SNPs
rs11886868 (OR=4; P=0.001), rs766432 (OR=3.7; P=0.002) and rs7606173 (OR=0.36;
P=0.032). KLF1 rs3817621 was not found associated with HbF levels. Our results
suggest that in Portuguese ß-thal carriers the HBG2 XmnI polymorphism is strongly
associated with HbF levels. In normal individuals, BCL11A polymorphisms, but not 
HMIP or HBG2 (XmnI) loci, are nominally associated with HbF expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25842369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Hemoglobin. 2015;39(3):156-61. doi: 10.3109/03630269.2015.1023897. Epub 2015 Mar 
25.

Genetic Modifiers of Sickle Cell Disease: A Genotype-Phenotype Relationship Study
in a Cohort of 82 Children on Mayotte Island.

Muszlak M(1), Pissard S, Badens C, Chamouine A, Maillard O, Thuret I.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pédiatrie, Centre Hospitalier de Mayotte , Mamoudzou , France .

Sickle cell disease presents a great clinical variability that remains largely
misunderstood. New disease protective genetic modifiers acting mainly through an 
increased Hb F level have recently been described. We studied relations between
clinical and hematological phenotypes and known sickle cell disease genetic
modifiers in patients from Mayotte Island, a remote French territory located in
the Indian Ocean. Eighty-two children with sickle cell disease were enrolled;
their median age was 5.9 years (range 1-18). Clinical and hematological features 
of sickle cell disease were retrospectively collected. Genetic studies included
determination of ß-globin genotypes [Hb SS, Hb S-ß(0)-thalassemia (Hb
S-ß(0)-thal), Hb S-ß(+)-thal], ß(S)-globin locus haplotype, a-thalassemia
(a-thal), and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in quantitative
trait loci for Hb F expression (XmnI polymorphism, BCL11A rs4671393 and
rs11886868, intergenic region of HBS1L-MYB rs28384513, rs4895441 and rs9399137). 
Univariate and multivariate analyses were conducted. Twenty-eight percent of the 
patients had Hb S-ß-thal (eight different mutations in 21 patients), 55.0% had
the -a(3.7) (rightward) deletion and 88.0% of the homozygous Hb SS patients were 
carrying a homozygous Bantu haplotype. In the multivariate model, the prognosis
role of the SNP BCL11A rs4671393 was confirmed in the studied population showing 
a significant association with an elevated Hb F level and with a low
hospitalization rate. The -a(3.7) deletion, XmnI polymorphism and intergenic
region HBS1L-MYB SNPs were not significantly linked to any clinical criteria of
severity. This report, the first to describe the main features of children with
sickle cell disease on Mayotte Island, highlights the protective effect of the
BCL11A polymorphism in this population.

PMID: 25806420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nature. 2015 May 28;521(7553):537-40. doi: 10.1038/nature14216. Epub 2015 Mar 23.

MAD2L2 controls DNA repair at telomeres and DNA breaks by inhibiting 5' end
resection.

Boersma V(1), Moatti N(1), Segura-Bayona S(1), Peuscher MH(1), van der Torre
J(1), Wevers BA(1), Orthwein A(2), Durocher D(3), Jacobs JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 
121, 1066 CX, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (2)The Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X5,
Canada. (3)1] The Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital,
600 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada [2] Department of
Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E1, Canada.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2015 Jun 12;34(12):1609-11.

Appropriate repair of DNA lesions and the inhibition of DNA repair activities at 
telomeres are crucial to prevent genomic instability. By fuelling the generation 
of genetic alterations and by compromising cell viability, genomic instability is
a driving force in cancer and ageing. Here we identify MAD2L2 (also known as
MAD2B or REV7) through functional genetic screening as a novel factor controlling
DNA repair activities at mammalian telomeres. We show that MAD2L2 accumulates at 
uncapped telomeres and promotes non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ)-mediated fusion
of deprotected chromosome ends and genomic instability. MAD2L2 depletion causes
elongated 3' telomeric overhangs, indicating that MAD2L2 inhibits 5' end
resection. End resection blocks NHEJ while committing to homology-directed
repair, and is under the control of 53BP1, RIF1 and PTIP. Consistent with MAD2L2 
promoting NHEJ-mediated telomere fusion by inhibiting 5' end resection, knockdown
of the nucleases CTIP or EXO1 partially restores telomere-driven genomic
instability in MAD2L2-depleted cells. Control of DNA repair by MAD2L2 is not
limited to telomeres. MAD2L2 also accumulates and inhibits end resection at
irradiation-induced DNA double-strand breaks and promotes end-joining of DNA
double-strand breaks in several settings, including during immunoglobulin class
switch recombination. These activities of MAD2L2 depend on ATM kinase activity,
RNF8, RNF168, 53BP1 and RIF1, but not on PTIP, REV1 and REV3, the latter two
acting with MAD2L2 in translesion synthesis. Together, our data establish MAD2L2 
as a crucial contributor to the control of DNA repair activity by 53BP1 that
promotes NHEJ by inhibiting 5' end resection downstream of RIF1.

PMCID: PMC4481296
PMID: 25799990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2015 May;19(5):242-7. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2014.0310.
Epub 2015 Mar 9.

Genetic Modifiers in ß-Thalassemia Intermedia: A Study on 102 Iraqi Arab
Patients.

Al-Allawi NA(1), Puehringer H, Raheem RA, Oberkanins C.

Author information: 
(1)1 Faculty of Medical Sciences, Scientific Research Center, University of Duhok
, Duhok, Iraq .

To determine the molecular basis of ß-thalassemia intermedia (TI) and the
contribution of the three hemoglobin F (HbF) quantitative trait loci (QTLs) on
chromosomes 11, 2, and 6 to the milder phenotype, a total of 102 Iraqi Arab
patients with TI were studied. The ß and a genotypes as well as HBG2<U+2009>g. 158 C>T
(rs7482144), BCL11A (rs1427407 and rs10189857), and HBS1L-MYB (rs28384513 and
rs9399137) by multiplex polymerase chain reaction and reverse hybridization were 
studied. A total of 21 different ß-thalassemia mutations arranged in 35 different
genotypes were identified. The genotypes encompassed ß(+)/ß(+) mutations in 33
cases, ß(+)/ß(0) in 17 cases, ß(0)/ß(0) in 47 cases, ß(0)/wild type in 3 and
ß(0)/Hb E in 2 cases. The most common was IVS-II-1 (G>A)/IVS-II-1 (G>A), followed
by IVS-I-6 (T>C)/IVS-I-6 (T>C) and IVS-I-110 (G>A)/IVS-I-110 (G>A), in 31.4%,
17.6%, and 6.9%, respectively. Alpha-thalassemia mutations were found in 15.2% of
those homozygous for the ß-mutations, while a gene triplication was identified in
all three heterozygotes. Of the five QTLs tested, only rs7482144 and rs10189857
were significantly associated with ß(0)/ß(0) when compared to ß(+)/ß(+), with
odds ratios of 6.4 (95% confidence interval [CI] 2.9-14.0) and 3.2 (95% CI
1.2-8.6), respectively. In conclusion, this study has demonstrated that among
Iraqi patients with thal intermedia, the main contributors to the milder
phenotype were ß(+) alleles, XmnI polymorphism, and BCL11A (rs10189857), while
other QTLs on chromosomes 2 and 6, as well as alpha-thalassemia, were not
significantly relevant.

PMID: 25751242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Mar;54(3):224-30. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2015.01.001. Epub
2015 Jan 30.

BCL11A enhancer haplotypes and fetal hemoglobin in sickle cell anemia.

Sebastiani P(1), Farrell JJ(2), Alsultan A(3), Wang S(4), Edward HL(2), Shappell 
H(4), Bae H(5), Milton JN(4), Baldwin CT(2), Al-Rubaish AM(6), Naserullah Z(7),
Al-Muhanna F(6), Alsuliman A(8), Patra PK(9), Farrer LA(2), Ngo D(2),
Vathipadiekal V(2), Chui DH(2), Al-Ali AK(10), Steinberg MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, United States. Electronic address: sebas@bu.edu. (2)Department of
Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States.
(3)Sickle Cell Disease Research Center and Department of Pediatrics, College of
Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (4)Department of
Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United
States. (5)College of Public Health and Human Sciences, Oregon State University, 
Corvallis, OR, United States. (6)Department of Internal Medicine, College of
Medicine, University of Dammam, Dammam, Saudi Arabia. (7)Department of
Pediatrics, Maternity & Child Hospital, Dammam, Saudi Arabia. (8)Department of
Hematology, King Fahd Hospital, Hafof, Al-Ahsa, Saudi Arabia. (9)Deptartment of
Biochemistry, Pt. J.N.M. Medical College, Raipur, Chattisgarh, India. (10)Prince 
Mohammed Center for Research & Consultation Studies, University of Dammam,
Dammam, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels in sickle cell anemia patients vary. We
genotyped polymorphisms in the erythroid-specific enhancer of BCL11A to see if
they might account for the very high HbF associated with the Arab-Indian (AI)
haplotype and Benin haplotype of sickle cell anemia.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Six BCL112A enhancer SNPs and their haplotypes were studied 
in Saudi Arabs from the Eastern Province and Indian patients with AI haplotype
(HbF ~20%), African Americans (HbF ~7%), and Saudi Arabs from the Southwestern
Province (HbF ~12%). Four SNPs (rs1427407, rs6706648, rs6738440, and rs7606173)
and their haplotypes were consistently associated with HbF levels. The
distributions of haplotypes differ in the 3 cohorts but not their genetic
effects: the haplotype TCAG was associated with the lowest HbF level and the
haplotype GTAC was associated with the highest HbF level and differences in HbF
levels between carriers of these haplotypes in all cohorts were approximately 6%.
CONCLUSIONS: Common HbF BCL11A enhancer haplotypes in patients with African
origin and AI sickle cell anemia have similar effects on HbF but they do not
explain their differences in HbF.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4341902
PMID: 25703683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nat Biotechnol. 2015 May;33(5):555-62. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3128. Epub 2015 Feb 18.

C2H2 zinc finger proteins greatly expand the human regulatory lexicon.

Najafabadi HS(1), Mnaimneh S(1), Schmitges FW(1), Garton M(1), Lam KN(2), Yang
A(1), Albu M(1), Weirauch MT(3), Radovani E(2), Kim PM(4), Greenblatt J(5), Frey 
BJ(6), Hughes TR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)1] Center for Autoimmune Genomics and
Etiology (CAGE) and Divisions of Biomedical Informatics and Developmental
Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
[2] Canadian Institutes for Advanced Research, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)1]
Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. [2] Department of Molecular Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. [3] Department of Computer Science, University
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (5)1] Donnelly Centre for Cellular and
Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. [2]
Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (6)1] Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. [2] Canadian Institutes for Advanced
Research, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. [3] Department of Computer Science,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. [4] Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (7)1]
Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. [2] Department of Molecular Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. [3] Canadian Institutes for Advanced Research,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Cys2-His2 zinc finger (C2H2-ZF) proteins represent the largest class of putative 
human transcription factors. However, for most C2H2-ZF proteins it is unknown
whether they even bind DNA or, if they do, to which sequences. Here, by combining
data from a modified bacterial one-hybrid system with protein-binding microarray 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses, we show that natural C2H2-ZFs encoded
in the human genome bind DNA both in vitro and in vivo, and we infer the DNA
recognition code using DNA-binding data for thousands of natural C2H2-ZF domains.
In vivo binding data are generally consistent with our recognition code and
indicate that C2H2-ZF proteins recognize more motifs than all other human
transcription factors combined. We provide direct evidence that most
KRAB-containing C2H2-ZF proteins bind specific endogenous retroelements (EREs),
ranging from currently active to ancient families. The majority of C2H2-ZF
proteins, including KRAB proteins, also show widespread binding to regulatory
regions, indicating that the human genome contains an extensive and largely
unstudied adaptive C2H2-ZF regulatory network that targets a diverse range of
genes and pathways.

PMID: 25690854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Transl Res. 2015 Jun;165(6):696-703. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2015.01.002. Epub 2015
Jan 13.

Genetics of fetal hemoglobin in tribal Indian patients with sickle cell anemia.

Bhanushali AA(1), Patra PK(2), Pradhan S(1), Khanka SS(1), Singh S(1), Das BR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development, SRL Ltd, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India. (2)Department
of Biochemistry, Pt. J.N.M. Medical College Raipur, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India. 
(3)Research and Development, SRL Ltd, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India. Electronic
address: brdas@srl.in.

India tops the list of countries with sickle cell disease (SCD) with an estimated
44,000 live births in 2010 and a prevalence of 10%-33%. In the present study, the
first from India, we have investigated the effect of genetic variants in the
BCL11A, the HMIP (HBS1L-MYB intergenic polymorphism) locus, in addition to the
HBB locus, which are known to be associated with fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels, a
major modulator of the disease phenotype. The present study was conducted on 240 
individuals with SCD and 60 with sickle cell trait. Genotyping was performed for 
the BCL11A rs11886868 and rs34211119; HMIP rs9399137, rs189600565, rs7776196,
rs34778774, and rs53293029; HBG2 Xmn1 polymorphism rs7482144; and -68C > T HBD
promoter polymorphism. All the 3 quantitative trait loci were associated with HbF
levels in Indian patients with SCD. The highest difference was seen in the Xmn1
single-nucleotide polymorphism, which accounted for 11% of the trait variance,
the BCL11A rs11886868 for 3.65%, whereas the HMIP rs9399137 for 3.8%. The present
study indicates the BCL11A, HMIP, and ß-globin region to be associated with
increased HbF levels in Indian patient. Further interrogation of these genotypes 
with respect to pain crisis is warranted in this population, which may help in
prognostication, as also a genome-wide association study, which may help uncover 
new loci controlling HbF levels.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25651163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2015 Mar;12(3):127. doi: 10.1038/nrclinonc.2015.10. Epub 2015
Jan 27.

Genetics: BCL11A-targeting triple-negative breast cancer?

Errico A.

Comment on
    Nat Commun. 2015;6:5987.

PMID: 25622975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Genome Med. 2015 Jan 20;7(1):1. doi: 10.1186/s13073-014-0122-2. eCollection 2015.

Comparison of DNA methylation profiles in human fetal and adult red blood cell
progenitors.

Lessard S(1), Beaudoin M(2), Benkirane K(3), Lettre G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Heart Institute, 5000 Bélanger Street, Montréal, Québec H1T 1C8
Canada ; Faculté de Médecine, Université de Montréal, 2900 Boul.
Édouard-Montpetit, Montréal, Québec H3T 1J4 Canada. (2)Montreal Heart Institute, 
5000 Bélanger Street, Montréal, Québec H1T 1C8 Canada. (3)Hôpital
Maisonneuve-Rosemont, 5415 Boul. de l'Assomption, Montréal, Québec H1T 2M4
Canada.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification that plays an important
role during mammalian development. Around birth in humans, the main site of red
blood cell production moves from the fetal liver to the bone marrow. DNA
methylation changes at the ß-globin locus and a switch from fetal to adult
hemoglobin production characterize this transition. Understanding this globin
switch may improve the treatment of patients with sickle cell disease and
ß-thalassemia, two of the most common Mendelian diseases in the world. The goal
of our study was to describe and compare the genome-wide patterns of DNA
methylation in fetal and adult human erythroblasts.
METHODS: We used the Illumina HumanMethylation 450 k BeadChip to measure DNA
methylation at 402,819 CpGs in ex vivo-differentiated erythroblasts from 12 fetal
liver and 12 bone marrow CD34+ donors.
RESULTS: We identified 5,937 differentially methylated CpGs that overlap with
erythroid enhancers and binding sites for erythropoiesis-related transcription
factors. Combining this information with genome-wide association study results,
we show that erythroid enhancers define particularly promising genomic regions to
identify new genetic variants associated with fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels in
humans. Many differentially methylated CpGs are located near genes with
unanticipated roles in red blood cell differentiation and proliferation. For some
of these new candidate genes, we confirm the correlation between DNA methylation 
and gene expression levels in red blood cell progenitors. We also provide
evidence that DNA methylation and genetic variation at the ß-globin locus
independently control globin gene expression in adult erythroblasts.
CONCLUSIONS: Our DNA methylome maps confirm the widespread dynamic changes in DNA
methylation that occur during human erythropoiesis. These changes tend to happen 
near erythroid enhancers, further highlighting their importance in erythroid
regulation and HbF production. Finally, DNA methylation may act independently of 
the transcription factor BCL11A to repress fetal hemoglobin production. This
provides cues on strategies to more efficiently re-activate HbF production in
sickle cell disease and ß-thalassemia patients.

PMCID: PMC4298057
PMID: 25606059  [PubMed]


52. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Oct;23(10):1341-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.291. Epub 2015
Jan 14.

Compound heterozygosity for KLF1 mutations is associated with microcytic
hypochromic anemia and increased fetal hemoglobin.

Huang J(1), Zhang X(2), Liu D(1), Wei X(1), Shang X(1), Xiong F(1), Yu L(1), Yin 
X(2), Xu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of Hematology, 303rd Hospital
of the People's Liberation Army, Nanning, China.

Krüppel-like factor 1 (KLF1) regulates erythroid lineage commitment, globin
switching, and the terminal maturation of red blood cells. Variants in human KLF1
have been identified as an important causative factor in a wide spectrum of
phenotypes. This study investigated two unrelated male children in China who had 
refractory anemia associated with poikilocythemia. These were accompanied by an
upregulation of biochemical markers of hemolysis, along with abnormal hemoglobin 
(Hb) level and elevated reticulocyte counts. Next-generation sequencing revealed 
that the patients were compound heterozygotes for a KLF1 frameshift mutation
c.525_526insCGGCGCC (p.(Gly176ArgfsTer179)) and one of two missense variants,
c.892<U+2009>G>C (p.(Ala298Pro)) and c.1012C>T (p.(Pro338Ser)). The subjects had
microcytic hypochromic anemia, and their healthy parents had single mutation. The
two missense mutations affected a highly conserved codon in the zinc finger
DNA-binding domain of KLF1, but the protein stability was unaffected in K-562
cells. A KLF1-targeted promoter-reporter assay showed that the two mutations
reduce the expression of the HBB, BCL11A, and CD44 genes involved in
erythropoiesis, with consequent dyserythropoiesis and an a/non-a chain imbalance.
A systematic analysis was performed of the phenotypes associated with the KLF1
mutations in the two families, and the clinical characteristics and differential 
diagnoses of the disease are presented. This is the first report of an autosomal 
recessive anemia presenting with microcytic hypochromia, abnormal Hb profile, and
other distinctive erythrocyte phenotypes, and provides insight into the multiple 
roles of KLF1 during erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC4592085 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 25585695  [PubMed - in process]


53. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 30;6(3):1446-61.

Identification of the oncogenic kinase TOPK/PBK as a master mitotic regulator of 
C2H2 zinc finger proteins.

Rizkallah R(1), Batsomboon P(2), Dudley GB(2), Hurt MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Florida State University, Tallahassee,
Florida, 32306, United States of America. (2)Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida, 32306, United
States of America.

TOPK/PBK is an oncogenic kinase upregulated in most human cancers and its high
expression correlates with poor prognosis. TOPK is known to be activated by Cdk1 
and needed for mitotic cell division; however, its mitotic functions are not yet 
fully understood. In this study, we show that TOPK plays a global mitotic role by
simultaneously regulating hundreds of DNA binding proteins. C2H2 zinc finger
proteins (ZFPs) constitute the largest family of human proteins. All C2H2 ZFPs
contain a highly conserved linker sequence joining their multi-zinc finger
domains. We have previously shown that phosphorylation of this conserved motif
serves as a global mechanism for the coordinate dissociation of C2H2 ZFPs from
condensing chromatin, during mitosis. Here, using a panel of kinase inhibitors,
we identified K252a as a potent inhibitor of mitotic ZFP linker phosphorylation. 
We generated a biotinylated form of K252a and used it to purify candidate
kinases. From these candidates we identified TOPK/PBK, in vitro and in vivo, as
the master ZFP linker kinase. Furthermore, we show precise temporal correlation
between TOPK activating phosphorylation by Cdk1 and linker phosphorylation in
mitosis. The identification of this fundamental role of TOPK underscores its
significance as a promising novel target of cancer therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4359306
PMID: 25575812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nat Commun. 2015 Jan 9;6:5987. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6987.

BCL11A is a triple-negative breast cancer gene with critical functions in stem
and progenitor cells.

Khaled WT(1), Choon Lee S(2), Stingl J(3), Chen X(4), Raza Ali H(5), Rueda OM(3),
Hadi F(6), Wang J(7), Yu Y(7), Chin SF(3), Stratton M(7), Futreal A(7), Jenkins
NA(8), Aparicio S(9), Copeland NG(8), Watson CJ(10), Caldas C(11), Liu P(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1HH, UK [2]
Department of Pharmacology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1PD, UK [3].
(2)1] Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1HH, UK [2].
(3)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, and Department of Oncology, University
of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.
(4)SAIC-Frederic, National Cancer Institute-Frederick, Frederick, Maryland 21701,
USA. (5)1] Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, and Department of Oncology,
University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK 
[2] Cambridge Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1PD, UK.
(7)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1HH, UK. (8)The
Methodist Hospital Research Institute, 6670 Bertner Street, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA. (9)Molecular Oncology Department, BC Cancer Agency Research Centre, 675 West
10th Avenue, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 1L3, Canada. (10)Department of
Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QP, UK. (11)1] Cancer Research
UK Cambridge Institute, and Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Li
Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK [2] Cambridge Experimental
Cancer Medicine Centre, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK [3] Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and NIHR Cambridge Biomedical 
Research Centre, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2015 Mar;12(3):127.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) has poor prognostic outcome compared with
other types of breast cancer. The molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying
TNBC pathology are not fully understood. Here, we report that the transcription
factor BCL11A is overexpressed in TNBC including basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) 
and that its genomic locus is amplified in up to 38% of BLBC tumours. Exogenous
BCL11A overexpression promotes tumour formation, whereas its knockdown in TNBC
cell lines suppresses their tumourigenic potential in xenograft models. In the
DMBA-induced tumour model, Bcl11a deletion substantially decreases tumour
formation, even in p53-null cells and inactivation of Bcl11a in established
tumours causes their regression. At the cellular level, Bcl11a deletion causes a 
reduction in the number of mammary epithelial stem and progenitor cells. Thus,
BCL11A has an important role in TNBC and normal mammary epithelial cells. This
study highlights the importance of further investigation of BCL11A in
TNBC-targeted therapies.

PMCID: PMC4338552
PMID: 25574598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2014;2014:213782. doi: 10.1155/2014/213782.
Epub 2014 Dec 10.

Molecular mechanism of yisui shengxue granule, a complex chinese medicine, on
thalassemia patients suffering from hemolysis and anemia of erythrocytes.

Chu NL(1), Wu ZK(1), Zhang XH(2), Fang SP(1), Wang WJ(3), Cheng YL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guang'anmen Hospital, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing
100053, China. (2)303 Hospital of Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA), Nanning
530000, China. (3)The Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, China.

The objective of this study was to investigate the therapeutic biological
mechanism of Yisui Shengxue Granule (YSSXG), a complex Chinese medicine, on the
hemolysis and anemia of erythrocytes from patient with thalassemia disease.
Sixteen patients with thalassemia (8 cases of a-thalassemia and 8 cases of
ß-thalassemia) disease were collected and treated with YSSXG for 3 months. The
improvements of blood parameter demonstrated that YSSXG had a positive clinical
effect on patients with thalassemia disease. For patients with a-thalassemia
disease, RT-PCR showed that YSSXG upregulated the relative mRNA expression level 
of a-globin to ß-globin and downregulated DNMT1, DNMT3a, and DNMT3b mRNA compared
with pretreatment. Western blotting showed that YSSXG downregulated the
expression of DNMT1 and DNMT3a. For patients with ß-thalassemia disease, the
relative expression level of (A) <U+03B3>-globin to a-globin had an increasing trend and
the level of BCL11A mRNA expression obviously increased. For all patients, RT-PCR
showed that YSSXG upregulated mRNA expression of SPTA1 and SPTB. Activities of
SOD and GSH-Px significantly increased and MDA obviously reduced on erythrocyte
and blood serum after YSSXG treatment. TEM showed that YSSXG decreased the
content of inclusion bodies. Activities of Na(+)K(+)-ATPtase and T-ATPtase of
erythrocyte increased significantly after YSSXG treatment. This study provides
the basis for mechanisms of YSSXG on thalassemia suffering with hemolysis and
anemia of erythrocytes from patient.

PMCID: PMC4276282
PMID: 25574177  [PubMed]


56. Nature. 2015 Mar 12;519(7542):223-8. doi: 10.1038/nature14135. Epub 2014 Dec 24.

Large-scale discovery of novel genetic causes of developmental disorders.

Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study.

Collaborators: Fitzgerald TW, Gerety SS, Jones WD, van Kogelenberg M, King DA,
McRae J, Morley KI, Parthiban V, Al-Turki S, Ambridge K, Barrett DM, Bayzetinova 
T, Clayton S, Coomber EL, Gribble S, Jones P, Krishnappa N, Mason LE, Middleton
A, Miller R, Prigmore E, Rajan D, Sifrim A, Tivey AR, Ahmed M, Akawi N, Andrews
R, Anjum U, Archer H, Armstrong R, Balasubramanian M, Banerjee R, Baralle D,
Batstone P, Baty D, Bennett C, Berg J, Bernhard B, Bevan AP, Blair E, Blyth M,
Bohanna D, Bourdon L, Bourn D, Brady A, Bragin E, Brewer C, Brueton L, Brunstrom 
K, Bumpstead SJ, Bunyan DJ, Burn J, Burton J, Canham N, Castle B, Chandler K,
Clasper S, Clayton-Smith J, Cole T, Collins A, Collinson MN, Connell F, Cooper N,
Cox H, Cresswell L, Cross G, Crow Y, D'Alessandro M, Dabir T, Davidson R, Davies 
S, Dean J, Deshpande C, Devlin G, Dixit A, Dominiczak A, Donnelly C, Donnelly D, 
Douglas A, Duncan A, Eason J, Edkins S, Ellard S, Ellis P, Elmslie F, Evans K,
Everest S, Fendick T, Fisher R, Flinter F, Foulds N, Fryer A, Fu B, Gardiner C,
Gaunt L, Ghali N, Gibbons R, Gomes Pereira SL, Goodship J, Goudie D, Gray E,
Greene P, Greenhalgh L, Harrison L, Hawkins R, Hellens S, Henderson A, Hobson E, 
Holden S, Holder S, Hollingsworth G, Homfray T, Humphreys M, Hurst J, Ingram S,
Irving M, Jarvis J, Jenkins L, Johnson D, Jones D, Jones E, Josifova D, Joss S,
Kaemba B, Kazembe S, Kerr B, Kini U, Kinning E, Kirby G, Kirk C, Kivuva E, Kraus 
A, Kumar D, Lachlan K, Lam W, Lampe A, Langman C, Lees M, Lim D, Lowther G, Lynch
SA, Magee A, Maher E, Mansour S, Marks K, Martin K, Maye U, McCann E, McConnell
V, McEntagart M, McGowan R, McKay K, McKee S, McMullan DJ, McNerlan S, Mehta S,
Metcalfe K, Miles E, Mohammed S, Montgomery T, Moore D, Morgan S, Morris A,
Morton J, Mugalaasi H, Murday V, Nevitt L, Newbury-Ecob R, Norman A, O'Shea R,
Ogilvie C, Park S, Parker MJ, Patel C, Paterson J, Payne S, Phipps J, Pilz DT,
Porteous D, Pratt N, Prescott K, Price S, Pridham A, Procter A, Purnell H, Ragge 
N, Rankin J, Raymond L, Rice D, Robert L, Roberts E, Roberts G, Roberts J,
Roberts P, Ross A, Rosser E, Saggar A, Samant S, Sandford R, Sarkar A, Schweiger 
S, Scott C, Scott R, Selby A, Seller A, Sequeira C, Shannon N, Sharif S,
Shaw-Smith C, Shearing E, Shears D, Simonic I, Simpkin D, Singzon R, Skitt Z,
Smith A, Smith B, Smith K, Smithson S, Sneddon L, Splitt M, Squires M, Stewart F,
Stewart H, Suri M, Sutton V, Swaminathan GJ, Sweeney E, Tatton-Brown K, Taylor C,
Taylor R, Tein M, Temple IK, Thomson J, Tolmie J, Torokwa A, Treacy B, Turner C, 
Turnpenny P, Tysoe C, Vandersteen A, Vasudevan P, Vogt J, Wakeling E, Walker D,
Waters J, Weber A, Wellesley D, Whiteford M, Widaa S, Wilcox S, Williams D,
Williams N, Woods G, Wragg C, Wright M, Yang F, Yau M, Carter NP, Parker M, Firth
HV, FitzPatrick DR, Wright CF, Barrett JC, Hurles ME.

Despite three decades of successful, predominantly phenotype-driven discovery of 
the genetic causes of monogenic disorders, up to half of children with severe
developmental disorders of probable genetic origin remain without a genetic
diagnosis. Particularly challenging are those disorders rare enough to have
eluded recognition as a discrete clinical entity, those with highly variable
clinical manifestations, and those that are difficult to distinguish from other, 
very similar, disorders. Here we demonstrate the power of using an unbiased
genotype-driven approach to identify subsets of patients with similar disorders. 
By studying 1,133 children with severe, undiagnosed developmental disorders, and 
their parents, using a combination of exome sequencing and array-based detection 
of chromosomal rearrangements, we discovered 12 novel genes associated with
developmental disorders. These newly implicated genes increase by 10% (from 28%
to 31%) the proportion of children that could be diagnosed. Clustering of
missense mutations in six of these newly implicated genes suggests that normal
development is being perturbed by an activating or dominant-negative mechanism.
Our findings demonstrate the value of adopting a comprehensive strategy, both
genome-wide and nationwide, to elucidate the underlying causes of rare genetic
disorders.

PMID: 25533962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Genome Biol. 2014 Dec 3;15(12):522. doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0522-z.

Sex differences in the genome-wide DNA methylation pattern and impact on gene
expression, microRNA levels and insulin secretion in human pancreatic islets.

Hall E, Volkov P, Dayeh T, Esguerra JL, Salö S, Eliasson L, Rönn T, Bacos K, Ling
C.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic factors regulate tissue-specific expression and
X-chromosome inactivation. Previous studies have identified epigenetic
differences between sexes in some human tissues. However, it is unclear whether
epigenetic modifications contribute to sex-specific differences in insulin
secretion and metabolism. Here, we investigate the impact of sex on the
genome-wide DNA methylation pattern in human pancreatic islets from 53 males and 
34 females, and relate the methylome to changes in expression and insulin
secretion.
RESULTS: Glucose-stimulated insulin secretion is higher in female versus male
islets. Genome-wide DNA methylation data in human islets clusters based on sex.
While the chromosome-wide DNA methylation level on the X-chromosome is higher in 
female versus male islets, the autosomes do not display a global methylation
difference between sexes. Methylation of 8,140 individual X-chromosome sites and 
470 autosomal sites shows sex-specific differences in human islets. These include
sites in/near AR, DUSP9, HNF4A, BCL11A and CDKN2B. 61 X-chromosome genes and 18
autosomal genes display sex-specific differences in both DNA methylation and
expression. These include NKAP, SPESP1 and APLN, which exhibited lower expression
in females. Functional analyses demonstrate that methylation of NKAP and SPESP1
promoters in vitro suppresses their transcriptional activity. Silencing of Nkap
or Apln in clonal beta-cells results in increased insulin secretion. Differential
methylation between sexes is associated with altered levels of microRNAs miR-660 
and miR-532 and related target genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Chromosome-wide and gene-specific sex differences in DNA methylation
associate with altered expression and insulin secretion in human islets. Our data
demonstrate that epigenetics contribute to sex-specific metabolic phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC4256841
PMID: 25517766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Mar;54(3):268-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2014.11.010. Epub 
2014 Nov 25.

Polymorphism at BCL11A compared to HBS1L-MYB loci explains less of the variance
in HbF in patients with sickle cell disease in Cameroon.

Bitoungui VJ(1), Ngogang J(1), Wonkam A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Parasitology & Haematology, Faculty of Medicine & 
Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaoundé 1, Yaoundé, Cameroon. (2)Division of
Human Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town (UCT), South 
Africa. Electronic address: ambroise.wonkam@uct.ac.za.

PMID: 25488618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Feb;54(2):160-3. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2014.11.015. Epub 
2014 Nov 26.

Breakpoint heterogeneity in (2;3)(p15-23;q26) translocations involving EVI1 in
myeloid hemopathies.

De Braekeleer M(1), Guéganic N(2), Tous C(3), Le Bris MJ(3), Basinko A(4), Morel 
F(5), Douet-Guilbert N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Histologie, Embryologie et Cytogénétique, Faculté de Médecine et
des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Brest, Brest, France; Institut National
de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U1078, Brest, France; Service
de Cytogénétique et Biologie de la Reproduction, Hôpital Morvan, CHRU Brest,
Brest, France. Electronic address: marc.debraekeleer@univ-brest.fr.
(2)Laboratoire d'Histologie, Embryologie et Cytogénétique, Faculté de Médecine et
des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Brest, Brest, France; Institut National
de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U1078, Brest, France.
(3)Service de Cytogénétique et Biologie de la Reproduction, Hôpital Morvan, CHRU 
Brest, Brest, France. (4)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale (INSERM), U1078, Brest, France; Service de Cytogénétique et Biologie de 
la Reproduction, Hôpital Morvan, CHRU Brest, Brest, France. (5)Laboratoire
d'Histologie, Embryologie et Cytogénétique, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences
de la Santé, Université de Brest, Brest, France; Institut National de la Santé et
de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U1078, Brest, France; Service de Cytogénétique
et Biologie de la Reproduction, Hôpital Morvan, CHRU Brest, Brest, France.

Several chromosomal rearrangements involving band 3q26 are known to induce EVI1
overexpression. They include inv(3)(q21q26), t(3;3)(q21;q26), t(3;21)(q26;q22)
and t(3;12)(q26;p13). Translocations involving the short arm of chromosome 2 and 
3q26 have been reported in more than 50 patients with myeloid disorders. However,
although the breakpoints on 2p are scattered over a long segment, their
distribution had only been analyzed in 9 patients. We performed fluorescent in
situ hybridization with a library of BAC (Bacterial Artificial Chromosome) clones
in 4 patients with t(2;3)(p15-23;q26). Our results combined with those of the 9
previously reported patients showed scattering of the breakpoints in 2 regions. A
1.08Mb region in band 2p21 encompassing the MTA3, ZFP36L2 and THADA genes was
documented in 5 patients. A second region of 1.83Mb in band 2p16.1 was identified
in 8 patients. Four patients showed clustering around the BCL11A gene and the
remaining 4 around a long intergenic non-coding RNA, FLJ30838. These regions are 
characterized by the presence of regulatory sequences (CpG islands and promoters)
that could be instrumental in EVI1 overexpression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25486926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Haematologica. 2015 Apr;100(4):452-7. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.113886. Epub
2014 Dec 5.

A genetic score for the prediction of beta-thalassemia severity.

Danjou F(1), Francavilla M(2), Anni F(2), Satta S(2), Demartis FR(2), Perseu
L(3), Manca M(3), Sollaino MC(3), Manunza L(2), Mereu E(2), Marceddu G(2),
Pissard S(4), Joly P(5), Thuret I(6), Origa R(2), Borg J(7), Forni GL(8), Piga
A(9), Lai ME(3), Badens C(10), Moi P(11), Galanello R(11).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica, Medicina Clinica e Molecolare, Università
degli Studi di Cagliari, Italy fabdanjou@yahoo.fr. (2)Dipartimento di Sanità
Pubblica, Medicina Clinica e Molecolare, Università degli Studi di Cagliari,
Italy. (3)Ospedale Regionale per le Microcitemie, ASL8, Cagliari, Italy.
(4)Laboratoire de Génétique, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.
(5)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Hôpital Edouard Herriot,
Lyon, France. (6)French reference center for Thalassemia and Service
d'Onco-Hématologie Pédiatrique, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Marseille,
France. (7)Department of Applied Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Sciences
and Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, 
University of Malta, Msida, Malta. (8)Ematologia - Centro della Microcitemia ed
Anemie Congenite, Ospedale Galliera, Genova, Italy. (9)Università di Torino,
Italy. (10)French reference center for Thalassemia and Department of Genetics,
Assistance Publique Hopitaux de Marseille and Aix-Marseille University, France.
(11)Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica, Medicina Clinica e Molecolare, Università
degli Studi di Cagliari, Italy Ospedale Regionale per le Microcitemie, ASL8,
Cagliari, Italy.

Clinical and hematologic characteristics of beta(ß)-thalassemia are determined by
several factors resulting in a wide spectrum of severity. Phenotype modulators
are: HBB mutations, HBA defects and fetal hemoglobin production modulators
(HBG2:g.-158C>T polymorphism, HBS1L-MYB intergenic region and the BCL11A). We
characterized 54 genetic variants at these five loci robustly associated with the
amelioration of beta-thalassemia phenotype, to build a predictive score of
severity using a representative cohort of 890 ß-thalassemic patients. Using Cox
proportional hazard analysis on a training set, we assessed the effect of these
loci on the age at which patient started regular transfusions, built a
Thalassemia Severity Score, and validated it on a testing set. Discriminatory
power of the model was high (C-index=0.705; R(2)=0.343) and the validation
conducted on the testing set confirmed its predictive accuracy with
transfusion-free survival probability (P<0.001) and with transfusion dependency
status (Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve=0.774; P<0.001).
Finally, an automatized on-line calculation of the score was made available at
http://tss.unica.it. Besides the accurate assessment of genetic predictors
effect, the present results could be helpful in the management of patients, both 
as a predictive score for screening and a standardized scale of severity to
overcome the major-intermedia dichotomy and support clinical decisions.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4380717
PMID: 25480500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Jan;54(1):4-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2014.10.003. Epub
2014 Nov 6.

Genetic variant in the BCL11A (rs1427407), but not HBS1-MYB (rs6934903) loci
associate with fetal hemoglobin levels in Indian sickle cell disease patients.

Bhanushali AA(1), Patra PK(2), Nair D(3), Verma H(4), Das BR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development, SRL Ltd, Prime Square Building, Plot No 1, S. V.
Road, Goregaon (W), Mumbai 400 062, India. Electronic address:
aparna.bhanushali@srl.in. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Pt. J.N.M. Medical
College, Raipur (C. G.), India. Electronic address: pkp1964@yahoo.co.in.
(3)Research and Development, SRL Ltd, Prime Square Building, Plot No 1, S. V.
Road, Goregaon (W), Mumbai 400 062, India. Electronic address:
devika.nair04@gmail.com. (4)Department of Biochemistry, Pt. J.N.M. Medical
College, Raipur (C. G.), India. Electronic address: henu.verma@yahoo.com.
(5)Research and Development, SRL Ltd, Prime Square Building, Plot No 1, S. V.
Road, Goregaon (W), Mumbai 400 062, India. Electronic address: brdas@srl.in.

India along with Nigeria and DRC contribute to 57% of the world sickle cell
anemia population. The annual number of newborns in India with SCA was estimated 
at 44,000 in 2010. Even with this high prevalence there is minimal information
about genetic factors that influence the disease course in Indian patients. The
current study was conducted on 240 patients with SCD and 60 with sickle cell
trait, to determine the association of genetic variants at the BCL11A (rs1427407)
and HBS1-MYB (rs6934903) loci with fetal hemoglobin levels (HbF). Both these loci
have been implicated with influencing HbF levels, a powerful modulator of the
clinical and hematologic features of SCD. Our results indicate the BCL11A
rs1427407 G>T variant to be significantly associated with HbF levels {19.12±6.61 
(GG), 20.27±6.92 (GT) and 24.83±2.92 (TT) respectively} contributing to ~23% of
the trait variance. Interestingly no association of the HBS1L-MYB rs6934903 with 
the HbF levels was seen. The present study indicates the BCL11A (rs1427407) but
not HMIP (rs6934903) to be associated with elevated HbF levels in Indian patient.
Further interrogation of additional variants at both the loci; as also a GWAS
which may help uncover new loci controlling HbF levels.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25457385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Jan;54(1):1-3. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2014.10.004. Epub
2014 Nov 3.

SCF-mediated <U+03B3>-globin gene expression in adult human erythroid cells is
associated with KLF1, BCL11A and SOX6 down-regulation.

Lulli V(1), Romania P(2), Morsilli O(1), Ilari R(1), Gabbianelli M(1), Testa
U(1), Marziali G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di
Sanità, Rome, Italy. (2)Dept. of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine,
Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy; Paediatric Haematology/Oncology
Department, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital IRCCS, Rome, Italy. (3)Dept. of
Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, 
Italy. Electronic address: giovanna.marziali@iss.it.

PMID: 25457384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Haematologica. 2014 Nov;99(11):1647-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.116483.

Flicking the switch: adult hemoglobin expression in erythroid cells derived from 
cord blood and human induced pluripotent stem cells.

Cantú I(1), Philipsen S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus MC Department of Cell Biology, P.O. Box 2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (2)Erasmus MC Department of Cell Biology, P.O. Box 2040, 3000 CA
Rotterdam, The Netherlands j.philipsen@erasmusmc.nl.

Comment on
    Haematologica. 2014 Nov;99(11):1677-85.

PMCID: PMC4222461
PMID: 25420279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Neurosci. 2014 Nov 19;34(47):15548-56. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3338-14.2014.

Differentially methylated plasticity genes in the amygdala of young primates are 
linked to anxious temperament, an at risk phenotype for anxiety and depressive
disorders.

Alisch RS(1), Chopra P(2), Fox AS(3), Chen K(4), White AT(5), Roseboom PH(5),
Keles S(4), Kalin NH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Psychiatry, alisch@wisc.edu nkalin@wisc.edu. (2)Department of
Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, and.
(3)Psychology, the Health Emotion Research Institute, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, Wisconsin 53719, Waisman Laboratory for Brain Imaging and Behavior,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53705. (4)Statistics, and.
(5)Departments of Psychiatry. (6)Departments of Psychiatry, Psychology, the
Health Emotion Research Institute, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin
53719, Waisman Laboratory for Brain Imaging and Behavior, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53705 alisch@wisc.edu nkalin@wisc.edu.

Children with an anxious temperament (AT) are at a substantially increased risk
to develop anxiety and depression. The young rhesus monkey is ideal for studying 
the origin of human AT because it shares with humans the genetic, neural, and
phenotypic underpinnings of complex social and emotional functioning.
Heritability, functional imaging, and gene expression studies of AT in young
monkeys revealed that the central nucleus of the amygdala (Ce) is a key
environmentally sensitive substrate of this at risk phenotype. Because epigenetic
marks (e.g., DNA methylation) can be modulated by environmental stimuli, these
data led us to hypothesize a role for DNA methylation in the development of AT.
To test this hypothesis, we used reduced representation bisulfite sequencing to
examine the cross-sectional genome-wide methylation levels in the Ce of 23
age-matched monkeys (1.3 ± 0.2 years) phenotyped for AT. Because AT reflects a
continuous trait-like variable, we used an analytical approach that is consistent
with this biology to identify genes in the Ce with methylation patterns that
predict AT. Expression data from the Ce of these same monkeys were then used to
find differentially methylated candidates linked to altered gene regulation. Two 
genes particularly relevant to the AT phenotype were BCL11A and JAG1. These
transcripts have well-defined roles in neurodevelopmental processes, including
neurite arborization and the regulation of neurogenesis. Together, these findings
represent a critical step toward understanding the effects of early environment
on the neuromolecular mechanisms that underlie the risk to develop anxiety and
depressive disorders.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3415548-09$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4236392
PMID: 25411484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 5;9(11):e111464. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111464.
eCollection 2014.

Genome wide association study of fetal hemoglobin in sickle cell anemia in
Tanzania.

Mtatiro SN(1), Singh T(2), Rooks H(3), Mgaya J(4), Mariki H(4), Soka D(4),
Mmbando B(5), Msaki E(4), Kolder I(2), Thein SL(6), Menzel S(3), Cox SE(7),
Makani J(8), Barrett JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Muhimbili Wellcome Programme, Department of Haematology and Blood Transfusion,
Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Science, Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania;
Department of Biological Sciences, Dar es Salaam University College of Education,
Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania. (2)Department of Human genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (3)King's College London, Department of
Molecular Haematology, Division of Cancer Studies, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Muhimbili Wellcome Programme, Department of Haematology and Blood Transfusion,
Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Science, Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania.
(5)Muhimbili Wellcome Programme, Department of Haematology and Blood Transfusion,
Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Science, Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania;
National Institute for Medical Research, Tanga Centre, Tanga, Tanzania. (6)King's
College London, Department of Molecular Haematology, Division of Cancer Studies, 
London, United Kingdom; King's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Department 
of Haematological Medicine, London, United Kingdom. (7)Muhimbili Wellcome
Programme, Department of Haematology and Blood Transfusion, Muhimbili University 
of Health and Allied Science, Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania; MRC International
Nutrition Group, Faculty of Epidemiology & Population Health, London School of
Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom. (8)Muhimbili Wellcome
Programme, Department of Haematology and Blood Transfusion, Muhimbili University 
of Health and Allied Science, Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania; Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) is an important modulator of sickle cell
disease (SCD). HbF has previously been shown to be affected by variants at three 
loci on chromosomes 2, 6 and 11, but it is likely that additional loci remain to 
be discovered.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in
1,213 SCA (HbSS/HbSß0) patients in Tanzania. Genotyping was done with Illumina
Omni2.5 array and imputation using 1000 Genomes Phase I release data. Association
with HbF was analysed using a linear mixed model to control for complex
population structure within our study. We successfully replicated known
associations for HbF near BCL11A and the HBS1L-MYB intergenic polymorphisms
(HMIP), including multiple independent effects near BCL11A, consistent with
previous reports. We observed eight additional associations with P<10(-6). These 
associations could not be replicated in a SCA population in the UK.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the largest GWAS study in SCA in Africa. We have confirmed
known associations and identified new genetic associations with HbF that require 
further replication in SCA populations in Africa.

PMCID: PMC4221031
PMID: 25372704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Oncol Rep. 2015 Jan;33(1):283-91. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3584. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

Loss of function of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling genes leads to genome
instability of human lung cancer.

Huang HT(1), Chen SM(1), Pan LB(1), Yao J(1), Ma HT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, P.R. China.

SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes are frequently mutated in a variety of
human cancers. We investigated the mutation incidence and the role of mSWI/SNF
(BAF) complexes in human lung cancer. In the present study, we analyzed somatic
mutations of BAF complexes and other driver mutated genes of lung carcinoma
deposited in the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) database. BAF 
complexes were mutated in 282 of 803 (35.12%) lung carcinoma samples analyzed,
ranking second to TP53. Significantly, BAF-mutated samples exhibited more genomic
mutations than BAF wild-type ones. Moreover, a significant positive correlation
existed between the BAF mutations and overall genomic mutations in these lung
carcinoma samples (P<0.001, Pearson's correlation analysis). Specifically, the
mutant-typing of 6 BAF genes, SMARCA4, ARID2, ARID1B, BCL11A, BCL11B and BRD9 was
associated with more overall mutations in the lung carcinoma samples. A mutation 
reporter system was developed by means of the establishment of stable cell
sublines with slippage-luciferase transcript in a lung adenocarcinoma cell line, 
Calu-3. SMARCA4, the most frequently mutated BAF gene in lung cancer, was stably 
knocked down by pSUPER constructs carrying short hairpin RNA (shRNA). Mutation
ratios determined from the mutation reporters of Calu-3 cells were significantly 
increased upon stable SMARCA4 knockdown. We demonstrated that genetic mutations
of BAF complexes lead to genome instability of lung carcinoma. Therefore, BAF
complexes play an important role in maintaining genome stability in human lung
cancer.

PMID: 25370573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cancer Biol Med. 2014 Sep;11(3):202-7. doi: 10.7497/j.issn.2095-3941.2014.03.006.

The gene expression patterns of BMPR2, EP300, TGFß2, and TNFAIP3 in B-Lymphoma
cells.

He DM(1), Wu H(1), Wu XL(1), Ding L(1), Xu L(1), Li YQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Institute of Hematology, Medical College, 2 Key Laboratory for Regenerative 
Medicine of Ministry of Education, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China.

OBJECTIVE: The results of a previous study showed that a clear dysregulation was 
evident in the global gene expression of the BCL11A-suppressed B-lymphoma cells. 
In this study, the bone morphogenetic protein receptor, type II (BMPR2), E1A
binding protein p300 (EP300), transforming growth factor-ß2 (TGFß2), and tumor
necrosis factor, and alpha-induced protein 3 (TNFAIP3) gene expression patterns
in B-cell malignancies were studied.
METHODS: The relative expression levels of BMPR2, EP300, TGFß2, and TNFAIP3 mRNA 
in B-lymphoma cell lines, myeloid cell lines, as well as in cells from healthy
volunteers, were determined by real-time quantitative reverse
transcript-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) with SYBR Green Dye.
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used as reference.
RESULTS: The expression level of TGFß2 mRNA in B-lymphoma cell lines was
significantly higher than those in the cells from the healthy control (P<0.05).
However, the expression level of TNFAIP3 mRNA in B-malignant cells was
significantly lower than that of the healthy control (P<0.05). The expression
levels of BMPR2 and EP300 mRNA showed no significant difference between
B-malignant cell lines and the healthy group (P>0.05). In B-lymphoma cell lines, 
correlation analyses revealed that the expression of BMPR2 and TNFAIP3 (r=0.882, 
P=0.04) had significant positive relation. The expression levels of BMPR2, EP300,
and TNFAIP3 mRNA in cell lines from myeloid leukemia were significantly lower
than those in the cells from the healthy control (P<0.05). The expression levels 
of TGFß2 mRNA showed no significant difference between myeloid leukemia cell
lines and the healthy control or B-malignant cell lines (P>0.05). The expression 
levels of BMPR2, EP300, and TNFAIP3 mRNA in B-lymphoma cells were significantly
higher than those of the myeloid leukemia cells (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Different expression patterns of BMPR2, EP300, TGFß2, and TNFAIP3
genes in B-lymphoma cells exist.

PMCID: PMC4197423
PMID: 25364581  [PubMed]


68. PLoS Genet. 2014 Oct 16;10(10):e1004645. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004645.
eCollection 2014.

An integrated cell purification and genomics strategy reveals multiple regulators
of pancreas development.

Benitez CM(1), Qu K(2), Sugiyama T(1), Pauerstein PT(1), Liu Y(1), Tsai J(1), Gu 
X(1), Ghodasara A(1), Arda HE(1), Zhang J(2), Dekker JD(3), Tucker HO(3), Chang
HY(4), Kim SK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California, United States of America. (2)Program in Epithelial Biology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of
America. (3)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology and Department of
Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, United
States of America. (4)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School
of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America; Department of
Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine,, Stanford, California,
United States of America; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America. (5)Department
of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, United States of America; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America;
Department of Medicine (Oncology Division), Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America.

The regulatory logic underlying global transcriptional programs controlling
development of visceral organs like the pancreas remains undiscovered. Here, we
profiled gene expression in 12 purified populations of fetal and adult pancreatic
epithelial cells representing crucial progenitor cell subsets, and their
endocrine or exocrine progeny. Using probabilistic models to decode the general
programs organizing gene expression, we identified co-expressed gene sets in cell
subsets that revealed patterns and processes governing progenitor cell
development, lineage specification, and endocrine cell maturation. Purification
of Neurog3 mutant cells and module network analysis linked established regulators
such as Neurog3 to unrecognized gene targets and roles in pancreas development.
Iterative module network analysis nominated and prioritized transcriptional
regulators, including diabetes risk genes. Functional validation of a subset of
candidate regulators with corresponding mutant mice revealed that the
transcription factors Etv1, Prdm16, Runx1t1 and Bcl11a are essential for pancreas
development. Our integrated approach provides a unique framework for identifying 
regulatory genes and functional gene sets underlying pancreas development and
associated diseases such as diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC4199491
PMID: 25330008  [PubMed - in process]


69. Hum Genet. 2014 Dec;133(12):1487-95. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1486-5. Epub 2014
Oct 2.

A comparison of type 2 diabetes risk allele load between African Americans and
European Americans.

Keaton JM(1), Cooke Bailey JN, Palmer ND, Freedman BI, Langefeld CD, Ng MC,
Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Genomics Program, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC, USA.

The prevalence of type 2 diabetes (T2D) is greater in populations of African
descent compared to European-descent populations. Genetic risk factors may
underlie the disparity in disease prevalence. Genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) have identified >60 common genetic variants that contribute to T2D risk in
populations of European, Asian, African and Hispanic descent. These studies have 
not comprehensively examined population differences in cumulative risk allele
load. To investigate the relationship between risk allele load and T2D risk, 46
T2D single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 43 loci from GWAS in European,
Asian, and African-derived populations were genotyped in 1,990 African Americans 
(n = 963 T2D cases, n = 1,027 controls) and 1,644 European Americans (n = 719 T2D
cases, n = 925 controls) ascertained and recruited using a common protocol in the
southeast United States. A genetic risk score (GRS) was constructed from the
cumulative risk alleles for each individual. In African American subjects, risk
allele frequencies ranged from 0.024 to 0.964. Risk alleles from 26 SNPs
demonstrated directional consistency with previous studies, and 3 SNPs from
ADAMTS9, TCF7L2, and ZFAND6 showed nominal evidence of association (p < 0.05).
African American individuals carried 38-67 (53.7 ± 4.0, mean ± SD) risk alleles. 
In European American subjects, risk allele frequencies ranged from 0.084 to
0.996. Risk alleles from 36 SNPs demonstrated directional consistency, and 10
SNPs from BCL11A, PSMD6, ADAMTS9, ZFAND3, ANK1, CDKN2A/B, TCF7L2, PRC1, FTO, and 
BCAR1 showed evidence of association (p < 0.05). European American individuals
carried 38-65 (50.9 ± 4.4) risk alleles. African Americans have a significantly
greater burden of 2.8 risk alleles (p = 3.97 × 10(-89)) compared to European
Americans. However, GRS modeling showed that cumulative risk allele load was
associated with risk of T2D in European Americans, but only marginally in African
Americans. This result suggests that there are ethnic-specific differences in
genetic architecture underlying T2D, and that these differences complicate our
understanding of how risk allele load impacts disease susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC4225163
PMID: 25273842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Am J Hematol. 2015 Jan;90(1):E1-4. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23859. Epub 2014 Oct 20.

Genetic variants at HbF-modifier loci moderate anemia and leukocytosis in sickle 
cell disease in Tanzania.

Mtatiro SN(1), Makani J, Mmbando B, Thein SL, Menzel S, Cox SE.

Author information: 
(1)Muhimbili Wellcome Programme, Muhimbili University of Health and Allied
Sciences, Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania; Department of Biological Sciences, Dar es
Salaam University College of Education, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.

Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) is a recognized modulator of sickle cell disease (SCD)
severity. HbF levels are strongly influenced by genetic variants at three major
genetic loci, Xmn1-HBG2, HMIP-2, and BCL11A, but the effect of these loci on the 
hematological phenotype in SCD, has so far not been investigated. In a cohort of 
individuals with SCD in Tanzania (HbSS and HbS/ß° thalassemia, n = 726, aged 5 or
older), HbF levels were positively correlated with hemoglobin, red blood cell
(RBC) indices, mean corpuscular volume (MCV), and mean corpuscular hemoglobin
(MCH), and negatively with white blood cell (WBC) and platelet counts (all P <
0.0001). We subsequently assessed the contribution of the three HbF modifier loci
and detected diverse effects, including a reduction in anemia, leukocytosis, and 
thrombocytosis associated with certain HbF-promoting alleles. The presence of the
'T' allele at Xmn1-HBG2 led to a significant increase in hemoglobin (P = 9.8 ×
10(-3) ) but no changes in cellular hemoglobin content. Xmn1-HBG2 'T' also has a 
weak effect decreasing WBC (P = 0.06) and platelet (P = 0.06) counts. The BCL11A 
variant (rs11886868-'C') increases hemoglobin (P = 2 × 10(-3) ) and one of the
HBS1L-MYB variants decreases WBC values selectively (P = 2.3 × 10(-4) ). The
distinct pattern of effects of each variant suggests that both, disease
alleviation through increased HbF production, and 'pleiotropic' effects on blood 
cells, are involved, affecting a variety of pathways.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4737118
PMID: 25263325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Am J Blood Res. 2014 Sep 5;4(1):27-32. eCollection 2014.

Transfusion-independent ß(0)-thalassemia after bone marrow transplantation
failure: proposed involvement of high parental HbF and an epigenetic mechanism.

Paciaroni K(1), Lucarelli G(1), Martelli F(2), Migliaccio AR(3), von Lindern
M(4), Borg J(5), Gillemans N(6), van Dijk TB(6), Philipsen S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Mediterranean Institute of Hematology, Policlinic of Tor Vergata Oxford
Avenue, 00152 Rome, Italy. (2)Istituto Superiore di Sanità Viale Regina Elena
299, 00161 - Rome, Italy. (3)Istituto Superiore di Sanità Viale Regina Elena 299,
00161 - Rome, Italy ; Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine,
Mount Sinai School of Medicine One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1079, New York, NY 
10029, USA. (4)Department of Hematopoiesis, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner
Laboratory Dr Plesmanlaan 125, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (5)Department 
of Applied Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Malta
Msida, MSD2090, Malta ; Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC P.O. box 2040,
3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (6)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC
P.O. box 2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Currently, bone marrow transplantation is the only curative treatment for
ß-thalassemia and sickle cell disease. In rare cases, sustained and full fetal
hemoglobin production was observed in patients after failure of bone marrow
transplantation. This rendered the patients transfusion-free, despite genetic
disease and transplant rejection. The mechanisms underlying this phenomenon
remain unexplored. We have studied a trio (father-mother-child) in which the
affected child became transfusion-independent after rejection of an allogeneic
bone marrow graft. Remarkably, we found that his non-thalassemic mother also
expressed unusually high levels of <U+03B3>-globin. High HbF in one of the parents may
therefore be of prognostic value in these rare cases. Genotyping of the HBB locus
and the HbF quantitative trait loci HBS1L-MYB, KLF1 and BCL11A, and protein
expression analysis of KLF1 and BCL11A, failed to explain the increased HbF
levels, indicating that an as yet unidentified HbF modifier locus may be
involved. We hypothesize that epigenetic events brought about by the
transplantation procedure allow therapeutic levels of HbF expression in the
child. Potential implications of our observations for reactivation of <U+03B3>-globin
expression and interpretation of the French globin gene therapy case are
discussed.

PMCID: PMC4165118
PMID: 25232502  [PubMed]


72. J Immunol. 2014 Oct 1;193(7):3470-91. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301663. Epub 2014
Aug 29.

GATA-3 dose-dependent checkpoints in early T cell commitment.

Scripture-Adams DD(1), Damle SS(1), Li L(1), Elihu KJ(1), Qin S(1), Arias AM(1), 
Butler RR 3rd(1), Champhekar A(1), Zhang JA(1), Rothenberg EV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125. (2)Division of Biology and Biological
Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125
evroth@its.caltech.edu.

GATA-3 expression is crucial for T cell development and peaks during commitment
to the T cell lineage, midway through the CD4(-)CD8(-) (double-negative [DN])
stages 1-3. We used RNA interference and conditional deletion to reduce GATA-3
protein acutely at specific points during T cell differentiation in vitro. Even
moderate GATA-3 reduction killed DN1 cells, delayed progression to the DN2 stage,
skewed DN2 gene regulation, and blocked appearance of the DN3 phenotype. Although
a Bcl-2 transgene rescued DN1 survival and improved DN2 cell generation, it did
not restore DN3 differentiation. Gene expression analyses (quantitative PCR, RNA 
sequencing) showed that GATA-3-deficient DN2 cells quickly upregulated genes,
including Spi1 (PU.1) and Bcl11a, and downregulated genes, including Cpa3, Ets1, 
Zfpm1, Bcl11b, Il9r, and Il17rb with gene-specific kinetics and dose
dependencies. These targets could mediate two distinct roles played by GATA-3 in 
lineage commitment, as revealed by removing wild-type or GATA-3-deficient early T
lineage cells from environmental Notch signals. GATA-3 worked as a potent
repressor of B cell potential even at low expression levels, so that only full
deletion of GATA-3 enabled pro-T cells to reveal B cell potential. The ability of
GATA-3 to block B cell development did not require T lineage commitment factor
Bcl11b. In prethymic multipotent precursors, however, titration of GATA-3
activity using tamoxifen-inducible GATA-3 showed that GATA-3 inhibits B and
myeloid developmental alternatives at different threshold doses. Furthermore,
differential impacts of a GATA-3 obligate repressor construct imply that B and
myeloid development are inhibited through distinct transcriptional mechanisms.
Thus, the pattern of GATA-3 expression sequentially produces B lineage exclusion,
T lineage progression, and myeloid-lineage exclusion for commitment.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4170028
PMID: 25172496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Oncologist. 2014 Sep;19(9):909-14. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2014-0099. Epub
2014 Aug 12.

Reverse-phase protein array for prediction of patients at low risk of developing 
bone metastasis from breast cancer.

Hayashi N(1), Manyam GC(1), Gonzalez-Angulo AM(1), Niikura N(1), Yamauchi H(1),
Nakamura S(1), Hortobágyi GN(1), Baggerly KA(1), Ueno NT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Breast Medical Oncology, Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology, and Systems Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas, USA; Department of Breast Surgical Oncology, St. Luke's
International Hospital, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Surgery, Division of Breast
Surgical Oncology, The Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Departments of Breast Medical Oncology, Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology, and Systems Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas, USA; Department of Breast Surgical Oncology, St. Luke's
International Hospital, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Surgery, Division of Breast
Surgical Oncology, The Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
nueno@mdanderson.org.

BACKGROUND: A biomarker that predicts bone metastasis based on a protein
laboratory assay has not been demonstrated. Reverse-phase protein array (RPPA)
enables quantification of total and phosphorylated proteins, providing
information about their functional status. The aim of this study was to identify 
bone-metastasis-related markers in patients with primary breast cancer using RPPA
analysis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Tumor samples were obtained from 169 patients with primary 
invasive breast carcinoma who underwent surgery. The patients were categorized by
whether they developed breast cancer bone metastasis (BCBM) during follow-up.
Clinical characteristics and protein expression by RPPA were compared and
verified by leave-one-out cross-validation.
RESULTS: Lymph node status (p = .023) and expression level of 22 proteins by RPPA
were significantly correlated with BCBM in logistic regression analysis. These
variables were used to build a logistic regression model. After filtering the
variables through a stepwise algorithm, the final model, consisting of 8 proteins
and lymph node status, had sensitivity of 30.0%, specificity of 90.5%, positive
predictive value of 30.0%, and negative predictive value of 90.5% in the
cross-validation. Most of the identified proteins were associated with cell cycle
or signal transduction (CDK2, CDKN1A, Rb1, Src, phosphorylated-ribosomal S6
kinase, HER2, BCL11A, and MYH11).
CONCLUSION: Our validated model, in which the primary tumor is tested with RPPA, 
can predict patients who are at low risk of developing BCBM and thus who likely
would not benefit from receiving a bisphosphonate in the adjuvant setting.
Clinical trials excluding these patients have the potential to clarify the
benefit of bisphosphonates in the adjuvant setting.

©AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4153464
PMID: 25117064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Haematologica. 2014 Nov;99(11):1677-85. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.110155. Epub
2014 Aug 8.

Induction of adult levels of ß-globin in human erythroid cells that intrinsically
express embryonic or fetal globin by transduction with KLF1 and BCL11A-XL.

Trakarnsanga K(1), Wilson MC(2), Lau W(2), Singleton BK(3), Parsons SF(3),
Sakuntanaga P(2), Kurita R(4), Nakamura Y(4), Anstee DJ(5), Frayne J(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom
Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand. (2)School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, 
Bristol, United Kingdom. (3)Bristol Institute for Transfusion Sciences, National 
Health Service Blood and Transplant (NHSBT), Filton, Bristol, UK. (4)Cell
Engineering Division, RIKEN BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(5)Bristol Institute for Transfusion Sciences, National Health Service Blood and 
Transplant (NHSBT), Filton, Bristol, UK jan.frayne@bristol.ac.uk
david.anstee@nhsbt.nhs.uk. (6)School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol,
Bristol, United Kingdom jan.frayne@bristol.ac.uk david.anstee@nhsbt.nhs.uk.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2014 Nov;99(11):1647-9.

A major barrier to the clinical use of erythrocytes generated in vitro from
pluripotent stem cells or cord blood progenitors is failure of these erythrocytes
to express adult hemoglobin. The key regulators of globin switching KLF1 and
BCL11A are absent or at a lower level than in adult cells in K562 and erythroid
cells differentiated in vitro from induced pluripotent stem cells and cord blood 
progenitors. Transfection or transduction of K562 and cord blood erythroid cells 
with either KLF1 or BCL11A-XL had little effect on ß-globin expression. In
contrast, transduction with both transcription factors stimulated ß-globin
expression. Similarly, increasing the level of BCL11A-XL in the induced
pluripotent stem cell-derived erythroid cell line HiDEP-1, which has levels of
endogenous KLF1 similar to adult cells but lacks BCL11A, resulted in levels of
ß-globin equivalent to that of adult erythroid cells. Interestingly, this
increase in ß-globin was coincident with a decrease in e- and <U+03B6>-, but not
<U+03B3>-globin, implicating BCL11A in repression of embryonic globin expression. The
data show that KLF1 and BCL11A-XL together are required, but sufficient to induce
adult levels of ß-globin in induced pluripotent stem cell and cord blood-derived 
erythroid cells that intrinsically express embryonic or fetal globin.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4222483
PMID: 25107887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. PLoS Genet. 2014 Aug 7;10(8):e1004555. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004555.
eCollection 2014.

A genetic strategy to measure circulating Drosophila insulin reveals genes
regulating insulin production and secretion.

Park S(1), Alfa RW(2), Topper SM(1), Kim GE(1), Kockel L(1), Kim SK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California, United States of America. (2)Department of Developmental
Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United
States of America; Neuroscience Program, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California, United States of America. (3)Department of Developmental
Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United
States of America; Department of Medicine (Oncology Division) Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America; Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, 
United States of America.

Insulin is a major regulator of metabolism in metazoans, including the fruit fly 
Drosophila melanogaster. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) suggest a genetic
basis for reductions of both insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion,
phenotypes commonly observed in humans with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). To
identify molecular functions of genes linked to T2DM risk, we developed a genetic
tool to measure insulin-like peptide 2 (Ilp2) levels in Drosophila, a model
organism with superb experimental genetics. Our system permitted sensitive
quantification of circulating Ilp2, including measures of Ilp2 dynamics during
fasting and re-feeding, and demonstration of adaptive Ilp2 secretion in response 
to insulin receptor haploinsufficiency. Tissue specific dissection of this
reduced insulin signaling phenotype revealed a critical role for insulin
signaling in specific peripheral tissues. Knockdown of the Drosophila orthologues
of human T2DM risk genes, including GLIS3 and BCL11A, revealed roles of these
Drosophila genes in Ilp2 production or secretion. Discovery of Drosophila
mechanisms and regulators controlling in vivo insulin dynamics should accelerate 
functional dissection of diabetes genetics.

PMCID: PMC4125106
PMID: 25101872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2014 Dec;53(4):176-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2014.07.006. Epub 
2014 Jul 30.

DNA polymorphisms at BCL11A, HBS1L-MYB and Xmn1-HBG2 site loci associated with
fetal hemoglobin levels in sickle cell anemia patients from Northern Brazil.

Cardoso GL(1), Diniz IG(1), Silva AN(1), Cunha DA(1), Silva Junior JS(1), Uchôa
CT(1), Santos SE(1), Trindade SM(2), Cardoso Mdo S(2), Guerreiro JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Genética Humana e Médica, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal do Pará, Rua Augusto Corrêa, No. 1, Guamá, CEP 66075-110,
Belém, PA, Brazil. (2)Fundação Centro de Hemoterapia e Hematologia do Pará,
Travessa Travessa Padre Eutíquio, 2109, Batista Campos, CEP 66033-000, Belém, PA,
Brazil.

Increased levels of fetal hemoglobin (HbF, a2<U+03B3>2) may reduce sickle cell anemia
severity due to its ability to inhibit HbS polymerization and also reduce the
mean corpuscular HbS concentration. We have investigated the influence of three
known major loci on the HbF trait (HBG2, rs748214; BCL11A, rs4671393; and
HBS1L-MYB, rs28384513, rs489544 and rs9399137) and HbF levels in SCA patients
from the State of Pará, Northern Brazil. Our results showed that high levels of
HbF were primarily influenced by alleles of BCL11A (rs4671393) and HMIP
(rs4895441) loci, and to a lesser extent by rs748214 G<U+03B3>-globin (HBG2) gene
promoter. The SNPs rs4671393 and rs4895441 explained 10% and 9.2%, respectively, 
of the variation in HbF levels, while 4.1% of trait variation was explained by
rs748214. The results can be considered as in accordance with the pattern of
ancestry displayed by the SCA patients: 39.6% European, 29.6% African and 30.8%
Native American, and reinforce the suggestion that studies of association between
genetic modifiers and clinical and laboratory manifestations in Brazil must be
controlled by ancestry.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25084696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Cell Biol Int. 2014 Oct;38(10):1205-14. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10332. Epub 2014 Jul
31.

Gene expression profile analysis of SUDHL6 cells with siRNA-mediated BCL11A
downregulation.

Wu H(1), Gao Y, Ding L, He D, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Medical College, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632,
P. R. China.

Our previous study has shown that downregulation of B-cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL)/lymphoma11A (BCL11A) gene by small interfering RNA (siRNA)
resulted in the growth inhibition and apoptosis of B cell lymphoma cell line
SUDHL6. To gain further insight into the molecular mechanisms of this process and
identify the differentially expressed genes in SUDHL6 cells after BCL11A
downregulation, the global gene expression profile was identified and analyzed
using the Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus 2.0 array. Twenty-one differentially expressed 
genes were validated and analyzed from the BCL11A siRNA-treated SUDHL6 cells.
There was a significant dysregulation in the global gene expression of the
BCL11A-suppressed SUDHL6 cells. There were 1903 genes differentially expressed
with >2-fold changes between the BCL11A siRNA- and negative control-transfected
cells. Of these, there were 916 upregulated genes and 987 downregulated genes.
The differential genes are involved in various molecular functions and signaling 
pathways. QRT-PCR validation of the selected differentially expressed genes
demonstrated there was a good correlation with the microarray analysis. There was
a significant deregulation of expression in the apoptosis-related genes such as
BCL-2, BCL2L11 and involved in TGFß, MAPK, WNT signaling pathways after BCL11A
was downregulated in SUDHL6 cells. Our results show that the suppression of
BCL11A by RNA interference altered gene expression profile of SUDHL6 cells. The
apoptosis-related genes BCL-2, BCL2L11 and the gene alterations in TGFß, MAPK,
WNT signaling pathways might be important in BCL11A siRNA-induced apoptosis of
SUDHL6 cells, suggesting BCL11A is involved in gene networks associated with
apoptosis.

© 2014 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 25044937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Am J Hematol. 2014 Nov;89(11):1019-23. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23811. Epub 2014 Aug 4.

The genetics of hemoglobin A2 regulation in sickle cell anemia.

Griffin PJ(1), Sebastiani P, Edward H, Baldwin CT, Gladwin MT, Gordeuk VR, Chui
DH, Steinberg MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts.

Hemoglobin A2 , a tetramer of a- and d-globin chains, comprises less than 3% of
total hemoglobin in normal adults. In northern Europeans, single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the HBS1L-MYB locus on chromosome 6q and the HBB cluster 
on chromosome 11p were associated with HbA2 levels. We examined the genetic basis
of HbA2 variability in sickle cell anemia using genome-wide association studies. 
HbA2 levels were associated with SNPs in the HBS1L-MYB interval and SNPs in
BCL11A. These effects are mediated by the association of these loci with <U+03B3>-globin
gene expression and fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels. The association of
polymorphisms downstream of the ß-globin gene (HBB) cluster on chromosome 11 with
HbA2 was not mediated by HbF. In sickle cell anemia, levels of HbA2 appear to be 
modulated by trans-acting genes that affect HBG expression and perhaps also
elements within the ß-globin gene cluster. HbA2 is expressed pancellularly and
can inhibit HbS polymerization. It remains to be seen if genetic regulators of
HbA2 can be exploited for therapeutic purposes.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4298130
PMID: 25042611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Oct 1;34(19):3560-9. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00714-14. Epub 2014 Jul
14.

Fetal globin gene repressors as drug targets for molecular therapies to treat the
ß-globinopathies.

Suzuki M(1), Yamamoto M(2), Engel JD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Radioisotope Sciences, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan Tohoku Medical Megabank, Tohoku
University, Sendai, Japan. (3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA engel@umich.edu.

The human ß-globin locus is comprised of embryonic, fetal, and adult globin genes
that are expressed in a developmental stage-specific manner. Mutations in the
globin locus give rise to the ß-globinopathies, ß-thalassemia and sickle cell
disease, which begin to manifest symptoms around the time of birth. Although the 
fetal globin genes are autonomously silenced in adult-stage erythroid cells,
mutations lying both within and outside the locus lead to natural variations in
the level of fetal globin gene expression, and some of these significantly
ameliorate the clinical symptoms of the ß-globinopathies. Multiple reports have
now identified several transcription factors that are involved in fetal globin
gene repression in definitive (adult)-stage erythroid cells (the TR2/TR4
heterodimer, MYB, KLFs, BCL11A, and SOX6). To carry out their repression
functions, chromatin-modifying enzymes (such as DNA methyltransferase, histone
deacetylases, and lysine-specific histone demethylase 1) are additionally
involved as a consequence of forming large macromolecular complexes with the
DNA-binding subunits of these cellular machines. This review focuses on the
molecular mechanisms underlying fetal globin gene silencing and possible
near-future molecularly targeted therapies for treating the ß-globinopathies.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4187729
PMID: 25022757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Exp Ther Med. 2014 Aug;8(2):459-463. Epub 2014 Jun 12.

BCL11A gene DNA methylation contributes to the risk of type 2 diabetes in males.

Tang L(1), Wang L(2), Ye H(3), Xu X(3), Hong Q(3), Wang H(4), Xu L(5), Bu S(2),
Zhang L(5), Cheng J(1), Liu P(6), Ye M(6), Mai Y(6), Duan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathophysiology, Ningbo University,
Ningbo, Zhejiang 315211, P.R. China ; The Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315000, P.R. China. (2)Bank of
Blood Products, Ningbo No. 2 Hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315010, P.R. China.
(3)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathophysiology, Ningbo University,
Ningbo, Zhejiang 315211, P.R. China. (4)Section of Endocrinology, Pritzker School
of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (5)The Affiliated
Hospital, School of Medicine, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315000, P.R.
China ; Bank of Blood Products, Ningbo No. 2 Hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315010,
P.R. China. (6)The Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Ningbo University,
Ningbo, Zhejiang 315000, P.R. China.

BCL11A is a critical modulator involved in hemoglobin switching. Recent studies
have established an association between BCL11A gene polymorphisms and a risk of
type 2 diabetes (T2D). The aim of the present study was to assess the correlation
between BCL11A DNA methylation and T2D. A total of 48 T2D cases and 48 age- and
gender-matched controls were recruited to evaluate BCL11A methylation using
bisulfite pyrosequencing technology. Although no significant association was
observed in BCL11A methylation between T2D patients and healthy controls
(P=0.322), breakdown analysis by gender identified a significant association
between BCL11A methylation and T2D in males (P=0.018). Notably, there was also a 
significant female-specific association between the mean BCL11A DNA methylation
and triglyceride (TG) concentration (r=-0.34; P=0.019). The results indicated
that BCL11A methylation contributed to the risk of T2D in males. In addition,
BCL11A methylation may have an effect on the development of T2D by influencing TG
metabolism. Thus, gender difference may provide new information to aid the
understanding of T2D pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4079426
PMID: 25009601  [PubMed]


81. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 30;9(6):e100516. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100516.
eCollection 2014.

The co-inheritance of alpha-thalassemia and sickle cell anemia is associated with
better hematological indices and lower consultations rate in Cameroonian patients
and could improve their survival.

Rumaney MB(1), Ngo Bitoungui VJ(2), Vorster AA(1), Ramesar R(3), Kengne AP(4),
Ngogang J(2), Wonkam A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular
Medicine (IDM), Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town (UCT), Cape
Town, Republic of South Africa. (2)Department of Microbiology, Parasitology and
Haematology, Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaoundé
1, Yaoundé, Cameroon. (3)Division of Human Genetics, Institute of Infectious
Disease and Molecular Medicine (IDM), Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Cape Town (UCT), Cape Town, Republic of South Africa; MRC Human Genetics Research
Unit), Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine (IDM), Faculty of
Health Sciences, University of Cape Town (UCT), Cape Town, Republic of South
Africa. (4)Non-Communicable Diseases Research Unit, South African Medical
Research Council and University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Co-inheritance of a-thalassemia was reported to be associated with a 
delayed age of disease onset among Cameroonian Sickle Cell Anemia (SCA) patients.
The present study aimed to explore the correlation between a-thalassemia,
hematological indices, and clinical events in these patients.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We studied 161 Cameroonian SCA patients and 103 controls
(59.1% HbAA) with median ages of 17.5 and 23 years. RFLP-PCR was used to confirm 
SCA genotype and to describe haplotypes in the HBB-like genes cluster. Multiplex 
Gap-PCR was performed to investigate the 3.7 kb a-globin gene deletions. SNaPshot
PCR, capillary electrophoresis and cycle sequencing were used for the genotyping 
of 10 SNPs in BCL11A, HMIP1/2, OR51B5/6 and HBG loci, known to influence HbF
levels. Generalised linear regression models adjusted for age, sex and SNPs
genotypes was used to investigate effects of a-thalassemia on clinical and
hematological indices. The median rate of vaso-occlusive painful crisis and
hospitalisations was two and one per year, respectively. Stroke was reported in
eight cases (7.4%). Benin haplotype was the most prevalent (66.3%; n<U+200A>=<U+200A>208
chromosomes). Among patients, 37.3% (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>60) had at least one 3.7 kb deletion,
compared to 10.9% (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>6) among HbAA controls (p<0.001). Among patients, the
median RBC count increased with the number of 3.7 kb deletions [2.6, 3.0 and 3.4 
million/dl, with no, one and two deletions (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01)]. The median MCV decreased 
with the number of 3.7 kb deletion [86, 80, and 68fl, with no, one and two
deletions (p<0.0001)], as well as median WBC counts [13.2, 10.5 and 9.8×109/L
(p<0.0001. The co-inheritance of a-thalassemia was associated with lower
consultations rate (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.038).
CONCLUSION: The co-inheritance of a-thalassemia and SCA is associated with
improved hematological indices, and lower consultations rate in this group of
patients. This could possibly improve their survival and explain the higher
proportion of a-thalassemia among patients than controls.

PMCID: PMC4076272
PMID: 24978191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Eur J Med Res. 2014 Jun 24;19:34. doi: 10.1186/2047-783X-19-34.

Combination of BCL11A siRNA with vincristine increases the apoptosis of SUDHL6
cells.

He D(1), Wu H, Ding L, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Medical College, Jinan University, No, 601, West
Huangpu Road, Guangzhou, Tianhe District 510632, PR China. thedm@jnu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/lymphoma 11 A (BCL11A) is
associated with human B cell malignancy initiation. Our previous study has shown 
that downregulation of BCL11A mRNA by small interfering RNA (siRNA) is capable of
inducing apoptosis in the SUDHL6 cell line. To further explore the effects of
BCL11A siRNA on the enhanced cytotoxicity of a chemotherapeutic drug, we
investigated the effects of BCL11A siRNA combined with vincristine (VCR) on
SUDHL6 cell proliferation and apoptosis.
METHODS: Chemically synthesized BCL11A siRNA was transfected into SUDHL6 cells
using the HiPerFect Transfection Reagent in combination with VCR. Cell
proliferation was measured by the CCK8 assay. The morphology of apoptotic cells
was observed with Hoechst 33258 staining. The rate of cell apoptosis was
determined by annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate/propidium iodide double
staining using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis.
RESULTS: After BCL11A siRNA plus VCR treatment, cell proliferation was
significantly decreased in comparison with VCR or BCL11A siRNA treatment alone
and negative control siRNA plus VCR treatment (P <0.05). The apoptotic rate of
BCL11A siRNA plus VCR treated cells was significantly increased compared with
BCL11A siRNA and VCR treatment alone and negative control siRNA plus VCR
treatment (P <0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of BCL11A siRNA and VCR increases apoptosis in
SUDHL6 cells. Our study implies that BCL11A siRNA in combination with VCR may be 
a useful approach for improving effective treatment for B cell lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC4086990
PMID: 24961604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2014 Jul;3(7):792-800. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2013-0216. Epub
2014 May 29.

Multicolor staining of globin subtypes reveals impaired globin switching during
erythropoiesis in human pluripotent stem cells.

Ochi K(1), Takayama N(1), Hirose S(1), Nakahata T(1), Nakauchi H(1), Eto K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Application, Center for iPS Cell Research and
Application, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan; Laboratory of Stem Cell Therapy,
Center for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Institute of Medical
Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Terumo Company Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Application, Center for iPS Cell Research and
Application, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan; Laboratory of Stem Cell Therapy,
Center for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Institute of Medical
Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Terumo Company Ltd., Tokyo, Japan
kojieto@cira.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Adult hemoglobin composed of a- and ß-globin reflects a change from expression of
embryonic e- and fetal <U+03B3>-globin to adult ß-globin in human erythroid cells,
so-called globin switching. Human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) are a potential 
source for in vitro erythrocyte production, but they show prominent expression of
<U+03B3>-globin with little ß-globin expression, which indicates incomplete globin
switching. To examine the mechanism of this impaired globin switching, we
optimized multicolor flow cytometry to simultaneously follow expression of
different globin subtypes using different immunofluorescent probes. This enabled 
us to detect upregulation of ß-globin and the corresponding silencing of <U+03B3>-globin
at the single-cell level during cord blood CD34(+) cell-derived erythropoiesis,
examined as an endogenous control. Using this approach, we initially
characterized the heterogeneous ß-globin expression in erythroblasts from several
hPSC clones and confirmed the predominant expression of <U+03B3>-globin. These
hPSC-derived erythroid cells also displayed reduced expression of BCL11A-L.
However, doxycycline-induced overexpression of BCL11A-L in selected hPSCs
promoted <U+03B3>-globin silencing. These results strongly suggest that impaired
<U+03B3>-globin silencing is associated with downregulated BCL11A-L in hPSC-derived
erythroblasts and that multicolor staining of globin subtypes is an effective
approach to studying globin switching in vitro.

©AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4073826
PMID: 24873860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 Sep;53(9):750-68. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22184. Epub
2014 May 15.

Amplification of 2p as a genomic marker for transformation in lymphoma.

Kwiecinska A(1), Ichimura K, Berglund M, Dinets A, Sulaiman L, Collins VP,
Larsson C, Porwit A, Lagercrantz SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, CCK Karolinska
University Hospital, Solna, Sweden.

To outline further genetic mechanisms of transformation from follicular lymphoma 
(FL) to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), we have performed whole genome
array-CGH in 81 tumors from 60 patients [29 de novo DLBCL (dnDLBCL), 31
transformed DLBCL (tDLBCL), and 21 antecedent FL]. In 15 patients, paired tumor
samples (primary FL and a subsequent tDLBCL) were available, among which three
possessed more than two subsequent tumors, allowing us to follow specific genetic
alterations acquired before, during, and after the transformation. Gain of
2p15-16.1 encompassing, among others, the REL, BCL11A, USP34, COMMD1, and OTX1
genes was found to be more common in the tDLBCL compared with dnDLBCL
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). Furthermore, a high-level amplification of 2p15-16.1 was also
detected in the FL stage prior to transformation, indicating its importance
during the transformation event. Quantitative real-time PCR showed a higher level
of amplification of REL, USP34, and COMMD1 (all involved in the NF<U+03BA><U+0392>-pathway)
compared with BCL11A, which indicates that the altered genes disrupting the NF<U+03BA><U+0392> 
pathway may be the driver genes of transformation rather than the previously
suggested BCL11A. Moreover, a 17q21.33 amplification was exclusively found in
tDLBCL, never in FL (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.04) or dnDLBCL, indicating an upregulation of genes of
importance during the later phase of transformation. Taken together, our study
demonstrates potential genomic markers for disease progression to clinically more
aggressive forms. We also confirm the importance of the TP53-, CDKN2A-, and
NF<U+03BA><U+0392>-pathways for the transformation from FL to DLBCL.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4369132
PMID: 24832791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Aug;164A(8):2091-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36599. Epub 2014
May 8.

De novo microdeletion of BCL11A is associated with severe speech sound disorder.

Peter B(1), Matsushita M, Oda K, Raskind W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington.

In 10 cases of 2p15p16.1 microdeletions reported worldwide to date, shared
phenotypes included growth retardation, craniofacial and skeletal dysmorphic
traits, internal organ defects, intellectual disability, nonverbal or low verbal 
status, abnormal muscle tone, and gross motor delays. The size of the deletions
ranged from 0.3 to 5.7 Mb, where the smallest deletion involved the BCL11A,
PAPOLG, and REL genes. Here we report on an 11-year-old male with a heterozygous 
de novo 0.2 Mb deletion containing a single gene, BCL11A, and a phenotype
characterized by childhood apraxia of speech and dysarthria in the presence of
general oral and gross motor dyspraxia and hypotonia as well as expressive
language and mild intellectual delays. BCL11A is situated within the dyslexia
susceptibility candidate region 3 (DYX3) candidate region on chromosome 2. The
present case is the first to involve a single gene within the microdeletion
region and a phenotype restricted to a subset of the traits observed in other
cases with more extensive deletions.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24810580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS One. 2014 May 6;9(5):e96636. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096636. eCollection 
2014.

Growth factor independence 1b (gfi1b) is important for the maturation of
erythroid cells and the regulation of embryonic globin expression.

Vassen L(1), Beauchemin H(1), Lemsaddek W(1), Krongold J(2), Trudel M(1), Möröy
T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, IRCM, Montréal, Québec, Canada. 
(2)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, IRCM, Montréal, Québec, Canada; 
Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(3)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, IRCM, Montréal, Québec, Canada; 
Département de Microbiologie, Infectiologie et Immunologie, Université de
Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada; Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill
University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Growth factor independence 1b (GFI1B) is a DNA binding repressor of transcription
with vital functions in hematopoiesis. Gfi1b-null embryos die at midgestation
very likely due to defects in erythro- and megakaryopoiesis. To analyze the full 
functionality of Gfi1b, we used conditionally deficient mice that harbor floxed
Gfi1b alleles and inducible (Mx-Cre, Cre-ERT) or erythroid specific (EpoR-Cre)
Cre expressing transgenes. In contrast to the germline knockout, EpoR-Cre
mediated erythroid specific ablation of Gfi1b allows full gestation, but causes
perinatal lethality with very few mice surviving to adulthood. Both the embryonic
deletion of Gfi1b by EpoR-Cre and the deletion in adult mice by Mx-Cre or Cre-ERT
leads to reduced numbers of erythroid precursors, perturbed and delayed erythroid
maturation, anemia and extramedullary erythropoiesis. Global expression analyses 
showed that the Hba-x, Hbb-bh1 and Hbb-y embryonic globin genes were upregulated 
in Gfi1b deficient TER119+ fetal liver cells over the gestation period from day
12.5-17.5 p.c. and an increased level of Hbb-bh1 and Hbb-y embryonic globin gene 
expression was even maintained in adult Gfi1b deficient mice. While the
expression of Bcl11a, a regulator of embryonic globin expression was not affected
by Gfi1b deficiency, the expression of Gata1 was reduced and the expression of
Sox6, also involved in globin switch, was almost entirely lost when Gfi1b was
absent. These findings establish Gfi1b as a regulator of embryonic globin
expression and embryonic and adult erythroid maturation.

PMCID: PMC4011847
PMID: 24800817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Diabetes. 2015 Mar;7(2):158-65. doi: 10.1111/1753-0407.12163. Epub 2014 Jul 15.

Decreased miR-146 expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells is correlated 
with ongoing islet autoimmunity in type 1 diabetes patients 1miR-146.

Yang M(1), Ye L, Wang B, Gao J, Liu R, Hong J, Wang W, Gu W, Ning G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Ruijin Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Key Laboratory for Endocrine Tumors, Shanghai Clinical Center 
for Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Shanghai JiaoTong University, Shanghai,
China.

BACKGROUND: Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D) is a common autoimmune disease
mediated by autoimmune attack against pancreatic ß-cells. It has been reported
that dysregulation of microRNAs (miRNAs) may contribute to the pathogenesis of
autoimmune diseases, including T1D. The aim of the present study was to identify 
pathogenic miRNAs in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of T1D patients.
METHODS: Global miRNA and mRNA expression was profiled in PBMC from 12 patients
with newly diagnosed T1D and 10 normal controls. Differently expressed miRNAs
were validated in an independent set of patients and controls. The dynamic
changes in miRNA and target gene expression were analyzed in T1D patients treated
with either a short (6 months) or long (12-24 months) course of insulin. The
association between miRNA expression and serum glutamic acid decarboxylase
antibody (GADA) titers was also investigated.
RESULTS: Compared with normal controls, there were 26 miRNAs and 1218 genes
differently expressed in PBMC of patients with newly diagnosed T1D. The greatest 
downregulation was for miR-146a (48% decrease; P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Expression of its
target genes, predicted to be tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 
(TRAF6), B cell CLL/lymphoma 11A (BCL11A), syntaxin 3 (STX3) and numb homolog
(NUMB), was upregulated. Moreover, T1D patients on long-course insulin and
optimized glucose control had sustained low expression of miR-146. Interestingly,
decreased miR-146a expression was significantly associated with high serum GADA
titers (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that dysregulation of miR-146 expression in PBMC
may be associated with the ongoing autoimmune imbalance in T1D patients.

© 2014 Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine and Wiley
Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24796653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Exp Hematol. 2014 Aug;42(8):630-6. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2014.04.005. Epub 2014
Apr 15.

From genome-wide association study hits to new insights into experimental
hematology.

Cvejic A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, UK; Wellcome Trust Sanger 
Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK. Electronic
address: as889@cam.ac.uk.

Despite significant improvements in our knowledge of the mechanisms of normal and
pathological hematopoiesis, our current understanding is most likely an
oversimplification of the complexity of regulatory networks at play. Thus,
considerable efforts have been made to catalogue the total sum of germline
alterations in individual genomes affecting human hematopoiesis. These efforts
ultimately led to the discovery of a large number of new genes not previously
implicated in blood formation. Although identification of novel genes is
important in revealing the profiles of genetic variations associated with normal 
hematopoiesis, further functional studies are necessary to improve our
understanding of the mechanism(s) involved in these processes. In this review, we
summarize the knowledge gained from genome-wide association studies to elucidate 
the relationship between genetics and blood cell traits. We discuss the most
important recent advances, with an emphasis on functional follow-up studies that 
have been particularly useful in providing an insight into novel regulatory
processes that influence blood cell formation and function. We also discuss
potential future directions and challenges in the field.

Copyright © 2014 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24746874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 25;9(3):e92506. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092506. eCollection
2014.

Association of variants at BCL11A and HBS1L-MYB with hemoglobin F and
hospitalization rates among sickle cell patients in Cameroon.

Wonkam A(1), Ngo Bitoungui VJ(2), Vorster AA(1), Ramesar R(3), Cooper RS(4), Tayo
B(4), Lettre G(5), Ngogang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town,
Republic of South Africa. (2)Department of Microbiology, Parasitology and
Haematology, Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaoundé
1, Yaoundé, Cameroon. (3)Division of Human Genetics, Institute of Infectious
Disease and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Cape Town, Republic of South Africa; UCT/MRC Human Genetics Research Unit, 
Division of Human Genetics, Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town,
Republic of South Africa. (4)Department of Public Health Sciences, Loyola
University Chicago, Stritch School of Medicine, Maywood, Illinois, United States 
of America. (5)Montreal Heart Institute and Université de Montréal, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Genetic variation at loci influencing adult levels of HbF have been
shown to modify the clinical course of sickle cell disease (SCD). Data on this
important aspect of SCD have not yet been reported from West Africa. We
investigated the relationship between HbF levels and the relevant genetic loci in
610 patients with SCD (98% HbSS homozygotes) from Cameroon, and compared the
results to a well-characterized African-American cohort.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Socio-demographic and clinical features were collected and 
medical records reviewed. Only patients >5 years old, who had not received a
blood transfusion or treatment with hydroxyurea were included. Hemoglobin
electrophoresis and a full blood count were conducted upon arrival at the
hospital. RFLP-PCR was used to describe the HBB gene haplotypes. SNaPshot PCR,
Capillary electrophoresis and cycle sequencing were used for the genotyping of 10
selected SNPs. Genetic analysis was performed with PLINK software and statistical
models in the statistical package R. Allele frequencies of relevant variants at
BCL11A were similar to those detected in African Americans; although the
relationships with Hb F were significant (p <.001), they explained substantially 
less of the variance in HbF than was observed among African Americans (~ 2% vs
10%). SNPs in HBS1L-MYB region (HMIP) likewise had a significant impact on HbF,
however, we did not find an association between HbF and the variations in HBB
cluster and OR51B5/6 locus on chromosome 11p, due in part to the virtual absence 
of the Senegal and Indian Arab haplotypes. We also found evidence that selected
SNPs in HBS1L-MYB region (HMIP) and BCL11A affect both other hematological
indices and rates of hospitalization.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has confirmed the associations of SNPs in BCL11A and
HBS1L-MYB and fetal haemoglobin in Cameroonian SCA patients; hematological
indices and hospitalization rates were also associated with specific allelic
variants.

PMCID: PMC3965431
PMID: 24667352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Mar 18;111(11):E998-1006. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1319228111. Epub 2014 Mar 3.

Dendritic cell fate is determined by BCL11A.

Ippolito GC(1), Dekker JD, Wang YH, Lee BK, Shaffer AL 3rd, Lin J, Wall JK, Lee
BS, Staudt LM, Liu YJ, Iyer VR, Tucker HO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712.

The plasmacytoid dendritic cell (pDC) is vital to the coordinated action of
innate and adaptive immunity. pDC development has not been unequivocally traced, 
nor has its transcriptional regulatory network been fully clarified. Here we
confirm an essential requirement for the BCL11A transcription factor in fetal pDC
development, and demonstrate this lineage-specific requirement in the adult
organism. Furthermore, we identify BCL11A gene targets and provide a molecular
mechanism for its action in pDC commitment. Embryonic germ-line deletion of
Bcl11a revealed an absolute cellular, molecular, and functional absence of pDCs
in fetal mice. In adults, deletion of Bcl11a in hematopoietic stem cells resulted
in perturbed yet continued generation of progenitors, loss of downstream pDC and 
B-cell lineages, and persisting myeloid, conventional dendritic, and T-cell
lineages. Challenge with virus resulted in a marked reduction of antiviral
response in conditionally deleted adults. Genome-wide analyses of BCL11A DNA
binding and expression revealed that BCL11A regulates transcription of E2-2 and
other pDC differentiation modulators, including ID2 and MTG16. Our results
identify BCL11A as an essential, lineage-specific factor that regulates pDC
development, supporting a model wherein differentiation into pDCs represents a
primed "default" pathway for common dendritic cell progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3964079
PMID: 24591644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2014 Apr;7(2):110-5. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.113.000387.
Epub 2014 Mar 1.

Prediction of fetal hemoglobin in sickle cell anemia using an ensemble of genetic
risk prediction models.

Milton JN(1), Gordeuk VR, Taylor JG 6th, Gladwin MT, Steinberg MH, Sebastiani P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health,
Boston, MA.

BACKGROUND: Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) is the major modifier of the clinical course
of sickle cell anemia. Its levels are highly heritable, and its interpersonal
variability is modulated in part by 3 quantitative trait loci that affect HbF
gene expression. Genome-wide association studies have identified
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in these quantitative trait loci that are 
highly associated with HbF but explain only 10% to 12% of the variance of HbF.
Combining SNPs into a genetic risk score can help to explain a larger amount of
the variability of HbF level, but the challenge of this approach is to select the
optimal number of SNPs to be included in the genetic risk score.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We developed a collection of 14 models with genetic risk
score composed of different numbers of SNPs and used the ensemble of these models
to predict HbF in patients with sickle cell anemia. The models were trained in
841 patients with sickle cell anemia and were tested in 3 independent cohorts.
The ensemble of 14 models explained 23.4% of the variability in HbF in the
discovery cohort, whereas the correlation between predicted and observed HbF in
the 3 independent cohorts ranged between 0.28 and 0.44. The models included SNPs 
in BCL11A, the HBS1L-MYB intergenic region, and the site of the HBB gene cluster,
quantitative trait loci previously associated with HbF.
CONCLUSIONS: An ensemble of 14 genetic risk models can predict HbF levels with
accuracy between 0.28 and 0.44, and the approach may also prove useful in other
applications.

PMCID: PMC3994553
PMID: 24585758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2014 Jun-Aug;53(1-2):11-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2014.02.005. 
Epub 2014 Feb 26.

Variability of hemoglobin F expression in hemoglobin EE disease: hematological
and molecular analysis.

Pakdee N(1), Yamsri S(2), Fucharoen G(2), Sanchaisuriya K(2), Pissard S(3),
Fucharoen S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Program, Graduate School, Khon Kaen University, Thailand; 
Centre for Research and Development of Medical Diagnostic Laboratories, Faculty
of Associated Medical Sciences, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(2)Centre for Research and Development of Medical Diagnostic Laboratories,
Faculty of Associated Medical Sciences, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
Thailand. (3)Laboratoire de Génétique, APHP, Groupe Hospitalier Henri Mondor and 
Université Paris Est Créteil (UPEC), France. (4)Centre for Research and
Development of Medical Diagnostic Laboratories, Faculty of Associated Medical
Sciences, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand. Electronic address:
supan@kku.ac.th.

Although the molecular basis of variability of hemoglobin (Hb) F has been
extensively examined in ß-thalassemia and sickle cell diseases, less study has
been done on Hb E disorder. To address the variability of Hb F expression in Hb
EE disease, we have examined multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
the ß-globin gene cluster, BCL11A and HBS1L-MYB genes and determined their
associations with Hb F levels in this syndrome. Study was done on 141 adult Thai 
individuals with homozygous Hb E. Hematological parameters were recorded and Hb F
measured using Hb-HPLC analyzer. It was found in 26 cases that co-inheritance of 
a-thalassemia could lead to significant lower production of Hb F. Association of 
Hb F expression with the (G)<U+03B3>-Xmn I polymorphism and other SNPs including
rs2297339, rs2838513, rs4895441 and rs9399137 in HBS1L-MYB gene and rs4671393 and
rs11886868 in BCL11A gene was therefore analyzed in the remaining 115 cases
without a-thalassemia. It was found that 4 of these 7 SNPs including (G)<U+03B3>-XmnI
polymorphism (rs7482144), HBS1L-MYB (rs4895441) and (rs9399137) and BCL11A
(rs4671393) were significantly associated with higher proportions of subjects
with high Hb F (Hb F=5%). The result demonstrated that multiple genetic modifying
factors including T allele of (G)<U+03B3>-XmnI polymorphism (rs7482144), G allele of
HBS1L-MYB (rs489441), C allele of HBS1L-MYB (rs9399137) and C allele of BCL11A
(rs4671393) are associated with increased Hb F and in combination could explain
approximately 80% of the variation of Hb F in Hb EE disease in Thai population.
Other genetic factors regulating Hb F expression in this common genetic disorder 
remains to be elucidated.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24581976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2014 Feb;7(1):89-92. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.114.000521.

Top advances in functional genomics and translational biology for 2013.

Pilbrow A(1), Arora P, Martinez-Fernandez A.

Author information: 
(1)Early Career Committee of the American Heart Association, Functional Genomics 
and Translational Biology Council, Dallas, TX.

PMID: 24550431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. BMC Genomics. 2014 Feb 6;15:108. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-108.

Genotyping of BCL11A and HBS1L-MYB SNPs associated with fetal haemoglobin levels:
a SNaPshot minisequencing approach.

Fanis P, Kousiappa I, Phylactides M, Kleanthous M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Thalassaemia Department, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology 
and Genetics, 6 International Airport Avenue, Agios Dometios, Nicosia 1683,
Cyprus. marinakl@cing.ac.cy.

BACKGROUND: B-thalassaemia and sickle cell disease (SCD) are two of the most
common monogenic diseases that are found in many populations worldwide. In both
disorders the clinical severity is highly variable, with the persistence of fetal
haemoglobin (HbF) being one of the major ameliorating factors. HbF levels are
affected by, amongst other factors, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at the
BCL11A gene and the HBS1L-MYB intergenic region, which are located outside the
ß-globin locus. For this reason, we developed two multiplex assays that allow the
genotyping of SNPs at these two genomic regions which have been shown to be
associated with variable HbF levels in different populations.
RESULTS: Two multiplex assays based on the SNaPshot minisequencing approach were 
developed. The two assays can be used to simultaneous genotype twelve SNPs at the
BCL11A gene and sixteen SNPs at HBS1L-MYB intergenic region which were shown to
modify HbF levels. The different genotypes can be determined based on the
position and the fluorescent colour of the peaks in a single electropherogram.
DNA sequencing and restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) assays
were used to verify genotyping results obtained by SNaPshot minisequencing.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, we propose two multiplex assays based on the SNaPshot
minisequencing approach for the simultaneous identification of SNPs located at
the BCL11A gene and HBS1L-MYB intergenic region which have an effect on HbF
levels. The assays can be easily applied for accurate, time and cost efficient
genotyping of the selected SNPs in various populations.

PMCID: PMC3922441
PMID: 24502199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Front Physiol. 2014 Jan 28;5:3. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2014.00003. eCollection 2014.

Primitive and definitive erythropoiesis in mammals.

Palis J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Pediatric Biomedical Research, University
of Rochester Medical Center Rochester, NY, USA.

Red blood cells (RBCs), which constitute the most abundant cell type in the body,
come in two distinct flavors- primitive and definitive. Definitive RBCs in
mammals circulate as smaller, anucleate cells during fetal and postnatal life,
while primitive RBCs circulate transiently in the early embryo as large,
nucleated cells before ultimately enucleating. Both cell types are formed from
lineage-committed progenitors that generate a series of morphologically
identifiable precursors that enucleate to form mature RBCs. While definitive
erythroid precursors mature extravascularly in the fetal liver and postnatal
marrow in association with macrophage cells, primitive erythroid precursors
mature as a semi-synchronous cohort in the embryonic bloodstream. While the
cytoskeletal network is critical for the maintenance of cell shape and the
deformability of definitive RBCs, little is known about the components and
function of the cytoskeleton in primitive erythroblasts. Erythropoietin (EPO) is 
a critical regulator of late-stage definitive, but not primitive, erythroid
progenitor survival. However, recent studies indicate that EPO regulates multiple
aspects of terminal maturation of primitive murine and human erythroid
precursors, including cell survival, proliferation, and the rate of terminal
maturation. Primitive and definitive erythropoiesis share central transcriptional
regulators, including Gata1 and Klf1, but are also characterized by the
differential expression and function of other regulators, including myb, Sox6,
and Bcl11A. Flow cytometry-based methodologies, developed to purify murine and
human stage-specific erythroid precursors, have enabled comparative global gene
expression studies and are providing new insights into the biology of erythroid
maturation.

PMCID: PMC3904103
PMID: 24478716  [PubMed]


96. FASEB J. 2014 Apr;28(4):1610-20. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-242669. Epub 2013 Dec 26.

Transcriptional regulators Myb and BCL11A interplay with DNA methyltransferase 1 
in developmental silencing of embryonic and fetal ß-like globin genes.

Roosjen M(1), McColl B, Kao B, Gearing LJ, Blewitt ME, Vadolas J.

Author information: 
(1)1Cell and Gene Therapy Group, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal
Children's Hospital, Flemington Rd., Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.
jim.vadolas@mcri.edu.au.

The clinical symptoms of hemoglobin disorders such as ß-thalassemia and sickle
cell anemia are significantly ameliorated by the persistent expression of
<U+03B3>-globin after birth. This knowledge has driven the discovery of important
regulators that silence <U+03B3>-globin postnatally. Improved understanding of the <U+03B3>- to
ß-globin switching mechanism holds the key to devising targeted therapies for
ß-hemoglobinopathies. To further investigate this mechanism, we used the murine
erythroleukemic (MEL) cell line containing an intact 183-kb human ß-globin locus,
in which the (G)<U+03B3>- and ß-globin genes are replaced by DsRed and eGFP fluorescent 
reporters, respectively. Following RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated knockdown of 
two key transcriptional regulators, Myb and BCL11A, we observed a derepression of
<U+03B3>-globin, measured by DsRed fluorescence and qRT-PCR (P<0.001). Interestingly,
double knockdown of Myb and DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) resulted in a robust 
induction of e-globin, (up to 20% of total ß-like globin species) compared to
single knockdowns (P<0.001). Conversely, double knockdowns of BCL11A and DNMT1
enhanced <U+03B3>-globin expression (up to 90% of total ß-like globin species) compared 
to single knockdowns (P<0.001). Moreover, following RNAi treatment, expression of
human ß-like globin genes mirrored the expression levels of their endogenous
murine counterparts. These results demonstrate that Myb and BCL11A cooperate with
DNMT1 to achieve developmental repression of embryonic and fetal ß-like globin
genes in the adult erythroid environment.

PMID: 24371119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Blood Med. 2013 Dec 4;4:149-59. doi: 10.2147/JBM.S54671. eCollection 2013.

A common signaling pathway is activated in erythroid cells expressing high levels
of fetal hemoglobin: a potential role for cAMP-elevating agents in ß-globin
disorders.

Ikuta T(1), Kuroyanagi Y(1), Odo N(1), Liu S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, GA, USA. (2)Department of Physiology, Medical College of
Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although erythroid cells prepared from fetal liver, cord blood, or
blood from ß-thalassemia patients are known to express fetal hemoglobin at high
levels, the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. We previously showed that
cyclic nucleotides such as cAMP and cGMP induce fetal hemoglobin expression in
primary erythroid cells. Here we report that cAMP signaling contributes to
high-level fetal hemoglobin expression in erythroid cells prepared from cord
blood and ß-thalassemia.
METHODS: The status of the cAMP signaling pathway was investigated using primary 
erythroid cells prepared from cord blood and the mononuclear cells of patients
with ß-thalassemia; erythroid cells from adult bone marrow mononuclear cells
served as the control.
RESULTS: We found that intracellular cAMP levels were higher in erythroid cells
from cord blood and ß-thalassemia than from adult bone marrow. Protein kinase A
activity levels and cAMP-response element binding protein phosphorylation were
higher in erythroid cells from cord blood or ß-thalassemia than in adult bone
marrow progenitors. Mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways, which play a role 
in fetal hemoglobin expression, were not consistently activated in cord blood or 
ß-thalassemia erythroid cells. When cAMP signaling was activated in adult
erythroid cells, fetal hemoglobin was induced at high levels and associated with 
reduced expression of BCL11A, a silencer of the ß-globin gene.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that activated cAMP signaling may be a common
mechanism among erythroid cells with high fetal hemoglobin levels, in part
because of downregulation of BCL11A. Activation of the cAMP signaling pathway
with cAMP-elevating agents may prove to be an important signaling mechanism to
reactivate fetal hemoglobin expression in erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC3862583
PMID: 24353450  [PubMed]


98. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 7;111(1):421-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1321704111. 
Epub 2013 Dec 16.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 3C binds to BATF/IRF4 or SPI1/IRF4 composite
sites and recruits Sin3A to repress CDKN2A.

Jiang S(1), Willox B, Zhou H, Holthaus AM, Wang A, Shi TT, Maruo S, Kharchenko
PV, Johannsen EC, Kieff E, Zhao B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Program in Virology,
Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, and Center for Biomedical
Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA3C) repression of CDKN2A p14(ARF) and 
p16(INK4A) is essential for immortal human B-lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL)
growth. EBNA3C ChIP-sequencing identified >13,000 EBNA3C sites in LCL DNA. Most
EBNA3C sites were associated with active transcription; 64% were strong H3K4me1- 
and H3K27ac-marked enhancers and 16% were active promoters marked by H3K4me3 and 
H3K9ac. Using ENCODE LCL transcription factor ChIP-sequencing data, EBNA3C sites 
coincided (±250 bp) with RUNX3 (64%), BATF (55%), ATF2 (51%), IRF4 (41%), MEF2A
(35%), PAX5 (34%), SPI1 (29%), BCL11a (28%), SP1 (26%), TCF12 (23%), NF-<U+03BA>B (23%),
POU2F2 (23%), and RBPJ (16%). EBNA3C sites separated into five distinct clusters:
(i) Sin3A, (ii) EBNA2/RBPJ, (iii) SPI1, and (iv) strong or (v) weak BATF/IRF4.
EBNA3C signals were positively affected by RUNX3, BATF/IRF4 (AICE) and SPI1/IRF4 
(EICE) cooccupancy. Gene set enrichment analyses correlated EBNA3C/Sin3A promoter
sites with transcription down-regulation (P < 1.6 × 10(-4)). EBNA3C signals were 
strongest at BATF/IRF4 and SPI1/IRF4 composite sites. EBNA3C bound strongly to
the p14(ARF) promoter through SPI1/IRF4/BATF/RUNX3, establishing RBPJ-, Sin3A-,
and REST-mediated repression. EBNA3C immune precipitated with Sin3A and
conditional EBNA3C inactivation significantly decreased Sin3A binding at the
p14(ARF) promoter (P < 0.05). These data support a model in which EBNA3C binds
strongly to BATF/IRF4/SPI1/RUNX3 sites to enhance transcription and recruits
RBPJ/Sin3A- and REST/NRSF-repressive complexes to repress p14(ARF) and p16(INK4A)
expression.

PMCID: PMC3890834
PMID: 24344258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Epigenetics. 2014 Feb;9(2):276-85. doi: 10.4161/epi.27021. Epub 2013 Nov 8.

Epigenomic elements enriched in the promoters of autoimmunity susceptibility
genes.

Dozmorov MG(1), Wren JD(2), Alarcón-Riquelme ME(3).

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation; Arthritis and Clinical Immunology
Research Program; Oklahoma City, OK USA. (2)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation;
Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program; Oklahoma City, OK USA;
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center; Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology; Oklahoma City, OK USA. (3)Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation; Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program; Oklahoma City, OK
USA; GENYO; Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research; Pfizer; University of
Granada; Andalusian Regional Government; Granada, Spain.

Genome-wide association studies have identified a number of autoimmune
disease-susceptibility genes. Whether or not these loci share any regulatory or
functional elements, however, is an open question. Finding such common regulators
is of considerable research interest in order to define systemic therapeutic
targets. The growing amount of experimental genomic annotations, particularly
those from the ENCODE project, provide a wealth of opportunities to search for
such commonalities. We hypothesized that regulatory commonalities might not only 
delineate a regulatory landscape predisposing to autoimmune diseases, but also
define functional elements distinguishing specific diseases. We further
investigated if, and how, disease-specific epigenomic elements can identify novel
genes yet to be associated with the diseases. We evaluated transcription factors,
histone modifications, and chromatin state data obtained from the ENCODE project 
for statistically significant over- or under-representation in the promoters of
genes associated with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE), Rheumatoid Arthritis
(RA), and Systemic Sclerosis (SSc). We identified BATF, BCL11A, IRF4, NFkB, PAX5,
and PU.1 as transcription factors over-represented in SLE- and RA-susceptibility 
gene promoters. H3K4me1 and H3K4me2 epigenomic marks were associated with SLE
susceptibility genes, and H3K9me3 was common to both SLE and RA. In contrast to a
transcriptionally active signature in SLE and RA, SSc-susceptibility genes were
depleted in activating epigenomic elements. Using epigenomic elements enriched in
SLE and RA, we identified additional immune and B cell signaling-related genes
with the same elements in their promoters. Our analysis suggests common and
disease-specific epigenomic elements that may define novel therapeutic targets
for controlling aberrant activation of autoimmune susceptibility genes.

PMCID: PMC3962538
PMID: 24213554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Hum Genet. 2014 Jan;59(1):54-6. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2013.116. Epub 2013 Nov 7.

Genetic association study between the detected risk variants based upon type II
diabetes GWAS and psychotic disorders in the Japanese population.

Kajio Y(1), Kondo K(1), Saito T(1), Iwayama Y(2), Aleksic B(3), Yamada K(2),
Toyota T(2), Hattori E(2), Ujike H(4), Inada T(5), Kunugi H(6), Kato T(7),
Yoshikawa T(2), Ozaki N(3), Ikeda M(1), Iwata N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Fujita Health University School of Medicine,
Toyoake, Japan. (2)Laboratory for Molecular Psychiatry, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako, Japan. (3)Department of Psychiatry, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. (4)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Science,
Okayama, Japan. (5)Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Neuropsychiatry, Seiwa 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of Mental Disorder Research, National
Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, 
Japan. (7)Laboratory for Molecular Dynamics of Mental Disorders, RIKEN Brain
Science Institute, Wako, Japan.

Several epidemiological and genetic studies have suggested that the risk of type 
II diabetes (T2D) is likely to overlap with the susceptibility to psychotic
disorders such as schizophrenia (SCZ) and bipolar disorder (BD). In this study,
we aimed to examine the association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
detected in previous T2D genome-wide association studies (GWAS) with SCZ, BD and 
psychosis (SCZ plus BD). A total of 37 SNPs were selected from the literature. A 
two-stage analysis was conducted using a first set of screening samples (total
N=3037) and a second set of replication samples (N=4950). None of the SNPs showed
a significant association to the screening samples after correction for multiple 
testing. To avoid type II error, we genotyped the top three SNPs in BCL11A,
HMG20A and HNF4A showing associations with any of the phenotypes (Puncorrected
<0.01) using independent samples to replicate the nominal associations. However, 
we were unable to find any significant associations based on the screening
results (Puncorrected>0.05). Our findings did not support the shared genetic risk
between T2D and psychotic disorders in the Japanese population. However, further 
replication using a larger sample size is required.

PMID: 24196380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Fungal Genet Biol. 2014 Jan;62:25-33. doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2013.10.008. Epub 2013
Oct 22.

The N-terminus region of the putative C2H2 transcription factor Ada1 harbors a
species-specific activation motif that regulates asexual reproduction in Fusarium
verticillioides.

Malapi-Wight M(1), Kim JE(1), Shim WB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, TX 77843-2132, USA. (2)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology,
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-2132, USA. Electronic address:
wbshim@tamu.edu.

Fusarium verticillioides is an important plant pathogenic fungus causing maize
ear and stalk rots. In addition, the fungus is directly associated with fumonisin
contamination of food and feeds. Here, we report the functional characterization 
of Ada1, a putative Cys2-His2 zinc finger transcription factor with a high level 
of similarity to Aspergillus nidulans FlbC, which is required for the activation 
of the key regulator of conidiation brlA. ADA1 is predicted to encode a protein
with two DNA binding motifs at the C terminus and a putative activator domain at 
the N terminus region. Deletion of the flbC gene in A. nidulans results in
"fluffy" cotton-like colonies, with a defect in transition from vegetative growth
to asexual development. In this study we show that Ada1 plays a key role in
asexual development in F. verticillioides. Conidia production was significantly
reduced in the knockout mutant (<U+0394>ada1), in which aberrant conidia and
conidiophores were also observed. We identified genes that are predicted to be
downstream of ADA1, based on A. nidulans conidiation signaling pathway. Among
them, the deletion of stuA homologue, FvSTUA, resulted in near absence of conidia
production. To further investigate the functional conservation of this
transcription factor, we complemented the <U+0394>ada1 strain with A. nidulans flbC, F. 
verticillioides ADA1, and chimeric constructs. A. nidulans flbC failed to restore
conidia production similar to the wild-type level. However, the Ada1N-terminal
domain, which contains a putative activator, fused to A. nidulans FlbC C-terminal
motif successfully complemented the <U+0394>ada1 mutant. Taken together, Ada1 is an
important transcriptional regulator of asexual development in F. verticillioides 
and that the N-terminus domain is critical for proper function of this
transcription factor.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24161731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Cancer. 2013 Sep 27;4(8):662-70. doi: 10.7150/jca.6641. eCollection 2013.

UCHL1 Is a Putative Tumor Suppressor in Ovarian Cancer Cells and Contributes to
Cisplatin Resistance.

Jin C(1), Yu W, Lou X, Zhou F, Han X, Zhao N, Lin B.

Author information: 
(1)1. Systems Biology Division and Propriumbio Research Center,
Zhejiang-California International Nanosystems Institute (ZCNI), Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Prov., China; ; 2. Collaborative Innovation Center
for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China.

Ubiquitin carboxyl terminal hydrolase 1 (UCHL1) catalyzes the hydrolysis of
COOH-terminal ubiquityl esters and amides. It has been reported as either an
oncogene or a tumor suppressor in cancers. However, UCHL1's role in ovarian
cancer is still unclear. Therefore, we conducted an analysis to understand the
role of UCHL1 in ovarian cancer. Firstly, we detected UCHL1 promoter methylation 
status in 7 ovarian cancer cell lines. 4 of them with UCHL1 silencing showed
heavy promoter methylation while the other 3 with relative high UCHL1 expression 
showed little promoter methylation. Then we reduced UCHL1 expression in ovarian
cancer cell line A2780 and IGROV1 and found that inhibition of UCHL1 promoted
cell proliferation by increasing cells in S phases of cell cycle. Knockdown of
UCHL1 also reduced cell apoptosis and contributed to cisplatin resistance.
Furthermore, the expression level of UCHL1 in several ovarian cancer cell lines
correlated negatively with their cisplatin resistance levels. Microarray data
revealed that UCHL1 related genes are enriched in apoptosis and cell death gene
ontology (GO) terms. Several apoptosis related genes were increased after UCHL1
knockdown, including apoptosis regulator BCL2, BCL11A, AEN and XIAP. Furthermore,
we identified up-regulation of Bcl-2 and pAKT as well as down-regulation of Bax
in UCHL1 knockdown cells, while no significant alteration of p53 and AKT1 was
found. This study provides a new and promising strategy to overcome cisplatin
resistance in ovarian cancer via UCHL1 mediated pathways.

PMCID: PMC3805994
PMID: 24155778  [PubMed]


103. Science. 2013 Oct 11;342(6155):253-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1242088.

An erythroid enhancer of BCL11A subject to genetic variation determines fetal
hemoglobin level.

Bauer DE(1), Kamran SC, Lessard S, Xu J, Fujiwara Y, Lin C, Shao Z, Canver MC,
Smith EC, Pinello L, Sabo PJ, Vierstra J, Voit RA, Yuan GC, Porteus MH,
Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Lettre G, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2013 Oct 11;342(6155):206-7.

Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have ascertained numerous
trait-associated common genetic variants, frequently localized to regulatory DNA.
We found that common genetic variation at BCL11A associated with fetal hemoglobin
(HbF) level lies in noncoding sequences decorated by an erythroid enhancer
chromatin signature. Fine-mapping uncovers a motif-disrupting common variant
associated with reduced transcription factor (TF) binding, modestly diminished
BCL11A expression, and elevated HbF. The surrounding sequences function in vivo
as a developmental stage-specific, lineage-restricted enhancer. Genome
engineering reveals the enhancer is required in erythroid but not B-lymphoid
cells for BCL11A expression. These findings illustrate how GWASs may expose
functional variants of modest impact within causal elements essential for
appropriate gene expression. We propose the GWAS-marked BCL11A enhancer
represents an attractive target for therapeutic genome engineering for the
ß-hemoglobinopathies.

PMCID: PMC4018826
PMID: 24115442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Science. 2013 Oct 11;342(6155):206-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1245813.

Genetics. GWAS to therapy by genome edits?

Hardison RC(1), Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Comparative
Genomics and Bioinformatics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA 16802, USA. rch8@psu.edu

Comment on
    Science. 2013 Oct 11;342(6155):253-7.

PMCID: PMC4500047
PMID: 24115432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Eur J Haematol. 2014 Jan;92(1):73-9. doi: 10.1111/ejh.12201. Epub 2013 Oct 24.

Phenotypic expression of Hb F in common high Hb F determinants in Thailand: roles
of a-thalassemia, 5' d-globin BCL11A binding region and 3' ß-globin enhancer.

Prakobkaew N(1), Fucharoen S, Fuchareon G, Siriratmanawong N.

Author information: 
(1)The Graduate School, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand; Centre for
Research and Development of Medical Diagnostic Laboratories, Faculty of
Associated Medical Sciences, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Deletions of d- and ß-globin genes are associated with different Hb F
levels. To address this, we have examined hematological and molecular
characteristics in a large cohort of high Hb F determinants in Thailand.
METHODS: A total of 160 unrelated adult subjects with heterozygous trait for high
Hb F determinants and another 10 patients with compound heterozygous trait for Hb
E were selectively recruited. Hematological parameters and Hb analysis were
recorded, and a-thalassemia mutations were investigated. DNA deletions causing
dß(0) -thalassemia and hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HPFH) were
identified using multiplex PCR and denaturing high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) assays developed.
RESULTS: Four different DNA deletions were detected including the 12.6 kb
deletion dß(0) -thalassemia (n = 79), 79 kb deletion hereditary persistence of
fetal Hb (HPFH)-6 (n = 65), Indian deletion-inversion (G) <U+03B3>((A) <U+03B3>dß)-thalassemia 
(n = 15) and 78 kb deletion Chinese (G) <U+03B3>((A) <U+03B3>dß)-thalassemia (n = 1). Eighteen 
cases were found to carry a-thalassemia with 10 different genotypes. All 10
patients who had similar hematological phenotype with that of Hb E-ß(0)
-thalassemia were found to be compound Hb E-dß(0) -thalassemia. Differences in
hematological features as well as Hb F levels were noted and are presented
comparatively.
CONCLUSION: Comparison of phenotypes, genotypes, and the deletion breakpoints of 
these Thai high Hb F determinants indicates that differences in Hb F expression
are correlated with the existence of a-thalassemia, the loss of BCL11A binding
region located 5' to the d-globin gene and the 3' ß-globin enhancer, which
confirms their important roles in fetal Hb expression.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24112054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Adv Immunol. 2013;120:239-67. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-417028-5.00009-0.

Transcriptional control of dendritic cell development.

Murphy KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington
University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA; School of Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. Electronic address:
kmurphy@wustl.edu.

Dendritic cells (DCs) drive both adaptive and innate immunity. Recent findings
support the notion that distinct subsets of classical DCs favor alternative
modules of immunity, acting on innate lymphoid-like cells (ILCs) and T cells
similarly to promote either ILC1/Th1/CTL- or ILC3/Th17-type responses.
Coordination between DC subsets and their favored immune module might imply that 
the genetic programs for DC diversification preceded the emergence of
recombination-activating gene-dependent adaptive immunity and operate initially
in coordinating ILC repertoires for appropriate responses against pathogens.
Consequently, understanding the molecular basis of DC developmental and
diversification is important for an underlying appreciation of immune regulation.
Currently, the basis for DC development into the recognized subsets/lineages is
only partially understood, based on the requirements for several transcription
factors including PU.1, Bcl11a, Irf8, E2-2, Id2, Irf4, Irf8, Batf3, and other
BATF family members. This chapter will briefly review recent transcriptional
aspects of DC development and function and then highlight some currently
unresolved questions.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24070387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Haematologica. 2013 Sep;98(9):e119-20. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.093716.

Low fetal hemoglobin rates in patients carrying Thai (dß)0-deletion and Turkish
(dß)0-deletion/inversion strengthen the hypothesis that the 5'd BCL11A binding
site plays a major role in its fetal hemoglobin inhibitory regulation. Response
to "The 12.6 kb-deletion in the ß-globin gene cluster is the known
Thai/Vietnamese (dß)0-thalassemia commonly found in Southeast Asia".

Ghedira ES, Pissard S.

Comment on
    Haematologica. 2013 Feb;98(2):305-8.
    Haematologica. 2013 Sep;98(9):e117-8.

PMCID: PMC3762116
PMID: 24006413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Exp Hematol. 2013 Nov;41(11):967-979.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2013.08.005. Epub 
2013 Aug 28.

Transcriptional environment and chromatin architecture interplay dictates globin 
expression patterns of heterospecific hybrids derived from undifferentiated human
embryonic stem cells or from their erythroid progeny.

Chang KH(1), Huang A, Han H, Jiang Y, Fang X, Song CZ, Padilla S, Wang H, Qu H,
Stamatoyannopoulos J, Li Q, Papayannopoulou T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA.

To explore the response of ß globin locus with established chromatin domains upon
their exposure to new transcriptional environments, we transferred the
chromatin-packaged ß globin locus of undifferentiated human embryonic stem cells 
(hESCs) or hESC-derived erythroblasts into an adult transcriptional environment. 
Distinct globin expression patterns were observed. In hESC-derived erythroblasts 
where both e and <U+03B3> globin were active and marked by similar chromatin
modifications, e globin was immediately silenced upon transfer, whereas <U+03B3> globin 
continued to be expressed for months, implying that different transcriptional
environments were required for their continuing expression. Whereas ß globin was 
silent both in hESCs and in hESC-derived erythroblasts, ß globin was only
activated upon transfer from hESCs, but not in the presence of dominant <U+03B3> globin 
transferred from hESC-derived erythroblasts, confirming the competing nature of <U+03B3>
versus ß globin expression. With time, however, silencing of <U+03B3> globin occurred in
the adult transcriptional environment with concurrent activation of ß-globin,
accompanied by a drastic change in the epigenetic landscape of <U+03B3> and ß globin
gene regions without apparent changes in the transcriptional environment. This
switching process could be manipulated by overexpression or downregulation of
certain transcription factors. Our studies provide important insights into the
interplay between the transcription environment and existing chromatin domains,
and we offer an experimental system to study the time-dependent human globin
switching.

Copyright © 2013 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3836866
PMID: 23993951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Nov;41(21):9663-79. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt761. Epub 2013
Aug 23.

A signature motif mediating selective interactions of BCL11A with the NR2E/F
subfamily of orphan nuclear receptors.

Chan CM(1), Fulton J, Montiel-Duarte C, Collins HM, Bharti N, Wadelin FR, Moran
PM, Mongan NP, Heery DM.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Group, Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, School of Pharmacy,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK, School of Psychology,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK and School of Veterinary
Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK.

Despite their physiological importance, selective interactions between nuclear
receptors (NRs) and their cofactors are poorly understood. Here, we describe a
novel signature motif (F/YSXXLXXL/Y) in the developmental regulator BCL11A that
facilitates its selective interaction with members of the NR2E/F subfamily. Two
copies of this motif (named here as RID1 and RID2) permit BCL11A to bind COUP-TFs
(NR2F1;NR2F2;NR2F6) and Tailless/TLX (NR2E1), whereas RID1, but not RID2, binds
PNR (NR2E3). We confirmed the existence of endogenous BCL11A/TLX complexes in
mouse cortex tissue. No interactions of RID1 and RID2 with 20 other
ligand-binding domains from different NR subtypes were observed. We show that
RID1 and RID2 are required for BCL11A-mediated repression of endogenous <U+03B3>-globin 
gene and the regulatory non-coding transcript Bgl3, and we identify COUP-TFII
binding sites within the Bgl3 locus. In addition to their importance for BCL11A
function, we show that F/YSXXLXXL/Y motifs are conserved in other NR cofactors. A
single FSXXLXXL motif in the NR-binding SET domain protein NSD1 facilitates its
interactions with the NR2E/F subfamily. However, the NSD1 motif incorporates
features of both LXXLL and FSXXLXXL motifs, giving it a distinct NR-binding
pattern in contrast to other cofactors. In summary, our results provide new
insights into the selectivity of NR/cofactor complex formation.

PMCID: PMC3834829
PMID: 23975195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Epigenetics. 2013 Oct;8(10):1080-8. doi: 10.4161/epi.25926. Epub 2013 Aug 6.

Coordinate H3K9 and DNA methylation silencing of ZNFs in toxicant-induced
malignant transformation.

Severson PL(1), Tokar EJ(2), Vrba L(3), Waalkes MP(2), Futscher BW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology; College of Pharmacy; University of 
Arizona; Tucson, AZ USA. (2)National Toxicology Program Laboratory; National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences; Research Triangle Park, NC USA.
(3)University of Arizona Cancer Center; Tucson, AZ USA. (4)Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology; College of Pharmacy; University of Arizona; Tucson, 
AZ USA; University of Arizona Cancer Center; Tucson, AZ USA.

Genome-wide disruption of the epigenetic code is a hallmark of malignancy that
encompasses many distinct, highly interactive modifications. Delineating the
aberrant epigenome produced during toxicant-mediated malignant transformation
will help identify the underlying epigenetic drivers of environmental
toxicant-induced carcinogenesis. Gene promoter DNA methylation and gene
expression profiling of arsenite-transformed prostate epithelial cells showed a
negative correlation between gene expression changes and DNA methylation changes;
however, less than 10% of the genes with increased promoter methylation were
downregulated. Studies described herein confirm that a majority of the DNA
hypermethylation events occur at H3K27me3 marked genes that were already
transcriptionally repressed. In contrast to aberrant DNA methylation targeting
H3K27me3 pre-marked silent genes, we found that actively expressed C2H2 zinc
finger genes (ZNFs) marked with H3K9me3 on their 3' ends, were the favored
targets of DNA methylation linked gene silencing. DNA methylation coupled,
H3K9me3 mediated gene silencing of ZNF genes was widespread, occurring at
individual ZNF genes on multiple chromosomes and across ZNF gene family clusters.
At ZNF gene promoters, H3K9me3 and DNA hypermethylation replaced H3K4me3,
resulting in a widespread downregulation of ZNF gene expression, which accounted 
for 8% of all the downregulated genes in the arsenical-transformed cells. In
summary, these studies associate toxicant exposure with widespread silencing of
ZNF genes by DNA hypermethylation-linked H3K9me3 spreading, further implicating
epigenetic dysfunction as a driver of toxicant associated carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3891689
PMID: 23974009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2013 Sep 1;3(9):a015412. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a015412.

Transcriptional mechanisms underlying hemoglobin synthesis.

Katsumura KR(1), DeVilbiss AW, Pope NJ, Johnson KD, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, UW-Madison Blood Research
Program, Wisconsin Institute for Medical Research, Carbone Cancer Center,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 
53705.

The physiological switch in expression of the embryonic, fetal, and adult ß-like 
globin genes has garnered enormous attention from investigators interested in
transcriptional mechanisms and the molecular basis of hemoglobinopathies. These
efforts have led to the discovery of cell type-specific transcription factors,
unprecedented mechanisms of transcriptional coregulator function, genome biology 
principles, unique contributions of nuclear organization to transcription and
cell function, and promising therapeutic targets. Given the vast literature
accrued on this topic, this article will focus on the master regulator of
erythroid cell development and function GATA-1, its associated proteins, and its 
frontline role in controlling hemoglobin synthesis. GATA-1 is a crucial regulator
of genes encoding hemoglobin subunits and heme biosynthetic enzymes.
GATA-1-dependent mechanisms constitute an essential regulatory core that
nucleates additional mechanisms to achieve the physiological control of
hemoglobin synthesis.

PMCID: PMC3753722
PMID: 23838521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Jun;21(3):628-32. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2013.03.018.

[Effect of BCL11A gene on transcription of <U+03B3>-globin gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun SC(1), Zhou ZM, Tu CQ, Peng YS, Song HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Examination, Bao'an District People Hospital, Shenzhen,
Guangdong Province, China. bayysun@sina.cn

This study was aimed to explore the effect of BCL11A gene on transcription of
<U+03B3>-globin gene in K562 cells. B-cell lymphoma/leukemia 11A (BCL11A) gene was
silenced by small interfering RNA (siRNA) expression vectors in K562 cells (human
erythroblastic leukemia cell line). Gamma-globin mRNA level in K562 cells was
determined by RT-PCR. Association between the BCL11A gene and <U+03B3>-globin gene
transcription was explored by comparison of mRNA levels. The results indicated
that the silence rate of the BCL11A gene in K562 cells by 4 siRNA expression
vectors was 49.7%, 55.4%, 78.2%, and 84.1%, respectively. The siRNA expression
vector with 84.1% silence rate was transfected into K562 cells, transcription
level of <U+03B3>-globin mRNA in K562 cells transfected with siRNA expression vector
increased 2.4 times as compared with control K562 cells. It is concluded that
level of <U+03B3>-globin mRNA increases when the BCL11A gene is silenced. It indicates
that the BCL11A gene may be a negative regulator for <U+03B3>-globin gene expression.

PMID: 23815911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Hemoglobin. 2013;37(5):413-22. doi: 10.3109/03630269.2013.805418. Epub 2013 Jun
27.

Utility of the multivariate approach in predicting ß-thalassemia intermedia or
ß-thalassemia major types In Iranian patients.

Banan M(1), Bayat H, Namdar-Aligoodarzi P, Azarkeivan A, Kamali K, Daneshmand P, 
Zaker-Kandjani B, Najmabadi H.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. mbbanan@yahoo.com

Recently, five genetic modifiers [ß-globin mutations, coinheritance of
a-thalassemia (a-thal), XmnI polymorphism and single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in the BCL11A and HBS1L-MYB loci] were used to predict the ß-thal major
(ß-TM) or ß-thal intermedia (ß-TI) types in 106 French patients with 83.2%
accuracy. The dichotomous grouping was based on the age when the patient received
his/her first transfusion (4 years). Here, a similar study was conducted in a
cohort of 306 Iranian ß-thal patients having distinct ß-globin mutations and
minor allele frequencies of key SNPs in these loci. Multivariate regression
analyses and a simple scoring system were used to predict the ß-TM/ß-TI types
using three scenarios: 1) when considering only the severe ß-TM and the mild ß-TI
cases, 2) using clinical parameters for ß-thal typing, and 3) using age at first 
transfusion as the basis for classification. Using these scenarios, the ß-thal
types could be correctly predicted in 77.6, 75.5 and 68.0% of cases,
respectively.

PMID: 23805990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Blood. 2013 Aug 8;122(6):1034-41. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-472308. Epub 2013
Jun 24.

LIN28B-mediated expression of fetal hemoglobin and production of fetal-like
erythrocytes from adult human erythroblasts ex vivo.

Lee YT(1), de Vasconcellos JF, Yuan J, Byrnes C, Noh SJ, Meier ER, Kim KS, Rabel 
A, Kaushal M, Muljo SA, Miller JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genomics and Therapeutics Section, Molecular Medicine Branch,
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases/NIH, 10 Center
Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Reactivation of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) holds therapeutic potential for sickle
cell disease and ß-thalassemias. In human erythroid cells and hematopoietic
organs, LIN28B and its targeted let-7 microRNA family, demonstrate regulated
expression during the fetal-to-adult developmental transition. To explore the
effects of LIN28B in human erythroid cell development, lentiviral transduction
was used to knockdown LIN28B expression in erythroblasts cultured from human
umbilical cord CD34+ cells. The subsequent reduction in LIN28B expression caused 
increased expression of let-7 and significantly reduced HbF expression.
Conversely, LIN28B overexpression in cultured adult erythroblasts reduced the
expression of let-7 and significantly increased HbF expression. Cellular
maturation was maintained including enucleation. LIN28B expression in adult
erythroblasts increased the expression of <U+03B3>-globin, and the HbF content of the
cells rose to levels >30% of their hemoglobin. Expression of carbonic anhydrase
I, glucosaminyl (N-acetyl) transferase 2, and miR-96 (three additional genes
marking the transition from fetal-to-adult erythropoiesis) were reduced by LIN28B
expression. The transcription factor BCL11A, a well-characterized repressor of
<U+03B3>-globin expression, was significantly down-regulated. Independent of LIN28B,
experimental suppression of let-7 also reduced BCL11A expression and
significantly increased HbF expression. LIN28B expression regulates HbF levels
and causes adult human erythroblasts to differentiate with a more fetal-like
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3739030
PMID: 23798711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Hemoglobin. 2013;37(5):423-34. doi: 10.3109/03630269.2013.800823. Epub 2013 Jun
19.

Annotated definition of BCL11A and HMIP-2 haplotypes through the analysis of
sicilian ß-thalassemia patients with high levels of fetal hemoglobin.

Buccheri MA(1), Spina S, Ruberto C, Lombardo T, Labie D, Ragusa AA.

Author information: 
(1)Unità Operativa Complessa Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics, Azienda
Ospedaliera Universitaria Policlinico-Vittorio Emanuele, Catania, Italy.

Fetal hemoglobin (Hb F) is the principal ameliorating factor of ß-thalassemia
(ß-thal) and sickle cell disease. Persistent production in adult life is a
quantitative trait regulated by loci inside or outside the ß-globin gene cluster.
From genome-wide association studies, principal quantitative trait loci (QTL)
(accounting for 50.0% of Hb F variability in different populations) have been
identified in the BCL11A gene, HBS1L-MYB intergenic polymorphism and the ß-globin
gene cluster itself. In this study, we analyzed quantitative trait haplotypes in 
two Sicilian families with extremely mild ß-thal and unusually high Hb F
expression, in order to examine possible genetic background variations in a
similar ß-thalassemic phenotype. This study redefines the linkage disequilibrium 
blocks at these loci, but also shows slight differences between probands in
haplotype combinations which could reflect different mechanisms of high Hb F
production in patients with ß-thal. We proposed a haplotype-based approach as a
useful tool for the understanding of ß-thal phenotype variation in patients with 
similar ß-thalassemic backgrounds in an attempt to answer the recurring question 
of why patients with the same ß-thalassemic genotype show different phenotypes.

PMID: 23777413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mol Cancer. 2013 Jun 12;12:61. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-61.

BCL11A overexpression predicts survival and relapse in non-small cell lung cancer
and is modulated by microRNA-30a and gene amplification.

Jiang BY(1), Zhang XC, Su J, Meng W, Yang XN, Yang JJ, Zhou Q, Chen ZY, Chen ZH, 
Xie Z, Chen SL, Wu YL.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, 106 Zhongshan Er Rd, Guangzhou, 510080,
China.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant activation of the proto-oncogene B-cell lymphoma/leukemia
11A (BCL11A) has been implicated in the pathogenesis of leukemia and lymphoma.
However, the clinical significance of BCL11A in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) remains unknown.
RESULTS: We examined BCL11A expression at the protein and mRNA levels in a cohort
(n=114) of NSCLC patients and assessed the relationship between BCL11A expression
and clinicopathological parameters. Data from array-based Comparative Genomic
Hybridization (aCGH) and microRNA transfection experiments were integrated to
explore the potential mechanisms of abnormal BCL11A activation in NSCLC. Compared
to adjacent non-cancerous lung tissues, BCL11A expression levels were
specifically upregulated in NSCLC tissues at both the mRNA (t=9.81, P<0.001) and 
protein levels. BCL11A protein levels were higher in patients with squamous
histology (<U+03C7>2=15.81, P=0.001), smokers (<U+03C7>2=8.92, P=0.004), patients with no lymph
node involvement (<U+03C7>2=5.14, P=0.029), and patients with early stage disease
(<U+03C7>2=3.91, P=0.048). A multivariate analysis demonstrated that in early stage
NSCLC (IA-IIB), BCL11A was not only an independent prognostic factor for
disease-free survival (hazards ratio [HR] 0.24, 95% confidence interval [CI]
0.12-0.50, P<0.001), but also for overall survival (HR=0.23, 95% CI 0.09-0.61,
P=0.003). The average BCL11A expression level was much higher in SCC samples with
amplifications than in those without amplifications (t=3.30, P=0.023). Assessing 
functionality via an in vitro luciferase reporter system and western blotting, we
found that the BCL11A protein was a target of miR-30a.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrated that proto-oncogene BCL11A activation
induced by miR-30a and gene amplification may be a potential diagnostic and
prognostic biomarker for effective management of this disease.

PMCID: PMC3695801
PMID: 23758992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. PLoS One. 2013 May 31;8(5):e64800. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064800. Print 2013.

Bcl11a controls Flt3 expression in early hematopoietic progenitors and is
required for pDC development in vivo.

Wu X(1), Satpathy AT, Kc W, Liu P, Murphy TL, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Bcl11a is a transcription factor known to regulate lymphoid and erythroid
development. Recent bioinformatic analysis of global gene expression patterns has
suggested a role for Bcl11a in the development of dendritic cell (DC) lineages.
We tested this hypothesis by analyzing the development of DC and other lineages
in Bcl11a (-/-) mice. We found that Bcl11a was required for expression of IL-7
receptor (IL-7R) and Flt3 in early hematopoietic progenitor cells. In addition,
we found severely decreased numbers of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) in
Bcl11a (-/-) fetal livers and in the bone marrow of Bcl11a (-/-) fetal liver
chimeras. Moreover, Bcl11a (-/-) cells showed severely impaired in vitro
development of Flt3L-derived pDCs and classical DCs (cDCs). In contrast, we found
normal in vitro development of DCs from Bcl11a (-/-) fetal liver cells treated
with GM-CSF. These results suggest that the persistent cDC development observed
in Bcl11a (-/-) fetal liver chimeras reflects derivation from a Bcl11a- and
Flt3-independent pathway in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3669380
PMID: 23741395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Br J Haematol. 2013 Aug;162(4):542-6. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12399. Epub 2013 May 29.

Genetic regulation of fetal haemoglobin in inherited bone marrow failure
syndromes.

Alter BP(1), Rosenberg PS, Day T, Menzel S, Giri N, Savage SA, Thein SL.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Clinical Epidemiology and Genetics,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health/DCEG/CGB Branch, 9609
Medical Center Dr, Rm 6E452, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. alterb@mail.nih.gov

Patients with inherited bone marrow failure syndromes (IBMFS) have 'stress
erythropoiesis', with anaemia, macrocytosis, increased fetal haemoglobin (Hb F)
and high erythropoietin levels. In haemoglobinopathies, Hb F levels are regulated
by 3 quantitative trait loci, HBS1L-MYB, BCL11A and Xmn1-HBG2. In our study of 97
patients with an IBMFS, increased Hb F was associated with young age, male
gender, anaemia, high erythropoietin levels, and alternative alleles in Xmn1-HBG2
[adjusted P = 0·04 for the total group, driven by Fanconi anaemia (P = 0·02) and 
dyskeratosis congenita (P = 0·09)]. Thus Hb F is regulated in IBMFS by Xmn1-HBG2,
as it is in the haemoglobinopathies.

Published 2013. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMCID: PMC3720816
PMID: 23713742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Nat Genet. 2013 Jun;45(6):592-601. doi: 10.1038/ng.2628. Epub 2013 May 5.

Proteomic and bioinformatic analysis of mammalian SWI/SNF complexes identifies
extensive roles in human malignancy.

Kadoch C(1), Hargreaves DC, Hodges C, Elias L, Ho L, Ranish J, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland, USA.

Subunits of mammalian SWI/SNF (mSWI/SNF or BAF) complexes have recently been
implicated as tumor suppressors in human malignancies. To understand the full
extent of their involvement, we conducted a proteomic analysis of endogenous
mSWI/SNF complexes, which identified several new dedicated, stable subunits not
found in yeast SWI/SNF complexes, including BCL7A, BCL7B and BCL7C, BCL11A and
BCL11B, BRD9 and SS18. Incorporating these new members, we determined mSWI/SNF
subunit mutation frequency in exome and whole-genome sequencing studies of
primary human tumors. Notably, mSWI/SNF subunits are mutated in 19.6% of all
human tumors reported in 44 studies. Our analysis suggests that specific subunits
protect against cancer in specific tissues. In addition, mutations affecting more
than one subunit, defined here as compound heterozygosity, are prevalent in
certain cancers. Our studies demonstrate that mSWI/SNF is the most frequently
mutated chromatin-regulatory complex (CRC) in human cancer, exhibiting a broad
mutation pattern, similar to that of TP53. Thus, proper functioning of
polymorphic BAF complexes may constitute a major mechanism of tumor suppression.

PMCID: PMC3667980
PMID: 23644491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Am J Hematol. 2013 Jul;88(7):571-6. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23457. Epub 2013 May 30.

Genetic modifiers of sickle cell anemia in the BABY HUG cohort: influence on
laboratory and clinical phenotypes.

Sheehan VA(1), Luo Z, Flanagan JM, Howard TA, Thompson BW, Wang WC, Kutlar A,
Ware RE; BABY HUG Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hematology Center, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas.

The recently completed BABY HUG trial investigated the safety and efficacy of
hydroxyurea in infants with sickle cell anemia (SCA). To investigate the effects 
of known genetic modifiers, genomic DNA on 190 randomized subjects were analyzed 
for alpha thalassemia, beta-globin haplotype, polymorphisms affecting endogenous 
fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels (XmnI, BCL11A, and HBS1L-MYB), UGT1A1 promoter
polymorphisms, and the common G6PD A(-) mutation. At study entry, infants with
alpha thalassemia trait had significantly lower mean corpuscular volume, total
bilirubin, and absolute reticulocyte count. Beta-globin haplotypes associated
with milder disease had significantly higher hemoglobin and %HbF. BCL11A and XmnI
polymorphisms had significant effects on baseline HbF, while UGT1A1 promoter
polymorphisms significantly influenced baseline serum bilirubin. At study exit,
subjects randomized to placebo still exhibited laboratory effects of alpha
thalassemia and other modifiers, while those assigned hydroxyurea had treatment
effects that exceeded most genetic influences. The pain phenotype was influenced 
by HbF modifiers in both treatment groups. These data document that genetic
polymorphisms do modify laboratory and clinical phenotypes even in very young
patients with SCA. The hydroxyurea effects are more potent, however, indicating
that treatment criteria should not be limited to certain genetic subsets, and
supporting the use of hydroxyurea for all young patients with SCA.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23606168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 4;8(4):e60436. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060436. Print 2013.

MicroRNA-486-3p regulates <U+03B3>-globin expression in human erythroid cells by
directly modulating BCL11A.

Lulli V(1), Romania P, Morsilli O, Cianciulli P, Gabbianelli M, Testa U, Giuliani
A, Marziali G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play key roles in modulating a variety of cellular processes
through repression of mRNAs target. The functional relevance of microRNAs has
been proven in normal and malignant hematopoiesis. While analyzing miRNAs
expression profile in unilineage serum-free liquid suspension unilineage cultures
of peripheral blood CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) through the
erythroid, megakaryocytic, granulocytic and monocytic pathways, we identified
miR-486-3p as mainly expressed within the erythroid lineage. We showed that
miR-486-3p regulates BCL11A expression by binding to the extra-long isoform of
BCL11A 3'UTR. Overexpression of miR-486-3p in erythroid cells resulted in reduced
BCL11A protein levels, associated to increased expression of <U+03B3>-globin gene,
whereas inhibition of physiological miR-486-3p levels increased BCL11A and,
consequently, reduced <U+03B3>-globin expression. Thus, miR-486-3p regulating BCL11A
expression might contributes to fetal hemoglobin (HbF) modulation and arise the
question as to what extent this miRNA might contribute to different HbF levels
observed among ß-thalassemia patients. Erythroid cells, differentiated from PB
CD34(+) cells of a small cohort of patients affected by major or intermedia
ß-thalassemia, showed miR-486-3p levels significantly higher than those observed 
in normal counterpart. Importantly, in these patients, miR-486-3p expression
correlates with increased HbF synthesis. Thus, our data indicate that miR-486-3p 
might contribute to different HbF levels observed among thalassemic patients and,
possibly, to the clinical severity of the disease.

PMCID: PMC3617093
PMID: 23593217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 16;110(16):6518-23. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1303976110. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Corepressor-dependent silencing of fetal hemoglobin expression by BCL11A.

Xu J(1), Bauer DE, Kerenyi MA, Vo TD, Hou S, Hsu YJ, Yao H, Trowbridge JJ, Mandel
G, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Reactivation of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) in adults ameliorates the severity of the 
common ß-globin disorders. The transcription factor BCL11A is a critical
modulator of hemoglobin switching and HbF silencing, yet the molecular mechanism 
through which BCL11A coordinates the developmental switch is incompletely
understood. Particularly, the identities of BCL11A cooperating protein complexes 
and their roles in HbF expression and erythroid development remain largely
unknown. Here we determine the interacting partner proteins of BCL11A in
erythroid cells by a proteomic screen. BCL11A is found within multiprotein
complexes consisting of erythroid transcription factors, transcriptional
corepressors, and chromatin-modifying enzymes. We show that the lysine-specific
demethylase 1 and repressor element-1 silencing transcription factor corepressor 
1 (LSD1/CoREST) histone demethylase complex interacts with BCL11A and is required
for full developmental silencing of mouse embryonic ß-like globin genes and human
<U+03B3>-globin genes in adult erythroid cells in vivo. In addition, LSD1 is essential
for normal erythroid development. Furthermore, the DNA methyltransferase 1
(DNMT1) is identified as a BCL11A-associated protein in the proteomic screen.
DNMT1 is required to maintain HbF silencing in primary human adult erythroid
cells. DNMT1 haploinsufficiency combined with BCL11A deficiency further enhances 
<U+03B3>-globin expression in adult animals. Our findings provide important insights
into the mechanistic roles of BCL11A in HbF silencing and clues for therapeutic
targeting of BCL11A in ß-hemoglobinopathies.

PMCID: PMC3631619
PMID: 23576758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Diabetes. 2013 Aug;62(8):2978-83. doi: 10.2337/db12-1627. Epub 2013 Apr 4.

Effects of common genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes and glycemic
traits on a- and ß-cell function and insulin action in humans.

Jonsson A(1), Ladenvall C, Ahluwalia TS, Kravic J, Krus U, Taneera J, Isomaa B,
Tuomi T, Renström E, Groop L, Lyssenko V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University
Diabetes Centre, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. jonsson@sund.ku.dk

Although meta-analyses of genome-wide association studies have identified >60
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with type 2 diabetes and/or
glycemic traits, there is little information on whether these variants also
affect a-cell function. The aim of the current study was to evaluate the effects 
of glycemia-associated genetic loci on islet function in vivo and in vitro. We
studied 43 SNPs in 4,654 normoglycemic participants from the Finnish
population-based Prevalence, Prediction, and Prevention of Diabetes-Botnia
(PPP-Botnia) Study. Islet function was assessed, in vivo, by measuring insulin
and glucagon concentrations during oral glucose tolerance test, and, in vitro, by
measuring glucose-stimulated insulin and glucagon secretion from human pancreatic
islets. Carriers of risk variants in BCL11A, HHEX, ZBED3, HNF1A, IGF1, and NOTCH2
showed elevated whereas those in CRY2, IGF2BP2, TSPAN8, and KCNJ11 showed
decreased fasting and/or 2-h glucagon concentrations in vivo. Variants in BCL11A,
TSPAN8, and NOTCH2 affected glucagon secretion both in vivo and in vitro. The
MTNR1B variant was a clear outlier in the relationship analysis between insulin
secretion and action, as well as between insulin, glucose, and glucagon. Many of 
the genetic variants shown to be associated with type 2 diabetes or glycemic
traits also exert pleiotropic in vivo and in vitro effects on islet function.

PMCID: PMC3717852
PMID: 23557703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2013 Aug;51(2):80-4. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2013.02.007. Epub
2013 Mar 28.

The influence of the BCL11A polymorphism on the phenotype of patients with beta
thalassemia could be affected by the beta globin locus control region and/or the 
Xmn1-HBG2 genotypic background.

Neishabury M(1), Zamani F, Keyhani E, Azarkeivan A, Abedini SS, Eslami MS,
Kakroodi ST, Vesiehsari MJ, Najmabadi H.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. nneisha@gmail.com

To study the influence of the ß globin locus control region (LCR) genotypic
background on the phenotype modifying role of BCL11A polymorphisms, 100 cases of 
thalassemia, 48 homozygous for the A allele and 52 homozygous for the G allele at
the 5'HS4-LCR palindromic polymorphic site were genotyped for two BCL11A single
nucleotide polymorphisms (rs11886868 and rs766432) in the intronic region of this
gene. The effect of these polymorphisms on HbF variation was also examined in 122
normal individuals. The 5'HS4-LCR had the most significant role in determining
the phenotype of these thalassemia patients. BCL11A polymorphisms showed a
significant role in determining the phenotype of patients homozygous for the G
allele at 5'HS4-LCR. However, the majority of patients homozygous for the A
allele at 5'HS4-LCR, showed a severe phenotype, regardless of the BCL11A
genotype. These results, without undermining the strength of BCL11A as a silencer
of the <U+03B3> globin gene, suggest that the LCR background, by governing the state of 
BCL11A binding to this region, plays a more significant role in determining the
thalassemia phenotype than the level of BCL11A protein expression, that might be 
influenced by single nucleotide polymorphisms in intronic regions of the BCL11A
gene. Functional studies to confirm the interactions between BCL11A and LCR could
be useful in designing pharmacogenetic strategies for the treatment of beta
thalassemia major.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23541515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Apr;161A(4):865-70. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35783. Epub 2013
Mar 12.

A patient with de novo 0.45 Mb deletion of 2p16.1: the role of BCL11A, PAPOLG,
REL, and FLJ16341 in the 2p15-p16.1 microdeletion syndrome.

Hancarova M(1), Simandlova M, Drabova J, Mannik K, Kurg A, Sedlacek Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty of 
Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.

The 2p15-p16.1 microdeletion syndrome is a novel, rare disorder characterized by 
developmental delay, intellectual disability, microcephaly, growth retardation,
facial abnormalities, and other medical problems. We report here on an
11-year-old female showing clinical features consistent with the syndrome and
carrying a de novo 0.45 Mb long deletion of the paternally derived 2p16.1 allele.
The deleted region contains only three protein-coding RefSeq genes, BCL11A,
PAPOLG, and REL, and one long non-coding RNA gene FLJ16341. Based on close
phenotypic similarities with six reported patients showing typical clinical
features of the syndrome, we propose that the critical region can be narrowed
down further, and that these brain expressed genes can be considered candidates
for the features seen in this microdeletion syndrome.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23495096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Curr Opin Hematol. 2013 May;20(3):193-200. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e32835f59ba.

Three fingers on the switch: Krüppel-like factor 1 regulation of <U+03B3>-globin to
ß-globin gene switching.

Tallack MR(1), Perkins AC.

Author information: 
(1)Blood and Bone Disease Program, Mater Research, Mater Hospital, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Krüppel-like factor 1 (KLF1) regulates most aspects of
erythropoiesis. Many years ago, transgenic mouse studies implicated KLF1 in the
control of the human <U+03B3>-globin to ß-globin switch. In this review, we will
integrate these initial studies with recent developments in human genetics to
discuss our present understanding of how KLF1 and its target genes direct the
switch.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent studies have shown that human mutations in KLF1 are
common and mostly asymptomatic, but lead to significant increases in levels of
fetal hemoglobin (HbF) (a2<U+03B3>2) and adult HbA2 (a2d2). Genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) have demonstrated that three primary loci are associated with
increased HbF levels in the population: the ß-globin locus itself, the BCL11A
locus, and a site between MYB and HBS1L. We discuss evidence that KLF1 directly
regulates BCL11A, MYB and other genes, which are involved directly or indirectly 
in <U+03B3>-globin silencing, thus providing a link between GWAS and KLF1 in hemoglobin 
switching.
SUMMARY: KLF1 regulates the <U+03B3>-globin to ß-globin genetic switch by many
mechanisms. Firstly, it facilitates formation of an active chromatin hub (ACH) at
the ß-globin gene cluster. Specifically, KLF1 conscripts the adult-stage ß-globin
gene to replace the <U+03B3>-globin gene within the ACH in a stage-specific manner.
Secondly, KLF1 acts as a direct activator of genes that encode repressors of
<U+03B3>-globin gene expression. Finally, KLF1 is a regulator of many components of the 
cell cycle machinery. We suggest that dysregulation of these genes leads to cell 
cycle perturbation and 'erythropoietic stress' leading to indirect upregulation
of HbF.

PMID: 23474875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2013 Jun;51(1):22-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2012.12.005. Epub
2013 Mar 7.

Fetal hemoglobin in sickle cell anemia: genetic studies of the Arab-Indian
haplotype.

Ngo D(1), Bae H, Steinberg MH, Sebastiani P, Solovieff N, Baldwin CT, Melista E, 
Safaya S, Farrer LA, Al-Suliman AM, Albuali WH, Al Bagshi MH, Naserullah Z,
Akinsheye I, Gallagher P, Luo HY, Chui DH, Farrell JJ, Al-Ali AK, Alsultan A.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Sickle Cell Disease, Department of Medicine, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. duyen.ngo@bmc.org

Comment in
    Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2014 Apr;52(4):175.

Sickle cell anemia is common in the Middle East and India where the HbS gene is
sometimes associated with the Arab-Indian (AI) ß-globin gene (HBB) cluster
haplotype. In this haplotype of sickle cell anemia, fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels
are 3-4 fold higher than those found in patients with HbS haplotypes of African
origin. Little is known about the genetic elements that modulate HbF in AI
haplotype patients. We therefore studied Saudi HbS homozygotes with the AI
haplotype (mean HbF 19.2±7.0%, range 3.6 to 39.6%) and employed targeted
genotyping of polymorphic sites to explore cis- and trans- acting elements
associated with high HbF expression. We also described sequences which appear to 
be unique to the AI haplotype for which future functional studies are needed to
further define their role in HbF modulation. All cases, regardless of HbF
concentration, were homozygous for AI haplotype-specific elements cis to HBB.
SNPs in BCL11A and HBS1L-MYB that were associated with HbF in other populations
explained only 8.8% of the variation in HbF. KLF1 polymorphisms associated
previously with high HbF were not present in the 44 patients tested. More than
90% of the HbF variance in sickle cell patients with the AI haplotype remains
unexplained by the genetic loci that we studied. The dispersion of HbF levels
among AI haplotype patients suggests that other genetic elements modulate the
effects of the known cis- and trans-acting regulators. These regulatory elements,
which remain to be discovered, might be specific in the Saudi and some other
populations where HbF levels are especially high.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3647015
PMID: 23465615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Blood. 2013 Apr 25;121(17):3493-501. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-11-466227. Epub 2013
Feb 26.

Mi2ß-mediated silencing of the fetal <U+03B3>-globin gene in adult erythroid cells.

Amaya M(1), Desai M, Gnanapragasam MN, Wang SZ, Zu Zhu S, Williams DC Jr, Ginder 
GD.

Author information: 
(1)VCU Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, 401 College St,
Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

An understanding of the human fetal to adult hemoglobin switch offers the
potential to ameliorate ß-type globin gene disorders such as sickle cell anemia
and ß-thalassemia through activation of the fetal <U+03B3>-globin gene. Chromatin
modifying complexes, including MBD2-NuRD and GATA-1/FOG-1/NuRD, play a role in
<U+03B3>-globin gene silencing, and Mi2ß (CHD4) is a critical component of NuRD
complexes. We observed that knockdown of Mi2ß relieves <U+03B3>-globin gene silencing in
ß-YAC transgenic murine chemical inducer of dimerization hematopoietic cells and 
in CD34(+) progenitor-derived human primary adult erythroid cells. We show that
independent of MBD2-NuRD and GATA-1/FOG-1/NuRD, Mi2ß binds directly to and
positively regulates both the KLF1 and BCL11A genes, which encode transcription
factors critical for <U+03B3>-globin gene silencing during ß-type globin gene switching.
Remarkably, <50% knockdown of Mi2ß is sufficient to significantly induce <U+03B3>-globin
gene expression without disrupting erythroid differentiation of primary human
CD34(+) progenitors. These results indicate that Mi2ß is a potential target for
therapeutic induction of fetal hemoglobin.

PMCID: PMC3637018
PMID: 23444401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 May;33(9):1768-81. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00987-12. Epub 2013 Feb
25.

The BCL11A transcription factor directly activates RAG gene expression and V(D)J 
recombination.

Lee BS(1), Dekker JD, Lee BK, Iyer VR, Sleckman BP, Shaffer AL 3rd, Ippolito GC, 
Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, Texas, USA.

Recombination-activating gene 1 protein (RAG1) and RAG2 are critical enzymes for 
initiating variable-diversity-joining (VDJ) segment recombination, an essential
process for antigen receptor expression and lymphocyte development. The
transcription factor BCL11A is required for B cell development, but its molecular
function(s) in B cell fate specification and commitment is unknown. We show here 
that the major B cell isoform, BCL11A-XL, binds the RAG1 promoter and Erag
enhancer to activate RAG1 and RAG2 transcription in pre-B cells. We employed
BCL11A overexpression with recombination substrates in a cultured pre-B cell line
as well as Cre recombinase-mediated Bcl11a(lox/lox) deletion in explanted murine 
pre-B cells to demonstrate direct consequences of BCL11A/RAG modulation on V(D)J 
recombination. We conclude that BCL11A is a critical component of a
transcriptional network that regulates B cell fate by controlling V(D)J
recombination.

PMCID: PMC3624176
PMID: 23438597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Hematology. 2014 Jan;19(1):45-8. doi: 10.1179/1607845413Y.0000000078. Epub 2013
Nov 25.

Concurrent rearrangements of BCL2, BCL3, and BCL11A genes in atypical chronic
lymphocytic leukemia.

Podgornik H, Pretnar J, Skopec B, Andoljek D, Cernelc P.

The most frequent chromosomal aberrations with the well established prognostic
meaning in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) are +12, del(11q), del(13q), and
del(17p). Less common translocations lead to deregulation of genes primarily due 
to juxtaposition with IGH gene. We present a case of CLL patient with atypical
morphology and an aggressive course of disease. In spite of aggressive treatment 
including allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation disease progressed
into a rare cutaneous Richter's syndrome. Trisomy 12 was found as a sole
chromosomal change at initial cytogenetic analysis of lymphoma cells. At
progression, besides trisomy 12 three concomitant balanced translocations
t(2;14)(p13;q32), t(14;19)(q32;q13), and t(18;22)(q21;q11) were found. The same
karyotype was confirmed in cells aspirated from skin infiltrates at Richter
transformation. Atypical cytological features, trisomy 12, and a progressive
course of disease observed in our case are typical for CLL with each of
particular Ig translocations that were concomitantly found in CLL for the first
time. Similar to "double hit" lymphoma concurrent rearrangements may be relevant 
also in CLL.

PMID: 23432949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55709. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055709. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

Candidate sequence variants and fetal hemoglobin in children with sickle cell
disease treated with hydroxyurea.

Green NS(1), Ender KL, Pashankar F, Driscoll C, Giardina PJ, Mullen CA, Clark LN,
Manwani D, Crotty J, Kisselev S, Neville KA, Hoppe C, Barral S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.
nsg11@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Fetal hemoglobin level is a heritable complex trait that strongly
correlates swith the clinical severity of sickle cell disease. Only few genetic
loci have been identified as robustly associated with fetal hemoglobin in
patients with sickle cell disease, primarily adults. The sole approved
pharmacologic therapy for this disease is hydroxyurea, with effects largely
attributable to induction of fetal hemoglobin.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In a multi-site observational analysis of
children with sickle cell disease, candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms
associated with baseline fetal hemoglobin levels in adult sickle cell disease
were examined in children at baseline and induced by hydroxyurea therapy. For
baseline levels, single marker analysis demonstrated significant association with
BCL11A and the beta and epsilon globin loci (HBB and HBE, respectively), with an 
additive attributable variance from these loci of 23%. Among a subset of children
on hydroxyurea, baseline fetal hemoglobin levels explained 33% of the variance in
induced levels. The variant in HBE accounted for an additional 13% of the
variance in induced levels, while variants in the HBB and BCL11A loci did not
contribute beyond baseline levels.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These findings clarify the overlap between baseline and
hydroxyurea-induced fetal hemoglobin levels in pediatric disease. Studies
assessing influences of specific sequence variants in these and other genetic
loci in larger populations and in unusual hydroxyurea responders are needed to
further understand the maintenance and therapeutic induction of fetal hemoglobin 
in pediatric sickle cell disease.

PMCID: PMC3567082
PMID: 23409025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Blood. 2013 Mar 28;121(13):2553-62. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-06-434530. Epub 2013 
Jan 29.

Erythropoiesis and globin switching in compound Klf1::Bcl11a mutant mice.

Esteghamat F(1), Gillemans N, Bilic I, van den Akker E, Cantù I, van Gent T,
Klingmüller U, van Lom K, von Lindern M, Grosveld F, Bryn van Dijk T, Busslinger 
M, Philipsen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

B-cell lymphoma 11A (BCL11A) downregulation in human primary adult erythroid
progenitors results in elevated expression of fetal <U+03B3>-globin. Recent reports
showed that BCL11A expression is activated by KLF1, leading to <U+03B3>-globin
repression. To study regulation of erythropoiesis and globin expression by KLF1
and BCL11A in an in vivo model, we used mice carrying a human ß-globin locus
transgene with combinations of Klf1 knockout, Bcl11a floxed, and EpoR(Cre)
knockin alleles. We found a higher percentage of reticulocytes in adult
Klf1(wt/ko) mice and a mild compensated anemia in Bcl11a(cko/cko) mice. These
phenotypes were more pronounced in compound Klf1(wt/ko)::Bcl11a(cko/cko) mice.
Analysis of Klf1(wt/ko), Bcl11a(cko/cko), and Klf1(wt/ko)::Bcl11a(cko/cko) mutant
embryos demonstrated increased expression of mouse embryonic globins during fetal
development. Expression of human <U+03B3>-globin remained high in Bcl11a(cko/cko)
embryos during fetal development, and this was further augmented in
Klf1(wt/ko)::Bcl11a(cko/cko) embryos. After birth, expression of human <U+03B3>-globin
and mouse embryonic globins decreased in Bcl11a(cko/cko) and
Klf1(wt/ko)::Bcl11a(cko/cko) mice, but the levels remained much higher than those
observed in control animals. Collectively, our data support an important role for
the KLF1-BCL11A axis in erythroid maturation and developmental regulation of
globin expression.

PMID: 23361909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Biomed Rep. 2013 Jan;1(1):47-52. Epub 2012 Sep 5.

Downregulation of BCL11A by siRNA induces apoptosis in B lymphoma cell lines.

Gao Y(1), Wu H(1), He D(1), Hu X(1), Li Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Medical College; (2)Institute of Hematology, Medical 
College; ; Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of Ministry of Education,
Jinan University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510632, P.R. China.

The B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)/lymphoma 11A gene (BCL11A) encodes 
a krüppel-like zinc finger protein, which is important in thymopoiesis and has
been associated with hematopoietic malignancies. In this study, we investigated
whether the downregulation of BCL11A mRNA by small interference RNA (siRNA) was
capable of inducing apoptosis, and tested the effect of BCL11A siRNA combined
with BCL2 siRNA in B lymphoma cell lines (SUDHL6, EB1). BCL11A siRNA was
transfected into SUDHL6, EB1 cells with HiPerfect transfection reagents. After
transient transfection with BCL11A siRNA, the expression levels of BCL11A mRNA
and protein were assayed by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (qRT-PCR) and western blot analysis. The cell proliferation was
determined by a cell counting kit-8 (CCK8) assay. Apoptosis was determined by
morphological observation and flow cytometric analysis. The results showed that
the expression levels of BCL11A mRNA and protein from SUDHL6, EB1 cells
transfected with BCL11A siRNA decreased, compared with either the scrambled
negative control siRNA group or untransfected cells group (P<0.05). Viability of 
cells transfected with BCL11A siRNA was less compared to cells transfected with
control siRNA and untransfected SUDHL6, EB1 cells, respectively (P<0.05). BCL11A 
siRNA induced apoptosis in both SUDHL6 and EB1 cells. BCL11A siRNA combined with 
BCL2 siRNA significantly inhibited cell growth. Apoptotic rates of SUDHL6, EB1
cells treated with BCL11A siRNA combined with BCL2 siRNA significantly increased 
(P<0.05), compared with either the scrambled control (Sc) siRNA and BCL2 siRNA
combination or BCL2 or BCL11A siRNA-treated cells alone. Findings of this study
suggest the downregulation of BCL11A mRNA by siRNA was able to induce apoptosis. 
Moreover, BCL11A siRNA combined with BCL2 siRNA increased apoptosis in SUDHL6,
EB1 cells. Thus, suppression of BCL11A expression may be a useful approach in the
treatment of B lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC3956826
PMID: 24648892  [PubMed]


134. J Exp Med. 2012 Dec 17;209(13):2467-83. doi: 10.1084/jem.20121846. Epub 2012 Dec 
10.

Bcl11a is essential for lymphoid development and negatively regulates p53.

Yu Y(1), Wang J, Khaled W, Burke S, Li P, Chen X, Yang W, Jenkins NA, Copeland
NG, Zhang S, Liu P.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding, and Reproduction of 
Ministry of Education, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.

Transcription factors play important roles in lymphopoiesis. We have previously
demonstrated that Bcl11a is essential for normal lymphocyte development in the
mouse embryo. We report here that, in the adult mouse, Bcl11a is expressed in
most hematopoietic cells and is highly enriched in B cells, early T cell
progenitors, common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs), and hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs). In the adult mouse, Bcl11a deletion causes apoptosis in early B cells and
CLPs and completely abolishes the lymphoid development potential of HSCs to B, T,
and NK cells. Myeloid development, in contrast, is not obviously affected by the 
loss of Bcl11a. Bcl11a regulates expression of Bcl2, Bcl2-xL, and Mdm2, which
inhibits p53 activities. Overexpression of Bcl2 and Mdm2, or p53 deficiency,
rescues both lethality and proliferative defects in Bcl11a-deficient early B
cells and enables the mutant CLPs to differentiate to lymphocytes. Bcl11a is
therefore essential for lymphopoiesis and negatively regulates p53 activities.
Deletion of Bcl11a may represent a new approach for generating a mouse model that
completely lacks an adaptive immune system.

PMCID: PMC3526365
PMID: 23230003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Blood. 2013 Jan 31;121(5):830-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-07-443986. Epub 2012 Dec
6.

Simvastatin and t-butylhydroquinone suppress KLF1 and BCL11A gene expression and 
additively increase fetal hemoglobin in primary human erythroid cells.

Macari ER(1), Schaeffer EK, West RJ, Lowrey CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth University,
Hanover, NH, USA.

Although increased fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels have proven benefit for people
with ß-hemoglobinopathies, all current HbF-inducing agents have limitations. We
previously reported that drugs that activate the NRF2 antioxidant response
signaling pathway increase HbF in primary human erythroid cells. In an attempt to
increase HbF levels achieved with NRF2 activators, in the present study, we
investigated potential complementary activity between these agents and HMG-CoA
reductase inhibitors (statins) based on their ability to induce KLF2 protein
levels. Experiments in K562 cells showed that simvastatin increased KLF2 mRNA and
protein and KLF2 binding to HS2 of the ß-globin locus control region and enhanced
-globin mRNA production by the NRF2 activator Tert-butylhydroquinone (tBHQ). When
tested in differentiating primary human erythroid cells, simvastatin induced HbF 
alone and additively with tBHQ, but it did not increase KLF2 mRNA or locus
control region binding above levels seen with normal differentiation.
Investigating alternative mechanisms of action, we found that both simvastatin
and tBHQ suppress ß-globin mRNA and KLF1 and BCL11A mRNA and protein, similar to 
what is seen in people with an HPFH phenotype because of KLF1 haploinsufficiency.
These findings identify statins as a potential class of HbF-inducing agents and
suggest a novel mechanism of action based on pharmacologic suppression of KLF1
and BCL11A gene expression.KEY POINTS: Simvastatin and tBHQ suppress KLF1 and
BCL11 gene expression and additively increase fetal hemoglobin in primary human
erythroid cells. Because both drugs are FDA-approved, these findings could lead
to clinical trials in the relatively near future.

PMCID: PMC3563366
PMID: 23223429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2013 Jan 1;3(1):a011643. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a011643.

The switch from fetal to adult hemoglobin.

Sankaran VG(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. sankaran@broadinstitute.org

The fetal-to-adult hemoglobin switch and silencing of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) have
been areas of long-standing interest among hematologists, given the fact that
clinical induction of HbF production holds tremendous promise to ameliorate the
clinical symptoms of sickle cell disease (SCD) and ß-thalassemia. In this
article, we discuss historic attempts to induce HbF that have resulted in some
therapeutic approaches to manage SCD and ß-thalassemia. We then go on to discuss 
how more recent molecular studies that have identified regulators, including
BCL11A, MYB, and KLF1, hold great promise to develop targeted and more effective 
approaches for HbF induction. We go on to discuss strategies by which such
approaches may be developed. Older studies in this field can provide important
lessons for future studies aimed at developing more effective strategies for HbF 
induction, and we therefore chronologically cover the work accomplished as this
field has evolved over the course of the past four decades.

PMCID: PMC3530042
PMID: 23209159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Med Sci (Paris). 2012 Nov;28(11):923-5. doi: 10.1051/medsci/20122811007. Epub
2012 Nov 12.

[BCL11A controls the expression of the human fetal hemoglobin].

[Article in French]

Labie D.

PMID: 23171892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Hum Mutat. 2013 Jan;34(1):221-8. doi: 10.1002/humu.22218. Epub 2012 Nov 2.

Molecular analysis of the rare in(Lu) blood type: toward decoding the phenotypic 
outcome of haploinsufficiency for the transcription factor KLF1.

Helias V(1), Saison C, Peyrard T, Vera E, Prehu C, Cartron JP, Arnaud L.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Blood Transfusion, INTS, Paris, France.

KLF1 encodes an erythroid transcription factor, whose essential function in
erythropoiesis has been demonstrated by extensive studies in mouse models. The
first reported mutations in human KLF1 were found in individuals with a rare and 
asymptomatic blood type called In(Lu). Here, we show that KLF1 haploinsufficiency
is responsible for the In(Lu) blood type, after redefining this peculiar blood
type using flow cytometry to quantify the levels of BCAM and CD44 on red blood
cells. We found 10 (seven novel) heterozygous KLF1 mutations responsible for the 
In(Lu) blood type. Although most were obligate loss-of-function mutations due to 
the truncation of the DNA-binding domain of KLF1, three were missense mutations
that were located in its DNA-binding domain and impaired the transactivation
capacity of KLF1 in vitro. We further showed that the levels of the hemoglobin
variants HbF and HbA(2) were increased in the In(Lu) blood type, albeit
differently. The levels of the membrane glycoproteins BCAM and CD44 were also
differently reduced on In(Lu) red blood cells. This biochemical and genetic
analysis of the In(Lu) blood type tackles the phenotypic outcome of
haploinsufficiency for a transcription factor.

© 2012 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMID: 23125034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Hemoglobin. 2012;36(6):592-9. doi: 10.3109/03630269.2012.735626. Epub 2012 Oct
24.

Influence of BCL11A, HBS1L-MYB, HBBP1 single nucleotide polymorphisms and the
HBG2 XmnI polymorphism On Hb F levels.

Roy P(1), Bhattacharya G, Mandal A, Dasgupta UB, Banerjee D, Chandra S, Das M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Molecular Biology & Bioinformatics, University of
Calcutta, Kolkata, India.

In search of genetic alterations responsible for high fetal hemoglobin (Hb F)
phenotypes in the population of eastern India, 91 probands were screened for four
polymorphisms by sequencing and/or restriction fragment length polymorphism
(RFLP) analysis. These are the A>G allele on the rs4895441 locus in the
intergenic region between HBS1L and MYB on chromosome 6, the G>A allele on the
rs4671393 locus on chromosome 2 (BCL11A gene), the A>C allele on the rs2071348
(HBBP1 gene) and the XmnI polymorphism (rs7482144, -158 position of HBG2) on
chromosome 11. We found a significant association (p = 0.002 and 0.0013) of Hb F 
levels with rs2071348 and rs4895441, respectively. However, the polymorphism
rs4671393 gene did not show significant association with Hb F levels (p =
0.0655). As is well known, the XmnI polymorphism (p <0.0001) showed the strongest
association.

PMID: 23094636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47175. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047175. Epub 2012 Oct 10.

NF-Y recruits both transcription activator and repressor to modulate tissue- and 
developmental stage-specific expression of human <U+03B3>-globin gene.

Zhu X(1), Wang Y, Pi W, Liu H, Wickrema A, Tuan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia
and College of Graduate Studies, Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, GA,
USA.

The human embryonic, fetal and adult ß-like globin genes provide a paradigm for
tissue- and developmental stage-specific gene regulation. The fetal <U+03B3>-globin gene
is expressed in fetal erythroid cells but is repressed in adult erythroid cells. 
The molecular mechanism underlying this transcriptional switch during erythroid
development is not completely understood. Here, we used a combination of in vitro
and in vivo assays to dissect the molecular assemblies of the active and the
repressed proximal <U+03B3>-globin promoter complexes in K562 human erythroleukemia cell
line and primary human fetal and adult erythroid cells. We found that the
proximal <U+03B3>-globin promoter complex is assembled by a developmentally regulated,
general transcription activator NF-Y bound strongly at the tandem CCAAT motifs
near the TATA box. NF-Y recruits to neighboring DNA motifs the developmentally
regulated, erythroid transcription activator GATA-2 and general repressor BCL11A,
which in turn recruit erythroid repressor GATA-1 and general repressor COUP-TFII 
to form respectively the NF-Y/GATA-2 transcription activator hub and the
BCL11A/COUP-TFII/GATA-1 transcription repressor hub. Both the activator and the
repressor hubs are present in both the active and the repressed <U+03B3>-globin promoter
complexes in fetal and adult erythroid cells. Through changes in their levels and
respective interactions with the co-activators and co-repressors during erythroid
development, the activator and the repressor hubs modulate erythroid- and
developmental stage-specific transcription of <U+03B3>-globin gene.

PMCID: PMC3468502
PMID: 23071749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Blood. 2012 Aug 30;120(9):1961-2. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-06-432849.

Meta-analysis of 2040 sickle cell anemia patients: BCL11A and HBS1L-MYB are the
major modifiers of HbF in African Americans.

Bae HT, Baldwin CT, Sebastiani P, Telen MJ, Ashley-Koch A, Garrett M, Hooper WC, 
Bean CJ, Debaun MR, Arking DE, Bhatnagar P, Casella JF, Keefer JR, Barron-Casella
E, Gordeuk V, Kato GJ, Minniti C, Taylor J, Campbell A, Luchtman-Jones L, Hoppe
C, Gladwin MT, Zhang Y, Steinberg MH.

PMCID: PMC3433099
PMID: 22936743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Hematol Oncol. 2012 Dec;30(4):210-3. doi: 10.1002/hon.2023. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease of donor origin, following
haematopoietic stem cell transplantation in a patient with blastic plasmacytoid
dendritic cell neoplasm.

Piccin A(1), Morello E, Svaldi M, Haferlach T, Facchetti F, Negri G, Vecchiato C,
Fisogni S, Pusceddu I, Cortelazzo S.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Dept, San Maurizio Regional Hospital, Bolzano, South Tyrol, Italy.
apiccin@gmail.com

Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) is an extremely rare
condition that originates from dendritic cells. We report on the first case of
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-driven post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder
(PTLD) of donor origin in a BPDC patient post-allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT). Flow cytometry study identified a cell population
CD4+/CD56+/CD45RA+/CD123+/TCL1+ suggestive of BPDCN diagnosis, which was
confirmed by a lymph node biopsy (cells positive for BCL11a, BDCA-2, CD2AP,
CD123, TCL1 and S100). Cytogenetic analysis revealed a complex karyotype: (19
metaphase) 47,XX,t(1;6)(q21;q2?5),-13<U+2009>+<U+2009>2mar[11]/47, XX, +21 [3]/46,XX [5]. The
patient was started on acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) induction schedule, and
subsequently an allogeneic HSCT was performed. On day +36 post-HSCT, bone marrow 
biopsy/aspirate showed complete morphological remission, and chimerism study
showed 100% donor chimera. However, on day +37, the patient was found to have
enlarged cervical and supraclavicular lymphoadenopathy, splenomegaly and raised
lactic dehydrogenase. EBV-DNA copies in blood were elevated, consistent with a
lytic cycle. A lymph node biopsy showed EBV encoded RNA and large atypical B
cells (CD45dim-, CD4+/CD56+, monoclonal for k-chain,
CD19+/CD20+/CD21+/CD22+/CD38+/CD43+/CD79ß-/CD5-/CD10-), consistent with PTLD
monomorphic type. Chimerism study showed that PTLD was of donor origin. This case
together with the recent literature findings on BPDCN and PTLD are discussed.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22915052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Blood. 2012 Oct 11;120(15):2945-53. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-06-292078. Epub 2012 
Aug 17.

Reawakening fetal hemoglobin: prospects for new therapies for the ß-globin
disorders.

Bauer DE(1), Kamran SC, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
MA, USA.

The level of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) modifies the severity of the common ß-globin 
disorders. Knowledge of the normal mechanisms that repress HbF in the adult stage
has remained limited until recently despite nearly 3 decades of molecular
investigation, in part because of imperfect model systems. Recent studies have
provided new insights into the developmental regulation of globin genes and
identified specific transcription factors and epigenetic regulators responsible
for physiologic silencing of HbF. Most prominent among these regulators is
BCL11A, a transcriptional repressor that inhibits adult-stage HbF expression.
KLF1 and c-Myb are additional critical HbF-regulating erythroid transcription
factors more broadly involved in erythroid gene expression programs. Chromatin
modifiers, including histone deacetylases and DNA methyltransferases, also play
key roles in orchestrating appropriate globin gene expression. Taken together,
these discoveries present novel therapeutic targets for further consideration.
Although substantial hurdles remain, opportunities are now rich for the rational 
design of HbF inducers.

PMCID: PMC4467860
PMID: 22904296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Int J Cancer. 2013 Feb 1;132(3):E116-27. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27774. Epub 2012 Sep 1.

High-resolution genomic profiling reveals clonal evolution and competition in
gastrointestinal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma and its large cell variant.

Flossbach L(1), Holzmann K, Mattfeldt T, Buck M, Lanz K, Held M, Möller P, Barth 
TF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.

We studied marginal zone B-cell lymphomas of the gastrointestinal tract including
seven small cell lymphomas, eight large cell areas of composite lymphomas and 13 
large cell variants using SNP array profiling. We found an increase of genomic
complexity with lymphoma progression from small to large cytology, and identified
gains of prominent (proto) oncogenes such as REL, BCL11A, ETS1, PTPN1, PTEN and
KRAS which were found exclusively in the large cell variants. Copy numbers of
ADAM3A, SCAPER and SIRPB1 were varying between the three different modes of
presentation, hence suggestive for aberrations associated with progression from
small to large cell lymphoma. The number of aberrations was slightly higher in
the large cell part of composite lymphomas than in large cell lymphomas,
suggesting that clonal selection takes place and that composite lymphomas are in 
a transition state. To further investigate this, we comparatively analyzed
samples of two morphologically different regions of the same small cell tumor
with a BIRC3-MALT1 translocation, as well as material acquired at two different
time points from one composite lymphoma. We found genomic heterogeneity in both
cases, supporting the theory of competing subclones in the evolution and
progression of extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 22890838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Int J Epidemiol. 2012 Oct;41(5):1376-82. doi: 10.1093/ije/dys104. Epub 2012 Jul
23.

Sex-specific differences in effect size estimates at established complex trait
loci.

Orozco G(1), Ioannidis JP, Morris A, Zeggini E; DIAGRAM consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Research UK Epidemiology Unit, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, The University of Manchester, UK. gisela.orozco@manchester.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Genetic differences between men and women may contribute to sex
differences in prevalence and progression of many common complex diseases. Using 
the WTCCC GWAS, we analysed whether there are sex-specific differences in effect 
size estimates at 142 established loci for seven complex diseases: rheumatoid
arthritis, type 1 diabetes (T1D), Crohn's disease, type 2 diabetes (T2D),
hypertension, coronary artery disease and bipolar disorder.
METHODS: For each Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), we calculated the
per-allele odds ratio for each sex and the relative odds ratios (RORs; the effect
size is higher in men with ROR greater than one). RORs were then meta-analysed
across loci within each disease and across diseases.
RESULTS: For each disease, summary RORs were not different from one, but there
was between-SNP heterogeneity in the RORs for T1D and T2D. Four loci in T1D,
three in Crohn's disease and three in T2D showed differences in the genetic
effect between men and women (P<0.05). We probed these differences in additional 
independent replication samples for T1D and T2D. The differences remained for the
T1D loci CTSH, 17q21 and 20p13 and the T2D locus BCL11A, when WTCCC data and
replication data were meta-analysed. Only CTSH showed different genetic effect
between men and women in the replication data alone.
CONCLUSION: Our results exclude the presence of large and frequent differences in
the effect size estimates between men and women for the established loci in the
seven common diseases explored. Documenting small differences in genetic effects 
between men and women requires large studies and systematic evaluation.

PMCID: PMC3465768
PMID: 22825589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Haematologica. 2013 Feb;98(2):305-8. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.061994. Epub 2012
Jul 16.

Estimation of the difference in HbF expression due to loss of the 5' d-globin
BCL11A binding region.

Ghedira ES(1), Lecerf L, Faubert E, Costes B, Moradkhani K, Bachir D, Galactéros 
F, Pissard S.

Author information: 
(1)APHP-Molecular Genetics Department, Henri Mondor Hospital, Créteil, France.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2013 Sep;98(9):e117-8.
    Haematologica. 2013 Sep;98(9):e119-20.

BCL11A was the focus of recent studies on its inhibiting effect when bound onto
the ß-globin cluster in the mechanism of hemoglobin switching and HbF
downregulation. We examined a cohort of 10 patients displaying different HbF
levels and short deletions within the <U+03B3>ß-d intergenic region to find a possible
correlation with the BCL11A binding site located 5' to the d-globin gene. Precise
characterization of deletions was achieved using a custom DNA-array chip and
breakpoint sequencing. The a-globin cluster and major SNP associated with HbF
expression were genotyped. Our results show that the loss of the BCL11A binding
domain located 5' to the d-globin gene is correlated with a strong HbF difference
(mean+2.7 g/dL, ratio 2.81). This result provides evidence for the use of BCL11A 
level down-regulation or this domain blockage for new therapies in sickle cell
disease and ß-thalassemia major patients.

PMCID: PMC3561440
PMID: 22801970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Jun;20(3):650-3.

[Correlation between hemoglobin F levels and single nucleotide polymorphism at
BCL11A gene rs11886868 locus in ß-thalassemia patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen QR(1), Sun SC, Peng YS, Wang Q, Mo BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transfusion Medicine, Bao'an District People Hospital, Shenzhen,
Guangdong Province, China.

This study was aimed to analyze hemoglobin F (HbF) level and single nucleotide
polymorphisms at rs11886868 locus of BCL11A gene in ß-thalassemia patients, and
to explore correlation between them. 89 mild ß-thalassemia patients with known
mutations were registered, and HbF levels were determined by capillary
electrophoresis. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral leukocytes, fragment
including rs11886868 locus in BCL11A gene was amplified by PCR, and polymorphism 
was determined by DNA sequencing. The results showed that 2 polymorphisms
including C and T were found at rs11886868 locus in BCL11A gene among 89 mild
ß-thalassemia patients. HbF levels in red blood cells were (4.47 ± 3.42)% and
(2.79 ± 2.21)% for ß-thalassemia patients carrying C/C and C/T haplotypes,
respectively. There was difference between 2 haplotype groups. It is concluded
that the C and T polymorphisms are found at rs11886868 locus in the BCL11A gene
for ß-thalassemia patients. C polymorphism may be related to high HbF expression 
in red blood cells.

PMID: 22739175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Hemoglobin. 2012;36(4):371-80. doi: 10.3109/03630269.2012.691147. Epub 2012 Jun
11.

The XmnI and BCL11A single nucleotide polymorphisms may help predict hydroxyurea 
response in Iranian ß-thalassemia patients.

Banan M(1), Bayat H, Azarkeivan A, Mohammadparast S, Kamali K, Farashi S, Bayat
N, Khani MH, Neishabury M, Najmabadi H.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. mbbanan@yahoo.com

Hydroxyurea (HU), a drug which can reactivate fetal hemoglobin (Hb F) production,
is frequently prescribed to ß-thalassemia (ß-thal) patients. However, transfusion
requirements of only a subset of patients are reduced upon HU treatment. Because 
of its potential side-effects, targeted prescription of HU is imperative. To
identify genetic markers that correlate with drug response, we have carried out a
retrospective association study of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
three Hb F quantitative trait loci (QTLs): the XmnI polymorphism, BCL11A, and the
HBS1L-MYB intergenic region, with the response to HU in a cohort of 81
transfusion-dependent Iranian ß-thal patients. An increase in blood transfusion
intervals post-therapy was used to measure drug response. Our results suggest
that presence of the XmnI T/T genotype or the BCL11A rs766432 C allele correlates
strongly with response to HU (p <0.001). Accordingly, these markers may be used
to accurately predict the HU response of Iranian ß-thal patients.

PMID: 22686296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e37963. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037963. Epub 2012 Jun 4.

The oncoprotein BCL11A binds to orphan nuclear receptor TLX and potentiates its
transrepressive function.

Estruch SB(1), Buzón V, Carbó LR, Schorova L, Lüders J, Estébanez-Perpiñá E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Institute of Biomedicine 
from the University of Barcelona, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Nuclear orphan receptor TLX (NR2E1) functions primarily as a transcriptional
repressor and its pivotal role in brain development, glioblastoma, mental
retardation and retinopathologies make it an attractive drug target. TLX is
expressed in the neural stem cells (NSCs) of the subventricular zone and the
hippocampus subgranular zone, regions with persistent neurogenesis in the adult
brain, and functions as an essential regulator of NSCs maintenance and
self-renewal. Little is known about the TLX social network of interactors and
only few TLX coregulators are described. To identify and characterize novel
TLX-binders and possible coregulators, we performed yeast-two-hybrid (Y2H)
screens of a human adult brain cDNA library using different TLX constructs as
baits. Our screens identified multiple clones of Atrophin-1 (ATN1), a previously 
described TLX interactor. In addition, we identified an interaction with the
oncoprotein and zinc finger transcription factor BCL11A (CTIP1/Evi9), a key
player in the hematopoietic system and in major blood-related malignancies. This 
interaction was validated by expression and coimmunoprecipitation in human cells.
BCL11A potentiated the transrepressive function of TLX in an in vitro reporter
gene assay. Our work suggests that BCL11A is a novel TLX coregulator that might
be involved in TLX-dependent gene regulation in the brain.

PMCID: PMC3366998
PMID: 22675500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. 3 Biotech. 2012 Mar;2(1):37-52. Epub 2011 Oct 18.

Comparative studies of glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored high-density
lipoprotein-binding protein 1: evidence for a eutherian mammalian origin for the 
GPIHBP1 gene from an LY6-like gene.

Holmes RS, Cox LA.

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored high-density lipoprotein-binding protein 1 
(GPIHBP1) functions as a platform and transport agent for lipoprotein lipase
(LPL) which functions in the hydrolysis of chylomicrons, principally in heart,
skeletal muscle and adipose tissue capillary endothelial cells. Previous reports 
of genetic deficiency for this protein have described severe chylomicronemia.
Comparative GPIHBP1 amino acid sequences and structures and GPIHBP1 gene
locations were examined using data from several mammalian genome projects.
Mammalian GPIHBP1 genes usually contain four coding exons on the positive strand.
Mammalian GPIHBP1 sequences shared 41-96% identities as compared with 9-32%
sequence identities with other LY6-domain-containing human proteins (LY6-like).
The human N-glycosylation site was predominantly conserved among other mammalian 
GPIHBP1 proteins except cow, dog and pig. Sequence alignments, key amino acid
residues and conserved predicted secondary structures were also examined,
including the N-terminal signal peptide, the acidic amino acid sequence region
which binds LPL, the glycosylphosphatidylinositol linkage group, the Ly6 domain
and the C-terminal a-helix. Comparative and phylogenetic studies of mammalian
GPIHBP1 suggested that it originated in eutherian mammals from a gene duplication
event of an ancestral LY6-like gene and subsequent integration of exon 2, which
may have been derived from BCL11A (B-cell CLL/lymphoma 11A gene) encoding an
extended acidic amino acid sequence. ELECTRONIC SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL: The
online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-011-0026-4) contains
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

PMCID: PMC3339605
PMID: 22582156  [PubMed]


151. Development. 2012 May;139(10):1831-41. doi: 10.1242/dev.072850. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

Bcl11a is required for neuronal morphogenesis and sensory circuit formation in
dorsal spinal cord development.

John A(1), Brylka H, Wiegreffe C, Simon R, Liu P, Jüttner R, Crenshaw EB 3rd,
Luyten FP, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Birchmeier C, Britsch S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Anatomy, Ulm University, 89081 Ulm,
Germany.

Dorsal spinal cord neurons receive and integrate somatosensory information
provided by neurons located in dorsal root ganglia. Here we demonstrate that
dorsal spinal neurons require the Krüppel-C(2)H(2) zinc-finger transcription
factor Bcl11a for terminal differentiation and morphogenesis. The disrupted
differentiation of dorsal spinal neurons observed in Bcl11a mutant mice
interferes with their correct innervation by cutaneous sensory neurons. To
understand the mechanism underlying the innervation deficit, we characterized
changes in gene expression in the dorsal horn of Bcl11a mutants and identified
dysregulated expression of the gene encoding secreted frizzled-related protein 3 
(sFRP3, or Frzb). Frzb mutant mice show a deficit in the innervation of the
spinal cord, suggesting that the dysregulated expression of Frzb can account in
part for the phenotype of Bcl11a mutants. Thus, our genetic analysis of Bcl11a
reveals essential functions of this transcription factor in neuronal
morphogenesis and sensory wiring of the dorsal spinal cord and identifies Frzb, a
component of the Wnt pathway, as a downstream acting molecule involved in this
process.

PMCID: PMC4067532
PMID: 22491945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Diabetes Metab. 2012 Oct;38(4):316-23. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2012.02.003. Epub
2012 Mar 29.

European genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes in North African Arabs.

Cauchi S(1), Ezzidi I, El Achhab Y, Mtiraoui N, Chaieb L, Salah D, Nejjari C,
Labrune Y, Yengo L, Beury D, Vaxillaire M, Mahjoub T, Chikri M, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8199, Genomics and Metabolic Diseases, Lille, France.

AIMS: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and previous approaches have 
identified many genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in
populations of European descent, but their contribution in Arab populations from 
North Africa is unknown. Our study aimed to validate these markers and to assess 
their combined effects, using large case-control studies of Moroccan and Tunisian
individuals.
METHODS: Overall, 44 polymorphisms, located at 37 validated European loci, were
first analyzed in 1055 normoglycaemic controls and 1193 T2D cases from Morocco.
Associations and trends were then assessed in 942 normoglycaemic controls and
1446 T2D cases from Tunisia. Finally, their ability to discriminate cases from
controls was evaluated.
RESULTS: Carrying a genetic variant in BCL11A, ADAMTS9, IGF2BP2, WFS1, CDKAL1,
TP53INP1, CDKN2A/B, TCF7L2, KCNQ1, HNF1A, FTO, MC4R and GCK increased the risk of
T2D when assessing the Moroccan and Tunisian samples together. Each additional
risk allele increased the susceptibility for developing the disease by 12% (P =
9.0 × 10(-9)). Genotype information for 13 polymorphisms slightly improved the
classification of North Africans with and without T2D, as assessed by clinical
parameters, with an increase in the area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve from 0.64 to 0.67 (P = 0.004).
CONCLUSION: In addition to TCF7L2, 12 additional loci were found to be shared
between Europeans and North African Arabs. As for Europeans, the reliability of
genetic testing based on these markers to determine the risk for T2D is low. More
genome-wide studies, including next-generation sequencing, in North African
populations are needed to identify the genetic variants responsible for ethnic
disparities in T2D susceptibility.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22463974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Blood. 2012 May 10;119(19):4512-23. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-04-281428. Epub 2012 
Mar 16.

An insertional mutagenesis screen identifies genes that cooperate with Mll-AF9 in
a murine leukemogenesis model.

Bergerson RJ(1), Collier LS, Sarver AL, Been RA, Lugthart S, Diers MD, Zuber J,
Rappaport AR, Nixon MJ, Silverstein KA, Fan D, Lamblin AF, Wolff L, Kersey JH,
Delwel R, Lowe SW, O'Sullivan MG, Kogan SC, Adams DJ, Largaespada DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, Masonic Cancer Center,
University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Patients with a t(9;11) translocation (MLL-AF9) develop acute myeloid leukemia
(AML), and while in mice the expression of this fusion oncogene also results in
the development of myeloid leukemia, it is with long latency. To identify
mutations that cooperate with Mll-AF9, we infected neonatal wild-type (WT) or
Mll-AF9 mice with a murine leukemia virus (MuLV). MuLV-infected Mll-AF9 mice
succumbed to disease significantly faster than controls presenting predominantly 
with myeloid leukemia while infected WT animals developed predominantly lymphoid 
leukemia. We identified 88 candidate cancer genes near common sites of proviral
insertion. Analysis of transcript levels revealed significantly elevated
expression of Mn1, and a trend toward increased expression of Bcl11a and Fosb in 
Mll-AF9 murine leukemia samples with proviral insertions proximal to these genes.
Accordingly, FOSB and BCL11A were also overexpressed in human AML harboring MLL
gene translocations. FOSB was revealed to be essential for growth in mouse and
human myeloid leukemia cells using shRNA lentiviral vectors in vitro.
Importantly, MN1 cooperated with Mll-AF9 in leukemogenesis in an in vivo BM viral
transduction and transplantation assay. Together, our data identified genes that 
define transcription factor networks and important genetic pathways acting during
progression of leukemia induced by MLL fusion oncogenes.

PMCID: PMC3362364
PMID: 22427200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Br J Haematol. 2012 Apr;157(2):240-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2012.09061.x. Epub
2012 Feb 24.

Hydroxycarbamide alters erythroid gene expression in children with sickle cell
anaemia.

Flanagan JM(1), Steward S, Howard TA, Mortier NA, Kimble AC, Aygun B, Hankins JS,
Neale GA, Ware RE.

Author information: 
(1)International Hematology Center of Excellence, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. jmflanag@bcm.edu

Sickle cell anaemia (SCA) is a severe debilitating haematological disorder
associated with a high degree of morbidity and mortality. The level of fetal
haemoglobin (HbF) is well-recognized as a critical laboratory parameter: lower
HbF is associated with a higher risk of vaso-occlusive complications, organ
damage, and early death. Hydroxycarbamide treatment can induce HbF, improve
laboratory parameters, and ameliorate clinical complications of SCA but its
mechanisms of action remain incompletely defined and the HbF response is highly
variable. To identify pathways of hydroxycarbamide activity, we performed
microarray expression analyses of early reticulocyte RNA obtained from children
with SCA enrolled in the HydroxyUrea Study of Long-term Effects (NCT00305175) and
examined the effects of hydroxycarbamide exposure in vivo. Hydroxycarbamide
affected a large number of erythroid genes, with significant decreases in the
expression of genes involved in translation, ribosome assembly and chromosome
organization, presumably reflecting the daily cytotoxic pulses of
hydroxycarbamide. Hydroxycarbamide also affected expression of numerous genes
associated with HbF including BCL11A, a key regulator of baseline HbF levels.
Together, these data indicate that hydroxycarbamide treatment for SCA leads to
substantial changes in erythroid gene expression, including BCL11A and other
potential signalling pathways associated with HbF induction.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22360576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Haematologica. 2012 Feb;97(2):156. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.062190.

Using the hemoglobin switch for the treatment of sickle cell disease.

Cools J.

PMCID: PMC3269470
PMID: 22298819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Haematologica. 2012 Jul;97(7):989-93. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.053504. Epub
2012 Jan 22.

Genetic modifiers of ß-thalassemia and clinical severity as assessed by age at
first transfusion.

Danjou F(1), Anni F, Perseu L, Satta S, Dessì C, Lai ME, Fortina P, Devoto M,
Galanello R.

Author information: 
(1)Clinica Pediatrica 2a, Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie,
Università di Cagliari, Ospedale Regionale Microcitemie ASL8, Cagliari, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The clinical and hematologic features of ß-thalassemia are modulated 
by different factors, resulting in a wide range of clinical severity. The main
factors are the type of disease-causing mutation and the ability to produce
a-globin and <U+03B3>-globin chains. In the present study we investigated the respective
contributions of known modifiers to the prediction of the clinical severity of
ß-thalassemia as assessed by the patients' age at first transfusion.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We studied the effect of seven loci in a cohort of 316
Sardinian patients with ß(0)-thalassemia. In addition to characterizing the
ß-globin gene mutations, a-globin gene defects and HBG2:g.-158C>T polymorphism,
we genotyped two different markers in the BCL11A gene and three in the HBS1L-MYB 
intergenic region using single nucleotide polymorphism microarrays, imputation
and direct genotyping. We performed Cox proportional hazard analysis of the time 
to first transfusion.
RESULTS: According to the resulting model, we were able to explain phenotypic
severity to a large extent (Harrell's concordance index=0.72; Cox & Snell
R(2)=0.394) and demonstrated that most of the model's discriminatory ability is
attributable to the genetic variants affecting fetal hemoglobin production
(HBG2:g.-158C>T, BCL11A and HBS1L-MYB loci: C-index=0.68, R(2)=0.272), while the 
remaining is due to a-globin gene defects and gender. Consequently, significantly
distinct survival curves can be described in our population.
CONCLUSIONS: This detailed analysis clarifies the impact of genetic modifiers on 
the clinical severity of the disease, measured by time to first transfusion, by
determining their relative contributions in a homogeneous cohort of
ß(0)-thalassemia patients. It may also support clinical decisions regarding the
beginning of transfusion therapy in patients with ß-thalassemia.

PMCID: PMC3396667
PMID: 22271886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. FASEB J. 2012 Apr;26(4):1736-44. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-199356. Epub 2012 Jan 20.

Generation of a genomic reporter assay system for analysis of <U+03B3>- and ß-globin
gene regulation.

Chan KS(1), Xu J, Wardan H, McColl B, Orkin S, Vadolas J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Gene Therapy Group, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal
Children's Hospital, Flemington Road, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.

A greater understanding of the regulatory mechanisms that govern <U+03B3>-globin
expression in humans, especially the switching from <U+03B3>- to ß-globin, which occurs 
after birth, would help to identify new therapeutic targets for patients with
ß-hemoglobinopathy. To further elucidate the mechanisms involved in <U+03B3>-globin
expression, a novel fluorescent-based cellular reporter assay system was
developed. Using homologous recombination, two reporter genes, DsRed and EGFP,
were inserted into a 183-kb intact human ß-globin locus under the control of
(G)<U+03B3>- or (A)<U+03B3>-globin promoter and ß-globin promoter, respectively. The modified
constructs were stably transfected into adult murine erythroleukaemic (MEL) cells
and human embryonic or fetal erythroleukemic (K562) cells, allowing for rapid and
simultaneous analysis of fetal and adult globin gene expression according to
their developmental stage-specific expression. To demonstrate the utility of this
system, we performed RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated knockdown of BCL11A in the 
presence or absence of known fetal hemoglobin inducers and demonstrated
functional derepression of a <U+03B3>-globin-linked reporter in an adult erythroid
environment. Our results demonstrate that the cellular assay system represents a 
promising approach to perform genetic and functional genomic studies to identify 
and evaluate key factors associated with <U+03B3>-globin gene suppression.

PMCID: PMC4050337
PMID: 22267339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2012 May;34(4):323-4. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0b013e3182370bff.

Analysis of rs4671393 polymorphism in hemoglobin E/ß-thalassemia major in Guangxi
Province of China.

He Y, Chen P, Lin W, Luo J.

PMID: 22258351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2011;2011:459-65. doi:
10.1182/asheducation-2011.1.459.

Targeted therapeutic strategies for fetal hemoglobin induction.

Sankaran VG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
sankaran@broadinstitute.org

Increased levels of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) can ameliorate the severity of the
ß-hemoglobin disorders, sickle cell disease (SCD) and ß-thalassemia, which are
major sources of morbidity and mortality worldwide. As a result, there has been a
longstanding interest in developing therapeutic approaches for inducing HbF. For 
more than 3 decades, the majority of HbF inducers developed were based on empiric
observations and have had limited success. Recently, human genetic approaches
have provided insight into previously unappreciated regulators of the
fetal-to-adult hemoglobin switch and HbF silencing, revealing molecular targets
to induce HbF. This article reviews these developments and discusses how
molecules including BCL11A, KLF1, MYB, SOX6, miRNAs 15a and 16-1, and histone
deacetylase 1 and 2 (HDAC1/2) could be important targets for HbF induction in
humans. The current understanding of how these molecules function and the
benefits and drawbacks of each of these potential therapeutic targets are also
examined. The identification of these regulators of HbF expression is extremely
promising and suggests that rationally designed approaches targeting the very
mechanisms mediating this switching process could lead to better, less toxic, and
more effective strategies for HbF induction.

PMID: 22160074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Am J Hematol. 2012 Feb;87(2):217-9. doi: 10.1002/ajh.22221. Epub 2011 Dec 3.

Fetal hemoglobin in sickle cell anemia: molecular characterization of the
unusually high fetal hemoglobin phenotype in African Americans.

Akinsheye I(1), Solovieff N, Ngo D, Malek A, Sebastiani P, Steinberg MH, Chui DH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Boston University
School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. idyakin@yahoo.com

Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) is a major modifier of disease severity in sickle cell
anemia (SCA). Three major HbF quantitative trait loci (QTL) are known: the Xmn I 
site upstream of (G)<U+03B3>- globin gene (HBG2) on chromosome 11p15, BCL11A on
chromosome 2p16, and HBS1L-MYB intergenic polymorphism (HMIP) on chromosome 6q23.
However, the roles of these QTLs in patients with SCA with uncharacteristically
high HbF are not known. We studied 20 African American patients with SCA with
markedly elevated HbF (mean 17.2%). They had significantly higher minor allele
frequencies (MAF) in two HbF QTLs, BCL11A, and HMIP, compared with those with low
HbF. A 3-bp (TAC) deletion in complete linkage disequilibrium (LD) with the minor
allele of rs9399137 in HMIP was also present significantly more often in these
patients. To further explore other genetic loci that might be responsible for
this high HbF, we sequenced a 14.1 kb DNA fragment between the (A)<U+03B3>-(HBG1) and
d-globin genes (HBD). Thirty-eight SNPs were found. Four SNPs had significantly
higher major allele frequencies in the unusually high HbF group. In silico
analyses of these four polymorphisms predicted alteration in transcription factor
binding sites in 3.

PMCID: PMC3302931
PMID: 22139998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Hum Genet. 2012 Jan;57(1):57-61. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.133. Epub 2011 Nov 24.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in JAZF1 and BCL11A gene are nominally associated
with type 2 diabetes in African-American families from the GENNID study.

Langberg KA(1), Ma L, Sharma NK, Hanis CL, Elbein SC, Hasstedt SJ, Das SK;
American Diabetes Association GENNID Study Group.

Collaborators: Boerwinkle E, Buse J, DeFronzo R, Ehrmann D, Elbein SC, Fujimoto
W, Kahn SE, Hanis CL, Mulivor RA, Beck JC, Norris J, Permutt M, Behn P, Raffel L,
Robbins DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Prior type 2 diabetes (T2D) genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have
generated a list of well-replicated susceptibility loci in populations of
European and Asian ancestry. To validate the trans-ethnic contribution of the
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) involved in these GWASs, we performed a
family-based association analysis of 32 selected GWAS SNPs in a cohort of 1496
African-American (AA) subjects from the Genetics of NIDDM (GENNID) study.
Functional roles of these SNPs were evaluated by screening cis-eQTLs in
transformed lymphoblast cell lines available for a sub-group of Genetics of NIDDM
(GENNID) families from Arkansas. Only three of the 32 GWAS-derived SNPs showed
nominally significant association with T2D in our AA cohort. Among the replicated
SNPs rs864745 in JAZF1 and rs10490072 in BCL11A gene (P=0.006 and 0.03,
respectively, after adjustment for body mass index) were within the 1-lod drop
support interval of T2D linkage peaks reported in these families. Genotyping of
19 tag SNPs in these two loci revealed no further common SNPs or haplotypes that 
may be a stronger predictor of T2D susceptibility than the index SNPs. Six T2D
GWAS SNPs (rs6698181, rs9472138, rs730497, rs10811661, rs11037909 and rs1153188) 
were associated with nearby transcript expression in transformed lymphoblast cell
lines of GENNID AA subjects. Thus, our study indicates a nominal role for JAZF1
and BCL11A variants in T2D susceptibility in AAs and suggested little overlap in 
known susceptibility to T2D between European- and African-derived populations
when considering GWAS SNPs alone.

PMCID: PMC3266455
PMID: 22113416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cell Res. 2011 Dec;21(12):1701-10. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.183. Epub 2011 Nov 22.

Downregulation of the transcription factor KLF4 is required for the lineage
commitment of T cells.

Wen X(1), Liu H, Xiao G, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai 200031, China.

The roles of the reprogramming factors Oct4, Sox2, c-Myc and Klf4 in early T cell
development are incompletely defined. Here, we show that Klf4 is the only
reprogramming factor whose expression is downregulated when early thymic
progenitors (ETPs) differentiate into T cells. Enforced expression of Klf4 in
uncommitted progenitors severely impaired T cell development mainly at the
DN2-to-DN3 transition when T cell lineage commitment occurs and affected the
transcription of a variety of genes with crucial functions in early T cell
development, including genes involved in microenvironmental signaling (IL-7Ra),
Notch target genes (Deltex1), and essential T cell lineage regulatory or
inhibitory genes (Bcl11a, SpiB, and Id1). The survival of thymocytes and the
rearrangement at the Tcrb locus were impaired in the presence of enforced Klf4
expression. The defects in the DN1-to-DN2 and DN2-to-DN3 transitions in Klf4
transgenic mice could not be rescued by the introduction of a TCR transgene, but 
was partially rescued by restoring the expression of IL-7Ra. Thus, our data
indicate that the downregulation of Klf4 is a prerequisite for T cell lineage
commitment.

PMCID: PMC3357995
PMID: 22105482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Haematologica. 2011 Nov;96(11):1573-5. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.055962.

Beta-thalassemia: from genotype to phenotype.

Danjou F, Anni F, Galanello R.

Comment on
    Haematologica. 2011 Nov;96(11):1712-4.

PMCID: PMC3208672
PMID: 22058279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26911. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026911. Epub 2011 Oct 26.

Association of new loci identified in European genome-wide association studies
with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in the Japanese.

Ohshige T(1), Iwata M, Omori S, Tanaka Y, Hirose H, Kaku K, Maegawa H, Watada H, 
Kashiwagi A, Kawamori R, Tobe K, Kadowaki T, Nakamura Y, Maeda S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Endocrinology and Metabolism, RIKEN Center for Genomic
Medicine, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Several novel susceptibility loci for type 2 diabetes have been
identified through genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for type 2 diabetes or 
quantitative traits related to glucose metabolism in European populations. To
investigate the association of the 13 new European GWAS-derived susceptibility
loci with type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population, we conducted a replication 
study using 3 independent Japanese case-control studies.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We examined the association of single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) within 13 loci (MTNR1B, GCK, IRS1, PROX1, BCL11A, ZBED3,
KLF14, TP53INP1, KCNQ1, CENTD2, HMGA2, ZFAND6 and PRC1) with type 2 diabetes
using 4,964 participants (2,839 cases and 2,125 controls) from 3 independent
Japanese samples. The association of each SNP with type 2 diabetes was analyzed
by logistic regression analysis. Further, we performed combined meta-analyses for
the 3 studies and previously performed Japanese GWAS data (4,470 cases vs. 3,071 
controls). The meta-analysis revealed that rs2943641 in the IRS1 locus was
significantly associated with type 2 diabetes, (P = 0.0034, OR = 1.15 95%
confidence interval; 1.05-1.26) and 3 SNPs, rs10930963 in the MTNR1B locus,
rs972283 in the KLF14 locus, and rs231362 in the KCNQ1 locus, had nominal
association with type 2 diabetes in the present Japanese samples (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that IRS1 locus may be common locus for type 
2 diabetes across different ethnicities.

PMCID: PMC3202571
PMID: 22046406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2011 Nov;28(8):708-17. doi: 10.3109/08880018.2011.616573.

Influences of genetic variation on fetal hemoglobin.

He Y(1), Lin W, Luo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.

Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) plays a dominant role in ameliorating morbidity and
mortality of hemoglobinopathies. The authors performed a replicated study
following the genome-wide association study (GWAS) guidelines to identify the
genetic mechanics that influence HbF. The authors recruited and phenotyped 312
unrelated ß-thalassemia subjects. Single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis
was performed by using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)/restriction enzymes. Four 
independent regions of interest were identified: HBS1L-MYB intergenic region,
BCL11A locus, ß-globin gene cluster, and the CSNK2A1 gene. There were 10 SNPs
associated with HbF levels. In addition, haplotypes of HBS1L-MYB and BCL11A were 
identified and showed association with HbF production. Three independent regions,
including HBS1L-MYB intergenic region, BCL11A locus, and ß-globin gene cluster,
were associated with HbF levels. This study can significantly improve the GWAS
findings in Chinese cohorts and is useful for further research in the field of
common predictors of the erythropoiesis.

PMID: 22023465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Blood. 2011 Dec 1;118(23):6200-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-363101. Epub 2011
Oct 18.

Distinct Ldb1/NLI complexes orchestrate <U+03B3>-globin repression and reactivation
through ETO2 in human adult erythroid cells.

Kiefer CM(1), Lee J, Hou C, Dale RK, Lee YT, Meier ER, Miller JL, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The Ldb1/GATA-1/TAL1/LMO2 complex mediates long-range interaction between the
ß-globin locus control region (LCR) and gene in adult mouse erythroid cells, but 
whether this complex mediates chromatin interactions at other developmental
stages or in human cells is unknown. We investigated NLI (Ldb1 homolog) complex
occupancy and chromatin conformation of the ß-globin locus in human erythroid
cells. In addition to the LCR, we found robust NLI complex occupancy at a site
downstream of the (A)<U+03B3>-globin gene within sequences of BGL3, an intergenic RNA
transcript. In cells primarily transcribing ß-globin, BGL3 is not transcribed and
BGL3 sequences are occupied by NLI core complex members, together with
corepressor ETO2 and by <U+03B3>-globin repressor BCL11A. The LCR and ß-globin gene
establish proximity in these cells. In contrast, when <U+03B3>-globin transcription is
reactivated in these cells, ETO2 participation in the NLI complex at BGL3 is
diminished, as is BCL11A occupancy, and both BGL3 and <U+03B3>-globin are transcribed.
In these cells, proximity between the BGL3/<U+03B3>-globin region and the LCR is
established. We conclude that alternative NLI complexes mediate <U+03B3>-globin
transcription or silencing through long-range LCR interactions involving an
intergenic site of noncoding RNA transcription and that ETO2 is critical to this 
process.

PMCID: PMC3234672
PMID: 22010104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Science. 2011 Nov 18;334(6058):993-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1211053. Epub 2011 Oct
13.

Correction of sickle cell disease in adult mice by interference with fetal
hemoglobin silencing.

Xu J(1), Peng C, Sankaran VG, Shao Z, Esrick EB, Chong BG, Ippolito GC, Fujiwara 
Y, Ebert BL, Tucker PW, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston and Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA 02115, USA.

Persistence of human fetal hemoglobin (HbF, a(2)<U+03B3>(2)) in adults lessens the
severity of sickle cell disease (SCD) and the ß-thalassemias. Here, we show that 
the repressor BCL11A is required in vivo for silencing of <U+03B3>-globin expression in 
adult animals, yet dispensable for red cell production. BCL11A serves as a
barrier to HbF reactivation by known HbF inducing agents. In a proof-of-principle
test of BCL11A as a potential therapeutic target, we demonstrate that
inactivation of BCL11A in SCD transgenic mice corrects the hematologic and
pathologic defects associated with SCD through high-level pancellular HbF
induction. Thus, interference with HbF silencing by manipulation of a single
target protein is sufficient to reverse SCD.

PMCID: PMC3746545
PMID: 21998251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Cell Cycle. 2011 Oct 1;10(19):3327-36. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.19.17619. Epub 2011 Oct
1.

Global mitotic phosphorylation of C2H2 zinc finger protein linker peptides.

Rizkallah R(1), Alexander KE, Hurt MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, 
USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Dec 1;10(23):3994.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Nov 15;10(22):3821-2.

Cessation of transcriptional activity is a hallmark of cell division. Many
biochemical pathways have been shown and proposed over the past few decades to
explain the silence of this phase. In particular, many individual transcription
factors have been shown to be inactivated by phosphorylation. In this report, we 
show the simultaneous phosphorylation and mitotic redistribution of a whole class
of modified transcription factors. C(2)H(2) zinc finger proteins (ZFPs) represent
the largest group of gene expression regulators in the human genome. Despite
their diversity, C(2)H(2) ZFPs display striking conservation of small linker
peptides joining their adjacent zinc finger modules. These linkers are critical
for DNA binding activity. It has been proposed that conserved phosphorylation of 
these linker peptides could be a common mechanism for the inactivation of the DNA
binding activity of C(2)H(2) ZFPs, during mitosis. Using a novel antibody, raised
against the phosphorylated form of the most conserved linker peptide sequence, we
are able to visualize the massive and simultaneous mitotic phosphorylation of
hundreds of these proteins. We show that this wave of phosphorylation is tightly 
synchronized, starting in mid-prophase right after DNA condensation and before
the breakdown of the nuclear envelope. This global phosphorylation is completely 
reversed in telophase. In addition, the exclusion of the phospho-linker signal
from condensed DNA clearly demonstrates a common mechanism for the mitotic
inactivation of C(2)H(2) ZFPs.

© 2011 Landes Bioscience

PMCID: PMC3233627
PMID: 21941085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jan;40(1):102-15. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr637. Epub 2011 Sep 
12.

Epigenetic regulation by RARa maintains ligand-independent transcriptional
activity.

Laursen KB(1), Wong PM, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Department of Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, NY 10065, USA.

Retinoic acid receptors (RARs) a, ß and <U+03B3> are key regulators of embryonic
development. Hematopoietic differentiation is regulated by RARa, and several
types of leukemia show aberrant RARa activity. Through microarray expression
analysis, we identified transcripts differentially expressed between F9 wild-type
(Wt) and RARa knockout cells cultured in the absence or presence of the
RAR-specific ligand all trans retinoic acid (RA). We validated the decreased
Mest, Tex13, Gab1, Bcl11a, Tcfap2a and HMGcs1 transcript levels, and increased
Slc38a4, Stmn2, RpL39l, Ref2L, Mobp and Rlf1 transcript levels in the RARa
knockout cells. The decreased Mest and Tex13 transcript levels were associated
with increased promoter CpG-island methylation and increased repressive histone
modifications (H3K9me3) in RARa knockout cells. Increased Slc38a4 and Stmn2
transcript levels were associated with decreased promoter CpG-island methylation 
and increased permissive histone modifications (H3K9/K14ac, H3K4me3) in RARa
knockout cells. We demonstrated specific association of RARa and RXRa with the
Mest promoter. Importantly, stable expression of a dominant negative, oncogenic
PML-RARa fusion protein in F9 Wt cells recapitulated the decreased Mest
transcript levels observed in RARa knockout cells. We propose that RARa plays an 
important role in cellular memory and imprinting by regulating the CpG
methylation status of specific promoter regions.

PMCID: PMC3245912
PMID: 21911359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. N Engl J Med. 2011 Sep 1;365(9):807-14. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1103070.

A functional element necessary for fetal hemoglobin silencing.

Sankaran VG(1), Xu J, Byron R, Greisman HA, Fisher C, Weatherall DJ, Sabath DE,
Groudine M, Orkin SH, Premawardhena A, Bender MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
sankaran@broadinstitute.org

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Sep 1;365(9):852-4.

BACKGROUND: An improved understanding of the regulation of the fetal hemoglobin
genes holds promise for the development of targeted therapeutic approaches for
fetal hemoglobin induction in the ß-hemoglobinopathies. Although recent studies
have uncovered trans-acting factors necessary for this regulation, limited
insight has been gained into the cis-regulatory elements involved.
METHODS: We identified three families with unusual patterns of hemoglobin
expression, suggestive of deletions in the locus of the ß-globin gene (ß-globin
locus). We performed array comparative genomic hybridization to map these
deletions and confirmed breakpoints by means of polymerase-chain-reaction assays 
and DNA sequencing. We compared these deletions, along with previously mapped
deletions, and studied the trans-acting factors binding to these sites in the
ß-globin locus by using chromatin immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: We found a new (dß)(0)-thalassemia deletion and a rare hereditary
persistence of fetal hemoglobin deletion with identical downstream breakpoints.
Comparison of the two deletions resulted in the identification of a small
intergenic region required for <U+03B3>-globin (fetal hemoglobin) gene silencing. We
mapped a Kurdish ß(0)-thalassemia deletion, which retains the required intergenic
region, deletes other surrounding sequences, and maintains fetal hemoglobin
silencing. By comparing these deletions and other previously mapped deletions, we
elucidated a 3.5-kb intergenic region near the 5' end of the d-globin gene that
is necessary for <U+03B3>-globin silencing. We found that a critical fetal hemoglobin
silencing factor, BCL11A, and its partners bind within this region in the
chromatin of adult erythroid cells.
CONCLUSIONS: By studying three families with unusual deletions in the ß-globin
locus, we identified an intergenic region near the d-globin gene that is
necessary for fetal hemoglobin silencing. (Funded by the National Institutes of
Health and others.).

PMCID: PMC3174767
PMID: 21879898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Blood. 2011 Nov 3;118(18):4985-91. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-364190. Epub 2011
Aug 29.

Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and pharmacogenetics of hydroxyurea treatment
for children with sickle cell anemia.

Ware RE(1), Despotovic JM, Mortier NA, Flanagan JM, He J, Smeltzer MP, Kimble AC,
Aygun B, Wu S, Howard T, Sparreboom A.

Author information: 
(1)International Hematology Center of Excellence, Department of Pediatrics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston TX, USA. reware@bcm.edu

Hydroxyurea therapy has proven laboratory and clinical efficacies for children
with sickle cell anemia (SCA). When administered at maximum tolerated dose (MTD),
hydroxyurea increases fetal hemoglobin (HbF) to levels ranging from 10% to 40%.
However, interpatient variability of percentage of HbF (%HbF) response is high,
MTD itself is variable, and accurate predictors of hydroxyurea responses do not
currently exist. HUSTLE (NCT00305175) was designed to provide first-dose
pharmacokinetics (PK) data for children with SCA initiating hydroxyurea therapy, 
to investigate pharmacodynamics (PD) parameters, including HbF response and MTD
after standardized dose escalation, and to evaluate pharmacogenetics influences
on PK and PD parameters. For 87 children with first-dose PK studies, substantial 
interpatient variability was observed, plus a novel oral absorption phenotype
(rapid or slow) that influenced serum hydroxyurea levels and total hydroxyurea
exposure. PD responses in 174 subjects were robust and similar to previous
cohorts; %HbF at MTD was best predicted by 5 variables, including baseline %HbF, 
whereas MTD was best predicted by 5 variables, including serum creatinine.
Pharmacogenetics analysis showed single nucleotide polymorphisms influencing
baseline %HbF, including 5 within BCL11A, but none influencing MTD %HbF or dose. 
Accurate prediction of hydroxyurea treatment responses for SCA remains a worthy
but elusive goal.

PMCID: PMC3208303
PMID: 21876119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mod Pathol. 2011 Dec;24(12):1586-97. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.116. Epub 2011
Aug 5.

Gray zone lymphoma: chromosomal aberrations with immunophenotypic and clinical
correlations.

Eberle FC(1), Salaverria I, Steidl C, Summers TA Jr, Pittaluga S, Neriah SB,
Rodriguez-Canales J, Xi L, Ylaya K, Liewehr D, Dunleavy K, Wilson WH, Hewitt SM, 
Raffeld M, Gascoyne RD, Siebert R, Jaffe ES.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

The term gray zone lymphoma has been applied to tumors that demonstrate
transitional morphologic and immunophenotypic features between classical
Hodgkin's lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, especially primary
mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma. Histopathological and genetic data are limited
for these unusual cases. We analyzed cases of gray zone lymphoma (n=27),
mediastinal composite lymphoma (n=3) and mediastinal synchronous/metachronous
lymphoma (n=3) by morphology, immunophenotyping and fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Mediastinal involvement was assured in 24/33 patients (73%). The
patient cohort showed a male predominance (M:F ratio; 20:13) and a median age of 
32 years (range, 16-91 years). Patients with mediastinal disease were
significantly younger (median age: 29.5 years) than patients presenting without
evident mediastinal disease (median age: 55 years). Gains including
amplifications in 2p16.1 (REL/BCL11A locus) were observed in 33% of all patients,
whereas alterations affecting the JAK2/PDL2 locus in 9p24.1 were present in 55%. 
Further studies revealed rearrangement of the CIITA locus at 16p13.13 in 8/30
cases (27%) and 7/26 cases (27%) demonstrated gains of 8q24 (MYC). Genetic
aberrations involving 2p16.1, 9p24.1 and 8q24 showed a higher incidence in cases 
with evident mediastinal involvement. However, this was not statistically
significant when compared with cases without known mediastinal involvement.
Twelve of the 27 cases of gray zone lymphoma were morphologically more
reminiscent of classical Hodgkin's lymphoma, whereas the other gray zone
lymphomas presented with morphological features more closely resembling large
B-cell lymphoma. Both morphological groups of gray zone lymphoma were similarly
positive for Cyclin E (75 and 93%) and p63 (50 and 53%, respectively) expression.
These findings further support a close relationship between gray zone lymphoma,
classical Hodgkin's lymphoma and primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma, and
suggest that some cases of gray zone lymphoma without mediastinal disease may
share similar genetic alterations.

PMID: 21822207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Haematologica. 2011 Nov;96(11):1712-4. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.046748. Epub
2011 Jul 26.

Variants in genetic modifiers of ß-thalassemia can help to predict the major or
intermedia type of the disease.

Badens C(1), Joly P, Agouti I, Thuret I, Gonnet K, Fattoum S, Francina A, Simeoni
MC, Loundou A, Pissard S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital dEnfants de la Timone,
Marseille, France. catherine.badens@univmed.fr

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2011 Nov;96(11):1573-5.

A cohort of 106 patients included in the French National Registry for Thalassemia
were genotyped for 5 genetic modifiers of severity: i) ß-thalassemia mutations;
(ii) the XmnI SNP; (iii) the -3.7 kb a-thal deletion; (iv) the tag-SNP rs
11886868 in BCL11A exon 2; and (v) the tag-SNP rs9399137 in the HBSB1L-cMYB
inter-region. Multivariate analysis was performed to study the risk of
thalassemia Intermedia phenotype associated with the different combinations of
alleles. The presence or absence of the favorable alleles could accurately
predict the type of thalassemia in 83.2% of the cases. The percentage of correct 
predictions made from the ß-thalassemia mutations and the XmnI SNP alone were
significantly improved by the adjustment with the 3 other modifiers; from 73.6%
to 83.2% (P<0.001). In this study, we showed that predictions based on genetic
modifiers can foresee the Major or Intermedia type of ß-thalassemia, even in
cohorts of patients with various ß-globin genotypes.

PMCID: PMC3208691
PMID: 21791466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Pediatr Rep. 2011 Jun 16;3(2):e17. doi: 10.4081/pr.2011.e17.

Recent advances in ß-thalassemias.

Cao A(1), Moi P, Galanello R.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical and Biotechnology Department, University of Cagliari, Cagliari,
Italy.

ß-thalassemias are heterogeneous hereditary anemias characterized by a reduced
output of ß-globin chains. The disease is most frequent in the temperate regions 
of the world, where it represents an important health problem. In the last
decades, several programs, aimed at controlling the birth rate of thalassemia
newborns by screening and prenatal diagnosis of populations with high risk of
ß-thalassemia, have been successful accomplished. Bone marrow transplantation has
offered a definitive cure for the fraction of patients with available donors. In 
the same time, steady improvements were made in the traditional clinical
management of ß-thalassemia patients. The introduction of the oral iron chelators
deferiprone that preferentially chelates hearth iron and the development of novel
NMR diagnostic methods has led to reduced morbility, increased survival and
improved quality of life. More recently, major advances have being made in the
discovery of critical modifier genes, such as Myb and especially BCL11A (B cell
lymphoma 11A), a master regulator of HbF (fetal hemoglobin) and hemoglobin
switching. Polimorphysms of BCL11A, Myb and <U+03B3>-globin genes account for most of
the variability in the clinical phenotypes in ß-thalassemia and sickle cell
anemia patients. Finally, the year 2010 has brought in the first successful
experiment of gene therapy in a ß-thalassemia patient, opening up the perspective
of a generalized cure for all ß- thalassemia patients.

PMCID: PMC3133499
PMID: 21772954  [PubMed]


175. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Mar;39(3):2447-54. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-0995-8. Epub 2011
Jun 5.

Replication study of novel risk variants in six genes with type 2 diabetes and
related quantitative traits in the Han Chinese lean individuals.

Bao XY(1), Peng B, Yang MS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Disorder Genes, Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy,
Chongqing Medical University, PO Box 380, 1 Yi Xue Yuan Road, Chongqing 400016,
People's Republic of China.

To replicating the associations of type 2 diabetes (T2D) and six novel reported
variants in Han Chinese lean individuals of first episode T2D, a total of six
high risk single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the BCL11A, DUSP9, IRS1,
CENTD2, ADRA2A, and CDKAL1 genes were examined. Candidate six SNPs were genotyped
in 761 T2D patients and 433 control subjects, and associations between the six
SNPs and Body Mass Index (BMI), Fasting Plasma Glucose (FPG) and Two Hours Oral
Glucose Tolerance Test (2hOGTT) were also investigated. CDKAL1 provided the
strongest evidence for replication, where rs7754840 was associated with T2D (odds
ratio = 1.54, per copy of the risk C allele, P = 8.10 × 10(-7)). SNP rs5945326 at
DUSP9 showed modest significance (odds ratio = 0.81, per copy of the protective G
allele, P = 0.02). After adjusting the confounders of age, gender and BMI, the
above results remain significant for both rs7754840 (P < 1.0 × 10(-4)) and
rs5945326 (P = 0.043) respectively. After correcting for multiple testing,
however, only the association between T2D and rs7754840 at CDKAL1 (P < 1×10(-4)) 
remains significant. In addition, the risk C allele of CDKAL1 rs7754840 was
significantly associated with increased FPG levels (P = 3.8 × 10(-4)). The
association between genetic variant in CDKAL1 gene was detected in the Han
Chinese lean individuals. The correlation between rs7754840-C allele and
increased FPG levels is consistent with the potential function of CDKAL1 gene in 
pancreatic islets.

PMID: 21643948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Cancer Causes Control. 2011 Jun;22(6):877-83. doi: 10.1007/s10552-011-9760-5.
Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Association study of type 2 diabetes genetic susceptibility variants and risk of 
pancreatic cancer: an analysis of PanScan-I data.

Pierce BL(1), Austin MA, Ahsan H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Studies and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University
of Chicago, IL, 60637, USA. brandonpierce@uchicago.edu

OBJECTIVE: To examine associations between recently identified common type 2
diabetes (T2D) susceptibility genetic variants and pancreatic cancer risk.
METHODS: Using data on individuals of European ancestry from the Cancer Genetic
Markers of Susceptibility PanScan-I study (1,763 pancreatic cancer cases and
1,802 controls), we tested associations for 37 T2D susceptibility variants with
pancreatic cancer risk. Associations with pancreatic cancer were also tested for 
three composite T2D susceptibility measures, incorporating data on all 37
variants, and for ten additional variants related to T2D-related phenotypes,
including fasting glucose and beta-cell function.
RESULTS: Of the 37 T2D risk alleles, two showed nominally significant positive
associations with pancreatic cancer risk (FTO rs8050136 per-allele OR = 1.12; CI:
1.02-1.23; MTNR1B rs1387153 OR = 1.11; CI: 1.00-1.23) and one showed an inverse
association (BCL11A rs243021 OR = 0.88; CI: 0.80-0.97). The composite T2D
susceptibility measures were not associated with pancreatic cancer. The
glucose-raising allele of MADD rs11039149 was associated with increased risk of
pancreatic cancer (OR = 1.14; CI: 1.03-1.27).
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these results do not provide strong evidence that common
variants underling T2D or related phenotypes also affect pancreatic cancer risk; 
however, associations for FTO, MTNR1B, BCL11A, and MADD variants warrant further 
investigation in larger studies. Hypothesis-driven analyses of existing
genome-wide genetic data can be cost-efficient and promising approaches for
investigating genetic susceptibility to complex diseases.

PMID: 21445555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jan;32(1):29-33.

[Preliminary study of gene expression profile associated with risk classification
of childhood patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang JL(1), Chai YH, Ji ZH, Shao XJ, Huang YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Soochow
University, Suzhou 215003, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore genes associated with risk classification of childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) by gene chip technology.
METHODS: Group A and B were both composed of three newly diagnosed ALL cases with
standard risk. After re-evaluation, group B was relegated to high-risk. The
control group was composed of three idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)
patients. The gene expression profiles of group A and B were studied by Illumina 
Human-6 Beadchip. Eighty-two ALL patients were selected as the experimental group
and 21 with normal bone marrow as control group for real-time quantitative RT-PCR
(RQ-PCR).
RESULTS: (1) There were 19 genes expressed differently between group B and A,
including 14 up-regulated as ABCC4 and BCL11A, 5 down-regulated genes as TOP2A.
(2) ABCC4 and BCL11A were validated by RQ-PCR and their expression level was
higher in the high risk group than in the standard risk group (P < 0.05). The
gene expression level in the group A and B was higher than that in the normal
control group (P < 0.01). TOP2A was also validated by RQ-PCR and its expression
level in the high risk group was lower than that in the standard risk group (P < 
0.05). The gene expression level in the groups A and B was lower than that in the
normal control group and the difference was statistically significance (P <
0.01). (3) There was a significant difference in the expression level of ABCC4
between the remission and unremission patients (P < 0.05). There was no
significant difference in the expression level of BCL11A between different
clinical indicators (P > 0.05). There was significant difference in the
expression level of TOP2A between remission and prednisone good responder groups 
(P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Fourteen genes studied were involved in the pathogenesis and drug
resistance mechanism in childhood ALL patients. Investigation of gene expression 
profile will be helpful for predicting drug resistance, prognosis, early
intervention and target therapy in childhood ALL.

PMID: 21429398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Blood. 2011 May 5;117(18):4935-45. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-11-317081. Epub 2011
Mar 8.

A 3-bp deletion in the HBS1L-MYB intergenic region on chromosome 6q23 is
associated with HbF expression.

Farrell JJ(1), Sherva RM, Chen ZY, Luo HY, Chu BF, Ha SY, Li CK, Lee AC, Li RC,
Li CK, Yuen HL, So JC, Ma ES, Chan LC, Chan V, Sebastiani P, Farrer LA, Baldwin
CT, Steinberg MH, Chui DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.

Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) is regulated as a multigenic trait. By genome-wide
association study, we confirmed that HBS1L-MYB intergenic polymorphisms (HMIP)
and BCL11A polymorphisms are highly associated with HbF in Chinese ß-thalassemia 
heterozygotes. In this population, the variance in HbF resulting from the HMIP is
13.5%; that resulting from the BCL11A polymorphism is 6.4%. To identify the
functional variant in HMIP, we used 1000 Genomes Project data, single nucleotide 
polymorphism imputation, comparisons of association results across populations,
potential transcription factor binding sites, and analysis of phylogenetic
conservation. Based on these studies, a hitherto unreported association between
HbF expression and a 3-bp deletion, between 135 460 326 and 135 460 328 bp on
chromosome 6q23 was found. This 3-bp deletion is in complete linkage
disequilibrium with rs9399137, which is the single nucleotide polymorphism in
HMIP most significantly associated with HbF among Chinese, Europeans, and
Africans. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed erythropoiesis-related
transcription factors binding to this region in K562 cells. Based on transient
expression of a luciferase reporter plasmid, the DNA fragment encompassing the
3-bp deletion polymorphism has enhancer-like activity that is further augmented
by the introduction of the 3-bp deletion. This 3-bp deletion polymorphism is
probably the most significant functional motif accounting for HMIP modulation of 
HbF in all 3 populations.

PMCID: PMC3100700
PMID: 21385855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Blood. 2011 Apr 28;117(17):4600-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-325357. Epub 2011
Mar 4.

A transient definitive erythroid lineage with unique regulation of the ß-globin
locus in the mammalian embryo.

McGrath KE(1), Frame JM, Fromm GJ, Koniski AD, Kingsley PD, Little J, Bulger M,
Palis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Pediatric Biomedical Research, University
of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA.

A transient erythromyeloid wave of definitive hematopoietic progenitors
(erythroid/myeloid progenitors [EMPs]) emerges in the yolk sac beginning at
embryonic day 8.25 (E8.25) and colonizes the liver by E10.5, before
adult-repopulating hematopoietic stem cells. At E11.5, we observe all
maturational stages of erythroid precursors in the liver and the first definitive
erythrocytes in the circulation. These early fetal liver erythroblasts express
predominantly adult ß-globins and the definitive erythroid-specific
transcriptional modifiers c-myb, Sox6, and Bcl11A. Surprisingly, they also
express low levels of "embryonic" ßH1-, but not ey-, globin transcripts.
Consistent with these results, RNA polymerase and highly modified histones are
found associated with ßH1- and adult globin, but not ey-globin, genes. E11.5
definitive proerythroblasts from mice transgenic for the human ß-globin locus,
like human fetal erythroblasts, express predominately human <U+03B3>-, low ß-, and no
e-globin transcripts. Significantly, E9.5 yolk sac-derived EMPs cultured in vitro
have similar murine and human transgenic globin expression patterns. Later liver 
proerythroblasts express low levels of <U+03B3>-globin, while adult marrow
proerythroblasts express only ß-globin transcripts. We conclude that yolk
sac-derived EMPs, the first of 2 origins of definitive erythropoiesis, express a 
unique pattern of globin genes as they generate the first definitive erythrocytes
in the liver of the mammalian embryo.

PMCID: PMC3099576
PMID: 21378272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2011 Mar;135(3):394-8. doi: 10.1043/2009-0463-RSR.1.

Primary mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell lymphoma: a short review with brief
discussion of mediastinal gray zone lymphoma.

Hutchinson CB(1), Wang E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA. blake.hutchison@duke.edu

Primary mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell lymphoma (PMBCL) is a subtype of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). It commonly presents as a bulky lesion in 
the anterior-superior mediastinum with symptoms related to local invasion or
compression. Microscopic examination typically shows infiltration of medium-large
cells surrounded by collagen fibrosis. The neoplastic cells express B-cell
markers, and CD30 often shows heterogeneous staining. Comparative genomic
hybridization has identified gains in loci of 9p24 and 2p15 as well as Xp11.4-21 
and Xq24-26. Amplification of REL and BCL11A at 2p as well as elevated expression
of JAK2, PDL1, and PDL2 at 9p has been demonstrated. Nodular sclerosis classic
Hodgkin lymphoma needs to be differentiated from PMBCL and cases with overlapped 
features have been described as mediastinal gray zone lymphoma. Primary
mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell lymphoma carries a favorable prognosis in
comparison to conventional DLBCL.

PMID: 21366467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Hum Genet. 2011 Apr;56(4):316-23. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.12. Epub 2011 Feb 17.

Genome-wide association study identifies genetic variants influencing F-cell
levels in sickle-cell patients.

Bhatnagar P(1), Purvis S, Barron-Casella E, DeBaun MR, Casella JF, Arking DE,
Keefer JR.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, School of Medicine, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) level has emerged as an important prognostic factor in
sickle-cell disease (SCD) and can be measured by the proportion of HbF-containing
erythrocytes (F-cells). Recently, BCL11A (zinc-finger protein) was identified as 
a regulator of HbF, and the strongest association signals were observed either
directly for rs766432 or for correlated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).
To identify additional independently associated genetic variants, we performed a 
genome-wide association study (GWAS) on the proportion of F-cells in individuals 
of African ancestry with SCD from the Silent Infarct Transfusion (SIT) Trial
cohort. Our study not only confirms the association of rs766432 (P-value <3.32 × 
10(-13)), but also identifies an independent novel intronic SNP, rs7606173,
associated with F-cells (P-value <1.81 × 10(-15)). The F-cell variances explained
independently by these two SNPs are ~13% (rs7606173) and ~11% (rs766432),
whereas, together they explain ~16%. Additionally, in men, we identify a novel
locus on chromosome 17, glucagon-like peptide-2 receptor (GLP2R), associated with
F-cell regulation (rs12103880; P-value <3.41 × 10(-8)). GLP2R encodes a G
protein-coupled receptor and involved in proliferative and anti-apoptotic
cellular responses. These findings highlight the importance of denser genetic
screens and suggest further exploration of the BCL11A and GLP2R loci to gain
additional insight into HbF/F-cell regulation.

PMID: 21326311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Hum Genomics. 2011 Jan;5(2):79-89.

Ancestry-informative markers on chromosomes 2, 8 and 15 are associated with
insulin-related traits in a racially diverse sample of children.

Klimentidis YC(1), Divers J, Casazza K, Beasley TM, Allison DB, Fernandez JR.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Statistical Genetics, Department of Biostatistics, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. yann@uab.edu

Type 2 diabetes represents an increasing health burden. Its prevalence is rising 
among younger age groups and differs among racial/ethnic groups. Little is known 
about its genetic basis, including whether there is a genetic basis for
racial/ethnic disparities. We examined a multi-ethnic sample of 253 healthy
children to evaluate associations between insulin-related phenotypes and 142
ancestry-informative markers (AIMs), while adjusting for sex, age, Tanner stage, 
genetic admixture, total body fat, height and socio-economic status. We also
evaluated the effect of measurement errors in the estimation of the individual
ancestry proportions on the regression results. We found that European genetic
admixture is positively associated with insulin sensitivity (S I ), and
negatively associated with the acute insulin response to glucose, fasting insulin
levels and the homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance. Our analysis
revealed associations between individual AIMs on chromosomes 2, 8 and 15 and
these phenotypes. Most notably, marker rs3287 at chromosome 2p21 was found to be 
associated with S I ( p = 5.8 × 10(-5)). This marker may be in admixture linkage 
disequilibrium with nearby loci ( THADA and BCL11A ) that previously have been
reported to be associated with diabetes and diabetes-related phenotypes in
several genome-wide association and linkage studies. Our results provide further 
evidence that variation in the 2p21 region containing THADA and BCL11A is
associated with type 2 diabetes. Importantly, we have implicated this region in
the early development of diabetes-related phenotypes, and in the genetic
aetiology of population differences in these phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3146800
PMID: 21296741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Haematologica. 2011 May;96(5):767-70. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.037333. Epub
2011 Jan 27.

Compound heterozygosity for KLF1 mutations associated with remarkable increase of
fetal hemoglobin and red cell protoporphyrin.

Satta S(1), Perseu L, Moi P, Asunis I, Cabriolu A, Maccioni L, Demartis FR,
Manunza L, Cao A, Galanello R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie-Università di Cagliari,
Ospedale Regionale Microcitemie ASL8, Cagliari, Italy.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2011 May;96(5):635-8.

The persistence of high fetal hemoglobin level in adults may ameliorate the
clinical phenotype of beta-thalassemia and sickle cell anemia. Several genetic
variants responsible for hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin, linked and
not linked to the beta globin gene cluster, have been identified in patients and 
in normal individuals. Monoallelic loss of KLF1, a gene with a key role in
erythropoiesis, has been recently reported to be responsible for persistence of
high levels of fetal hemoglobin. In a Sardinian family, high levels of HbF
(22.1-30.9%) were present only in compound heterozygotes for the S270X nonsense
and K332Q missense mutations, while the isolated S270X nonsense
(haploinsufficiency) or K332Q missense mutation were associated with normal HbF
levels (<1.5%). Functionally, the K332Q Klf1 mutation impairs binding to the
BCl11A gene and activation of the <U+03B3>- and ß-globin promoters. Moreover, we report 
for the first time the association of KLF1 mutations with very high levels of
zinc protoporphyrin.

PMCID: PMC3084925
PMID: 21273267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Diabetologia. 2011 May;54(5):1052-6. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2054-3. Epub 2011
Jan 26.

Type 2 diabetes risk allele near CENTD2 is associated with decreased
glucose-stimulated insulin release.

Nielsen T(1), Sparsø T, Grarup N, Jørgensen T, Pisinger C, Witte DR; Diabetes
Genetics Replication and Meta-analysis (DIAGRAM) Consortium, Hansen T, Pedersen
O.

Author information: 
(1)Marie Krogh Center for Metabolic Research, Section of Metabolic Genetics,
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 1, 2100 
Copenhagen, Denmark. trine.nielsen@sund.ku.dk

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2011 May 54(5):1266.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: By combining multiple genome-wide association (GWA) studies and 
comprehensive replication efforts, 12 novel type 2 diabetes associated loci have 
recently been discovered. Here we evaluate the effect of lead variants of these
loci on estimates of insulin release and insulin resistance derived from an oral 
glucose tolerance test.
METHODS: We examined 12 lead variants in or near HMGA2, CENTD2 (also known as
ARAP1), KLF14, PRC1, TP53INP1, ZBED3, ZFAND6, CHCHD9, DUSP9, KCNQ1, BCL11A and
HNF1A in 5,722 middle-aged people from the population-based Inter99 sample.
RESULTS: Carriers of the major diabetogenic allele of rs1552224 in CENTD2 had
increased 30-min plasma glucose values (2.0%, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>2<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-5)) as well as 4.2%
reduced insulin release 30 min after an oral glucose load (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). Risk
allele carriers also had decreased BIGTT-acute insulin release (AIR), which is a 
surrogate measure of insulin release where sex, BMI, plasma glucose and serum
insulin are integrated (5.3%, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>8<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-7)). In addition, a decreased corrected
insulin response (CIR; 9.9%, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>3<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8)) was observed. For rs5945326 near
DUSP9 on the X-chromosome we stratified according to sex. Male carriers of the
risk allele showed nominally decreased BIGTT-AIR (2.6%, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01). No
associations with intermediate metabolic traits were found in women. For the
remaining ten lead variants no consistent associations were demonstrated.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Of the lead variants from 12 novel type 2 diabetes
associated loci, CENTD2 significantly associated with increased plasma glucose
values and decreased glucose-stimulated insulin release, suggesting that the
diabetogenic effect of this locus is mediated through an impaired pancreatic beta
cell function.

PMID: 21267535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Cell. 2011 Jan 21;41(2):232-42. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.01.007.

Activation-induced cytidine deaminase induces reproducible DNA breaks at many
non-Ig Loci in activated B cells.

Staszewski O(1), Baker RE, Ucher AJ, Martier R, Stavnezer J, Guikema JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655-0122, USA.

After immunization or infection, activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID)
initiates diversification of immunoglobulin (Ig) genes in B cells, introducing
mutations within the antigen-binding V regions (somatic hypermutation, SHM) and
double-strand DNA breaks (DSBs) into switch (S) regions, leading to antibody
class switch recombination (CSR). We asked if, during B cell activation, AID also
induces DNA breaks at genes other than IgH genes. Using a nonbiased genome-wide
approach, we have identified hundreds of reproducible, AID-dependent DSBs in
mouse splenic B cells shortly after induction of CSR in culture. Most
interestingly, AID induces DSBs at sites syntenic with sites of translocations,
deletions, and amplifications found in human B cell lymphomas, including within
the oncogene B cell lymphoma11a (bcl11a)/evi9. Unlike AID-induced DSBs in Ig
genes, genome-wide AID-dependent DSBs are not restricted to transcribed regions
and frequently occur within repeated sequence elements, including CA repeats,
non-CA tandem repeats, and SINEs.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3044441
PMID: 21255732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. JAMA. 2011 Jan 19;305(3):239-40, 242. doi: 10.1001/jama.2010.1929.

Advances reshaping sickle cell therapy.

Friedrich MJ.

PMID: 21245175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Rev Bras Hematol Hemoter. 2011;33(3):231-6. doi: 10.5581/1516-8484.20110059.

What influences Hb fetal production in adulthood?

Carrocini GC(1), Zamaro PJ, Bonini-Domingos CR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hemoglobin and Genetics of Hematologic Diseases, Universidade
Estadual Paulista - UNESP/IBILCE, São José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil.

Human hemoglobin genes are located in a and ß globin gene clusters in chromosomes
16 and 11, respectively. Different types of hemoglobin are synthesized according 
to the stage of development with fetal hemoglobin (a(2)<U+03B3>(2)) (Hb F) being the
main hemoglobin in the fetal period. After birth, there is a reduction (to about 
1%) in Hb F levels and adult hemoglobin, Hb A (2a(2)ß(2)), increases to more than
96% of total hemoglobin. However, some genetic conditions whether linked to the
ß-globin gene cluster or not are associated with high Hb F levels in adults.
Among those linked to ß-globin are hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin,
delta-beta thalassemia (dß-Thalassemia) and the XmnI polymorphism (-158 C = T).
Other polymorphisms not related to ß-globin gene cluster are known to influence
the <U+03B3>-globin gene expression in adulthood. The most relevant polymorphisms that
increase concentrations of Hb F are the HMIP locus on chromosome 6, the BCL11A
locus on chromosome 2, the Xp22.2 region of the X chromosome and the 8q region on
chromosome 8. Findings from our research group studying genetic factors involved 
in <U+03B3>-globin gene regulation in adults without anemia in the northwestern region
of São Paulo State showed that high Hb F levels are influenced by the presence of
hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin mutations and the XmnI polymorphism,
suggesting that both genetic alterations characterize the molecular basis of the 
evaluated population.

PMCID: PMC3415736
PMID: 23049301  [PubMed]


188. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Feb;31(4):876-83. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00725-10. Epub 2010 Dec
20.

Human globin knock-in mice complete fetal-to-adult hemoglobin switching in
postnatal development.

McConnell SC(1), Huo Y, Liu S, Ryan TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Elevated levels of fetal <U+03B3>-globin can cure disorders caused by mutations in the
adult ß-globin gene. This clinical finding has motivated studies to improve our
understanding of hemoglobin switching. Unlike humans, mice do not express a
distinct fetal globin. Transgenic mice that contain the human ß-globin locus
complete their fetal-to-adult hemoglobin switch prior to birth, with human
<U+03B3>-globin predominantly restricted to primitive erythroid cells. We established
humanized (100% human hemoglobin) knock-in mice that demonstrate a distinct fetal
hemoglobin (HbF) stage, where <U+03B3>-globin is the dominant globin chain produced
during mid- to late gestation. Human <U+03B3>- and ß-globin gene competition is evident 
around the time of birth, and <U+03B3>-globin chain production diminishes in postnatal
life, with transient production of HbF reticulocytes. Following completion of the
<U+03B3>- to-ß-globin switch, adult erythroid cells synthesize low levels of HbF. We
conclude that the knock-in globin genes are expressed in a pattern strikingly
similar to that in human development, most notably with postnatal resolution of
the fetal-to-adult hemoglobin switch. Our findings are consistent with the
importance of BCL11A in hemoglobin switching, since removal of intergenic binding
sites for BCL11A results in human <U+03B3>-globin expression in mouse definitive
erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC3028651
PMID: 21173165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2011 Feb;23(1):1-8. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e3283420fd0.

Update on fetal hemoglobin gene regulation in hemoglobinopathies.

Bauer DE(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Boston and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The developmental switch from fetal to adult hemoglobin has
long fascinated biologists and attracted hematologists given its importance for
patients with hemoglobin disorders. New discoveries have reinvigorated the field 
of globin gene regulation. These results hold promise for improved treatment of
the major hemoglobinopathies.
RECENT FINDINGS: Both genome-wide association studies and traditional linkage
studies have identified several genetic loci involved in silencing fetal
hemoglobin. BCL11A is a potent silencer of fetal hemoglobin in both mouse and
humans. It controls the beta-globin gene cluster in concert with other factors.
KLF1, a vital erythroid transcription factor, activates BCL11A and assists in
coordinating the switch from fetal to adult hemoglobin. A regulatory network of
cell-intrinsic and cell-extrinsic factors maintains the epigenetic homeostasis of
the beta-globin cluster and accounts for the precise lineage-specific and
developmental stage-specific regulation of the globin genes.
SUMMARY: With an improved understanding of pathways involved in the switch from
fetal to adult hemoglobin, new targets have emerged for the treatment of the
common hemoglobin disorders, sickle cell anemia and beta-thalassemia.

PMCID: PMC3092400
PMID: 21157349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Blood. 2011 Mar 10;117(10):2817-26. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-300723. Epub 2010 
Dec 14.

Therapeutic levels of fetal hemoglobin in erythroid progeny of ß-thalassemic
CD34+ cells after lentiviral vector-mediated gene transfer.

Wilber A(1), Hargrove PW, Kim YS, Riberdy JM, Sankaran VG, Papanikolaou E,
Georgomanoli M, Anagnou NP, Orkin SH, Nienhuis AW, Persons DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine,
Springfield, IL, USA.

ß-Thalassemia major results from severely reduced or absent expression of the
ß-chain of adult hemoglobin (a2ß2;HbA). Increased levels of fetal hemoglobin
(a2<U+03B3>2;HbF), such as occurs with hereditary persistence of HbF, ameliorate the
severity of ß-thalassemia, raising the potential for genetic therapy directed at 
enhancing HbF. We used an in vitro model of human erythropoiesis to assay for
enhanced production of HbF after gene delivery into CD34(+) cells obtained from
mobilized peripheral blood of normal adults or steady-state bone marrow from
patients with ß-thalassemia major. Lentiviral vectors encoding (1) a human
<U+03B3>-globin gene with or without an insulator, (2) a synthetic zinc-finger
transcription factor designed to interact with the <U+03B3>-globin gene promoters, or
(3) a short-hairpin RNA targeting the <U+03B3>-globin gene repressor, BCL11A, were
tested. Erythroid progeny of normal CD34(+) cells demonstrated levels of HbF up
to 21% per vector copy. For ß-thalassemic CD34(+) cells, similar gene transfer
efficiencies achieved HbF production ranging from 45% to 60%, resulting in up to 
a 3-fold increase in the total cellular Hb content. These observations suggest
that both lentiviral-mediated <U+03B3>-globin gene addition and genetic reactivation of 
endogenous <U+03B3>-globin genes have potential to provide therapeutic HbF levels to
patients with ß-globin deficiency.

PMCID: PMC3062294
PMID: 21156846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. N Engl J Med. 2010 Dec 2;363(23):2258-60. doi: 10.1056/NEJMcibr1010767.

Reversing the hemoglobin switch.

Sankaran VG(1), Nathan DG.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Boston, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, USA.

PMID: 21121839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Blood. 2011 Jan 27;117(4):1390-2. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-302703. Epub 2010
Nov 10.

Genetics of fetal hemoglobin in Tanzanian and British patients with sickle cell
anemia.

Makani J(1), Menzel S, Nkya S, Cox SE, Drasar E, Soka D, Komba AN, Mgaya J, Rooks
H, Vasavda N, Fegan G, Newton CR, Farrall M, Thein SL.

Author information: 
(1)Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences, Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania.
jmakani@muhas.ac.tz

Fetal hemoglobin (HbF, a(2)<U+03B3>(2)) is a major contributor to the remarkable
phenotypic heterogeneity of sickle cell anemia (SCA). Genetic variation at 3
principal loci (HBB cluster on chromosome 11p, HBS1L-MYB region on chromosome 6q,
and BCL11A on chromosome 2p) have been shown to influence HbF levels and disease 
severity in ß-thalassemia and SCA. Previous studies in SCA, however, have been
restricted to populations from the African diaspora, which include multiple
genealogies. We have investigated the influence of these 3 loci on HbF levels in 
sickle cell patients from Tanzania and in a small group of African British sickle
patients. All 3 loci have a significant impact on the trait in both patient
groups. The results suggest the presence of HBS1L-MYB variants affecting HbF in
patients who are not tracked well by European-derived markers, such as rs9399137.
Additional loci may be identified through independent genome-wide association
studies in African populations.

PMID: 21068433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Nat Genet. 2010 Dec;42(12):1049-51. doi: 10.1038/ng.707. Epub 2010 Nov 7.

Fine-mapping at three loci known to affect fetal hemoglobin levels explains
additional genetic variation.

Galarneau G(1), Palmer CD, Sankaran VG, Orkin SH, Hirschhorn JN, Lettre G.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Heart Institute, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

We used resequencing and genotyping in African Americans with sickle cell anemia 
(SCA) to characterize associations with fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels at the
BCL11A, HBS1L-MYB and ß-globin loci. Fine-mapping of HbF association signals at
these loci confirmed seven SNPs with independent effects and increased the
explained heritable variation in HbF levels from 38.6% to 49.5%. We also
identified rare missense variants that causally implicate MYB in HbF production.

PMCID: PMC3740938
PMID: 21057501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2011 Feb;56(2):177-81. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22754. Epub 2010
Sep 9.

Genetic modifiers of HbF and response to hydroxyurea in sickle cell disease.

Green NS(1), Barral S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New
York 10032, USA. nsg11@columbia.edu

Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels are generally inversely proportional to severity of
sickle cell disease (SCD) for given sickle phenotypes. Molecular regulation of
HbF occurs through complex interactions cis and trans to the beta globin gene
locus. Novel insights made through population-based genetic epidemiologic studies
of non-anemic populations were replicated in SCD groups, despite large
differences in HbF levels. Identification of the lymphoid transcription factor
BCL11A as a key suppressor of HbF expression validates approaches using
population genetics to study HbF expression. We review these methods and
findings, and speculate on applying pharmaco-genetics to optimize hydroxyurea
therapy aimed at increasing HbF.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3006002
PMID: 20830771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Mol Diagn. 2010 Sep;12(5):670-9. doi: 10.2353/jmoldx.2010.090192. Epub 2010 Aug
19.

Array comparative genomic hybridization detects chromosomal abnormalities in
hematological cancers that are not detected by conventional cytogenetics.

Shao L(1), Kang SH, Li J, Hixson P, Taylor J, Yatsenko SA, Shaw CA, Milosavljevic
A, Chang CC, Cheung SW, Patel A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77021-2039, USA.

Application of array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) has allowed an
unprecedented high-resolution analysis of cancer genomes. We developed a custom
genome-wide oligonucleotide microarray interrogating 493 genes involved in
hematological disorders. We analyzed 55 patients with hematological neoplasms by 
using this microarray. In 33 patients with apparent normal conventional
cytogenetic analysis, aneuploidy or isochromosomes were detected in 12% (4 of 33)
of the patients by aCGH. The chromosomal changes included trisomy of chromosomes 
10, 14, and 15, tetrasomy 11, and isochromosome 17q. In 17 patients with chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia who were initially investigated by using a panel of standard
fluorescence in situ hybridization probes, additional copy number changes that
were not interrogated by the fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) panel were
detected in 47% (8 of 17) of the patients by aCGH. Important copy number changes 
included gain on 2p16 involving REL and BCL11A genes, rearrangements of
chromosomes 8 and 15, and trisomy of chromosomes 19 and 22. In five patients with
known abnormal karyotypes, aCGH identified the origin of two marker chromosomes
and detected microdeletions at five breakpoints involved in three apparent
balanced translocations. Our results suggest that a subset of potentially
significant genomic alterations is missed by the currently available cytogenetic 
techniques. This pilot study clearly demonstrates high sensitivity of
oligonucleotide aCGH for potential use in diagnosis and follow-up in patients
with hematological neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC2928432
PMID: 20724749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 Aug;1202:248-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05549.x.

Ninth Cooley's Anemia Symposium: summary and perspective.

Nienhuis AW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA. arthur.nienhuis@stjude.org

The Ninth Cooley's Symposium provided an outstanding summary of progress in the
field. Highlights of the conference included the report of clinical benefit in
one of two patients treated in a gene therapy trial. Another major breakthrough
was the report that the transcriptional factor, BCL11A, is a key molecular
component of the gamma-globin silencing mechanism that results in the fetal to
adult perinatal switch. The ability to evaluate tissue iron is becoming
increasingly more sophisticated, with results presented at this conference
indicating that independent measurement of cardiac ferritin and hemosiderin can
be achieved with specific MRI sequences. The three available iron chelators,
deferoxamine, deferiprone, and deferasirox, provide a potent therapeutic
armamentarium so that effective chelation regimens can be devised for most
individual patients. Unfortunately, compliance remains a significant issue
despite the availability of oral chelators. Modification of conditioning regimens
and the use of alternative donor sources have made stem cell transplantation
available to an increasing number of patients with progressive improvement in
outcome. Despite many advances, the global burden of disease for the thalassemias
remains very high, with many challenges that still need to be addressed in order 
to optimize treatment for the majority of patients.

PMID: 20712801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 Aug;1202:64-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05574.x.

Transcriptional silencing of fetal hemoglobin by BCL11A.

Sankaran VG(1), Xu J, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The beta-thalassemia syndromes are a major global health problem. Increased
levels of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) ameliorate the clinical symptoms seen in this
disease. By taking advantage of the natural variation in the level of HbF in
various populations, we and others identified several common genetic variants in 
three major loci that regulate HbF levels. One of these variants resides in the
gene BCL11A. We have studied the role of this gene product and established that
BCL11A maintains silencing of gamma-globin expression in adult erythroid cells
and functions as a direct transcriptional regulator of the fetal to adult
hemoglobin switch in humans. Moreover, we found that BCL11A plays a central role 
in the evolutionarily divergent globin gene switches of mammals. As a factor
critical for gamma-globin gene silencing, BCL11A should be considered as a
therapeutic target to increase HbF in a directed manner in beta-thalassemia
patients.

PMID: 20712774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Nat Genet. 2010 Sep;42(9):801-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.630. Epub 2010 Aug 1.

Haploinsufficiency for the erythroid transcription factor KLF1 causes hereditary 
persistence of fetal hemoglobin.

Borg J(1), Papadopoulos P, Georgitsi M, Gutiérrez L, Grech G, Fanis P,
Phylactides M, Verkerk AJ, van der Spek PJ, Scerri CA, Cassar W, Galdies R, van
Ijcken W, Ozgür Z, Gillemans N, Hou J, Bugeja M, Grosveld FG, von Lindern M,
Felice AE, Patrinos GP, Philipsen S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Physiology and Biochemistry,
University of Malta, Msida, Malta.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2010 Sep;42(9):733-4.

Hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HPFH) is characterized by persistent 
high levels of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) in adults. Several contributory factors,
both genetic and environmental, have been identified but others remain elusive.
HPFH was found in 10 of 27 members from a Maltese family. We used a genome-wide
SNP scan followed by linkage analysis to identify a candidate region on
chromosome 19p13.12-13. Sequencing revealed a nonsense mutation in the KLF1 gene,
p.K288X, which ablated the DNA-binding domain of this key erythroid
transcriptional regulator. Only family members with HPFH were heterozygous
carriers of this mutation. Expression profiling on primary erythroid progenitors 
showed that KLF1 target genes were downregulated in samples from individuals with
HPFH. Functional assays suggested that, in addition to its established role in
regulating adult globin expression, KLF1 is a key activator of the BCL11A gene,
which encodes a suppressor of HbF expression. These observations provide a
rationale for the effects of KLF1 haploinsufficiency on HbF levels.

PMCID: PMC2930131
PMID: 20676099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Nat Genet. 2010 Sep;42(9):742-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.637. Epub 2010 Aug 1.

KLF1 regulates BCL11A expression and gamma- to beta-globin gene switching.

Zhou D(1), Liu K, Sun CW, Pawlik KM, Townes TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics and University of Alabama at
Birmingham Stem Cell Institute, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Schools of
Medicine and Dentistry, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2010 Sep;42(9):733-4.

We show that knockdown of KLF1 in human and mouse adult erythroid progenitors
markedly reduces BCL11A levels and increases human gamma-globin/beta-globin
expression ratios. These results suggest that KLF1 controls globin gene switching
by directly activating beta-globin and indirectly repressing gamma-globin gene
expression. Controlled knockdown of KLF1 in adult erythroid progenitors may
provide a method to activate fetal hemoglobin expression in individuals with
beta-thalassemia or sickle cell disease.

PMID: 20676097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Science. 2010 Jul 16;329(5989):291-2. doi: 10.1126/science.1194035.

Medicine. Sickle cell disease at 100 years.

Orkin SH(1), Higgs DR.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Boston and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
stuart_orkin@dfci.harvard.edu

PMID: 20647458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Br J Haematol. 2010 Sep;150(6):689-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08303.x.

Role of the cold shock domain protein A in the transcriptional regulation of HBG 
expression.

Petruzzelli R(1), Gaudino S, Amendola G, Sessa R, Puzone S, Di Concilio R, d'Urzo
G, Amendolara M, Izzo P, Grosso M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli Studi di 
Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

Impaired switching from fetal haemoglobin (HbF) to adult globin gene expression
leads to hereditary persistence of fetal haemoglobin (HPFH) in adult life. This
is of prime interest because elevated HbF levels ameliorate ß-thalassaemia and
sickle cell anaemia. Fetal haemoglobin levels are regulated by complex mechanisms
involving factors linked or not to the ß-globin gene (HBB) locus. To search for
factors putatively involved in the expression of the <U+03B3>-globin genes (HBG1, HBG2),
we examined the reticulocyte transcriptome of three siblings who had different
HbF levels and different degrees of ß-thalassaemia severity although they had the
same <U+0397>BA- and <U+0397><U+0392>B cluster genotypes. By mRNA differential display we isolated the
cDNA coding for the cold shock domain protein A (CSDA), also known as dbpA,
previously reported to interact in vitro with the HBG2 promoter. Expression
studies performed in K562 and in primary erythroid cells showed an inverse
relationship between HBG and CSDA expression levels. Functional studies performed
by Chromatin Immunoprecipitation and reporter gene assays in K562 cells
demonstrated that CSDA is able to bind the HBG2 promoter and suppress its
expression. Therefore, our study demonstrated that CSDA is a trans-acting
repressor factor of HBG expression and modulates the HPFH phenotype.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 20636440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Neurosci Res. 2010 Aug 15;88(11):2364-73. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22407.

X-linked mental retardation gene CASK interacts with Bcl11A/CTIP1 and regulates
axon branching and outgrowth.

Kuo TY(1), Hong CJ, Chien HL, Hsueh YP.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic 
of China.

Calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine kinase (CASK), a causative gene in X-linked
mental retardation, carries out multiple functions in neurons, including vesicle 
trafficking of ion channels, synapse formation, and gene transcription. From a
yeast two-hybrid screen, Krüppel-like zinc finger protein B cell
lymphoma/COUP-TF-interacting protein 1 (Bcl11A/CTIP1) was identified as a CASK
binding protein. Through alternative splicing, a single Bcl11A gene encodes two
major protein products in neurons, Bcl11A-S and Bcl11A-L. CASK interacted with
both Bcl11A-S and Bcl11A-L in transfected COS cells and brain. Immunofluorescence
staining further indicated the colocalization of CASK and Bcl11A in the nuclei of
neurons. These studies supported an interaction between CASK and Bcl11A in vivo. 
Bcl11A-L has previously been shown to play a role in gene transcription as well
as axon outgrowth and branching. Here, we further show that Bcl11A-L rearranges
the distribution of nuclear actin, which may be related to the function of
Bcl11A-L in gene expression. More importantly, using cultured hippocampal neurons
as a model system, we show that CASK enhances the ability of Bcl11A-L to restrict
axon outgrowth and branching. Interruption of the interaction between CASK and
Bcl11A increased the outgrowth and branching of axons, suggesting that the
interaction between CASK and Bcl11A controls axon arborization. In conclusion,
our results suggest that, through the interaction with Bcl11A, CASK plays a role 
in axonogenesis, which may be related to brain anatomical characteristics in
humans.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20623620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Am J Hematol. 2010 Aug;85(8):575-8. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21758.

14q32/miRNA clusters loss of heterozygosity in acute lymphoblastic leukemia is
associated with up-regulation of BCL11a.

Agueli C(1), Cammarata G, Salemi D, Dagnino L, Nicoletti R, La Rosa M, Messana F,
Marfia A, Bica MG, Coniglio ML, Pagano M, Fabbiano F, Santoro A.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di ematologia con UTMO, Ospedali Riuniti Villa Sofia-Cervello,
Palermo, Italy.

This study evaluated the loss and expression level of miRNAs 14q32 clusters in
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) patients with cryptic deletions at 14q32
chromosomal band to investigate their involvement in this disease. We demonstrate
that a subset of ALL cases bearing 14q32 LOH showed a down-regulation of miRNA
14q32 clusters, which is directly linked to the submicroscopic chromosomal
deletion. As a consequence of miRNAs deregulation we reported an inverse
correlation with the expression of their target BCL11a, a transcription factor
involved in lymphoid differentiation. These results suggest that 14q32/miRNA
clusters LOH may be another mechanism involved in lymphoid B cell transformation 
and differentiation and therefore, could be used as a diagnostic marker and
therapeutic target in subsets of ALL.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20578197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Am J Hematol. 2010 Jul;85(7):541-4. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21742.

Analysis of the REL, BCL11A, and MYCN proto-oncogenes belonging to the 2p
amplicon in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Deambrogi C, De Paoli L, Fangazio M, Cresta S, Rasi S, Spina V, Gattei V, Gaidano
G, Rossi D.

PMID: 20575024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2010 Aug 15;45(2):140-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2010.05.006.
Epub 2010 Jun 12.

Binding patterns of BCL11A in the globin and GATA1 loci and characterization of
the BCL11A fetal hemoglobin locus.

Jawaid K(1), Wahlberg K, Thein SL, Best S.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, The James Black Centre, UK.

BCL11A is a major regulator of fetal hemoglobin production. Reduced levels of
BCL11A have been shown to delay switching from fetal to adult hemoglobin,
suggesting that it acts as a stage-specific repressor of gamma globin expression.
We have carried out a survey of BCL11A binding in the globin, BCL11A and GATA1
loci by ChIP-on-chip analysis in primary human erythroid cells. We found strong
occupancy in both alpha and beta globin upstream regulatory regions as well as in
regions involved in switching and hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin.
Genetic studies have identified a restricted 14kb region in BCL11A intron 2 as
being highly associated with HbF levels. Strong GATA-1 binding and acetylated
histone H3 was found in this area, which could be indicative of a regulatory
element, changes in which might be responsible for the overall regulation of
BCL11A. We also observed BCL11A and GATA-1 binding in a known auto-regulatory
promoter element of the GATA1 locus.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20542454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Neurochem. 2010 Sep 1;114(5):1381-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06852.x.
Epub 2010 Jun 8.

Bcl11A/CTIP1 mediates the effect of the glutamate receptor on axon branching and 
dendrite outgrowth.

Kuo TY(1), Chen CY, Hsueh YP.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

While neuronal activity regulates neurite outgrowth and branching, the details of
the underlying mechanisms are still largely unclear. This study investigated the 
effect of the glutamate receptors on neuritogenesis using cultured hippocampal
neurons. At 3-4 days in vitro, NMDA treatment promoted axon branching but not
primary axon extension. In contrast, blockade of the NMDA receptor (NMDAR) by AP5
treatment enhanced primary axon extension. NMDAR activation also increased
dendrite number and total dendrite length. These results suggest that NMDAR
controls axon and dendrite morphogenesis. A previous study demonstrated that
knockdown of the zinc finger transcription factor B cell lymphoma 11A-long
(Bcl11A-L) reduces deleted in colorectal cancer (DCC) and microtubule-associated 
protein (MAP) 1b expression, thereby promoting axon branching. Here, glutamate
stimulation down-regulated the levels of the Bcl11A-L, DCC, MAP1b, and MAP2c
proteins. Over-expression of either Bcl11A-L or DCC countered the effect of NMDA 
or glutamate on axon branching and dendrite outgrowth, indicating that the
Bcl11A-L/DCC pathway is an important downstream effector of glutamate receptors
in neurite arborization. Because knockdown of Bcl11A-L did not down-regulate
MAP2c, our results suggest that glutamate receptors also use a
Bcl11A-L-independent pathway to control dendrite outgrowth. To summarize, this
study reveals novel pathways downstream of glutamate receptors that regulate axon
and dendrite arborization.

PMID: 20534004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2010 Aug 15;45(2):124-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2010.04.002.
Epub 2010 May 15.

The XmnI (G)gamma polymorphism influences hemoglobin F synthesis contrary to
BCL11A and HBS1L-MYB SNPs in a cohort of 57 beta-thalassemia intermedia patients.

Nguyen TK(1), Joly P, Bardel C, Moulsma M, Bonello-Palot N, Francina A.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Hospices Civils de Lyon and Université Claude
Bernard, France.

The HbF level is a quantitative trait influenced by many loci inside or outside
the beta-globin gene cluster. The aim of this study was to analyze in 57
beta-thalassemia intermedia patients with very various genotypes the effects on
fetal hemoglobin levels of SNPs lying in three genes or chromosome regions which 
include the XmnI (G)gamma polymorphism at position -158 of the HBG2 promoter
(rs7482144), two SNPs located in the BCL11A region (rs4671393 and rs11886868) and
three SNPs located in the HBS1L-MYB region (rs28384513, rs9399137 and rs4895441).
Our study shows a strong correlation between the XmnI (G)gamma polymorphism and
the fetal hemoglobin expression in this patient population (p=0.002).
Unfortunately, although recent studies clearly showed a role of SNPs in BCL11A
and a HBS1L-MYB region on either clinical expression or fetal hemoglobin levels
of beta-hemoglobinopathies such as sickle cell disease and beta-thalassemia, SNPs
in BCL11A and the HBS1L-MYB region did not show statistically significant
correlations with fetal hemoglobin levels. This suggests that the BCL11A and
HBS1L-MYB loci have a minor effect on HbF level compared to the XmnI QTL in
beta-thalassemia intermedia patients.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20472475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Yi Chuan. 2010 Apr;32(4):295-300.

[Progress on genes related to fetal hemoglobin quantitative trait].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo XQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Bethune Military Medical College, Shijiazhuang
050081, China. xiaoqiangguo123@163.com

Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) is the main type of hemoglobin in the fetus and few in
adult, but retains high levels in some people and patients with beta-thalassemia 
major or sickle cell disease. High HbF levels are beneficial to ameliorating the 
disease severity of the anemia. Previous researches had established that
quantitative trait loci were associated with 6q23 and 2p15. Recent researches
indicated that HBS1L-MYB in 6q23 and BCL11A in 2p15 are highly correlated to HbF 
levels. These discoveries not only help to understanding of mechanism in HbF
expression, but also provide potential drug targets for therapy of sickle cell
disease. The progress on genes related to fetal hemoglobin quantitative trait and
potential applications was summarized in this review.

PMID: 20423883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Genes Dev. 2010 Apr 15;24(8):783-98. doi: 10.1101/gad.1897310.

Transcriptional silencing of {gamma}-globin by BCL11A involves long-range
interactions and cooperation with SOX6.

Xu J(1), Sankaran VG, Ni M, Menne TF, Puram RV, Kim W, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The developmental switch from human fetal (gamma) to adult (beta) hemoglobin
represents a clinically important example of developmental gene regulation. The
transcription factor BCL11A is a central mediator of gamma-globin silencing and
hemoglobin switching. Here we determine chromatin occupancy of BCL11A at the
human beta-globin locus and other genomic regions in vivo by high-resolution
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-chip analysis. BCL11A binds the upstream
locus control region (LCR), epsilon-globin, and the intergenic regions between
gamma-globin and delta-globin genes. A chromosome conformation capture (3C) assay
shows that BCL11A reconfigures the beta-globin cluster by modulating chromosomal 
loop formation. We also show that BCL11A and the HMG-box-containing transcription
factor SOX6 interact physically and functionally during erythroid maturation.
BCL11A and SOX6 co-occupy the human beta-globin cluster along with GATA1, and
cooperate in silencing gamma-globin transcription in adult human erythroid
progenitors. These findings collectively demonstrate that transcriptional
silencing of gamma-globin genes by BCL11A involves long-range interactions and
cooperation with SOX6. Our findings provide insight into the mechanism of BCL11A 
action and new clues for the developmental gene regulatory programs that function
at the beta-globin locus.

PMCID: PMC2854393
PMID: 20395365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Haematologica. 2010 Aug;95(8):1253-60. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.018259. Epub
2010 Mar 19.

Mechanism of human Hb switching: a possible role of the kit receptor/miR 221-222 
complex.

Gabbianelli M(1), Testa U, Morsilli O, Pelosi E, Saulle E, Petrucci E, Castelli
G, Giovinazzi S, Mariani G, Fiori ME, Bonanno G, Massa A, Croce CM, Fontana L,
Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, 00161 Rome, Italy. marco.gabbianelli@iss.it/cesare.peschle@yahoo.it

BACKGROUND: The human hemoglobin switch (HbF-->HbA) takes place in the
peri/post-natal period. In adult life, however, the residual HbF (<1%) may be
partially reactivated by chemical inducers and/or cytokines such as the kit
ligand (KL). MicroRNAs (miRs) play a pivotal role in normal hematopoiesis:
downmodulation of miR-221/222 stimulates human erythropoietic proliferation
through upmodulation of the kit receptor.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We have explored the possible role of kit/KL in perinatal Hb 
switching by evaluating: i) the expression levels of both kit and kit ligand on
CD34(+) cells and in plasma isolated from pre-, mid- and full-term cord blood
samples; ii) the reactivation of HbF synthesis in KL-treated unilineage erythroid
cell cultures; iii) the functional role of miR-221/222 in HbF production.
RESULTS: In perinatal life, kit expression showed a gradual decline directly
correlated to the decrease of HbF (from 80-90% to <30%). Moreover, in full-term
cord blood erythroid cultures, kit ligand induced a marked increase of HbF (up to
80%) specifically abrogated by addition of the kit inhibitor imatinib, thus
reversing the Hb switch. MiR-221/222 expression exhibited rising levels during
peri/post-natal development. In functional studies, overexpression of these miRs 
in cord blood progenitors caused a remarkable decrease in kit expression,
erythroblast proliferation and HbF content, whereas their suppression induced
opposite effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies indicate that human perinatal Hb switching is under
control of the kit receptor/miR 221-222 complex. We do not exclude, however, that
other mechanisms (i.e. glucocorticoids and the HbF inhibitor BCL11A) may also
contribute to the peri/post-natal Hb switch.

PMCID: PMC2913072
PMID: 20305142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Br J Haematol. 2010 Apr;149(2):181-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08105.x.
Epub 2010 Mar 1.

Advances in the understanding of haemoglobin switching.

Sankaran VG(1), Xu J, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.

The study of haemoglobin switching has represented a focus in haematology due in 
large part to the clinical relevance of the fetal to adult haemoglobin switch for
developing targeted approaches to ameliorate the severity of the
beta-haemoglobinopathies. Additionally, the process by which this switch occurs
represents an important paradigm for developmental gene regulation. In this
review, we provide an overview of both the embryonic primitive to definitive
switch in haemoglobin expression, as well as the fetal to adult switch that is
unique to humans and old world monkeys. We discuss the nature of these switches
and models of their regulation. The factors that have been suggested to regulate 
this process are then discussed. With the increased understanding and discovery
of molecular regulators of haemoglobin switching, such as BCL11A, new avenues of 
research may lead ultimately to novel therapeutic, mechanism-based approaches to 
fetal haemoglobin reactivation in patients.

PMCID: PMC4153468
PMID: 20201948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Hum Genet. 2010 Mar;127(3):303-14. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0770-2.

A genome-wide association identified the common genetic variants influence
disease severity in beta0-thalassemia/hemoglobin E.

Nuinoon M(1), Makarasara W, Mushiroda T, Setianingsih I, Wahidiyat PA, Sripichai 
O, Kumasaka N, Takahashi A, Svasti S, Munkongdee T, Mahasirimongkol S,
Peerapittayamongkol C, Viprakasit V, Kamatani N, Winichagoon P, Kubo M, Nakamura 
Y, Fucharoen S.

Author information: 
(1)Thalassemia Research Center, Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol
University, Phutthamonthon, Nakhonpathom 73170, Thailand.

b-Thalassemia/HbE disease is clinically variable. In searching for genetic
factors modifying the disease severity, patients were selected based on their
disease severities, and a genome-wide association study (GWAS) was performed.
Genotyping was conducted with the Illumina Human 610-Quad BeadChips array using
DNAs from 618 Thai b0-thalassemia/HbE patients who were classified as 383 severe 
and 235 mild phenotypes by a validated scoring system. Twenty-three SNPs in three
independent genes/regions were identified as being significantly associated with 
the disease severity. The highest association was observed with SNPs in the
b-globin gene cluster (chr.11p15), and rs2071348 of the HBBP1 gene revealed the
most significant association [P = 2.96 9 10(-13), odds ratio (OR) = 4.33 (95%
confidence interval (CI), 2.74-6.84)]. The second was identified in the
intergenic region between the HBS1L and MYB genes (chr.6q23), among which
rs9376092 was the most significant [P = 2.36 9 10(-10), OR = 3.07 (95% CI,
2.16-4.38)]. The third region was located in the BCL11A gene (chr.2p16.1), and
rs766432 showed the most significant association [P = 5.87 9 10-10, OR = 3.06
(95% CI, 2.15-4.37)]. All three loci were replicated in an independent cohort of 
174 Indonesian patients. The associations to fetal hemoglobin levels were also
observed with SNPs on these three regions. Our data indicate that several genetic
loci act in concert to influence HbF levels of beta(0)-thalassemia/HbE patients. 
This study revealed that all the three reported loci and the alpha-globin gene
locus are the best and common predictors of the disease severity in
beta-thalassemia.

PMID: 20183929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Cancer Res. 2010 Mar 1;70(5):2053-63. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2161. Epub
2010 Feb 9.

FOXQ1 is overexpressed in colorectal cancer and enhances tumorigenicity and tumor
growth.

Kaneda H(1), Arao T, Tanaka K, Tamura D, Aomatsu K, Kudo K, Sakai K, De Velasco
MA, Matsumoto K, Fujita Y, Yamada Y, Tsurutani J, Okamoto I, Nakagawa K, Nishio
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Biology, Kinki University School of Medicine,
Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, Japan.

Forkhead box Q1 (FOXQ1) is a member of the forkhead transcription factor family, 
and it has recently been proposed to participate in gastric acid secretion and
mucin gene expression in mice. However, the role of FOXQ1 in humans and
especially in cancer cells remains unknown. We found that FOXQ1 mRNA is
overexpressed in clinical specimens of colorectal cancer (CRC; 28-fold/colonic
mucosa). A microarray analysis revealed that the knockdown of FOXQ1 using small
interfering RNA resulted in a decrease in p21(CIP1/WAF1) expression, and a
reporter assay and a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that p21 was one 
of the target genes of FOXQ1. Stable FOXQ1-overexpressing cells (H1299/FOXQ1)
exhibited elevated levels of p21 expression and inhibition of apoptosis induced
by doxorubicin or camptothecin. Although cellular proliferation was decreased in 
H1299/FOXQ1 cells in vitro, H1299/FOXQ1 cells significantly increased
tumorigenicity [enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP): 2/15, FOXQ1: 7/15] and
enhanced tumor growth (437 +/- 301 versus 1735 +/- 769 mm3, P < 0.001) in vivo.
Meanwhile, stable p21 knockdown of H1299/FOXQ1 cells increased tumor growth,
suggesting that FOXQ1 promotes tumor growth independent of p21. Microarray
analysis of H1299/EGFP and H1299/FOXQ1 revealed that FOXQ1 overexpression
upregulated several genes that have positive roles for tumor growth, including
VEGFA, WNT3A, RSPO2, and BCL11A. CD31 and terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling staining of the tumor specimens
showed that FOXQ1 overexpression mediated the angiogenic and antiapoptotic effect
in vivo. In conclusion, FOXQ1 is overexpressed in CRC and enhances tumorigenicity
and tumor growth presumably through its angiogenic and antiapoptotic effects. Our
findings show that FOXQ1 is a new member of the cancer-related FOX family.

PMID: 20145154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Blood. 2010 Mar 4;115(9):1815-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-08-239517. Epub 2009
Dec 16.

Fetal hemoglobin in sickle cell anemia: genome-wide association studies suggest a
regulatory region in the 5' olfactory receptor gene cluster.

Solovieff N(1), Milton JN, Hartley SW, Sherva R, Sebastiani P, Dworkis DA, Klings
ES, Farrer LA, Garrett ME, Ashley-Koch A, Telen MJ, Fucharoen S, Ha SY, Li CK,
Chui DH, Baldwin CT, Steinberg MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, MA,
USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2011 Oct 20;118(16):4493-5; author reply 4495.

In a genome-wide association study of 848 blacks with sickle cell anemia, we
identified single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with fetal
hemoglobin concentration. The most significant SNPs in a discovery sample were
tested in a replication set of 305 blacks with sickle cell anemia and in subjects
with hemoglobin E or beta thalassemia trait from Thailand and Hong Kong. A novel 
region on chromosome 11 containing olfactory receptor genes OR51B5 and OR51B6 was
identified by 6 SNPs (lowest P = 4.7E-08) and validated in the replication set.
An additional olfactory receptor gene, OR51B2, was identified by a novel SNP set 
enrichment analysis. Genome-wide association studies also validated a previously 
identified SNP (rs766432) in BCL11A, a gene known to affect fetal hemoglobin
levels (P = 2.6E-21) and in Thailand and Hong Kong subjects. Elements within the 
olfactory receptor gene cluster might play a regulatory role in gamma-globin gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC2832816
PMID: 20018918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Free Radic Biol Med. 2010 Jan 15;48(2):298-305. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2009.10.054. Epub 2009 Nov 3.

Variation in gene expression profiles of human monocytic U937 cells exposed to
various fluxes of nitric oxide.

Turpaev K(1), Glatigny A, Bignon J, Delacroix H, Drapier JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Chimie des Substances Naturelles, Centre de Recherche de Gif,
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

We examined early and late alterations in gene expression patterns and
phosphorylation levels of key regulators of selected signaling pathways in U937
cells exposed to various (*)NO fluxes. cDNA microarray analysis and real-time
quantitative PCR identified 45 NO-sensitive genes (>or=2-fold change), among
which KLF2, KLF6, TSC22D3, DDIT4, MKP-5 (up-regulated), KIF23, histone H4,
ARL6IP2, CLNS1A, SLC7A6, CDKN3, SRP19, and BCL11A (down-regulated) have not been 
reported before. For two selected genes, KLF2 and DDIT4, the sensitivity to (.)NO
was also proven at the protein level. Among the examined genes, only KLF2 had a
higher sensitivity to slow release of NO (DETA-NO) than to high-dose,
short-duration exposure (DPTA-NO), reaching an about 50-fold increase in mRNA
level. Our study revealed that fast and slow NO donors activate similar signaling
pathways and induce phosphorylation of MAP kinases and downstream transcription
factors ATF2 and c-Jun. Inhibitory analysis of major signaling pathways showed
that activity of p38 MAPK and tyrosine kinases is indispensable for gene
induction in cells exposed to DPTA-NO, whereas G-protein Rho suppression caused
superinduction of KLF2 in (*)NO-stimulated cells. Finally, we showed that both
(*)NO donors caused a marked decrease in phosphorylation of p70S6K, an mTOR
substrate and regulator of mRNA translation, and protein kinase Akt, an upstream 
positive regulator of mTOR.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19892011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Transfusion. 2010 Mar;50(3):672-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2009.02483.x. Epub
2009 Nov 4.

Compensated variability in the expression of globin-related genes in
erythroblasts generated ex vivo from different donors.

Varricchio L(1), Fabucci ME, Alfani E, Godbold J, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Superiore Sanità, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Ex vivo generated erythroblasts are being evaluated for transfusion. 
Expression of balanced levels of globin mRNA is essential for normal red blood
cell function and survival but it is unknown whether the expression of the globin
genes in ex vivo expanded cells is balanced.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Immature erythroblasts (IEs) were expanded in human
erythroid massive amplification cultures from blood mononuclear cells of 19
normal donors and four beta(0)-thalassemia patients (for comparison) and induced 
to mature for 4 days in the presence of erythropoietin. mRNA was prepared from
IEs and mature erythroblasts to evaluate the expression of alpha-, beta-, and
gamma-globin genes and of adult hemoglobin-stabilizing protein (AHSP) and BCL11A,
two proteins directly controlling globin function and/or production. Results were
analyzed using Pearson's correlation coefficient, the Wilcoxon signed rank, and
the Mann-Whitney rank sum tests.
RESULTS: The absolute levels of globin, AHSP, and BCL11A mRNA expressed by
erythroblasts generated ex vivo from normal donors were distributed along a 2-log
range. With maturation, the levels of gamma-globin and BCL11A mRNA did not
decrease while those of alpha-globin, gamma + beta-globins, and AHSP mRNA greatly
increased. In normal cells, the modest imbalance (two- to fourfold) observed
between alpha- and gamma + beta-globin mRNA was fully compensated by AHSP
expression. Thus, the levels of alpha-globin mRNA were correlated with those of
gamma + beta-globin (R(2) = 0.93, p < 0.0001) and AHSP (R(2) = 0.86, p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Ex vivo expanded erythroblasts from normal donors express modestly
imbalanced levels of alpha-globin and gamma + beta-globin fully compensated by
AHSP expression, likely ensuring normal function and survival.

PMID: 19891622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Diabetes. 2010 Jan;59(1):293-301. doi: 10.2337/db09-1048. Epub 2009 Oct 15.

Gene variants in the novel type 2 diabetes loci CDC123/CAMK1D, THADA, ADAMTS9,
BCL11A, and MTNR1B affect different aspects of pancreatic beta-cell function.

Simonis-Bik AM(1), Nijpels G, van Haeften TW, Houwing-Duistermaat JJ, Boomsma DI,
Reiling E, van Hove EC, Diamant M, Kramer MH, Heine RJ, Maassen JA, Slagboom PE, 
Willemsen G, Dekker JM, Eekhoff EM, de Geus EJ, 't Hart LM.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Recently, results from a meta-analysis of genome-wide association
studies have yielded a number of novel type 2 diabetes loci. However, conflicting
results have been published regarding their effects on insulin secretion and
insulin sensitivity. In this study we used hyperglycemic clamps with three
different stimuli to test associations between these novel loci and various
measures of beta-cell function.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: For this study, 336 participants, 180 normal glucose
tolerant and 156 impaired glucose tolerant, underwent a 2-h hyperglycemic clamp. 
In a subset we also assessed the response to glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1 and
arginine during an extended clamp (n = 123). All subjects were genotyped for gene
variants in JAZF1, CDC123/CAMK1D, TSPAN8/LGR5, THADA, ADAMTS9, NOTCH2/ADAMS30,
DCD, VEGFA, BCL11A, HNF1B, WFS1, and MTNR1B.
RESULTS: Gene variants in CDC123/CAMK1D, ADAMTS9, BCL11A, and MTNR1B affected
various aspects of the insulin response to glucose (all P < 6.9 x 10(-3)). The
THADA gene variant was associated with lower beta-cell response to GLP-1 and
arginine (both P < 1.6 x 10(-3)), suggesting lower beta-cell mass as a possible
pathogenic mechanism. Remarkably, we also noted a trend toward an increased
insulin response to GLP-1 in carriers of MTNR1B (P = 0.03), which may offer new
therapeutic possibilities. The other seven loci were not detectably associated
with beta-cell function.
CONCLUSIONS: Diabetes risk alleles in CDC123/CAMK1D, THADA, ADAMTS9, BCL11A, and 
MTNR1B are associated with various specific aspects of beta-cell function. These 
findings point to a clear diversity in the impact that these various gene
variants may have on (dys)function of pancreatic beta-cells.

PMCID: PMC2797936
PMID: 19833888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Nature. 2009 Oct 8;461(7265):712-4. doi: 10.1038/461712a.

Human genetics: Hit or miss?

Chi KR.

PMID: 19812647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Oct 15;18(R2):R216-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp401.

Control of fetal hemoglobin: new insights emerging from genomics and clinical
implications.

Thein SL(1), Menzel S, Lathrop M, Garner C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene and Cell Based Therapy, King's College London School of
Medicine, Molecular Haematology, Denmark Hill Campus, London SE5 9NU, UK.
sl.thein@kcl.ac.uk

Increased levels of fetal hemoglobin (HbF, alpha(2)gamma(2)) are of no
consequence in healthy adults, but confer major clinical benefits in patients
with sickle cell anemia (SCA) and beta thalassemia, diseases that represent major
public health problems. Inter-individual HbF variation is largely genetically
controlled, with one extreme caused by mutations involving the beta globin gene
(HBB) complex, historically referred to as pancellular hereditary persistence of 
fetal hemoglobin (HPFH). These Mendelian forms of HPFH are rare and do not
explain the common form of heterocellular HPFH which represents the upper tail of
normal HbF variation, and is clearly inherited as a quantitative genetic trait.
Genetic studies have identified three major quantitative trait loci (QTLs)
(Xmn1-HBG2, HBS1L-MYB intergenic region on chromosome 6q23, and BCL11A on
chromosome 2p16) that account for 20-50% of the common variation in HbF levels in
patients with SCA and beta thalassemia, and in healthy adults. Two of the major
QTLs include oncogenes, emphasizing the importance of cell proliferation and
differentiation as an important contribution to the HbF phenotype. The review
traces the story of HbF quantitative genetics that uncannily mirrors the changing
focus in genetic methodology, from candidate genes through positional cloning, to
genome-wide association, that have expedited the dissection of the genetic
architecture underlying HbF variability. These genetic results have already
provided remarkable insights into molecular mechanisms that underlie the
hemoglobin 'switch'.

PMCID: PMC2758709
PMID: 19808799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Blood. 2009 Oct 29;114(18):3935-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-04-217901. Epub 2009
Aug 20.

Amelioration of Sardinian beta0 thalassemia by genetic modifiers.

Galanello R(1), Sanna S, Perseu L, Sollaino MC, Satta S, Lai ME, Barella S, Uda
M, Usala G, Abecasis GR, Cao A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Università di Cagliari,
Ospedale Regionale Microcitemie ASL Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
renzo.galanello@mcweb.unica.it

Sardinian beta-thalassemia patients all are homozygotes for the same null allele 
in the beta-globin gene, but the clinical manifestations are extremely variable
in severity. Previous studies have shown that the coinheritance of
alpha-thalassemia or the presence of genetic variants that sustain fetal
hemoglobin production has a strong impact on ameliorating the clinical phenotype.
Here we evaluate the contribution of variants in the BCL11A, and HBS1L-MYB genes,
implicated in the regulation of fetal hemoglobin, and of alpha-thalassemia
coinheritance in 50 thalassemia intermedia and 75 thalassemia major patients. We 
confirm that alpha-thalassemia and allele C of single nucleotide polymorphism
rs-11886868 in BCL11A were selectively represented in thalassemia intermedia
patients. Moreover, allele G at single nucleotide polymorphism rs9389268 in the
HBS1L-MYB locus was significantly more frequent in the thalassemia intermedia
patients. This trio of genetic factors can account for 75% of the variation
differences in phenotype severity.

PMCID: PMC2925722
PMID: 19696200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Horm Metab Res. 2010 Jan;42(1):14-22. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1233480. Epub 2009 Aug 
10.

Lack of significant effects of the type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci JAZF1,
CDC123/CAMK1D, NOTCH2, ADAMTS9, THADA, and TSPAN8/LGR5 on diabetes and
quantitative metabolic traits.

Schleinitz D(1), Tönjes A, Böttcher Y, Dietrich K, Enigk B, Koriath M, Scholz GH,
Blüher M, Zeggini E, McCarthy MI, Kovacs P, Stumvoll M.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Centre for Clinical Research, University of Leipzig, Leipzig
04109, Germany.

Recently, several novel loci reaching genome-wide significance levels for type 2 
diabetes (T2D) were identified through a meta-analysis of three genome-wide scans
and large-scale follow-up. The aim of our study was to investigate the
association of these loci with T2D and related subphenotypes in two cohorts from 
Germany. We performed an association study of 9 SNPs in or around JAZF1, CDC123/ 
CAMK1D, NOTCH2, BCL11A, ADAMTS9, VEGFA, DCD, THADA, and TSPAN8/ LGR5 with T2D and
related quantitative traits (fasting insulin and glucose, indices derived from
OGTT) in the isolated population of Sorbs (205 cases and 695 controls) and in a
mixed German population (Leipzig) (938 subjects with and 918 without T2D). None
of the variants was associated with T2D, but the meta-analysis of both cohorts
revealed a modest trend of association of rs7578597 in THADA with T2D (p=0.055). 
Furthermore, Sorbian subjects homozygous for the rs7578597 T-allele had lower
mean 30-minute plasma insulin when compared with carriers of the C-allele
(p<0.05). The T-allele was also nominally associated with higher fasting plasma
glucose in the Leipzig cohort (p<0.05). Although several other SNPs showed some
evidence for association with T2D-related traits the effects were not replicated 
within our study. Associations of the T2D-risk alleles with T2D or related
subphenotypes were overall very weak in the approximately 2 700 subjects studied.
This is compatible with the modest effect size of these "second sweep" variants, 
which will require large-scale association studies on quantitative traits to
clarify their role in the pathophysiology of T2D.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart New York.

PMID: 19670153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Nature. 2009 Aug 27;460(7259):1093-7. doi: 10.1038/nature08243. Epub 2009 Aug 5.

Developmental and species-divergent globin switching are driven by BCL11A.

Sankaran VG(1), Xu J, Ragoczy T, Ippolito GC, Walkley CR, Maika SD, Fujiwara Y,
Ito M, Groudine M, Bender MA, Tucker PW, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston and Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The contribution of changes in cis-regulatory elements or trans-acting factors to
interspecies differences in gene expression is not well understood. The mammalian
beta-globin loci have served as a model for gene regulation during development.
Transgenic mice containing the human beta-globin locus, consisting of the linked 
embryonic (epsilon), fetal (gamma) and adult (beta) genes, have been used as a
system to investigate the temporal switch from fetal to adult haemoglobin, as
occurs in humans. Here we show that the human gamma-globin (HBG) genes in these
mice behave as murine embryonic globin genes, revealing a limitation of the model
and demonstrating that critical differences in the trans-acting milieu have
arisen during mammalian evolution. We show that the expression of BCL11A, a
repressor of human gamma-globin expression identified by genome-wide association 
studies, differs between mouse and human. Developmental silencing of the mouse
embryonic globin and human gamma-globin genes fails to occur in mice in the
absence of BCL11A. Thus, BCL11A is a critical mediator of species-divergent
globin switching. By comparing the ontogeny of beta-globin gene regulation in
mice and humans, we have shown that alterations in the expression of a
trans-acting factor constitute a critical driver of gene expression changes
during evolution.

PMCID: PMC3749913
PMID: 19657335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. IUBMB Life. 2009 Aug;61(8):800-30. doi: 10.1002/iub.226.

Erythropoiesis: model systems, molecular regulators, and developmental programs.

Tsiftsoglou AS(1), Vizirianakis IS, Strouboulis J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. tsif@pharm.auth.gr

Human erythropoiesis is a complex multistep developmental process that begins at 
the level of pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) at bone marrow
microenvironment (HSCs niche) and terminates with the production of erythrocytes 
(RBCs). This review covers the basic and contemporary aspects of erythropoiesis. 
These include the: (a) cell-lineage restricted pathways of differentiation
originated from HSCs and going downward toward the blood cell development; (b)
model systems employed to study erythropoiesis in culture (erythroleukemia cell
lines and embryonic stem cells) and in vivo (knockout animals: avian, mice,
zebrafish, and xenopus); (c) key regulators of erythropoiesis (iron, hypoxia,
stress, and growth factors); (d) signaling pathways operating at hematopoietic
stem cell niche for homeostatic regulation of self renewal (SCF/c-kit receptor,
Wnt, Notch, and Hox) and for erythroid differentiation (HIF and EpoR).
Furthermore, this review presents the mechanisms through which transcriptional
factors (GATA-1, FOG-1, TAL-1/SCL/MO2/Ldb1/E2A, EKLF, Gfi-1b, and BCL11A) and
miRNAs regulate gene pattern expression during erythroid differentiation. New
insights regarding the transcriptional regulation of alpha- and beta-globin gene 
clusters were also presented. Emphasis was also given on (i) the developmental
program of erythropoiesis, which consists of commitment to terminal erythroid
maturation and hemoglobin production, (two closely coordinated events of
erythropoieis) and (ii) the capacity of human embryonic and umbilical cord blood 
(UCB) stem cells to differentiate and produce RBCs in culture with highly
selective media. These most recent developments will eventually permit customized
red blood cell production needed for transfusion.

PMID: 19621348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2009 Nov;42(3):195-207. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2009.07.006. Epub
2009 Jul 17.

Bcl11A/CTIP1 regulates expression of DCC and MAP1b in control of axon branching
and dendrite outgrowth.

Kuo TY(1), Hong CJ, Hsueh YP.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, 11221, Taiwan.

The extension of axon branches is important for target innervation but how axon
branching is regulated is currently not well understood. Here, we report that
Bcl11A/CTIP1/Evi9, a zinc finger transcription factor, downregulates axon
branching. Knockdown of Bcl11A induced axon branching and multi-axon formation,
as well as dendrite outgrowth. Due to alternative splicing, a single Bcl11A gene 
encodes two protein products, Bcl11A-L and -S. Bcl11A-L was found to be the main 
Bcl11A player in regulation of neurite arborization; Bcl11A-S is an antagonist of
Bcl11A-L. Time-lapse study further suggests that Bcl11A-L knockdown enhances axon
dynamics and increases the duration of axon outgrowth. Finally, the expression of
DCC and MAP1b, two molecules involved in direction and branching of axon
outgrowth, is controlled by Bcl11A-L. DCC overexpression rescues the phenotype
induced by Bcl11A-L knockdown. In conclusion, this report provides the first
evidence that Bcl11A is important for neurite arborization.

PMID: 19616629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Exp Hematol. 2009 Oct;37(10):1131-42. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2009.06.007. Epub
2009 Jul 2.

Transcriptional activation of the gamma-globin gene in baboons treated with
decitabine and in cultured erythroid progenitor cells involves different
mechanisms.

Chin J(1), Singh M, Banzon V, Vaitkus K, Ibanez V, Kouznetsova T, Mahmud N,
DeSimone J, Lavelle D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the mechanism(s) responsible for increased gamma-globin
expression in vivo in decitabine-treated baboons and in vitro in cultured
erythroid progenitor cells (EPC) from adult baboon bone marrow (BM).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fetal liver, adult BM erythroid cells pre- and
post-decitabine, and cultured EPCs were analyzed for distribution of RNA
polymerase II, histone acetylation, and histone H3 (lys4) trimethyl throughout
the gamma-globin gene complex by chromatin immunoprecipitation. DNA methylation
of the gamma-globin promoter was determined by bisulfite sequencing. Expression
of the baboon Igamma- and Vgamma-globin chains was determined by high performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC). Expression of BCL11A, a recently identified
repressor of gamma-globin expression, was analyzed by Western blot.
RESULTS: Increased gamma-globin expression in decitabine-treated baboons and
cultured EPC correlated with increased levels of RNA polymerase II, histone
acetylation, and histone H3 (lys4) trimethyl associated with the gamma-globin
gene consistent with a transcriptional activation mechanism. Cultured EPC
expressed the Igamma- and Vgamma-globin chains in a pattern characteristic of
fetal development. The level of DNA methylation of the gamma-globin gene promoter
in EPC cultures was similar to BM erythroid cells from normal adult baboons.
Different BCL11A isoforms were observed in BM erythroid cells and cultured EPC.
CONCLUSION: The mechanism responsible for increased gamma-globin expression in
cultured EPC was unexpectedly not associated with increased DNA hypomethylation
of the gamma-globin gene promoter compared to normal BM erythroid cells, in
contrast to BM erythroid cells of decitabine-treated baboons. Rather, increased
fetal hemoglobin in EPC cultures was associated with a fetal Igamma/Vgamma chain 
ratio and a difference in the size of the BCL11A protein compared to normal BM
erythroid cells.

PMID: 19576949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Med Sci (Paris). 2009 May;25(5):457-60. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2009255457.

[BCL11A represses HbF expression and varies during ontogeny].

[Article in French]

Labie D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de génétique, Institut Cochin, Paris, France.
labie@cochin.inserm.fr

PMID: 19480825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Am J Clin Pathol. 2009 May;131(5):663-70. doi: 10.1309/AJCPXLY46UPFLISC.

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia With t(2;14)(p16;q32) involves the BCL11A and IgH
genes and is associated with atypical morphologic features and unmutated IgVH
genes.

Yin CC(1), Lin KI, Ketterling RP, Knudson RA, Medeiros LJ, Barron LL, Huh YO,
Luthra R, Keating MJ, Abruzzo LV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The t(2;14)(p16;q32) has been reported previously in only 12 cases of chronic
lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL). The clinicopathologic 
features have been incompletely described. We describe 6 new cases of CLL/SLL
with t(2;14)(p16;q32). All had marrow involvement, 4 had absolute lymphocytosis, 
4 had lymphadenopathy, and 3 had hepatosplenomegaly. All showed atypical
lymphocyte morphologic features with plasmacytoid differentiation and irregular
nuclei; 3 had increased prolymphocytes. Flow cytometry demonstrated typical
immunophenotypes in 5 and an atypical immunophenotype in 1. All expressed ZAP70; 
5 assessed showed unmutated IgV(H) genes. Karyotyping identified t(2;14)(p16;q32)
as the sole abnormality in 1, primary abnormality in 2, and part of a complex
karyotype in 3. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis revealed BCL11A/IgH
rearrangement in all. After chemotherapy, 3 patients died of disease and 3 were
alive with disease (median follow-up, 80 months). We conclude that CLL/SLL with
t(2;14) (p16;q32) and BCL11A/IgH rearrangement is characterized by atypical
morphologic features and unmutated IgV(H) genes.

PMID: 19369625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Br J Haematol. 2009 May;145(4):455-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.07650.x.
Epub 2008 Mar 2.

Discovering the genetics underlying foetal haemoglobin production in adults.

Thein SL(1), Menzel S.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London School of Medicine, Molecular Haematology, Division of
Gene and Cell Based Therapy, Denmark Hill Campus, London, UK. sl.thein@kcl.ac.uk

Sickle cell disease (SCD) and beta thalassaemia, caused by lesions that affect
the HBB (beta globin gene), form the most common human genetic disorders
world-wide, and represent a major public health problem. Inter-individual
variation in foetal haemoglobin (HbF) expression is a known and heritable disease
modifier; high HbF levels are correlated with reduced morbidity and mortality in 
both diseases. This review traces our progress in the understanding of the
persistence of HbF in adults as a quantitative trait and the genetic approaches
used in teasing out the loci contributing to its variability in normal
populations and in patients with haemoglobinopathies. Three major loci --
Xmn1-HBG2 single nucleotide polymorphism, HBS1L-MYB intergenic region on
chromosome 6q, and BCL11A -- contribute 20-50% of the trait variance in patients 
with sickle cell anaemia and healthy European Caucasians. It is likely that the
remaining trait variance is due to numerous other loci, many contributing modest 
effects. Identification of the three major loci has not yet been translated into 
new therapeutic approaches for HbF reactivation but an immediate application
would be an improved prediction of one's ability to produce HbF, which in turn,
may improve prediction of disease severity.

PMID: 19344402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Lung Cancer. 2009 Dec;66(3):372-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.02.017. Epub 2009 
Mar 25.

Genomic aberrations in squamous cell lung carcinoma related to lymph node or
distant metastasis.

Boelens MC(1), Kok K, van der Vlies P, van der Vries G, Sietsma H, Timens W,
Postma DS, Groen HJ, van den Berg A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Medical Biology, University Medical Centre
Groningen, University of Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ, Groningen, The
Netherlands.

About 50% of patients presenting with resectable lung cancer develop distant
metastases within 5 years. Genomic markers predicting metastatic behaviour of
squamous cell lung carcinoma (SCC) are currently underexposed. We analyzed a
cohort of patients with primary SCC using array-based comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH) to identify which genomic aberrations are related to
metastatic behaviour. The cohort consisted of 34 patients with a follow-up of at 
least 5 years, 8 with metastases in regional lymph nodes only and 26 patients
without any metastases at the time of surgery. Eleven of the latter 26 developed 
metastases in distant organs within 3 years after surgery. Copy number changes
observed in at least 40% of all SCC included gains at chromosomal arms 3q, 5p,
8q, 19q, 20p, 22q and losses at 3p, 4p, 4q, 5q, 8p and 9p. High copy number
amplifications were observed at 2p15-p16, 3q24-q29, 8p11-p12, 8q23-q24, and
12p12, containing candidate oncogenes such as BCL11A, REL, ECT2, PIK3CA, ADAM9,
MYC and KRAS. Amplification of 2p15-p16 is a novel finding in SCC. Another novel 
finding is the homozygous deletion observed at 4q33-34.1 in 15% of the SCC cases.
Gains at 7q36, 8p12, 10q22, 12p12, loss at 4p14 and the homozygous deletions at
4q occurred significantly more frequent in SCC from patients with lymph node
metastases only. SCC from patients with distant metastases showed a significantly
higher gain frequency at 8q22-q24 and loss at 8p23 and 13q21, and a significantly
lower gain frequency at 2p12 and 2p16 and loss at 11q25 compared with SCC from
patients without metastases. Of these, gains at 7q, 8p and 10q were restricted to
SCC with lymph node metastasis and gain at 8q was restricted to patients with
distant metastasis. Two genomic aberrations, i.e. loss of 4p and gain of 19q12
were observed more frequently in SCC with only lymph node metastases as compared 
to SCC with distant metastases. In conclusion, we identified genomic aberrations 
in primary SCC that were related to lymph node or distant metastases.

PMID: 19324446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2009 Mar-Apr;42(2):144-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2008.12.003.
Epub 2009 Jan 18.

BCL11A represses HBG transcription in K562 cells.

Chen Z(1), Luo HY, Steinberg MH, Chui DH.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Sickle Cell Disease, Division of Hematology/Oncology, 
Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118,
USA.

BCL11A on chromosome 2p16 was recently shown to be a major quantitative trait
locus for Hb F level and F-cell number in several populations with or without
beta-hemoglobinopathy. We now show that BCL11A isoforms are expressed in K562
cells. Butyrate induction of HBG globin production in K562 is associated with
reduced BCL11A. Conversely, augmented expression of BCL11A in K562 cells through 
transfection of BCL11A expression vector results in more than 50% reduction of
HBG promoter transcription activity. This transcription repression can be
abrogated by sodium butyrate. BCL11A binds to GGCCGG motif in nucleotide -56 to
-51 on the HBG proximal promoter. Together, these data are consistent with BCL11A
being able to bind to a core motif in the HBG proximal promoter, recruit and
interact with partners to form a repression complex, leading to deacetylation of 
histones and down-regulation of the HBG transcription.

PMID: 19153051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Blood. 2009 Mar 19;113(12):2765-3775. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-07-168096. Epub
2008 Dec 18.

Molecular profiling of classical Hodgkin lymphoma tissues uncovers variations in 
the tumor microenvironment and correlations with EBV infection and outcome.

Chetaille B(1), Bertucci F, Finetti P, Esterni B, Stamatoullas A, Picquenot JM,
Copin MC, Morschhauser F, Casasnovas O, Petrella T, Molina T, Vekhoff A, Feugier 
P, Bouabdallah R, Birnbaum D, Olive D, Xerri L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bio-Pathology, Institut Paoli-Calmettes and Université de la
Méditerranée, Marseille, France.

The outcome of classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) patients may be related to the
tumor microenvironment, which in turn may be influenced by Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) infection. To characterize the cHL microenvironment, a set of 63 cHL tissue
samples was profiled using DNA microarrays. Their gene expression profile
differed from that of histiocyte T cell-rich B-cell lymphoma (H/TCRBCL) samples
that were used as controls, mainly due to high expression of PDCD1/PD-1 in
H/TCRBCL. EBV(+) cHL tissues could be distinguished from EBV(-) samples by a gene
signature characteristic of Th1 and antiviral responses. Samples from cHL
patients with favorable outcome overexpressed genes specific for B cells and
genes involved in apoptotic pathways. An independent set of 146 cHL samples was
analyzed using immunohistochemistry. It showed a significant adverse value in
case of high percentage of either TIA-1(+)-reactive cells or topoisomerase-2(+)
tumor cells, whereas high numbers of BCL11A(+), FOXP3(+), or CD20(+) reactive
cells had a favorable influence. Our results suggest an antitumoral role for B
cells in the cHL microenvironment and a stronger stromal influence of the PD1
pathway in H/TCRBCL than cHL. The observation of Th1/ antiviral response in
EBV(+) cHL tissues provides a basis for novel treatment strategies.

PMID: 19096012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Science. 2008 Dec 19;322(5909):1803-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1169216.

Developmental biology. From genetic association to genetic switch.

Michelson AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, 31
Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. michelsonam@mail.nih.gov

Comment on
    Science. 2008 Dec 19;322(5909):1839-42.

PMID: 19095932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Science. 2008 Dec 19;322(5909):1839-42. doi: 10.1126/science.1165409. Epub 2008
Dec 4.

Human fetal hemoglobin expression is regulated by the developmental
stage-specific repressor BCL11A.

Sankaran VG(1), Menne TF, Xu J, Akie TE, Lettre G, Van Handel B, Mikkola HK,
Hirschhorn JN, Cantor AB, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2008 Dec 19;322(5909):1803-4.

Differences in the amount of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) that persists into adulthood 
affect the severity of sickle cell disease and the beta-thalassemia syndromes.
Genetic association studies have identified sequence variants in the gene BCL11A 
that influence HbF levels. Here, we examine BCL11A as a potential regulator of
HbF expression. The high-HbF BCL11A genotype is associated with reduced BCL11A
expression. Moreover, abundant expression of full-length forms of BCL11A is
developmentally restricted to adult erythroid cells. Down-regulation of BCL11A
expression in primary adult erythroid cells leads to robust HbF expression.
Consistent with a direct role of BCL11A in globin gene regulation, we find that
BCL11A occupies several discrete sites in the beta-globin gene cluster. BCL11A
emerges as a therapeutic target for reactivation of HbF in beta-hemoglobin
disorders.

PMID: 19056937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Blood. 2009 Jan 29;113(5):1075-85. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-03-144436. Epub 2008
Oct 23.

A retroviral mutagenesis screen reveals strong cooperation between Bcl11a
overexpression and loss of the Nf1 tumor suppressor gene.

Yin B(1), Delwel R, Valk PJ, Wallace MR, Loh ML, Shannon KM, Largaespada DA.

Author information: 
(1)Masonic Cancer Center and Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and
Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

NF1 inactivation occurs in specific human cancers, including juvenile
myelomonocytic leukemia, an aggressive myeloproliferative disorder of childhood. 
However, evidence suggests that Nf1 loss alone does not cause leukemia. We
therefore hypothesized that inactivation of the Nf1 tumor suppressor gene
requires cooperating mutations to cause acute leukemia. To search for candidate
genes that cooperate with Nf1 deficiency in leukemogenesis, we performed a
forward genetic screen using retroviral insertion mutagenesis in Nf1 mutant mice.
We identified 43 common proviral insertion sites that contain candidate genes
involved in leukemogenesis. One of these genes, Bcl11a, confers a growth
advantage in cultured Nf1 mutant hematopoietic cells and causes early onset of
leukemia of either myeloid or lymphoid lineage in mice when expressed in
Nf1-deficient bone marrow. Bcl11a-expressing cells display compromised p21(Cip1) 
induction, suggesting that Bcl11a's oncogenic effects are mediated, in part,
through suppression of p21(Cip1). Importantly, Bcl11a is expressed in human
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia samples. A
subset of AML patients, who had poor outcomes, of 16 clusters, displayed high
levels of BCL11A in leukemic cells. These findings suggest that deregulated
Bcl11a cooperates with Nf1 in leukemogenesis, and a therapeutic strategy
targeting the BCL11A pathway may prove beneficial in the treatment of leukemia.

PMCID: PMC2635073
PMID: 18948576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Oct 15;186(2):110-4. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.06.007.

BCL2 and BCL3 are recurrent translocation partners of the IGH locus.

Szymanowska N(1), Klapper W, Gesk S, Küppers R, Martín-Subero JI, Siebert R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus
Kiel, Christian-Albrechts University, Schwanenweg 24, 24105 Kiel, Germany.

Chromosomal translocations affecting the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) locus
in chromosomal band 14q32 are the most frequent cytogenetic changes in B-cell
lymphomas. We studied the presence of IGH translocations in a consecutively
ascertained series of 94 classical Hodgkin lymphomas (cHL) by combined
immunofluorescence for CD30 and interphase cytogenetics (FICTION technique). The 
Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells of a total of 11 of 87 evaluable cases (13%)
showed signal patterns indicative of IGH translocations. To identify the
translocation partners, these cases were further studied with probes for the MYC,
BCL2, BCL6, BCL3, REL/BCL11A, JAK2/PDCD1LG2 (alias PDL2) C14orf43, and C2TA loci.
The IGH translocation partner could be identified in four cHL and involved BCL2
and BCL3 in two cases each. Immunohistochemistry in cases with suitable material 
revealed that tumor cells of the two cHL with IGH/BCL2 fusion and the cHL with
IGH/BCL3 fusion expressed the BCL2 and BCL3 protein, respectively. These data
indicate that BCL2 or BCL3 are recurrent translocation partners of the IGH locus 
in cHL; however, most of the translocation partners of IGH translocations in cHL 
remain to be identified.

PMID: 18940474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Br J Haematol. 2008 Nov;143(4):532-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07373.x. Epub
2008 Aug 24.

Genome-wide DNA analysis identifies recurrent imbalances predicting outcome in
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia with 17p deletion.

Forconi F(1), Rinaldi A, Kwee I, Sozzi E, Raspadori D, Rancoita PM, Scandurra M, 
Rossi D, Deambrogi C, Capello D, Zucca E, Marconi D, Bomben R, Gattei V, Lauria
F, Gaidano G, Bertoni F.

Author information: 
(1)Sezione Ematologia e Trapianti, Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Scienze
Immunologiche, Università di Siena, Siena, Italy. forconif@unisi.it

Deletion of 17p (TP53) identifies a rare subset of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia 
(17p- CLL) with aggressive behaviour. Genome-wide DNA-profiling was performed to 
investigate 18 patients with 17p- CLL. All cases had multiple copy-number (CN)
changes. Among the several recurrent CN changes identified, 8q24.13-q24.1-gain
(MYC), 8p-loss (TNFRSF10A/B, also known as TRAIL1/2) and 2p16.1-p14-gain
(REL/BCL11A) appeared frequently represented. 8p-loss and 2p16.1-p14-gain also
appeared clinically relevant and predicted significant shorter time from
diagnosis to treatment (8p-loss) and overall survival (8p-loss and
2p16.1-p14-gain, P < 0.05). These observations document a highly unstable genome 
in 17p- CLL and suggest that additional genes outside the TP53 locus may be
important for tumour behaviour.

PMID: 18752589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. PLoS One. 2008 Aug 20;3(8):e3019. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003019.

Novel meta-analysis-derived type 2 diabetes risk loci do not determine
prediabetic phenotypes.

Staiger H(1), Machicao F, Kantartzis K, Schäfer SA, Kirchhoff K, Guthoff M,
Silbernagel G, Stefan N, Fritsche A, Häring HU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Angiology, Nephrology, and Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany. harald.staiger@med.uni-tuebingen.de

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association (GWA) studies identified a series of novel
type 2 diabetes risk loci. Most of them were subsequently demonstrated to affect 
insulin secretion of pancreatic beta-cells. Very recently, a meta-analysis of GWA
data revealed nine additional risk loci with still undefined roles in the
pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. Using our thoroughly phenotyped cohort of
subjects at an increased risk for type 2 diabetes, we assessed the association of
the nine latest genetic variants with the predominant prediabetes traits, i.e.,
obesity, impaired insulin secretion, and insulin resistance.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: One thousand five hundred and seventy-eight
metabolically characterized non-diabetic German subjects were genotyped for the
reported candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) JAZF1 rs864745,
CDC123/CAMK1D rs12779790, TSPAN8/LGR5 rs7961581, THADA rs7578597, ADAMTS9
rs4607103, NOTCH2 rs10923931, DCD rs1153188, VEGFA rs9472138, and BCL11A
rs10490072. Insulin sensitivity was derived from fasting glucose and insulin
concentrations, oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), and
hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp. Insulin secretion was estimated from OGTT
data. After appropriate adjustment for confounding variables and Bonferroni
correction for multiple comparisons (corrected alpha-level: p = 0.0014), none of 
the SNPs was reliably associated with adiposity, insulin sensitivity, or insulin 
secretion (all p > or = 0.0117, dominant inheritance model). The risk alleles of 
ADAMTS9 SNP rs4607103 and VEGFA SNP rs9472138 tended to associate with more than 
one measure of insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion, respectively, but did
not reach formal statistical significance. The study was sufficiently powered
(1-beta = 0.8) to detect effect sizes of 0.19 < or = d < or = 0.25 (alpha =
0.0014) and 0.13 < or = d < or = 0.16 (alpha = 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In contrast to the first series of GWA-derived type 2
diabetes candidate SNPs, we could not detect reliable associations of the novel
risk loci with prediabetic phenotypes. Possible weak effects of ADAMTS9 SNP
rs4607103 and VEGFA SNP rs9472138 on insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion,
respectively, await further confirmation by larger studies.

PMCID: PMC2500187
PMID: 18714373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2008 Nov-Dec;41(3):255-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2008.06.007.
Epub 2008 Aug 8.

BCL11A is a major HbF quantitative trait locus in three different populations
with beta-hemoglobinopathies.

Sedgewick AE(1), Timofeev N, Sebastiani P, So JC, Ma ES, Chan LC, Fucharoen G,
Fucharoen S, Barbosa CG, Vardarajan BN, Farrer LA, Baldwin CT, Steinberg MH, Chui
DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Increased HbF levels or F-cell (HbF containing erythrocyte) numbers can
ameliorate the disease severity of beta-thalassemia major and sickle cell anemia.
Recent genome-wide association studies reported that single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in BCL11A gene on chromosome 2p16.1 were correlated with
F-cells among healthy northern Europeans, and HbF among Sardinians with
beta-thalassemias. In this study, we showed that SNPs in BCL11A were associated
with F-cell numbers in Chinese with beta-thalassemia trait, and with HbF levels
in Thais with either beta-thalassemia or HbE trait and in African Americans with 
sickle cell anemia. Taken together, the data suggest that the functional motifs
responsible for modulating F-cells and HbF levels reside within a 3 kb region in 
the second intron of BCL11A.

PMCID: PMC4100606
PMID: 18691915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Genes Cells. 2008 Sep;13(9):931-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01216.x. Epub
2008 Aug 4.

BCL11A is a SUMOylated protein and recruits SUMO-conjugation enzymes in its
nuclear body.

Kuwata T(1), Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.

BCL11A/EVI9 is a zinc-finger protein predominantly expressed in brain and
hematopoietic cells. Previous studies show that BCL11A is involved in acute
myelomonocytic leukemia and chronic lymphoid leukemia in mouse and human,
respectively. Moreover, BCL11A is localized in the characteristic nuclear body in
which BCL6 is co-localized. However, the significance of BCL11A in leukemogenesis
and nuclear function remains unknown. In this study we show that BCL11A interacts
with UBC9, a small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) E2 conjugating enzyme, and
recruits SUMO1 into the nuclear body. A lysine residue at amino acid 634 of
BCL11A is SUMOylated but not required for the SUMO1 recruitment. The N-terminal
region of BCL11A is responsible for SUMO1 recruitment as well as its nuclear body
formation. We also show that SENP2, a SUMO specific peptidase, is co-localized in
the nuclear body. These results suggest that BCL11A could be involved in the SUMO
conjugation system, and that BCL11A might play an important role in protein
modification.

PMID: 18681895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Aug 19;105(33):11869-74. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0804799105. Epub 2008 Jul 30.

DNA polymorphisms at the BCL11A, HBS1L-MYB, and beta-globin loci associate with
fetal hemoglobin levels and pain crises in sickle cell disease.

Lettre G(1), Sankaran VG, Bezerra MA, Araújo AS, Uda M, Sanna S, Cao A,
Schlessinger D, Costa FF, Hirschhorn JN, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. lettre@broad.mit.edu

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Aug 19;105(33):11595-6.

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a debilitating monogenic blood disorder with a
highly variable phenotype characterized by severe pain crises, acute clinical
events, and early mortality. Interindividual variation in fetal hemoglobin (HbF) 
expression is a known and potentially heritable modifier of SCD severity. High
HbF levels are correlated with reduced morbidity and mortality. Common single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at the BCL11A and HBS1L-MYB loci have been
implicated previously in HbF level variation in nonanemic European populations.
We recently demonstrated an association between a BCL11A SNP and HbF levels in
one SCD cohort [Uda M, et al. (2008) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:1620-1625]. Here,
we genotyped additional BCL11A SNPs, HBS1L-MYB SNPs, and an SNP upstream of
(G)gamma-globin (HBG2; the XmnI polymorphism), in two independent SCD cohorts:
the African American Cooperative Study of Sickle Cell Disease (CSSCD) and an SCD 
cohort from Brazil. We studied the effect of these SNPs on HbF levels and on a
measure of SCD-related morbidity (pain crisis rate). We strongly replicated the
association between these SNPs and HbF level variation (in the CSSCD, P values
range from 0.04 to 2 x 10(-42)). Together, common SNPs at the BCL11A, HBS1L-MYB, 
and beta-globin (HBB) loci account for >20% of the variation in HbF levels in SCD
patients. We also have shown that HbF-associated SNPs associate with pain crisis 
rate in SCD patients. These results provide a clear example of inherited common
sequence variants modifying the severity of a monogenic disease.

PMCID: PMC2491485
PMID: 18667698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. BMC Evol Biol. 2008 Jun 18;8:176. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-8-176.

Evolution of C2H2-zinc finger genes and subfamilies in mammals: species-specific 
duplication and loss of clusters, genes and effector domains.

Tadepally HD(1), Burger G, Aubry M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Université de Montreal, C,P, 6128, Succ,
Centre-Ville, Montreal, QC, H3C 3J7, Canada. hamsa.tadepally@gmail.com
<hamsa.tadepally@gmail.com>

BACKGROUND: C2H2 zinc finger genes (C2H2-ZNF) constitute the largest class of
transcription factors in humans and one of the largest gene families in mammals. 
Often arranged in clusters in the genome, these genes are thought to have
undergone a massive expansion in vertebrates, primarily by tandem duplication.
However, this view is based on limited datasets restricted to a single chromosome
or a specific subset of genes belonging to the large KRAB domain-containing
C2H2-ZNF subfamily.
RESULTS: Here, we present the first comprehensive study of the evolution of the
C2H2-ZNF family in mammals. We assembled the complete repertoire of human
C2H2-ZNF genes (718 in total), about 70% of which are organized into 81 clusters 
across all chromosomes. Based on an analysis of their N-terminal effector
domains, we identified two new C2H2-ZNF subfamilies encoding genes with a SET or 
a HOMEO domain. We searched for the syntenic counterparts of the human clusters
in other mammals for which complete gene data are available: chimpanzee, mouse,
rat and dog. Cross-species comparisons show a large variation in the numbers of
C2H2-ZNF genes within homologous mammalian clusters, suggesting differential
patterns of evolution. Phylogenetic analysis of selected clusters reveals that
the disparity in C2H2-ZNF gene repertoires across mammals not only originates
from differential gene duplication but also from gene loss. Further, we
discovered variations among orthologs in the number of zinc finger motifs and
association of the effector domains, the latter often undergoing sequence
degeneration. Combined with phylogenetic studies, physical maps and an analysis
of the exon-intron organization of genes from the SCAN and KRAB
domains-containing subfamilies, this result suggests that the SCAN subfamily
emerged first, followed by the SCAN-KRAB and finally by the KRAB subfamily.
CONCLUSION: Our results are in agreement with the "birth and death hypothesis"
for the evolution of C2H2-ZNF genes, but also show that this hypothesis alone
cannot explain the considerable evolutionary variation within the subfamilies of 
these genes in mammals. We, therefore, propose a new model involving the
interdependent evolution of C2H2-ZNF gene subfamilies.

PMCID: PMC2443715
PMID: 18559114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Br J Haematol. 2008 Aug;142(4):529-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07227.x.
Epub 2008 Jun 28.

Chromosome 14q32 translocations involving the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus in
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia identify a disease subset with poor prognosis.

Cavazzini F(1), Hernandez JA, Gozzetti A, Russo Rossi A, De Angeli C, Tiseo R,
Bardi A, Tammiso E, Crupi R, Lenoci MP, Forconi F, Lauria F, Marasca R, Maffei R,
Torelli G, Gonzalez M, Martin-Jimenez P, Maria Hernandez J, Rigolin GM, Cuneo A.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Haematology, Department of Biomedical Sciences and Advanced
Therapies, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

Comment in
    Br J Haematol. 2009 Jan;144(1):131-3.

Immunophenotypic studies, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and
conventional karyotyping were used to define the clinicobiological significance
of 14q32 translocations involving the immunoglobulin gene locus (14q32/IGH) in
252 chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) patients. The following regions were
studied: 13q14, centromere 12, 6q21; 11q22/ATM; 17p13/TP53, 14q32/IGH. Patients
were classified as group 1 (favourable, i.e. 13q-single or normal), group 2
(intermediate risk, i.e. +12, 6q-, 1-2 anomalies), group 3 (unfavourable, i.e.
17p-, 11q-, complex karyotype), or group 4 (14q32/IGH translocation). Endpoints
were treatment-free survival (TFS) and overall survival (OS). One hundred and ten
patients were included in group 1, 99 in group 2, 25 in group 3 and 18 in group
4. 14q32/IGH translocation partners were identified in eight cases (BCL2 in five 
cases, BCL11A, CCND3 and CDK6 in one case each). group 4 showed shorter TFS
versus groups 2 and 1 (25% patients treated at 2 months vs. 12 (P = 0.02) and 20 
months (P = 0.002), respectively) and shorter OS (25% patients dead at 18 months 
versus 50 (P = 0.0003) and >60 months (P < 0.0001) respectively. The 14q32/IGH
translocation maintained prognostic significance at multivariate analysis on TFS 
(P = 0.025) and OS (P < 0.001), along with advanced stage and CD38+. These
findings show that the 14q32/IGH translocation predicts for an unfavourable
outcome in CLL and that this cytogenetic subset might be included as a separate
entity in a hierarchical cytogenetic classification of CLL.

PMID: 18547320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Haematologica. 2008 May;93(5):670-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.12221. Epub 2008 Mar
26.

Comparative genome profiling across subtypes of low-grade B-cell lymphoma
identifies type-specific and common aberrations that target genes with a role in 
B-cell neoplasia.

Ferreira BI(1), García JF, Suela J, Mollejo M, Camacho FI, Carro A, Montes S,
Piris MA, Cigudosa JC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cytogenetics Group, Centro Nacional Investigaciones Oncologicas
(CNIO), Melchor Fernandez Almagro, 3, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2008 May;93(5):641-5.

BACKGROUND: Low-grade B-cell lymphomas are a very heterogeneous group of tumors, 
whose differential diagnosis is frequently compromised by the lack of specific
cytogenetic or molecular features. Our objective was to search for genomic
features that allow a better molecular identification of the different types of
lymphoma studied.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We selected a panel of 87 low-grade B-cell lymphoma tumor
samples that were unambiguously diagnosed (clinically and cytogenetically) as:
follicular, splenic marginal zone, nodal marginal zone, lymphoplasmacytic, mantle
cell, extranodal marginal zone MALT-type lymphoma or B-cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. All samples were subjected to the same high-resolution genomic DNA
analysis (array-based comparative genomic hybridization): a whole genome platform
that contained 44000 probes distributed across the genome. Genomic imbalances
were recorded, compiled and analyzed.
RESULTS: Eighty percent of analyzed cases showed genomic imbalances (deletions
and gain/amplifications) but the frequency of these imbalances ranged from 100%
in mantle cell lymphomas to 33% in MALT lymphomas. A total of 95 new genomic
imbalances affecting all lymphoma subtypes, were defined. We evaluated the
extension of the genomic instability, detecting distinct patterns of genomic
instability within subtypes. Specific pathways, such as nuclear factor kB (gains 
of REL and BCL11A, and losses of COMMD3, BIRC1, IKK1 and NFKB2), Polycomb group
proteins (gain of BMI1 and deletion of PCGF6), DNA repair checkpoint pathways
(deletion of 16q24 involving CDT1), or miRNA with a role in B-cell lymphoma
pathogenesis (MIRN15A, MIRN16-1), were targeted by this genomic instability.
CONCLUSIONS: Although all subtypes of lymphomas showed gains and losses of DNA,
the analysis of their genomic profiles indicated that there are specific
aberrations in almost every subtype as well as frequent aberrations that are
common to a large number of lymphoma types. These common aberrations target genes
that are important in B-cell lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 18367492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2007;119(3-4):204-10. doi: 10.1159/000112062. Epub 2008 Feb
1.

U-HO1, a new cell line derived from a primary refractory classical Hodgkin
lymphoma.

Mader A(1), Bruderlein S, Wegener S, Melzner I, Popov S, Muller-Hermelink HK,
Barth TF, Viardot A, Moller P.

Author information: 
(1)Happareute, Rothenbach, Germany.

The Hodgkin cell line U-HO1 was established from a malignant pleural effusion of 
a 23-year-old male patient during the end stage of refractory nodular sclerosing 
classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL). Since its establishment in 2005, U-HO1 has
maintained stable characteristics in vitro and has a doubling time of about 4
days under standard culture conditions. U-HO1 forms typical Reed-Sternberg cells 
in suspension, is EBV negative, lacks HLA-A, -B, -C but expresses HLA-D
proteins/CD74 and exposes CD15 together with CD30 in the absence of CD19 and CD20
on the cell surface. Karyotype analysis of U-HO1 revealed a hyperdiploid
karyotype with multiple clonal aberrations. Most significant is an elongated
chromosome 2, der(2)t(2;10)(q35; q16.1)add(2)(p13). CGH analysis revealed the
following imbalances: ish cgh dim(1)(p13p31)(p12q21), enh(2)(p13p23),
dim(4)(q31.3qter), enh(6)(q22q27), enh(12), enh(18), enh(20) (q13.1pter). FISH
analysis showed about six-fold amplification of REL and BCL11A, thus, U-HO1 is
prototypical for cHL in every aspect tested so far. As an outstanding feature
compared to the existing HL cell lines, U-HO1 has high levels of microRNA
transcripts of MIRN216 and MIRN217 located in the amplicon 2p16. Compared to
other HL cell lines, U-HO1 proved far less genetically aberrant suggesting that
U-HO1's imbalances suffice to cause the full-blown phenotype of primary
refractory cHL.

Copyright (c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18253030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Feb 5;105(5):1620-5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0711566105.
Epub 2008 Feb 1.

Genome-wide association study shows BCL11A associated with persistent fetal
hemoglobin and amelioration of the phenotype of beta-thalassemia.

Uda M(1), Galanello R, Sanna S, Lettre G, Sankaran VG, Chen W, Usala G, Busonero 
F, Maschio A, Albai G, Piras MG, Sestu N, Lai S, Dei M, Mulas A, Crisponi L,
Naitza S, Asunis I, Deiana M, Nagaraja R, Perseu L, Satta S, Cipollina MD,
Sollaino C, Moi P, Hirschhorn JN, Orkin SH, Abecasis GR, Schlessinger D, Cao A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, Cittadella Universitaria di Monserrato, Monserrato, Cagliari, Italy.

beta-Thalassemia and sickle cell disease both display a great deal of phenotypic 
heterogeneity, despite being generally thought of as simple Mendelian diseases.
The reasons for this are not well understood, although the level of fetal
hemoglobin (HbF) is one well characterized ameliorating factor in both of these
conditions. To better understand the genetic basis of this heterogeneity, we
carried out genome-wide scans with 362,129 common SNPs on 4,305 Sardinians to
look for genetic linkage and association with HbF levels, as well as other red
blood cell-related traits. Among major variants affecting HbF levels, SNP
rs11886868 in the BCL11A gene was strongly associated with this trait (P <
10(-35)). The C allele frequency was significantly higher in Sardinian
individuals with elevated HbF levels, detected by screening for beta-thalassemia,
and patients with attenuated forms of beta-thalassemia vs. those with thalassemia
major. We also show that the same BCL11A variant is strongly associated with HbF 
levels in a large cohort of sickle cell patients. These results indicate that
BCL11A variants, by modulating HbF levels, act as an important ameliorating
factor of the beta-thalassemia phenotype, and it is likely they could help
ameliorate other hemoglobin disorders. We expect our findings will help to
characterize the molecular mechanisms of fetal globin regulation and could
eventually contribute to the development of new therapeutic approaches for
beta-thalassemia and sickle cell anemia.

PMCID: PMC2234194
PMID: 18245381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Blood. 2008 Apr 1;111(7):3778-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-10-117531. Epub 2008
Jan 24.

Novel markers of normal and neoplastic human plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Marafioti T(1), Paterson JC, Ballabio E, Reichard KK, Tedoldi S, Hollowood K,
Dictor M, Hansmann ML, Pileri SA, Dyer MJ, Sozzani S, Dikic I, Shaw AS, Petrella 
T, Stein H, Isaacson PG, Facchetti F, Mason DY.

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia Research Fund Immunodiagnostics Unit, Nuffield Department of
Clinical Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.
teresa.marafioti@ndcls.ox.ac.uk

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) are involved in innate immunity (eg, by
secreting interferons) and also give rise to CD4+CD56+ hematodermic neoplasms. We
report extensive characterization of human pDCs in routine tissue samples,
documenting the expression of 19 immunohistologic markers, including signaling
molecules (eg, BLNK), transcription factors (eg, ICSBP/IRF8 and PU.1), and
Toll-like receptors (TLR7, TLR9). Many of these molecules are expressed in other 
cell types (principally B cells), but the adaptor protein CD2AP was essentially
restricted to pDCs, and is therefore a novel immunohistologic marker for use in
tissue biopsies. We found little evidence for activation-associated morphologic
or phenotypic changes in conditions where pDCs are greatly increased (eg, Kikuchi
disease). Most of the molecules were retained in the majority of pDC neoplasms,
and 3 (BCL11A, CD2AP, and ICSBP/IRF8) were also commonly negative in leukemia
cutis (acute myeloid leukemia in the skin), a tumor that may mimic pDC neoplasia.
In summary, we have documented a range of molecules (notably those associated
with B cells) expressed by pDCs in tissues and peripheral blood (where pDCs were 
detectable in cytospins at a frequency of <1% of mononuclear cells) and also
defined potential new markers (in particular CD2AP) for the diagnosis of pDC
tumors.

PMID: 18218851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Immunol. 2007 Sep 15;179(6):3662-71.

Characterization of early stages of human B cell development by gene expression
profiling.

Hystad ME(1), Myklebust JH, Bø TH, Sivertsen EA, Rian E, Forfang L, Munthe E,
Rosenwald A, Chiorazzi M, Jonassen I, Staudt LM, Smeland EB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute for Cancer Research,
Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2009 May1;182(9):5882.

We have characterized several stages of normal human B cell development in adult 
bone marrow by gene expression profiling of hemopoietic stem cells, early B
(E-B), pro-B, pre-B, and immature B cells, using RNA amplification and Lymphochip
cDNA microarrays (n = 6). Hierarchical clustering of 758 differentially expressed
genes clearly separated the five populations. We used gene sets to investigate
the functional assignment of the differentially expressed genes. Genes involved
in VDJ recombination as well as B lineage-associated transcription factors (TCF3 
(E2A), EBF, BCL11A, and PAX5) were turned on in E-B cells, before acquisition of 
CD19. Several transcription factors with unknown roles in B lymphoid cells
demonstrated interesting expression patterns, including ZCCHC7 and ZHX2. Compared
with hemopoietic stem cells and pro-B cells, E-B cells had increased expression
of 18 genes, and these included IGJ, IL1RAP, BCL2, and CD62L. In addition, E-B
cells expressed T/NK lineage and myeloid-associated genes including CD2, NOTCH1, 
CD99, PECAM1, TNFSF13B, and MPO. Expression of key genes was confirmed at the
protein level by FACS analysis. Several of these Ags were heterogeneously
expressed, providing a basis for further subdivision of E-B cells. Altogether,
these results provide new information regarding expression of genes in early
stages of human B cell development.

PMID: 17785802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Nat Genet. 2007 Oct;39(10):1197-9. Epub 2007 Sep 2.

A QTL influencing F cell production maps to a gene encoding a zinc-finger protein
on chromosome 2p15.

Menzel S(1), Garner C, Gut I, Matsuda F, Yamaguchi M, Heath S, Foglio M, Zelenika
D, Boland A, Rooks H, Best S, Spector TD, Farrall M, Lathrop M, Thein SL.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London School of Medicine, Division of Gene and Cell Based
Therapy, King's Denmark Hill Campus, London SE5 9PJ, UK.

F cells measure the presence of fetal hemoglobin, a heritable quantitative trait 
in adults that accounts for substantial phenotypic diversity of sickle cell
disease and beta thalassemia. We applied a genome-wide association mapping
strategy to individuals with contrasting extreme trait values and mapped a new F 
cell quantitative trait locus to BCL11A, which encodes a zinc-finger protein, on 
chromosome 2p15. The 2p15 BCL11A quantitative trait locus accounts for 15.1% of
the trait variance.

PMID: 17767159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Am J Clin Pathol. 2007 Aug;128(2):323-32.

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia FISH panel: impact on diagnosis.

Nelson BP(1), Gupta R, Dewald GW, Paternoster SF, Rosen ST, Peterson LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Feinberg Medical School, Northwestern University,
Chicago, IL 60611-2908, USA.

Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is an alternative to
conventional chromosome analysis of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells. We 
analyzed 172 samples from 136 possible CLL cases using a FISH panel. Reflex
testing with probes to CCND1, BCL2, BCL3, BCL11A, c-MYC, MALT1, and a break-apart
immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) probe was done if more than 2 signals for 14q32 
occurred. For 111 cases, there were sufficient data for analysis. Of 111 cases,
81 (72.9%) had 1 or more genetic abnormalities. The most frequent abnormality was
13q-, followed by trisomy 12, 11q-, and 17p-. In 13 cases, there were IGH
abnormalities. Two cases with CCND1/IGH fusion were reclassified as mantle cell
lymphoma. Four CLL cases had IGH fusion with BCL2, BCL3 (2 cases), and BCL11A; no
fusion partner was detected in 7 cases. Morphologic features were atypical for
CLL in 2 cases with IGH fusion (BCL11A and BCL3). The FISH CLL panel is useful to
identify prognostic aberrations and to clarify diagnosis in cases with unusual
morphologic features.

PMID: 17638669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Neurosci Res. 2007 Jun;85(8):1628-36.

Expression of zinc finger transcription factor Bcl11A/Evi9/CTIP1 in rat brain.

Kuo TY(1), Hsueh YP.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Bcl11A/Evi9/CTIP1, a Kruppel-like zinc finger gene, plays an important role in
B-cell development. In addition to expression in B lymphocytes, Bcl11A/Evi9/CTIP1
is also highly expressed in the brain, although its function there is still
unclear. In the present study, regional and subcellular distributions of
Bcl11A/Evi9/CTIP1 in rat brain were investigated by immunostaining and
biochemical fractionation. Using antibodies recognizing the first 18 amino acid
residues of Bcl11A/Evi9/CTIP1, the distribution of 2 isoforms of
Bcl11A/Evi9/CTIP1 gene products, Bcl11A-L/Evi9a and Bcl11A-S/Evi9c, was examined.
In rat brain, both Bcl11A-L/Evi9a and Bcl11A-S/Evi9c were expressed, although the
amount of Bcl11A-S/Evi9c protein was higher. Bcl11A-S/Evi9c was widely expressed 
in different regions of the rat brain. In contrast, Bcl11A-L/Evi9a was more
restricted, being expressed in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and olfactory
bulb. At the subcellular level, biochemical fractionation and confocal analysis
of adult rat brain revealed that, in addition to being in the nuclei of neurons, 
fractions of Bcl11A-L/Evi9a and Bcl11A-S/Evi9c could be found in extranuclear
locations. Double staining with the synaptic marker synaptophysin indicated a
synaptic distribution of Bcl11A/Evi9/CTIP1. Postsynaptic density was also
biochemically purified and subjected to immunoblotting using Bcl11A/Evi9/CTIP1
antibodies. The results showed that Bcl11A-L/Evi9a was enriched in the PSD I and 
PSD II fractions. In contrast, only a trace amount of Bcl11A-S was detected in
PSD fractions. Our study also indicated that a fraction of Bcl11A/Evi9/CTIP1 was 
present in the cytoplasm, even at synapses. To regulate gene expression in the
nuclei, nuclear translocation of Bcl11A/Evi9/CTIP1 may be one of the mechanisms
controlling neuronal Bcl11A/Evi9/CTIP1 function.

Copyright (c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17455301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 May 18;356(4):829-35. Epub 2007 Mar 5.

Functional analysis of a novel KRAB/C2H2 zinc finger protein Mipu1.

Jiang L(1), Tang D, Wang K, Zhang H, Yuan C, Duan D, Xiao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, 110 Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan 410078, PR China.

A novel rat gene, Mipu1, encodes a 608 amino acid protein with an amino-terminal 
KRAB domain and 14 carboxyl-terminal C2H2 zinc finger motifs. Mipu1 is localized 
to the nucleus through its KRAB domain or the linker adjacent to its zinc finger 
region. Using the GST-Mipu1 bound to glutathione-Sepharose beads, a consensus
putative DNA binding site (5'-TGTCTTATCGAA-3') was extracted from a random
oligonucleotide library. EMSA and target detection assay showed that the probe
containing the putative site can bind to purified GST-Mipu1 fusion protein. The
oligonucleotide containing the putative site was inserted into the pGL3-promotor 
vector to produce a reporter construct. The expression of reporter gene was
repressed by overexpression of Mipu1 in a dose-dependent manner. Mutation
analysis of the consensus sequence indicated that the repression mediated by
Mipu1 is sequence-dependent. These results suggest that Mipu1 is a nuclear
protein, which functions as a transcriptional repressor.

PMID: 17397802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Leukemia. 2007 Mar;21(3):515-23. Epub 2007 Jan 18.

Mapping of MYC breakpoints in 8q24 rearrangements involving non-immunoglobulin
partners in B-cell lymphomas.

Bertrand P(1), Bastard C, Maingonnat C, Jardin F, Maisonneuve C, Courel MN,
Ruminy P, Picquenot JM, Tilly H.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe d'Etude des Proliférations Lymphoïdes, Centre Henri Becquerel, INSERM
U614, IFRMP23, Rouen, France. pbertrand@rouen.fnclcc.fr

Chromosomal translocations joining the immunoglobulin (IG) and MYC genes have
been extensively reported in Burkitt's and non-Burkitt's lymphomas but data
concerning MYC rearrangements with non-IG partners are scarce. In this study,
8q24 breakpoints from 17 B-cell lymphomas involving non-IG loci were mapped by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). In seven cases the breakpoint was
inside a small region encompassing MYC: in one t(7;8)(p12;q24) and two
t(3;8)(q27;q24), it was telomeric to MYC whereas in four cases, one
t(2;8)(p15;q24) and three t(8;9)(q24;p13) it was located in a 85 kb region
encompassing MYC. In these seven cases, partner regions identified by FISH
contained genes known to be involved in lymphomagenesis, namely BCL6, BCL11A,
PAX5 and IKAROS. Breakpoints were cloned in two t(8;9)(q24;p13), 2.5 and 7 kb
downstream from MYC and several hundred kb 5' to PAX5 on chromosome 9, joining
MYC to ZCCHC7 and to ZBTB5 exon 2, two genes encoding zinc-finger proteins. In
these seven cases, MYC expression measured by quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was significantly higher when
compared to that of patients without 8q24 rearrangement (P=0.006). These results 
suggest that these rearrangements are the consequence of a non-random process
targeting MYC together with non-IG genes involved in lymphocyte differentiation
and lymphoma progression.

PMID: 17230227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Blood. 2007 Feb 1;109(3):1202-10. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

Genome-wide analysis of DNA copy number changes and LOH in CLL using high-density
SNP arrays.

Pfeifer D(1), Pantic M, Skatulla I, Rawluk J, Kreutz C, Martens UM, Fisch P,
Timmer J, Veelken H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Freiburg University Medical Center,
Germany.

Recurrent genomic aberrations are important prognostic parameters in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). High-resolution 10k and 50k Affymetrix SNP arrays
were evaluated as a diagnostic tool for CLL and revealed chromosomal imbalances
in 65.6% and 81.5% of 70 consecutive cases, respectively. Among the
prognostically important aberrations, the del13q14 was present in 36 (51.4%),
trisomy 12 in 9 (12.8%), del11q22 in 9 (12.8%), and del17p13 in 4 cases (5.7%). A
prominent clustering of breakpoints on both sides of the MIRN15A/MIRN16-1 genes
indicated the presence of recombination hot spots in the 13q14 region. Patients
with a monoallelic del13q14 had slower lymphocyte growth kinetics (P=.002) than
patients with biallelic deletions. In 4 CLL cases with unmutated VH genes, a
common minimal 3.5-Mb gain of 2p16 spanning the REL and BCL11A oncogenes was
identified, implicating these genes in the pathogenesis of CLL. Twenty-four large
(>10 Mb) copy-neutral regions with loss of heterozygosity were identified in 14
cases. These regions with loss of heterozygosity are not detectable by
alternative methods and may harbor novel imprinted genes or loss-of-function
alleles that may be important for the pathogenesis of CLL. Genomic profiling with
SNP arrays is a convenient and efficient screening method for simultaneous
genome-wide detection of chromosomal aberrations.

PMID: 17053054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Leukemia. 2006 Oct;20(10):1880-2. Epub 2006 Jul 27.

Gains of the proto-oncogene BCL11A and nuclear accumulation of BCL11A(XL) protein
are frequent in primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma.

Weniger MA, Pulford K, Gesk S, Ehrlich S, Banham AH, Lyne L, Martin-Subero JI,
Siebert R, Dyer MJ, Möller P, Barth TF.

PMID: 16871282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mol Carcinog. 2006 Dec;45(12):887-900.

The putative human stem cell marker, Rex-1 (Zfp42): structural classification and
expression in normal human epithelial and carcinoma cell cultures.

Mongan NP(1), Martin KM, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Medical College, Cornell University, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

Human Rex-1 (hRex-1) (also referred to as zinc-finger protein-42, Zfp42) encodes 
a zinc finger protein expression of which is believed to be characteristic of
pluripotent stem cells. We have applied bioinformatics to classify the
relationship of human, rat, and mouse REX1 proteins in the C2H2 family of zinc
finger proteins and demonstrate that REX1 is a member of the YY1 sub-family of
transcription factors, which includes the Drosophila pleiohomeotic (Pho) protein.
We have generated a molecular model of the human REX1 zinc finger domains based
on the crystal structure of the YY1 transcription factor. To date, expression of 
hRex-1 and its extensively studied mouse homolog mRex-1, has been reported only
in embryonic and adult stem cells and in differentiated spermatocytes. In this
study, reverse transcription-PCR and Western analysis were employed to assay for 
hRex-1 expression in cultured normal human epithelial cells and human carcinoma
cell lines. Expression of hRex-1 mRNA was detected in normal human epidermal
keratinocytes, normal prostate epithelial cells (PrEC), bronchial, and small
airway lung epithelial cells. Other stem cell markers, such as Oct 4, DAB2, and
cMyc were also detected in normal human epidermal keratinocyte cultures.
Expression of hRex-1 was also detected in some human tumor cell lines including
MDA-MB-468 mammary carcinoma, SCC-15 head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, and
N-TERA2 human teratocarcinoma cells. Western analyses confirmed expression of the
human REX1 (ZFP42) protein in MDA-MB-468 cells and normal human keratinocytes.
This research has identified model human cell culture systems, in addition to
embryonic stem (ES) cells, in which Rex-1 is expressed, and this should enable
the characterization of REX1 functions in normal adult epithelial cells and
tumorigenic stem cells.

Copyright (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16865673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Blood. 2006 Oct 15;108(8):2695-702. Epub 2006 Jun 29.

BCL11B participates in the activation of IL2 gene expression in CD4+ T
lymphocytes.

Cismasiu VB(1), Ghanta S, Duque J, Albu DI, Chen HM, Kasturi R, Avram D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell Biology and Cancer Research (MC-165), Albany Medical College, 
47 New Scotland Avenue, Albany, NY 12208, USA.

BCL11A and BCL11B are transcriptional regulators important for lymphopoiesis and 
previously associated with hematopoietic malignancies. Ablation of the mouse
Bcl11b locus results in failure to generate double-positive thymocytes,
implicating a critical role of Bcl11b in T-cell development. However, BCL11B is
also expressed in CD4+ T lymphocytes, both in resting and activated states. Here 
we show both in transformed and primary CD4+ T cells that BCL11B participates in 
the control of the interleukin-2 (IL2) gene expression following activation
through T-cell receptor (TCR). BCL11B augments expression from the IL2 promoter
through direct binding to the US1 site. In addition, BCL11B associates with the
p300 coactivator in CD4+ T cells activated through TCR, which may account for its
transcriptional activation function. These results provide the first evidence
that BCL11B, originally described as a transcriptional repressor, activates
transcription of a target gene in the context of T-cell activation.

PMCID: PMC1895584
PMID: 16809611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Cancer Sci. 2006 Jun;97(6):499-504.

Characterization of target genes at the 2p15-16 amplicon in diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma.

Fukuhara N(1), Tagawa H, Kameoka Y, Kasugai Y, Karnan S, Kameoka J, Sasaki T,
Morishima Y, Nakamura S, Seto M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Nagoya
464-8681, Japan.

Amplification of 2p has been observed as a recurrent alteration in diffuse large 
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Whereas two candidate oncogenes, REL and BCL11A, have
been investigated as targets for 2p amplification, the question remains as to
whether the true target gene in the amplicon is REL, BCL11A or both. We
previously identified frequent genomic gains of chromosomal 2p in 25 out of 99
DLBCL cases by means of genome-wide array comparative genomic hybridization
(CGH). All of these 25 cases included recurrent copy number gain at 2p15-16. In
the study presented here, cases were analyzed in greater detail by means of
contig bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) array CGH for the 4.5-Mb region at
2p15-16, which contained 33 BAC clones. We confined the minimal common region to 
500-kb in length, where only the candidate oncogene REL, and not BCL11A, is
located. Real-time quantitative PCR was carried out to investigate the
correlation between genomic gain and expression. It showed a significant
correlation for both genes, indicating that these two genes are common targets
for the 2p15-16 amplicon. However, given the fact that REL is more frequently
amplified than BCL11A, the REL gene may play a more important role than BCL11A in
the pathogenesis of DLBCL.

PMID: 16734728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Leukemia. 2006 Aug;20(8):1439-41. Epub 2006 May 18.

The BCL11AXL transcription factor: its distribution in normal and malignant
tissues and use as a marker for plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Pulford K, Banham AH, Lyne L, Jones M, Ippolito GC, Liu H, Tucker PW, Roncador G,
Lucas E, Ashe S, Stockwin L, Walewska R, Karran L, Gascoyne RD, Mason DY, Dyer
MJ.

PMID: 16710303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Cancer. 2006 May 16;5:18.

Functional studies of BCL11A: characterization of the conserved BCL11A-XL splice 
variant and its interaction with BCL6 in nuclear paraspeckles of germinal center 
B cells.

Liu H(1), Ippolito GC, Wall JK, Niu T, Probst L, Lee BS, Pulford K, Banham AH,
Stockwin L, Shaffer AL, Staudt LM, Das C, Dyer MJ, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and Institute for Cellular and 
Molecular Biology, 1 University Station, A5000, University of Texas, Austin,
Texas 78712, USA. hui.liu@zimmer.com

BACKGROUND: Chromosomal aberrations of BCL11A at 2p16.1 have been reported in a
variety of B-cell malignancies and its deficiency in mice leads to a profound
block in B-cell development.
RESULTS: Alternative pre-mRNA splicing of BCL11A produces multiple isoforms
sharing a common N-terminus. The most abundant isoform we have identified in
human lymphoid samples is BCL11A-XL, the longest transcript produced at this
locus, and here we report the conservation of this major isoform and its
functional characterization. We show that BCL11A-XL is a DNA-sequence-specific
transcriptional repressor that associates with itself and with other BCL11A
isoforms, as well as with the BCL6 proto-oncogene. Western blot data for
BCL11A-XL expression coupled with data previously published for BCL6 indicates
that these genes are expressed abundantly in germinal-center-derived B cells but 
that expression is extinguished upon terminal differentiation to the plasma cell 
stage. Although BCL11A-XL/BCL6 interaction can modulate BCL6 DNA binding in
vitro, their heteromeric association does not alter the homomeric transcriptional
properties of either on model reporter activity. BCL11A-XL partitions into the
nuclear matrix and colocalizes with BCL6 in nuclear paraspeckles.
CONCLUSION: We propose that the conserved N-terminus of BCL11A defines a
superfamily of C2HC zinc-finger transcription factors involved in hematopoietic
malignancies.

PMCID: PMC1526750
PMID: 16704730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Leukemia. 2006 Jan;20(1):48-54.

Characterization of a recurrent translocation t(2;3)(p15-22;q26) occurring in
acute myeloid leukaemia.

Trubia M(1), Albano F, Cavazzini F, Cambrin GR, Quarta G, Fabbiano F, Ciambelli
F, Magro D, Hernandezo JM, Mancini M, Diverio D, Pelicci PG, Coco FL, Mecucci C, 
Specchia G, Rocchi M, Liso V, Castoldi G, Cuneo A.

Author information: 
(1)IFOM, Milan, Italy.

Six patients with de novo acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and a
t(2;3)(p15-21;q26-27) were identified among approximately 1000 cases enrolled in 
the GIMEMA trial. The t(2;3) was the sole anomaly in three patients, whereas in
three cases monosomy 7, trisomy 15 and 22, and trisomy 14 represented additional 
aberrations. No cryptic chromosome deletions at 5q, 7q, 12p, and 20q were
observed. One patient carried a FLT3 D835 mutation; FLT3 internal tandem
duplication (ITD) was not detected in three patients tested. Characterization of 
the translocation breakpoints using a 3q26 BAC contig specific for the PRDM3
locus showed that the breakpoints were located 5' to EVIl as follows: within
myelodysplatic syndrome (MDS) intron 1 (# 3), between MDS1 exons 2 and 3 in three
patients (# 1, 2, 4) with a 170bp cryptic deletion distal to the breakpoint in
one (# 2), and in a more centromeric position spanning from intron 2 to the 5'
region of EVI1 (# 6, 5). A set of 2p16-21 BAC probes showed that the breakpoints 
on chromosome 2p were located within BCL11A in two separate regions (# 1, 4 and #
2-5), within the thyroid adenoma-associated (THADA) gene (# 6) or distal to the
ZFP36L2 locus (# 3). Regulatory elements were present in proximity of these
breakpoints. RACE PCR studies revealed a chimeric transcript in 1/6 patient
analyzed, but no fusion protein. Quantitative PCR showed a 21-58-fold
over-expression of the EVIl gene in all cases analyzed. The patients showed
dysplasia of at least two myeloid cell lineages in all cases; they had a
low-to-normal platelet count and displayed an immature CD34+ CD117+
immunophenotype. Despite intensive chemotherapy and a median age of 43 years
(range 36-59), only two patients attained a short-lived response; one patient is 
alive with active disease at 12 months, five died at 4-14 months. We arrived at
the following conclusions: (a) the t(2;3) is a recurrent translocation having an 
approximate 0.5% incidence in adult AML; (b) breakpoints involve the 5' region of
EVIl at 3q26, and the BCL11A, the THADA gene or other regions at 2p16.1-21; (c)
cryptic deletions distal to the 3q26 breakpoint may occur in some cases; (d) the 
juxtaposition of the 5' region of EVIl with regulatory elements normally located 
on chromosome 2 brings about EVI1 overexpression; (e) clinical outcome in these
cases is severe.

PMID: 16619048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 Mar;12(3):135-44. Epub 2006 Mar 23.

Transcriptome analysis of FSH and FSH variant stimulation in granulosa cells from
IVM patients reveals novel regulated genes.

Perlman S(1), Bouquin T, van den Hazel B, Jensen TH, Schambye HT, Knudsen S,
Okkels JS.

Author information: 
(1)Maxygen, Hørsholm, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby.

FSH is crucial for oocyte maturation and fertility and is the main component in
infertility treatment in assisted reproduction. The granulosa cells expressing
the FSH receptor interact with the oocyte and provide nourishing substrates
controlling the oocyte maturation. Thus, transcriptome analysis of granulosa
cells stimulated by FSH is of major importance in understanding the communication
between oocytes and granulosa cells. In this study, gene expression profiles were
assessed in human granulosa cells from normal cycling in vitro maturation (IVM)
patients using oligonucleotide gene chips. Granulosa cells were stimulated for 2 
h with either FSH or a previously generated glycosylated FSH variant (FSH1208)
that exhibited increased in vivo activity because of prolonged half-life. The
analysis identified 74 significantly FSH/FSH1208 regulated genes. Amongst these
were well known FSH regulated genes as well as genes not previously described to 
be important in the FSH signalling pathway. These novel FSH regulated genes
include transcription factors [cAMP responsive element modulator (CREM)/inducible
cAMP early repressors (ICER), GATA 6, ZFN 361, Bcl11a, CITED1 and TCF 8] and
other regulatory proteins and enzymes (IGF-BP3, syntaxin and PCK1) possibly
important for oocyte/granulosa cell interaction and function. Array data were
validated for 13 genes by northern blots or RT-PCR. Furthermore, no significant
differences in gene regulation were detected between the two FSH analogs. This
work uncovers novel data important for understanding the folliculogenesis.
Furthermore, the results suggest that FSH1208 has a gene expression profile like 
FSH and thus, in the light of known prolonged in vivo activity, might be a
candidate for improved infertility treatment.

PMID: 16556681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Surg Res. 2005 Jun 1;126(1):86-91; discussion 1-2.

Expression of ZER6 in ERalpha-positive breast cancer.

Stabach PR(1), Thiyagarajan MM, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19107, USA.

BACKGROUND: ZER6 is a C2H2 zinc finger transcription factor with two isoforms
(p52-ZER6 and p71-ZER6), which are differentially repressed by a ligand-dependent
interaction with estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha). We sought to determine if
ZER6 proteins are expressed in ERalpha-positive breast cancer cells and if ZER6
is expressed in association with ERalpha in breast cancers.
METHODS: The expression of ZER6 protein was examined by Western blot and the
pattern of ZER6 expression was examined in a panel of ERalpha-positive and
ERalpha-negative breast cancers using RT-PCR.
RESULTS: COS-1 cells transfected with expression vectors for p52-ZER6 express a
major protein of 52 kDa and a minor protein of 75 kDa, whereas cells transfected 
with the p71-ZER6 expression vector express a major protein of 77 kDa and a minor
protein of 100 kDa. Breast carcinoma cells express ZER6-specific proteins of
similar size, and expression of the p52-ZER6 isoform was only detected in the
ERalpha-positive cell lines. In primary breast cancer tissue, 8/16 (50%) of the
ERalpha-positive tumors had high ZER6 expression, whereas only 1/12 (8%) of the
ERalpha-negative tumors had a high ZER6 level of expression. The relative
abundance of ZER6 mRNA in the ERalpha-positive group was statistically greater
than the ERalpha-negative group (188 versus 106, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: We have confirmed that breast carcinoma cells express ZER6 proteins 
and identified an association between the level of ZER6 expression and ERalpha
expression in primary breast cancers. These data support a role for the ZER6
transcription factors in regulating the expression of genes in hormone-responsive
breast cancer.

PMID: 15916980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Curr Opin Hematol. 2005 May;12(3):203-9.

Genetic networks that regulate B lymphopoiesis.

Medina KL(1), Singh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Chicago, Illinois 60367, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The B cell developmental pathway represents a leading model
within the hematopoietic system for the analysis of genetic networks, which
orchestrate cell fate specification and commitment. Considerable progress is
being achieved in the characterization of regulatory components that comprise
such networks and examining their connectivity. These components include the
cytokine receptors Flk2 and IL-7R as well as the transcription factors PU.1,
Ikaros, Bcl11a, E2A, EBF, and Pax-5. Based on new experimental evidence, a
comprehensive model is proposed that invokes sequentially acting and
inter-dependent regulatory modules that instruct the generation of B cell
precursors from multipotential hematopoietic progenitors.
RECENT FINDINGS: The transcription factor PU.1 regulates the generation of
lymphoid progenitors that express Flk2 and IL-7R. IL-7R receptor signaling
appears to function in specification of the B cell fate. The transcription factor
EBF can bypass the requirement for PU.1 and E2A in early B cell development.
Pax-5 expression and function are contingent on EBF.
SUMMARY: Assembly of gene regulatory networks involved in cell fate specification
may facilitate the efficient and directed generation of lineage-specific
hematopoietic progenitors from embryonic stem cells for therapeutic purposes.

PMID: 15867576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Apr 22;33(7):2318-31. Print 2005.

COUP-TF interacting protein 2 represses the initial phase of HIV-1 gene
transcription in human microglial cells.

Marban C(1), Redel L, Suzanne S, Van Lint C, Lecestre D, Chasserot-Golaz S, Leid 
M, Aunis D, Schaeffer E, Rohr O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM unité 575 Pathophysiology of Nervous System, Centre de Neurochimie 5
rue Blaise Pascal, 67084 Strasbourg, France.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) gene transcription is characterized
by two temporally distinct phases. While the initial phase relies solely on
cellular transcription factors, the subsequent phase is activated by the viral
Tat transactivator. We have previously reported that the subsequent phase of
viral gene transcription can be repressed by the chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter transcription factor (COUP-TF)-interacting protein 2 (CTIP2) in human
microglial cells [O. Rohr, D. Lecestre, S. Chasserot-Golaz, C. Marban, D. Avram, 
D. Aunis, M. Leid and E. Schaeffer (2003), J. Virol., 77, 5415-5427]. Here, we
demonstrate that CTIP proteins also repress the initial phase of HIV-1 gene
transcription, mainly supported by the cellular transcription factors Sp1 and
COUP-TF in microglial cells. We report that CTIP2 represses Sp1- and
COUP-TF-mediated activation of HIV-1 gene transcription and viral replication as 
a result of physical interactions with COUP-TF and Sp1 in microglial nuclei.
Using laser confocal microscopy CTIP2 was found to colocalize with Sp1, COUP-TF
and the heterochromatin-associated protein Hp1alpha, which is mainly detected in 
transcriptionally repressed heterochromatic region. Moreover, we describe that
CTIP2 can be recruited to the HIV-1 promoter via its association with Sp1 bound
to the GC-box sequences of the long terminal repeat (LTR). Since our findings
demonstrate that CTIP2 interacts with the HIV-1 proximal promoter, it is likely
that CTIP2 promotes HIV-1 gene silencing by forcing transcriptionally repressed
heterochromatic environment to the viral LTR region.

PMCID: PMC1084325
PMID: 15849318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Mol Immunol. 2005 Jun;42(10):1235-42. Epub 2005 Jan 7.

Proviral integration of an Abelson-murine leukemia virus deregulates
BKLF-expression in the hypermutating pre-B cell line 18-81.

Kirberg J(1), Gschwendner C, Dangy JP, Rückerl F, Frommer F, Bachl J.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Immunbiology, Stübeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany.

The transcription factor BKLF (basic Krüppel-like factor, KLF3) is a member of
the Krüppel-like factors (KLF) family. KLF members harbor a characteristic
C-terminal zinc-finger DNA-binding domain and bind preferentially to
CACCC-motifs. BKLF is highly expressed in haematopoietic and erythoid cells and
works either as repressor or activator of transcription in various genes.
BKLF-deficient mice display myeloproliferative disorders and abnormalities in
haematopoiesis. Other members of the KLF-family such as GKLF and BCL11A have been
implicated in tumorigenesis, however, for BKLF such association has not yet been 
demonstrated. We report here that a single Abelson-murine leukemia virus (A-MuLV)
provirus is present in the genome of the hypermutating murine pre-B cell line
18-81. The provirus has integrated into the locus of the transcription factor
BKLF. In contrast to other A-MuLV transformed pre-B cell lines, BKLF is highly
transcribed in cell line 18-81. BKLF transcripts originate from the retroviral
long terminal repeats (LTRs) and BKLF protein can be detected by gel shift
retardation assay. We hypothesize on a potential role of BKLF deregulation in
tumorigenesis and/or in the induction of somatic hypermutation in cell line
18-81.

PMID: 15829312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Apr 5;102(14):4949-53. Epub 2005 Mar 23.

Contingent gene regulatory networks and B cell fate specification.

Singh H(1), Medina KL, Pongubala JM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell 
Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
hsingh@midway.uchicago.edu

The B cell developmental pathway represents a leading system for the analysis of 
regulatory circuits that orchestrate cell fate specification and commitment.
Considerable progress has been achieved within the past decade in the
identification and genetic analysis of various regulatory components. These
components include the transcription factors PU.1, Ikaros, Bcl11a, E2A, EBF, and 
Pax-5, as well as the cytokine receptors Flk2 and IL-7R. Experimental evidence of
connectivity among the regulatory components is used to assemble sequentially
acting and contingent gene regulatory networks. Transient signaling inputs,
self-sustaining positive feedback loops, and cross-antagonism among alternate
cell fate determinants are key features of the proposed networks that instruct
the development of B lymphocyte precursors from hematopoietic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC555998
PMID: 15788530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Blood. 2005 Jun 1;105(11):4407-15. Epub 2005 Feb 22.

Derivation of 2 categories of plasmacytoid dendritic cells in murine bone marrow.

Pelayo R(1), Hirose J, Huang J, Garrett KP, Delogu A, Busslinger M, Kincade PW.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 825 NE
13 St, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) competent to make type I interferon were
rigorously defined as a Ly-6C(+) and CD11c(Lo) subset of the B220(+)CD19(-)
CD43(+)CD24(Lo) bone marrow (BM) Fraction A. Otherwise similar Ly6C(-) cells
expressed the natural killer (NK) markers DX5 and NK1.1. pDCs represented a
stable, discrete, and long-lived population. Stem cells and early lymphoid
progenitors (ELPs), but not prolymphocytes, were effective precursors of pDCs,
and their differentiation was blocked by ligation of Notch receptors.
Furthermore, pDCs were present in the BM of RAG1(-/-), CD127/IL-7Ra(-/-), and
Pax5(-/-) mice. pDCs in RAG1/GFP knock-in mice could be subdivided, and
immunoglobulin D(H)-J(H) rearrangements, as well as transcripts for the
B-lineage-related genes Pax5, mb1/CD79a, ebf, and Bcl11a, were identified only in
the green fluorescent protein-positive (GFP(+)) pDC1 subset. All pDCs expressed
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT), the ETS transcription factor Spi-B, 
the nuclear factor-kappaB transcription factor RelB, toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9),
and interferon consensus sequence binding protein (ICSBP)/interferon regulatory
factor 8 (IRF-8) transcripts; lacked CD16 and granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor receptor (G-CSFR); and were uniformly interleukin-7 receptor alpha
(IL-7Ralpha(-)) AA4.1(Lo), CD27(-), Flk-2(Lo), c-Kit(-), DX-5(-), and CD11b(-),
while CD4 and CD8alpha were variable. GFP(+) pDC1 subset was less potent than
GFP(-) pDC2s in T allostimulation and production of tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNFalpha), interferon alpha (IFNalpha), and interleukin-6 (IL-6), while only
pDC2s made IFNgamma and IL-12 p70. Thus, 2 functionally specialized subsets of
pDCs arise in bone marrow from progenitors that diverge from B, T, and NK
lineages at an early stage.

PMCID: PMC1850236
PMID: 15728131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2005 Feb 15;434(2):316-25.

BCL11A-dependent recruitment of SIRT1 to a promoter template in mammalian cells
results in histone deacetylation and transcriptional repression.

Senawong T(1), Peterson VJ, Leid M.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
OR 97331, USA.

The B cell leukemia 11A protein (BCL11A/Evi9/CTIP1) has been implicated in
hematopoietic cell development and malignancies. BCL11A is a transcriptional
repressor that binds directly to a GC-rich motif and is also recruited to a
promoter template via interaction with the orphan nuclear receptor, chicken
ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor II. In both cases,
BCL11A-mediated transcriptional repression is only minimally reversed by
trichostatin A, suggesting the possible lack of involvement of class I or II
histone deacetylases. Nonetheless, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed 
that expression of BCL11A in mammalian cells resulted in deacetylation of
histones H3 and/or H4 that were associated with the promoter region of a reporter
gene. BCL11A-mediated transcriptional repression, as well as deacetylation of
histone H3/H4 in BCL11A-transfected cells, was partially reversed by
nicotinamide, an inhibitor of class III histone deacetylases such as SIRT1. SIRT1
was found to interact directly with BCL11A and was recruited to the promoter
template in a BCL11A-dependent manner leading to transcriptional repression.
These findings define a role for SIRT1 in transcriptional repression mediated by 
BCL11A in mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC2819353
PMID: 15639232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Dec 24;325(4):1383-92.

ZNF322, a novel human C2H2 Kruppel-like zinc-finger protein, regulates
transcriptional activation in MAPK signaling pathways.

Li Y(1), Wang Y, Zhang C, Yuan W, Wang J, Zhu C, Chen L, Huang W, Zeng W, Wu X,
Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Heart Development, College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal
University, Changsha, 410081 Hunan, Peoples' Republic of China.

Cardiac differentiation involves a cascade of coordinated gene expression that
regulates cell proliferation and matrix protein formation in a defined
temporal-spatial manner. The C(2)H(2) zinc finger-containing transcription
factors have been implicated as critical regulators of multiple cardiac-expressed
genes and are important for human heart development and diseases. Here we have
identified and characterized a novel zinc-finger gene named ZNF322 using
degenerated primers from a human embryo heart cDNA library. The gene contains
four exons and spans 23.2kb in chromosome 6p22.1 region, and transcribes a 2.7kb 
mRNA that encodes a protein with 402 amino acid residues. The predicted protein
contains 9 tandem C(2)H(2)-type zinc-finger motifs. Northern blot analysis shows 
that ZNF322 is expressed in every human tissue examined at adult stage and during
embryonic developmental stages from 80 days to 24 weeks. When overexpressed in
COS-7 cells, ZNF322-EGFP fusion protein is detected in the nucleus and cytoplasm.
Reporter gene assays show that ZNF322 is a transcriptional activator.
Furthermore, overexpression of ZNF322 in COS-7 cells activates the
transcriptional activity of SRE and AP-1. Together, these results suggest that
ZNF322 is a member of the zinc-finger transcription factor family and may act as 
a positive regulator in gene transcription mediated by the MAPK signaling
pathways.

PMID: 15555580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Dec 24;325(4):1145-52.

Cloning and characterization of a novel human zinc finger gene, hKid3, from a
C2H2-ZNF enriched human embryonic cDNA library.

Gao L(1), Sun C, Qiu HL, Liu H, Shao HJ, Wang J, Li WX.

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Science,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430072, PR China. liwxlab@whu.edu.cn

To investigate the zinc finger genes involved in human embryonic development, we 
constructed a C(2)H(2)-ZNF enriched human embryonic cDNA library, from which a
novel human gene named hKid3 was identified. The hKid3 cDNA encodes a 554 amino
acid protein with an amino-terminal KRAB domain and 11 carboxyl-terminal C(2)H(2)
zinc finger motifs. Northern blot analysis indicates that two hKid3 transcripts
of 6 and 8.5kb express in human fetal brain and kidney. The 6kb transcript can
also be detected in human adult brain, heart, and skeletal muscle while the 8.5kb
transcript appears to be embryo-specific. GFP-fused hKid3 protein is localized to
nuclei and the ZF domain is necessary and sufficient for nuclear localization. To
explore the DNA-binding specificity of hKid3, an oligonucleotide library was
selected by GST fusion protein of hKid3 ZF domain, and the consensus core
sequence 5'-CCAC-3' was evaluated by competitive electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. Moreover, The KRAB domain of hKid3 exhibits transcription repressor
activity when tested in GAL4 fusion protein assay. These results indicate that
hKid3 may function as a transcription repressor with regulated expression pattern
during human development of brain and kidney.

PMID: 15555547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Leukemia. 2004 Dec;18(12):2026-31.

Rapid amplification of immunoglobulin heavy chain switch (IGHS) translocation
breakpoints using long-distance inverse PCR.

Sonoki T(1), Willis TG, Oscier DG, Karran EL, Siebert R, Dyer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Haematology and Cytogenetics, Institute of Cancer Research, UK.

Molecular cloning of immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) translocation breakpoints
identifies genes of biological importance in the development of normal and
malignant B cells. Long-distance inverse PCR (LDI-PCR) was first applied to
amplification of IGH gene translocations targeted to the joining (IGHJ) regions. 
We report here successful amplification of the breakpoint of IGH translocations
targeted to switch (IGHS) regions by LDI-PCR. To detect IGHS translocations,
Southern blot assays using 5' and 3' switch probes were performed. Illegitimate
Smu rearrangements were amplified from the 5' end (5'Smu LDI-PCR) from the
alternative derivative chromosome, and those of Sgamma or Salpha were amplified
from the 3' end (3'Sgamma or 3'alpha LDI-PCR) from the derivative chromosome 14. 
Using a combination of these methods, we have succeeded in amplifying IGHS
translocation breakpoints involving FGFR3/MMSET on 4p16, BCL6 on 3q27, MYC on
8q24, IRTA1 on 1q21 and PAX5 on 9p13 as well as BCL11A on 2p13 and CCND3 on 6p21.
The combination of LDI-PCR for IGHJ and IGHS allows rapid molecular cloning of
almost all IGH gene translocation breakpoints.

PMID: 15496980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Crit Rev Oral Biol Med. 2004 Sep 1;15(5):282-97.

Zinc finger transcription factors in skeletal development.

Ganss B(1), Jheon A.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Group in Matrix Dymanics, Faculty of Dentistry, University of Toronto,
239-150 College Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3E2, Canada. b.ganss@utoronto.ca
<b.ganss@utoronto.ca>

Cellular and molecular processes that regulate the development of skeletal
tissues resemble those required for regeneration. Given the prevalence of
degenerative skeletal disorders in an increasingly aging population, the
molecular mechanisms of skeletal development must be understood in detail if
novel strategies are to be developed in regenerative medicine. Research in this
area over the past decade has revealed that cell differentiation is largely
controlled at the level of gene transcription, which in turn is regulated by
transcription factors. Transcription factors usually recognize and bind to
specific DNA sequences in the promoter of target genes via characteristic
DNA-binding domains. Although the gene family containing C2H2 zinc fingers as
DNA-binding motifs is the largest family of transciptional regulators, with
several hundred individual members in mammals, only a small but increasing number
of zinc finger genes have been implicated in bone, cartilage, or tooth
development. These zinc finger proteins (ZFPs) contain multiple structural motifs
that require zinc to maintain their structural integrity and function.
Interestingly, zinc deficiency is known to result in skeletal growth retardation 
and has been identified as a risk factor in the pathogenesis of osteoporosis.
This review attempts to summarize our current state of knowledge regarding the
role of ZFPs in the molecular regulation of skeletogenesis.

PMID: 15470266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Oct;4(6):733-9.

CTIP1 and CTIP2 are differentially expressed during mouse embryogenesis.

Leid M(1), Ishmael JE, Avram D, Shepherd D, Fraulob V, Dollé P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA. mark.leid@oregonstate.edu

Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor-interacting proteins 1
and 2 (CTIP1 and CTIP2) are related transcriptional regulatory proteins. While
overexpression of both of these proteins has been linked to the development of
several lymphoid malignancies, lack of CTIP1 and CTIP2 expression results in
defective lymphopoiesis and abnormal thymocyte development, respectively. Here,
we describe the expression patterns of CTIP1 and CTIP2 during mouse embryogenesis
and in the post-natal brain. Both CTIP1 and CTIP2 were expressed diffusely in the
embryo at 10.5 days post-coitum (d.p.c.). However, the expression of both genes
became increasingly restricted to the central nervous system (CNS) during the
course of fetal development, culminating with high, but differential, expression 
levels throughout the hippocampal subregions, olfactory bulb and cortex, limbic
system, basal ganglia and frontal cortex of the developing brain, and in dorsal
cells of the spinal cord. The brain expression domains of CTIP1 and CTIP2 were
maintained into adulthood. Outside the CNS, both genes exhibited differential
expression within the facial mesenchyme at 12.5 d.p.c., and CTIP2 was selectively
expressed from day 12.5 onwards in the olfactory epithelium and developing
thymus, and to a lesser extent in oral and gut epithelia. Strong CTIP2 expression
was maintained in the thymus at 18.5 d.p.c. These results support the selective
contributions of both CTIP1 and CTIP2 in the development and function of both the
central nervous and immune systems and the importance of future investigations to
define the function(s) of both proteins.

PMCID: PMC2819357
PMID: 15465497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Clin Oncol. 2004 Sep 1;22(17):3498-506.

Clinicopathologic significance and prognostic value of chromosomal imbalances in 
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

Beà S(1), Colomo L, López-Guillermo A, Salaverria I, Puig X, Pinyol M, Rives S,
Montserrat E, Campo E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology and Hematology Department, Hospital Clínic, Institut
d'Investigactions Biomediques August Pi I Sunyer, University of Barcelona, Spain.

PURPOSE: To determine the clinicopathologic significance and prognostic value of 
chromosomal imbalances in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We have examined 64 tumors at diagnosis using comparative
genomic hybridization and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
single-stranded conformational polymorphism, and DNA sequencing for the analysis 
of several potential target genes.
RESULTS: The most recurrent alterations were gains of 18q (20%), Xq (15%), 2p,
7q, and 12p (14%), and losses of 6q and 17p (14%). Frequent high-level DNA
amplifications were detected at 2p13-p16 and 18q21 loci. Real-time quantitative
PCR detected REL and BCL11A gene amplifications in the nine patients with gains
at 2p13-p16 and only in one additional patient with normal chromosome 2.
Similarly, the BCL-2 gene was amplified in the 12 tumors with gains of 18q21 but 
in none of 39 patients with normal 18q profile. p53 gene inactivation was
detected in nine of 58 (16%) tumors and was commonly associated with 17p losses. 
Tumors with 18q gains were significantly associated with a high number of
chromosomal imbalances, primary nodal presentation, high serum lactate
dehydrogenase levels, high International Prognostic Index, shorter cause-specific
survival, and a high risk of relapse. Losses of 17p and p53 gene alterations were
associated with an absence of complete response achievement.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that DLBCLs have a characteristic pattern of
genomic alterations; 18q gains or amplifications and 17p losses are associated
with particular clinicopathological features and aggressive clinical behavior.
Additional studies are needed to confirm these observations in larger series of
patients.

PMID: 15337798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Cancer Res. 2004 Aug 15;64(16):5578-86.

Aberrant expression of the tyrosine kinase receptor EphA4 and the transcription
factor twist in Sézary syndrome identified by gene expression analysis.

van Doorn R(1), Dijkman R, Vermeer MH, Out-Luiting JJ, van der Raaij-Helmer EM,
Willemze R, Tensen CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the
Netherlands.

Sézary syndrome (Sz) is a malignancy of CD4+ memory skin-homing T cells and
presents with erythroderma, lymphadenopathy, and peripheral blood involvement. To
gain more insight into the molecular features of Sz, oligonucleotide array
analysis was performed comparing gene expression patterns of CD4+ T cells from
peripheral blood of patients with Sz with those of patients with erythroderma
secondary to dermatitis and healthy controls. Using unsupervised hierarchical
clustering gene, expression patterns of T cells from patients with Sz were
classified separately from those of benign T cells. One hundred twenty-three
genes were identified as significantly differentially expressed and had an
average fold change exceeding 2. T cells from patients with Sz demonstrated
decreased expression of the following hematopoietic malignancy-linked tumor
suppressor genes: TGF-beta receptor II, Mxi1, Riz1, CREB-binding protein, BCL11a,
STAT4, and Forkhead Box O1A. Moreover, the tyrosine kinase receptor EphA4 and the
potentially oncogenic transcription factor Twist were highly and selectively
expressed in T cells of patients with Sz. High expression of EphA4 and Twist was 
also observed in lesional skin biopsy specimens of a subset of patients with
cutaneous T cell lymphomas related to Sz, whereas their expression was nearly
undetectable in benign T cells or in skin lesions of patients with inflammatory
dermatoses. Detection of EphA4 and Twist may be used in the molecular diagnosis
of Sz and related cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. Furthermore, the membrane-bound
EphA4 receptor may serve as a target for directed therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 15313894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Lab Invest. 2004 Sep;84(9):1193-9.

Epstein-Barr virus is integrated between REL and BCL-11A in American Burkitt
lymphoma cell line (NAB-2).

Luo WJ(1), Takakuwa T, Ham MF, Wada N, Liu A, Fujita S, Sakane-Ishikawa E, Aozasa
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, 
Osaka, Japan.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) initially isolated from the cultured Burkitt lymphoma
(BL) cells, is one of the well-known oncogenic virus. The NAB-2 line, which was
established from a North American Burkitt's tumor, was indicated to contain one
copy of EBV DNA as the integrated form into chromosome 2p13 of the host genome.
To demonstrate the integration site of EBV directly, and to clarify the relation 
between the integration sites and the oncogenes, fragments containing the
nucleotide sequence of NAB-2 integration sites were cloned. EBV was integrated
via the terminal repeats (TR), and integration sites located in the clone
RP11-440P5 on chromosome 2, between two oncogenes, REL and BCL11A, which is apart
from approximately 350 kbp from each other. Expression level of REL in NAB-2 was 
increased. The flanking region of chromosome 2 at the bilateral junction sites
showed no homology to the junction sites of EBV. The integration site 2p13
overlaps with common fragile site, FRA2E. NAB-2 cells expressed almost all latent
genes but LMP-2A that flanks the TR, indicating the type III of latent infection 
of EBV. Integration event in NAB-2 might alter the regulation of the oncogenes
and provide advantage for continuous cell proliferation.

PMID: 15241441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2004 Feb;149(1):72-6.

A novel t(6;14)(q25-q27;q32) in acute myelocytic leukemia involves the BCL11B
gene.

Bezrookove V(1), van Zelderen-Bhola SL, Brink A, Szuhai K, Raap AK, Barge R,
Beverstock GC, Rosenberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cytochemistry and Cytometry, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Wassenaarseweg 72, 2333 AL Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2004 Aug;153(1):88-9.

Cytogenetic studies in a patient with acute myelocytic leukemia (AML) revealed as
the sole karyotypic alteration a half-cryptic rearrangement, identified with
48-color combined binary ratio-labeled fluorescence in situ hybridization
(pq-COBRA-FISH) as a reciprocal t(6;14)(q?;q?). The breakpoints were later
assigned on the basis of G-banding to t(6;14)(q25-q26;q32). FISH experiments
using genomic probes showed that the breakpoint on 14q32.2 was within bacterial
artificial chromosome RP11-782I5 and revealed BCL11B as the only candidate gene
in the region. BCL11B is a homolog to BCL11A (2p13), a highly conserved gene
implicated in mouse and human leukemias. To our knowledge, this is the first
report implicating BCL11B in hematological malignancies. Because of lack of
material, the translocation partner remains unknown.

PMID: 15104287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 31;278(44):43041-50. Epub 2003 Aug 19.

Involvement of the histone deacetylase SIRT1 in chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter transcription factor (COUP-TF)-interacting protein 2-mediated
transcriptional repression.

Senawong T(1), Peterson VJ, Avram D, Shepherd DM, Frye RA, Minucci S, Leid M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
College of Pharmacy, Environmental Health Sciences Center, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA.

Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor (COUP-TF)-interacting
proteins 1 and 2 (CTIP1 and CTIP2) enhance transcriptional repression mediated by
COUP-TF II and have been implicated in hematopoietic cell development and
malignancies. CTIP1 and CTIP2 are also sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins
that repress transcription through direct, COUP-TF-in-dependent binding to a
GC-rich response element. CTIP1- and CTIP2-mediated transcriptional repression is
insensitive to trichostatin A, an inhibitor of known class I and II histone
deacetylases. However, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that
expression of CTIP2 in mammalian cells resulted in deacetylation of histones H3
and/or H4 that were associated with the promoter region of a reporter gene.
CTIP2-mediated transcriptional repression, as well as deacetylation of
promoter-associated histones H3/H4 in CTIP2-transfected cells, was reversed by
nicotinamide, an inhibitor of class III histone deacetylases such as the
mammalian homologs of yeast Silent Information Regulator 2 (Sir2). The human
homolog of yeast Sir2, SIRT1, was found to interact directly with CTIP2 and was
recruited to the promoter template in a CTIP2-dependent manner. Moreover, SIRT1
enhanced the deacetylation of template-associated histones H3/H4 in
CTIP2-transfected cells, and stimulated CTIP2-dependent transcriptional
repression. Finally, endogenous SIRT1 and CTIP2 co-purified from Jurkat cell
nuclear extracts in the context of a large (1-2 mDa) complex. These findings
implicate SIRT1 as a histone H3/H4 deacetylase in mammalian cells and in
transcriptional repression mediated by CTIP2.

PMCID: PMC2819354
PMID: 12930829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Int J Hematol. 2003 May;77(4):315-20.

The pathogenetic role of oncogenes deregulated by chromosomal translocation in
B-cell malignancies.

Dyer MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Toxicology Unit, Hodgkin Building, University of Leicester, Leicester,
United Kingdom. mjsd1@le.ac.uk

Chromosomal translocations involving the immunoglobulin (IG) loci play a pivotal 
role in the pathogenesis of many subtypes of mature B-cell malignancy. Although
all the common IG translocations have been cloned, cloning of rare but
nonetheless recurrent translocations continues to allow identification of genes
of importance to the development of both normal and malignant B-cells. Clustering
of breakpoints within the IG gene segments has allowed development of polymerase 
chain reaction methods that facilitate cloning. IG translocations result in
overexpression of a wide variety of genes ranging from cell surface receptors to 
transcriptional repressors. Genes recently shown to be involved in such
translocations include BCL11A and MALT1. As with the acute leukemias, different
translocations in B-cell lymphomas may target different proteins that interact
directly. A common endpoint for several translocations is activation of the
nuclear factor kappaB pathway. Analysis of the mechanisms of transformation may
define new therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 12774917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Nat Immunol. 2003 Jun;4(6):512-4.

Bcl11: sibling rivalry in lymphoid development.

Durum SK.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2003 Jun;4(6):533-9.
    Nat Immunol. 2003 Jun;4(6):525-32.

PMID: 12774073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Nat Immunol. 2003 Jun;4(6):533-9. Epub 2003 Apr 28.

Bcl11b is required for differentiation and survival of alphabeta T lymphocytes.

Wakabayashi Y(1), Watanabe H, Inoue J, Takeda N, Sakata J, Mishima Y, Hitomi J,
Yamamoto T, Utsuyama M, Niwa O, Aizawa S, Kominami R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Niigata University, Asahimachi 1-757, Niigata 951-8122, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2003 Jun;4(6):512-4.

The gene Bcl11b, which encodes zinc finger proteins, and its paralog, Bcl11a, are
associated with immune-system malignancies. We have generated Bcl11b-deficient
mice that show a block at the CD4-CD8- double-negative stage of thymocyte
development without any impairment in cells of B- or gammadelta T cell lineages. 
The Bcl11b-/- thymocytes showed unsuccessful recombination of V(beta) to D(beta) 
and lacked the pre-T cell receptor (TCR) complex on the cell surface, owing to
the absence of Tcrb mRNA expression. In addition, we saw profound apoptosis in
the thymus of neonatal Bcl11b-/- mice. These results suggest that Bcl11b is a key
regulator of both differentiation and survival during thymocyte development.

PMID: 12717433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Nat Immunol. 2003 Jun;4(6):525-32. Epub 2003 Apr 28.

Bcl11a is essential for normal lymphoid development.

Liu P(1), Keller JR, Ortiz M, Tessarollo L, Rachel RA, Nakamura T, Jenkins NA,
Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, National Cancer Institute-Frederick, Maryland
21702, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2003 Jun;4(6):512-4.

Bcl11a (also called Evi9) functions as a myeloid or B cell proto-oncogene in mice
and humans, respectively. Here we show that Bcl11a is essential for postnatal
development and normal lymphopoiesis. Bcl11a mutant embryos lack B cells and have
alterations in several types of T cells. Phenotypic and expression studies show
that Bcl11a functions upstream of the transcription factors Ebf1 and Pax5 in the 
B cell pathway. Transplantation studies show that these defects in Bcl11a mutant 
mice are intrinsic to fetal liver precursor cells. Mice transplanted with
Bcl11a-deficient cells died from T cell leukemia derived from the host. Thus,
Bcl11a may also function as a non-autonomous T cell tumor suppressor gene.

PMID: 12717432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Genome Res. 2003 Mar;13(3):476-84.

A highly efficient recombineering-based method for generating conditional
knockout mutations.

Liu P(1), Jenkins NA, Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

Phage-based Escherichia coli homologous recombination systems have recently been 
developed that now make it possible to subclone or modify DNA cloned into
plasmids, BACs, or PACs without the need for restriction enzymes or DNA ligases. 
This new form of chromosome engineering, termed recombineering, has many
different uses for functional genomic studies. Here we describe a new
recombineering-based method for generating conditional mouse knockout (cko)
mutations. This method uses homologous recombination mediated by the lambda phage
Red proteins, to subclone DNA from BACs into high-copy plasmids by gap repair,
and together with Cre or Flpe recombinases, to introduce loxP or FRT sites into
the subcloned DNA. Unlike other methods that use short 45-55-bp regions of
homology for recombineering, our method uses much longer regions of homology. We 
also make use of several new E. coli strains, in which the proteins required for 
recombination are expressed from a defective temperature-sensitive lambda
prophage, and the Cre or Flpe recombinases from an arabinose-inducible promoter. 
We also describe two new Neo selection cassettes that work well in both E. coli
and mouse ES cells. Our method is fast, efficient, and reliable and makes it
possible to generate cko-targeting vectors in less than 2 wk. This method should 
also facilitate the generation of knock-in mutations and transgene constructs, as
well as expedite the analysis of regulatory elements and functional domains in or
near genes.

PMCID: PMC430283
PMID: 12618378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Blood. 2003 Apr 15;101(8):3109-17. Epub 2002 Oct 24.

Transformation of follicular lymphoma to diffuse large cell lymphoma is
associated with a heterogeneous set of DNA copy number and gene expression
alterations.

Martinez-Climent JA(1), Alizadeh AA, Segraves R, Blesa D, Rubio-Moscardo F,
Albertson DG, Garcia-Conde J, Dyer MJ, Levy R, Pinkel D, Lossos IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Hospital Clinico, University of
Valencia, Spain. martinez_jos@gva.es

Genomic aberrations in a series of paired biopsy samples from patients who
presented initially with follicle center lymphoma (FCL) and subsequently
transformed to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) were measured by array
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). The consequences of these aberrations on
gene expression were determined by comparison with expression analysis on these
specimens using cDNA microarrays. A heterogeneous pattern of acquired genomic
abnormalities was observed upon transformation, some of which were recurrent in
small subsets of patients. Some of the genomic aberration acquired upon
transformation, such as gain/amplification of 1q21-q24, 2p16 (REL/BCL11A gene
loci), 3q27-q29 (including the BCL6 locus), 7q11.2-q22.1, 12pter-q12, 18q21
(including the BCL2 locus) and Xq, and deletion of 6q22-q24, 13q14-q21 and 17p13 
(P53 locus) have been previously implicated in the FCL/DLBCL pathogenesis. In
addition, novel genomic imbalances not previously reported in association with
FCL transformation, such as overrepresentation of 4p12-pter, 5p12-p15,
6p12.3-p21, 9p23, 9q13-q31, 16q, 17q21, and loss of 1p36.3, 4q21-q23, 5q21-q23,
9q31-qter, 11q24-q25, and 15q23, were identified. We observed a differential
expression profile of many genes within regions of gain and deletion upon
transformation, including novel target genes associated with FCL transformation. 
However, other genes did not show deregulated expression despite their location
within these areas. In summary, the combination of array CGH and expression
analysis provides a more comprehensive picture of the transformation of FCL to
DLBCL. This process is associated with the acquisition of a variable spectrum of 
genomic imbalances affecting recurrent chromosomal areas that harbor
overexpressed or underexpressed genes targeted upon transformation.

PMID: 12406872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Biochem J. 2002 Dec 1;368(Pt 2):555-63.

COUP-TF (chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor)-interacting
protein 1 (CTIP1) is a sequence-specific DNA binding protein.

Avram D(1), Fields A, Senawong T, Topark-Ngarm A, Leid M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
College of Pharmacy, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331-3507, U.S.A.

Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor (COUP-TF)-interacting
proteins 1 and 2 [CTIP1/Evi9/B cell leukaemia (Bcl) l1a and CTIP2/Bcl11b
respectively] are highly related C(2)H(2) zinc finger proteins that are
abundantly expressed in brain and the immune system, and are associated with
immune system malignancies. A selection procedure was employed to isolate
high-affinity DNA binding sites for CTIP1. The core binding site on DNA
identified in these studies, 5'-GGCCGG-3' (upper strand), is highly related to
the canonical GC box and was bound by a CTIP1 oligomeric complex(es) in vitro.
Furthermore, both CTIP1 and CTIP2 repressed transcription of a reporter gene
harbouring a multimerized CTIP binding site, and this repression was neither
reversed by trichostatin A (an inhibitor of known class I and II histone
deacetylases) nor stimulated by co-transfection of a COUP-TF family member. These
results demonstrate that CTIP1 is a sequence-specific DNA binding protein and a
bona fide transcriptional repressor that is capable of functioning independently 
of COUP-TF family members. These findings may be relevant to the physiological
and/or pathological action(s) of CTIPs in cells that do not express COUP-TF
family members, such as cells of the haematopoietic and immune systems.

PMCID: PMC1223006
PMID: 12196208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Leukemia. 2002 Jun;16(6):973-84.

The configuration of the immunoglobulin genes in B cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia.

Dyer MJ(1), Oscier DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Leicester, Leicester Royal Infirmary,
UK.

B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) lacks a consistent genetic abnormality.
However, immunoglobulin V(H) gene segment mutation analysis has provided insights
into the pathogenesis of these diseases and allowed the development of powerful
prognostic markers. Immunoglobulin gene chromosomal translocations are rare in
CLL and involve a distinct subset of genes including BCL3, BCL11A and CCND2. BCL2
translocations in CLL appear to arise via a different mechanism from comparable
translocations seen in B cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

PMID: 12040429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Leukemia. 2002 May;16(5):937-9.

Lack of somatic hypermutation of IG V(H) genes in lymphoid malignancies with
t(2;14)(p13;q32) translocation involving the BCL11A gene.

Küppers R(1), Sonoki T, Satterwhite E, Gesk S, Harder L, Oscier DG, Tucker PW,
Dyer MJ, Siebert R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine I, LFI E4 R706,
University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmannstrasse 9, D-50931 Cologne, Germany.

The t(2;14)(p13;q32.3) involving the BCL11A and IGH genes is a rare but recurrent
chromosomal aberration in B-cell malignancies. Hitherto, juxtaposition of BCL11A 
and IGH has only been described in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL)
and immunocytoma. As subgroups of B-CLL can be distinguished by the pattern of
somatic mutation of immunoglobulin variable (V) genes we investigated four
lymphomas with IGH/BCL11A involvement for IGH hypermutation. Clonal V(H) gene
rearrangements were amplified; in all four cases, sequencing of the amplificates 
revealed the rearranged V(H) genes to lack somatic mutations. These results
suggest that t(2;14)(p13;q32.3) is associated with a subset of B-CLL/immunocytoma
characterized by non-mutated IG genes deriving from pre-germinal center B cells. 
As the translocations in both informative cases are targeted to the switch
regions of the IGG2 gene, which is mainly used in T cell-independent immune
responses, these translocations presumably occurred in activated B cells in the
course of T cell-independent immune responses outside the germinal center.

PMID: 11986957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Blood. 2002 Feb 15;99(4):1474-7.

Recurrent involvement of the REL and BCL11A loci in classical Hodgkin lymphoma.

Martín-Subero JI(1), Gesk S, Harder L, Sonoki T, Tucker PW, Schlegelberger B,
Grote W, Novo FJ, Calasanz MJ, Hansmann ML, Dyer MJ, Siebert R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Kiel, Germany.

Comparative genomic hybridization studies have shown gains in chromosome region
2p as the most common imbalance in classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL). The minimal 
region of gain contained 2 candidate oncogenes, REL and BCL11A. This study
examined the involvement of REL and BCL11A loci in 44 primary cases of cHL by
combined immunophenotyping and interphase cytogenetics (FICTION). A median 2p13
copy number above the tetraploid range was detected in 24 (55%) cases. Adjustment
for centromere 2 copy number indicated gains of 2p13 in 11 of 31 cHLs (35%) with 
8 (26%) high-level amplifications. One cHL displayed selective amplification of
the REL locus not affecting BCL11A; another case studied by FICTION and a cHL
with cytogenetic 2p change investigated by fluorescence in situ hybridization
showed signal patterns suggesting breakpoints in the region spanned by the REL
probe. These data indicate that REL rather than BCL11A may be the target of the
2p13 alterations in cHL.

PMID: 11830502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Blood. 2001 Dec 1;98(12):3413-20.

The BCL11 gene family: involvement of BCL11A in lymphoid malignancies.

Satterwhite E(1), Sonoki T, Willis TG, Harder L, Nowak R, Arriola EL, Liu H,
Price HP, Gesk S, Steinemann D, Schlegelberger B, Oscier DG, Siebert R, Tucker
PW, Dyer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Department of Haematology and Cytogenetics, Haddow Laboratories,
Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom.

Many malignancies of mature B cells are characterized by chromosomal
translocations involving the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) locus on chromosome
14q32.3 and result in deregulated expression of the translocated oncogene.
t(2;14)(p13;q32.3) is a rare event in B-cell malignancies. In contrast, gains and
amplifications of the same region of chromosome 2p13 have been reported in 20% of
extranodal B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas (B-NHL), in follicular and mediastinal
B-NHL, and in Hodgkin disease (HD). It has been suggested that REL, an NF-kappaB 
gene family member, mapping within the amplified region, is the pathologic
target. However, by molecular cloning of t(2;14)(p13;q32.3) from 3 cases of
aggressive B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)/immunocytoma, this study has
shown clustered breakpoints on chromosome 2p13 immediately upstream of a CpG
island located about 300 kb telomeric of REL. This CpG island was associated with
a Krüppel zinc finger gene (BCL11A), which is normally expressed at high levels
only in fetal brain and in germinal center B-cells. There were 3 major RNA
isoforms of BCL11A, differing in the number of carboxy-terminal zinc fingers. All
3 RNA isoforms were deregulated as a consequence of t(2;14)(p13;q32.3). BCL11A
was highly conserved, being 95% identical to mouse, chicken, and Xenopus
homologues. BCL11A was also highly homologous to another gene (BCL11B) on
chromosome 14q32.1. BCL11A coamplified with REL in B-NHL cases and HD lymphoma
cell lines with gains and amplifications of 2p13, suggesting that BCL11A may be
involved in lymphoid malignancies through either chromosomal translocation or
amplification.

PMID: 11719382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Genomics. 2000 Dec 15;70(3):387-91.

Human EVI9, a homologue of the mouse myeloid leukemia gene, is expressed in the
hematopoietic progenitors and down-regulated during myeloid differentiation of
HL60 cells.

Saiki Y(1), Yamazaki Y, Yoshida M, Katoh O, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japan Science and
Technology Corporation, Toshima-ku, Tokyo, 170-8455, Japan.

Evi9, a common site of retroviral integration in BXH2 murine myeloid leukemias,
encodes a C2H2 zinc finger protein and is overexpressed in these leukemic cells. 
To investigate a possible role of EVI9 in the human hematopoietic system, we
isolated the cDNA clone of the human homologue. Human EVI9, located on the
chromosome 2p13 region, contains an open reading frame of 797 amino acids that is
98.7% identical to the mouse protein. RT-PCR analysis of purified human
hematopoietic cells showed that EVI9 is expressed in CD34-positive myeloid
precursors, B cells, monocytes, and megakaryocytes, but only weakly in T
lymphocytes, suggesting that EVI9 may play an important role in hematopoiesis.
Furthermore, EVI9 was down-regulated during myeloid differentiation of HL60 cells
induced by all-trans-retinoic acid, whereas the expression remained during
monocytic differentiation induced by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate. These
results indicate a distinct role for EVI9 in human hematopoietic cells and
suggest that EVI9 may cause leukemia through inhibition of myeloid
differentiation.

PMID: 11161790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(9):3178-86.

Evi9 encodes a novel zinc finger protein that physically interacts with BCL6, a
known human B-cell proto-oncogene product.

Nakamura T(1), Yamazaki Y, Saiki Y, Moriyama M, Largaespada DA, Jenkins NA,
Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Toshima-ku,
Tokyo 170-8455, Japan. takuro-ind@umin.u-tokyo,ac.jp

Evi9 is a common site of retroviral integration in BXH2 murine myeloid leukemias.
Here we show that Evi9 encodes a novel zinc finger protein with three
tissue-specific isoforms: Evi9a (773 amino acids [aa]) contains two C(2)H(2)-type
zinc finger motifs, a proline-rich region, and an acidic domain; Evi9b (486 aa)
lacks the first zinc finger motif and part of the proline-rich region; Evi9c (239
aa) lacks all but the first zinc finger motif. Proviral integration sites are
located in the first intron of the gene and lead to increased gene expression.
Evi9a and Evi9c, but not Evi9b, show transforming activity for NIH 3T3 cells,
suggesting that Evi9 is a dominantly acting proto-oncogene. Immunolocalization
studies show that Evi9c is restricted to the cytoplasm whereas Evi9a and Evi9b
are located in the nucleus, where they form a speckled localization pattern
identical to that observed for BCL6, a human B-cell proto-oncogene product.
Coimmunoprecipitation and glutathione S-transferase pull-down experiments show
that Evi9a and Evi9b, but not Evi9c, physically interact with BCL6, while
deletion mutagenesis localized the interaction domains in or near the second zinc
finger and POZ domains of Evi9 and BCL6, respectively. These results suggest that
Evi9 is a leukemia disease gene that functions, in part, through its interaction 
with BCL6.

PMCID: PMC85612
PMID: 10757802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


